I do allow the Printing of this Book, entitled An Abridgment of the
Ecclesiastical Laws.

FRA: NORTH.

Imprimatur hic Liber, cui Titulus AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE. ECCLESIASTICAL LAWS.

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. HENR. Episc. Land a Sacris Dom.

Repertorium Canonicum; OR An Abridgment OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL LAWS OF THIS
REALM, Consistent with the TEMPORAL: WHEREIN The most Material Points relating
to such Persons and Things, as come within the Cognizance thereof, are
succinctly Treated.

Principio Comperto facile est adjicere, and Reliquum Cooptare;

Tho. Cana. in Proaem. Decret. nu. 3. T. 1. By JOHN GODOLPHIN, LL. D.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1678.

THE Introduction.
THE Question which King Henry the Eighth did once put to both the Universities
of this Realm, The Kings Supremacy.
viz. An aliquid Authoritatis in hoc Regno Angliae Pontifici Romano de jure
competat, plusquam alii cuicunque Episcopo Extero? being Resolved in the
Negative, and that Resolution ratified in the Convocation An. 1534. an Act of
Parliament passed about two years after for the extinguishing of that Papal
Authority in this Realm. This succceded so well in consequence of what the
Convocation An. 1530. had before acknowledged him, viz. The Supreme Head on
Earth of the Church of England, that that Supremacy was likewise after
confirmed by Act of Parliament to him, his Heirs, and Successors. This is that
Supremacy here tenderly touched at in the first Chapter of the ensuing
Abridgment, and without which all that follows would be but insignificant and
disfigured Ciphers. When King Henry the Eighth was thus both Parliamentarily
and Synodically invested herewith, although it was with all the Privileges and
Preheminences incident thereto, yet no more accrued to the Crown thereby, than
was legally inherent in it before; yet in regard of the Usurpations, that in
diverse Kings Reigns had successively invaded the Rights of the Crown in that
most splendent Jewel thereof, another Convocation in An. 1532. (to give the
King as it were, Livery and Seisin of the said Supremacy) promised him in verbo
Sacerdotii, That they would not from thenceforth Assemble in any Convocation or
Synod without his Majesty's Writ, nor make any Canons or Constitutions without
his License and consent, nor execute the same until they were Ratified under
the Great Seal of England. All which was done without the least diminution of
any Archiepiscopal or Episcopal Power or Privileges, in the free exercise of
that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which they anciently enjoyed. The whole of
this Design being only to eject the Roman Pontifex, and annul his Usurpation in
a matter of that weighty Consequence, to which the Crown was so undoubtedly
Entitled: And this only in a way consonant to that Allegiance, which every
Subject without distinction owes to his lawful Sovereign in all matters, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions; Vld.
Heyl. Cypr. Angl. p. 1.
whereby the Clergy as well as Laity, being all Subjects alike, might be
reduced not only to their Primitive Obedience unto, but also to their
Dependence on their own Sovereign in preference to any Foreign Potentate
whatever. -- That the Supreme Civil Power is also Supreme Governor over all
Persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical, In his Cases of Conscience, lib. 3.
chapter 3. fol. 544.
is a Rule (says the Learned Bishop Tailor) of such great necessity for the
conduct of Conscience, as that it is the measure of determining all Questions
concerning the Sanction of Obedience to all Ecclesiastical Laws, the duty of
Bishops and Priests to their Princes, the necessity of their paying Tribute,
and discharging the burdens, and relieving the necessities of the Republic.
Lib. 3. cap. 4. fol. 600. nu. 4.
It was never known (says the same Author) in the Primitive Church, that ever
any Ecclesiastical Law did oblige the Catholic Church; unless the Secular
Prince did establish it. The Nicene Canons became Laws by the Rescript of the
Emperor Constantine, says Sozomen. When the Council of Constantinople was
finished, the Fathers wrote to the Emperor Theodosius, and petitioned Vt
Edicto Pietatis tuae confirmetur Synodi sententia. The confirmation of the
Canon and Decrees of the great Council at Ephesus by the Emperor is to be seen
at the end of the Acts of the Synod. And Marcian the Emperor wrote to
Palladius his Prefect a Let^er, in which he testifies, that he made the Decrees
of the Council of Chalcedon to become Laws, Ea quae de Christiana fide a
Sacerdotibus qui Chalcedone ^convenerunt, per nostra Praecepta Statuta sunt,
etc. Thus also the Fathers of the Fifth General Synod petitioned Justinian to
confirm and establish their Canons into a Law. The same Prince also Published a
Novel, in which he commands Vim Legum obtinere Ecclesiasticos Canones a quatuor
Synodis, Nicena, Constantinopolitana prima, Ephesina prima and Chalcedonensi
expositos and confirmatos. Vid. Council. Tolet. All which confirms it for a
Truth, That even in the Primitive Church the Supremacy in matters
Ecclesiastical was in the Supreme Secular Prince.

Touching Archbishops, Archbishops, and Bishops:
our Malmesbury confesses, that in the Ancienter times of the Britains it was
unknown where the Archbishopric was: At the Council of Arles, An. 314.
Silvester the Pope is but plain Bishop, as appears by the Nomenclature of those
that were at that Council. The High Title of Archbishop was for a long time in
use in the Eastern Church, before it came into the West Spelm. in Archaeologo.
. For whereas our Beda tells us, That Augustine was Ordained Archbishop of the
English Nation by Etherius Archbishop of Arles aforesaid, he therein follows
the mode of speaking current in his own times: for Gregory the then Pope, in
his several Letters written to them, affords neither of them that Title; no,
not when he bestows the Pall upon Augustine, and gives him the precedence and
priority in respect of York and all other Bishops of Britain Bed. Eccl. Hist.
lib. cap. 1. 27.
. Yet the incomparable B. Usher affirms, that they did not quite deny
Archbishops among the Old Britains (for he proves they had such;) but that all
Memorials were lost, where the Archiepiscopal or Patriarchal Seat resided D.
Usserius, in primord. page 97.
. For although London has been for many Ages the Chiefest of Britain, and was
no less than 1300 years since reputed Vetus Oppidum, and Augusta Ammian. Marc.
lib. 14.
. yet a Modern Writer of great Learning and Authority, would have York as the
more Ancient Metropolis of the Diocese of the Britains Philip. Berterius,
Pithanon Diatrib. 1. c. 3. fin.
; and that not only because it was a Roman Colony, which London was not, as
Onuphrius (contrary to so great and plain Authority of Tacitus) does affirm
Onuphr. in Imperio Romana.
: but also, for that the Emperors Palace, and Praetorium likewise, Tribunal or
chief Seat of Judgment was there; whence by the Old Historian Spartianus it was
called Civitas by way of excellency Spartian. in Severo. vid. Burt. Com. in
Anton. page 83, etc.
. It must be acknowledged, that the very Original of things are to us much
clouded in obscurity and uncertainty; yet he that duly consults Antiquity, will
find, That what Radulphus de Diceto writes touching the Original of Episcopacy
and Archiepiscopacy in Britain, seems to have the best Analogy with the truth,
comparing one Antiquary with another touching that Subject. This Radulphus de
Diceto was Dean of London, a very Ancient Historian, he wrote the History of
England, from A. 1147. to 1193. in a Book Entitled Imagines Historiarum; and
in the Prologue to his Chronicle Abbreviations, says, That Augustine (who by
Pope Gregory was sent into England. An. 600.) after he had Converted Ethelbert
King of Kent to the Christian Faith, went in the year 602. to Arles, where he
was Consecrated Episcopus Anglorum by Etherius Archbishop of that place; and
being returned into Britain sent Laurentius the Presbyter, and Petrus the Monk
to Pope Gregory, giving him an account of Britains being converted to the
Faith, and himself made Bishop thereof: Whereupon the said Gregory sent them
back into England, and with them several Divines to preach the Gospel in this
Isle, among which the Chief were Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, and Ruffinianus,
by whom he also sent the Pall to Augustine, and at the same time wrote him in
what manner he should Constitute Bishops in England, and that in haec verba,
viz. Per locos singulos 12 Episcopos ordines, qui tuae subjaceant ditioni^,
quatenus Lundoniensis Civitatis Episcopus semper in posterum a Synodo propria
debeat Consecrari, etc. Ad Eboricum vero Civitatem te volumus Episcopum
mittere, quem ipse judicaveris Ordinare. Ita duntaxat, ut si eadem Civitas cum
finitimis locis Verhum Dei receperit, ipse quoque 12. Episcopos ordinet, and
Metropolitani honor fruatur. Quem tamen tuae Fraternitatis volumus
dispositioni subjacere. Post obitum vero tuum ita Episcopus quos ordinaverit
praesit, ut Lundoniensis Episcopi nullo modo ditioni subjaceat. Sit vero inter
Lundoni and Eboricae Civitatis Episcopos in posterum honoris ista Distinctio,
ut ipse prior habeatur qui prius fuerit Ordinatus. Tua vero Fraternitas
Episcopos quos ordinaveris, qui vel per Episcopum Eboracae fuerint Ordinati,
Sacerdotes etiam totius Britanniae Subjectos habeat Hist. Angl. Script. Antiq.
Radulph. Abbre. Chron. Col. 435, 436.
. After the receipt of these Orders from Pope Gregory, the Bishops of Britain
were convened to a Conference by Augustine, he having first Ordained the said
Laurentius as his Suffragan, the said Mellitus Bishop of London, and the said
Justus Bishop of Rochester: About which time King Ethelbert built St. Paul's
Church London, or re-edified the same Beda, l. 2. c. 3.
. About this time also it was, viz. An. 608. that Pope Boniface obtained of the
Emperor Phocas, That the Church of Rome should be the Head of all other
Churches, (That of Constantinople having till then assumed that Title) the
which was after Decreed sub Anathemate in a Council of 62 Bishops. Afterward
the the said Laurentius, Mellitus, and Justus, became Archbishops of Canterbury
successively, viz. Laurentius in An. 615. Mellitus in An. 622. and Justus in
An. 626. according to the computation of the said Radulphus; by the last of
which Paulinus was Ordained Archbishop of York Bed. lib. 2. cap. 9.
, and to which Justus Pope Boniface wrote in haec verba, viz. Authoritati beati
Petri praecipientes firmamus, ut in Dorobernia Civitate semper in posterum
Metropolitanus totius Britanniae locus habeatur, omnesque Provinciae Regni
Anglorum praefati loci Metropolitanae Ecclesiae subjiciantur. Again, the
precedence of the Sea of Canterbury is recorded by the said Rodolphus in these
words, viz. Sicut Cantia subjicitur Romae, quod ex ea fidem accepit, ita
Eboricum subjicitur Cantuariae, quae eo Praedicatores misit. Sicut igitur seeds
Cantuariae prima fuit in fide, prima sit in honor. After Justus, Honorius was
made Archbishop of Canterbury, whom Paulinus consecrated at Lincoln; to whom
Honorius Pope wrote in haec verba, viz. Cum Dorobernensis Antistes, vel
Eboracensis de hac vita transierit, is qui superest habeat potestatem alterum
ordinandi. It is Reported, That Fridona a Saxon was the first English
Archbishop, and of the Sea of Canterbury in the Seventh Century, about the year
656. Fuller. Church-Hist. Cent. 7. p. 84. nu. 85.
Bed. lib. 2. cap. 16. Si de Consecrationibus Archiepiscoporum Cantuar.
contrarium aliquid inveneris in Authentico Libro, quam in hoc volumine
reperiatur, adquiescam in omnibus. And in the year 632. Pope Honorius wrote
unto Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury in these words, viz. Tuae Jurisdictioni
subjici praecipimus omnes Angliae Ecclesias and Regiones, and ut in Civitate
Dorobernia Metropolitanus Locus and honor Archiepiscopatus, and Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum Anglorum semper in posterum servetur.

That the Archiepiscopal Seat at York is likewise of very great Antiquity, is
evident by what is forementioned touching Paulinus Archbishop thereof above one
Thousand years since: Our Learned Antiquary tells us, Ex Patriis Scriptoribus,
That York was adorned with an Episcopal Seat by Constantius; But if so, or if
that be the truth which is recorded of Paulinus aforesaid, how then could
Faganus, sent hither by Pope Eleut herius to King Lucius, to plant the
Christian Religion, be (as reported) the first Archbishop thereof Anonym. qui
de Archiepisc. Ebor. scripsit. An. 1460.
or how could King Lucius place there one Theodosius, which yet is also
affirmed Harris. descrip. Britan. l. 1. c. 7.
? Or how could Sampson under the same King be Bishop of York? as appears by
Godwin, who yet suspects it, in regard that at the first entertainment of
Christianity among us, nor Hebrew, nor Greek Names of the New Testament were so
rise among the Britains; and indeed this Sampson is more generally reserved to
some Ages after, till King Arthurs time. Thus the Original of things (as
aforesaid) seems full of obscurity and uncertainty; yet it is most probable,
that the first Bishop of York was not till Constantines days; and we shall find
this Bishop at Arles, in the Council there held about the year 314. whither (as
himself writes in his Epistle to Chrestus Bishop of Syracuse) Eusebius. Eccl Hist.
l. 10. c. 5.
he summoned (to hear the Cause of the Donatists) many Bishops from diverse
places. Page 9.
In the last Edition of this Council, published by Jacobus Sirmondus at Paris,
among other Subscriptions thereunto, you have out of Britain these following,
viz. See the Admired Seldom, ad Eutichii Origines, pa. 122.
Eborius Episcopus, de Civitate Eboracensi, Provincia Britannia. Restitutus
Episcopus, de Civitate Londinensi, Provincia superscripta. Adelphus Episcopus,
de Civitate Colonia Londinensium, exinde Sacerdos Presbyter, Arminius Diaconus.
From which Council at Arles it may be observed, (1) That York was no
Archbishopric at that time, as neithet indeed was Rome it self. (2) That
Eborius Bishop of York at this Council takes place of Restitutus Bishop of
London, where (as some suppose) the Primacy always remained, till translated
to Canterbury. Whether Constantine the Great (who is supposed) to have adorned
York with an Episcopal Seat, as aforesaid) were Born there, and not elsewhere,
as some conceive, is not easily, at least not expressly proved out of the
Ancients, says a Learned Antiquary of Late times; Burt. Com* on Antonin. fo. 81.
yet (says he) That Authority seems to be drawn from them, which the
Ambassadors of England made use of, and that in the hearing of the Learned
World then, both at the Council of Constance, An. 1414. as also at that of
Basil, An. 1431. At the Council of Constance, there being a Contest about
Precedence between the English and French Ambassadors, the English have these
words, viz. Domus Regalis Angliae Sanctam Helenam, cum suo filio Constantino
Magno Imperatore, nato in urbe Regia Eboracensi, educere comperta est: The
Royal House of England, it is known for certain, brought forth Helena, with her
Son Constantine the Great, Emperor, Born in the Royal City Eboracum. Likewise,
the English at Basil opposing the Precedence of Castile, say thus, viz.
Constantium illum Magnum, qui Primus Imperator Christianus (so are their words)
Licentiam dedit per universum Orbem Ecclesias constituere, immensa ad hoc
Conferens bona, Peternae natum in Eboracensi Civitate: That Constantine, who
being the first Christian Emperor, gave leave to build Churches throughout the
World, was Born at Peterne in the City of York. By this they mean Bederne, a
College of Vicars there, sometime serving the Quire, which (as also
Christchurch) called in Ancient Charters Ecclesia Sanctae Trinitatis in Curia
Regis, is verily thought to have been part of the Imperial Palace in old time;
which seems the more probable by what Herodian writes, viz. That Severus the
Emperor, and his eldest Son Antoninus, sat at York about Private and Common
affairs, and gave their Judgment in ordinary Causes Herod. Hist. lib. 3.
, as in that of Coecilia about recovery of Right of Possession; The Rescript or
Law of which matter is to this day preserved in the Code C. de Reivindicat.
, whereon the Learned Cuiacius of Great Britain has made very remarkable
Observations Seld. Anaect. Angl. Brit. ib. 1. cap. 7.
. This was that Septimius Severus, Emperor of Rome, and Master of the World,
who in this Isle breathed his last, and who, when he saw there was nothing to
be expected but Death, called for the Vrn wherein he had appointed his Ashes
(after the Ossilegium Ossilegium, or the gleaning up of his Bones.
should be put, and viewing it very exactly, Thou shall hold (said he) the Man
whom the World could not contain Dio. Cassius Hist. Romans l. 76.
. No wonder then, that this City of so great Renown and Antiquity, was adorned
with an Archiepiscopal Seat above a Thousand years since, as aforesaid; yet it
never had those high Privileges or Pterogatives which were, and are peculiar
to the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury, whereof the Power (next under the
Crown) of convening Councils and Synods is not the least. Gervasius in his
Chronicle de Tempore H. 2. tells us, That RICHARDUS CANTUARIENSIS
Archiepiscopus totius ANGLIAE Primas and Apostolicae Sedis Legatus, Convocato
Clero ANGLIAE, celebravit Concilium in Ecclesia Beati PETRI ad WESTMONASTERIUM
15. kal. Junii Dominica ante Ascentionem Domini An. 1175. In hoc Concilio ad
dextram Primatis sedit Episcopus LONDONIENSIS, quia inter Episcopos
CANTUARIENSIS Ecclesiae Suffraganeos DECONATVS praeminet dignitate: Ad
sinistram sedit Episcopus WINTONIENSIS, quia CANTORIS officio praecellit.

The Church when Disdiocesan'd by Death, Guardians of the Spiritualties.
Translation or otherwise, or quasi viduata whilst the Bishop is employed about
Transmarine Negotiations in the Service of the King or Kingdom, the Law takes
care to provide it a Guardian quoad Jurisdictionem Spiritualem, during such
vacancy of the Sea or remote absence of the Bishop, to whom Presentations may
be made, and by whom Institutions, Admissions, etc. may be given; and this is
that Ecclesiastical Officer, whether he be the Archbishop, or his Vicar
General, or Deans and Chapters, in whomsoever the Office resides, him we
commonly call the Guardian of the Spiritualties. The Power and Jurisdiction of
this Office in the Church is very Ancient, and was in use before the time of
King Edward the First; it does cease and determine so soon as a new Bishop is
Consecrated to that See that was vacant, or otherwise Translated, who needs no
new Consecration. This Ecclesiastical Office is in being immediately upon the
vacancy of an Archiepiscopal See, as well as when a Bishopric happens to be
vacant. Beside the Presentations, Admissions, Institutions, etc. aforesaid,
that this Officer is legally qualified for, he may also by force of the Act of
Parliament made in the Five and twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, grant
Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties, etc. which together with such Instruments,
Rescripts, and other Writings as may be granted by virtue of the said Statute,
may be had, made, done, and granted under the Name and Seal of the Guardian of
the Spiritualties: And in case he shall refuse to give the same an effectual
dispatch, where by Law it may and ought to be granted, in every such case the
Lord Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, upon Petition and
Complaint thereof to him made, may issue his Majesty's Writ directed to such
Guardian of the Spiritualties, requiring him by virtue of the said Writ, under
a certain penalty therein limited by the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper,
to grant the same in due form of Law; otherwise (and no just and reasonable
cause showed for such refusal) the said penalty may be incurred to his Majesty,
and a Commission under the Great Seal issued to two such Prelates or Spiritual
persons as shall be nominated by his Majesty, impowring them by virtue of the
said Act to grant such Licenses, etc. as were so refused to be granted by the
Guardian, etc. as aforesaid.

The first thing in order to the Election of a Bishop, Conge d'Eslire,
Election, etc.
in the Vacancy of any Episcopal See, is (and ever has been since the time of
King John) the Royal Conge d'Eslire, which being obtained, the Dean and Chapter
proceeds to Election. It cannot legally be doubted, but that the consent of the
Dean is not only requisite, but also necessary to the Election of a Bishop, as
appears by an Ancient Contest above five hundred years since, between the Dean
and Canons of London touching the Election of Anselme. Soon after King Stephen
came to the Crown, he convened a Council at Westminster, vocati sunt ad
Concilium (says an Historian) WILLIELMVS DECANVS LVNDONIAE, Radulph. de Diceco
Abbre. Chronic. de Reg. Steph. R.
siuml and Canonici. Cum autem haberetur Tractatus de Concilio Lundoniensis
Ecclesiae tunc vacantis, nec in aliquem possent unanimiter convenire,
recesserunt a Decano Canoni little multi, citra conscientiam ejus ANSELMUM
Abbatem in Episcopum Eligentes. Canonici vero, quos Decanus habebat secum in
Mensa diebus singulis, Appellaverunt, nec Regis occurrerunt offensam. Canonici
quidem alii, quia quod fecerant, tam Regi quam toto Concilio videbatur iniquum,
Regis indignationem plurimam meruerunt, quorum aliqui bonis suis spoliati sunt.
The Pope afterward having on this occasion a solemn Conference with his
Cardinals, Albericus Hostiensis Episcopus, quod sequitur pronunciavit in
Publicum, Quoniam Electio Canonicorum Lundoniensium citra conscientiam and
Assensum Decani facta fuit, cujus est Officium in Eligendo Pastore suo de jure
primam vocem habere, Nos eam auctoritate beati Petri devocamus in irritum. So
that according to this Ancient President, the Election of a Bishop may not be
without the consent of the Dean; yet this we find upon Record nigh as Ancient
as the former; That where at present there was no Dean, there the Election of
the Bishop has been by the Canons alone, Canonici Saresbirienses Decanum non
habentes ad praesens, Idem de Reg. R. 1.
a Rege prius impetrata Licentia, Fratrem suum and Concanonicum Herebertum
Cantuariensem Archidiaconum, Assensu Communi solemniter in Episcopum Elegerunt.
Electionem factam in Publico recitavit Walterus Praecentor: Electioni factae
praebuit Rex Assensum, quam and Hubertus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus
Auctoritate propria Confirmavit, etc. Consonant to which method is the Act of
Parliament made in the 25. of H. 8. whereby it is Enacted, That on the vacancy
of every Bishopric, his Majesty should issue out his Writ of Conge d'Eslire to
the Dean and Chapter of the Church so vacant, enabling them to proceed to
Election of another Bishop; which Election being returned by the said Dean and
Chapter, and ratified by the Royal Assent, his Majesty should issue out his
Writ to the Metropolitan to proceed to the Confirmation of the party Elected,
and taking to himself two other Bishops at least, to proceed to Consecration,
in case he had not before been Consecrated Bishop of some other Church.

The place of Consecration of Bishops was anciently at Canterbury, as the
Mother Church not only of that Province, but of all England; For when in the
time of R. 1. An. 1192. a Bishop of Worcester Elect was to be Consecrated, and
Westminster the place designed for that solemnity according to the Popes
Command, it was opposed by the Prior and Covent of Christ-Church in Canterbury,
and at a time when the Archbishop thereof (whose presence could not but have
strengthened that opposition) was absent; yet the said Prior insisting on the
Privileges and Customs of the Church of Canterbury, opposed the said place of
Consecration, as appears by his Letter to the Bishop of Ely, the Popes Legate,
and other Bishops of that Province, in haec verba, Reverendis in Christo
Dominis and Fratribus W. Dei gratia Heliensi Episcopo Apostolicae sedis Legato,
Domini Regis Cancellario, caeterisque Episcopis Cantuariensis Ecclesiae
Suffraganeis, O. Prior and Conventus Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae salutem ab
Auctore salutis. Chron. Gervas. de Temp. R. 1.
Noverit Sanctitas vestra, Nos ad sedem Apostolicam appellasse, ne Wigorniensis
Electus alias quam in Ecclesia Cantuariensi, sicut moris est, Consecretur, and
ne quis vestrum, qui indemnitati Ecclesiae Cantuariensis vinculo Professionis
providere tenemini, alias quam in eadem Ecclesi^ ejus Consecationi interesse
praesumat. And at a Synod held at Westminster under P. Honorius 2. in the Reign
of H. 1. An. 1126. it was Ordained, That at the Consecration of Bishops nothing
should by way of Offerings be exacted or by force required. Statuimus and
Apostolica Authoritate Decernimus, ut in Consecrationibus Episcoporum, etc. nil
omnino per violentiam, nisi sponte oblatum fuerit, penitus exigatur. Simeon.
Dunelm. Hist. de Gest. Reg. Angl. The like you have Decreed at another Synod
held also at Westminster under P. Innocent. 2. in King Stephens Reign, An.
1138. Apostolica authoritate Sancimus, ut in Consecrationibus Episcoporum ne
quicquam ab Episcopo vel Ministris ejus exigatur. Hist. Richard. Prioris
Hagustald. de Gest. Reg. Steph. In the year 1123. which was in the Reign of H.
1. at the Council of Three hundred Bishops convened at Rome, P. Calixtus 2.
being President, it was Decreed, That no Bishop should be Consecrated, unless
he were first Canonically Elected. Nullus in Episcopum nisi Canonice Electum
Consecret, quod etsi praesumptum fuerit, and Consecratus and Consecrator absque
recuperationis spe deponatur. dict. Sim. Dunelm. Hist. As that Canon was not in
being, so the matter thereby ordained, in all probability was far from being
observed, when Plegmundus Archbishop of Canterbury, whom P. Formosus honored
with the Pall, Consecrated no less than Seven Bishops in one day, in the two
and twentieth year of King Alured. Chron. Johan. Bromton, Abbatis Jornalensis.
When a Bishop is Consecrated, then may he Consecrate, viz. Churches, etc. and
may Ordain Deacons, etc. But it was long since provided by the Council of
Lateran, under P. Alexander, That the Bishop should not confer Holy Orders on
any that were not then, or speedily to be provided with an Ecclesiastical
Living, Episcopus, si aliquem sine certo Titulo, de quo Necessaria vitae
percipiat, in Diaconum vel Presbyterum Ordinaverit, tam diu ei necessaria
subministret, donec ei in aliqua Ecclesia Convenientia stipendia militiae
clericalis assignet, nisi talis forte, qui Ordinatur, extiterit, qui de sua vel
paterna haereditate subsidium vitae possit habere. Can. 9. And as touching the
Bishops Consecrating of Churches, it being vulgarly supposed that there is a
considerable piece of Superstition therein, it cannot but be seasonable here to
enquire whether so or no, or whether the Consecration of Churches be not truly
Primitive, according to the Judgment of the Learned Dr. Heylin. To which
purpose you have here his very words, viz. The place of Public Worship is
called generally (according to the style of the Ancient Fathers) by the name of
the Church: For Consecrating or setting apart whereof to Religious uses, I find
(says he) so great Authority in the Primitive times, as will sufficiently free
it from the guilt of Popery: Witness the Testimony which Pope Pius gives of his
Sister Eutorepia in an Epistle to Justus Viennensis, An. 158. or thereabouts,
for setting apart her own House for the use and service of the Church: Witness
the Testimony which Metaphrastes gives of Felix the First, touching his
Consecrating of the House of Cicilia, about the year 272. And that which
Damasus gives unto Marcellinus, who succeeded Felix, for Consecrating the House
of Lucinia for Religions uses: Witness the famous Consecration of the Temple of
the Holy Martyrs in Jerusalem, Founded by Constantine the Great, at which
almost all the Bishops in the Eastern parts were summoned and called together
by the Emperors Writ: and finally (not to descend to the following Times)
witness the 89th Sermon of St. Ambrose, entitled De Dedicatione Basilicae,
Preached at the Dedication of a Church built by Vitalianus and Maianus, and the
Invitation of Paulinus, another Bishop of that Age, made by Sulpitius Severus
his especial Friend, Ad Basilicam quae prorexerat, in Nomine Domini
consummabitur, Dedicandum, to be present at the Dedication of a Church of his
Foundation. Heyl. Cyprian. Angl. p. 12.

The Decree of Faith made by the Council of Trent, was attended with no less
than Eight Anathematisms; the first whereof was against him that shall say,
that there is no visible Priesthood in the New Testament, nor any power to
Consecrate, etc. For in the beginning of that Decree it is affirmed, That there
is a visible and external Priesthood, in which Power is given, by Divine
Institution, to Consecrate the Eucharist, etc. In which Decree the Synod does
also condemn those who say all Christians are Priests, or have equal Spiritual
power, which is nothing but to confound the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which is
in an Order, as an Army of Soldiers; To which Hierarchical Order do belong
especially Bishops, who are Superior to Priests. Therefore one of the said
Anathematisms did reach those who say, Hist. Counc. Trent. lib. 8.
that there is not an Hierarchy instituted in the Catholic Church, by Divine
Ordination, consisting of Bishops, Priests, and Ministers. The Historian of the
aforesaid Council of Trent tells us, That the Sixth of the said Eight
Anathematisms was much noted in Germany, in which an Article of Faith was made
of Hierarchy; which word and signification thereof ( says he) is Alien, not to
say contrary to the Holy Scriptures; and though it was somewhat Anciently
invented, yet the Author is not known; and in case he were, yet ( says he) he
is an Hyperbolical Writer, not imitated in the use of that word by any of the
Ancients: and following the style of the Primitive Church, it ought ( says he)
to be named not Hierarchy, Dict. Lib. 8.
but Hierodiaconia, or Hierodoulia. But Thomas Passius, a Canon of Valentia,
said in that Council, That all doubt made of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, did
proceed from gross ignorance of Antiquity; it being a thing Notorious, that in
the Church the People have always been governed by the Clergy, and in the Clergy
the Inferiors by the Superiors, until all be reduced unto one Universal
Rector, which is the Pope of Rome; and that it was plain that the Hierarchy
consists in the Ecclesiastical Orders, which is nothing but an holy Order of
Superiors and Inferiors. But Francis Forrier, a Dominican of Portugal, at the
same time said, That Hierarchy consists in Jurisdiction, and the Council of
Nice places it in that, when it speaks of the Bishop of Rome, Alexandria,
and Antioch, and therefore the handling of Hierarchy not to be joined with that
of Order. Others were of a Third opinion, viz. That Hierarchy was a mixture of
both, viz. of Order and Jurisdiction also. Thus was that Learned Council
divided in this high point of Hierarchy, that though they all agreed the thing,
yet they could not agree wherein to fix it, whether in Order, or in
Jurisdiction, or in both. Notwithstanding it is generally agreed, That the
Hierarchy of the Catholic Church is proved by the Testimony of all Antiquity,
and by the continual use of the Church, and that it consists of Prelates and
Ministers, who are Ordained by Bishops, in whom resides the power of
Consecration, which may be a sufficient warrant for this digression. Which
Consecration, as it refers to Persons, is done per impositionem manuum, except
as to Virgins; for they also by the Pontifical Law are Consecrable Creatures,
though they be Foolish Virgins, yea, though they be Polluted Virgins, provided
it be not per spontaneam and voluntariam pollutionem, and there be but putativa
Virginitas in the case; and shall have not only Laureolam Virginitatis, but
also Velum Consecrationis, as they call it. Cajetan. in Sum. V. Virgin.
consecrat. and Less. de Just. and Jur. lib. 4. c. 2. Dub. 16. and alii DD. But
where the Consecration refers to Things, as Churches, Chapels, Bells, and
other things of the like sound, there it is done per preces together with other
Consecration-ceremonies, the Episcopal Order therein concurring: so likewise
the Consecration of Virgins is per preces, together with other Ceremonies used
in the Consecration of Virgins, Cujus Signum est, quod in Pontificali Romano,
ubi de hac Consecratione agitur, non dicatur roganda de aliqua contaminatione,
sed de vita, conscientia, and carnis integritate, ut notat Cajetanus. Less. ubi
sup.

That which is next in view, Deans and Chapters.
is some prospect of Deans and Chapters; there were it seems in former times
certain Deans, who usurped an Authority beyond their Dignity or Function, and
took upon them to exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction. These were condemned in a
Council at Lateran under Pope Alexander, by the fifth Canon of, that Council in
these words, viz. Quoniam, quidam in quibusdam partibus sub pretio statuuntur,
qui Decani vocantur, and pro certa pecuniae quantitate Episcopalem
Jurisdictionem exercent, praesenti Decreto statuimus, ut qui de caetero id
praesumpserit, Officio suo privetur, and Episcopus conferendi hoc officium
potestatem amittat. Chron. Gervas. de Temp. H. 2. Anciently likewise there were
certain Deans, which were called Decani Christianitatis; one of which kind
appears in an Ancient Record nigh Four hundred years since, relating to the
Privileges of the Priory of St. Austins, wherein the words to this present
purpose sic se habent, viz. Super Privilegiis Innocentii Papae 4. hic superius
ad mandatum conservatorum, ut praetactum est, publicatis, Thomas Prior
Ecclesiae Christi Cant. Guydo Prior S. Gregorii, and Thomas Decanus
Christianitatis, ejusdem Civitatis eadem Privilegia inspexisse ad certitudinem
futurorum testati sunt. Chron W. Thorn. de Temp. Ed. 1. An. 1293. Heretofore
also Priors have been called Deans; so we find Ceolnothus or Chelnothus ( in
the time of King Ethelred and his Brother Alured) Dean of Canterbury to have
been called, Postea Ceolnothus Cantuariensis Ecclesiae Decanus, etc. ubi cum
Decanus esset, quem nos Priorem vocamus, non modicum videre solebat Conventum.
And again, Egelnothum, alias Ceolnothum, ejusdem Ecclesiae Christi Decanum, vel
Praepositum suum Decanum vocabant, quem nos post adventum Lanfranci Priorem
appellamus. Gervas. Act. Pontif. Cant. And where we meet with the word Decania,
as in the History of Ranulphus Bishop of Durham in the Conquerors time, written
by Simeon the Monk, Deconatus is thereby intended, it being the Ecclesiastical
Dignity of him, qui, in Majori Ecclesia, denis ad minus Canonicis sive
Praebendariis (ut vocant) sub Episcopo praeest; but the DECANVS CHRISTIANITATIS
aforesaid, so called per Antiquiores Anglos, is secundum recentiores DECANVS
RVRALIS, quem Exteri ARCHIPRESBYTERVM VICANVM vocant. De quo and de Vrbano vid.
Duaren. de Sacr. Eccl. minist. and benef. lib. 1. cap. 8. A probable conjecture
why anciently he might be called Decanus Christianitatis, we may (ut mihi
videtur) have from Mr. Seldom, in Notis ad EADMERUM, page 208. Christianitas (
says he) and ea quae ad Christianitatem pertinent, passim apud Eadmerum atque
alios illius aevi Scriptores, functionem Episcopalem, atque Fori sacri actionem
and administrationem, seu Officium Episcopale, ut usitatius appellatur,
denotant. -- Hinc apud nos, Fora sacra, quibus, jure nempe communi subnixis,
aut Episcopi praesunt, aut ii qui eo nomine Episcopos, utpote quos provocare
licet, suscipiunt, Curiae Christianitatis etiamnum vocitantur. Glossar. Hist.
Angl. Antiq. ver. Christianitas. -- vid. plura in Vrbis Cantuar. Antiq. page
362, 363. ubi de Decano Christianitatis. But the Deans here specially meant and
intended, are only such as with the Chapters, according to the ancient and
genuine use thereof, are as Senatus Episcopi to assist the Bishop in his
Jurisdiction, Cathedral Churches being the first Monuments of Christianity in
England. So Dr. Hacket in Parliament, 1640.

The Office and Ecclesiastical Dignity of Archdeacons, Archdeacons.
which you next meet with in this Abridgment, is of very great Antiquity. There
was a sharp Contest above Five hundred years since, in the time of King H. 2.
between the Archdeacons and the Priors of Winchester and Ely, touching the
Presentation of their Bishops Elect unto the Metropolitan in order to their
Consecration, wherein by the Interlocutory of the said Metropolitan the Priors
had the Victory. Hora congrua Consecrationis instante R. Wintoniensis and R.
Elyensis Archidiaconi, cum Officiales Episcoporum dicantur, ad suum spectare
contendebant Officium Electiones, etc. praesentare Metropolitano: W.
Wintoniensis and S. Elyensis Priores in contrarium sentiebant: quam enim in
Ecclesiis Cathedralibus, ubi Canonici divinis mancipantur obsequiis, Decani
sibi vindicant dignitatem: hanc si Monachorum Conventus in Episcopali sede
praemineat, sibi jure possunt vendicare Priores. Sed ut omnis in posterum
amputetur occasio Litigandi, de Interlocutoria Metropolitani sententia, etc.
Wintoniensis and Elyensis Electi^, ad Priorum suorum praesentationem recepti,
ad Priorum suorum postulationem Episcopi Consecrati sunt. -- Radulph. de Diceto
Imag. Hist. By the 25th Canon of the Council of Lateran under Pope Alexander it
was Ordained, That an Archdeacon in his Visitation should not exceed the numqer
of Five or Seven Horsemen for his Retinue. Chron. Gervas. de Temp. H. 2. And as
to the Visitation-Articles, every Bishop and Archdeacon heretofore framed a
Model thereof for themselves; but at the Convocation in the year 1640. a Body
thereof was composed for the public use of all such as exercised
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And by the foresaid Canon of the Council of
Lateran, it was further Ordained, That no Archdeacon in his Visitation should
presume to exact from the Clergy more than was justly due, Archidiaconi autem
sive Decani nullas exactiones in Presbyteros seu Clericos exercere praesumant.
Notwithstanding what toleration the Law allows as to Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, etc. as to the number of their Retinue in their Visitations; yet
therein respect is ever to be had to the condition of the Churches, Persons,
and Places Visited, as may plainly appear by the express words of the Canon
aforesaid, viz. Sane quod de numero evectionis secundum tolerantiam dictum est,
in illis Locis poterit observari, in quibus ampliores sunt redditus and
Ecclesiasticae facultates. In pauperibus autem Locis tantam volumus teneri
mensuram, ut ex acc^ssu majorum minores non debeant gravari, ne sub tali
indulgentia illi qui paucioribus Equis uti solebant hactenus, plurium sibi
credant potestatem indultam. So that no Archdeacon or other having Right of
Visitation, ought by what the Law allows them in that case, to exercise their
power in this matter, beyond what the condition of the place Visited will
reasonably admit.

In all Visitations of Parochial Churches, Procurations.
made by Bishops and Archdeacons, the Law has provided that the Charge thereof
should be answered by the Procurations then due and payable by the Inferior
Clergy, wherein Custom as to the Quantum shall prevail; but the undue Demands
and supernumerary Attendants of Visitors have Anciently as well as in Later
times, given the occasion of frequent Contests and Complaints: For prevention
whereof it was Ordained by the 25th Canon of the Council of Lateran under Pope
Alexander, circa An. 1179. in haec verba, viz. Cum quidam Fratrum and
Coepiscoporum nostrorum ita graves in Procurationibus subditis suis existunt,
ut pro hujusmodi causa interdum ipsa Ecclesiastica Ornamenta subditi
compellantur exponere, and longi temporis victum brevis hora consumat. Quocirca
statuimus, Quod Archiepiscopi Parochias Visitantes, pro diversitate
Provinciarum and facultatibus Ecclesiarum 40 vel 50 evectionis Numerum,
Episcopi 20 vel 30, Cardinales vero 20 vel 25 nequaquam excedunt. Archidiaconi
vero Quinque aut Septem, Decani Constituti sub Episcopis, Duobus Equis contenti
existant. Prohibemus etiam, ne subditos suos talliis and exactionibus Episcopi
gravare praesumant. Archidiaconi autem, sive Decani nullas exactiones, vel
tallias in Presbyteros, seu Clericos exercere praesumant. vid. Chron. Gervas.
de Temp. H. 2. col. 1455. can. 25. whereby it is evident, that these
Procurations ought to be so moderated by the Bishops, as that they may not
become a burden or grievance to the Clergy. The lawfulness of these Episcopal
and Archidiaconal Rights of Procurations are not to be called into question at
this day; for in all the Establishments and Ordinations of Vicarages upon the
Ancient Appropriations of Churches, you shall find these Procurations excepted,
and reserved in statu Quo: As appears by these of Feversham and Middleton, when
by William the Conqueror they were Appropriated to the Abbey of St. Austins; as
also by these of Wivelsberg, Stone, and Brocland in Kent, when they were
Appropriated to the same Abbey by the Charter of King Ed. 3. and in that of the
Parish of Stone aforesaid, Pentecostals by name are reserved, in these words,
Nihilominus solvet Procurationem debitam Archidiacono Cantuariensi Visitanti,
and expensas pro Pentecostalibus faciendis. -- vid. Chron. W. Thorn,
Appropria. Eccles. col. 2089. Hist. Angl. What Procurations the Archbishop of
Messena, who arrived in England as the Popes Legate in the year 1261. exacted
and extorted from the Bishops and Abbots with great violence in the Reign of
King* H. 3. you may find in Matthew Paris. But by the Fourth Canon of the
Council at Rome under Pope Alex. 3. An. 1180. it was Ordained, That Bishops and
Archbishops in their Visitations should not overcharge the Church of their
Bounds, with unnecessary charges and expenses, specially the Churches that are
poor.

No sooner had Princes in Ancient times assigned and limited certain Matters
and Causes controversal to the cognizance of Bishops, Diocesan Chancellors.
and to that end dignified the Episcopal Order with an Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; but the multiplicity and emergency of such affairs required, for
the dispatch and management thereof, the assistance of such subordinate
Ordinaries, as being experienced in the Laws adapted to the nature of such
Causes, might prove a sufficient Expedient to prevent the avocation of Bishops,
by reason of such Litigious interpositions, from the discharge of the more
weighty Concerns of that Sacred Function. Hence it is supposed, that the
Ecclesiastical Office of Diocesan Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials
originally came into use and practice, the place of their Session anciently
styled the Bishops Consistory. Among the many Learned Ecclesiedicts, who have
supplied that Ecclesiastical place, William Lindwood (who finished his
industrious and useful work of the Provincial Constitutions about the year
1433. in the time of K. Henry the Sixth) seems to be of the highest Renown; his
Education was in the University of Cambridge, first Scholar of Gonvil, then
Fellow of Pembrook-hall; his younger years he employed in the study of the
Imperial and Canon Laws; afterward became Keeper of the Privy Seal unto King
Henry the Fifth, by whom he was honored with an Embassy to the Crowns of
Spain and Portugal. After the Kings death he reassumed his Officials place of
Canterbury, and then collected the Constitutions of the Fourteen later
Archbishops of Canterbury, from Stephen Langton unto Henry Chichley, unto whom
he dedicated that highly to be esteemed Work, his Gloss thereon, being in it
self as a Canonical Magazine, or the Key which opens the Magazine of the whole
Canon Law. It was printed at Paris, An. 1505. at the cost and charges of
William Bretton Merchant of London, revised by the care of Wolfangus
Hippolitus, and Prefaced unto by Jodocus Badius. This Famous Lindwood was
afterward made Bishop of St. David's.

By the Grant of William the Conqueror the Bishops originally had an entire
Jurisdiction to judge all Causes relating to Religion, Courts Ecclesiastical.
for before that time the Sheriff and Bishop kept their Court together. He
granted also to the Clergy Tithes of Calves, Colts, Lambs, Woods, Mills, etc.
So that before the Conquest there were no such Courts in England as we now call
Courts Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, for Anciently the Bishops sat in Judgment
together with the Secular Judges and Sheriffs on the same Tribunal, specially
about Easter and Michalmass; which appears by Mr. Seldom in his Notes on
Eadmerus, page 167. as also by the Laws of King Aethelstane, Debent Episcopi
cum Seculi Judicibus interesse Judiciis, ne permittant si possint, ut illinc
aliqua pravitatum germina pullulaverint; and Sacerdotibus pertinet in sua
Diocoesi, ut ad rectum sedulo quemcunque juvent, nec patiantur si possint, ut
Christianus aliquis alii noceat, etc. Chron. Jo. Bromton. de Leg. Aethelst.
Reg. And in the Preamble to the Laws of that King you will find these words,
viz. Debet etiam Episcopus sedulo pacem and concordiam operari cum Seculi
Judicibus. Yea, long after the Conquest, in the Reign of H. 2. An. 1164. by his
Laws made at Clarendon the Bishops might interest themselves with the Kings
Secular Judges, where the matter in Judgment extended not to diminution of
Members, or were Capital. An. 1164. Congregati sunt Praesules and Proceres
Anglicani regni apud Clarendoniam. Rex igitur Henricus, etc. Then it follows in
Lege undecima, viz. Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, etc. sicut Barons caeteri
debent interesse Judiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, usque perveniatur in
Judicio ad diminutionem Membrorum, vel ad mortem. Notwithstanding, at the same
time the Bishops Ecclesiastical Courts, as also the Archdeacons Courts, were
established in this Kingdom, and further ratified and confirmed by these very
Laws of King H. 2. made at Clarendon, as appears by the Tenth Law, and that
immediately foregoing the Premises, in haec verba, viz. Qui de Civitate, vel
Castello, vel Burgo, vel dominico manerio Domini Regis fuerit, si ab
Archidiacono vel Episcopo de aliquo delicto Citatus fuerit, unde debeat eis
Respondere, and ad Citationes eorum noluerit satisfacere, been licet eum sub
Interdicto ponere, sed non debet, etc. and exinde poterit Episcopus ipsum
Accusatum Ecclesiastica Justitia coercere. Chron. Gervas. de Temp. H. 2. In
those days there was no occasion for that just Complaint, which a Learned Pen
(as a Modern Author observes) makes, viz. That Courts which should distribute
Peace, do themselves practice Duells, whilst it is counted the part of a
Resolute Judge to enlarge the Privilege of his Court. Lord Bacon in his
Advanc. of Learn. p. 463. Aphor. 96. -- It was with more moderation expressed
by him who said, It was sad, when Courts that are Judges, become Plaintiffs and
Defendants touching the Bounds of their Jurisdiction. In the first Parliament
of King Edward the Sixth's Reign it was Enacted, That all Process out of the
Ecclesiastical Courts should from thenceforth be issued in the Kings Name only,
and under the Kings Seal of Arms contrary to the usage of former Times. But
this Statute being Repealed by Queen Mary, and not Revived by Queen Elizabeth,
the Bishops and their Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials, have ever since
exercised all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in their own Names, and
under the distinct Seals of their several Offices respectively. Also by the
Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 19. it being Enacted, That all former Canons and
Constitutions, not contrary to the Word of God, the Kings Prerogative, or the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, should remain in force, until they were
reviewed by Thirty two Commissioners, to be appointed by the King, and that
Review being never made in that Kings time, nor any thing done therein by King
Ed. 6. (though he had also an Act of Parliament to the same effect) the said
Ancient Canons and Constitutions remained in force as before they were; whereby
all Causes Testamentary, Matrimonial, Tithes, Incontinency, Notorious Crimes of
Public Scandal, Wilful absence from Divine Service, Irreverence, and other
Misdemeanors in or relating to the Church, etc. not punishable by the Temporal
Laws of this Realm, were still reserved unto the Ecclesiastical Courts, as a
standing Rule whereby they were to proceed and regulate the Exercise of their
Jurisdiction. Vid. Heyl. ubi supr. p. 2, 3. Touching the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and what Matters and Causes should be cognizable in the
Ecclesiastical Courts of Normandy in the Reign of King Richard the First, upon
occasion of a Contest inter Ecclesiam ROTHOMAGENSEM and WILLIELMUM Filium
RADULFI, Steward of Normandy, it was nigh Five hundred years since finally
Accorded, Published, and (inter alia) Declared by all the Clergy, That all
Perjuries and Breach of Faith (except in case of National Leagues,) all
Controversies relating to Dowries and Donations propter Nuptias (quoad Mobilia)
should be heard and determined in the Ecclesiastical Court; it was then also so
many hundred years since further Resolved in haec verba, viz. Quod distributio
eorum quae in Testamento relinquuntur, auctoritate Ecclesiae fiet, nec Decima
pars (ut olim) subtrahetur: It was likewise at the same time and so long since
further Resolved, That Si quis subitanea morte, vel quolibet alio Fortuito Casu
praeoccupatus fuerit, ut de rebus suis disponere non possit, Distributio
Bonorum ejus Ecclesiastica auctoritate fiet. -- Radulph. de Diceto. Hist. de
Temp. Rich. 1. Regis.

Of all the Churches in Great Britain, Churches and Chapels.
that of Saint Paul's London is of the largest structure, if not of the highest
Antiquity: Some will have it in Ancient times to have been the Temple of Diana,
but the Ingenious Commentator on Antoninus's Itinerary, page 169.
though he will admit that Diana was indeed worshipped here in the Roman times,
and had Temples here also, yet he will not agree it other than a Tradition to
assert, That St. Paul's Church was formerly a Temple of Diana; and is free to
conjecture, that Mr. Seldom did but sport his Wit, and was not in good earnest,
when he imagined that London might be called first Lhan Dien, that is, the
Temple of Diana Claris. Seld. illust. in Polyol. magni Poetae Angl. Cant. 8.
. The same may be said concerning the Temple of Apollo, on the Ruins of which,
the report is, St. Peter's in Westminster was founded Guil. Stephanides
Descript. Land.
. The Antiquary will also have it, That at York was Bellona's Temple; and
Minerva's Temple at Bath, and that from her the Town was called Caer Palladour,
that is, the City of Palladian waters Spartian. Hist*
. They that will have the Church of Rome to be Caput Ecclesiarum, do ascribe it
to Pope Boniface, that he obtained it of the Emperor Focas, because the Church
of Constantinople writ her self Primam omnium Ecclesiarum: This was so Decreed
in the year 608. by a Council of 62 Bishops sub Anathemata Rad. de Diceto Abbr.
Chron.
. At a Synod held at Westminster under Pope Innocent 2. in the Third year of
King Stephen An. D. 1138. it was Decreed, That no Church should be built
without Leave first obtained from the Bishop of the Diocese, Apostolica
authoritate prohibemus, ne quis absque Licentia Episcopi sui Ecclesiam vel
Oratorium constituat Hist. Ri. Prioris Hagulstad. de Gest. R. Steph.
. By the Fifth Law of Ina King of the West Saxons the Church is made a
Sanctuary, Si quis sit mortis Reus, and ad Ecclesiam fugiat, vitam habeat, and
emendet sicut rectum consulet L. 5. Inae R.
. At a Synod held at Westminster in the Reign of H. 2. An. 1175. it was
ordained then no Judgments touching Blood or Corporal punishment should be
given in a Church or Churchyard; by the Sixth Canon made at that Synod,
Seculares Causas, in quibus de sanguinis effusione, vel de poena Corporali
agitur, in Ecclesiis, vel in Coemiteriis agitari sub interminatione anathematis
prohibemus Chron. G^rvas. de Temp. H. 2.
. By the Fifth Canon made at a Synod held in London during the Reign of Edmond,
Father of Edwin and Edgar, who succeeded Aethelstan, at which Synod were
present Odo and Wulstan Archbishops, provision was for the Repairing of
Churches, viz. Vt omnis Episcopus reficiat Dei domos in suo proprio, and Regem
ammoneat, ut omnes Ecclesiae Dei sint been paratae Chron. Jo. Brampton de LI.
Edm. Reg.
. The like you have in the 92 Law of King Kanute, Ad refectionem Ecclesiae
debet omnis populus secundum Legem subvenire Idem de Legib. K^nuti Reg.
. At a General Council held at Rhemes under Pope Calixtus, An. 1119. during the
Reign of H. 1. it was Ordained, That whoever invaded the possessions of the
Church should be Anathematized; Vniversas Ecclesiarum possessiones, quae
Liberalitate Regum, vel Largitione Principum concessae sunt, inconcussas in
perpetuum, and inviolatas esse decernimus. Quod si quis eas abstulerit, aut
invaserit, Anathemate perpetuo feriatur. And by the Sixth Law of Ina aforesaid,
if any man fought in the Church, he should forfeit Six pounds; si quis in
Ecclesia pugnet, 120 solid. emendet. And although it be now looked upon as
Exaction for a Parson to demand his Funeral dues of Burial, where the deceased
is carried out of his Parish to be buried in another, so it was long since
Ordained by the Laws of King Kanute, leg. 16. Si Corpus aliquod a sua Parochia
deferatur in aliam, pecunia tamen Sepulturae ejus jure in eam Ecclesiam
pertinebit.

Among other Officers relating to the Church, Churchwardens.
those of Churchwardens, Questmen, and Sidemen are not to be omitted; for
although they may be some of the Lower Form, yet they are of necessary use, and
such as without whose care many disorders in the Church may pass unpunished, as
well as the Concerns thereof much prejudiced; for which end and reason the Law
will have them to be a Corporation, qualifies them to Sue, subjects them to
Suits, and understands them in the nature of Ecclesiastical Trustees as
Guardians of the Moveable Possessions of the Church: Therefore the Canons have
determined, as to the qualification of the persons Eligible, the manner of
their Choice, by whom, and the time when, their Oath, Office, Duration, and
Account; when and before whom it shall be made, and how they shall be finally
discharged.

By reason of the great desolation and ruin of many Churches and Parishes in
the late Unnatural War in this Kingdom, Consolidation.
and otherwise, it has been judged necessary to pass an Act of Parliament for
the Uniting of certain Churches in Cities and Towns Corporate: Notwithstanding
which, the Parishes to remain distinct as to all Rates, Taxes, Parochial
Rights, Charges and Duties, and all other Privileges, Liberties, and Respects
whatsoever; wherein it is also Enacted, That the Patrons of such Churches and
Chapels so united, shall Present by Turns only to that Church, which shall
remain and be Presentative from time to time, etc. Provided, That Parishes
having 100 l. maintenance per An. may not be United. Also the Incumbents of
such united Parishes must be Graduates in some University. And the Owners of
Impropriations may bestow and annex Maintenance to the Churches where they lie,
and settle it in Trust for the benefit of the said Parsonage or Vicarage,
without any License of Mortmain. It is there also further Enacted, That if the
settled Maintenance of such Parsonage, Vicarage, Churches, and Chapels so
united, etc. shall not amount to the full sum of 100 l. per An. clear and above
all charges and reprizes, that then it shall be lawful for the Parson, Vicar,
and Incumbent of the same, and his Successors, to take, receive, and purchase
to him and his Successors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, and other
Hereditaments, without any License of Mortmain; any Law or Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding. The Churches and Parishes in London, which by that
Act since the Dreadful Fire are United, are these, viz. The Parishes of
Alhallowes Breadstreet and St. John Evangelist are united into one Parish, and
the Church of the former to be the Parish Church of the Parishes so united. The
Parishes of St. Albans Woodstreet, and St. Olaves Silverstreet are united into
one Parish, and the Church of the former to be the Parish Church of the said
Parishes so united. The Parishes of St. Austins and St. Faiths are united into
one Parish, and the Church of the former to be the Parish Church of the said
Parishes so united. The like order to be observed in all the rest of the Parish
Churches that are by that Act united.

Touching Dilapidations of Ecclesiastical Edifices and Possessions,
Dilapidations.
it may well be presumed, That the most of that kind that ever was in the
Christian World, was in the time of Dioclesian's Persecution; which moved
Constantine, Son of Constantius Chlorus, who began his Reign in the year of our
Lord 310. to give command for the Re-edifying and Repairing the Temples of the
Christians; which was not only expeditely put in Execution, but many new
Churches were also erected for the Convention of the Christians; and
Idol-Temples shut up until Julian the Apostate restored the Heathenish
Idolatry. It has ever belonged to the care and cognizance of the Church, to
make provision for the Repair of the Dilapidations of the Church. Thus Jehoida
made it his business to repair the Dilapidations of the Temple: 1 Chro. 24.
But although Controversies hence arising, and incident to this matter, are
properly belonging to Ecclesiastical cognizance, yet they are not only
Ecclesiastical persons that are hereunto obliged; for although they alone are
to prevent and repair, or make satisfaction for what part of the Churches Dowry
themselves have suffered to be Dilapidated, whilst in their own possession; yet
as to the Church it self, and the Incidents thereof, others as well as
Ecclesiastics are obliged to the Repairs thereof; for the Steeple with the
Body of the Church, and all Chapels lying in Common thereunto, are to be
Repaired by the Joint cost of the Parishioners: And such Private Chapels, as
wherein particular persons claim a propriety of Seat and Sepulture, are to be
Repaired at their own charge; but the Chancel is to be kept in Repair at the
Parsons cost: yet in all these respect is chiefly to be had to the Custom of
the Place time out of mind, for that shall rule the Premises, and will go far
to determine, whether the Fences of the Churchyard are to be made and repaired
at the charge of the Parson (who may have the ground thereof as part of his
Glebe) or at the charge of the Parishioners, or of such persons whose Land
surrounds or abutts on the same. Suarez de Virt. and St^tu Religionis, lib. 1.
c. 28. nu. 18.
Suarez says, That for the better prevention of Dilapidations, there was
Anciently a Custom in some places, That some part of the Tithes should not be
paid to the Clerk, or applied to the party Beneficed, but should be reserved
for the use of the Fabric of the Church, to repair the same, and for the use
of the Poor; and were not properly due to any particular Clerk, ut in ejus
dominium transferantur, but to the Church; not the material Temple, but to the
Church, that is, the Clergy for the use of the Temple. The Executors or
Administrators of a Dilapidator stand charged in the Ecclesiastical Court to
the succeeding Incumbent to make good the Repairs; and if such Dilapidator in
his lifetime shall make a Deed of Gift to defeat the Successor of the effect
of his Suit, it is void, 13 Eliz. cap. 10. And the Successor Incumbent shall
have like remedy in the Ecclesiastical Court against such Donee or Grantee, as
he might have had against the Dilapidators Executor or Administrator. Also by
14 Eliz. cap. 11. it is provided, That all the Moneys received for
Dilapidations, shall within Two years be employed upon the Buildings, for which
they were paid, on pain of forfeit of so much to the King as shall not be so
employed.

When a Church becomes Litigious, Patrons and Patronage.
and doubt arises touching the right of Patronage or Presentation, in that case
the Law has provided an Expedient for the Ordinary, whereby his being a
Disturber, in case he Collate or Present, is prevented; to which end and in
such case the Law directs him to award the Jure Patronatus; wherein the
Practice with us at this day, answers to the pretense of all persons quorum
interest, with more exactness and general satisfaction, than was anciently
practicable according to the Canons and Constitutions of old, as appears by the
defect (in this matter) of the Seventeenth Canon of the Council at Rome, An.
1180. which is only to this effect, viz. If a question arise concerning
Presentations of diverse persons to one Church, or concerning the Gift of
Patronage, if the foresaid Question be not decided within the space of Three
months, the Bishop shall place in the Church the person whom himself conceives
most worthy. The Law takes notice of a twofold Jus Patronatus, the one Civil,
the other Canonicum: The former is that which is introduced by the Civil Law,
and refers to a Lord or Patron in respect of his Bondsman made Free, and his
Goods: the other, and which only is here intended, is, That which is instituted
by the Church in show of gratitude to him who either Founded, built, or Endowed
some Church; for which reason the Bishops granted them a certain Right in such
Churches, which is commonly called Jus Patronatus, and that by the Canon Law
understood as Honorificum, Vtile, and Onerosum. Honorificum, in regard of that
obsequious Respect due from the Parish to the Patron, specially in that the
chiefest Seat in his Church is granted to him: Onerosum, in that the Patron may
lawfully defend his Church, and prevent the Dilapidations both of the Church,
and of what she is Endowed with according to the way and manner prescribed in
cap. Filiis 16. q. 7. It is also called Jus Vtile, because that if any time the
Patron or any descending from him shall happen to fall into decay, in such case
the said Church is more obliged to supply the necessities of him and his, than
of any other Poor. c. Quaecunque cum sequent. For this reason also it is, and
that others may be encouraged to the like Acts of Piety, the Church (as a Mark
of special grace and favor) has granted to such Patrons the Jus Praesentandi,
or a Right to Present fit persons to the Benefice of such Churches. This Right
or Jus Patronatus did not belong to Patrons anciently or jure antiquo, as
appears by the Gloss in cap. Piae mentis; yet most certain it is, That this
Right of Patronage was Jus antiquissimum, as is evident by cap. Quoniam. de
jure Patronat. And the Lateran Council calls it Potestatem, in qua Ecclesia huc
usque Patronos sustinuit.

The present Incumbents, Parsons and Parsonage.
Parsons and Vicars, of Churches burnt in London by the late Dreadful Fire, and
by Act of Parliament not to be rebuilt, are by the said Act not deprived of the
Tithes, or other profits formerly belonging to their respective Churches so
long as they shall assist in serving the Cure, and other Offices belonging to
their duty in the Parish Church, whereunto their respective Parishes shall be
united and annexed by the said Act, according to the direction of the Ordinary,
etc. Saving to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the Tenths and
First Fruits of all such Parish-Churches as by force of the said Act are united
and consolidated, etc. yet so, as that the said Parsons and Vicars are by the
said Act indemnified from the payment of all First Fruits, Tenths, and Pensions
due, and which shall be due unto his Majesty, and from all dues to the Ordinary
and Archdeacon, and all other dues whatsoever chargeable upon them
respectively, until such time as they shall receive the Profits arising from
the same, as formerly. And no Process to issue out of any Court whatsoever,
against the persons aforesaid, for their Non-payment of First Fruits, Tenths,
Pensions, or any other the dues aforesaid, etc. The said Parsons are likewise
by the said Act indemnified for not Reading the 39 Articles, or not doing other
thing enjoined by Law, until such time as the said Churches be Re-edified, or
made fit for Public Worship. The said Parsons and Vicars are likewise
empowered to let Leases of their Glebe-Lands, with the consent of the Patron
and Ordinary, for any Term not exceeding 40 years, and at such yearly Rents,
without Fine, as can be obtained for the same: And that no Lapses incurred upon
any Non-Presentation in due time of any of the Patrons of the said Livings
since the said Fire, shall any ways prejudice, or make void the Presentations
that the said Patrons have since made, whereupon any Incumbent is since
Instituted and Inducted, any Law or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. By the Third Canon of that great Assembly of 180 Bishops at
Rome, in the Church of Constantiniana, An. 1180. in the Twentieth year of Pope
Alexander the Third, it was Ordained, That no man should be admitted to the
Office of a Bishop under the age of Thirty years; nor that any should be
admitted to be a Deacon, or Archdeacon, or to have the government of a Parish
until he were of the full age of Five and twenty years.

The next Chapter speaks of Vicars, Vicars, Vicarages, and Benefices.
Vicarages, and Benefices; Gervasius a Monk of Canterbury in his Chronicle de
tempore H. 2. (under whom a Synod was convened at Westminster, An. 1175. by
Richard then Archbishop of Canterbury) acquaints us with an Ancient Canon made
at that Synod, whereby Vicars are restrained from behaving themselves proudly
against their Parsons, a piece of Spiritual Insolence not grown quite out of
practice to this day: It is the Eleventh Canon, the words are, Illud etiam de
Vicariis, qui personis fide and juramento obligati sunt, duximus statuendum,
quod si fide vel Sacramenti religione contempta Personatum sibi falso
assumentes, contra Personas se erexerint, si super hoc in jure vel confessi vel
convicti fuerint, de caetero in eodem episcopatu ad Officii sui Executionem non
admitta^tur. In all Appropriations of Churches there ever was, and ought to be,
an establishment of sufficient Maintenance for the Vicar and his Successors,
pro sustentatione sua congrua, made by the Bishop of the Diocese, by and with
the consent of such as to whom such Churches are Appropriated: And this, though
for the most part consisting only of the Minute Tithes, yet has the
denomination of a Benefice, or Ecclesiastical Benefice, as properly as any
Rectory or Parsonage whatever; for they are perpetual Vicars, in whom the
Vicarage or Benefice is as in Fee, though not properly in demesne as in Fee, as
Temporal Inheritances are; and therefore the word [ Beneficium] with the
Feudists and Canonists is the same as Feodum or Feudum with our Common Lawyers;
yet sometimes it is opposed to that which we call Allodium, or what a man has
in his own Name, and in his own proper Right and absolutely, for that which is
here understood by Beneficium, may be possessed nomine alieno, and certis sub
Legibus; which may not properly be said of Allodium, that being properly what a
man does possess nomine proprio, and absolute: An instance of this you have in
the Grant made by King William Rufus to Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury;
Praecepit Rex, ut investiretur Anselmus omnibus ad Archiepiscopatum
pertinentibus, atque ut Civitas Cantuariae, quam Lanfrancus suo tempore in
Beneficio a Rege tenebat, and Abbatia Sancti Albani, quam non solum Lanfrancus,
sed and Antecessores ejus habuisse noscuntur, in Allodium Ecclesiae Christi
Cantuariensis pro redemptione animae suae perpetuo jure transirent. By the
Ninth Canon of the Lateran Council under Pope Alexander, It is prohibited to
grant or promise any Ecclesiastical Benefices before they are actually void;
the reason of which Canon was, to prevent the desire of the death of the
present Incumbent, by him who by such promise or grant had an expectation to
succeed him in the Benefice.

In the next place follows the Chapter of Advowsons, Advowsons.
which the Canon Law calls Jus Patronatus, being a power or right of Presenting
one to be Instituted to a vacant Ecclesiastical Benefice; I say, Vacant,
because if the Benefice be not then void, the Presentation will be void in Law;
the reason is, because were it otherwise, occasion might thereby be given the
Presented to desire or wish for the Incumbents death. cap. Nulla. de Concess.
Praebend. And although, what we call Advowson, the Canon Law calls Jus
Patronatus; yet every Jus Patronatus is not an Advowson, according to the Civil
Law; for the Jus Patronatus has a twofold acceptance in the Law; the one,
That Right which Lords or Patrons have on their Bondmen made Free by
Manumission, and so it is taken in ff. de jur. Patron. but this is not to our
present purpose: the other, That Right of Presentation to an Ecclesiastical
Benefice, which belongs to Patrons of Benefices and Churches, which in the Law
is likewise called Jus Advocationis, as appears by cap. Quia Clerici, de Jur.
Patronat. And this is that Advowson here intended. This Right of Advowsons or
Jus Patronatus the Law does also distinguish into Ecclesiastical and Laical.
Touching the Ecclesiastical vid. Covarru. in qq. pract. c. 36. n^. 2. which is
so called, not because an Ecclesiastic does enjoy or possess it (for so he may
also possess a Laick Patronage;) but because it belongs to one for that he has
founded, built, or endowed the Church Ex bonis Ecclesiasticis, or by reason of
some Rectory of a Church, or some Ecclesiastical Dignity: As when a Benefice is
erected with money gotten ex bonis Ecclesiasticis; in that case he has Jus
Patronatus Ecclesiastici, or Patronatum Ecclesiasticum: And so it is, if one
has the Advowson or right of Presentation on, because he is a Bishop, a Dean,
or the like; this also is Jus Patronatus Ecclesiastici, so the Gloss, in Clem.
2. de jur. Patronat. and alii. The other kind of Advowsons or Jus Patronatus
Laici is so called, for that it belongs to one, because he has either founded,
built, or endowed some Church, or erected some Benefice Ex bonis
patrimonialibus. Lessius de Justic. and jure, cap. 34. de Benefic. Dub. 4. In
pursuance of that distinction it is, that the Canon Law determines in a
different manner in respect of Ecclesiastic and Laick Patronages, touching the
time limited for Presentation to a vacant Benefice; for (according to that Law)
if the Patronage be Laick, the Patron is obliged to Present within Four months
next after the Church becomes void: but if the Patronage be Ecclesiastical,
then within Six. cap. unico, de Jur Patronat. in 6.

Concerning Appropriations of Churches, Appropriations.
the first thereof since the Conquest appears to be that of Feversham and
Middleton in Kent, An. 1070. granted by William the Conqueror to the Abbey of
St. Austins in Canterbury in manner following, viz. In Nomine, etc. Ego
Willielmus, etc. ex his quae omnipotens Deus sua gratia mihi largiri est
dignatus, quaedam concedo Ecclesiae. S. Augustini Anglorum Apostoli, etc. pro
salute Animae meae and Parentum meorum, Predecessorum, and Successorum,
haereditario jure; haec sunt Ecclesiae and Decimae duarum Mansionum, viz.
Feversham and Middleton ex omnibus redditibus qui, etc. and omnibus ibidem
appendentibus, terra, sylva, pratis, and aqua, etc. Haec omnia ex integro
concedo S. Augustino, and Abbati, and Fratribus, ut habeant, and teneant,
possideant in perpetuum; which was afterward Confirmed by Pope Alexander the
Third, and Ratified by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, together with an
Establishment and Ordination of a Vicarage by the said Archiepiscopal Authority
in each of the said Churches respectively. The like you have for the
Appropriating of three other Churches to the same Abbey, viz. of Wyvelsberg,
Stone, and Brocland in Kent, by the Charter of Ed. 3. above Three hundred years
since, Confirmed by Pope Clement's Bull, and Ratified by Simon Mepham then
Archbishop of Canterbury, with his Establishment of Three perpetual Vicarages
to the said Churches: Which Charter is to this effect, viz. Nos de gratia
nostra speciali, and pro C. Libris, quas praefati Abbas and Conventus nobis
solvent, etc. Concessimus and Licentiam dedimus pro Nobis and haeredibus
nostris, quantum in Nobis est, ejusdem Abbati and Conventui, Vid. G. Thorn in
his chronicle De Reb. gestis Abbatum S. Augustine. Cant.
quod ipsi Ecclesias praedictas Appropriare, and eas sic Appropriatas in
proprios usus tenere possint sibi and Successoribus suis in perpetuum (nisi in
hoc, Quod Nos tempore vacationis Abbatiae praedictae, si contigerit Ecclesias
praedictas, vel aliquam earundem tunc vacare, Nos Jus Praesentandi ad easdem
amitteremus) sine occasion, vel impedimento Nostri, vel haeredum nostrorum
quorumcunque. Hujus Data est sub An. Do. 1349. The Modern Church-Historian of
Britain in his Eleventh Book, page 136. calls to remembrance, That about An.
1626. there were certain Feoffees, a whole dozen of them (though not
incorporated by the Kings Letters Patents, or any Act of Parliament, yet)
Legally ( he says) settled in Trust to purchase in Impropriations, and that it
was incredible ( how then possible to be believed?) what large Sums were
advanced in a short time toward that work: But then withal tells us somewhat
that is Credible, viz. That there are 9284 Parochial Churches in England,
endowed with Glebe and Tithes; but of these (when the said Feoffees entered on
their work) 3845 were either Appropriated to Bishops, Cathedrals, and
Colleges, or Impropriated (as Lay-Fees) to Private persons, as formerly
belonging to Abbeys. The Redeeming and Restoring (he does not mean to the
Abbeys) was the design of these Feoffees, as to those in the hands of Private
persons, but re infecta, the Design proved abortive.

A Commendam or Ecclesia Commendata, Commendams:
so called in contradistinction to Ecclesia Titulata, is that Church, which for
the Custodial charge and government thereof, is by a revocable Collation
concredited with some Ecclesiastical person, in the nature of a Trustee, vel
tanquam fidei Commissarius, and that for the most part only for some certain
time, absque titulo; for he that is Titularly Endowed, has the possession of
the Church in his own Name and in his own proper Right during his life; hence
it is, that in the Canon Law a Church collated in Commendam, and a Church
bestowed in Titulum, are ever opposed as contraries vid. Hist. Council. Trident.
lib. 6. page 600. and Duaren. de Benefic. lib. 5. cap. 7. Thus King Edgar
Collated Dunstan Bishop of Worcester to the Bishopric of London by way of
Commendam; Rex Edgarus (says Radulph. de Diceto in his Abbreviat. Chronicorum)
Lundoniensem Ecclesiam proprio Pastore viduatam commisit regendam Dunstano
Wigornensi Episcopo. Et sic Dunstanus Lundoniensem Ecclesiam Commendatam
habuit, and non Titulatam. dict. Radulph. de An. 962. It is supposed that the
first Patent of a Commendam retinere granted in England by the King to any
Bishop Elect, was that which King Henry the Third by the advice of his Council
(in imitation of the Popes Commendams then grown very common) granted by his
Letters Patents to Wengham then Chancellor of England notwithstanding his
insufficiency in the knowledge of Divinity, to hold and retain all his former
Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices, whereof the King was Patron, together
with his Bishopric (he then succeeded Fulco Bishop of London) for so long time
as the Pope should please to grant him a Dispensation: whose Dispensation alone
would not bar the King to Present to those Dignities and Benefices, being all
void in Law by making him a Bishop. He had also the like Patent of Commendam
retinere as to his Benefices and Ecclesiastical Preferments in Ireland. And
this Patent of such a Commendam being made by the King, his Lords and Judges,
is for that reason the more remarkable. vid. Le Hist. of the Church of Great
Britain, page 84. According to the proper and ancient Account, Commendams were
originally introduced in favor and for advantage of the Church which is
Commended, in favorem and utilitatem Ecclesiae quae Commendatur. Imola in ca.
Nemo. de Elect. in 6. says, that Commendams are not to be Nisi ex evidenti
Ecclesiae Commendatae necessitate vel utilitate. The distinction of Temporal
and Perpetual Commendams in the Canon Law is of no great use with us; indeed in
the Church of Rome, according to the former mode of Commendams, a vacant Church
is Commended either by the Authority of the Pope, if it be a Cathedral; ca.
penult. and ult. 21. q. 1. or by the Authority of the Bishop, if it be a Church
Parochial. This is commonly Temporal, or for Six months, and is in utilitatem
Ecclesiae: the other commonly Perpetual, and are magis in subventionem eorum,
quibus commendantur, quam ipsarum Ecclesiarum. And a Commendatary for life, is
the same in reality with the Titular. These Commendams in their Original were
Instituted to a good purpose, but after used to an evil end: For when by reason
of Wars, Pestilence, or the like, the Election or Provision could not be made
so soon as otherwise it might, the Superior did Recommend the vacant Church to
some honest and worthy person; to govern it, besides the Care of his own, until
a Rector were provided; who then had nothing to do with the Revenues, but to
govern them and consign them to another. But in process of time these
Commendataries, under pretense of Necessity, made use of the Fruits, and to
enjoy them the longer, sought means to hinder the Provision: for remdy whereof,
order was taken that the Commenda should not continue longer than Six months:
But the Popes by the plenitude of their Power, did exceed these Limits, and
Commended for a longer time, and at last for the life of the Commendatary,
giving him power to use the Fruits.

When any Ecclesiastical Benefices happen to be void, Lapse.
the Law provides that they shall be seasonably supplied with meet Incumbents,
and will not by any means admit any long Vacancy, and has therefore set a
competent time within which he that has the original right of Presentation in
him, shall discharge his duty therein, or the Lapse shall incurr to him or them
to whom by Law ab Inferiori ad Superiorem it gradually devolves. This matter of
Lapse ( in the intent and purpose thereof, though not by that denomination) is
very Ancient: By the Ninth Canon of the Council of Lateran under Pope
Alexander, it is provided, That Cum Praebendas, Ecclesias, seu quaelibet
officia in aliqua Ecclesia vacare contigerit, vel si etiam modo vacant, non diu
maneant in suspenso, sed in Sex menses personis quae digne administrare valiant
conferantur. Si autem Episcopus, ubi ad eum spectaverit, confer distulerit,
per Capitulum ordinetur. Quod si ad Capitulum Electio pertinuerit, and infra
praescriptum terminum hoc non fecerit, Episcopus exequatur. Aut si forte omnes
neglexerint, Metropolitanus de ipsis absque illorum contradictione disponat.
vid. Chron. Gervasii de Temp. H. 2. And by the Eighth Canon or Constitution of
the Council at Rome in the year 1180, under Pope Alexander the Third, it was
Ordained, That no Ecclesiastical Office should be promised to any man before it
became vacant by the decease of the Possessor. For ( says the Canon) it is an
unrighteous thing to put any man in expectation of another man's Living, whereby
he may wish his Brothers death. And when any place shall happen to be vacant,
let it be planted again within Six months, or else he who has the Right of
Plantation shall lose it at that time, and the Chapter, or Metropolitan Bishop
shall have power to provide the vacant place. According to the Canon Law the
Lay-Patron has but Four months to present to a Benefice, but an Ecclesiastical
Patron has Six. Patronatus vero Laicus intra quatuor menses praesentare
potest, Ecclesiasticus autem Patronus intra Sex menses. c. uno, de jure Patron.
in 6. But the Pope is not limited to any time, so that he may Collate to such
Ecclesiastical vacant Benefice at what time he pleases. Papae vero non est
aliquod tempus praefixum, cum non habet Superiorem, qui possit ejus
negligentiam supplere. c. aliorum 9. q. 3. nisi in c. Statutum, de Praeb. in 6.
Although regularly all inferior Dignities Ecclesiastical and Benefices ought
to be bestowed within Six months of their Vacancy, according to the Rule of the
Canon Law, c. cum nostris, c. dilectus, and c. postulastis. Yet the greater
Dignities are by that Law to be conferred within Three months, Majores vero
Dignitates, ut Episcopales, debent intra Tres menses tribui. c. ne pro defectu,
de Elect. c. postquam, 50. Did.

Although in strictness and propriety of Speech, Collation and Presentation.
Presentation referrs to the Lay-Patron, and Collation to the Bishop, yet in
the Canon Law the words Collation and Collator are frequently used in a sense
promiscuously relating to them both. Therefore you have it in one place said,
That Praesentatio a Fundatore fieri solet, Episcopo, vel alteri Collatori, and
Episcopus instituit Praesentatum a Patrono. Rub. and per tot. tit. de Instit.
and c. quod autem, de jur. Patron. In another place it is said, That
Praesentatio Large dicitur Collatio. Rebuff. in Prax. Benefic. Reg. de infirm.
Benefic. resignant, gloss. 14. nu. 6. post Barba. in c. Abbatem de Rescript.
col. pen. Yea, and sometimes Collation is generally taken also for Institution;
per tex. in ca. uno. ut Ecclesiast. Benefic. sine diminut. conferant. Although
a Layman does found, build, or endow a Church, yet the Canon Law allows him
not the Privilege of Jus Patronatus or Jus Praesentandi otherwise than ex
gratia; for the Canonists do hold, That de rigore juris non potest Laicus
Ecclesiastica tractare negotia. c. 2. de Judic. only (say they) the Popes to
encourage them in the founding, building, or endowing of Churches, have
reserved that Privilege for them, and confirmed it by a Law. -- c. Decernimus
16. q. 7. and per tot. tit. de jur. Patronat. As the Jus Patronatus, so
Presentation also by the Canon Law is twofold, the one by an Ecclesiastical
Patron, the other by a Lay Patron: This distinction is best known only to the
Canon Law, and although it may be so in Presentation, yet it is not properly
applicable to Collation. The Ecclesiastical Patron (as aforesaid) has by that
Law Six months, to be computed from the day of his having Notice of the Vacancy
to Present. c. unic. de jur. Patronat. 6. Do. de Rota, Decis. 568. tit. de
Sent. and re jud. Decis. 31. and 845. tit. de filiis Presb. decis. 4. By the
Ecclesiastical Patron is meant or intended, that person who has the Jus
Patronatus in him ratione Ecclesiae seu Beneficii quod possidet. c. dilectus de
Offic. Leg. c. cum dilectus, de jure Patro. But the Lay Patron, who has the
Jus Patronatus ratione sui patrimonii, has only Four months (as aforesaid) ad
Praesentandum. d. c. uno. yet in his Presentation he may variare, but that may
not be more than semel tantum. c. quod autem, de jure Patr. and this
Cumulative, non autem ut a primo recedere omnino possit. c. cum autem, ubi Pan.
ibid. So likewise as to Collation, that also is twofold by the same Law, viz.
Necessary and Voluntary (a distinction of little use with us;) Necessary, which
the Collator is bound to make, as to one who has a Mandate from the Superior
Power for the same, c. tibi, and c. duobus. de Resor. lib. 6. The Voluntary
Collation, being that which is free in him who has power to make the same.

The Canon positively requires, Examination. Admission.
that Examination shall ever precede Ordination, Admission, Institution, and
Induction; and although this be incumbent on the Bishop or Ordinary (when it is
in order to a Benefice) before the Six months expire; yet no obligation lies
upon him to effect it, so soon as the party offers his submission to an
Examination, specially if at the same time the Ordinary be circa curam
Pastoralem. This Examination referrs to the due qualification of the person to
be Ordained or Beneficed, as to his Ability and Conversation. After this
Examination and thereon the Ordinaries Approbation, the way is open for
Admission, if no other Legal impediment appears to the Ordinary; yet the Canon
requires, that notwithstanding the Bishops Approbation upon the party's
Examination, he may not Ordain him, unless he has in esse or posse, a promise
or a prospect of some Ecclesiastical Living, whereof to assume the Cure, and
whereon to receive subsistence, unless the Ordinary will maintain him until he
be so provided, in case he has not of his own wherewith to subsist without
such provision, for our Law and Practice both requires, that they should be
Incumbents, and not Mendicants. By the Fifth Canon or Constitution made by that
great Convention of no less than One hundred and Eighty Bishops at Rome, under
Pope Alexander the Third, it was Ordained, That if any Bishop should Admit any
man to be a Presbyter or a Deacon, without the Title of a Place that may afford
unto him things necessary for the maintenance of his life: Let the Bishop
himself sustain him, until he provide a Living for him, except he be able of
his own patrimony to sustain himself. In the Council of Carthage it was
Ordained, Quod nullus ordinetur Clericus, nisi probatus, aut examine
Episcoporum, aut populari testimonio. cap. Nullus 24. did. And by the Council
of Pope Martinus it was Decreed, That all such as were Ordained Presbyters or
Deacons without Examination, were to be expelled the Clergy. c. si. 24. Did.
The Subject Matter whereon they are to be Examined differs with us from that
used in the Church of Rome chiefly in these Three particulars, viz. Quoad
Genus: quoad Patriam: quoad Fidem. vid. c. quando. 24. Did. There are several
ancient Canons which give this Jus Examinationis to Archdeacons, c. adhaec,
etc. ut nostrum, De Offic. Arch. c. si quis 94. Did. yet Rebuffus tells us,
that at this day in France they have lost that part of their Office by a kind
of desuetude or disuse thereof, it now wholly belonging to the Episcopal Order
in that Kingdom, as in this and most other Churches of Christendom. c. Si
servus, 54. Did. c. accepimus. de aetate and qualitate.

Vacatio Beneficii, Avoidance.
or the Avoidance of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, which you meet with also in
the ensuing Abridgment, as it is opposed to Plenarty, is the want of a lawful
Incumbent; during which vacancy the Law looks on the Church quasi viduata,
without her Spiritual husband, and our Common Law on the Possessions thereof as
in abeiance. An Avoidance in the causes thereof, as practicable with us,
differs, much from that at the Canon Law, where there are thrice as many as are
in use with us. Rebuff. Prax. Benef. de Regia ad Praelatur. nominat. fac..
Monasteriis.
Rebuffus enumerates above Thirty Causes of such Avoidances, but of such
relation to the Pontifical Constitutions, that not above a Third part of them
takes place in this Realm. It is Quaestio Juris, whether a Benefice be void
before Sentence Judicially pronounced, albeit in the Law it be said, Quod ipso
facto sit privatus? Admitting the Crime to be committed for which the Law says
he shall be deprived ipso facto; yet the Question is held in the Negative,
unless it plainly appears that the mind of the Legislators were otherwise, as
if those words were added, viz. Beneficium eo ipso vacare, ita ut alteri Libere
possit conferri. c. Dudum 2. de Elect. As when one takes a second Benefice
Incompatible. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 62. art. 3. Cajetan. ib. Sotus lib. 1. de Just.
q. 6. art. 7. Covar. de Matrim. p. 2. cap. 6.. 8. nu. 9, and 13. and generally
the Modern DD. But the Question is put a little further, As whether the
Benefice be void when it is said in the Law, Sit privatus ipso facto absque
alia declaratione? Covarruvios, Sotus, and Henriquez de Excom. c. 56. and many
other of the later Writers are of Opinion, that it is not void, but that a
declaratory Sentence of the Crime is requisite; and that Clause, absque alia
declaratione, is to be understood of a declaration of the penalty incurred, not
of the Crime committed; which exposition of the words, though it may seem
somewhat strained, is notwithstanding by the frequent use and practice thereof
among the Canonists sufficiently confirmed. And those Laws which say, that the
Benefice shall be void ipso jurc, as in Extrav. Ambitiosae, De reb. Eccl. do
not seem to be taken in that strict and rigorous sense, Vt sponte teneatur se
Reus spoliare. Less. de Just. and Jur. lib. 2. cap. 29. de Judice. Dub. 8. nu.
68. If it shall hence be demanded, of what force, energy, or operation then are
such Laws, whereby a man is ipso jure deprived of his Benefice, by reason
either of some Crime committed, or another Benefice Incompatible accepted? the
Answer which the Canonists make to it is, That by the words ( ipso jure
privatus Beneficio) the Offender does immediately lose the very Title he had to
the Benefice, insomuch as that he is no longer Dominus Beneficii, yet does
retain the possession thereof, of which he cannot be Deprived, nisi causa
cognita, without a fair Trial at Law. Gloss. in c. Licet Episcopus, 28. de
Praebendis in 6. and DD. ibi. Note, This is not said by way of interpretation
of these words ( ipso jure) in any Statute Law of this Realm, but by way of
Exposition thereof among the Canonists.

Although the Clergy have ever been had in the highest repute both with Prince
and People, Plurality.
where the Gospel has been received, and have been honored with diverse
Privileges and Immunities above the Laity, yet the Law has ever held it as
prejudicial to the Church, That Plures honores Ecclesiastici uni personae sint
tribuendi. At a Council convened at Westminster in the Five and twentieth year
of the Reign of H. 1. being above Five hundred years since, Honorius 2. then
Pope, in this Synod it was Ordained in these words, Praecipimus ne uni personae
in Ecclesia Archidiaconatus, aut diversi tribuantur honores. To this purpose is
the Third Canon of the Lateran Council under Pope Alex under, Quia nonnulli
diversas Ecclesiasticas Dignitates, and plures Ecclesias Parochiales contra
Sacrorum Canonum instituta nituntur adquirere, ita ut cum unum Officium vix
implere sufficiant, stipendia sibi vendicent plurimorum, ne id de caetero fiat,
districtius inhibemus. Et quia tantum quorundam processit ambitio, ut non duas
vel tres, sed Sex vel plures Ecclesias perhibeantur habere, nec duabus possunt
debitam provisionem impendere: per Fratres and Coepiscopos nostros hoc emendari
praecipimus. Likewise Gregory the Tenth, who succeeded Clement, at a Council at
Lions, Pluralitatem Beneficiorum Curatorum damnavit. Hen. de Knyghton. de
Event. Angl. lib. 2. In like manner it appears by the Fourteenth Canon of the
Council at Rome under Pope Alexander 3. An. 1180. That Plurality of Benefices
is there forbidden, as a vice smelling of Avarice and Ambition, dangerous and
prejudicial to the People, whose Souls are neglected by such Pastors. One of
the chiefest Reasons, why the Law forbids Pluralities, is, because it enjoins
Residence, both which are inconsistent in the same Incumbent. Aquinas says,
That the having of Two Benefices is not intrinsecally evil, or Malum in se, nor
that it is altogether indifferent, but carries in it a species of Evil, yet so
as that upon due Circumstances it may be capable of a qualified lawfulness.
Aquin. quod-lib. 9. art. 15. To the many Inconveniences, which the Law does
specifically observe to follow upon Pluralities, this may not impertinently be
added, That thereby the pious Intention of Founders is frustrated. The Council
of Trent has these words of it, Haec Pluralitas est perversio totius Ordinis
Ecclesiastici. Council. Trid. Sess. 24. cap. 17. Pope Alexander the Third said,
That Pluralitas Beneficiorum certum continet animarum periculum. c. Quia in
tantum 7. de Praebend. The Canonists speaking of this Subject in reference to
Dispensations, to salve the matter if possible, and bring both ends together,
have found out a very pretty distinction of Beneficia Incompatabilia primi
generis, ^o ^ius de Just. and Jure.
and Incompatabilia secundi generis: But we are not concerned in that
Distinction. In that Council of Trent it was said by the Bishop of Bitonto,
That Plurality of Benefices, unknown to the First Ages, was not brought in by
the Court of Rome, but by Bishops and Princes, before the Popes took upon them
to regulate the matter of Benefices throughout all Christendom. Yet the Author
of the History of the said Council of Trent, lib. 2. says, That Clement the
Seventh Commended to this Nephew Hippolitus, Cardinal de Medicis, in the year
1534. all the Benefices of the world, Secular and Regular, Dignities and
Parsonages, Simple and with Cure, being vacant for Six months, to begin from
the first day of his possession, with power to convert all the Profits thereof
to his own use.

The ways whereby an Ecclesiastical Benefice may be acquired, Deprivation.
are not many; but the Causes for which an Ecclesiastical person may thereof be
Deprived, are very many; generally they may all be reduced to these Three
Heads, (1) By the Disposition of the Law: (2) By the Sentence of the Judge: or
(3) By a free and voluntary Resignation, which though it be not properly a
Deprivation, yet it is an amission of the Benefiee. Deprivation by the
disposition of the Law, is either by reason of some Crime, whereunto the
penalty of Deprivation ipso facto is by the Law annexed, or by reason of
accepting another Benefice Incompatible. The Pontifical Law adds Two more,
which do not concern us, viz. Ingress into Religion, and Matrimony. The Crimes
that incurr Deprivation are many, but they must be proved, for the Beneficed
party is not bound sponte sua to quit his Benefice ante Sententiam Judicis.
Less. de Benefic. cap. 29. Dub. 8. And when a man is not Jure Privatus, but
only Privandus, in that case his Benefice cannot be bestowed on another, unless
a Privative Sentence be first pronounced by the Judge. If a person Beneficed be
long absent and Non-resident from his Benefice, the Benefice is not by reason
of such long Absence void ipso Jure; but the Law in that case also requires a
Judicial Sentence of Deprivation, and that only post trinae Citationis in eorum
Ecclesiis public Edictum. Gloss. in c. Quoniam, ut lite non contestata, etc.

One of the chiefest Reasons in Law why Pluralities are prohibited, Residence.
is for the prevention of Non-residence, as appears by the Third Canon of the
Lateran Council; which Canon, after it prohibits the having of diverse
Ecclesiastical Dignities or more Parochial Churches than one, it makes
provision against Non-Residence in these words, viz. Cum igitur vel Ecclesia,
vel Ecclesiasticum Ministerium committi debuerit, talis ad hoc persona
quaeratur, quae Residere in loco, and curam ejus per seipsum valeat exercere.
Quod si aliter Actum fuerit, and qui receperit, quod contra Sacros Canones
acceperit amittat; and qui dederit, largiendi potestate privetur. Likewise by
the Thirteenth Canon of that great Council of One hundred and eighty Bishops,
Assembled at Rome by Pope Alexander the Third in the year of our Lord 1180. it
was Ordained, That such persons should be preferred to Ecclesiastical
Dignities, as shall be actually resident with their people, and undertake the
Cure of their Souls, by doing the work of their Ministry in their own persons,
otherwise to deprive them of the Office and Benefice conferred on them; and
they who do conferr them without these Conditions, let them lose the right of
conferring Offices and Benefices. By this appears, how strict and exact the Law
is against Non-Residence in the Romish Church.

One of the most famous Abbots and Monasteries in Britain anciently, Abbots and
Abbeys.
seems to be that of Bangor in Flintshire, whereof Ranulphus Cestrensis says,
that Tradunt nonnulli Pelagium fuisse Abbatem apud Famosum illud Monasterium de
Bangor Cestrens. Polychron. l. 4. c. 31.
.. This Monastery which Ranulphus speaks of, is by our Beda called Bamornabyrig
lingua Anglorum, in quo (says he) tantus fertur fuisse numerus Monachorum, ut
cum in Septem portiones esset cum Praepositis sibi Rectoribus Monasterium
divisum, nulla harum portio minus quam Trecentos homines haberet, qui omnes de
labor manuum suarum vivere solebant Bed. Eccl. Hist. lib. 2. c. 2.
. But concerning Abbots, having nothing to do with them, nor they with us; it
being also well known what once they were in this Kingdom, and what now they
are where the Pope does exercise his Jurisdiction, it may here suffice only to
observe, That the word [ Abbates] has anciently had a wide and far different
signification from what we now commonly understand thereby; for in and among
the Laws of King Aethelstan, we find the words [ quatuor Abbates] to be taken
(according to the Glossographist thereon) for quatuor hebdomadas: That Law
directs how and in what manner the Hundred Court shall be held; the words are,
Hoc est judicium qualiter HUNDREDUM teneri debeat: In primis ut conveniant
semper ad quatuor ABBATES, and faciat omnis homo Rectum alii Hist. Angl. Scrip.
Antiq. col. 847.
. which the Glossary calls Locum plane mendosum, and by the quatuor Abbates
will have quatuor hebdomadas to be understood; which is the more probable by
what appears in one of the Laws of King Edward, Father of the said Aethelstan,
who began his Reign in An. 901. being the Son of King Alured: the words of
which Law are, Volo ut omnis praepositus habeat GEMOTUM semper ad QUATUOR
EBDOMODAS, and efficiat ut omnis homo rectum habeat, and omne placitum capiat
terminum quando perveniat ad finem Ibid. col. 837.
By the word [ Gemotum] in that place is meant Conventus Publicus, Concilium,
but chiefly Placitum, as appears by the 107th Law of King Kanute, made for the
indemnity of such as should have recourse to Tribunals, for their safe coming
and going to and from Courts of Justice. Et volo ut omnis homo pacem habeat
eundo ad gemotum, Quam varia sint gemotorum genera, vid. Equit. Doct. in suo
Glossario.
vel rediens de gemoto, id est, placito, nifi fit fur probatus. It is a word
from the Saxon (...), convenire, unde Nostratium, to meet. But this digression
the Reader must put on the Abbots score, in regard the word [ Abbates] gave the
occasion thereof; which may be but a Venial offense, in regard that that
Ecclesiastical Dignity is with us laid aside, though their Possessions had
better Fortune; yet when King H. 8. did dissolve them, he did not only augment
the number of Colleges out of the Revenues thereof, but also erected diverse
new Bishoprics, as at Westminster, Oxford, Peterborough, Bristol, Chester, and
Gloucester; all remaining at this day save that at Westminster, which being
restored to its pristine Institution by Queen Mary, and Benedictines placed
therein, was after by Queen Elizabeth converted to a Collegiate Church. In this
Chapter there is mention also made of Chauntries, Cantaria, or if you please,
Aedes Sacra: ideo Instituta and Dotata Praediis, ut missa ibidem Cantaretur pro
anima Fundatoris and propinquorum ejus. Ita Spelm. Of these and Free Chapels
about 2374. were dissolved by King H. 8. to whom they were given by Parliament
in the 38th year of his Reign: The Religious Houses under 200 l. per An. were
granted to him in An. 1535. All greater Monasteries in An. 1538. The Chantery
and Free Chapels in An. 1545. Of these Chanteries Forty seven belonged unto
St. Paul's, London.

And as for Annates or First Fruits, Annates or First Fruits.
it is Historically reported to us, that they were first introduced into
England in the time of King Edward the First by Pope Clement, who succeeded
Benedict. For this Pope Clement after the death of Pope Benedict, was no sooner
Elected and Enthroned in France, but he began to exercise his new Rapines here
in England, by a compliance with the said King Edward, in granting him a Two
years Disme from his Clergy for his own use, though pretended for the aid of
the Holy Laud, that with the more ease himself might exact the First Frutts of
vacant Ecclesiastical Benefices to augment his own Revenues, though not within
his own Territories. This is said to be the first President of any Popes
reserving or exacting Annates or First Fruits of all Ecclesiastical Dignities
and Benefices throughout England, extant in our Histories: which, though
reserved but for Two years by the Pope at first, yet afterward grew into a
Custom by degrees, both in England and elsewhere. And thus they remained in
the Pope until an Act of Parliament entitled the Crown thereunto in the time
of King Henry the Eighth, which afterward were restored again to the Pope by
Queen Mary; but in the first year of Queen Elizabeth an Act passed for
restoring the Tenths and First Fruits to the Crown. Notwithstanding what some
Historians have (as aforesaid) reported touching the first introduction of
First Fruits into England by Pope Clement in the time of King Edward the First,
it is most evident that they were to be yielded and paid here in England some
hundreds of years before that time, as appears by the Laws of Ina King of the
West Saxons, who began his Reign in the year 712. The Law was this, viz.
Primitias seminum quisque ex eo dato domicilio, in quo ipso Natali die Domini
commoratur. Lambert. de Leg. Inae Reg. And by the Laws of King Edgar, who began
his Reign in the year 959. it is Ordained in these words, Ex omni quidem
ingeniorum terra, ipsae Seminum Primitiae primariae penduntor Ecclesiae. Idem
de Leg. Edgari Reg. Ipsas autem Seminum Primitias sub Festum Divi Martini
reddito. Ibid. The like you have in the Laws of King Kanute, who began his
Reign in the year 1016. Seminum Primitiae ad Festum Divi Martini penduntor: si
quis dare distulerit, eas Episcopo undecies praestato, ac Regi Ducenos, and
viginti Solidos persolvito. Idem Lamb. It is supposed, that Boniface Archbishop
of Canterbury in the Reign of Ed. 3. was the first that made way for Popes to
Appropriate Annates and First Fruits in this Kingdom to themselves; for the
said Archbishop An. 1246. upon a feigned pretense, that his Church of
Canterbury was involved in very great Debts by his Predecessor, but in truth by
himself, to carry on Foreign Wars, and gratify the Pope, procured from Pope
Innocent a grant of the First years Fruits of all Benefices, Anon. Hist. of the
Church of Great Britain, p. 80.
that should fall void within his Diocese for the space of Seven years, till he
should thence raise the Sum of Ten thousand Marks yearly out of the Bishopric.
So that this Grant of First Fruits of Benefices to Boniface the said
Archbishop, made way for Popes Appropriating First Fruits and Annates to
themselves soon after. But in process of time the Parliament having (as
aforesaid) settled them on King H. 8. there was an Office thereof established
in London, An. 1538. whereby the Kings Revenue increased exceedingly from this
Office for the receipt of Tenths and First Fruits, which was then first erected
in London; such Moneys being formerly paid to the Pope, for that the Tenths and
First Fruits of the English Clergy were yearly returned to Rome. But now the
Pope being dead in England, the King was found his Heir at Common Law, as to
most of the Power and Profit he had usurped, and the Rents which the Clergy
paid were now changed together with their Landlord; for Commissioners (whereof
the Bishop of the Diocese was ever one) were appointed to estimate their Annual
Revenues, that so their Tenths and First Fruits might be proportioned
accordingly. At this time the Oblations from the Living, An Obit was at 40 s.
in St. Paul's London; yet at Waltham Abbey, but at 2 s. 2 d. received by the
Churchwardens.
and Obits from the Dead, were as duly paid as Predial Tithes, and much
advanced the Income: but Queen Mary did after by Act of Parliament exonerate
the Clergy from all these First Fruits, and ordered the payment of the Tenths
to Cardinal Poole, for discharge of Pensions allowed to certain Monks and Nuns;
but Queen Elizabeth in the first year of her Reign resumed these First Fruits
and Tenths, only Personages not exceeding ten Marks, and Vicarages ten Pounds,
were freed from First Fruits. vid. Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 4.

That which in the method of the ensuing Treatise next offers it self to
consideration, Altarage.
is Altarage; Altaragium, taking its denomination from the Altar, because (to
speak properly) Altargium est Emolumentum Sacerdoti provenieus ratione Altaris,
ex Oblationibus sc. vid. Jo. de Athon. in Constit. Legatim. Otho. c. Auditu
ver. Proventus. Touching this Altarage, there is an Ancient Record in the time
of King H. 3. about the year 1234. in the Chronicle of William Thorn the
Augustine Monk of Canterbury, whereof (among other things) there is mention
made in a certain Composition between Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Abbot of St. Austins in Canterbury, as to whom it may be paid, and to what
value it may extend: The Composition runs thus, viz. Noverint universi praesens
Scriptum inspecturi vel audituri, Quod cum inter Dominum Ed mundum Dei gratia
Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum totius Angliae Primatem, Magistrum S. de Langeton,
Archidiaconum Cantuariensem ex una part, and ^^minum Robertum Abbatem and
Conventum S. Augustini Cantuariae ex altera, Controversia diutius mota fuisset
super Ecclesia de Chistlet and Jurisdictione, etc. Item pro bono pacis
concedunt Abbas and Conventus, quod Archidiaconus quando Visitationis exercet
Officium, in Ecclesiis eorum sicut in aliis Ecclesiis Diocesis Cantuariensis
recipiat Procurationem consuetam, exceptis, etc. In Capellis vero de Menstre
scil. Sanct. P. and Johannis, and Laurentii praesentabunt Domino Archiepiscopo
idoneos Capellanos perpetuos ad Altaragia, ita tamen quod singula Altaragia
valiant december Marcas, qui hac portione tantum erunt contenti sub poena
amissionis dictae portionis, Hist. Angl. Scrip. Antiq. col. 1882, 1883.
si coram Judice quocunque ex certa scientia plus aliquando petierint,
praesertim cum Vicarius Matricis Ecclesiae de Menstre, etc. Whereby it is very
evident, That these Altarages issued out of the Offerings to the Altar, and
were anciently payable to the Priesthood, as well as Tithes and other
Oblations. It is most probable, that the greatest Annual Revenue by Altars, if
not by Altarages, in any one Church within this Realm, was in that of St.
Paul's, London; for it seems when Chanteries were granted to King Henry the
Eight, whereof there were 47 belonging to St. Paul's, as aforesaid, there were
in the same Church at that time no less than Fourteen several Altars: Full. chapter
Hist. lib. 6. p. 352.
And although they were but Chantery-Priests that Officiated at them, and had
their Annual Salaries on that account, distinct from Altarages in the sense of
Oblations aforesaid, yet in regard these Annual Profits accrued by their
Service at the Altar, they may not improperly be termed Pension-Altarages,
though not Oblation-Altarages.

Concerning Tithes, Tithes.
whether they are eo nomine due and payable now under the Gospel, is not to our
purpose either to question or determine; it will be agreed on all hands, that
the Law requires the payment thereof, and has stated it within the cognizance
of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Historins of good credit and great
Antiquity tell us, That Aethelwolfe King of the West Saxons gave the Tenth part
of his Kingdom unto God, whatever his design was by it, whether for the
Redemption of his and his Ancestors Souls, or otherwise, yet it is now above
800 years since he Decimated totum Regni sui Imperium; An. 855. Aethelwolphus
Rex Decimam totius Regni sui partem ab omni Regali servitio and tributo
liberavit, and in sempiterno graphio in Cruce Christi, etc. uni and trino Deo
immolavit. Simeon. Dunelm. Hist. de Gest. Reg. Angl. Likewise Aethelstan, who
Reigned about 70 years after Aethelwolfe, in the first of all his Laws made
special provision for the punctual payment of Tithes, Ego Adelstanus Rex, etc.
Mando Praepositis meis omnibus in regno meo, etc. ut in primis reddant de meo
proprio Decimas Deo, tam in vivente captali quam mortuis frugibus terrae, and
Episcopi mei similiter faciant de suo proprio, and Aldermanni mei and
Praepositi mei. Et volo ut Episcopi and Praepositi hoc judicent omnibus, qui
eis parere debent, etc. Recolendum quoque nobis est, quam terribiliter in
Libris positum est, Si Decimam dare nolumus, ut auferantur a nobis Novem
parts, and solummodo Decima relinquatur. This AEthelstan dying without Issue
was succeeded in the Kingdom by his Brother Edmond, in the Second of whose Laws
we find it thus Enacted, in a great Synod convened at London, where Odo and
Wolstan Archbishops were present, Decimas Praecipimus omni Christiano super
Christianitatem suam dare, etc. Si quis hoc dare noluerit, Excommunicatus sit.
And in the First of King Edgar's Laws you have these words, Reddatur omnis
Decimatio ad Matrem Ecclesiam cui Parochia adjacet. Also in the Fourth of King
Ethelred's Laws it is commanded in these words, Praecipimus ut omnis homo, etc.
det rectam Decimam suam, sicut in diebus Antecessorum nostrorum fecit, quando
melius fecit, hoc est, sicut aratrum peragrabit decimam acram. Et omnis
Consuetudo reddatur ad Matrem nostram Ecclesiam cui adjacet. Et nemo auferat
Deo, quod ad Deum pertinet, and Praedecessores nostri concesserunt. And in the
Ninth of King Alured's Laws, Si quis Decimam contra teneat, reddat LASHLITE cum
DACIS, Daeis pro Danis. Lashlite, h. e. Muleta quinque Marcaruma Wita, j.e.
Mulcta 30 Solidorum. Secundum Glossar. Hist. Angle. Seriptores December.
WITAM cum ANGLIS. And in the Laws of the Conqueror it is particularly
Ordained, That de omni annona Decima garba Deo debita est, and ideo reddenda.
Si gregem Equarum habuerit, pullum reddat decimum; qui unam tamen vel duas
habuerit, de singulis pullis Singulos denarios. Similiter, qui Vaccas plures
habuerit, decimum vitulum: qui unam vel duas, de Vitulis singulis Obolos
singulos. Et qui Caseum fecerit, det Deo decimum; si vero non fecerit, Lac
decima die. Similiter decimum Agnum, decimum Vellus, decimum Caseum, decimum
Butyrum, decimum Porcellum. Item, de Apibus vero Similiter Commodi. Quinetiam
de bosco, and prato, and aquis, de molendinis, parcis, vivariis, piscariis,
virgultis, and hortis, and Negotionibus, and de omnibus rebus quas dederit
Deus, decima pars ei reddenda est, qui Novem parts simul cum December largitur.
Qui eam detinuerint, per Justitiam Episcopi, and Regis si necesse fuerit, ad
redditionem arguantur. It is on good ground that the Canonists do hold, That
Tithes Originally and ex sua natura are of Ecclesiastical cognizance, beside
the Statute of primo R. 2. That pursuit for Tithes ought, and of ancient time
did pertain to the Spiritual Court, notwithstanding what others assert, That in
their own nature they are a Civil thing, and that (as Bract. lib. 5. fol. 401.)
they were annexed to the Spiritualty.

In the Chapter of Tithes in this ensuing Abridgment you find the Order of
Cistercians, so called from Cistercium in Burgundy, being but refined
Benedictines, exempted from paying of Tithes: so also were the Orders of
Templers and Hospitallers, otherwise called of St. John's of Jerusalem; for
anciently the Lands of Abbeys did pay Tithes to the Parish Priest as well as
the Lands of Laymen, but in the year 1100 they obtained (besides the
Appropriations they then had) of Pope Paschal the Second at the Council of
Mentz, that their Lands for the future should be discharged thereof. But this
Exemption was after limited and restrained by Pope P. Adrian 4. was an English
man, and had been a Benedictine Monk of St. Albans.
Adrian the Fourth about the year 1150. (excepting the Tithes of new
improvements in their own occupation by culture, Pasture and Garden-Fruits)
Vid. Alex. 4. in 6. de dec. c. 2. Statuto. and Innoc. 8. To. 2. p. 4. 10. Edit.
Colon.
only the said Three Orders were exempted from the general payment of all
Tithes whatever. The Templers and Hospitallers were mere Laymen, yet they were
exempted as well as the other: Yet the Lateran Council in An. 1215. Ordered,
That this Privilege should not extend to Covents erected since that Lateran
Council, nor to Lands since bestowed on the said Orders, though their Covents
were erected before that Council. Insomuch that when the said Cistercians,
contrary to the Canons of that Council, purchased Bulls from the Pope to
discharge their Lands from Tithes: King H. 4. Nulled such Bulls by the Stat. of
2 H. 4. cap. 4. and reduced their Lands to a Statu quo. These Exemptions from
payment of Tithes in this or that particular Religious Order, was not known in
the World, when Aethelwolph Son of Egbert, whom he succeeded as King of the
West Saxons, gave (as aforesaid) Tithes of all his Kingdom, and that freed of
all Tributes, Taxes, and Impositions, as appears by his Vid Ingulph. and
Malmesb. Gest. Reg. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Charter to that purpose; having at a Solemn Council held at Winchester,
subjected the whole Kingdom of England to the payment of Tithes. True it is,
that long before his time many Acts for Tithes may be produced, such as the
Imperial Edicts, Canons of some Councils and Popes, beside such Laws as were
made by King Ina and Offa; yet the said Edicts and Canons were never received
in their full power into England by the consent of Prince and People, nor were
King Ina and Offa (though Monarchs of England, as it were, in their turns) such
Kings as conveyed their Crowns to the Issue of their Bodies, but the said
Aethelwolph was Monarcha, Natus, non factus; and although before his time there
were Monarchs of the Saxon Heptarchy, yet not successive and fixed in a Family;
but the said King Egbert, being the first that so obtained this Monarchy, as to
leave it by descent unto his Son, the said Aethelwolph, he thereby had the more
indisputable power to oblige all the Kingdom unto an observance of the said Act.

In the said Chapter of Tithes there is also mention made of Mortuaries,
Mortuaries.
as having some relation of Tithes, wherein is showed what it is, when, by and
to whom, and wherefore to be paid. By the Stat. of 21 H. 8. they are reduced to
another Regulation, than what was in the time of King Henry the Sixth. A
Mortuary was then the Second best Beast whereof the party died possessed; but
in case he had but two in all, then none due. It was called a Corse-Present,
because ever paid by the Executors, though not always bequeathed by the dying
party. All persons possessed of an Estate, (Children under Tuition, and Femes
Covert, but not Widows, excepted) were liable to the payment thereof to the
Priest of that Parish, where the dying party received the Sacrament (not where
he repaired to Prayers;) but in case his House at his death stood in two
Parishes, it was then divided betwixt them both: And it was given in lieu of
Personal Tithes, which the party in his life time had through ignorance or
negligence not fully paid -- Lindw. Cons. de Consuetud. Such of the ancient
Lawyers as were unacquainted with this word Mortuarium in the aforesaid sense
as we now use it, took Mortuarium only pro derelicto in morte, and say of it,
That it is Vocabulum novum and harbarum; but we understand it better, where of
Custom it is due and payable. These Mortuaries, where by the Custom they are
to be paid, were ever in consideration of the omission of Personal Tithes in
the parties Lifetime, which Personal Tithes were by the Canon Law to be paid
only of such as did receive the Sacraments, and only to that Church where they
did receive them, as may be inferred plainly from cap. Ad Apostolicae de
Decimis. But observe, says Lessius, that in many places these Personal Tithes
have been quite taken away, and in some places they are paid only at the end of
a man's Life, as among the Venetians, ( which manner of payment seems to have a
great resemblance to these Mortuaries;) and in some places they are paid only
ot the end of the year. And in like manner many Predial and Mixed Tithes in
diverse places are also abolished; which (says he) is for the most part done by
the permission of the Church, where men have been observed to pay them with
regret and much against their minds, nor has the Church in such cases thought
fit to compel them to it, on purpose to avoid scandal. Lessius de Just. and
jur. lib. 2. cap. 39. Dub. 5. nu. 27. And in such places where the Custom is
to pay a Personal Tithe, when any persons shall Hunt, Fish, or Fowl to make
gain or merchandise thereby, and it be neglected to be paid, Vid. Less. de ma.
acq. dom. lib. 2. c. 5. Dub. 7. nu. 38.
whether Restitution or Compensation by way of a Mortuary (where Mortuaries are
Customable) be in that case due by Law, is a Question, which by Covarruvies may
be well held in the Affirmative.

Although the face of the Church as well as State began to look with a purer
(though less Sanguine) complexion, Banns.
when Queen Elizabeth adorned the Crown, than when her Sister wore it, yet even
in Queen Elizabeth's time there crept such abuses into the Church, that
Archbishop Parker found it necessary to have recourse unto the Power given him
by the Queens Commission, and by a Clause of the Act of Parliament, For the
uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church, etc. whereupon by the
Queens consent, and the Advice of some of the Bishops, he sets forth a certain
Book of Orders to be diligently observed and executed by all persons whom it
might concern; wherein it was Provided, That no Parson, Vicar, or Curate of any
Church Exempt, should from thenceforth attempt to conjoyn, by solemnization of
Matrimony, any, not being of his or their Parish Church, without good Testimony
of the Banns being asked in the several Churches where they dwell, or otherwise
were sufficiently Licensed. Heyl. Hist. of Q. Eliz. An. Reg. 3. Banns or Banna,
that word Bannum is sometimes taken pro Mandato, scil. Edicto; it is a word of
diverse significations, as appears almost by all the Glossographists and
Feudists; it sounds sometimes like Edictum, sometimes like Mandatum or
Decretum, and sometimes (as here) like Proclamatio, Saxonibus gebann, whence
there is their gebannian pro Proclamare, edicere, mandare, ut and nostratium
Bannes, pro Nuptiarum foedere Publicato. This Publication of Banns was
cautiously ordained for the prevention of Clandestine Marriages, which were
prohibited in this Kingdom above 500 years since, as a thing contrary in all
Ages to the practice of all Nations and Churches where the Gospel was received;
and therefore at a Council convened at Westminster in the year 1175. by Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury under the Reign of King H. 2. it was Ordained, That no
person whatsoever should solemnize Marriage in any clandestine manner, and in
case any Parson should have a hand therein, he was to be suspended ab Officio
for the space of Three years: Nullus Fidelis cujuscunque Conditionis sit,
occulte Nuptias faciat, sed a Sacerdote public nubat in Domino. Si quis ergo
Sacerdos aliquos occulte conjunxisse inventus fuerit, triennio ab Officio
suspendatur. Can. 17. dict. Council. It is Recorded by good Historians, that
Anciently in Ireland they were so far from Publishing these Banns before
Marriage, that they rejected all Matrimonial Laws whatever, insomuch that
Polygamy was very common amongst them until the Reign of King H. 2. who sent
Nicholaus his Chaplain, and Radulphus Archdeacon of Landaff into Ireland, where
at Cassell they held a great Council under Pope Alexander; in which Council
Three things were specially Ordained, the one concerning Baptism, to be In the
Name of the Father, Son, etc. for till then their Custom was to Dip the Child,
as soon as it was born, three times in Water, but if it were a Rich man's Child,
then in Milk: Another concerning Tithes to be duly paid to Ecclesiastical
Persons, for till then many of them scarce knew whether Tithes ought to be paid
or not: And the third was concerning Marriage, that it should be solemnized
jure Ecclesiastico, plerique enim (says the Historian) illorum, quot uxores
volebant tot habebant. There was also a Fourth thing Decreed in that Council,
and that was concerning Testaments, and distributions of the Goods and Chattel
of persons deceased. -- Chron. Jo. Bromt. de Temp. H. 2.

Within the cognizance of the Episcopal or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction are also
all matters relating to the sin of Adultery; Adultery.
the Bishops Jurisdiction herein is very Ancient, as appears by the Laws of
King Kanute, made above 650 years since, in Leg. 80. Si quis Sponsam and
Concubinam simul habuerit, non faciat ei 'Presbyter aliquid rectitudinum, quae
Christiano fieri debent, priusquam poeniteat, and ita emendet sicut Episcopus
injunget. Such Adultery is a kind of double Fornication, according to the
definition in the 75th of the same Laws, Adulterium est, si Sponsus cum vacua
fornicetur, and multo pejus si cum sponsa alterius. It was a strange and most
cruel punishment that Philip Earl of Flanders, in the time of King H. 2. caused
to be executed on Walter de Fontibus, taken (as reported) in Adultery with the
Countess Isabella: who commanded that he should be beaten to death with blows
or strokes of Keys tied up in bundles; and being dead, his Body to be hung by
the Feet on a Fork with the Head downwards, in a place prepared for that
purpose, there to remain ignominiously exposed to the view of all Spectators.
Radulph. de Diceto, Imag. In Spain it is lawful for a man to kill his Wife or
his Daughter, taken by him in Adultery. Dr. Tailor.
Hist. The punishment of an Adulteress according to the foresaid Laws of King
Kanute was much more favorable; for by the 78th of those Laws she was to lose
but her Nose and her Ears, Si Mulier, vivente Marito suo, faciat Adulterium,
and manifestetur, etc. ipsa perdat Nasum and Aures. But the Emperor Aurelian
is said to have punished it in one of his Soldiers, for committing it with his
Hostess, in a way of Cruelty little inferior to that practiced by the said
Earl of Flanders; for he commanded the heads of two Trees growing nigh together
to be bowed down, the Soldiers Legs to be fast tied thereunto, then to be
suddenly let go; whereby he was torn in two parts, the one hanging on the one
Tree, the other on the other, and so to remain as a terrifying Spectacle to his
Army. Buc. Chron. Notwithstanding what was first abovesaid in reference to what
Jurisdiction the cognizance hereof did anciently belong in the days of King
Kanute, viz. That the Offender should make such satisfaction as the Bishops
should enjoin; yet it is evident that after this, viz. in the Conquerors time,
Fornication and Adultery were punishable in the Kings Temporal Court, and the
Leets especially (by the name of Lecherwite,) and the Fines of Offenders
assessed to the King, though now it merely belongs to the Church, a President
whereof we have in the Church of Corinth, which by St. Paul's Command proceeded
against the Incestuous person; but as to a Rape, there being force and violence
in the case, the Temporal Court and Common Law (were there no Statute in the
case) has the best Right to the trial and punishment thereof. By the
Conqueror's Laws the punishment of Adultery was only pecuniary, Leg. 14. Qui
Desponsatam alteri vitiaverit, Wera, h. e. pretium Nativitatis hominis.
forisfaciat Weram suam Domino suo. Yet in some cases it was Capital, according
to the said Conquerors Laws, as in Leg. 37. Si Pater deprehenderit filiam in
Adulterio in domo sua, seu in domo generi sui, been licebit ei Our ( lege for
san Occire, Occidere) Adulterum. Lambert. de Priscis Angl. Legibus.

Forasmuch as Bastards and matters of Bastardy are within the cognizance of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Bastardy.
some notice is taken thereof in the next place of this Abridgment. By Bastard
we commonly understand prolem ex illicito concubitu procreatam. The most Famous
of this kind that we meet with in History, and that concerns us, was William
the Conqueror, of whom Simeon Monachus Dunelmensis in his History says, That
An. 1035. Obiit Robertus Dux Normandorum, cui successit Willielmus Bastard
filius ejus in puerili aetate. Of whom also Radulphus de Diceto in suis
Abbreviationibus Chronicorum on the year 1036. says, That Obiit ROBERTUS Dux
NORMANNIAE Frater Tertii RICHARDI, ab JEROSOLIMIS rediens, apud NICEAM
Civitatem. Cui successit WILLIELMUS BASTARD filius ejus in puerili aetate, qui
ANGLIAM postea conquisivit; pater WILLIELMI Regis RUFI, and HENRICI. It is
frequent in History to find William the Conqueror Sirnam'd the Bastard; nor did
himself in the least disdain to style himself by that Addition; for in his
Epistle to Alanus Earl of Britannia Minor, we find him thus styling himself,
Ego Willielmus cognomento Bastardus. And no wonder (says the Glossographer on
the said Historians) when the Title or Name of Bastard in those days was used
by some as a mark of Honor; the which he is the rather induced to believe, for
that ( vocis derivationem Kilianam amplectens) scil. a best-aerd, that is,
optima indoles sive natura, there is no cause of being ashamed thereof:
Illegitimo enim (says he) and furtivo concubitu procreati, animo plerunque sunt
alacri and elato, ingenio sagaci, and judicio exacto: hanc (inquam) vocis
originationem potius probarem, cum in caeteris nulla sit gloriandi causa. By
the Canon Law a Bastard is prohibited from taking Orders, as also from having
an Ecclesiastical Benefice. c. 1. and per tot. De filiis Presbyt. The said
Prohibition is grounded by that Law on Deuteronomy. 23. Non i^ gredietur Manzer, hoc
est, de Scorto Natus, in Ecclesi^m Domini usque ad decimam generationem. Yet
the Pope does usually dispense with that Canon, specially where such
Illegitimates live commendably, and follow not the vicious practice of their
Parents; In illis qui paterna vitia non sequuntur, possunt suffragari virtutes,
quae inducent S^mmum Pontificem ad Dispensandum, si morum honestas eos.
Commendabiles reddat. c. Presbyterorum 56. Distin. And lest such should
conceive themselves causlesly injured by that Prohibition, the Canonists assign
three Reasons for it; the one is the Dignity of the Clergy and the Sacraments,
which ought not to be committed to Infamous persons: Another is in detestation
of their Parents Crime, which commonly extends also to their Children: The
third is the Parents Incontinency, and because the Children do for the most
part inherit their Parents Vices. -- cap. Si gens Angelorum. 56. Distin. Yet a
Modern Historian speaking of Pope Leo the Seventh, An. 935. says (out of
Luitprandus) that Bozon Bishop of Placentia, Theobald of Millain, and another
great Prelate, were all the Bastards of Hugo King of Italy by his three Queens
Bezola, Rosa, and Stephana, whom he termed Venus, Juno, and Semalo. vid.
Prideaux 's Compend. Introduct. of Hist. p. 106. Edit. 5.

Next follows the matter of Divorce, Divorce.
which is the separation of Married persons by force of the Sentence of an
Ecclesiastical Judge qualified to pronounce the same. Adultery in either party
is the common, though not the only, cause of Divorce. Some there are (it seems)
of great Reputation in the Church (for this is Quaestio tam Theologiae quam
Juris) who positively condemn it as unlawful for a Man or Woman to live with
their Husband or Wife respectively, if either of them be notoriously guilty of
Adultery. Of which Opinion was St. Hierom, saying, That a man is Sub
maledictione si Adulteram retineat. In Matthew. 19.
And St. Chrysostom, Fatuus and iniquus, qui retinet Meretricem; Patronus enim
Turpitudinis est, Cause. 32. q. 1. c. Sicut.
qui celat Crimen uxoris. So that it was none of Cato's wisdom, nor any great
piece of kindness done his Friend Hortensius, to lend him his wife Martia,
whose Chastity deserved a better requital. Socrates also is reported to be as
kind-hearted in this matter, as ever Cato was; and they are both said to lend
their Wives as freely as a man lends an Utensil: As these Wife men were beyond
the reach of a Diovorce, so they were more serious than to blush at Cornutism,
the common Fate of such Philosophers. St. Basil was of Opinion, That it was
lawful for a Woman still to cohabit with an adulterous Husband; to which
purpose he made a Canon, and commanded it to be done in his Church, as appears
in his Epistle to Amphilochius, 1. Can. 9. and 21. This also was the Sentence
of St. Austin to Pollentius, and in his Book de Adulterinis Conjugiis. David
received his wife Michal, who had lived with another man. St. Basil it seems,
though he be of opinion that the Woman should still live with the Adulterous
Husband, Vid. Dr. Tailor Cases of Consc. lib. 1. c. 5. nu. 9.
yet does not think it fit, that the man should be so obliged as to his
Adulterous Wife. The Council of Eliberis refused to give the Sacrament to a
Clergyman, that did not instantly expel from his house his Wife whom he knew
to commit Adultery: And by the Council of Neo-Caesarea he was to be deposed
from his Dignity in the same case. In the Council of Trent there was a Canon
made, having an Anathema added to it, which condemned those that say, That the
Bond of Marriage is dissolved by Adultery, Trent. Council. lib. 8. 1563.
and that either of the parties may contract another Matrimony whilst the other
lives: And by the Fifth Anathematism of that Council, 22. July 1563. were
condemned Divorces allowed in Justinian's Code: which Anathematism was added at
the instance of the Cardinal of Lorain, to oppose the Opinion of the
Calvinists. In the same Council upon the Article of Divorce, Father Soto.
it was said by one of the Fathers there, that the Matrimonial Conjunction was
distinguished into Three parts; the Bond, the Cohabitation, and the Carnal
Copulation: inferring, that there were as many Separations also: and that the
Ecclesiastical Prelate had power to separate the Married, or to give them a
Divorce in respect of the Two latter, Council. Trent. lib. 7.
the Matrimonial Bond still standing sure, so that neither can marry again. Yet
the Gospel admits but of one cause of Divorce, viz. Fornication, which should
seem to be understood de Vinculo, because Divorce in the other respects may
have many Causes.

Of all Personal Actions within the Ecclesiastical Cognizance, Defamation.
that of Defamation seems to be of the tenderest concern, if that be observed
which Solomon says, That a Good Name is to be chosen before great Riches; Prove.
22. 1.
where by Name, nothing can be understood other than a man's Credit, Fame, and
Reputation in the World: So that the Inference is clear, a Defamer is the worst
of Thieves, the Sacrilegious ones excepted; yet were it not for the sweetness
of Revenge, and the encouragement of the Law, such Actions might be better
spared than what it costs to maintain them; and such illscented Suits do savor
worse being kept alive in a Tribunal, than they would by being buried in
Oblivion, specially if the Defamed considered, that to forget Injuries is the
best use we can make of a bad Memory. This Defamation is not properly that,
which we call Detractio, for Detractio in its proper signification is alienae
famae occulta and injusta violatio; but Defamation, though it be an unjust, yet
it is not an occult violation of another man's Fame or Reputation; they have
indeed both the same end, but they do not both take the same way to that end:
they both aim and design the extinguishing or diminishing the Credit and Repute
which one man has in the mind and good opinion of another; but the one does it
more openly and publicly, at least not in so clandestine way as the other.
This Defamatio is of near affinity to that which we call Contumelia, which is
an unlawful violation of a persons Honor and Reputation by undecent and false
Speeches, Gestures, or Actions, on purpose to disgrace him: only in this also
they differ, that Defamatio may be of one man to another in the absence of the
Defamed; but Contumelia is not but to the party present, vel absenti tanquam
praesenti, that is, in the prrsence of such as have a relative representation
of the person Contumeliously so reproached. Touching Actions of Defamation
there are two Questions raised, rather by the Casuists than Canonists; the one,
Whether the Heirs of the Defamer be obliged to make restitution of Damage to
the Defamed, in case the Defamer died before satisfaction made? the other,
Whether satisfaction for the damage done by Defamation, be to be made to the
Heirs of the Defamed, in case he died before such damages were recovered by
him? Although both these Questions are answered in the Negative by that known
Rule in Law, Actio personalis moritur cum persona; the Reason being, because
the Obligation arising thence is merely Personal, and non est ad aliquid
dandum, sed ad aliquid agendum; yet Navar. Adria^. and others, who hold the
contrary, will not be so answered; for though they agree the Rule of Law, yet
they deny the foresaid reason of that Rule to hold in this case, for ( say
they) the obligation in this case is not purely and merely Personal, as is
commonly supposed, but does quodammodo affect the Estate of the Defamer,
whether alive or dead: He gives an Instance, A man sets his Neighbors House on
fire, and dies; his Heirs shall make good the damage done by that fire: A man's
Good Name and Reputation is far more precious than his habitation: he that
consumes that Good Name and Credit without cause, shall refund the damage out
of his Estate, and death it self (before satisfaction made) shall not excuse
his Heirs. vid. Navarr. c. 18. nu. 45. and Adrian. quodlibet 11. So likewise as
to the other Question, Vtrum defuncto sit Fama restituenda? there are who hold
it in the Affirmative, Quia Fama est bonum, quod homo etiam post mortem
censetur possidere. But when all is said (for some will superabound in their
own Judgments) the said Rule of Law must stand void of all Exceptions, and hold
good and applicable to the Premises, That Actio Personalis moritur cum persona.

Among all those horrid Offenses whereby the Church is or can be violated,
Sacrilege.
that of Sacrilege seems to look with the blackest face; which, though as a
Felonious act, may fall under a Temporal cognizance, yet the Canon Law
concludes it as a thing in its own nature properly subjected to the
determination of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. An. ^^4.
It is now nigh a Thousand years since Withred King of Kent convened a Synod,
wherein Brithwa^d Archbishop and Primate of all Britain was President: In which
Synod it was so long since declared in these words, Ex M S. in Colleg. C. C.
Cant. Chron. (...).
viz. Horrendum est hominibus Deum vivum expoliare, tunicamque ejus and
haereditatem semdere. By the Laws of Alured King of the West Saxons, Leg. 7.
the Sacrilegious person was to lose that hand wherewith he did the Fact, Si
quis in Ecclesia furetur aliquid, amputetur manus de qua furatus est. In the
time of Queen Elizabeth there were a Sacrilegious kind of Church-Plunderers,
who under pretense of abolishing Superstition, demolished Ancient Tombs, razed
the Epitaphs and Coat-Armours of most Noble Families, and other Monuments of
venerable Antiquity, took the Bells out of Churches, and uncovered the Roofs of
Churches by plucking off the Lead; but these Birds of Prey had their wings soon
clipped by the said Queens Proclamation, which was effectually put in execution
for the restraint of such Sacrilegious Rapines: King Guthred, who by St.
Cuthbert's Command was in Childhood taken out of a Servile estate and made King
of Northumberland about the year 890, made such an Edict against the
Sacrilegious persons as thundered them all into Hell, Gravissimae maledictionis
Anathemate percussit, ut cum Juda Proditore Domini, damnationis sententia
feriantur. Simeo. Hist. de Dunelm. Eccl. Nor are Korah and his Confederates the
only persons whom the Earth interred alive for their Rebellion against the
Sacerdotal Function; for (if you will credit Tradition) the like has since
happened in the case of Sacrilege to the Scotch Army, which in the said
Guthred's time had no sooner (according to their Modern Practice) fleeced the
Church of Lindisfarne nigh Tweed, to tunick their Longshanks, but the Earth
greedily opened her mouth, and devoured these Devourers, at that very instant
when they were all ready to engage in a Battle with the said King of
Northumberland. dict. Sim. ibid. But not to rake up Antiquity for discovery of
what Legends and Romances lie under the Ashes thereof; this is as well True as
Chronicled, That King William Rufus was Casu fortuito, non voluntary, darted
to death instead of a Stag by a certain Franck, one Walter Tyrell, in the same
place, which his Father the Conqueror had Sacrilegiously disecclesiated for
more than 30 Miles, to Forest it into Speluncas latronum and lustra ferarum.
This was a real Sacrilege in a Victorious Monarch, which added little to the
Credit of his Conquests; but that in Pope Boniface the Seventh (if Historians
do not belly him) was a Personal Sacrilege, who when he understood that the
Roman Citizens conspired against him, took with him all the Jewels of the
Church of St. Peter and fled to Constantinople, where he converted the same
into money for the proper use of his Sacrilegious Holiness.

Another gross offense, Simony.
and little inferior to the former, within the Cognizance of the Church, is
Simony, or that Art Magic whereby Parsons, scarce worth the name of Persons,
as the Devil did into our Natural Mother insensibly, so they Serpentine
themselves into our Spiritual Mother, the Church visible, invisibly.
Hildebrand, or by an alias Pope Gregory the Seventh, Convened a Synod General
against Church-purchasers and buyers of Ecclesiastical Livings, and against
such Bishops as from the hands of Kings or Emperors, receive the investure of
their Bishoprics per traditionem Annuli and Baculi; he said, That Quisquis
Episcopatum mercatur, contra Spiritum Sanctum, qui donum Dei dicitur, facit. He
likewise made a Decree in the year 1074, That not only the Buyer and Seller of
any Ecclesiastical Office, but whoever also that is consenting thereunto, shall
be damned with Simon Magus. Simeon Dunelm. Hist. de Gest. Reg. Angl. It is
unavoidable, for the Pope, who has the Keys of Hell by his girdle, has so
Decreed it. But Pope Gelasius was in this matter better natured by far, for he
left some place for Repentance, and proceeded not an inch beyond a Reversable
Anathema; Si quis vendiderit, aut emerit vel per se, vel per alium,
Episcopatum, Abbatiam, Deconatum, Archidiaconatum, Presbyteratum,
Praeposituram, Praebendam, Altaria, vel quaelibet Ecclesiastica Beneficia,
Promotiones, Ordinationes, Consecrationes, Dedicationes Ecclesiarum, Clericalem
tonsuram, Seeds in choro, aut quaelibet Ecclesiastica Officia, and vendens and
emens Dignitatis and Officii sui ac Beneficii periculo subjaceat. Q^^d nisi
resipuerit, Anathematis mucrone perfossus, ab Ecclesia Dei quam ^aesit, modis
omnibus abscidatur. The like was Ordained by a Council of 300 Bishops Convened
at Rome, Pope Calixius the Second being President, viz. Ordinari quemquam per
pecuniam in Ecclesia Dei, vel promoveri auctoritate Sedis Apostolicae modis
omnibus prohibemus. Si quis vero in Ecclesia Ordinationem vel Promotionem
taliter adquisierit, acquisita careat prorsus dignitate. dict. Simeo. ubi
supra. The same in terminis you have Ordained at a Synod Convened at
Westminster An. 1126. in the Reign of King Henry the First, Honorius the Second
being then Pope, viz. Sanctorum Patrum vestigiis inhaerentes, quenquam in
Ecclesia per pecuniam ordinari auctoritate Apostolica prohibemus. -- ibid. And
at another Council Convened at Westminster in the year 1175. under the Reign of
King H. 2. it was Ordained, that all Simoniacal Patrons should be deprived of
their Right of Presentation for ever; Nulli liceat Ecclesiam nomine dotalitii
ad aliquem transfer, vel pro Praesentatione alicujus personae pecuniam vel
aliquod emolumentum, pacto interveniente, recipere. Quod si quis fecerit, and
in jure vel convictus vel Confessus fuerit, ipsum tam Regia quam nostra freti
auctoritate Patrocinio ejusdem Ecclesiae in perpetuum privari Statuimus. Can.
8. vid. Chron. Gervas. de Temp. H. 2. It is Reported of the Emperor Henry, Son
of Conradus, that in his youth he accepted of a Silver Pipe from a certain
Clerk on this Promise and Agreement, That when he should be made Emperor he
should bestow a Bishopric on the said Clerk, the which he after did
accordingly when he became Emperor; but not long after the Emperor being
surpised with Sickness, and his Disease increasing he lay senseless and
speechless for three days, and so rapt as it were out of the Body, that he lay
as one dead, the Bishops appointed a Three days Fast for the Emperors
Recovery, which having obtained, he does immediately by a Decree of the Council
degrade the Bishop whom he had Simoniacally so made for a Silver Pipe; for it
was confessed by all that heard hereof, That he was among the Devils during the
space of all those Three days wherein he lay as dead, those Devils all that
while darting fiery Flames through a Pipe into his mouth, whereby his whole
body became but as one Firebrand, in comparison whereof our Material Fire here
on Earth was but as congeled Ice to it, etc. As you like this, so you may have
more out of the same Infallible Author, viz. Jo. Bromton. in Chronico suo. At a
Council Assembled at Mantua by the Emperor Henry the Fourth in the year 1066.
by the Third Canon of that Council it was Ordained, That whosoever was admitted
to a Church Office, willingly and wittingly by a Simoniack person, should be
removed from his Order: And by the Sixth Canon of the same Council it was
likewise Ordained, That no Ecclesiastical Office or Benefice should be sold for
Money, but freely given. Also by the Seventh Canon of the Council at Rome,
consisting of 180 Bishops in the year 1180. under Pope Alexander the Third, it
was Ordained, That no Reward be taken for admitting men to Spiritual Offices,
and that no money be taken for Blessing them that are Married, or for
Administration of any other Sacrament: For at this time Marriage was counted a
Sacrament of the Roman Church. He that Simoniacally enters on an Ecclesiastical
Living, aimed at something worth money; he cannot be supposed to intend
principally the Ministry of Souls, who comes to that Office instructed only
with a bag of Money. In Ireland there is a Custom of receiving Oblations at
the Baptism of Infants; but if the Priest shall refuse to Baptize the Infant
till he be secured of his Money, he is a direct Simoniack, for then he sells
the Sacrament at a price certain. It is Recorded in History of Henricus Auceps,
that when he fought against the Hungarians, he made a Vow to God, That if he
would give him Victory, he would purge his Country of Simony. Epiphanius.

The precedent Evils of Sacrilege and Simony are no further punished than as
they are reduced into act and practice; but Heresy, which in the method of the
subsequent Abridgment next follows, and as within the Ecclesiastical
Cognizance, is more speculative, having its Seat more in the Head than in the
Hand, and consequently of the more pernicious quality, in regard of its
poisonous venom in these more noble parts, the Head and Heart; nor is it only
the poison of the Soul, fatal in whom it is; but it is also the plague and
Leprosy of the Soul, dangerously infectious to others in whom but very lately
it was not. This Heresy may be defined to be a Published Opinion, repugnant to
the Principles of our Christian Faith, obstinately maintained and persisted in
by such as profess the Name of Christ; and so Heretics are distinguished from
Atheists and Infidels, properly so called, albeit in a sense they have somewhat
of both the other in them: He seems to give it an adequate definition, that
made one for it by the true interpretation of the Greek word, Haeresis Graece,
Electio Latin, est sententia humano sensu Electa, Scripturae Sacrae contraria,
palam docta, pertinaciter defensa: And he seems to give the Heretic an apt
comparison, who made one for him by the Mole, which is a Beast blind, with a
black, but smooth outside, lurking in holes, working under ground, and spoiling
the best Land. In the black List or Catalogue of Heretics, which you meet with
in its proper Chapter of the ensuing Abridgment, you will not find all those
Heresies mentioned by Epiphanius, contr. Haeres. lib. 2. being purposely
omitted for brevities sake, because they were like abortive Births, and
continued not long to disturb the Peace of the Church. Heresies of old, as of
late days, have ever crept into the Church under a double pretense; the one, of
zeal to the Glory of God; the other, of a detestation of Sin; the Devil would
cease to be the Old Serpent, if after so many thousand years experience he were
now to learn how to wheedle and deceive the Nations. It is observable, that
whenever and wheresoever the Light of the Gospel has appeared in any more than
ordinary luster and purity, there immediately the Devil has exerted the utmost
of his power and policy to obscure that Light, by cau^ing Clouds of Error to
gather in that Element where the Gospel so increased in purity and splendour;
and whenever he desists from this practice, let him no more be styled The
Prince of Darkness; whence, if Simon Magus were (as some say) the Father of
Heretics, you may guess who their Grandfather is; for according to the
infernal genealogy, the Father of Lies must needs be the Grandfather of
Heresies.

In this ensuing Abridgment therefore you have one Chapter of Blasphemy and
Heresy, Blasphemy.
as being also within the sphere of Ecclesiastical Cognizance; they are placed
together, in regard of that affinity they have each to other; for many of them
are Cosin-Germans, but one degree of a Lie removed, or rather are Brethren in
Iniquity, Joh. 8. 44.
for they have both the same Father, Ye are of your Father the Devil, etc. he
abode not in the Truth (says our Savior of the Jews that believed not;) many
of whom Blasphemously said of him, That he had a Devil, Joh. 10. 20.
and was mad: Others of them were foretold of by St. Peter, That they privily
should bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and 3. 16.
even denying the Lord that bought them, etc. wresting the Scriptures unto
their own destruction. (...) Blasphemare, that is, convitiis incessere, to
speak reproachfully and wickedly of God, to ascribe to the Creature what
belongs only to God, vel ab eo removere quod illi convenit, says St. Ambrose,
or to prefer a False god before the True God, Rev. 13. 1. This kind of
Blasphemy referrs chiesly to God the Father. There is Blasphemy likewise which
referrs to God the Son; such was the Blasphemy of the Pharisees, when they said
of Christ, That he was a man gluttonous, Matthew. 11. 19.
and a Wine-bibber, etc. This they might probably say out of their ignorance of
his Person, and therefore a much inferior Blasphemy to that against the Holy
Ghost, which is ever against Conscience, and out of Envy and Malice. Bartolus
is of opinion, That there is a Blasphemy also which referrs to Men. Bart. in l.
Item apud, ait Praetor. ff. de Injur. But this is not that Blasphemy here
intended, although that Opinion seems to be backed with good Authority, 1 Cor.
4. 13. and Tit. 3. 2. yet St. Austin, who understood this matter better than
Bartol, was of another opinion, Est autem Blasphemia (says he) cum aliqua mala
dicuntur de bo^is. Itaque jam vulgo Blasphemia non accipitur, nisi mala verba
de Deo dicere. De hominibus namque dubitari potest: Deus vero sine controversia
bonus est. D. August. in lib. de Morib. Manichaeor. cap. 11. It is but a weak
illustration of the matter, to say Quod in homines est Contumelia, hoc in Deum
est Blasphemia. It may formally be defined to be an Injurious and Contumelious
Speech against God: It is diametrically opposed to Divine Praise; and both
these may be as well Internal, of the Heart, as External, of the Mouth, for in
Gods Omnisciency there is the language of the Heart, as well as of the Lip; and
there may be Blasphemy in the one, as well as of the other. Levit. 24.
By the Levitical Law the Blasphemer was to be stoned to death. By the Civil
Law he was likewise to die for it. Authen. ut non Luxurientur. in fin. But this
Penalty in those days by reason of a defect of Religion and Justice is not
inflicted, says Lucas de Penna, in L. omnes. C. de Delatorib. and Jul. Clarus.
Blasphemia, nu. 3. yet Blasphemers of the highest rank are at this day put to
death in some places, in others they are condemned to the Oars, in some places
they are Banished, in others they have their Tongues cut off, or a hole bored
through with an hot Iron, ut refert Clarus. By the Canon Law solemn Penance was
anciently enjoined to Lay-Blasphemers. c. 2. de Maled. But this is not now in
use. The Council of Lateran under Pope Leo the Tenth, Commanded that such
Blasphemers should not be absolved in foro Conscientiae absque gravissima
poenitentia. dict. Council. Sess. 9.. Ad abolendum. There are some who would
have Heresy to be a kind of Blasphemy; Heresy.
doubtless there are some Heresies that are very Blasphemous; but Heresy in
sui natura is quite another thing; for as Blasphemy is de Deo male dicendo, so
Heresy is de Fide Catholica male eligendo; for the word Haeresis is derived
(...), Eligo, whence they are understood as Heretics, who departing from the
true Catholic Faith of Christ aliam sectam Eligunt. Some there are, who would
have all Heretics to be divided into the Major and the Minor; by the Major
they will have to be understood all those qui nominatam haeresin praedicant,
such of old were the Manichaeans, Arrians, Eutychians, Samaritans, Ophites,
Donatists, Priscillianists, and the like: By the Minor, those qui haeresin
innominatam defendunt. Drosaeus in Method. Jur. Thus the Philosophers of old
had their Sects also among them, and unusquisque sibi aliquod genus disciplinae
ac Sectae proprium elegit; there were various Factions among them, which by the
Greeks were termed Heresies, but by the Latins, Sects. Among the Ancient this
word Heresy was not sensed in that odium as now with us, nor the word Secta
among the Latins; St. Paul himself speaks of it in one place as in a sense
almost indifferent, Act. 26. 5. Notwithstanding it is well known, that the Holy
Scripture generally understands and speaks of it in pessimam partem; so in Tit.
3. 10. A man that is an Heretic after the first and second Admonition reject:
And in 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies among you, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest: And in Gal. 5. 20. Heresies are numbered among
the works of the Flesh: And in 2 Pet. 2. 1. they are called Damnable Heresies.
By the Civil Law an Heretic can neither make a Testament, nor receive any
benefit by a Testament. L. fin. C. de Haereticis. And if you will believe Tho.
Aquinas (as in this you very safely may) all Heretics by robbing the Holy
Scriptures of the Truth to establish their pernicious Lies, are guilty of a
kind of Sacrilege; and by Fathering such Lies on God, tacitly of Blasphemy.
Aquin. ar. 2.

In the One and fortieth Chapter of the ensuing Treatise you have a brief
Catalogue of the Councils according to our computation, Councils.
here you have them more succinctly according to the Roman Account: Sebastus, a
Judge in Thessolonica, in the time of Constantinus Harmenopulus says, That some
of the Ecclesiastical Canons were of the Holy Apostles, others of the Seven
Ecumenical Councils, others of particular Synods, and others of certain If by
certain Fathers of the Church are here meant any of the Popes, observe what B.
Tailor says; It is no trifling Consideration ( says he) that the Body of the
Canon Law was made by the worst and most, Ambitious Popes: Alexander the Third,
who made Gracians Decree to become Law, was a Schismatical Pope, an Antipope,
and unduly Elected: The rest were Gregory 9. Boniface 8. Clement. 5. John 22.
persons Ambitious, and Traitors to their Princes. B. Taylor's Casee of
Conscience* lib. 3. cap. 4. nu. 4. fol. 647.
Fathers of the Church; to say nothing of the Papal Decretals ordered to be
compiled by Pope Gregory the 9th. The First Ecumenical Council was Convened at
Nice under Constantine the Great, against Arius, who held the Son of God to be
a mere Creature: This Council consisted of 318 Bishops, by whom Arius was
Anathematized, and his Heresy condemned. The Second was at Constantinople
under Theodosius the Great, against the Pneumatomachists, who denied the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost: This Council consisted of 150 Bishops, by whom
these Heretics together with their damnable heresy, was accursed. The Third
was at Ephesus under Theodosius the Less, against Nestorius and Celestinus, who
held that Christ was only Man: At this Council were 200 Bishops, by whom these
Heretics were likewise censured as the former. The Fourth was at Chalcedon
under Marcianus, against Dioscorus and Eutyches, who held that the Two natures
of the Word, viz. of God and Man, were after the Union reduced into one Nature;
for which they were Anathematized by 630 Bishops there Convened. The Fifth was
at Constantinople under Justinianus the First, where 160 Bishops were present,
who confirmed the Decrees of the Fourth Synod, and condemned Origin and all
other Heretics The Sixth was also at Constantinople under Constantinus
Barbatus, where were Assembled 170 Bishops, who pronounced the Sentence of
Anathema against all those qui unum in Christo voluntatem, and unam agendi vim
tradehant. The Seventh was at Nice under Constantine and his Mother Irene,
where 367 Bishops were assembled against the Adversaries of Images, whom they
subjected to their Anathema. (2) Of Particular Synods, one was held in the
Temple of the Apostles in Constantinople under the Patriarch Photius, which was
called the First and Second: Another under Leo and Constantine in the most
Famous Temple Sanctae Dei Sapientiae, or Sanctae Sophiae, which confirmed the
Seventh Synod: Another at Ancyra, more ancient than the first Universal Synod:
Another at Caesarea, more ancient than that at Ancyra: Another at Gangra, after
the Nicene, against Eustachius, who despised Marriage, and taught things not
consonant to Ecclesiastical Tradition: Another at Antioch a City in Syria,
where in truth were two Synods, the one under Aurelianus against Paulus
Samosatenus, who said that Christ was mere Man; the other under Constantius Son
to Constantine the Great: Another at Laodicea, situate in Phrygia Pacatiana:
Another at Sardica, that when Constantius embraced the foresaid Sect, his
Brother Constans, Emperor of Old Rome, by his Letters threatening him with a
War, if he would not desist from perverting the Church; his Answer was, That he
sought no other Doctrine, than what was most agreeable to the Catholic Faith;
whereupon by their and the Bishop of Romes appointment 341 Bishops were
Convened in a Synod, which having established the power and authority of the
Nicene Synod, did constitute diverse Canons for the Church: Another at Carthage
under Theodosius, where 217 Bishops were assembled, and with them the Popes
Vicegerents; this Carthage was part of Charchedon, and that a Province of
Africa. (3) The Canons of the Fathers are taken (according to the Roman
computation) out of the Epistles partly of Dionysius Alexandrinus, partly of
Petrus Alexandrinus, partly of the Wonder-working Gregorius: partly also out of
the Epistles of Bazil or Basilius the Great: partly out of the Epistle of
Gregory or Gregorius Nyssenus to the B. of Melita: partly out of the Responses
of Timotheus Alexandrinus: partly out of the Responses of the
Constantinopolitan Synod to certain Monks, Nicholaus the Patriarch being
President: partly out of the Epistles of Cyril or Cyrillus: and partly out of
the Epistles of Nicephorus the Patriach. (4) The Canons of the Holy Apostles (a
book falsely ascribed to the Apostles) are in number Eighty Five, according to a
modest Computation, if you have any Faith to spare, at least enough to believe
the Church of Rome, in that as in other Points, infallible. But the Canons
indeed of the Apostles, which are of Order and External Government, do oblige
(as Dr. Tailor says) the Conscience, by being accepted in several Churches, not
by their first Institution; and were fitted only to Times, and Places, and
present Necessities: For (says he) the Apostolical Decree of Abstaining from
Blood was observed by more Churches, than those of Syria and Cilicia, to which
the Canon was directed; and the College of Widows or Deaconesses, derived it
self into the manners of the Western Churches. And the Apostles in their first
Preaching and Conversation in Jerusalem instituted a coenobitick life, and had
all things in Common with Believers: (indeed no man was obliged to it.) Of the
same nature were their Canons, Counsels, and Advices. The Canon concerning
Widows, Let not a Widow be chosen under 60 years; and yet Justinian suffered
one of 40 years old to be chosen. Novel. 123. c. 12, 13. And the Canon of the
Apostles forbidding to eat things strangled, Anonym. The Hist. of the Church of
Great Britain.
is no where observed in the Western Churches of Christendom. In the beginning
of the Fourth Century, above 1300 years since, we find our Bishops, British
Bishops, at the Councils of Arles, Nice, Sardis, and Ariminum; a clear Evidence
of the flourishing state of Christianity so long since in this Island. At Arles
in France, convened touching the Donatists, appeared for the Britains, Eborius
Bishop of York, Restitutus Bishop of London, Adelfius Bishop of the City called
the Colony of London, which some suppose to be Colchester, others Maldon in
Essex; Sacerdos, a Priest both by Name and Office; Arminius, a Deacon, An. 313.
At the Synod of Nice in Bithynia, An. 325. to suppress Arrianism, were British
Bishops present, as Athanasius and Hilary Bishop of Poictiers affirm. At the
Council of Sardis in Thracia convened by Constanitus and Constans, Sons to
Constantine the Great, the British Bishops were likewise present, when the
Arrians were condemned, and Athanasius acquitted. And at the Council of
Ariminum in Italy the British Bishops were also present; who (according to
Athanasius) were about An. 360. summoned to diverse Foreign Councils in remote
parts. As also here at home in and after the Seventh Century were diverse
particular Councils and Synods, the first whereof (according to Stapleton out
of Bid) called The first of the English Nation, Lib. 4. c. 5.
was convened at Hertford by Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, who succeeded
Deusdedit in that See; in this Council the Observation of Easter was settled
according to the Romish Rite; yet whosoever will have this Council to be (as
aforesaid) The first of the English Nation, must understand it the First, whose
Canons are completely extant. Bid lib. 4. c. 5. About the year 740 Ethelbald
King of Mercia, with Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, called a Council at
Cliffe in Kent; the acts of which Synod were 31 Canons, among which is was (
inter alia) Ordained, That Prayers should publicly be made for Kings and
Princes. But some few years before this, the said Theodorus held a Synod or
Council of Bishops at Hatfield, by authority whereof he divided the Province of
Mercia (which Sexwolphus then governed alone) into five Bishoprics, viz. to
Chester, Worcester, Lichfield, Cedema in Lindsey, and to Dorchester. In the
year 692 a great Council was held at Becanceld by Withred King of Kent, and
Bertuald Archbishop of Britain, wherein many things were concluded in favor of
the Church. About the same time a Council was held at Berghamsteed by the said
Withred King of Kent; at which Council Bishop Wilfrid was restored to York,
whence he departed for Rome, upon the endeavors which Theodorus Archbishop of
Canterbury had used, to have that Diocese of York divided. In the year 801
Ethelard the Archbishop called a Synod at Clivesho in Kent, where by power from
the Pope, he rivited (that's the word) the Archbishopric into the City of
Canterbury. There was likewise at Celichyth an eminent Council under Wolphred,
who succeeded Ethelard, Archbishop of Canterbury. But nigh one hundred years
before this, viz. about the year 709, a Synod was assembled at Alncester in
Worcestershire, to promote the building of Evesham-Abbey. And not long after
another Synod was called at London, to introduce the Doctrine of Image Worship
into England, now first beginning to appear in the public practice thereof.
Also, above one hundred years before that, viz. about the year 601. Augustine
by the aid of Ethelbert King of Kent, called a Council of Saxon and British
Bishops to meet in the Confines of the Mercians and West Saxons, in the borders
of Worcester and Herefordshire, under an Oak; thereby tacitly reproving the
Idolatry of the Pagan Britains, who acted their Superstitions under an Oak; as
the Learned Sr. H. Spelman observes. Spelm. Council.
In the Tenth Century King Edward the Elder, Son of King Alfred, called a Synod
at Intingford, where he confirmed the same Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which
King Alured had made before. Many Councils were Convened during the Reign of
King Athelstan, as at Exiter, Feversham, Thunderfield, London, and at Great
Lea, which last is of most account in regard of the Laws therein made,
specially that concerning the payment of Tithes; the which you may peruse in
the Learned Sr. H. Spelm. Council. p. 405. During the Reign of King Edgar, Hoel
Dha held a National Council for all Wales at Tyquin, which was wholly in favor
of the Clergy; this Council was held when Dunst in was Archbishop of
Canterbury, in whose time there were Two other Councils convened, the one at
Cartlage in Cambridgshire, the other at Caln in Wiltshire. After this William
the Conqueror convened a Council of his Bishops at Winchester, wherein himself
was personally present, with two Cardinals sent from Rome; in this Council
Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury was deposed, and L^^frank a Lombard
substituted in his room. During the Reign of King Henry the First, Anselm
Archbishop of Canterbury summoned a Council at Westminster, which
Excommunicated all Married Priests, half the Clergy at that time being Married,
or the Sons of Married Priests. During the Reign of King Stephen, Albericus
Bishop of Hostia, sent by Pope Innocent into England, convened a Synod at
Westminster, wherein it was concluded, That no Priest, etc. should have a Wife
or a Woman in his house, on pain of being sent to Hell. Also that their
Transubstantiated God should dwell but Eight days in the Box, for fear of being
Worm-eaten or molded. Under the Reign of King Henry the Second (who disclaimed
the Popes authority, refused to pay Peter Pence, and interdicted all Appeals to
Rome) a Synod was called at Westminster, wherein was a great Contest between
the two Archbishops of Canterbury and York for Precedence; York appeals to
Rome, the Pope interposes, and to end old Divisions makes a new distinction,
entituling York Primate of England, and Canterbury Primate of all England.
Under the Reign of King Henry the Third a Council was held at Oxford under
Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein many Constitutions were made,
as against Excess of demands for Procurations in Visitations, against
Pluralities, Non-Residence, and other abuses of the Clergy. In the Ninth year
of King Edward the First, John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, held a Council
at Lambeth with his Suffragans, some account whereof Walsingham gives us in
these words, viz. Frater Johannes Peckham, Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, ne
nihil fecisse videretur, convocat Concilium apud Lambeth, in quo non Evangelii
Regni Dei praedicationem imposuit, sed Constitutiones Othonis and Ottobonis
quondam Legatorum in Anglia innovans, jussit eas ab omnibus servari, etc.
Walsing. in Ed. 1. He then made Sixteen Ecclesiastical Laws, which are inserted
among the Provincial Constitutions. After this he summoned another Council of
his Clergy at Reading, wherein he propounded the drawing of all Causes
concerning Advowsons to the Ecclesiastical Courts, and to cut off all
Prohibitions from the Temporal Courts in Personal Causes; but upon the Kings
express Command to desist from it, this Council was dissolved. Parker de Antiq.
Eccles. Anglic. fo. 205. An 1290. During the Reign of King Henry the Fourth,
Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury convened a Synod at St. Paul's Church
Land. wherein the King joined with them in punishing all Opposers of the
Religion received. -- Trussel. de vita H. 4. Under King Henry the Fifth an
Universal Synod of all the Bishops and Clergy was called at London, where it
was determined, That the day of St. George, and also of St. Dunstan, should be
a double Feast in holy Church. In the same Kings Reign was a Convocation held
at London, convened by Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein were
severe Constitutions made against the Lollards. In the Reign of King Henry the
Seventh a Synod was held at London by John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, to
redress the Excess of the London Clergy in Apparel and frequenting of Taverns.
We had almost omitted the Synod in England An. 1391. under the Reign of King
Richard the Second, Simon Sudbury then Archbishop of Canterbury; in which Synod
it was Ordained, That whosoever Appealed to Rome (besides Excommunication)
should lose all his Goods, and be Imprisoned during his Life. vid. Hist. of the
Church of Great Britain, -- p. 117. A Modern and Ingenious, yet unfortunate,
Author well observes a Fourfold difference or distinction of Synods or
Convocations in this Realm, in reference to the several manners of their
Meeting, and degrees of their Power. The First, he states in point of Time
before the Conquest. The Second, since the Conquest, and before the Statute of
Praemunire. The Third, after that Statute, but before another made in the Reign
of King H. 8. The Fourth, after the 25th of the said King. (1) Before the
Conquest the Popes power prevailed not over the Kings of England, who were then
ever present Personally or Virtually at all Councils, wherein matters both of
Church and State were debated and concluded, Spelm. An. 605. page 118.
Communi consensu tam Cleri quam Populi, Episcoporum, Procerum, Comitum, nec
non omnium Sapientum, Seniorum populorumque totius Regni. (2) After the
Conquest, but before the Statute of Praemunire, the Archbishops used upon all
emergent Cases, toties quoties, at their own discretions to assemble the Clergy
of their respective Provinces, where they pleased, continuing and dissolving
them at their pleasure; which they then did without any leave from the King;
whose Canons and Constitutions (without any further Ratifification) were in
that Age obligatory to all subjected to their Jurisdiction. Such (it seems)
were all the Synods from Lanfranck to Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury,
in which Arundels time the Statute of Praemunire was Enacted. (3) After which
Statute (which much restrained the Papal power, and subjected it to the Laws of
the Land) the Archbishops called no more Convocations by their sole and
absolute Command, but at the pleasure of the King, by whose Writ and Precept
only they were now and henceforth Summoned. Of this Third sort of Convocations,
were all those kept by and from Thomas Arundel unto Thomas Cranmer, or from the
16th of R. 2. unto the 25th of King H. 8. These Convocations also did make
Canons (as in Lindwoods Constitutions) which were Obligatory, although
confirmed by no other Authority than what was merely Synodical. (4) The last
sort of Convocations, since the said Statute, called the 25th of King H. 8.
That none of the Clergy should presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in
ure, any Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial, or Synodals, or any ^^her
Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial (by whatsoever Name or Names
they may be called) in their Convocation in time coming, (which always shall
be assembled by the Kings Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the Kings most
Royal assent and License to make, promise and execute such Canons,
Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial, or Synodical, upon pain of every one
of the said Clergy doing the contrary to this Act, and thereof convicted, to
suffer Imprisonment, and making Fine at the Kings will. Since this year, from
Archbishop Cranmer to this day, all Convocations are to have the Kings leave to
debate on matters of Religion; and their Canons (besides his Royal assent) an
Act of Parliament for their Confirmation. And as to the General Councils, Dr.
Tail. Cas. of Conscience, lib. 3. cap. 4. fol. 637.
there are not any of them of use in England, except the first Four General
Councils, which are established into a Law by King and Parliament.

The Learned Bishop Prideaux in his Synopsis of Councils gives us the
definition of Synodographie, and says, It is such a Methodical Synopsis of
Councils and other Ecclesiastical Meetings, as whereby there may be a clear
discovery to him that doubts how any Case may be enquired after, and what may
be determined concerning the same. And then immediately after gives us the
definition of a Council, which he calls a Free Public Ecclesiastical Meeting,
especially of Bishops, as also of other Doctors lawfully deputed by diverse
Churches, for the examining of Ecclesiastical Causes, according to the
Scriptures, and those according to the power given by Common Suffrages, without
favor of parties to be determined, in matters of Faith by Canons, in cases of
Practice by Presidents, in matters of Discipline by Decrees and Constitutions.
Of these Councils he observes some to have been Judaical, others Apostolical,
others Ecumenical, some Controverted, others Rejected, and some National, to
all which he likewise adds Conferences. (1) Under the Title of Judaical
Councils he comprehends the more solemn Meetings about extraordinary affairs
for the Confirming, Removing, or Reforming any thing, as the matter required.
Such he observes to have been at Sichem under Josuah and Eleazer, Josh. 24. At
Jerusalem, the first under David, Gad and Nathan being his Assistants, 1 Chro.
13. At Carmelita under Ahab and Elias, 1 King. 18. At Jerusalem, the Second
under Hezekiah, 2. Chro. 29. At Jerusalem, the Third under Josiah and Hilkiah,
2 Kin. 33. 2 Chro. 34. At Jerusalem, the Fourth under Zorobabel and Ezra and
the Chief of the Jews, that returned from the Captivity of Babylon. And lastly,
that which is called the Synod of the Wise under John Hircanus. Genebrand.
Chron. l. 2 p. 197. (2) The Apostolical Councils he observes to have been, for
the substituting of Matthias in the place of Judas, Act. 1. For the Election of
Seven Deacons, Act. 6. For not pressing the Ceremonial Law, Act. 15. 11. For
the toleration of some Legal Ceremonies for a time, to gain the Weak by such
condescension, Matthew. 21. 18. For composing the Apostles Creed. For obtruding
to the Church 85 Canons under the notion of the Apostles authority, concerning
which there are many Controversies. Lastly, for the Meeting at Antioch, where
among Nine Canons, the Eighth commanded Images of Christ to be substituted in
the room of Heathenish Idols; the other pious Canons being destitute of the
Synods authority. vid. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 19. and Longum. p. 147. (3) Of
Ecumenical or General Councils, some were Greek or Eastern, others were Latin
or Western. The more Famous of the Ecumenical Greek Councils were, the Nicene,
the first of Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, the first of Chalcedon. Of
Constantinople, the second of Constantinople, the third. The Nicene the second.
The more Famous of the Ecumenical Latin Councils were at Ariminum: the
Lateran: at Lions: at Vienna: the Florentine: the Lateran the fifth; and lastly
at Trent. (4) Of Controverted Councils (if that distinction be admissable,
according to the Classis thereof digested by Bellarmine) the Computation is at
Constantinople the fourth: at Sardis: at Smyrna: at Quinisext: at Francfort: at
Constance; and at Basil. (5) Of Rejected Councils (whereby are intended such as
either determine Heretical Opinions, or raise Schisms) the Computation is at
Antioch: at Milain: at Seleucia: at Ephesus the second: at Constantinople: at
Pisa the first; and at Pisa the second. (6) Of National Synods, which
comprehend the Provincials of every Metropolitan or Diocesan Bishop, the
distribution is into Italian, Spanish, French, German, Eastern, African,
Britain. (7) To these may be added Ecclesiastical Conferences, which were only
certain Meetings of some Divines, wherein nothing could be Canonically
determined, and therefore needless to be here particularly inserted. vid. B.
Prideaux. Synops. of Counc. verse. fin.

The grand Censure of the Church, whereby it punishes obstinate Offenders, is
by way of Excommunication, which though the Canonists call Traditio Diabolo, or
giving the Devil as it were Livery and Seizin of the Excommunicate person, yet
the Romanists have a Tradition, that St. Bernard Excommunicated the Devil
himself, Sanctus Bernardus, plenus virtutibus, quadam die praesentibus
Episcopis, clero, and populo, Excommunicavit quendam Diabolum Incubum, qui
quandam mulierem in Britannia per septeunium vexabat; and sic Liberata est ab
eo. -- Chron. Jo. Bromton. de Temp. H. 1. A miraculous Excommunication, and a
Sovereign Remedy against Diabolical incubations. The Excommunication which St.
Oswald pronounced against one, who would not be persuaded to be reconciled to
his Adversary, had nothing so good though a more strange effect, for that
Excommunicated him out of his Wits, and had it not been for Wolstan, who as
miraculously cured him, you might have found him, if not in Purgatory, then in
Bedlam at this day; Illi cujus es (says Sanctus Oswaldus) Te commendo, and
carnem Sathanae tuam trado. Statim ille dentibus stridere, spumas jacere, caput
rotare incipit. Qui tamen a Wolstano sanatus, cum Pacem adhuc recusaret, iterum
and tertio est arreptus simili modo, quousque ex cord injuriam remitteret and
offensam. If you have not faith enough to believe this on the Credit of Abbot
Brompton, who Chronicled from the year 588, in which St. Austin came into
England, to the death of King Richard the First, which was in the year 1198. if
you have not (I say) faith enough for the premises, you are not like to be
supplied with any on this side Rome, unless you have it from Henry de Knighton
Canon of Leyster, who wrote the Chronicle De Eventibus Angliae, from King
Edgars time to the death of King Richard the Second, for he in his Second Book
de Temp. W. 2. does put it under his infallible pen for an undeniable Truth.
And indeed is much more probable, than what the said Abbot reports touching St.
Austins raising to life the Priest at Cumpton in Oxfordshire 150 years after
his death, to absolve a penitent Excommunicate, that at the same time rose also
out of his grave, and walked out of the Church at St. Austins command, That no
Excommunicate person should be present whilst he was at Mass, having in his
lifetime been Excommunicated by the said Priest for refusing to pay his
Tithes. vid. Cron. dict. Bromton. de Regn. Cantiae. Excommunication is of such
a large extent, that this World is too narrow to contain it, therefore it
extends it self to the next World also, and that not only in reference to the
Soul, but also to the Body; insomuch that the interred Bodies of persons dying
under Excommunication, have often been inhumanely exhumated and taken out of
their Parochial graves, to associate with the rotten Carkases of bruit Beasts,
a President whereof you have in King Edward the Thirds time, when the Pope by
his Bull to the Bishop of Lincoln commanded, That the Bodies of all such
Excommunicates as in their Lifetime had adhered to the Lady Wake, in the
Contest between her and the Bishop of Ely touching a Manor, should be taken
out of their Graves, and cast out of the Churchyard. This is much worse than
to be denied the honor of a Christian burial, which by the Council at Rome,
An. 1180. was the punishment of such Lay-persons as transferred the right of
Tithes to other Laics, without delivering them to the Church; yet by the Sixth
Canon of that Council it is Ordained, That no man shall be Excommunicated or
suspended from his Office, until he be legally and duly summoned to appear and
answer for himself, except in such cases as deserve summary Excommunication. It
was a strange Excommunication, as to the new and insolent Form thereof,
wherewith Pope Theodorus Excommunicated Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople,
who having been infected with the Heresy of the Monothelites, and thereupon
Excommunicated, and upon his Recantation absolved, relapsed into the same
Error, whereupon the said Theodorus Excommunicated him the second time, but in
such a way and manner, as never had a former President or second Practice: For
he infused some drops of consecrated Cup into Ink, and therewith writ a
Sentence of Anathema against Pyrrhus. Hist. Mag. Cent. 7. cap. 39. Whether the
Dead may be Excommunicated? was the first Question moved in the Fifth General
Council at Constantinople, An. 551. under the Emperor Justinian: To which
Eutychius answered, That as Josiah opened the Sepulchers of the Dead, 2 Kin.
23. 16.
and burnt their Bones: So the Memorials of such might be accursed after their
death, who had injured the Church in their life; for which pertinent Answer the
said Emperor made him Bishop of Constantinople; so that he succeeded Menas,
who about the same time had departed this life suddenly, sitting the Council.
That worthy Prelate, who affirmed That it was certainly unlawful to
Excommunicate any man for not paying the Fees of Courts, Dr. Tailor in his
Cases of Conscience. lib. 3. cap. 4. fol. 617. nu. 4.
is scarce so generally credited in his Law, as he may deserve to be in his
Doctrines, especially when his Reason for that Assertion, viz. That a Contumacy
there (speaking of Courts Ecclesiastical) is an Offense against the Civil
Power, is duly weighed and considered; and more especially, when such Fees are
not paid, notwithstanding the Orders and Decrees of such Courts for the payment
thereof: Contempts of which kind might pass wholly unpunished, if
Ecclesiastical Censures should not take place in such cases. Many are the
Prejudices which ensue upon Excommunication, some whereof (in case of obstinate
persistency) reach us as Men as well as Christians, and seem, as it were, to
unman us, as well as unchristian us; extending ( per brachium Seculare) as well
to our Civil Liberty, as ( per censuram Ecclesiasticam) to our Christian;
having a dreadful influence both on Body and Soul, and that in both worlds.
Rebussus enumerates no less than above Threescore of these penalties, for so he
calls them, Poenae contra Excommunicatos. Rebuff. de Excom. non vitand. Such
persons as are extra Communionem Ecclesiae, or Excommunicates with us, were
apud Hebraeos anciently called Aposynagogi, as cast out of the Synagogue, and
for their Contumacy Extorres, to be shunned of all men until they repented.
Old. Such as are Anathematized and under the greater Excommunication, are as it
were expelled out of all Humane Society and banished from Mankind (understand
it of those within the Church;) such an Anathema may be somewhat compared to
that Punishment, which the Romans of old called Interdictio ignis and aquae,
borrowed from the Graecians, which their great Legislator Draco enacted as a
Law to the Athenians, and which Punishment in truth was second to none, save
that which is Capital.

Toward the close of this Ecclesiastical Abridgment you have some mention made
of the Statute of Circumspecte Agatis: In the Thirteenth year of the Reign of
King Edward the First, An. 1285. the Bounds and Limits of both Jurisdictions
Spiritual and Temporal were fixed by Parliament, by a Statute under that Title,
the English whereof translated from the Latin out of the Records runs thus, viz.

The King to his Judges sends Greeting. Use your selves circumspectly in all
matters concerning the Supposed to be William Middleton.
Bishop Norwich. An Example in one, to stand as a President for all.
of Norwich, and his Clergy, not punishing them, if they hold Plea in Court
Christian, of such things as be merely Spiritual, viz. of penance enjoined for
deadly Sin, as Fornication, Adultery, and such like; for the which many times
corporal penance or pecuniary is enjoined, specially if a Freeman be convict of
such things.

Also if Prelates do punish for leaving Churchyards unclosed, or for that the
Church is uncovered, or not conveniently decked; in which cases none other
penance can be enjoined, but pecuniary.

Item, If a Parson demand of his Parishioners Oblations and Tithes due and
accustomed; or if any person plead against another for Tithes, more or less, so
that the Fourth part of the value of the Benefice be not demanded.

Item, If a Parson demand Mortuaries in places, where a Mortuary has used to
have been given.

Item, If a Prelate of a Church, or if a Patron demand a `Pension due to
themselves, all such demands are to be made in a Spiritual Court. And for
laying violent hands on a Priest, and in case of Defamation, it has been
granted already, that it shall be tried in a Spiritual Court, when money is not
demanded, but a thing done for punishment of Sin, and likewise for breaking an
Oath. In all cases before rehearsed, the Spiritual Judge shall have power to
take knowledge, notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition. vid. Lindw. Constit.
lib. 2. Tit. De Foro-Competenti. Vid. Full. Chur. Hist. lib. 3. p. 79.

Now whereas some doubt has heretofore been, whether this were indeed an Act
of Parliament, or any thing more than a Constitution made by the Prelates
themselves, or only a mere Writ issued out from the King to his Judges, Sr. Ed.
Coke. Instit. par. 2. page 487. resolves it in express terms thus, viz. Though
some have said, that this was no Statute, but made by the Prelates themselves;
yet that this is an Act of Parliament, it is proved, not only by our Books, but
also by an Act of Parliament.

By this Statute of Circumspecte Agatis, the Ecclesiastical Court might proceed
to punish the Offender, who offered violence to a Priest; the which de jure it
might do by proceeding Ex Officio and pro salute animae, Damages on an Action
of Battery in the case reserved to the Common Law.

To conclude; The Protestation which Bellamera the Canonist, in the Proem to
his Lecture on the Clementine Constitutions makes, shall (as to this
Repertorium Canonicum, Jurisve Anglico-Ecclesiastici Compendium) be mine, Id
submittens correctioni and determinationi tam Canonum Ecclesiasticorum, quam
Statutorum, Jurumque Public Forensium and Secularium, and cujuslibet melius
sentientis, Protestans, quod si in praesenti Opusculo de lapsu chalami, aut
inadvertentia, vel forte ex ignorantia aliqua jam Scripsero, id praeter
intentionem scribere me contigerit: Si etiam aliqua Scripsero, quae errorem
saperent, aut male sonarent, illa ex nunc Revoco, and volo haberi pro non
Scriptis; Determinationibusque Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and dicti Juris Forensis
Oraculis semper, and in omnibus volo stare. Et hanc Protestationem volo pro
Repetita haberi in quolibet Dictorum meorum, and etiam condicendorum, ut si
reprobantur dicta, Actor non propter hoc reprobetur.

The several CHAPTERS of the Ensuing Abridgment.
CHAP. PAGE. 1. OF His Majesty's Supremacy, 1 2. Of Archbishops, 12 3. Of
Bishops and Ordinaries, 22 4. Of Guardians of the Spiritualties. 39 5. Of Conge
d'Eslire, Election, and Confirmation, 43 6. Of Consecration, 46 7. Of Deans and
Chapters, 51 8. Of Archdeacons. 60 9. Of Procurations, Synodals, and
Pentecostals, 67 10. Of Diocesan Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials; as also
of Consistories. 80 11. Of Courts Ecclesiastical and their Jurisdiction, 94 12.
Of Churches, Chapels, and Churchyards, 134 13. Of Churchwardens, Questmen,
and Sidemen, 159 14. Of Consolidation and Union of Churches, 169 15. Of
Dilapidations, 173 16. Of Patrons, and De jure Patronatus, 178 17. Of Parsons
and Parsonages, 185 18. Of Vicars, Vicarages, and Benefices, 196 19. Of
Advowsons. 220 20. Of Appropriations. 220 21. Of Commendams, 230 22. Of Lapse,
242 23. Of Collation, Presentation, and Nomination, 251 24. Of Examination,
Admission, Institution, and Induction, 269 25. Of Avoidance and Next Avoidance;
also of Cession, 282 26. Of Pluralities, 291 27. Of Deprivation, 305 28. Of
Incumbents; also of Residence and Non-Residence, 316 29. Of Abbots and Abbeys;
also of Chauntreys; and of the Court of Augmentations, 326 30. Of Annates or
First Fruits; also of Aumone, or Frank-Almoin, 335 31. Of Altarage, 339 32. Of
Tithes, with the Incidents thereof, 344 33. Of Banns, 465 34. Of Adultery, 469
35. Of Bastards and Bastardy, 477 36. Of Divorce; also of Alimony, 492 37. Of
Defamation, 514 38. Of Sacrilege. 528 39. Of Simony, 535 40. Of Blasphemy,
Heresy, and Heretics, 559 41. Of Councils, Synods, and Convocations, 584 42.
Of Excommunication, 623 43. Of the Statutes, Articuli Cleri, and Circumspecte
agatis, 639 44. Of several Writs at Common Law, pertinent to this Subject, 643
AN ABRIDGEMENT OF Ecclesiastical LAWS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Kings Supremacy.
1. A Description thereof, or what it is. 2. The Establishment thereof by
Statute Laws. 3. The Oath of the Kings Supremacy; when first Enacted, the Cause
thereof. 4. The King in his own Dominions, Dei Vicarius. 5. The King Supreme
Governor (under God) of the Church in England, etc. 6. Impugners of the Kings
Supremacy how censured by the Canon. 7. In matters Ecclesiastical the King has
here the same power de jure, which the Pope formerly exercised by Usurpation.
8. The Kings of this Realm anciently made their own Canons and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions without the Popes Authority. 9. The King is Lex viva, in some
cases may dispense with some Canons: 10. Provisoes of some Statutes in right of
the Kings Supremacy. 11. No Canons or Ecclesiastical Constitutions to be made,
or to be of force to oblige the Subject without the Royal Assent. 12. The Regal
Supremacy asserted by the Ecclesiastical Injunctions of King Ed. 6. 13. The
same further asserted by other Eccles. Powers and Authorities. 14. The Regal
Supremacy asserted in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
(1.) THis Ecclesiastical Abridgment begins with the Regal Supremacy, a Point
which cannot be touched with too much tenderness; such of the Church of Rome as
question the validity thereof, may be presumed not to have consulted that
Learned Canonist of their own, Jo. Quintinus Hoedeus, where he says, That
Nemini dubium, J^. Qaint Hoed. Repet. in c. Novit De Judic. nu. 145.
quin in Primitiva Ecclesia de rebus and Personis Ecclesiasticis Principes jus
dixerint. The Emperors were all Secular Princes, who by those Laws which they
established touching Persons and Things Ecclesiastical, proclaimed to all the
world their Supremacy therein: The Thirteen first Titles of the First Book of
the Emperor Justinian's Code, being the Constitutions of diverse Emperors, do
treat and judge of Things and Persons merely Ecclesiastical; yea, the Emperors
Areadius and Honorius ejected a Bishop as well out of his Title of
Ecclesiastical Dignity as out of his Episcopal See, and commanded him to be
Banished for disturbing the public Peace. l. quicunque, C. de Episc. and
Cleric. By this word [ Supremacy] is here understood, that undoubted Right and
ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical within these his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions (with the abolishing of all Foreign and Usurped Power
repugnant to the same) which the Laws and Statutes have restored to the Crown
of this Kingdom, and now invested in the King, as the Highest Power under God
within these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, unto whom all persons within
the same, in all Causes and Matters, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, do owe
their Loyalty and Obedience, before and above all other Powers and Potentates
on Earth whatever.

(2.) By the Injunctions of King Ed. 6. to the Clergy, all persons
Ecclesiastical having cure of Souls, Vid. B. Spar. Collect. Edit. 1675.
were Four times a year to preach in vindication of the Kings Supremacy, and in
opposition to the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome in this Kingdom. There
were diverse Laws made in the time of King H. 8. for the extinguishment of all
Foreign Power, and for the restoring unto the Crown of this Realm the Ancient
Rights and Jurisdictions of the same; which is the substance of the Preamble of
the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. The express Letter and meaning whereof is, as
Sir Edward Coke observes Co. Inst. p. 4. c. 74.
to restore and unite to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, where (as he says) the First clause of the Body of the Act,
being to let in the Restitution of the Ancient Right and Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical within the Realm, does abolish all Foreign Jurisdiction out of
the Realm. And then follows the principal Clause of Restitution and Uniting
of the ancient Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, being the main purpose of the Act,
in these words, viz. Be it Enacted, That such Jurisdiction Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual Power or Authority has heretofore been, or
lawfully may be exercised or used for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical
State and Persons, and for-Reformation, Order, and Correction of the same, and
of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities, shall for ever by Authority of this Parliament, be united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. This Act by a former Clause
thereof does Repeal the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 8. whereby the Acts
of 26 H. 8. c. 1. and 35 H. 8. c. 3. were repealed; so that the Act of Repeal
being repealed, the said Acts of H. 8. were implicitly revived, whereby it is
declared and enacted, That the King, his Heirs and Successors, should be taken
and accepted the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England, and
should have and enjoy, annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the
Title and style thereof, as all Honors, Dignities, Prebeminencies,
Jurisdictions, etc. to the said dignity of Supreme Head belonging, etc. By
which Style, Title and Dignity the King has all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
whatever Co. ibid.
; And by which Statute the Crown was but remitted and restored to its Ancient
Jurisdiction, which had been formerly usurped by the Bishop of Rome Davis 1.
Proxies 4.
. And this is that Supremacy which is here meant and intended.

(3.) The said Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 1. does not only repeal the said Stat. of
1, and 2 P. and M. c. 8. but it is also a reviver of diverse Acts asserting
several branches of the Kings Supremacy, and re-establishing the same; it does
likewise not only abolish all Foreign Authority, but also annex the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown of this Realm, By virtue hereof were
the Letters Patent of the High Commission-Court.
with power to assign Commissioners for the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: And then further Enacts to this effect, viz. That all
Ecclesiastical persons of what degree soever, and all and every Temporal Judge,
Justice, Mayor, or other Lay or Temporal Officer or Minister, and every other
person having Fees or wages from the Crown, within this Realm or the Dominions
thereof, shall upon his Corporal Oath testify and declare in his Conscience,
That the Kings Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all
other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; And that no Foreign Prince.
Person, Prelate, State or Potentate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
power, superiority, pre-eminence or authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual,
within this Realm; And therefore does utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, powers, superiorities and authorities; and does promise that
from henceforth be shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to his power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, privileges, preheminencies and authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or united or annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. The practices of the Romanists in the 4th year of
Queen Elizabeth, and the danger thereby threatening both the Queen and State,
occasioned her to call a Parliament 12. Jan. An. 156 2/3, which passed an Act
For assurance of the Queens Royal power over all Estates and Subjects within
her Dominions. By which Statute was enacted The Oath of Supremacy; as also what
persons were obliged to take it, and who should have power to administer the
same: And this was both the original and the cause of that Oath. By the said
Statute of 1 El. c. 1. appears also what the penalty is for refusing to take
the said Oath; as also the penalty of maintaining a Foreign Authority, as
likewise what other persons than the forementioned shall be obliged to take
the said Oath; which was afterward again further ratified and established by
the Statute of 5 Eliz. c. 1.

(4.) The King within his own Territories and Dominions, is (according to
Bracton) Dei Vicarius tam in Spiritualibus quam Temporalibus Bract. de Leg. and
Consue^ud. Angl.
And in the Ecclesiastical Laws of Edward the Confessor the King is styled,
Vicarius summi Regis, and Reges regunt Ecclesiam Dei, in immediate
subordination to God Leg. Eccl. Ed. C^nf. a. 15. Spelm. Conc.
: Yea the Pope himself, Eleutherius, An. 169. styled King Lueius, Dei Vicarius
in Regno suo Spelm. ib.


(5.) The Supremacy which heretofore the Pope did usurp in this Kingdom, was in
the Crown originally, to which it is now legally reverted. The Kings Supremacy
in and over all Persons and Causes Ecclesiastical, within his own Dominions, is
essentially inherent in him; so that all such Authority as the Pope here once
usurped, claiming as Supreme Head, did originally and legally belong to the
Crown, and is now reunited to it by several Statutes as aforesaid 26 H. 8. 1.
1 El. 1. 5. El. 1. vid. C^. Instit. p. 4. c. 74.
. On this Supremacy of the King, as Supreme Head, Sr. Edward Coke grounds the
power of granting a Commission of Review after a Definitive Sentence in the
Delegates Ce. ubi sup. de Com. ad Revid.
; for one Reason that he gives, is, because after a Definitive Sentence the
Pope, as Supreme Head by the Canon Law, used to grant a Commission Ad
Revidendum: And such Authority as the Pope had, claiming as Supreme Head, does
of right belong to the Crown; Quia sicut Fontes communicant aquas fluminibus
cumulative, non privitive: sic Rex subditis suis Jurisdictionem communicate in
Causis Ecclesiasticis (vigore Statuti in hujusmodi Casu editi) cumulative, non
privitive Ce. ibid.
.

By the Second Canon of the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of the Church of
England it is ordained, Edit. An. 1603.
That whoever shall affirm, that the Kings Majesty has not the same Authority
in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had among the Jews and Christian
Emperors in the Primitive Church, or impeach in any part his Regal Supremacy in
the said Cases restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of this Realm therein
established, shall be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not be restored but only
by the Archbishop after his repentance and public revocation of those his
wicked Errors.

(7.) The King being next under God Supreme Governor of the Church of England,
may Qua talis redress as he shall see cause, in all matters of Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction for the conservation of the Peace and Tranquillity
of his Realms Vid. Stat, supradict.
. The Pope, as appears by the Stat. of 25 H. 8. c. 21. claimed full power to
dispense with all human Laws of all Realms in all Causes, which he called
Spiritual: Now the King as Supreme has the same power in himself within his
own Realms legally, which the Pope claimed and exercised by Usurpation. Eadem
praesumitur men's Regis, quae est Juris. The Kings immediate, personal,
ordinary, inherent power, which he executes or may execute Authoritate Regia
suprema Ecclesiastica, as King and Supreme Governor of the Church of England,
is one of these Flowers qui faciunt Coronam Colt and Glover against the Bishop
of Covent^y and Lichfield. Hob. Rep.
. Nor is the Kings immediate power restrained by such Statutes as authorize
inferior persons: The Lord Chief Justice Hobart asserts, That although the
Stat. of 25 H. 8. 21. does say, That all Dispensations, etc. shall be granted
in manner and form following, and not otherwise, yet the King is not thereby
restrained, but his power remains full and perfect as before, and he may still
grant them as King, for that all Acts of Grace and Justice flow from him Ibid.
. By the Eighth Canon Concilii Calchuthensis held under Pope Adrian the First,
Council. Calchuth. c. 8. Spelm.
An. 787. the Pope had power to grant what Immunities and Privileges he
pleased in Church Matters, and they were by the said Canon to be duly observed:
Whatever Authority the Pope pretended to in this Kingdom in such matters by way
of Usurpation, the same may the King, as Supreme Governor of the Church next
under God in his own Dominions, use and lawfully exercise by his Regal
Authority, ex justa plenitudine Potestatis suae. Likewise Pope Agathon, An.
680. in Concilio Romano-Britannico, exercised his Papal Authority, in the time
of Lotharius King of Kent, not only touching the Reformation of Errors and
Heresies then in this Church, but also as to the composure of differences and
dissentions that then were among the Clergy of this Realm. Such Presidents of
the usurped power of the Papal See exercised in this Kingdom, are now of no
further use, than to illustrate or exemplify the Legal power inherent in the
Kings of this Realm in such matters of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; for the
most High and Sacred Order of Kings being of Divine Right, it follows that all
persons of what estate soever, and all Causes of what quality soever, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, are
subordinated to the Power and Authority of the King as Supreme. It is not only
acknowledged, but also constituted by way of an Ecclesiastical Canon, Can. 1.
of the Synod held at London. An. 1640.
That the power of Calling and Dissolving Councils both National and
Provincial, is the true Right of all Christian Kings within their own Realms
and Territories.

(8.) The Ecclesiastical Legislative power was ever in the Kings of this Realm
within their own Dominions; That in Ancient times they made their own
Ecclesiastical Laws, Canons and Constitutions, appears by several Presidents
and Records of very great Antiquity, which were received and observed within
their own Territories without any Ratification from any Foreign power. One
instance (among many) may be given of the Ecclesiastical Laws of Alured Mag.
Regis Anglorum, An. 887. This they did de jure, by virtue of their own inherent
Supremacy. And therefore when Pope Nicholas the Second, An. 1066. in the Bull,
wherein he ordained Westminster to be the place for the Consecration of Kings,
gave power to Edward the Confessor and his Successors, to constitute such Laws
in the Church, as he should think fit, he gave him therein no more than was his
own before: For the Kings of England might ordain or repeal what Canons they
thought fit within their own Dominions in right of their Regal Supremacy, the
same being inherent in them Jure Divino, non Papali. For we find that in King
AEtheldreds days, An. 1009. in Concilio AEnhamensi Generali, the Canons then
made, and afterward caused by King Kanutus to be Transcribed, were called the
Kings Canons, not the Bishops; En hujus Concilii Canones, quos in suas Leges
passim transcripsit Rex Canutus, Malmsburius AEtheldredo Regi, non Episcopis,
tribuit. And the Peers of this Realm per Synodum Landavensem were
unexcommunicable, Circa An. 560.
nisi prius Consulto Rege, aut ejus praecepto. Which is a plain demonstration,
That the Kings of England Anciently had the Supremacy and superintendent
Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction inherent in themselves exclusively to all
other, either home or Foreign powers whatever.

(9.) It is by good Authority asserted, That the King as Supreme, is himself
instead of the whole Law, yea, that he is the Law it self, and the only chief
Interpreter thereof, as in whose Breast resides the whole knowledge of the
same; And that his Majesty by communicating his Authority to his Judge to
expound the Laws, does not thereby abdicate the same from himself, but that he
may assume it again unto him, when and as often as he pleases. Dr. Ridl. View, p.
2. c. 1. Sect. 7. Consonant whereunto is that which Borellus has, Principum
Placita Legis habent vigorem, and eatenus vim Legis obtinebunt, quatenus
fuerint cum honestate conjuncta. Borel. de Magist. Edict. l. 2. c. 4. and
Roland, a Val. Cons. 91. nu. 54. vo. 2. And Suarez tells us, That Princeps est
Lex viva, and reipsa praecipit, ut Lex per scripturam. Of which Opinion also is
Alexander, Imola, and many others. Suar. Alleg. 9. nu. 13. The grant of
Dispensations is a peculiar and very considerable part of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, the which is eminently in the Crown; and by the Stat. of 25 H. 8.
the Archbishop of Canterbury may grant Dispensations: Archiepiscopus possit
dispensare contra Statutum Provinciale per se editum; Et qui potest jus
condere, potest illud tollere. Lindw. de Cler. Conju. c. 2. gl. ult. Extr. de
Elect. c. Significasti, etc. Intonuit. And in another place, Episcopus in
quibusdam Casibus Dispensare potest contra Canones. Constable. Otho. de Concu.
Cler. gl. ver. Meritis.

10. The Laws and Statutes of this Realm have been tender of the Kings
Supremacy ever since the Foreign power over the State Ecclesiastical was
abolished; In the Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 12. there is a Proviso, That
nothing in the said Act shall extend to abridge or diminish the Kings Majesty's
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters and affairs. And in the Stat. of 22 Car. 2.
cap. 1. there is a Proviso, That, not any thing therein contained shall extend
to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs; but
that his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, may from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authority in Ecclesiastical
affairs, as fully and amply as any of his Predecessors have or might have done.

11. As no Convocations for Ecclesiastical Constitutions, or for correction or
reformation of Abuses in the Church, can be Convened without his Majesty's Writ
for that end and purpose: so being Convened, no Canons or Constitutions that
shall then be agreed on, can have any effect in Law, or be in force to oblige
any of his Majesty's Subjects until his consent thereunto be first had and
obtained, and until they shall have the power of Ecclesiastical Laws by being
ratified and confirmed by the Supreme Authority. Therefore the Archbishop of
Canterbury may not hold a Council for his Province without the Kings leave;
Never used to be held but by Sovereign permittance. Hoveden.
for when such Council was held by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, it was
prohibited by Fitz-Peter Chief Justice, for that he had not the Kings License
therein, but he would not obey Speed 538, 12.
And 13 E. 3. Rot. Parl. M. 1. there was a Writ for a Convocation of the Clergy
of the Province of Canterbury and Paul's; And another for the other of York,
vid. Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 19. where the Clergy of England acknowledge that the
Convocations of the same Clergy are, and always have been and ought to be
assembled only by the Kings Writ. Roll. Abridg. verb. Preregative, Lit. X.
The Convocation is under the power and Authority of the King. 21 E. 3. 45. b.

(12.) After the Reign of King H. 8. this Supremacy in the Crown was signally
exercised by King Ed. 6. styling himself, Supreme Head (under Christ) of the
Church of England and Ireland, in the Preface of his Injunctions, given as well
to all the Clergy as Laity of this Realm; the Close whereof is as follows,
viz. All which singular Injunctions the Kings Majesty ministers unto his
Clergy and their Successors, and to all his loving Subjects; straightly charging
and commanding them to observe and keep the same, upon pain of Deprivation,
Sequestration of Fruits or Benefices, Suspension, Excommunication, and such
other Coercion, as to Ordinaries or others, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
whom his Majesty has appointed for the due execution of the same, Vid. the
Injunctions in Bishop Sparrows Collect. of Articles.
shall be seen convenient: Charging and commanding them to see these
Injunctions observed and kept of all persons, being under their Jurisdiction,
as they will answer to his Majesty for the contrary; And his Majesty's pleasure
is, That every Justice of Peace (being required) shall assist the Ordinaries
and every of them for the due execution of the said Injunctions.

(14.) The Three first Articles to be enquired of at the Visitations within the
Province of Canterbury in the second year of the Reign of the said King Edward
the Sixth, were as follows, viz. (1.) Whether Parsons, Vicars and Curates,
and every of them have purely and sincerely, without color or dissimulation,
four times in the year at the least, preached against the Usurped power,
pretended Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome? (2.) Whether they
have preached and declared likewise four times in the year at least, that the
Kings Majesty's power, authority and pre-eminence, within his Realms and
Dominions, is the highest power under God? (3.) Whether any person has by
writing, cyphring, preaching or teaching, deed or act obstinately holden, and
stand with to extol, set-forth, maintain or defend the authority, jurisdiction
or power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See heretofore claimed and usurped,
Bishop Sparrow's Collect. ubi. supr. p. 25.
or by any pretense, obstinately or maliciously, invented any thing for the
extolling of the same, or any part thereof? Likewise by the Articles of
Religion, agreed on by the Convocation held in London, and published An. 1553.
by the Authority of King Ed. 6. it is declared, That the King of England is
Supreme Head in Earth next under Christ of the Church of England, etc. and that
the Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm. Art. 37.
The like you have in the Articles of Religion agreed on by the Archbishops and
Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in the Convocation held in
London, An. 1562. and published by the Authority of Queen Elizabeth, That the
Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other her
Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is not, nor
ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction. Which Articles (being the
Articles of the Church of England) were afterward ratified and confirmed by
his Majesty, King CHARLES I. of ever Blessed Memory, by his Royal Declaration
thereunto prefixed, in which Declaration you have as follows, viz. That we
are Supreme Governor of the Church of England, and that if any difference rise
about the External Policy, concerning the Injunctions, Canons, or other
Constitutions whatsoever thereto belonging, the Clergy in their Convocation is
to order and settle them, having first obtained leave under our Broad Seal so
to do: and We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions, provided that
none b^ made contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land. Likewise in the
first of the aforesaid Injunctions of King Ed. 6. as also in the first of the
Injunctions given by Q. Elizabeth, concerning both the Clergy and Laity of this
Realm, published Ann. 1559. being the first year of her Reign, it is enjoined,
That all Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and all other Ecclesiastical
persons, shall faithfully keep and observe, etc. all and singular Laws and
Statutes made for the restoring to the Crown, the ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical, and abolishing of all Foreign power repugnant to the
same, etc. By the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 19. Appeals to Rome are prohibited;
and it is Ordained, that in default of Justice in any of the Courts of the
Archbishops of this Realm, it shall be lawful to appeal to the King in his
Court of Chancery, and thereupon a Commission shall be granted, etc. And by a
Proviso toward the end of that Statute an Appeal is given to the King in
Chancery upon Sentences in places exempt, in the same manner as was before used
to the Sea of Rome. And as by the said Statute there may be an Appeal to the
King in Chancery, Vid. Roll. Abr. ver. Prerogativ. Lit. G. 232.
when the Suit is in the Archbishops Court, or some Peculiar exempt: so in some
Cases the Appeal may be to the King generally, as he is Supreme Head of all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the Realm; for by the Statutes made in the
time of King Hen. 8. the Crown was only remitted and restored to its Ancient
Jurisdiction, which had been usurped by the Bishop of Rome: 33 Ed. 3. Fitz. Aid
del Roy 103. Reges sacro oleo uncti Spiritualis Jurisdictionis sunt capaces.
Rex est Mixta persona cum Sacerdote. Et causa Spiritualis Committi potest
Principi Laico. Cassan. in Catal. glo. mund. p. 5. Consid. 24. The King of
England, etc. is Persona Sacra and mixta cum Sacerdote, and at his Coronation,
by a solemn Consecration and Unction becomes a Spiritual person, Sacred and
Ecclesiastical, and then has tam Vestem Dalmaticam, as an emblem of his Royal
Priesthood, quam Coronam Regni in respect of his Regal power in Temporals, and
is Supreme Governor in all Causes and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil. The King is Supreme Ordinary by the Ancient Common Law of England,
before the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 12. for a Resignation might be made to him
19 El. 40. 8.
; he might make a Grant of a Church to a man to hold to his own proper use; 7
E. 3. Fitz. Q. Imp. 19. vid. 29 E. 3. 9.
he might not only exempt any Ecclesiastical person out of the Jurisdiction of
the Ordinary, 1 H. 7. 23.
but also give him Episcopal Jurisdiction; he might Present to Free Chapels
(in default of the Dean) by Lapse, and that as Ordinary, and in respect of his
Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; 27 E. 3. 84. F. N. B. 34. f.
he might dispense with one not lawfully born, to be a Priest, 11 H. 7. 12.
albeit the Ecclesiastical Laws allowed within this Realm do prohibit it; but
the reason is, for that it is not Malum in se, but Malum prohibitum. In a word,
All that the Pope was wont to do in such cases within this Realm, as
Provisions, 19 E. 3. Fitz. Quare non admisit, 7. vid. Stat. 25. E. 3. De
Proviscribus.
Appeals to Rome, Vid. Preamble of the Stat. of 24 H. 8. c. 12.
holding Plea of Spiritual things thence arising 9 E. 4. 3. F. N. B. 44. h.
, Excommunications by his Bulls 3^ Ass. pl. 19.
, and the like, were no other than Usurpations and Encroachments on the Dignity
and Prerogative Royal.

(14.) In the Reign of King H. 8. An. 1539. the Abbots of Colchester, Reading,
and Glastenbury, were condemned and executed under color (so the Author
expresses it) of denying the Kings Supremacy; and their rich Abbeys seized on,
as Confiscations to the use of the King Dr. Heylins Hist. Eccl. Restaurat. p.
10.
: But when the Act of Supremacy came to be debated in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, it seemed a thing strange in Nature and Polity, That a Woman should
be declared to be the Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England; but the
Reformed party not so much contending about Words and Phrases, as aiming to
oust the Pope of all Authority within these Dominions, fixed the Supreme power
over all Persons and Estates, of what rank soever, in the Crown Imperial, not
by the Name of Supreme Head, but tantamount, of the Supreme Governess. In Queen
Mary 's time there was an Act of Parliament made* declaring, That the Regal
power was in the Queens Majesty as fully as it had been in any of her
Predecessors. In the body whereof it is expressed and declared, That the Law of
the Realm is, and ever has been, and ought to be understood, That the Kingly
or Regal Office of the Realm, and al^ Dignities, Prerogatives Royal, Power,
Preheminences, Privileges, Authorities and Jurisdictions thereunto annexed,
united or belonging, being invested either in Male or Female, are, be, and
ought to be, as fully, wholly, absolutely and entirely deemed, adjudged,
accepted, invested and taken in the one as in the other. So that whatsoever
Statute or Law does limit or appoint, that the King of this Realm may, or shall
have, execute and do, any thing as King, etc. the same the Queen (being Supreme
Governess, Possessor and Inheritor to the Imperial Crown of this Realm) may by
the same power have and execute, to al^ intents, constructions and purposes,
without doubt, ambiguity* question or scruple; any Custom, use, or any other
thing to the contrary notwithstanding. By the tenor of which Act made in Queen
Mary 's Reign is granted to Queen Elizabeth as much Authority in all the
Church-Concernments, as had been e^ercised and enjoyed by King H. 8. and King
Ed. 6. according to any Act or Acts of Parliament in their several times. Which
Acts of Parliament (as our learned Lawyers on these occasions have declared)
were not to be considered as Introductory of a new power, which was not in the
Crown before, but only Declaratory of an old, which naturally belonged to all
Christian Princes, and amongst others to the Kings and Queens of the Realm of
England. And whereas some Seditious persons had dispersed a rumor, that by the
Act for recognizing the Queens Supremacy, there was something further ascribed
unto the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, (viz.) a power of administering Divine
Service in the Church; which neither by any equity or true sense of the words
could from thence be gathered, she thereupon makes a Declaration to all her
Subjects, That nothing was, or could be meant or intended by the said Act, than
was acknowledged to be due to King H. 8. and King Ed. 6. And further declared,
That she neither does nor will challenge any other Authority by the same, than
was challenged and lately used by the said Two Kings, and was of Ancient time
due unto the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that is, under God to have the
Sovereignty and Rule over all persons born within her Realms and Dominions, of
what estate (either Ecclesiastical or Temporal) soever they be, so as no other
Foreign Power shall, or ought to have any Superiority over them. Which
Declaration published in the Queens Injunctions, An. 1559. not giving that
general satisfaction to that groundless Cavil as was expected and intended; the
Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation of the year 1562. by the Queens
Authority and Consent, declared more plainly, viz. That they gave not to their
Princess by virtue of the said Act or otherwise, either the ministering of Gods
Word or Sacraments; but that only Prerogative which they saw to have been given
always to all godly Princes in holy Scripture by God himself; that is to say,
that they should Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword
the stubborn and evil doers. And lastly, to conclude this tender point, There
is in the said Act, for the better exercising and enjoying of the Jurisdiction
thus recognized to the Crown, an Oath (as aforesaid) for the acknowledgment and
defense of this Supremacy, not only in the Queen, but also her Heirs and
Successors. Likewise a power given to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, To Assign and Authorize, etc.
as she and they shall think fit, such Persons being natural born Subjects, to
exercise, use and occupy under her and them, all manner of Jurisdictions,
Privileges and Preheminencies in any wise, touching or concerning any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the Realms of England and
Ireland, or any other her Highness Dominions or Countries, and to visit,
reform, repress, order, correct and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, or can or may
lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended to
the pleasure of Almighty God, Hactenus Dr. Heylin ubi supra, p. 280, 281, 282.
etc. This was the Foundation of the High Commission Court, and from hence
issued that Commission, by which the Queens Ministers proceeded in their
Visitation, in the First year of her Majesty's Reign.

CHAP. II.
Of Archbishops.
1. A Description of that Dignity here in England; the Antiquity, Precedence,
Privileges and Style of the Archbishop of Canterbury; with the Precincts of
that See. 2. The Antiquity, Precedence, and Style of the Archbishop of York;
with the Precincts of that See. 3. What difference between Archbishop and
Metropolitan; and why called Metropolitan. 4. Three Archbishops in England and
Wales, Anciently. 5. The vicissitudes of the Christian Religion Anciently in
this Island of Great Britain. 6. How the Third Archbishop came to be lost. 7.
The great Antiquity of an Archbishop in London. 8. The Original of the Style,
Primate and Metropolitan. 9. What the difference Anciently between the Two
Archbishopricks of Canterbury and York; certain Privileges of the latter. 10.
Whether an Archbishop may call Cases to his own cognizance, nolente Ordinario?
11. In what Case the Clerk is to be Instituted by the Archbishop, where the
Inferior Ordinary has right to Collate; Also his power of Dispensations. 12.
A Case at Common Law, relating to the Archbish. Jurisdiction. 13. Certain
special Privileges of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
(1.) ARCHBISHOP [ ab Archos, Dicuntur Patres propter honor^s eis exhibendes.
Princeps, and Episcopus, Superintendens] is that Spiritual person Secular, who
within that Province whereof he is Archbishop, has next and immediately under
the King, Supreme power, Authority and Jurisdiction in all causes and things
Ecclesiastical. Of such there are only Two in England; one of the Province of
Canterbury, styled Metropolitanus and Primas Totius Angliae; the other of York,
styled Primas and Metropolitanus Angliae. Under the two Archbishops are twenty
six Bishoprics, whereof twenty two in the Province of Canterbury, and four in
the Province of York: so that besides the two Archbishops, there are twenty
four Bishops. The Christian Religion in England took root first in the Sea of
Canterbury; St. Austin, who first preached the Gospel to the one, was the first
Archbishop of the other. Canterbury, once the Royal City of the Kings of Kent,
was by King Ethelbert, on his Conversion, bestowed on St. Augustine the
Archbishop and his Successors for ever; and so the Chair thereof became
originally fixed in that City of Canterbury; Cantuarienses Archiepiscopi, An^.
Brit. in p^in.
Dorovernenses antiquitus dicti sunt: quia totius Anglicanae Ecclesiae Primates
and Metropolitani fuerunt. The Archbishop whereof, being styled Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, is the first Peer of the Realm, and has
Precedence, not only before all the Clergy of the Kingdom of England, but also
(next and immediately after the Blood Royal) before all the Nobility of the
Realm. Sr. Edward Cok^ says more, and lets us to understand, That in Ancient
time they had great Precedence, even before the Brother of the King Co. Inst.
par. 4. cap. 77. in fin.
; as appears by the Parliament Roll of 18 E. 1. and many others, which
continued until it was altered by Ordinance in Parliament in the Reign of H. 6.
as appears by a Roll of Parliament of that Kings Reign, entered in the Back of
the Parliament Roll. The Precedence in Parliament and other Places of Council
at this day is, That the two Archbishops have the Precedence of all the Lords
Temporal; and every other Bishop in respect of his Barony, has place of all
the Barons of the Realm, and under the estate of the Viscount and other
Superior Dignities; And at this day, in all Acts, Ordinances and Judgments,
etc. of Parliament, it is said, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal. The Bishops
(among themselves) have this Precedence, (1.) The Bishop of London; (2.) The
Bishop of Duresme; (3.) The Bishop of Winchester Co. ibid.
. The Archbishop of Canterbury, as he has the Precedence of all the Nobility,
so also of all the great Officers of State. He is styled in the Kings Writs
directed to him, Dei gratia A^chiepisc. po C^n^u^riensi.
He writes himself Divina Providentia, whereas other Bishops only use Divina
Permissione. The Coronation of the Kings of England belongs to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and it has been formerly resolved, that wheresoever the Court
was, the King and Queen were Speciales and Domestici Parochiani Domini
Archiepiscopi. He had also heretofore this Privilege of special remark, That
such as held ^ands of him, were liable for Wardship to him, and to compound
with him for the same, albeit they held other Lands in chief of our Sovereign
Lord the King Dr. Heyli^ Help to Hist. verb. Canter^ury.
. All the Bishoprics in England (except Duresme, Carlisle, Chester, and the
Isle of Man, which are of the Province of York) are within the Province of
Canterbury Co. Inst. par. 4. cap. 74*
. The Archbishop whereof has also a peculiar Jurisdiction in thirteen Parishes
within the City of London, and in other Diocesses, etc. Having also an Ancient
Privilege, That wherever any Manors or Advowsons do belong to his See, they
forthwith become exempt from the Ordinary, and are reputed Peculiars, and of
his Diocese of Canterbury. If you consider Canterbury as the Seat of the
Metropolitan, it has under it twenty one Suffragan Bishops, whereof seventeen
in England, and four in Wales; But if you consider it as the Seat of a
Diocesan, so it comprehends only some part of Kent, viz. 257 Parishes (the
residue being in the Diocese of Rochester) together with some other Parishes
dispersedly situate in several Diocesses: it being (as aforesaid) an Ancient
Privilege of this See, that the places where the Archbishop has any Manors
or Advowsons, are thereby exempted from the Ordinary, and are become Peculiars
of the Diocese of Canterbury, properly belonging to the Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Canterbury; whose Provincial Dean is the Bishop of London, whose
Chancellor is the Bishop of Winchester, whose Vice Chancellor anciently was
the Bishop of Lincoln, whose Precentor the Bishop of Salisbury, whose Chaplain
the Bishop of Worcester, and the Bishop of Rochester (when time was) carried
the Cross before him. Lind. Constable. de Poenis, gl. ibid. c. 1. ver. tanquam.

(2.) The Metropolitan See of York had its Original at the first reception of
the Gospel in England, when King Lucius established Sampson the first
Archbishop thereof: Not long after the Conversion of the Saxons, Paulinus by
Pope Gregory's appointment was made Archbishop thereof, An. 622. This Province
of York anciently claimed and had a Metropolitan Jurisdiction over all the
Bishops of Scotland, whence they had their Consecration, and to which they
swore Canonical Obedience Heylin, ubi supra, verb. York.
. The Archbishop of York styles himself, Primate and Metropolitan of England,
as the Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of All England. About
two hundred years since, viz. An. 1466. when George Nevil was Archbishop of
York, the Bishops of Scotland withdrew themselves from their obedience to him,
and had Archbishops of their own. The Archbishop of York has precedence before
all Dukes, not being of the Blood Royal, as also before all the Great Officers
of State, except the Lord Chancellor Ibid.
. Of this Province of York are the Bishoprics of Duresme, Chester, Carlisle,
and the Isle of Man, who write themselves Eboracenses, or Eborum. The Diocese
belonging to this See of York contains the two Counties of York and Notingham,
and in them 581 Parishes, whereof 336 are Impropriations.

(3.) It has been questioned, whether there be any difference between
Archbishop and Metropolitan; the DD. herein seem to be divided, some conceiving
that there is some difference between them, others affirming that they are both
one; the Canon Law seems in a sense to favor each of these Opinions, saying in
one place, that the Archbishop as President has the charge and oversight of
the Metropolitans and other Bishops, 21. Did. Cleros. In another place, That
Archbishop and Metropolitan are but one and the same in deed and in truth,
although they differ in Name. Wilhel. in Clem. ult. de Privileg. verb.
Archiepiscopo verse. fin. Metropolitanus and Archiepiscopus idem sunt. Sed
Metropolitanus nomen trahit a numero Ecclesiarum, viz. a [metro] mensura, and
[polis] Civitas. Otho glo. in verb. Archiepiscopus, De Offic. Archiepisc. He is
called Archiepiscopus, quasi Princeps Episcoporum, in respect of the other
Bishops, whereof he is chief: and Metropolitanus, in respect of the number of
the Cities or Cathedral Churches where the Bishoprics are. Lindw. ubi supr.
gl. ib. ver. Metropolitanum. For the word [ Civitas] does signify with us, as
it does in other Kingdoms, such a Town Corporate as has a Bishop and a
Cathedral Church. Yet Crompton in his Jurisdictions, in his Computation of our
Cities, does omit Ely, though it has a Bishop and a Cathedral Church. St. 35
El. c. 6.
Thus Westminster is called a City, and accordingly there is mention made of a
Bishop of Westminster in a Statute made during the Reign of King Henry 8. St.
3^ H. 8. c. 10.
But by Letters Patents, dated 21. May 2 Eliz. (in pursuance of an Act of
Parliament of 1 Eliz. not printed) the Revenues of that late Monastery were
vested in the Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Westminster, which
has caused Errors in the Pleadings of some Cases, by styling it the Cathedral,
for Collegiate Church of Westminster. Cassanaeus, Cassan. de Consuet. Burgund.
page 15.
who wrote as well De Gloria Mundi in general, as of the Customs of Burgundy
in particular, says, That France has within its Territories 104 Cities, and
gives this Reason, Because there are so many Seats of Archbishops and Bishops.
Yet Sir Edw. Coke observes Cambridge to be a City by ancient Record, Co. Li^t.
fo. 109. b. Mich. 7 R^^. Rot. 1.
although it does not evidently appear that it ever was an Episcopal See: And
in the Stat. of 11 H. 7. c. 4. it is there called the Town of Cambridge.

(4.) In England and Wales there were Anciently three Provinces, and over them
Three Archbishops, whose Archbishopricks were founded above 1500 years since;
For soon after the Conversion of King Lu^ius (who began his Reign over the
Britains, An. 170.) being prevailed with to embrace the Christian Faith by the
persuasions of Elvanus, who had been brought up at Glastenbury, and of
Medwanus, both Britains Capg^. Hist, Landa^*
, and therein confirmed by the Divines which Eleutherius (who became Pope, An
177.) sent into Britain for that end and purpose Malmsb.
; The said King being by them baptized, the False Religion of the Druids with
their Idols was soon abolished, Heathen Temples purged, and then consecrated to
the service and worship of the True God, and in the place of twenty eight
^lam^ns were Bishops consecrated, the Three Archbishops whereof were founded in
the Three chief Cities of the then Three Provinces, erected by the Romans where
Arch-Flamins had formerly been maintained, viz. at London, the Metropolis of
Britannia Prima: at York the Metropolis of Maxima Caesariensis; and at
Caerlegion in Wales, which is said to be Caerleon upon Vske, formerly called
Isca in Monmouthshire, the Metropolis or chief City of Britannia Secunda, or
under Vrbs Legionum, Cambria Lel^nd. in Assert. Artur. ^^ 36. a. Mal^^b. Ant.
Brit. B. Godw. St. David's in Wales. Sp. fo. 79. nu. 18.
. Gildas antiquissimus inter eos, qui fide digni sunt, Britannicarum rerum
scriptor, tradit Britannos ab ortu Evangelii Christianam suscepisse fidem. Ant.
Brit. ubi supr. Ac primum, Paulum ipsum, cum aliis Gentibus, tum nominatim
Britannis Evangelium nunciasse post priorem suam Romae incarcerationem.
Theodoret. l. 9. de Curand. Graecor. affect. Origenes, qui proximis fuit post
Apostolos seculis, testatur Britanniam in Christianam consentire Religionem.
Orig. Hom. 4. in Ezech. Lucius, Rex Britanniae, An. 179. Baptizatus. Ab
Eleutherio, Ponti^ice Romano, reformationem Angliae petiit, Episcop. 29.
ordinavit. Ant. Brit. fo. 4, 5, 7. Before the coming of the Saxons into
England, the Christian Britains had three Archbishops, viz. of London, York and
Caerleon in Wales. The Archiepiscopal See of London, was by the Saxons placed
at Canterbury for St. Austins sake, where he was buried. That of Caerleon being
translated to St. David's, and after subjected to the Sea of Canterbury.

(5.) From this time to Dioclesians Perfecution (which though the Tenth and
last, An. 302.
yet the first which the Britains felt) Christianity flourished in this Island,
An. 306.
which ^y that Persecution was almost extirpated out of the Land, till
Constantine the Great wore the Imperial Crown, An. 413.
in whose time it revived till the beginning of the next Century, when it was
infected with the Pelagian Heresy, till the condemnation thereof in the
Council of Carthage and Mela, and happily suppressed by Germanus Bishop of
Auxerre, and by Lupus Bishop of Troys in Campeigne, who at the request of the
English Catholics were sent by the French Bishops into England; as at the same
time, and for the same end, Palladius was by Pope Celestine into Scotland
Prosp. Anasi. Cild. Pol^d. Euch. Hunt. l. 3.
. And now the Christian Religion flourished again till the time of the usurping
Tyrant Vortiger, who after he had slain Vodinus Archbishop of London B. Godw.
Bid l. 1. c. 15. Polych. l. 5. Sp.
, was himself burnt in a Castle besieged by Aurelius Ambrose, having first
surrendered Kent, Suffolk and Norfolk to the Infidel He^gist, who with his
Saxons almost desolated the Land; insomuch that Theanus Bishop of London, and
Theodiceus Bishop of York, were forced to fly into Cornwall and Wales, until
St. Augustines coming hither (where he then found only one Archbishop and seven
Bishops) being with forty others as Assistants to him, sent hither by Pope
Gregory to Convert the Nation Bid. l. 2. c. 23. Hunt, l. 2. Jo. Dia. in vit.
Greg. leg. 2.
; whom Ethelbert King of Kent kindly received, and seated him (as aforesaid) in
a Mansion in Canterbury, the Metropolis of his Kingdom Bid, l. 1. c. 25.
, and assigned him a place to erect a Bishops See, who afterward fixed his
Seat at Canterbury, whichever since has continued the Metropolis of this
Kingdom: And thus St. Austin upon his Entrance into England, by the favor and
bounty of the said King Ethelbert, An. 596.
having fixed his Seat at Canterbury, the Archbishops thereof have by a
continual Series or Succession continued as Metropolitans of all England.

(6.) And whereas there were (as aforesaid) anciently Three Archbishopricks in
Three distinct Provinces within this Kingdom, whereof that of Caerleon upon
Vske in Wales was one, and whereof Dubritius in the year 466 was Archbishop,
who having his Seat at Landaff, became for his integrity Archbishop of all
Wales, and was upon Resignation in his old Age succeeded in the Archbishopric
by his Disciple David, An. 519.
Uncle toking Arthurn, by whose consent he removed the Sea to Menevia, of which
place he still retains the name of Episcopus Menevensis, and the Town it self
thereupon called Twy Devi, or Saint David's, as taking its denomination from his
Name; yet it afterward so unhappily happened, that Sampson a succeeding
Archbishop, upon a great Plague raging in Wales, went to Dola in Little
Britain, and thither carried the Pall with him, whereby St. David's for ever
after lost the dignity of an Archbishop. And in the time of H. 1. both that
See, and the rest in Wales became subject to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Cambd.
as at this day Cambd. Bale ex Leland B. Godw.
.

(7.) In the time of King Lucius, London had an Archbishop to whose
Jurisdiction at that time the greatest part of England was subject; This
Archbishop was that Theanus forementioned, who was the chief Founder and
Builder of St. Antiq. E^it, f. 11.
Peter's Church in Cornhill, London, which was the Cathedral of his Diocese till
King Ethelbert built St. Paul's Church. In this See continued the Dignity of an
Archbishop above 180 years; but by reason of the Saxon Persecution stood void,
till that Ten years after the coming of St. Austin, Melitus was consecrated
Bishop of that See, and so it continued ever after as a Bishopric (which in
the days of King Lucius was an Archbishopric, as aforesaid) till St. Augustine
in the year 598 took on him the Title of Archbishop of England, settling his See
at Canterbury.

(8.) Upon the abrogating of the Popes power in England by King H. 8. in the
Seventh year of his Reign, it was concluded, that the Archbishop of Canterbury
should no more be styled the Popes Legate, but Primate and Metropolitan of all
England; at which time Tho. Cranmer, Fellow of Jesus-Colledge in Cambridge, who
pronounced the Divorce from Queen Katharine of Spain, upon his advice given the
King to leave the Court of Rome, and to require the Opinions of Learned
Divines, being then in Germany, procured such favor with the King, that he
caused him to be elected to this See of Canterbury, and was afterward, with
the then Bishop of Duresme, made Tutor to King Edward the Sixth Ant. ^rit.
.

(9.) The Archbishop of Canterbury was supposed to have had a concurrent
Jurisdiction in the inferior Diocesses within his Province; which is not
denied in the case of Dr. James Dr. James's Case, Heb. Rep.
; only it is there said, That was not as he was Archbishop, but as he was
Legatus Natus to the Pope, as indeed so h^ was before the t^me of King H. 8.
(as aforesaid) by whom that Power (together with the Pope) was abrogated, and
so it ceased; which the Archbishop of York never had, nor ever claimed Case
ibid.
, as appears in the forecited Case, where it is further said, That when there
is a Controversy between the Archbishop and a Bishop touching Jurisdiction, or
between other Spiritual Persons, the King is the indifferent Arbitrator in all
Jurisdictions as well Spiritual as Temporal, and that is a right of his Crown
to distribute to them, that is, to declare their Bounds; Consonant to that
which is asserted in a Case of Commendam, in Colt and Glovers Case against the
Bishop of Coventry and Lich^ield, where it is declared by the Lord Hobart Chief
Justice, That the King has an immediate, personal, originary, inherent Power,
which he executes, or may execute, Authoritate Regia Suprema Ecclesiastica, as
King and Sovereign Governor of the Church of England, which is one of those
Flowers, qui faciunt Coronam, which makes the Royal Crown and Diadem in force
and virtue Mich. 10. Jac. rot. 2642. Colt and Glov^r verse. Bp. of Covent. and
L^c^field. Hob. Rep*
. The Archbishop of Canterbury, as he is Primate over All England, and
Metropolitan, has a Supereminency, and some power even over the Archbishop of
York; has (under the King) power to summon him to a National Synod, and
Archiepiscopus Eboracensis venire debet cum Episcopis suis, ad nutum ejus^, ut
ejus Canonicis dispositionibus Obediens existat. Yet the Archbishop of York had
anciently not only diverse Bishoprics in the North of England, under his
Province; but for a long time all the Bishoprics of Scotland, until little
more than 200 years since, and until Pope Sixtus the Fourth, An. 1470. created
the Bishop of St. Andrews, Archbishop and Metropolitan of all Scotland. He was
also Legatus Natus, and had the Legantine Office and Authority annexed to that
Archbishopric; he has the Honor to Crown the Queen, and to be her perpetual
Chaplain: Of the forementioned Diocesses of his Province, the Bishop of Durham
has a peculiar Jurisdiction, and in many things is wholly exempt from the
Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of York; who has notwithstanding diverse
Privileges within his Province, which the Archbishop of Canterbury has within
his own Province.

(10.) The Archbishop is the Ordinary of the whole Province; yet it is clear,
That by the Canon Law he may not, as Metropolitan, exercise his Jurisdiction
over the Subjects of his Suffragan Bishops; but in certain Cases specially
allowed in the Law, whereof Hostiensis enumerates one and twenty Hestiens. cap.
Pastorall^ de Of^icio Ordinari^.
. The Jurisdiction of the Archbishop is opened sometimes by himself, nolente
Ordinario, as in the Case of his Visitation; and sometimes by the party, in
default of Justice in the Ordinary, as by Appeal, or Nullities. Again, it may
sometimes be opened by the Ordinary himself, without the party or Archbishop,
as where the Ordinary sends the Cause to the Archbishop; for although the Canon
Law restrains the Archbishop to call Causes from the Ordinary, Nolente
Ordinario, save in the said 21 Cases; yet the Law left it in the absolute power
of the Ordinary, to send the Cause to the Archbishop absolutely at his will,
Vid. Case Jones verse. Jones, Hob. Rep.
without assigning any special reason; and the Ordinary may consult with the
Archbishop at his pleasure, without limitation. Notwithstanding which, and
albeit the Archbishop be Judge of the whole Province, tamen Jurisdictio sua est
signata, and non aperitur nisi ex causis. Nor is the Subject hereby to be put
to any such trouble as is a Grievance; and therefore the Law provides, that
Neminem oportet exire de Provincia ad Provinciam, vel de Civitate ad Civitatem,
nisi ad Relationem Judicis, ita ut Actor forum Rei sequatur Bald. Caus^ 3. Q.
6. c. penult. Ex Synod. Romans
.

(11.) If the Archbishop visit his Inferior Bishop, and Inhibit him during the
Visitation, if the Bishop has a title to Collate to a Benefice within his
Diocese by reason of Lapse, yet he cannot Institute his Clerk; but he ought to
be presented to the Archbishop, and he is to Institute him, by reason that
during the Inhibition his power of Jurisdiction is suspended Trin. 1^ Car. B.
R. inter Dodson and Lynn.
. It was a point on a special Verdict in the County of Lincoln, and the
Civilians who argued thereon seemed to agree therein; but the Case was argued
upon another point, and that was not resolved Intrat. Tr. 11 Car. Rot 446. and
Roll. Abr. verb. Presen^ment. lit. C. p. 357, and lit. Z. 367.
. Likewise, by the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. the Archbishop of Canterbury has
power to give Faculties and Dispensations, whereby he can (as to Plurality)
sufficiently now Dispense de jure, as Anciently the Pope did in this Realm de
facto, before the making of that Statute, whereby it is enacted, That all
Licenses and Dispensations (not repugnant to the Law of God) which heretofore
were sued for in the Court of Rome, should be hereafter granted by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and his Successors.

(12.) By the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, Edit. 1603. Can. 94. It
is Ordained, That no Dean of the Arches, nor Official of the Archbishops
Consistory, shall originally Cite or Summon any person which dwells not
within the particular Diocese or Peculiar of the said Archbishop, etc. without
the License of the Diocesan first had and obtained in that behalf, other than
in such particular Cases only as are expressly excepted and reserved in and by
the Statute of 23 H. 8. c. 9. on pain of suspension for three months. In the
Case of Lynche against Porter, for a Prohibition upon the said Statute of 23 H.
8. c. 9. it was declared by the Civilians in Court, That they used to Cite any
Inhabitant of and in London to appear, and make Answer in the Archbishop of
Canterbury's high Court of Arches originally: And Dr. Martyn said, It had been
so used for the space of 427 years before the making of the Statute; and upon
complaint thereof made to the Pope, the Answer was, That any man might be Cited
to the Arches out of any Diocese in England: Also, That the Archbishop may hold
his Consistory in any Diocese within his Jurisdiction and Province: That the
Archbishop has concurrent Jurisdiction in the Diocese of every Bishop, as well
as the Archdeacon: and, That the Archbishop of Canterbury prescribes to hold
Plea of all persons in England. But as to his power of having a Consistory in
the Diocese of every Bishop, this was in this Case denied, but only where he
was the Popes Legate, whereof there were Three sorts: (1.) Legates a Latere,
and these were Cardinals, which were sent a Latere from the Pope. (2.) A Legate
born, and these were the Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Mentz, etc. (3.)
A Legate given, and these have Authority by special Commission from the Pope
^rownl. Rep. p. 2. Case Lynche verse. ^orter.
. Likewise, in the Case of Jones against Boyer, C. B, it was also said by Dr.
Martyn, That the Archbishop has Ordinary* Jurisdiction in all the Diocesses of
his Province, and that this is the cause that he may Visit Trin. 9 Jac. C. B.
^ones verse. ^oyer. Brownl. ibid.
.

(13.) The Archbishop of Canterbury Anciently had Primacy as well over all
Ireland as England, from whom the Irish Bishops received their Consecration,
for Ireland had no other Archbishop until the year 1152. For which reason it
was declared in the time of the Two first Norman Kings, That Canterbury was the
Metropolitan Church of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Isles adjacent*
the Archbishop of Canterbury was therefore sometimes styled a Patriarch
Patriarcha was a chief Bishop over several Kingdoms or Provinces (as an
Archbishop is of s^veral Diocesses) and had several Archbishops under him.
and Orbis Britannici Pontifex, insomuch that Matters recorded in
Ecclesiastical Affairs did run thus, viz. Anno Pontificatus Nostri primo,
secundo, etc. He was also Legatus Natus, that is, he had a perpetual Legantine
power annexed to his Archbishopric nigh a thousand years since. And at General
Councils he had the Precedence of all other Archbishops abroad, and at home he
had some special Marks of Royalty, as to be the Patron of a Bishopric, as he
was of Rochester) to coin Money, to make Knights, and to have the Wardships of
all those who held Lands of him Jure Hominii, although they held in Capite
other ^ands of the King, as was formerly hinted. He is said to be Inthroned,
when he is invested in the Archbishopric. And by the Stat. of 25 H* 8. he has
power to grant Licenses and Dispensations in all Cases heretofore sued for in
the Court of Rome, not repugnant to the Law of God, or the Kings Prerogative:
As also, to allow a Clerk to hold a Benefice in Commendam or in Trust; to allow
a Clerk, rightly qualified, to hold Two Benefices with Cure of Souls; to allow
a Beneficed Clerk, for some certain causes, to be non-Resident for some time,
and to Dispense in several other Cases prohibited by the Letters of the Canon
Law. Likewise the Archbishop of Canterbury Consecrates other Bishops; confirms
the Election of Bishops within his Province; calls Provincial Synods according
to the Kings Writ, to him ever directed; is chief Moderator in the Synods and
Convocations; he Vi^its the whole Province; appoints a Guardian of the
Spiritualties during the vacancy of any Bishopric within his Province, whereby
all the Episcopal Ecclesiastical Rights of that Diocese for that time belong to
him; all Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions as Visitations, Institutions, etc. He may
retain and qualify Eight Chaplains, which is more by Two than any Duke is
allowed by Statute to do; and has power to hold diverse Courts of Judicature,
for the decision of Controversies pertaining to Ecclesiastical Cognizance.

CHAP. III.
Of Bishops and Ordinaries.
1. Bishop, Why so called; Not above One to be in one Diocese. 2. Why called
Ordinary; and what the Pallium Episcopale is. 3. Bishoprics originally
Donative; Kings of England the Founders thereof. 4. The manner of Election of
Bishops; their Confirmation and Consecration. 5. Their Seals of Office; in what
cases they may use their own Seals. 6. What follows upon Election, to make them
Bishops complete; the grant of their Temporalties. 7. The Conge d'eslire, and
what follows thereupon. 8. Bishoprics were Donative, till the time of King
John. 9. What the Interest and Authority is, in his several capacities. 10.
Episcopal Authority derived from the Crown. 11. The Use and Office of Suffragan
Bishops. 12. Whether a Bishop may give Institution out of his own proper
Diocese, and under other Seal than his own Seal of Office. 13. Several things
incident to a Bishop qua talis. 14. Ordinary, what properly he is, and why so
called. 15. In what cases the Ordinaries Jurisdiction is not merely Local. 16.
The Ordinaries power de jure Patronatus. 17. Whether the Ordinary may cite a
man out of his own Diocese; Also his Right ad Synodalia. 18. The Ordinaries
power of Visitation. 19. The Dignity, and true Precedence of the Bishops in
England. 20. Temporal Jurisdiction anciently exercised by Bishops in this
Realm; the Statute of 17 Car. 1. against it, Repealed; and they Restored to it
by the Stat. of 13 Car. 2. as formerly. 21. The Act made in the Reign of Ed. 6.
concerning the Election of Bishops; the Endeavors thereby to take away
Episcopal Jurisdiction; the Nomination of all Bishops was Anciently Sole in the
King. 22. The Bishops of London are Deans of the Episcopal College. 23. A Case
at Common Law, Bishop, supposed from the Saxon word, Biceop, and that from the
Greek (...), Speculator vel Superintendens.
touching a Lease made by one Bishop during the life of another of the same
Diocese in Ireland.
(1.) BISHOP, Episcopus, from (...), supra, and (...), intendere, an Overseer
or Superintendent, so called from that watchfulness, care, charge, and
faithfulness, which by his Place and Dignity he has and owes to the Church; A
word which all Antiquity has appropriated to signify the Chief in
Superintendency over the whole Church within his Diocese, wherein are diverse
inferior Pastors. This Oversight or Care the Hebrews call Pekudah Numb. 3. 32.
. Of this Office or Ecclesiastical Dignity there can be but one at a time in
one and the same Diocese; whence it is that Cornelius Bishop of Rome (as
Eusebius relates) upbraided Novatius for his ignorance in that point Eus^b. l
1. Hist. Eccl.
, when he could not but know there were no less than 46 Presbyters in that
Church; Oecumenius and St. Chrysostom affirming also, as many at Philippi; For
in this restrained sense, as the word [ Bishop] is now taken, it cannot be
imagined that there should be more than one in one City or Diocese at the same
time; consonant whereunto the Synod of Nice prohibited Two or more Bishops to
have their Seats at once in the same City. This Novatius aforesaid was a Priest
of Rome 254 years after Christ; he abhorred Second Marriages, and was condemned
as an Heretic in a Synod at Rome the same year Eusebius. ib. cap. 42.
Every Bishop, many Centuries after Christ, was universal Incumbent of his
Diocese, received all the Profits, which were but Offerings of Devotion, out of
which he paid the Salaries of such as Officiated under him^, as Deacons and
Curates in places appointed Seld. Hist, T^bes, c. 6. p. 3. fo. 80. b. etc. 9.
p. 2. fo. ^53.
.

(2.) Under this Name or Appellation of Bishops are contained, Bishops,
Primates, Metropolitans, Patriarchs, and Summus Pontifex. Did. 21. c. 1. And
the Presbyters also, C. Legimus,. 1. Did. 93. Spec. de Instr. Edit. Sect. 14.
verse. de Episcopo, and for such commonly used and taken in the New Testament
Phil. 1. 1. Acts 1. 21.
: l. 14. c. de Episc. and Cler. In some Acts of Parliament we find the Bishop
to be called Ordinary Westminster. 2. c. 19. 31 E. 3. c. 11. 22 H. 8. 5. Co. Lit. fo.
344.
; and so taken at the Common Law, as having Ordinary Jurisdiction in Causes
Ecclesiastical; albeit in the Civil Law, whence that word [ Ordinarius] is
taken, it signifies any Judge authorized to take Cognizance of Causes proprio
suo jure, as he is a Magistrate, and not by way of Deputation or Delegation
Vid. Br^. tit. Ordinarius.
. The word [ Ordinary] does chiefly take place in a Bishop, and other
Superiors, who alone are Universal in their Jurisdictions; yet under this word
are comprised also other Ordinaries, viz. such as to whom Ordinary Jurisdiction
does of right belong, whether by Privilege or by Custom. Lindw. de Constit.
c. Exterior. ver. Ordinarii. The Pallium Episcopale, or Bishops Pall, mentioned
(as Sr. Ed. Coke observes) in some Statutes, and many Records and Histories, is
a Hood of white Wool, to be worn as Doctors Hoods upon the Shouldiers, with
Four Crosses woven into it, etc. for the Form and Colors whereof vid. Antiq.
Brit. Eccles. fo. 1. This Pallium Episcopale is the Arms belonging to the Sea
of Canterbury Co. Inst. p. 4. c. 74. vid. 20 H. 8. c. 20.
: vid. Cassan. de glo. mun. p. 4. fo. 103. a. 26. Consid. ubi multa Legas de
Pallio. Henry Dean, the 65th Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 1502. had Pallium
Archiepiscopatus Insigne sent him from Pope Alexander 6. by his Secretary
Adrian; which by the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, Authorized thereto by
the Pope, was presented him at Lambeth in these words, viz. Ad honorem Dei
Omnipotentis, etc. Tibi tradimus Pallium de Corpore beati Petri sumptum,
plenitudinem videlicet Pontificalis Officii, etc. Ant. Brit. A^gl. fo. 302. nu.
30.
, whereupon he swore Canonical obedience to the Apostolical See of Rome.

(3.) The Kings of England were Anciently the Founders of all the
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics in this Realm Co. p. 5. Cawd^y's Case St. 1 Jac
c. 3. 17 Ed. 3. 40. By delivery of a Ring, with a Crosier or Pastoral Staff.
Roll Abr. ver. Presentment, Advowson 342.
; and also in Wales, the Bishops thereof were Originally of the Foundation of
the Princes of Wales. Bishops in England originally were Donative per
traditionem Baculi Pastoralis and Annuli, until King John by his Charter
granted, that they should be Eligible. Chart. 25. Jan. An. Reg. 17. De Commu^i
Consensu Baronum; after which came in the Conge d'Eslire. And at this day the
Bishoprics in Ireland are Donative: Rolls 342. The Patronage of all
Bishoprics is in the King, so as that he gives leave to the Chapters to choose
them 17 E. 3. 40. b.
. In Ancient times the King gave the Bishoprics, and then afterward gave
leave to the Chapters to choose them, as aforesaid Ibid.
. The learned Sergeant Roll, in that part of his Abridgment touching this
Subject, makes mention of 1 E. 1. Rot. Clauso Memb. 11. in dorso, where there
is this Protestation made by the King, Cum Ecclesia Cathedralis viduatur, and
de jure debeat, and soleat de Consuetudine provideri per Electionem Canonicam
ab ejusmodi potissimum Celebrandam Collegiis, Capitulis, and personis, ad quos
jus pertinet, petita tamen prius ab Illustri Rege Angliae super hoc Licentia
and obtenta; and demum Celebrata Electione, persona Electa eidem Regi habeat
Praesentari, ut idem Rex contra personam ipsam possit proponere, si quid
rationabile habeat contra eum. And the Protestation goes further, That in case
the Pope makes Provision without such Canonical Election, the King shall not be
obliged to give him his Temporalties; yet of grace for the time present he give
the Temporalties to the Abbot Elect of Canterbury Vid. Similiter 11 E. 1. Rot.
Finium. M. 5. for the Abbot of St. Augustine of Canterbury, etc. See it there
at large.
. Thus the Election of Bishops by Deans and Chapters began by the grant of the
King; but the Grant was to Elect after License first had and obtained, as
appears by the Stat. of 25 Ed. 3. Stat. de Provisoribus. Rastal. 325 d. And
King John was the first that granted it by his Charter, dated 15 Jan. An. 16.
Matthew. Par. Hist. Mag. 253. Da. 1. Dean and Charter, Fernes, 46. and Praemuni e
90.
. William Rufus K. after the Archbishop of Canterbury's death, kept the Sea
without an Archbishop for the space of four years, and then assumed diverse
other Ecclesiastical Promotions into his own hands that were then vacant,
putting to Sale diverse Rights and Revenues of the Church Speed 428. b.
. But King H. 1. made a Law against Reservations of Ecclesiastical Possessions
upon Vacancies Idem 453.
. In the time of Edward the Confessor the Prelates used to receive Investitute
from the King by giving them the Pastoral Staff and a Ring Matthew. Paris:.
; And so it was used in the time of H. 1. but Suffragans were invested only by
the Ring, without the Staff, for that they are not Bishops so fully and
completely as the other Dr. Field 148.
.

(4.) To the Creation of Bishops are requisite, Election, Confirmation,
Consecration, and Investiture. Upon the vavancy of a See the King grants his
License under his Great Seal to the Dean and Chapter of such vacant Cathedral
to proceed to an Election of such a person as by his Letters Missive, he shall
nominate and appoint to succeed in such vacant Archbishopric or Bishopric;
which Election must be within twenty days next after their receiving such
License or Letters Missive; upon failure whereof they run the danger of a
Praemunire Vid. St. 25 H. 8. 20. Sec. 3. Rastall. vid. Co. par. 12. Rep. 59. 2^.
Or if above twelve days after their receipt thereof the Election be deferred,
the King may by his Letters Patent nominate or present to such vacant
Bishopric, to the Archbishop or Metropolitan of that Province wherein such See
is void; or unto one Archbishop and two other Bishops, or to four such Bishops
as his Majesty shall think fit, in case upon such Nomination or Presentment by
the King, the default of Election by: the Dean and Chapter be to the Office and
Dignity of a Bishop: Otherwise, if they Elect according to his Majesty's
pleasure in his Letters Missive, the Election is good; and upon their
Certificate thereof unto his Majesty under their Common Seal, the person so
Elected is reputed and called Lord Bishop Elect; yet is he not thereby complete
Bishop to all intents and purposes, for as yet he has not Potestationem
Jurisdictionis neque Ordinis, nor can have the same until his Confirmation and
Consecration Mich. 22 Jac. Latch. Rep. 246.
; for which Reason it is, that if (after such Election and before Consecration)
a Writ of Right be brought in the Court of a Manor belonging to such
Bishopric; it is not directed Episcopo, but Ballivis of the Bishop Elect. The
order of making a Bishop consists chiefly in these Eight things, viz. 1.
Nomination, 2. Conge d'Eslire, 3. Election, 4. Royal Assent, 5. Confirmation,
6. Creation, 7. Consecration, 8. Installation. Vid. Grendon's Case in Plowd.
and Trin. 17 Jac. B. R. Sobrean and Teige verse. Kevan, Roll. Rep. par. 2. F. N.
B. ^.
. The Creation of a Bishop is in this Solemn manner, viz. The Bishops See being
vacant, the Dean and Chapter of that Cathedral gives notice thereof to the
King, humbly requesting his Majesty's leave to choose another; the King grants
his Conge d'Eslire: Thereupon the Dean summons a Chapter; they elect the person
recommended by his Majesty's Letters; that Election (after a first or second
modest refusal) being accepted by the party elected, is certified to the King,
and to the Archbishop of that Province; hereupon the King grants his Royal
Assent under his Great Seal, exhibited to the said Archbishop, with Command to
Confirm and Consecrate him; upon this the Archbishop subscribes his Fiat
Confirmatio, withal giving Commission under his Archiepiscopal Seal to his
Vicar General, to perform all the Acts requisite for perfecting his
Confirmation. Hereupon the Vicar General in the Archbishops name issues a
Citation, summoning all Oppose^s of the said Election to make their appearance
at a certain time and place, then and there to offer their Objections, if they
have any: This done by an Officer of the High-Court of Arches (usually at
Bow-Church, London) by Proclamation thrice, and affixing the said Citation on
that Church-door, an Authentic Certificate thereof is by the said Officer
returned to the said Archbishop and Vicar General. At the time and place
aforesaid the Proctor for the said Dean and Chapter exhibits the Royal Assent,
and the Commission of the Archbishop, to the Vicar General, who after the
reading thereof accepts the same; Then the Proctor exhibits the Proxy from the
Dean and Chapter, presents the elected Bishop, returns the Citation, and
desires that the Opposers may be thrice publicly called; which done, and their
Contumacy accused, desires that in poenam Contumaciae the business in hand may
proceed, which the Vicar General: in a Schedule by him read and subscribed does
order. Then the Proctor gives a Summary Petition, therein deducing the whole
Process of Election and Consent, and desires a time may be assigned him to
prove it, which the Vicar General admits and decrees. After this, the Proctor
exhibits the Royal Assent again, with the elected Bishops Assent* and the said
Certificate to the Archbishop, desiring a time to be presently assigned for
Final Sentence, which the Vicar General decrees. Then the Proctor desires, that
all Opposers may again be thrice publicly called; which done, and none
appearing nor opposing, they are pronounced Contumacious, and a Decree made to
proceed to Sentence, by a Schedule read and subscribed by the Vicar General.
Whereupon the Bishop elect takes the Oaths of Supremacy, Simony, and Canonical
Obedience. After this, the Dean of the Arches reads and subscribes the
Sentence. Next after the Confirmation, follows the Consecration of the elected
Bishop, according to the Kings Mandate, which is solemnly done by the
Archbishop, with the assistance of two other Bishops, according to the approved
Rights and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and in conformity to the manner
and Form of Consecrating Bishops, according to the Rule laid down in the Fourth
Council of Carthage; about the year 470, generally received in all the
Provinces of the Western Church. After the Premises, there issues a Mandate
from the Archbishop to the Archdeacon of his Province, to install the Bishop
Elected, Confirmed, and Consecrated; who (or his Proxy, which is usual) being
in presence of a Public Notary introduced into the Cathedral Church on any
day* between the hours of 9 and 11, by the said Archdeacon, does first declare
his assent to the Kings Supremacy, etc. Then the Archdeacon, with the Canons,
etc. having accompanied the Bishop to the Quire, and placed him in the
Episcopal Seat, does pronounce as follows, viz. Ego authoritate mihi Commissa
Induco and Inthro^izo Reverendum in Christo Patrem, Dominum J. S. Episcopum; Et
Dominus custodiat suum introitum and exitum ex hoc, nunc and in saeculum, etc.
Then after the Divine Service proper for the occasion, the Bishop being
conducted into the Chapter House, and there placed on a high Seat, the
Archdeacon and all the Prebends, etc. of the Church acknowledge Canonical
Obedience to him. And the Public Notary, by the Archdeacons command, records
the whole matter of Fact in this Affair, in an Instrument to remain as
Authentic to Posterity. After all which, the Bishop is introduced into the
Kings presence to do his Homage for his Temporalties or Barony, by kneeling
down, and putting his hands between the hands of the King, sitting in his Chair
of State, and by taking a solemn Oath, to be true and faithful to his Majesty,
and that he holds his Temporalties of Him. When Matthew. Parker in the second
year of Queen Eliz. 1559. elected to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, had his
Confirmation in the Court of Arches, according to the usual form in that
behalf. This being performed, an entertainment for the Vicar General, the Dean
of the Arches, and other Officers of that Court (whose presence was requisite
at this Solemnity) was provided at the Nag^head Tavern in Cheapside, Land.
whereby occasion was taken by the Roman Adversaries maliciously to report, That
the Nagshead Tavern was the place of Consecration: Heyl. The form or manner of
making a Bishop, and of translating him from one Bishopric to another, differs
only in this, that in the latter there needs no Consecration. And the
translation of a Bishop to an Archbishopric, differs only in the Commission,
which is directed by his Majesty to four or more Bishops to Confirm him.

(5.) Each Archbishop, every Bishop, and their Officials have their Seals of
Office respectively, which being affixed to a writing, makes the Instrument
Authentic, whereby the use and practice of Tabellions or Public Notaries (as
in Foreign parts) is with us much abated. For that of a Tabellion allowed by
Authority to Engross and Register private Contracts and Obligations, his Office
in some Countries did formerly differ from that of a public Notary, but now
they are as one and the same Office; Quoniam Tabellionum usus in Regno Angliae,
proper quod magis ad Sigilla Authentica credi est necesse, ut ^orum facilius
habeatur, Statuimus ut Sigillum habeant non solum Archiepiscopi and Episcopi,
sed eorum Officiales Matt. Pari^. fo. 454. de An. 1236.
. And all Bishops, Ordinaries, Archdcacons, and all others exercising any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, ought to have the Kings Arms engraven on their
Seal of Office; but the Archbishop of Canterbury may use his own Seal Stat. 1
Ed. 6. 2.
. And all Process Ecclesiastical, and Certificates into any Court of Record,
are to be in the Kings name, Test the Bishop Ibid.
. But as to the making, admitting, ordering, and reforming of Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials, Advocates, Proctors, and other Officers, Ministers and
Substitutes: This the Bishops may do in their own Names, and under their own
Seals Ibid.
.

(6.) If one be Elected, and the Temporalties granted to him, yet he is not
Bishop before Consecration. 41 E. 3. 6. 46 E. 3. 32. Quaere, For he may refuse
to be Bishop after Election, and before Consecration, but not after. 41 E. 3.
5. b. When upon vacancy of a Bishopric the Dean and Chapter, by virtue of his
Majesty's License, under the Great Seal of England, has proceeded to the
Election of a new Bishop in pursuance of, and according to his Majesty's
Letters Missive on that behalf, and Certificate thereof made unto the Kings
Majesty under their Common Seal, then follows the Confirmation, Consecration
and Investiture, by the Archbishop or Metropolitan of that Province, wherein
such Bishopric was void, the said Election having (upon such elected Bishops
Oath of Fealty to the Kings Majesty) been first signified to the Archbishop by
the King, Bishops have Precedence of all Temporal Barons under Vicounts.
under his Great Seal, whereby the said Archbishop is required to Confirm the
said Election, and to Consecrate and Invest the person Elected; And now he is
complete Bishop, as well unto Temporalties as Spiritualties; yet after his
Confirmation and before his Consecration, the King may (if he please) ex gratia
grant him the Temporalties 41 Ed. 3. 6. 46 Ed. 3. 22.
. But after his Consecration, Investiture, and Instalment, he is qualified to
sue for his Temporalties out of the Kings hands by the Writ de Restitutione
Temporalium F. N. B. acc.
. And yet it seems the Temporalties are not de jure to be delivered to him,
until the Metropolitan has certified the time of his Consecration, although
the Freehold thereof be in him by his very Consecration 38 E. 3. 30. Pars. Law,
cap. 1.
. But if during the Vacation of Archbishopricks, or Bishoprics, and while
their Temporalties are in the Kings hands, the Freehold-Tenants of Archbishops
or Bishops happen to be attainted of Felony, the King by his Prerogative has
the Escheats of such Freeholders-Lands, to dispose thereof at his pleasure,
saving to such Prelates the Service that is thereto due and accustomed St. 17
Ed. 2. 14.
. Before the Conquest the Principality of Wales was held of the King of
England, and by the Rebellion and forfeiture of the Prince, the Principality
came to the King of England, whereby the Bishoprics were annexed to the Crown,
and the King grants them their Temporalties. 10 H. 4. 6.

(7.) The manner of making a Bishop is fully described in Evans and Kiffin's
Case against Askwith, wherein it was agreed, That when a Bishop dies, or is
Translated, the Dean and Chapter certify the King thereof in Chancery, and
pray leave of the King to make Election; Then the King gives his Conge
d'Es^ire, whereupon they make their Election, and first certify the same to
the party Elect, and have his consent; Then they certify it to the King in
Chance^y, also they certify it to the Archbishop; and then the King by his
Letters Patents gives his Royal Assent, and commands the Archbishop to Confirm
and Consecrate him, and to do all other things necessary thereunto; whereupon
the Archbishop examines the Election, and the Ability of the party, and
thereupon confirms the Election, and after Consecrates him according to the
usage upon a New Creation: And upon a Translation all the said Ceremonies are
observed, saving the Consecration, which is not in that case requisite, for
that he was Consecrated before.

(8.) Bishoprics were Donatives by the King, till the time of W. Rufus, and so
until the time of King John. Read for that the History of Eadmerus. Vid. Case
Evans verse. Ascouth, in ^in. Ca^. Noy 's Rep. It has been generally held, That
before the Conquest and after, till the time of King John, Bishops were
Invested by the King per Baculum and Annulum; but King John by his Charter
granted, That there should be a Canonical Election with Three Restrictions:
(1.) That leave be first asked of the King. (2.) His Assent afterward. (3.)
That he shall have the Temporalties during the Vacation of the Bishopric;
whereof mention is made in the Stat. of 25 Ed. 3. de Provisoribus, and which is
confirmed by the Stat. of 13 R. 2. c. 2. Case of the Dean and Chapter of
Norwich. Co. Rep. par. 3.
. Also the Law in general is positive therein, That in the making of all
Bishops, it shall be by Election and the Kings Assent; and by the 25 H. 8. the
Statute for Consecration of Bishops, makes it more certain: And if the Pope
after the said Charter did use to make any Translation upon a Postulation
without Election and Assent of the King, it was but an Usurpation, and contrary
to the Law, and restrained by 16 R. 2. and 9 H. 4. 8. And after the 25 H. 8. it
was never used to have a Bishop by Postulation or any Translation of him, but
by Election, as the said Statute prescribes; And the form of making a Bishop at
this day, is after the same manner as aforesaid, and according to the said
Statute.

(9.) The Interest and Authority which a Bishop Elect has, is, That he is
Episcopus Nominis, non Ordinis, neque Jurisdictionis; But by his Confirmation
he has Potestatem Jurisdictionis, as to Excommunicate and Certify the same, 8
Rep. 89. And then the power of the Guardian of the Spiritualties does cease
Dyer 350.
. But after Election and Confirmation he has Potestatem. Ordinationis, for
then he may Consecrate, confer Orders, etc. For a Bishop has Three Powers,
(1.) Ordinis, which he has by Consecration, whereby he may take the
Resignation of a Church, confer Orders, consecrate Churches; And this does not
appertain to him quatenus, Bishop of this or that place, but is universal over
the whole World: So the Archbishop of Spalato, when he was here, conferred
Orders. (2.) Jurisdictionis, which is not Universal, but limited to a place,
and confined to his See; This power he has upon his Confirmation. (3.)
Administratio rei familiaris, as the Government of his Revenue; and this also
he has upon his Confirmation Evans and Ascough's, Case, Luch. Rep.
. The Bishop acts either by his Episcopal Order or by his Episcopal
Jurisdiction; By the former he Ordains Deacons and Priests, Dedicates or
Consecrates Churches, Chapels and Churchyards, administers Confirmation, etc.
By the latter he acts as an Ecclesiastical Judge in matters Spiritual, by his
Power either Ordinary or Delegated.

(10.) An. 1430. Temp. Reg. H. 6. Hen. Chicheley Archiepisc. Cant. in Synodo
Constitutum est, Ne quis Jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam exerceret, nisi Juris
Civilis aut Canonici gradum aliquem ab Oxoni^nsi vel Cantabrigiensi Academia
accepisset. Ant. Brit. fo. 284. nu. 40. The power of the Bishop and Archbishop
is derived from the Crown, as was held in Walkers Case against Lamb; where it
was also held, That the Grant of a Commissary or Official to one was good,
notwithstanding he were a Lay man, and not a Doctor of Law, but only a
Batchelour of Law; for the Court then said, That the Jurisdiction of the Bishop
and Archdeacon is derived from the Crown by usage and prescription; and that in
it self, as it is coercive to punish Crimes, or to determine Matrimonial Causes
and Probate of Testaments, and granting of Administrations, being Civil Causes
are derived from the Crown, and not incident de mero jure to the Bishop, which
appears by Henslows Case, par. 9. Cawdry's Case, par. 5. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. the
Stat. of 37 H. 8. and diverse other Authorities, and the Statute of 37 H. 8. c.
17. is to that purpose Trin. 8. Car. B. R. Case Walker verse. Lamb, Jones Rep.
.

(11.) In former times many Bishops had their Suffragans, who were also
Consecrated, as other Bishops were; These (in the absence of the Bishops upon
Embassies, or in multiplicity of business) did supply their places in matter of
Orders, but not in Jurisdiction Antiq. B^i^. fo. 22.
. These were chiefly for the ease of the Bishops in the multiplicity of their
Affairs, ordained in the Primitive times, called Chorepiscopi, Suffragan, or
Subsidiary Bishops, or Bishops Suffragans, and were Titular Bishops,
Consecrated by the Archbishop of the Province; and to execute such Power and
Authority, and receive such profits as were limited in their Commissions by the
Bishops or Diocosans, whose Suffragans they were. What Towns or Places to be
the Sees of Bishops Suffragans, and how many to a Diocese, and in what
Diocesses, appears by an Act of Parliament made in the Reign of King H. 8. Such
Suffragan Bishops are made in case the Archbishop, or some other Bishop desire
the same; In which case, the Bishop presents Two able persons for any place
allowed by the said Act of Parliament, whereof his Majesty does choose one; but
at present there are no Suffragan Bishops in England. They were no other than
the Chorepiscopi of the Primitive Times, Subsidiary Bishops, ordained for
easing the Diocesan of some part of his burden, as aforesaid: Heyl. Hist.
Eccles. page 294.
by means whereof they were enabled to perform such Offices belonging to that
Sacred Function, not limited to time and place by the ancient Canons, by which
a Bishop was restrained in some certain Acts of Jurisdiction to his proper
Diocese. Of these there were twenty six in the Realm of England, distinguished
by the Names of such Principal Towns as were appointed for their Title and
Denomination. The Names and Number whereof, together with the Jurisdiction and
preheminences proportioned to them, the Reader may peruse in the Act of
Parliament made An. 26 H. 8.

(12.) According to the Temporal Laws of this Land, if a Bishop grant Letters
of Institution under any other Seal than his Seal of Office, and albeit it be
out of his Diocese, yet it is good; For in Cort's Case against the Bishop of
St. David's and others, where the Plaintiff offered in evidence Letters of
Institution, which appeared to be sealed with the Seal of the Bishop of London,
because the Bishop of St. David's had not his Seal of Office there, and which
Letters were made also out of the Diocese; It was held, That they were good
enough, albeit they were sealed with another Seal, and made out of the Diocese;
for that the Seal is not material, it being an Act made of the Institution: And
the writing and sealing is but a Testimonial thereof, which may be under any
Seal, or in any place. But of that point they would advise Hill. 8 Car. B. R.
Rot. 454 Co^t verse. Bishop of St. David's, and alios, Cro. Rep.
.

(13.) A Bishop, if he celebrate Divine Service in any Church of his Diocese,
may require the Offerings of that day Linw. de jure presbyt. verb. Oblatioris.
. He may sequester, if the King present not; and 12 H. 8. 8. by Pollard, he
must see the Cure served, if the person fail, at his own Costs Colt and Glover
verse. Bp. of Coventry and L^chfield. Hob. Rep.
. He may commit Administration, where Executors being called, refuse to prove
the Will 4 H. 7. 13. 10 H. 7. 18. 7 E. 4. 12. L^tt. ad Colleg.
. He has power of distribution and disposing of Seats, and charges of Repairs
of the Churches within his Diocese Case B^o^hly verse. Baily. Hob. Rep.
. He may award his Jure Patronatus where a Church is Litigious between an
Usurper and the other; but if he will choose the Clerk of either at his peril,
he ought at his peril to receive him that has Right by the Statute Lord
Stanhop's Case verse. Bishop of Lincoln. and al.
. He may License Physicians, Chirurgions, Schoolmasters, and Midwives W. 2 cap.
5.
. He may Collate by Lapse. He may take competent time to examine the
sufficiency and fitness of a Clerk. He may give convenient time to persons
interested to take notice of Avoidances. He is discharged against the true
Patron, and quit of Disturbance, to whom it cannot be imputed, if he receive
that Clerk, that is in pursuance of a Verdict after Inquest in a Jure
Patronatus Sr. W. Elvis verse. Archbishop of York and others. H^b. Rep.
. He may have Six Chaplains, and every Archbishop may have Eight Chaplains
Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 13.
. He may unite and consolidate small Parishes; and assist the Civil Magistrate
in execution of some Statutes concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs. And by the
Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. any Bishop may at his pleasure join and associate
himself to the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or to the Justices of Assize at
the open and general Sessions to be holden at any place within his Diocese, in
Causes of the Church. And the Statute made 17 Car. 1. c. 27. for the
disinabling of persons in Holy Orders to exercise Temporal Jurisdiction or
Authority, is Repealed by the Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 2. whereby they are
now enabled to exercise such Temporal Jurisdiction as formerly; and is commonly
styled the Ordinary of that Diocese, where he does exercise his Episcopal
Authority and Jurisdiction. In Parliament, Bishops, as Barons, may be present
and Vote at the Trial and Arraignment of a Peer; only before Sentence of death,
or loss of Member, be pronounced, (that they may have no hand in blood in any
kind) they have by Canon Law the Privilege and Injunction to absent
themselves; and by Common Law, to make Proxies to vote for them.

(14.) ORDINARY, according to the acceptance of the Common Law with us, is
usually taken for him that has Ordinary Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical
Vid. Broc. hoc tit.
, immediate to the King. He is in Common understanding the Bishop of the
Diocese, who is the Supervisor, and for the most part Visitor of all his
Churches within his Diocese, and has Ordinary Jurisdiction in all the Causes
aforesaid for the doing of Justice within his Diocese in jure proprio and non
per deputationem, and therefore it is his care to see that the Church be
provided of an able Curate, Habet enim Curam Curarum, and may execute the Laws
of the Church by Ecclesiastical Censures, and to him alone are made all
Presentations to Churches vacant within his Diocese. Ordinarius habet locum
principaliter in Episcopo, and aliis Superioribus, qui soli sunt Vniversales in
suis Jurisdictionibus, sed sunt sub eo alii Ordinarii, hi videlicet, quibus
Competit Jurisdictio Ordinaria de jure, privilegio, vel consuetudine. Lindw.
cap. Exterior. tit. de Constitutionib.

(15.) The Jurisdiction of the Ordinary or Bishop, as to the Examination of the
Clerk, or as to the Admission or Institution of him into a Benefice, is not
Local; but it follows the person of the Ordinary or Bishop wheresoever he is:
And therefore if a Clerk be presented to the Bishop of Norwich, to a Church
which is void within the Diocese of Norwich, who is then in London; or if it be
to a Bishop of Ireland, who is then in England, and in London; the Ordinary may
examine the Clerk, or give him Admission or Institution in London: And so it
was adjudged 27 Eliz. C B. in Carter and Crofts Case. Leon. 33. and Pasch. 21
Jac. C. B. in Kn^lly's and Dobbin^ Case. 342. Leon.
.

(16.) The Ordinary is not obliged upon a Vacancy to receive the Clerk of him
that comes first; for as he may take competent time to examine the sufficiency
and fitness of a Clerk: so may he give convenient time to persons interessed,
to take knowledge of the Avoidance, even in case of Death, and where notice is
to be taken, not given, to present their Clerks to it. And perhaps, if he do
receive the Clerk of him that comes first, yet he may quit himself of
Disturbance, because he does nothing therein but as Ordinary in Law. But if two
or more Present, so that the Title is become Litigious, then and in such case
he cannot receive the Clerk of any* of his own pleasure, except the Title be
certain, but has his way of safety by Jure Patronatus; and when he has used
the Jure Patronatus, and that finds for one party, yet he may still receive a
contrary Clerk if he will, for who can let him? but that must be at his own
peril, and that is at a double peril, (1.) That the Title be the better: (2.)
That the Patron, whose Clerk he has received, will plead and defend that
Title; for otherwise he cannot do it. But though after Inquest, in Jure
Patronatus, the Ordinary may accept the contrary Clerk, yet it is against
Justice and the intent of the Law; For since it is a Provision merely for the
good and safety of the Ordinary, and he pretends Doubt, and therefore puts the
Patron to this enquiry to his charge and delay to satisfy and secure him, he
ought to judge and receive the Clerk according to that Verdict. And that is the
true meaning of the Books that say, that the Ordinary is to judge of the better
Title, that is, not to prejudge of his own Will, but secundum allegata and
probata, upon Verdict of the Right given, and found according to the form of
Law, to give Institution which is his Judgment, and the Induction his
Execution. And though it is but an Inquest of Office, and therefore binds not;
True it is, it binds not but with a distinction, that is, it binds not the
Patron in his Quare Impedit, but is Final, even to the true Patron, that he
cannot impute disturbance to the Ordinary, following that Verdict, and
therefore it ought to bind him to follow it. For to these purposes it is a full
Verdict, never to be tried again. And if but one Present, if the Ordinary make
doubt of his Title, as in many cases he justly may, being a stranger to it, he
may require satisfaction by Jure Patronatus Pasch. 17 Jac. Rot. 877. Sr. Will.
Elvis verse. Archbishop of York, and others; in Hob. Rep.
.

(17.) If it be demanded, whether the Ordinary can cite a man out of his
Diocese? the Common Law answers it in the Negative; And so it was held by Jones
and Whitlock Justices in Brown's Case, where they held, That at the Common Law
a Bishop cannot cite a man out of his Diocese; and there Whitlock held, that
the Ordinary has not any power of Jurisdiction out of his Diocese, but to
absolve a person Excommunicated Brown's Case, Latch. Rep.
. If one in N. commit Adultery in another Diocese, during the time of his
Residence, he may be cited in the Diocese where he committed the offense,
although he dwell out of the Diocese: by Coke, Warburton, and Winch Brownl. p.
^. Cases in Law.
. And in the time of his Visitation he has Jus ad Synodalia, according to the
Custom more or less, as in Gloucestershire, where the Impropriation of
Dereburt pays annually 7s. 9d. pro Synodalibus and Procurationibus; for this
Synodal is not in this sense here taken as in the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 19.
for Synodals Provincial, which seem to signify the Canons or Constitutions of
a Provincial Synod, nor for the Synod it self, which the word Synodale does
sometimes signify; but it is here in the same sense as the word Synodies in
the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 16. for a Synodal is no other than a Cense or
Tribute in money paid to the Bishop or Archdeacon by the Inferior Clergy.

(18.) Every Spiritual person is visitable by the Ordinary Davis 1. Commend.
72. b.
. So is a Dean de mero jure, for he is Spiritual D. 10 El. 273.
. The Ordinary has also power of Correction of a Parson 20 H. 6. 46.
. And every Hospital, be it Lay or Spiritual, is Visitable Co. 10. Sutton's
Hosp. 31.
. By the ancient Law of the Realm the King has power to Visit, reform and
correct all Abuses and Enormities in the Church Davis 1. Proxies 4.
. Nor are the Kings Donatives visitable by the Ordinary Davis 1. D. and C. de
Ferns 46. temps E. 6. Br. praemunire 21.
; but properly by the Lord Chancellor Davis 1. 46. F. N. B. 42. a.
. And the King may grant a Special Commission to that purpose D. 1. 46.
. But as to Hospitals, if they be Spiritual, the Ordinary shall visit them; if
they be Lay-Hospitals, the Patron Co. 10. Suttons 31.
. In the Statute of 1 El. cap. 2. there is a Proviso, That all and singular
Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors, Commissaries,
Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, as
well to enquire in their Visitations, Synods, and elsewhere within their
Jurisdiction, or any other time or place, to take occasions and informations of
all and every the things abovementioned, done, committed, or perpetrated
within the Limits of their Jurisdiction or Authority, and to punish the same by
Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation, and other Censures
and Process in like manner as heretofore has been used by the Queens
Ecclesiastical Laws. The Ancient custom was for the Visitor to visit in his
own person, and visitare Ecclesiatim, per cunctas Dioceses parochiasque suas.
10. q. 1. c. Episcopum E. Council. Toletan 4. ca. 35. This Visitation is a
special and peculiar duty belonging to every Bishop, as derived from the
Apostles, who themselves were Visitors, and for that end and purpose did
pertransire Ecclesias and Vrbes. Act. 15 and 16.
The Bishop has his Triennials, per Archidiaconi Visitatio potest fieri
singulis annis. Extr. de Offic. Archid. c. Mandamus. We find also, that
Episcopus debet Visitare singulis annis Parochiam, nisi dimittat propter
gravamen Ecclesiarum, and 2. Coke 15. De Spelm. Council. p. 238.
tunc mittat Archidiaconum, etc. Ab. Sic. super 2. 1. de Offic. Archid. c. ut
Archidiaconus 10. q. 1. c. Decrevimus, etc. Episcopum.

(19.) Every Bishop has his Cathedral and Council, and the Council and Bishop
there decide matters of Controversy; the Prebends have their names from the
affording of help to the Bishop. If any Clerk, B^ownl. Rep. par. 1. Mich. 10
Jac. Cases in Law, etc.
after he has sworn Canonical Obedience, should happen to commit Episcopicide,
he is guilty of Petty-Treason, and shall suffer as such. Whereas heretofore the
County of Gloucester was a part of the Diocese of Worcester, out of which it
was taken by King H. 8. when first made a Bishopric; the Diocese of Worcester
was in the time of King Ed 6. laid to the Sea of Gloucester. Dr. Heylin 's
Hist. Eccl. p. 101. Next unto the Two Archbishops, the Bishop of London, of all
the other Bishops, has the Pre-eminence. Episcopus Londinensis (says an
Ancient Record) speciali quadam Dignitate caeteris anteponendus, quia Ecclesiae
Cantuariensis Decanus est Provincialis. The Bishop of Duresme (who is next in
precedence) has been a Count Palatine about six or seven hundred years, and
has at this day the Earldom of Sadberg, long since annexed to this Bishopric
by the King. Note, a President has been showed at Common Law, That the Bishop
of Durham imprisoned one for a Lay-Cause; and the Archbishop of York, as his
Sovereign, cited him to appear before him, to answer for that Imprisonment; and
the Archbishop was fined four thousand Marks. Cro. par. 1. The Bishop of
Winchester was anciently reputed Earl of Southampton: All the other Bishops
take place according to the Seniority of their Consecration, unless any Bishop
happen to be made Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, or Secretary of
State, which anciently was very usual. All the Bishops of England are Barons
and Peers of the Realm, have place in the Upper house of Parliament, as also in
the Upper house of Convocation; The Bishoprics were erected into Baronies by
William the Conqueror at his coming into England, And as a special remark of
Honor, Three Kings, viz. of England, Scotland, and South Wales, in the year
1200. did contribute their Royal shoulders for the conveyance of the deceased
Corpse of Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln to his Grave. And no wonder, when Princes
themselves, and such as were of the Blood Royal were anciently Bishops in this
Kingdom; they have been not only of the best Nobility, but diverse of the Sons
and Brothers of several English Kings since the Conquest and before, have
entered into Holy Orders and became Ecclesiastics, as at this day is
practicable in the most of all other Monarchies throughout the whole Christian
World. Ethelwolph, Son and Successor to Egbert, first Sole King of England, was
in Holy Orders, and Bishop of Winchester at his Fathers death. Odo, Brother to
William the Conqueror was Bishop of Bayeux in Normandy. Henry de Blois, Brother
to King Stephen, was Bishop of Winchester. Geofry Plantagenet, Son to King
Henry the Second, was Bishop of Lincoln. And Henry de Beauford, Brother to King
Henry the Fourth, was Bishop also of Winchester.

(20.) The Statute of 17 Car. 1. cap. 27. for disinabling persons in Holy
Orders to exercise Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority, being Repealed (as
aforesaid) by the Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 2. they are thereby restored to
the exercise of Temporal Jurisdiction as formerly; which indeed is no more than
what they ever Anciently exercised in this Kingdom; For, Ex Clero Rex semper
sibi eligebat Primos a Consiliis, Primos ad Officia Regni obeunda. Primi igitur
sedebant in omnibus Regni Comitiis and Tribunalibus Episcopi, in Regali quidem
Palatio cum Regni Magnatibus, in Comitatu una cum Comite, in Turno cum
Vice-comite, and in Hundredo cum Domino Hundredi, sic ut in promovenda Justitia
usquequaque gladii gladium adjuvaret, and nihil inconsulto Sacerdote vel
Episcopo ageretur. This Union of Persons, Authority, and Courts of Judicature,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, Seldom, lib. 2. de Synedrits.
(as Mr. Seldom proves) continued above Four thousand years, till Pope Nicholas
the First, about the Eighth Century, to exclude the Emperor from meddling in
the Ecclesiastical Government, began to exclude the Clergy from meddling with
the Civil. And for the space of four or five hundred years, during the Reign of
the Saxon Kings in England, Vid. Great. Did. c. Cum ad ve^um.
the Ecclesiastical and Secular Magistrates sat jointly together, determining
Ecclesiastical Affairs in the Morning, and Secular or Civil Affairs in the
Afternoon; so that in those days, as there was no clashing of Jurisdictions, so
no complaint touching Prohibitions, but an unanimous harmony in a kind of
Joynt-Jurisdiction in reference to all Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, until
William the Conqueror, did put a distinction between Church and State, in a
more divided way than formerly had been practiced. Also the excellent Laws made
by King Ina, King Athelstan, King Edmund, and St. Edward the Confessor, from
whom we have our Common Laws, and our Privileges mentioned in Magna Charta,
were all made by the persuasions and advice of Archbishops and Bishops, named
in our Histories.

(21.) That which during the Reign of King Edw. 6. made the greatest
alteration, and threatened most danger to the State Ecclesiastical, was the Act
entitled, An Act for Election, and what Seals and Styles shall be used by
Spiritual persons, etc. In which it was ordained, That Bishops should be made
by the Kings Letters Patents, and not by the Election of the Deans and
Chapters: That all their Processes and Writings should be made in the Kings
Name only, with the Bishop's Test added to it; and sealed with no other Seal
than the Kings, or such as should be Authorized and Appointed by him. In the
compounding of which Act there was more danger (as Dr. Heylin observes)
couched, than at first appeared. For by the last Branch thereof it was plain
and evident (says he) that the intent of the Contrivers was, by degrees to
weaken the Authority of the Episcopal Order, by forcing them from their strong
hold of Divine Institution, and making them no other than the Kings Ministers
only, or as it were, his Ecclesiastical Sheriffs, to execute his Will, and
disperse his Mandates. And of this Act such use was made (though possibly
beyond the true intention of it) that (as the said Dr. Heylin observes) the
Bishops of those Times were not in a Capacity of conferring Orders, but as they
were thereunto empowered by special License. The Tenor whereof (if Sanders be
to be believed) was in these words following: viz. The King to such a Bishop
Greeting. Whereas all and all manner of Jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, flows from the King as from the Supreme Head of all the Body, etc. We
therefore give and grant to thee full power and License, to continue during our
good pleasure, for holding Ordination within thy Diocese of N. and for
promoting fit persons unto Holy Orders, even to that of the Priesthood. Which
being looked on by Queen Mary, not only as a dangerous diminution of the
Episcopal Power, but as an odious Innovation in the Church of Christ; she
caused this Act to be Repealed in the first year of her Reign, leaving the
Bishops to depend on their former claim, and to act all things which belonged
to their Jurisdiction in their own Names, and under their own Seals, as in
former times. In which estate they have continued without any Legal
Interruption, from that time to this. But (says the same Author) in the First
Branch there was somewhat more than what appeared at the first sight: For,
though it seemed to aim at nothing, but that the Bishops should depend wholly
on the King for their preferment to those great and eminent places; yet the
true drift of the Design was, to make Deans and Chapters useless for the time
to come, and thereby to prepare them for a Dissolution. For, had nothing else
been intended in it, but that the King should have the sole Nomination of all
the Bishops in his Kingdoms, it had been only a reviver of an Ancient power,
which had been formerly invested in his Predecessors* and in all other
Christian Princes. If we consult the Records of elder Times, it will readily
appear, not only that the Roman Emperors of the House of France did Nominate
the Popes themselves; but that, after they had lost that power, they retained
the Nomination of the Bishops in their own Dominions. The like done also by the
German Emperors, Dr. Heylin, Hist. Eccl. de Temp. Ed 6. p. 51, 52.
by the Kings of England, and by the Ancient Kings of Spain: The Investure
being then performed per Annulum and Baculum, that is, by delivering of a Ring,
together with a Crosier or Pastoral Staff to the party nominated.

(22.) By Ancient Right the Bishops of London are accounted Deans of the
Episcopal College; and being such, are by their place to signify the pleasure
of their Metropolitan to all the Bishops of the Province, to execute his
Mandates, and disperse his Missives, on all emergency of Affairs: Ibid. p 54,
55.
As also to preside in Convocations, or Provincial Synods, during the vacancy
of the Sea, or in the necessary absence of the Metropolitan.

(23.) Mich. 17 Jac. Br. Revan O Brian and others, and Knivans case. Cro. par.
2.
In O Brian and Knivan's Case, the Case was, That King Ed. 6. under his Privy
Seal signified to Sir J. C. and to the Lord Chancellor, and others in Ireland;
That he elected and appointed J. B. to be Bishop of Ossory: Requiring them to
Instal him in the Bishopric. The Deputy being removed, the Chancellor and the
other made a Commission under the Great Seal of Ireland to the Bishop of Dublin
to Consecrate him; which was done accordingly, and he did his Fealty, and
recovered the Temporalties out of the Kings hands. Afterward in the life of J.
B. Queen Mary elected J. T. to be Bishop there: who was likewis^ Consecrated,
and who made a Lease of diverse Lands of the Bishopric for 101 years, which was
confirmed by the Dean and Chapter. J. B. died; and after J. T. died J. W. was
elected Bishop. The Questions in the Case were, (1.) Whether J. B. was well
created Bishop? (2.) Whether this Lease made by J. T. being Bishop de facto,
but not de jure in the life of J. B. he surviving J. B. should be good to bind
the Successor. Resolved, The Commission was well executed, although the Deputy
Sir J. C. were removed. (2.) Resolved, That before the Statute of 2 Eliz. the
King might by Patent without a Writ of Conge d'eslire create a Bishop, for that
was but a Form or Ceremony. (3.) Resolved, That although J. T. was Bishop de
facto in the life of J. B. that the Lease made by him for 101 years was void,
though it was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, and should not bind the
Successor: But all Judicial Acts made by him, as Admissions, Institutions, etc.
should be good; but not such voluntary Acts as tended to the depauperation of
the Successor. Mich. 3 Car. C. B. Owen and Tho. Ap Ree's Case. Cro. par. 3.


A Bishop made a Lease for three Lives, not warranted by the Statute of 1 Eliz.
rendering Rent; the Successor accepted the Rent. It was Resolved, It should bind
him during his time, so as he shall not avoid the Lease, which otherwise was
voidable.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Guardian of the Spiritualties.
1. What the Office of such a Guardian is, and by whom Constituted. 2. The
power of such Guardians in vacancy of Archbishopricks. 3. What Remedy in case
they refuse to grant such Licenses or Dispensations, as are legally grantable.
4. Who is Guardian of the Spiritualties, of Common Right. 5. What things a
Guardian of the Spiritualties may do.
(1.) GVardian of the Spiritualties (Custos Spiritualium, vel Spiritualitatis)
is he to whom the Spiritual Jurisdiction of any Diocese (during the vacancy of
the Sea) is committed Vid. St. 25* H. 8. c. 21. and 13 Eliz. c. 12.
. Dr. Cowell conceives, that the Guardian of the Spiritualties, may be either
Guardian in Law, or Jure Magistratus (as the Archbishop is of any Diocese
within his Province) or Guardian by Delegation, as he whom the Archbishop or
Vicar General does for the time depute. Guardian of, etc. by the Canon Law
pertains to the Appointment of the Dean and Chapter. c. ad abolend. Extr. Ne
sede vacant aliquid innovetur: But with us in England, to the Archbishop of
the Province by Prescription. Howbeit (according to Mr. Gwin in the Preface to
his Readings.) diverse Deans and Chapters do challenge this by Ancient Charters
from the Kings of this Realm. Cowell verb. Custos. This Ecclesiastical Office
is specially in request, and indeed necessarily in the time of the Vacancy of
the Episcopal See, or when the Bishop is in remotis agendis about the public
Affairs of the King or State; at which time Presentations must be made to the
Guardian of the Spiritualties, which commonly is the Dean and Chapter: or unto
the Vicar General, who supplies the place and room of the Bishop Co. 1. par.
In^tit acc.
. And therefore if a man Recover, and have Judgment for him in a Quare Impedit,
and afterward the Bishop (who is the Ordinary) dies. In this case the Writ to
admit the Clerk to the Benefice must be directed to the Guardian of the
Spiritualties, Sede vacant, to give him Admission: But if before his Admission
another be created Bishop of that See, and Consecrated Bishop; in that case the
power of the Guardian of the Spiritualties does cease, and the party may have a
new Writ to the new Bishop to admit his Clerk 18 Eliz. Dyer 35^.
. A Guardian of the Spiritualties may admit a Clerk, but he cannot confirm a
Lease Case Evans and Ascough. Latch. Rep^.
.

(2.) The Guardian of the Spiritualties takes place as well in the vacancy of
Archbishopricks as Bishoprics, and has power of granting Licenses,
Dispensations, and the like, during such Vacancies, by the Statute of 25 H. 8.
whereby it is provided and enacted, That if it happen the Sea of the Archbishop
of Canterbury to be void, that then all such Licenses, Dispensations,
Faculties, Instruments, Rescripts, and other Writings which may be granted by
virtue of the said Act, shall (during such vacation of the said See) be had,
done, and granted under the Name and Seal of the Guardian of the Spiritualties
of the said Archbishopric, according to the tenor and form of the said Act,
and shall be of like force, value and effect, as if they had been granted under
the Name and Seal of the Archbishop for the time being. Where it is also
further enacted,

(3.) That if the said Guardian of the Spiritualties shall refuse to grant such
Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties, etc. to any person that ought upon a good,
just, and reasonable cause to have the same, then and in such case the Lord
Chancellor of England, or the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, upon any complaint
thereof made, may direct the Kings Writ to the said Guardian of the
Spiritualties, (during such Vacancy as aforesaid) refusing to grant such
Licenses, etc. enjoining him by the said Writ, under a certain penalty therein
limited at the discretion of the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, that he
shall in due form grant such License, Dispensation, Faculty, etc. according to
the request of the Procurers of the same, or signify into Chancery by a day
certain, for what cause he refused to grant the same: where, if upon such
Certificate it shall appear, that the cause of such Refusal was reasonable,
just, and good, that then it shall be admitted and allowed; otherwise, there
may issue thence by virtue of the said Statute a Writ of Injunction, commanding
the said Guardian of the Spiritualties, so refusing as aforesaid, to make
sufficient grant of such License, Dispensation, etc. by a certain day; and if
after the receipt of such Writ, the Guardian of the Spiritualties shall yet
refuse to grant the same, and show no just or reasonable cause for so doing,
that then and in such case the said Guardian of the Spiritualties shall incur
such penalty to his Majesty, as shall be limited and expressed in the said Writ
of Injunction; And moreover in such case, a Commission under the Great Seal may
issue to Two Spiritual Prelates or persons to be nominated by his Majesty,
Authorizing them to grant such Licenses, Faculties, and Dispensations, as were
so refused to be granted by the Guardian of the Spiritualties, as aforesaid:
And what in this case is here enjoined to the Guardian of the Spiritualties
during the vacancy of the Archbishopric, is likewise expressly by the said
Statute to the Archbishop himself in time of Plenarty or Non-vacancy of the Sea.

(4.) Of the Metropolitan, the Dean and Chapter is of Common right the Guardian
of the Spiritualties: Of Inferior Bishoprics in times of Vacation, the Dean
and Chapter of the Sea is of Common right the Guardian of the Spiritualties,
and not the Metropolitan Contra 31 H. 6. 10. admit. Dub. 17 E. 3. 23. b. where
it is said, per Stou^. that in the time of R. 1. and ever before, the
Metropolitan was Guardian till the time of H 3 etc. Roll. Abr. ver*
Prerogative, lit. 5.
. Yet 5 E. 2. Quare impedit, 165. Admit. that during the vacancy of the
Bishopric of Durham, the Archbishop of York is Guardian of the Spiritualties.
And 23 E. 1. Rot. Claus. Memb. 4. the Prior of Christ-Church in Canterbury was
Guardian of the Spiritualties in time of vacation of the Archbishopric. Of
which Archbishopric the Dean and Chapter is Guardian of the Spiritualties in
the time of vacancy. Also of the Archbishopric of York, the Dean and Chapter
is Guardian of the Spiritualties in the vacancy thereof, and not the Archbishop
of Canterbury, for that it is a distinct Province, not subordinate to, etc.
contra 31 H. 6. 10. Admit. for there a Parson of the Province of York had aid
of the Metropolitan Guardian of the Spiritualties of the Archbishopric of York
in time of vacancy of that Archbishopric R^l. Abr. ibid.
.

In the Case of Grange against Denny it was said by Coke, That of common Right,
Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. Rot. 165. Grange verse. Denny. Bulstr. Rep.
by the Common Law, the Dean and Chapter, Sede vacant, of the Bishop, is
Guardian of the Spiritualties, as appears by Pasch. 17 E. 3. fo. 23. but that
now the Archbishops have used to have this by way of Composition. And in the
same Case it was said by Doderidge, That every Archbishop has a Diocese and a
Province, and of his Diocese he is a Bishop, and of his Province he is
Archbishop, and within his Province he is to be Visitor of all the Churches
within his Province; and Sede vacant of any Bishop within his Province he
himself is Guardian of the Spiritualties, of all the Bishoprics within his
Province: but Sede vacant of his own Diocese, the Dean and Chapter of this is
Guardian of the Spiritualties; and that no mention is made in the Books of the
Common Law of any such Composition aforesaid, but that the Guardian of the
Spiritualties is to be according to the difference before put, between a
Province and a Diocese.

5. The Learned Sergeant Roll in his Abridgment does acquaint us out of the
Ancient Books, That a Guardian of the Spiritualties may Admit and Institute a
Clerk presented to him 17 E. 3. 23.
. That the King did present to the Guardian of the Spiritualties of the
Archbishopric of Dublin (Sede vacant) for a Church in Ireland 2 E. 1. Rot.
Pat. Memb 5.
. That the Guardian of the Spiritualties may try Bastardy 41 Ass. 29. adjudged.
. That Letters were directed to all the Bishops, and (in the Vacancy) to the
Guardian of the Spiritualties, to make Prayers for the King in his Journey in
France 27 E. 1* Rot Clauso Memb. 11. Dorso.
. And that the Prior of Christ-Church in Canterbury, Guardian of the
Spiritualties during the Vacancy of that Archbishopric, had a Felon delivered
to him 23 E. 1. Rot. Clauso Memb. 4.
. But in the time of the Vacancy of the Bishop, the Archbishop is Guardian of
the Spiritualties, and not the Dean and Chapter Br^wnl. Rep. p^ 1. Much. 1^^
Jac. Cases in Law, etc.
.

CHAP. V.
Of Conge d'Eslire, Election, and Confirmation.
1. What Conge d'Eslire signifies; the Original thereof. 2. To whom it is
directed, and the manner of Proceedings thereupon, and of Election. 3.
Confirmation of Bishops, the form or manner thereof. 4. Confirmation in a
Temporal, not Spiritual sense, what? 5. The Confirmation of Bishops Elect
beyond Sea, far different from this in England. 6. The Law and Practice in
France, touching the making of Bishops.
(1.) COnge d'Eslire, in French, [ Leave to Chuse] is the Kings permission to a
Dean and Chapter to choose a Bishop in the time of Vacancy F. N. B. 169. Term.
Leg.
. And time was when this Venia Eligendi was also the permission Royal to an
Abbey or Priory of his own Foundation to choose their Abbot or Prior Ibid. B. and
170 B, C, etc.
. But we now understand it under no other signification than as his Majesty's
leave vouchsafed to a Dean and Chapter to elect a certain person to succeed as
Bishop of that Diocese, whose Episcopal See is vacant. For the better
interpretation of this Conge d'Eslire, the Modern Pens refer themselves to Mr.
Guin in the Preface to his Readings, where he says. The the King of England,
as Sovereign Patron of all Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other
Ecclesiastical Benefices, had of Ancient time free Appointment of all
Ecclesiastical Dignities,, whenever they happened to be void: Investing them
first Per Baculum and Annulum, and afterward by his Letters Patents: And that
in process of time he made the Election over to others, under certain Forms and
Conditions, viz. That they should at every Vacation before they choose, desire
of the King Conge d'Eslire, that is, Leave or License to proceed to Election,
and then after the Election to crave the Royal Assent, etc. He affirms also
by good proof, out of the Books of the Common Law, that King John was the first
that granted this; and that afterward it was confirmed by Westminster 1. cap.
1. which Statute was made An. 3. Ed. 1. And again by the Statute [ Articuli
Cleri] cap. 2. which was Ordained, An. 25. Ed. 3. Stat. 3. it is generally
agreed, That the Kings of this Realm were originally the Founders of all
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics within this Kingdom, being at first Donative
per traditionem Baculi Pastoralis and Annuli: But afterward King John by his
Chapter, 15 Jan. in the seventh year of his Reign, De Communi consensu Baronum,
granted that they should ever after be eligible. And from that time came in the
Conge d'Eslire. Vid. Co. 5. par. 14. in Candry's Case. vid. Stat. 1 Jac. cap.
3. vid. 17 Ed. 3. cap. 40.

(2.) The Conge d'Eslire being granted to the Dean and Chapter, they proceed
accordingly to Election, which in the sense here intended, as appropriated to
this Subject, is that Regular Choice, which is made of an Ecclesiastical person
to succeed in the office and dignity of Bishop, in, and of that Diocese, whose
See at the time of such Election is vacant. This Election referring to an
Episcopacy, or the choice of a new Bishop in a vacant See, is done by a Dean
and Chapter; but there are also other Elections Ecclesiastical relating to a
Regular choice of other persons to other Offices and Dignities in the Church,
subordinate to the former; but here it is specially meant of such an Election
or choice of a new Bishop, as is precedent to Confirmation, Consecration, and
Investure or Instalment, being made (as aforesaid) by the Dean and Chapter of a
Cathedral Church, by virtue of the Kings License and Letters Missive, according
to his Majesty's nomination and pleasure, contained in such Letters Missive, in
pursuance of such License to Elect, under the Great Seal of England; which
Election being made accordingly, the Dean and Chapter are to return a
Certificate thereof under their Common Seal unto his Majesty. This Election
alone and of it self, be it to an Archbishopric or Bishopric, if the person
Elected were before the Parson or Vicar of any Church Presentative, or Dean of
any Cathedral, or held any other Episcopal Dignity, does not ipso facto make
void in Law such former Benefice, or Dignity, or Deanery, because he is not
complete and absolute Bishop merely by such Election, but only Bishop Elect;
And an Election only of such one to a Bishopric, who had before a Benefice
with Cure, or any other Ecclesiastical Dignity or promotion, does not make a
Cession thereof 20 Ed. 3. Fitz. tit. Brief. 25.
. And it has been adjudged, that a Commendam retinere made to such a person of
such a Parsonage, Deanery, or other dignity Ecclesiastical, which the said
Parson had before his Election to the Bishopric, is yet good to him
notwithstanding such Election, and so remains good to him until his
Consecration Trin. 11 Jac. C. B. in Colt, and the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield. Hob. Rep. and Evans and Ascough^ Case, L^tch. Rep.
.

(3.) Confirmation has various senses according to the different Acceptance
of the word; but here it is mainly intended for that, which in order to an
Investure of a Bishop, is done by the Archbishop or Metropolitan of that
Province in which a Bishopric is void, and unto which a new Bishop is to be
Invested, with such usual Benedictions and Ceremonies as are requisite to the
same Vid. Stat. ^ 25 H. 8. cap. 20.
. Note, That before an Archbishop or other Bishop is Confirmed, Consecrated, or
Invested, he must take the Oath of Fealty unto the Kings Majesty only, after
which the King under his Great Seal does signify his Election to one
Archbishop and two other Bishops, otherwise unto four Bishops within his
Majesty's Dominions, thereby requiring them to Confirm his Election, and to
Consecrate and Invest the person Elected. After which Confirmation and
Consecration he is complete Bishop to all intents and purposes, as well to
Temporalties as Spiritualties. And now he has plenam potestatem tam
Jurisdictionis quam Ordinis; and may therefore after his Consecration certify
an Excommengment; and upon his Confirmation the power of the Guardian of the
Spiritualties does cease 18 Eliz. Dyer 350.
, and a Writ for Admission of a Clerk to a Benefice, awarded Episcopo Electo
and Confirmato, has been held to be good 22 E. 3. 13.
. Likewise the King may by his Letters Patents, after such Confirmation and
before Consecration, grant unto such Bishop his Temporalties 41 E. 3. 6. and 46
E. 3. 22.
, which Grant from his Majesty is held to be potius de gratia quam de jure; but
if the Bishop of one Diocese be translated to a Bishopric in another, there
needs no new Confirmation of him. In the Canon [ de Confirmatione Episcoporum]
of Othobon's Constitutions, it is Ordained in haec verba, viz. Vt cujus
Electionis Episcopalis Confirmatio postulatur, inter caetera super quibus
Inquisitio and Examinatio praecedere debet Secundum Canonum Instituta: Ot^o^on.
de Confirm. Epist. cap* unic.
illud exactissime inquiratur, utrum plura Beneficia cum animarum cura, qui
Electus est, antequam eligeretur, habuerit: Et si habuisse inveniatur, an cum
eo super hoc fuerit dispensatum: Et an Dispensatio, si quam exhibuerit, vera
sit, and ad omnia beneficia, quae obtinuit, extendatur. Et si in aliquo
Praemissorum, is ad quem Confirmatio spectat Electam deficere sua discussione
compererit: eidem nullatenus munus Confirmationis impendat.

(4.) There is also Confirmation of another kind, and far remote in sense from
the former, not of any Ecclesiastical consideration, nor of any Affinity with
the other, otherwise than Nominal, and that is the ratifying or confirming of
an Office, or an estate in a Place or Office, to one who has or formerly had
the possession thereof by a good Title, but voidable, though not actually and
at present void. To explain this; A Bishop grants his Chancellorship by Patent
to one for term of his Natural life: this Grant is good to the Patentee, and
not in it self void; yet upon the Bishops death it is voidable, unless it be
corroborated and ratified by the Confirmation of the Dean and Chapter Weast.
Symb. par. 1. lib. 2. Sect. 300. F. N. B* fo. 169. b. 226. (...). 271. d. 162
(...) Litt. lib. 3. c. ^^.
. This is not the Confirmation here intended, but the Confirmation of the
Election of a new Bishop in order to his Consecration and Investure; which
though heretofore was by the Bishop of Rome, when he claimed a Spiritual
Jurisdiction in this Realm; yet now since the Stat. of 25 H. 8. c. 20. the same
is at his Majesty's Command performed by the Archbishop or Metropolitan of the
Province wherein such Bishopric is void, and two other Bishops, otherwise by
four such Bishops within his Majesty's Dominions, as to whom under his Broad
Seal he shall signify such Election, commanding them to Confirm the same, as
also to Consecrate and Invest the person whose Election to the Bishopric is so
Confirmed as aforesaid.

(5.) The Confirmation of the Election of Bishops to vacant Sees according to
the Canon Law, and as practiced in such Kingdoms beyond Sea, where the Pope
does claim and exercise a Spiritual Jurisdiction, is, as to the mode and
solemnity thereof, quite another thing to what the practice is with us in this
Realm.

(6.) In France, though the Nomination of a Bishop to succeed in a vacant See
belongs to the French King, yet if he does not Nominate within Six or Nine
months next after the death of the former Bishop, Jus devolutum est ad Papam
Cap. ne pro defect^ de Elect. c. 2. (...) concess. Pr^^bend. and in Sect. 1. de
Regia N^m^na. Pet. Rebuss. Respons. 14.
; if a Bishopric be there void, be it quomodocunque, whether by Cession or
otherwise, the Law speaks indefinitely in that case, the King shall Nominate in
France who shall be the new Bishop; but then he must Nominate within Six or
Nine months, which being Elapsed and no Nomination, he cannot afterward
Nominate, Nam jus sit ad Papam dev^lutum: nec poterit purgare moram Gloss. and
D D. in dict. cap. 2. de concess. Praebend^
. For the Law in that Case and in that Kingdom is, that Nominatione non facta
intra Sex menses, devolvitur Nominatio and plena Dispositio Episcopatus ad
Papam. As also appears in that remarkable Case controverted touching the
Confirmation of the Election, Ad Episcopatum Appamiarum; For upon the death of
Cardinal de Albret, An. 1520. 10. Dec. that Bishopric became void; whereupon
the Canons of that Church convened, and proceeded to the Election of a new
Bishop, and chose D. Bernard de Lordat, who being elected, applied himself
Archiepiscopo Tholosano, tanquam suo Metropolitano, saltem Vicariis suis, for
the Confirmation of his Election, which was done accordingly; to which
Confirmation the Procurator Regius was not called, who appealed from the said
Election and Confirmation, alleging that the Nomination to the Bishopric
belonged to the King, who Nominated D. John de Puis to the Pope; whereupon the
Pope granted the said Bishopric to the said John de Puis, who by the Bulls and
Proxies of the Pope took possession thereof. From all which Appeal was again
afterward in Supremam Curiam, between De (...) and Lordat; but De Puis
obtaining another Bishopric, the Process on the Appeal was Extinct, and Lordat
by a Definitive, had the Possession of the said Bishopric Confirmed to him
Rebu^^. ubi supr*
.

CHAP. VI.
Of Consecration*
1. What Consecration signifies; the Ancient Rites and Ceremonies thereof under
the Law; who they were to whom it belonged. 2. Consecration, as specially
Applicable to Bishops. 3. An Ancient Canon touching the Consecration of
Churches. 4. The Form of Consecration of Churches by the Justinian Law, the
Rites and Ceremonies therein used by the Greek and Latin Churches. 5.
Consecration of Bishops how necessary by the Imperial Law, Consonant to the
practice of the Greek and Latin Churches. 6. Consecration of Bishops is
Character Indelebilis at the Common Law. 7. Who first Consecrated Churches; who
first took the style of Pope; The Original of Godfathers and Godmothers in
Baptism. 8. In case of Translations of Bishops no need of new Consecrations;
Requisites to Creation and Translation of Bishops according to the Common Law
of England.
1. CONSECRATION here chiefly refers either to Bishops or Churches: The Civil
as well as Canon Law takes notice of both ^. 3. si quando, C. de Bon. vac. and
24. q. 1. c. Pudenda, and Jul. Patric. in Version. Nov. 6.
. It signifies a Dedication to God; Justinian in his Novel's makes use of the
word, thereby signifying an Imposition of hands dict. Nov. 6.
: For in this manner (says that Book of great Antiquity, entitled (...)) began
Bishops to be Consecrated. It is a kind of Separation of persons Ec^csiastical
from the Laity, and of things Sacred from Profane, for the especial use and
service of God. The word in the Hebrew signifies a Filling of the hand, thereby
intimating that under the Law in the Consecration of any, there was a giving
them or Putting into their hands things to offer, whereby they were admitted to
their Priestly Office Exodus 29. 9.
. In this Consecration the holy Unction was used, or the holy Oil or holy
Ointment, which was not to be applied to any Profane or Civil use, but to be
appropiated to the Sons of Aaron; only whereas Kings were and are to be
Anointed, that is to be understood, as by especial command from God 1 King. 19.
15, 16. and 1 King. 1. 39. and 1 Samuel 16. 12. Psalm. 89. 20.
, as an Exception to the Sacerdotal practice, and as a Consecrating them to the
Government; in relation whereto a King is a Mixed person under a double
capacity, Ecclesiastical and Civil, as next under God the Supreme in Church and
State within his own Dominions. And although under the Levitical Law there was
an Anointing Oil common to the High Priest with the Inferior Priests Exodus 29.
20.
; yet the High Priest had a Consecration peculiar to himself, which was by the
pouring out the precious Ointment upon his head Lev. 8. 12. Exodus 29. 7. Psalm.
133. 2.
. In imitation whereof are Kings at this day anointed to the Regal Authority.

(2.) The import of this word [ Consecration] as practicable in all Ages,
specially refers to Archbishops and Bishops, and with us consists in certain
Benedictions and Ceremonies peculiarly requisite thereunto; And when after
Election and Confirmation the person is Consecrated and Invested, he is then
complete Bishop, as well to Temporalties as Spiritualties, and then the power
of the Guardian of the Spiritualties does cease. Being Consecrated he may
confer Holy Orders upon others, and may Consecrate Churches and Chapels, which
before he could not. Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury deprived diverse Prelates
for receiving Investure of King H. 1. but after they were restored ex gratia.
Speed 436. The Roman Synod made a Cannon, that Investure belongs to the Pope;
yet H. 1. used to give Investure, as he did to Ralph, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Sp. 440. b.

(3.) Touching the Consecration of Churches, the Learned Sir H. Spelman makes
mention of a very Ancient Canon made by the Synod held at Celichyth, Celichyth.
in the year 816. under Wulfred Archbishop of Canterbury, and President of the
said Synod, Kenulph King of Morcia being threat also personally present; The
Canon is to this purpose, viz. Wherever a Church is built or erected, let it be
Sanctified by the Bishop of the proper Diocese: Let it have a Benediction from
himself, and be sprinkled with Holy Water, and so be made a complete Church, in
such manner as is prescribed in the Ministerial Book. Afterward, let the
Eucharist, which is Consecrated by the same Bishop, be together with other
Relics reposited and laid up in a Chest, and kept and preserved in the same
Church. And we Ordain and Command, that every Bishop take care that the Saints,
to whom their Churches are dedicated respectively, be painted on the
Church-walls, or in Tables, or on the Altars Spelm. Consil. Synod. Celichyth.
Can. 2.
.

4. The Emperor Justinian in his care of the Church, has prescirbed a Form of
Consecration thereof in this manner, viz. his Law is, That none shall presume
to erect a Church, until the Bishop of the Diocese has been first acquainted
therewith, and shall come the lift up his hands to Heaven, and Consecrate the
place to God by Prayer: and erect the Symbol of our Salvation, viz. the
venerable and truly precioas Rood Auth. de Monach.. illud igitur. Coll. 1. vid.
Novell. 123, 131.
. Likewise among other Ceremonies of Consecrating Churches, the laying of the
first Stone was of Ancient use in the Greek Church, as may be observed out of
their Euchologue, where it is said, That the Bishop, after some other Rites
performed, standing in the place where the Holy Altar shall be set, says
certain Prayers, which being ended, he gives tho Ite Missa est, and then
takes up one of the Stones, and having cut a Cross upon it, himself with his
own hands lays it upon the Groundwork, as the first Foundation-stone; then be
pronounces the (...), etc. and so the Workmen begin the Building. The like
Ceremonies are used in the Latin Church at this day at the Consecration of
Churches, as appears by their Pontificale Pontificale, page 281. per Clement.
8. An. 5565.
There is this further touching the Consecration of Churches in the Euchologue
of the Greek Church, That the Bishop having on his Formilities, fumeth the
Groundwork or Foundation with his Iacense Circular-wise, then the Singing-men
say a kind of Collect for the Saint to whose Name the Church is Dedicated, and
some other Services as the Chaunter shall appoint. So that although the Patron
might choose the Ground, yet the Prelate was to come and Consecrate it; the
Patron might bring the Stones, but the Bishop laid the Foundation; the Workmen
might with the Materials make a House, but the Bishop by Consecration made it a
Church; It was but the dead body of a Temple, till it received the being of a
Church by the influence of the Diocesan. Thence it was that the privilege of a
new Church followed not the Building, but the Consecration thereof, as was well
observed by that Devout and Learned King Alured in the fifth Canon of his
Ecclesiastical Laws, where he says That if a man pursued by his Enemy fly to
the Temple, no man shall thence take him away for the space of seven days;
which Law was yet made under a Caution, That this freedom shall not be granted
to any Church, but such as shall be Consecrated by the Bishop.

(5.) Consecration relating to the person, office, and dignity of a Bishop (as
in the former part of this Chapter) was by the Imperial Law so necessary to the
making him a Bishop complete, as that without it his Election and Confirmation
would not have entitled him to any Church that should be new erected within
his Diocese, whereunto he being Consecrated, had a right and Title; as is
evident not only by the Emperors Novel, but also more peculiarly acknowledged
by the (...), or the setting up of the Cross behind the Altar when he made the
Consecration. Thus the Eucholgue for the Greek Church. The like also is
observed in the Latin, where the Ceremonies are more tedious and elaborate. By
the setting up of the said (...), the Right of the new Church was conveyed to
the Patriarch or Bishop as by an especial Title, and that not only by the
Euchologue in the Greek, but also by the Emperor's Novel in the Latin Church:
Concerning which Right and the Conveyance thereof by the (...). Observable to
this purpose is that Synodical Sentence given by Germanus, Patriarch of
Constantinople, against John Archbishop of Lepanto, touching certain Episcopal
Monasteries, whereon he had illegally fixed his Cross under pretense of a Right
to the same Jus Graec. Lat. To. 1. Synod. 1. 232, 233, etc.


(6.) This Consecration, specially as it refers to Bishops, is Character
indelebilis, insomuch that although it should so happen, that for some just
cause he should be deposed or removed from the Sea, or suspended ab Officio and
Beneficio, both from his Spiritual Jurisdiction, as to the exercise and
execution thereof, as also from the Temporalties and profits of the Bishopric;
yet he still retains the Title of a Bishop, for that it is supposed the Order
it self cannot absolutely be taken from him 21 H. 6. 3. by Markham.
King H. 1. banished Thurstan, Archbishop of York, for five years, for
receiving Consecration from the Pope. Speed 440. b. 458. b.

(7.) It appears by good Chronology, that the first that ever Consecrated
Churches was Euginus, who was a Greek, and Priest of Rome, and was the first
that ever styled himself Pope, An. 154. who wrote de Trinitate and Vnitate Dei.
He was the first that Decreed, that Churches should be Consecrated, with the
consent of the Metropolitan or Bishop; and that there should be one Godfather,
and one Godmother at Baptism Plat. Berg. Chrisp. Isaacs. Sat. Ephem.


(8.) In a Case of Translation the Bishop need not to be Consecrated de Novo,
as in case of Creation Case Evans and Ascough. Latch. Rep.
Anciently and according to the Canon Law, and where the Pope's Spiritual power
and authority was in force, Bishops were not so much by Election as by
Postulation, and then the saying was Electus Postulando, and Postulatus
obligando; and in that case the Elected was a Bishop presently, without either
Confirmation or Consecration, only by the Assent of the Superior Sum. Rosell.
Postulation, and ut. Si quis Panorm. 2. p. 100
Before Consecration the Bishop has not actual possession, although he has a
Freehold in Law after Consecration: But in case of Translation there is not any
new Election, nor may the Dean and Chapter pray a Conge d'Estire; but they
signify to the King how their Bishopric is void, and ideo humilime Postulamus
Humbricensem Episcopum fore Episcopum nostrum, and that is called, Postulation;
and then if the King grant it, he is the Bishop. Trin. 21 Jac. B. R. Sir Jo.
Vaughan's Case verse. Ascough, Roll. Rep. Postulatio est alicujus personae ad
dignitatem, vel Societatem Fraternam, Canonica facta vocatio: vel est personae,
quae eligi non potest, ad eligendum petitio. Cap. innotuit,. habito. de Elect.
The Bishop of St. P. was chosen Bishop of Trevers, and had the assent of the
Pope, and when he came there he found another in possession; whereupon he would
have returned to his former Bishopric, but could not, because it was void
before by the consent of the Superior. And in the Case of Evans and Ascough,
it was said, That a Bishop has been Summoned to Parliament before by
Confirmation; but, as Jones there said, That was after his Possessions or
Temporalties were restored to him. And Caltheep there said, That in the Case of
Translation of a Bishop there are five things to be performed, 1. The Chapters
Intimation of the death of their Bishop, praying Conge d'Estire. 2. Conge al
eux d'Estire. 3. A Certificate of the Election. 4. The Assent of the Bishop and
the King. 5. The Writ to the Archbishop to Confirm and Install him; because in
such case of Translation he shall not be Consecrated de Novo, as aforesaid. But
Consecration is necessary to the making of him a Bishop who was none before,
and is the fourth Act in order to a Bishop, according to the enumeration of
these steps and degrees thereunto, which in the said case of Evans and Ascough
is mentioned by Whitlock; where he faith, That in the making of a Bishop when a
Bishopric is void, the course is, (1.) To obtain a Conge d'Estire. 2. The
Kings Letters Missive, whom they shall abuse. 3. Upon the Election three
Instruments thereof; one whereof to the party Elected, another to the
Archbishop, a third to the King, certifying him of the Election, and then there
is an act of Assent to the Election, which cannot be without his Assent. 4. The
Kings Writ to the Archbishop to Consecrate and Install the person Elected. 5.
Then the Archbishop issues forth a general Citation, and therein does prefix a
certain day for the Confirmation, which is done accordingly, and then be is
Consecrated. Then the new Bishop swears Fealty to the King, which being done
the King orders him his Temporalties: so that there are three principal Acts
required to the making of a Bishop; The Election is as the Solicitation, the
Confirmation is the Contract, the Consecration is the Consummation of the
Marriage: Answerable whereunto, said Doderidge in the Case aforesaid, are the
Acts of making a Parson; As 1. Presentation, whereto answers the Election of a
Bishop: 2. Admission, to which Confirmation answers: 3. Institution, which is
as the Consecration; and Induction as the Restitution of the Temporalties in
dict. Case Evans and Ascough.
The Spiritual Marriage between the Church and the Bishop initurper Electionem,
Contrabitur per Confirmationem, and Consummatur per Consecrationem; and the
Restitution of the Temporalties is as the bringing home of the Wise.

CHAP. VII.
Of Deans and Chapters.
1. What a Dean is, why so called; what Dean and Chapter signifies; and what
Deans Rural arc. 2. The Division of Deans according to the Civil and Canon
Laws; a Question in Law touching the Deanary of St. Martins. 3. Two ways of
Creating Deans; and in what other senses the word or style of Dean is
applicable. 4. Four sorts of Deans according to the Law of the Land. 5. The
Patronage of Deanaries is in the Crown. 6. The Dean and Chapter of a Cathedral,
is a Corporation Spiritual. 7. A Deanary consists of two parts; The difference
between a Dean, Prebend, and Parson; and that Deanaries and Archdeacomies are
Ecclesiastical Dignities. 8. Chapter, what; the several Acceptations of that
word. 9. The difference between Capitulum and Conventus in the Canon Law. 10.
The description of a Chapter as to their Constitution and Government. 11.
Whether one Bishop may have two Chapters? 12. Whether the Lease of a Parsonage
in one Diocese, annexed to a Prebend in another, made by that Prebend, be good
without the Confirmation of that Bishop in whose Diocese the Parsonage is?
(1.) DEAN ((...), december) is an Ecclesiastical Magistrate, so called, because
anciently he presided or had power over Ten Canons or Prebends at the least.
Sed dicuntur Decani Rurales, eo quod December Clericis five Parochiis praesint.
Secund. Papiam, Lindw. de Constit. verb. Decan. Rurales gloss. Dean Rural,
because he usually had charge over Ten Country Parishes. Anciently also called
Archipresbyter, because other Presbyters were under his charge. Here in England
he is commonly called a Dean who is next under the Bishop, and Chief of the
Chapter ordinarily in a Cathedral Church, the rest of that Ecclesiastical
Society or Corporation being called Capitulum, the Chapter. Dean and Chapter is
a Body Corporate Spiritual, consisting of many able persons in Law, viz. the
Dean (who is Chief) and his Prebends, and they together make the Corporation.
And as this Corporation may jointly purchase Lands and Tenements to the use of
their Church and Successors: so likewise every of them severally may purchase
to the use of himself and his Heirs. After the death of a Prebend, the Dean and
Chapter shall have the Profits 33 L. 3. Aid del Roy 03. per Therp.
And after the death of a Dean of a Free Chapel belonging to the King, the
King shall have the Profits of the Deanary; for it is at the pleasure whether
he will Collate a new Dean to it Ibid. per Fif.
It is likewise held, that a Deanary is a Spiritual Promotion, and not a
Temporal, by all the Judges D. to El. 273, 37
And if the Nomination and Patronage of a Deanary be at the appointment of the
King, his Heirs and Successors, and he appoint a Dean, yet it is a Spiritual
Promotion Ibid.
The King makes the Corporations of Dean and Chapter 14 H 8. 3 b.
The Chapter of the Bishop consists of a Dean as the Chief, and of the
Prebendaries, or the like, which are commonly called the Chapter 17 E. 3. 40.
b. per ^arning
As to the Bishop and Chapter, which are but one Body, their possessions are
divided, so as the Bishop has a part for himself, and the Chapter the residue
40 Ea. 23. Coke 3. Rep. 75. b.
And their Possessions also for the most part are divided, the Dean having one
part alone in right of his Deanary, and each particular Prebendary a certain
part in right of their Prebends: the residue the Dean and Chapter have alike;
and each of them is to this purpose incorporate by himself 17 E. 4. 76. 17 Ass.
pl. 29. 18 E. 3. 36. F. N. B. 195.
In the Cathedral Churches of St. David and of Landaff; there never has been
any Dean, but the Bishop in either is Head of the Chapter; and in the Bishops
absence, in the Chapter at St. David's and at Landaff, the Archdeacon. There are
also some Deans in England without any Jurisdiction, only for Honor so styled;
as the Dean of the Chapel Royal, and Dean of the Chapel of St. George at
Windsor: And some Deans there are without any Chapter, yet enjoying certain
Jurisdictions, as the Dean of Croydon, the Dean of Battle, the Dean of Bockin,
etc. In the Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich it is said, That in
Christian Policy it was thought necessary, Coke 3. Dean and Chapter of Norwich,
Case 40 and 41 Eliz.
(for that the Church could not be without Sects and Heresies) that every
Bishop should be assisted with a Council, viz. a Dean and Chapter, (1). To
Consult with them in deciding of difficult Controversies of Religion; to which
purpose every Bishop habet Cathedram. (2). To Consent to every Grant the Bishop
shall make to bind his Successors; for the Law did not judge it reasonable to
repose such confidence in him alone. At first all the Possessions were to the
Bishop, afterward a certain portion was assigned to the Chapter; therefore the
Chapter was before they had any Possessions, and of Common right the Bishop is
Patron of all the Prebends, because their Possessions were derived from him. So
that so long as the Bishopric continues, the Dean and Chapter (being his
Council) remains. This word [ Dean] is diversely used by Lindwood Lind w. pro
Constable. tit. de Constit. verb. per Decanos Rurales.
who speaking of Dean-Rurals Decretal. Ext. de Offic. Archi. Dean Rurals; what.
Decani Rurales sunt Decans Temporales, ad aliquid Ministerium sub Episcepo vel
Archicpiscopo exercendum Constituti. Lindw. de Constable. c. 1. Gloss. in verb.
Decan. Rural.
describes them to be certain persons that have certain Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical over other Ministers and Parishes near adjoining, assigned unto
them by the Bishop and Archdeacon, being placed and displaced by them: Such are
the Dean of Croydon in Surrey, the Dean of Battle in Kent, the Dean of Burian
in Cornwall, etc. These Deans Rural are Decani Temporales, Constituted to some
Ministerial Function under the Bishop or Archbishop Lindw. ib. They were
anciently called, Testes Synedales.
They are certain Ecclesiastical persons having certain Offices commonly
belonging to the Bishop and Archdeacon, and therefore to either of them belongs
the receiving or removing of them; and their Office is temporal, not perpetual,
as is the Office of the Deans of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and other
Churches quibus perpetuo intitulantur Idem de Jadic. ver. Decan. Rural.


(2.) The Civil and Canon Laws do chiefly take notice but of three sorts of
Deans; the one, he who is empowered and set over Ten Soldiers C. de Decanis,
l. 12. per totum.
Another, he who is called Dean Rural, as aforesaid Extra de Censib. c. cum
Apostolus.
The third is, a Dean of a Cathedral or Collegiate Church, as abovesaid Extr.
de App. c. dilectis filiis.
There is also the Deanary of St. Martin le Grand, Land. concerning which
Lindwood puts the question, Whether it be such an Ecclesiastical Benefice as in
effect may incur such penalties, as may possibly happen to other persons
Beneficed? And after deep enquiries into the Laws, Presidents, and Antiquities
Foreign and Domestic, with very delectable variety of great Learning hinc
inde argumentatively, and pro and con impartially, at last does conclude it in
the Affirmative. Lindwood, Constit. tit. de Cohab. Cleric. and Mul. c. ut
Clericalis, verb. Beneficiati.

(3.) As there are two Foundations of Cathedral Churches in England, the Old
and the New: (the New being those which King Hen. 8. upon the suppression of
Abbeys, transformed from Abbot or Prior and Convent, to Dean and Chapter) So
there are two ways or means of Creating these Deans; for those of the old
Foundation were raised to their Dignity much like Bishops: the King first
issuing and granting his Conge d'Eslire to the Chapter, the Chapter thereupon
making their Election, the King then yielding his Royal Assent, and the Bishop
Confirming him, and giving his Mandate to install him. But those of the New
Foundation are by a much shorter course installed by virtue of the Kings
Letters Patents, without either Election or Confirmation. Deans of the Old
Foundation (before the suppression of Monasteries) arrive to their Dignities
much like Bishops: But Deans of the New Foundations (upon suppression of Abbeys
or Priories, transformed by H. 8. into Dean and Chapter) are by a shorter
course Installed by virtue of the Kings Let. Pat. Without Election or
Confirmation, it was said by Hobart in Briggs Case, That a Dean and Chapter are
a Body Spiritual, and annexed to the Bishop throughout all England. Briggs C.
in Winch. Rep. The same word is also applied to diverse that are the Chief of
certain peculiar Churches or Chapels, as the Dean of his Majesty's Chapel,
the Dean of the Arches, the Dean of St. George's Chapel in Windsor, etc. Nec
Collogia alicui praefecti, nec Jurisdictione ulla donati, Nomine tamen velut
honocis gratia. Insignes, says the Learned Spelman.

(4.) Each Archbishop and every Bishop has a Dean and Chapter; and whereas it
was formerly said, That the Civil and Canon Laws do chiefly take notice but of
three sorts of Deans, it is manifest, that there are four sorts of Deans or
Deanaries, whereof the Laws of this Kingdom do take knowledge. The first is a
Dean who has a Chapter consisting of Canons and Prebendaries, as aforesaid,
subordinate to the Bishop, as a Council assistant to him in matters Spiritual
relating to Religion, and in matters Temporal relating to the Temporalties of
his Bishopric Co. par. 3. Case Dean and Chap. of Norwich.
The second is a Dean who has no Chapter, Presentative, having Cure of Souls;
he has a Peculiar, and a Court with Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction therein; he is
not subject to the Visitation of the Ordinary: Such is the Dean of Battle in
Sussex, a Deanary Founded by William the Canquerour in memory of his Conquest;
who though he be Presentable to the Bishop by the Patron, and admitted to the
Deanary by Institution and Induction by the Bishop of Chichester, yet is exempt
from his Visitation. The third is, whose Deanary is not Presentitive, but
Donative, nor has he Cure of Souls, but is only by Covenant or Condition; he
has a Court and a Peculiar, holding Plea of matters Ecclesiastical arising
within his Peculiar over diverse Parishes. Such a Dean constituted by Commission
of the Metropolitan, is the Dean of the Arches, the Dean of Bocking in Essex,
and diverse others. The fourth is the Rural Dean aforesaid, having no absolute
Judicial power in himself, but is only by the direction of the Bishop or
Archdeacon, to order and prepare Ecclesiastical affairs within his Deanary and
Precinct; the power of these Rural Deans is at this day nigh extinguished by
the Office of the Archdeacon and the Bishops Chancellor; yet in some parts of
this Realm it is still in force.

(5.) Of these Four sorts of Deans, the first, as was said, has a Chapter,
being an Ecclesiastical Governor Secular over the Canons and Prebendaries in
the Cathedral Church, as the Dean of Canterbury, St. Paul's, etc. The Patronge
of all which Deanaries is in the Crown, and does not belong to any Subject.
Also, the new Deanaries (as was formerly hinted) which were translated from
Priories and Covents, or were after the dissolution of Abbeys and Monasteries
Founded by King H. 8. or other Kings of this Realm are now Donative, and the
Deans thereof are by the Kings Letters Patents Installed: but the Ancient Deans
of Chapters are (as Bishops) by a Conge d'Eslire, and are after Confirmed by
the Bishop.

(6.) The Dean end Chapter of Canterbury are, during a Vacancy of that
Archbishopric, Guardians of the Spiritualties, to whom the Stat. of 25 H. 8.
of Dispensations, gives power of Dispensation when that See is vacant Cab. and
Glovers Cise verse. the Bishop of Coventry and L^^field. Hob. Rep.
The Dean and Chapter of any Cathedral make a Corporation Spiritual, and at the
Common Law challenges are allowed where the Issue concerns a Corporation, and
they to make the Panel, or where any of their Body are to go on the Jury, or
any of kin unto them, though the Body Corporate be not directly a party to the
Suit: A Dean and Chapter bringing an Assize, a Juror was challenged, because he
was Brother to one of the Prcbendaries Vid. (...) E. 4 (...) 18. 21 (...).
and the challenge for that reason allowed Day's Case verse. Savage. Hob. Rep.
If a Dean take an Obligation to him and his Successors, it goes to his
Executors; which holds true also as to a Bishop, Parson, Vicar, etc. Arundel's
Case. Hob. Rep.


(7.) A Deanary consists of Two parts, viz. Officium and Beneficium; The
Officium has two parts, the one is Dignity and Jurisdiction, the other is
Administration: But some Promotions are mere Administrations, as Prebends and
Parsons, which are not Dignisies, because they have not Jurisdiction, 11 H. 4.
But an Archdeacon has a Dignity, because he has a Jurisdiction Case Evans and
Ascough. Latch. Rep.
So has a Dean, to whom Anciently (according to Lindwood) the Canons made
their Confessions, Et quod Canonici quead euram animarum subsunt Decano. Lindw.
de Poenit. c. 1. gloss. in verb. vel Decano, and in ver. Decanum and Capitulum.
Who ought to visit his Chapter, 5. E. 3. 7. and if a Probend be made a Dean,
the Prebendary is void by Cossion, 5 E. 2. F. Brieff. 800. Also a Dean may make
a Substitute as to the matters of his Jurisdiction, as for Corrections, or
Visitations; but not as for the other part, viz. the Administration: for which
reason he cannot make a Deputy to Confirm Leases, and the like Dict. Case.
Evans and Ascough
So that in a Deanary Cathedral there seems to be, (1) Dignity and
Jurisdiction, (2.) Office and Administration, (3.) the Behefit or Profits
thereof; which seems very clear, for that a Parson, a Prebend, or the like,
has not Dignity, but only the Office or Administration, with the Profits; but
a Dean, who has Administration as others, has also Jurisdiction and Dignity.
The Law is also the same as to an Archdeacon, 11 H. 4. 40. 7 H. 6. 27. 27 H. 6.
5. And a Writ brought against a Dean is good and sufficient without his proper
Name, because it is of it self a Name of Dignity: and that a Deanary is a
Dignity, appears by 5 E. 3. 9. Breve 800. as aforesaid; and it is an Office
also, for that in Ancient times, a Dean took the Confessions of his Prebends,
as was likewise hinted before. Also a Dean may by his Dignity make a Deputy to
correct, etc. but not as to his Judicial Office, as to Confirm Leases, and the
like Case Evans verse. Ase. in primo loca Latch. Rep.
By the Canon Law, he that is the Archipresbyter, is also called Dean, scil.
Presbyterorum vel Ecclesiae. Cap. ad. haec, De Offic. Archidiac. Cano.
innovamus, 60. Distinct. And because the Dean of a Church (understand it of the
Roman Church) in locum Archipresbyteri subrogatus est. Rotae Decis. 451. in
novis -- and rursum, in Decis. 443. The Archipresbyter was so called, because
he was in some certain matters and causes set or appointed over the Priests or
Presbyters, and such as were of the Sacerdotal Office, specially in the absence
of the Bishop; Cap. 1. and 2. De Offic, Archipresb. The Dean is such a Dignity,
that the Canon Law styles him, honorabiliorem partem Capituli; Cap. post
Electionem. c. 7. de Concess. Praebend. c. cum inter ca. 18. and ibi Panor. and
gloss. de Elect. And in a large sense a Dean may be said to be the chief of any
that are of the same state and order; Gloss. in rubr. de Decanis, lib. 12. C.
and ibi Alceat. and so the Canons of the Church of Constantinople, tanquam
Digniores, were by Honorius and Theodosius called Decani: L. non plures 4. de
Sacros. Eccles. lib. 1. C. tit. 5. and the more honorable inter Rotae
Auditores, is the Dean of the Pope's Chapel, propter Ministerium, quod vocatur
Mithrae. Lud. Gomes. in proaem. ad Reg. Cancel. de Prothonotariis. The truth
is, the Canon Law in express terms says, that Deconatus, or a Deanary, est
Nomen speciale Dignitatis: Cap. cum illis vero,. illis de Praebend. in 6. that
is, when it refers to praeeminency in any Church Cathedral or Collegiate;
Gemin. Cons. 131. nu. 5. ver. expressit. de Deconatu. For as to Deans Rural, it
is otherwise: Cap. licet Canon. de Elect. in 6. the Dignity, qua talis,
belonging properly to the other, viz. Decano Capituli, who is Caput principale
ipsius; yet under the notion or appellation of a Chapter, the Dean thereof is
not comprehended, unless he be specially mentioned or nominated: Rebuff. in
Tract. nominat. q. 8. nu. 33. and Barbos in 3 Decret. c. post Electionem. de
Concess. Praebend. nu. 3.

(8.) Chapter, Capitulum, so termed by the Canonists, not properly, but
metaphoricaily, quasi a Little head, or a kind of Head, not only to rule and
govern the Diocese in the Vacation of the Bishopric, but also when the Sea is
full to assist the Bishop as a Council, by way of Advice in matters pertaining
to the Diocese: Vid. Panor. in cap. Capitulum, extra de Rescript. The Chapter
consisting of a Dean, Canons, and Prebends, is Clericorum Congregatio sub uno
Decano in Ecclesia Cathedrali; or it signifies, Congregationem Clericorum in
Ecclesia Cathedrali, Conventuali, Regulari, vel Collegiata. Of these Chapters
some are Ancient, some New; the New are those which were founded or translated
by King Henry the Eighth in the places of Abbots and Covents, or Priors and
Covents: Or those which are annexed unto new Bishoprics founded by H. 8. as
were Bristol, Chester, and Oxford. This word Capitulum, or Chapter, has (in
addition to the Premises) other significations in Lindwoods Provincials, where
he speaks de Capitulis Ruralibus, of Chapters Rural, Lindw. tit. de Constit.
cap. quia incontinentiae, gloss. verb. Capitulis Ruralibus; and there acquaints
us with no less than six significations of this word. Sometimes (says he) it is
taken for the place, in quo fiunt Communes tractatus Collegiatorum. Sometimes
it is taken for the place, In quo fiunt Disciplinae delinquentium: Cap.
Reprehensibilis in fi. Extr. de Appell. Sometimes it is taken pro Decretali vel
abia certa distinctione Sacrae Scripturae: Cap. cum supr. Extr. de Sepult.
Sometimes it is taken, pro Capitulis Ruralibus, as aforesaid, that is, when in
Lecis minus insignibus, viz. in Rure Constitutis, known by the name of
Conventus in Otho's Constitutions: Cap. Sacramenta, ad finem, ver. Conventib.
Sometimes it is taken for a Collection of persons, adinvicem de his quae eis
incumbunt in Locis ad hoc assignatis tractantium; and being taken in this
sense, it may be understood sometimes for persons Congregated in a Metropolitan
or Cathedral Church, and sometimes for persons congregated in a Church
Conventual, Regular or Collegiate: and each of these last may in a large sense
be said to be a Collegiate Church, according to the description thereof, viz.
That Ecclesia Collegiata est Collectio hominum simul viventium; but to speak
properly, that is Capitulum, which is respectis Ecclesiae Cathedralis: That
Conventus, which is respectu Ecclesiae Regularis: and that Collegium, which is
respectu Ecclesiae Inferioris, ubi est Collectio viventium in Communi. And
sometimes Capitulum is taken for a Collection of many persons, not living in
Common, sed ob tracatus Communes inter se habendos, ad aliquem locum
Constuentium; according to which, a convening together of many Rectors, Vicars,
and other Ecclesiastical persons, ob tractatus communes inter se habendos,
etiam dicitur Capitulum Lindw. ubi supra.
Panormitan understands it, pro Collectione seu pro Collegio ipsorum
Canonicorum; but withal says, it has diverse significations, all which he
comprizes in this one Verse, Distinguit, minuit, Locat, and Collectio fertur.
Distinguit, when one Subject is distinguished from another in any Tract or
Treatise: Minuit, when it stands diminutively, Capitulum, quasi parvum Caput,
as aforesaid, understand it secundum modum: Locat, when it is taken for the
Place it self where the Canons are met or convened: Collectio, and so it is
taken pro ipso Collegio, as aforesaid; Panorm. de Rescript. Extr. c. Capitum.
Whereof there are three inseparable signs, as one Common Seal, one Common Stock
or Treasure, and one Common Head or Rector.

(9.) By the Canon Law the words, Capitulum, Conventus, Coetus, and Concilium,
are as it were Synonymous; but the terms, Capitulum and Conventus, are
frequently used Promiscuously: But to speak properly according to that Law,
Conventus is said to be Congregatio Ecclesiae Regularis; and Capitulum or a
Chapter is said to be Congregatio Ecclesiae Secularis Gloss. ib.
The word [ Chapter] taken (as here) in a proper Canon-sense, is a name
Collective, having a Plural signification; yet in reference to different
things, may be accommodated as well to the Singular as the Plural.

(10.) A Chapter Ecclesiae Cathedralis, consists of persons Ecclesiastical,
Canons and Prebendaries, whereof the Dean is chief, all subordinate to the
Bishop, to whom they are as Assistants in matters relating to the Church, for
the better ordering and disposing the things thereof, and for Confirmation of
such Leases of the Temporalties and Offices relating to the Bishopric, as the
Bishop from time to time shall happen to make Co. 3. par. Case of the D. and
Chapter of Norwich.
It seems that at the Common Law, by the Gift or Grant of Lands to a Dean and
Chapter (being a Corporation Aggregate) the Inheritance or Fee-simple may pass
to them without the word [ Successors,] because in Construction of Law such
Body Politic is said never to die Hugh's Pars. Law. cap. 3.
This must be understood only in reference to their taking of the thing
granted, in their Politic, not Natural Capacity.

(11.) One Bishop may possibly have two Chapters, and that by Union or
Consolidation, as in the Bishop of Waterford's Case, who had the Bishopric of
Lismore and the Chapter thereof united to that of Waterford: In which Case
although the Chapter of Lismore, only Confirmed the Grants of Lands belonging
to Lismore, and the Chapter of Waterford only confirmed the Grants of Lands
belonging to the Bishopric of Waterford; yet because the Union there was not
extant, the Judges held the Confirmation in manner aforesaid to be good; but
otherwise all the Judges held, that both Chapters ought to have Confirmed Co.
12. 71. a. b. Dyer. 282. p. 26. Sr. Sim. Degg's Law, cap. 5. Pars. Counselor.
par. 1. c. 10.
For it seems if a Bishop has two Chapters, both must Confirm his Leases Temp.
R, ^. Fitz. tit. Grnats 104. Hugh's Pars.


(12.) A Parsonage in the Diocese of W. is annexed to a Prebend in S. the
Prebend makes a Lease for years, which is Confirmed by the Bishop, and Dean and
Chapter of S. It was held by the Court to be good, without the Confirmation of
the Bishop of W. in whose Diocese it is. More's Rep.
In Eyre's Case it was resolved, That Chapters are not of a capacity to take by
Purchase or Gift without the Dean, who is their Head. And in the Case of
Eaton-Colledge, where a Lease was made by the Dean and Chapter of the College
of Eaton, whereas they were incorporated by the Name of the Dean and Chapter of
the College of St. 3 and 4 Ma. Eaton-Colledg. Case. More ibid.
Mary's of Eaton; Resolved, that the Lease was void for the Misnosiner. Yet,
whereas the Dean and Canons of Windsor were Incorporated by Act of Parliament,
by the Name of the Dean and Canons of the Kings Free-Chappel of his Castle of
Windsor, and they made a Lease by the Name of the Dean and Canons of the Kings
Majesty's Free-Chappel of the Castle of Windsor, Pasch. 6 Eliz. More ibid.
in the County of Berks: Resolved, the Lease was good; For although the King in
the Act of Parliament calls it his Castle, yet when another speaks of it, it is
more apt to call it the Castle, and therefore such variance shall not avoid the
Lease. Likewise, whereas Christs-Church in Oxon is incorporated by the Name of
Dean and Chapter Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi de Oxon: The Lord North's Case.
Mores Rep.
and they made a Lease by the Name of Dean and Chapter Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Christi in Academia de Oxon; and the Liberties de Academia did extend further
than the Liberties of the City; yet it was adjudged a good Lease, because the
substance of the Corporation was inserted in the words of the Lease.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Archdeacons.
1. What an Archdeacon is; his Office and Jurisdiction. 2. The several kinds of
Archdeaconries; and how many in England. 3. Whence the Archdeacons power is
derived, and whether a Quare Impedit does lie of it or not? 4. In what case
Action lies against an Archdeacon, for refusing to give Induction to a Clerk
Instituted by the Bishop. 5. Archdeaconry not comprised under the notion of a
Benefice with Cure of Souls. 6. Process of Quorum Nomina prohibited by the
Canon to be issued by any Archdeacon. 7. How often an Archdeacon may have his
Visitation; and what his Office or Power therein is. 8. How a person ought to
be qualified, that may be an Archdeacon: It is an Ecclesiastical Dignity. 9.
Cardinal Otho's Constitution touching the Archdeacons government in his
Visitations. 10. How Archdeacons are distinguished at the Canon Law. 11.
Conformity thereto in the practice of the Common Law. 12. A Case at Common Law,
touching a Lease for years of a Glebe made by an Archdeacon. 13. The same Case
somewhat otherwise reported. 14, Whether a Quare Impedit lies of an
Archdeaconry.
(1.) ARCHDEACON, Philip, a Fifth Son of Lewis the Gress, K. of France,
disdained not to be an Archdeacon in (...) Paul. AEm^l. Tilius.
from [ archos] Princeps or Chief, and Diaconos, Deacon, that is, the first or
chief of the Deacons: Sum. Host. de Offic. Archid. etc. 1. de Scrut. in Ord.
fac. being (according to the Canon Law) such, as has obtained a Dignity in a
Cathedral Church, to have the Priority among the Deacons, and first in
Jurisdiction next after the Bishop; Sum. Host. ibid. For as of Common Right all
Ecclesiastical matters within the Diocese appertain to the cognizance of the
Bishop, so under him to the Archdeacon, excepting only such things as by Law
are specially prohibited Sum. ibid.
. And therefore is said to be dignified with this Title, for that in many
things he does supply the room of the Bishop, to whom he is in precedence to
others subservient, and unto whom his service chiefly relates Can. Legi^^. 93.
Did.
Every Bishop (be it Archbishop or other) has under him an Archdeacon for the
better discharge of his Cure. He has Jurisdiction of Common right, which may
vary according to Circumstances and the Custom of the place; There are 60.
Archdeacons in England.
and therefore in some cases it is Jurisdictio Ordinaria, in others it is
Delegata. And although regularly (as such) he does not exercise any
Jurisdiction within the Church it self, yet it cannot be denied but that an
Archdeaconry is an Ecclesiastical Dignity: Fran. de Aret. in Council. 23. His
Office and Jurisdiction by the Canon Law is of a far larger extent, than is now
practicable with us, otherwise we should not there find him so frequently
styled Oculus Episcopi, for that he is by the very Law the Bishops Vicar in
several respects, and therefore may (where the Bishop himself conveniently
cannot) keep the Triennial Visitations, or not oftener than once a year, save
where emergent occasions do require it oftener. He has also under the Bishop
the power of Examination of Clerks to be Ordained, as also of Institution and
Induction; likewise of Excommunication, Injunction of Penance, Suspension,
Correction, Dispensations of hearing, determining and reconciling of
Differences among the Clergy, Clergy, from (...), Portio, they being in a
peculiar sense, a^ the Lords Portion.
as also of enquiring into, inspecting, and reforming Abuses and Irregularities
of the Clergy, with a power over the Subdeacons, and a charge of the Parochial
Churches within the Diocese. In a word, (according to the practice of, and the
latitude given by the Canon Law) to supply the Bishops room, and as the words
of that Law are, in omnibus vicem Episcopi gerere. Synt. jur. l. 15. cap. 20.
de Archidiacono.

(2.) The Diocesses within this Realm of England are divided into several
Archdeaconries, they being more or less in a Diocese according to the extent
thereof 17 Ed. 3. 23. Coo. par. 5 Cawdry's Case.
respectively, and in all amounting to the number of Threescore: And they
divided again into Deanaries, which also are subdivided into Parishes, Towns,
and Hamlets. Of these Archdeaconries some are by Prescription, some by Law 8 H.
6. 3. per Chauntr^^ The Archdeaconry ^^ Richmond i^ by, Prescription.
, and some by Covenant. Which difference has this Operation in Law, That the
Jurisdiction of an Archdeaconry by Prescription, or de jure, is exclusive to
the Jurisdiction of the Bishop, insomuch that a Prohibition lies for such
Archdeacon against the Bishop, if he intermeddle Juridically with any matters
or things within such Archdeaconries: Otherwise it is where the Archdearonry is
only by Contract or Covenant made between the Bishop and the Archdeacon; for in
that case, if the Bishop so intermeddle within the Jurisdiction of such
Archdeacon, or hold Plea within the same, he can have but an Action of Covenant
against the Bishop, and no Prohibition lies in that case (...) 2^. Jac. B. R
Castrell and Jones Case.
. The Cognizance which the Archdeacon has, is of matters merely
Ecclesiastical, to which end he or his Commissary may hold his Court, where,
and in what places the Archdeacon either by Prescription or Composition has
Jurisdiction in Spiritual Causes within his Archdeaconry; and from him the
Appeal is to the Diocesan 24 H. 8. c. 11. Co. Inst. par. 4. cap. 74.
.

(3.) An Archdeaconryship being only matter of Function, and (as supposed) not
properly Local, nor any Indenture made of it, it has been some question
heretofore, whether a Quare Impedit does lie of it, or not? But it was held in
the Affirmative, for that an Archdeacon has Locum in choro Tim. 31 Eliz. C. B.
Smallwood verse. Bishop of Lichfield. Leon. Rep.
. The power of an Archdeacon was derived from the Bishop, and to him he is
subordinate: To which purpose the opinion of the Court in Hutton's Case upon a
Quare Impedit was, That if a Suit be before an Archdeacon, whereof by the
Statute of 23 H. 8. the Ordinary may license the Suit to a higher Court; that
the Archdeacon cannot in such case balk his Ordinary, and send the Cause
immediately into the Arches: for he has no power to give a Court, but to remit
his own Court, and to leave it to the next; for since his power was derived
from the Bishop to whom he is subordinate, he must yield it to him of whom he
received it; and it was said in that Case, that so it had been ruled heretofore
Sir Timothy Hutton's Case C. B. Hob. Rep.
.

(4.) If after the Clerk has been presented by the Patron, and Admitted and
Instituted by the Bishop, the Archdeacon shall refuse to Induct him into the
Benefice, an Action upon the Case lies for the Clerk against the Archdeacon
Pasch. 23 Eliz. C. B. Adjudg. Godb. 23. vid. F N. B. 47. 26 H. 8. 3. by
Knightly.
. He has power to keep a Court, which is called the Court of the Archdeacon,
or his Commissary; And this Court is to be holden where and in what places the
Archdeacon either by Prescription or Composition has Jurisdiction in Spiritual
Causes within his Archdeaconry. And from him the Appeal is to the Diocesan.

(5.) Although by the Canon Law, if one having a Benefice with Cure of Souls
accepts an Archdeaconry, the Archdeaconry is void; yet it is conceived, that
upon the Stat. of 21 H. 8. 13. the Law is qualified in that point by reason of
a Proviso there, viz. Provided that no Deanary, Archdeaconry, etc. be taken or
comprehended under the Name of a Benefice, having Cure of Souls, in any Article
above-specified; and to this Opinion did Wray and the other Justices incline in
Vnderhill's Case Pasch. 31 Eliz. B. R. Underhill and Savage's Case. Leon. Rep.
. And indeed an Archdeaconry, by the express Letter of that Statute, is exempt
from being comprehended under the name of a Benefice with Cure; for the words
are, That no Deanary, Archdeaconry, Chancellorship, Treasurership, Chantership,
or Prebend in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, nor Parsonage that has a
Vicar endowed, nor any Benefice perpetually Appropriate, shall be taken or
comprehended under the name of a Benefice having Cure of Souls St. 21 H. 8. 13.
.

(6.) By the Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Canons of the Church, of England,
no Archdeacon (nor indeed any other Ecclesiastical Judge) may suffer any
general Process of Quorum Nomina to issue out of his Court: Except the Names of
those to be cited be first expressly entered by the Register or his Deputy under
such Process, and both Process and Names first subscribed by such Archdeacon,
or other Ecclesiastical Judge, or his Deputy, with his Seal thereto affixed.
And in places where both the Bishop and Archdeacon do by Prescription or
Composition visit at several times in one and the same year, the Archdeacon or
his Official, shall within one month next after the Visitation ended that year,
and the Presentiments received, certify under his hand and Seal to the Bishop
or his Chancellor, the Names and Crimes of all such as are presented in his
said Visitation, to the end the Chancellor may not Convent the same person for
the same Crime, for which he is presented to the Archdeacon; which course the
Chancellor is in like manner to observe, in reference to the Archdeacon, after
the Bishops Visitation ended. The which was Ordained, to prevent the
Prosecution of the same party for the same fault in diverse Ecclesiastical
Courts Can. 120, 121.
. And in cases of remitting Causes from the Inferior Judge, the Archdeacon
cannot remit the Cause to the Archbishop; but he must remit it to his Bishop,
and he to the Archbishop. Trin. 11 Jac.

(7.) The Archdeacon within the Jurisdiction of his Archdeaconry may by virtue
of his Office have his Visitation, if he so please or need shall require, once
every year; but of necessity he is to have his Triennial Visitation: Lindw. de
Offic. Archid. c. 1. verb. Visitatione gloss. But whether of Common right and
by the Jus Commune the Archdeacon may Visit within the Jurisdiction of his
Archdeaconry is some question, yet resolved by distinguishing whether the
Visitation be made per modum Serutationis simplicis by the Archdeacon, as the
Bishops Vicar, and so he may Visit of Common Right: but if in such Enquiries he
take upon him nomine suo proprio to correct Faults, other than such small ones
as wherein Custom may warrant him; in such case it is held, that he has not
power of Visitation de jure communi: Lindw. ibid. And in all such things as
belong to his Visitation he has Jurisdiction, and by Custom over Lay-persons
as well as over the Clergy: It seems therefore he may do all such things, as
without the doing and dispatch whereof his Jurisdiction could not clearly
appear; L. cui Jurisdictio ff. de Jurisd. om. Jud. and therefore wherever he
may take cognizance of a matter, there he may also give sentence and condemn;
Extr. de Cause. Poss. and propr. c. cum Super. and de Offic. Deleg. c. ex
Literis. which is supposed to hold true by Custom, and inasmuch as the
cognizance and reformation of such matters do belong to the Ecclesiastical
Court; whence it is that an Archdeacon may impose a penalty on Laymen for the
not repairing their Parish Church within his Jurisdiction; Extr. eod. c. ult.
and Extr. de Offic. Ord. c. 1. and Lindw. ubi supr. verb. Imperitiam. For it is
expressly enjoined and ordained, That Archdeacons and their Officials, shall at
their Visitation of Churches, take the condition of the Fabric thereof into
special consideration, specially of the Chancel; and in case there be need of
Reparations, shall set or fix a time within which such Reparations shall be
finished, which time is likewise to be set under a certain penalty: Lindw. de
Offic. Archidiac. c. Archidiaconi.

(8.) By the Canon Law a man cannot be an Archdeacon under the age of 25 years;
Can. Nullus in propositum, 60 Did. And by the Council of Trent he ought to be
a Licentiate in Law or Divinity; Cons. Trid. 8. Cessio de Reform. general. Can.
12. They are called the Chief of the Deacons; C. 1. de Scrutin. in Ord.
faciend. in whom there is an Ecclesiastical Dignity inherent jure Communi: And
in some places they have this Dignity sine Officio; for Innocentius observes,
That in Ecclesia Parmensi Archidiaconus nullum exercet Officium, and
nihilominus dignitatem habet: Innocent. in c. de multa de Praebend. But
regularly, according to the Canon Law, Archdeacons as to their Dignity, Office,
and Degree are to be reputed according to the Law, Usage, and Custom of their
own Church and Chapter; Hostiens. Sum. de Offic. Archid. The Archdeacon is
Oculus Episcopi, and ipso jure his Vicar in Visitations, Corrections, and
Dispensations in matters Ecclesiastical within his Jurisdiction, he has power
of reforming the Clergy, of examining and presenting to the Bishop such as are
to be Ordained, and of putting into possession such as are Presented,
Instituted and Inducted into Ecclesiastical Benefices.

(9.) Cardinal Otho, in his Canon de Archidiaconis, has Ordained, That all
Archdeacons do prudently and faithfully visit the Churches within their
respective Archdeaconries, as touching the Sacred Vessels and Vestments
thereof, and generally to enquire into the Temporalties and Spiritualties
belonging to the same, and that they endeavor to amend what they find amiss:
Also, that they grieve not the Churches with superfluous charges or expenses,
but require only moderate procurations in their Visitations; wherein they may
not presume to receive money of any when Crimes are to be corrected or
punished, nor Sentence any unjustly, on purpose to extort money from them, on
pain of double the Sum to pious uses at the discretion of the Bishop, besides
other Ecclesiastical punishment. Constit. Othonis, de Archdiaconis.

(10.) The Canon Law does distinguish of Archdeacons; the whole Title
throughout [ De Offic. Archidiac.] regularly speaks of an Archdeacon General,
who has not any Archdeaconry distinctly limited, Sed tanquam Vicarius fungitur
vice Episcopi Vniversaliter, and does represent the Bishop: Extra. de Consue.
non putamus. Otherwise it is in him who has a distinct Limitation of his
Archdeaconry, for then he has a Jurisdiction separate from the Bishop, which,
where it is by Custom, may be prescribed: Gloss. in ver. Visitent. dict.
Constable. Otho. Consonant to this seems that difference which the Judges took in
the Case between Chiverton and Trudgeon, wherein they held and agreed, That
there is a Jurisdiction of one Archdeacon, and there is the Jurisdiction of
another, which is but a peculiar Jurisdiction; for the Archdeacon is an Officer
who has a Court of his own, in which he has the Probat of Testaments de jure:
And Doderidge Justice said, That he is a principal Officer belonging to the
Bishop, and est quasi Oculus Episcopi; but otherwise it is of one who has but
a special Jurisdiction, as the Archdeacon of Richmond has to make
Institutions; and so 21 H. 6. 23. the Dean of Paul's in that case has special
Authority in St. Panchridge. Hill. 17 Jac. B. R. Case Chiverton and Trudgeon:
Roll. Rep.

(11.) In the Case between Gastrell and Jones, it was said by Ley Chief
Justice, That it is to be considered, what Authority the Archdeacon has in his
own nature, as such, and what power he may have by Prescription, or otherwise:
The Archdeacon is a Minister subordinate to the Bishop, viz. Deputy and Vicar,
or an Officer under him, for, in case of Induction, the Bishops Warrant is
necessary to empower him to give the same; He has also Judicial power, but it
is not exclusive to the Episcopal Authority, but the Bishop is his Superior:
Both are Judges, but the one subordinate to the other, etc. And if Sentence be
given in the Archdeacons Court, Q
the Appeal thence shall not be in the Bishops Court, but in the Archbishops:
And if a man dies Intestate, having goods within the Archdeacons Jurisdiction,
and other Goods within the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, Q.
the Archbishop (as he said) shall commit the Administration to the Archdeacon.

(12.) The Archdeacon of H. having the Parsonage of A. appropriate to it, Let
the Land parcel of his Glebe for fifty years, in Anno 12 Eliz. The Bishop of E.
Patron of the Archdeaconry, and the Dean and Chapter confirm it; The Archdeacon
dies, another is Collated to the Archdeaconry. It was the Opinion of the
Justices in this Case, first, That the Confirmation by the Bishop was not void,
for that it was but an Assent only to the Lease of the Possession of the
Archdeaconry, and not of the Bishop, and therefore not within the Statute of 1
Eliz. The second Point was, Whether this Lease was void by the Statute of 13
Eliz. Quaere, for not Resolved. Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz. B. R. Sir Edw. Denny and
Eakenstall 's Case. Cro. par. 1.

(13.) The same Case Reported by More; An Archdeacon having a Parsonage
appertaining to his Archdeaconry before the Statute of 13 Eliz. made a Lease
for forty years of the Parsonage, which was Confirmed after the Statute;
adjudged the Lease and Confirmation both good. Arkingsall, or Eakenstall, and
Denny's Case. More's Rep.

(14.) A Quare Impedit was brought by the Executors of J. S. for not suffering
them to Present to the Archdeaconry of D. which became void in the life of the
Testator, and the Writ and Count both supposed a disturbance to the Testator in
his life, In nunc retardationem Executionis Testamenti praedict. In this Case
it was Resolved (1.) That a Quare Impedit did lie of an Archdeaconry. (2.) That
the Writ as brought should abate, because it was in nunc retardationem, which
cannot be of a Disturbance in the life of the Testator. But it was agreed, that
the Executors might have a special Action upon the Case for their Disturbance.
Trin. 31 Eliz. B. R. Smalwood and the Bishop of Coventry and Marshes Case. Cro.
par. 1.

CHAP. IX.
Of Procurations, Synodals, and Pentecostals.
1. Procuration, what; whence so called; and how paid. 2. Whether Procurations
be only due ratione Visitationis. 3. Procurations Anciently paid in
Victualibus, and not in Money; how paid to Archdeacons in Lindwoods time. 4.
Whether Procurations may be payable by Custom to Archdeacons sine Visitatione?
5. Archdeacons to Visit personally; if otherwise, then how the Procurations are
payable. 6. Not above one Procuration to be paid; how that is to be understood.
7. The Number of the Visitor's Attendants by the Council of Lateran in
reference to Procurations; and how many an Archdeacon may have by the Canon. 8.
Synodals, the threefold signification of that word. 9. The Synodal anciently
called Cathedraticum and Synodaticum: what the Cathedraticum was, why so
called; the Original thereof, and how it differs from Procuration. 10.
Pentecostal, what it is; when, by, and to whom payable; the probable Original
thereof. 11. A remarkeble Case relating to this Subject, that was Resolved and
Adjudged in Ireland.
(1.) THe Ordinary at his Visitation may by the Canon require his Synodals or
Procurations, Extr. de Cens. c. Procurationes; that is, a certain Cense or
Tribute in money paid to the Bishop or Archdeacon by the inferior Clergy at
Easter-Visitation; called Synodale or Synodaticum, quia in Synodo frequentius
dabatur. So that these Procurations are no other than certain sums of money
which the Parochial Clergy do annually pay to the Ordinary or Archdeacon
ratione Visitationis. Anciently they were paid in provisions of Victuals
necessary for the Visitor and his Attendants, now converted into money instead
thereof: So that this Procuratio is by Vallensis aptly defined, Vallens.
Paratis, de Censib.. 3.
Necessariorum sumptuum Exhibitio, quae, ratione Visitationis, debetur ab
Ecclesia vel Monasterio ei cui ex officio incumbit jus and onus Visitandi, sive
is sit Episcopus, sive Archidiaconus, sive Decanus, sive Legatus summi
Pontificis. An. 1290. M. quod die Mercurii in Festo Sanct. Lucae Evang. Dominus
Episcopus coepit Procurationem in Cibis and Potibus apud Bordesley, and
pernoctavit ibidem Giss. fo. 226. b. vid. Nome. Lex, ver. Procurat.
. Whence the word Procuration is supposed to have its derivation, even from the
duty incumbent on the Visited in Procuring of necessary Accommodations for the
Visitor and his Attendants as aforesaid; which seems the more probable by what
Duarenus says, Hoc autem munus ideo Procuratio vocatur, quia Ecclesiae
Episcopum Procurant, id est, Curant, alunt, ac tuentur.

(2.) It has at times been smartly controverted, Whether Procurations be due
only ratione Visitationis, or whether the payment thereof may legally be
enforced without the Act of Visiting, and not exclusively to Archdeacons in the
years of Episcopal Visitations? For if so, then the foresaid description which
Vallensis makes thereof, is not adequate enough to the nature of the thing; of
which opinion grounded on solid Arguments, is the Learned Author of the
Historical Discourse on this Subject Stephens de Procurat. Edit. 1661.
.

(3.) Anciently (as aforesaid) these Visitation-Procurations, or Exhibitio
necessariorum sumptuum, as Vallensis calls it, was no other than Victuals: For
by the Council of Lateran (not the great General Council under Innoc. 3.) but
that under Alex. 3. above thirty years before, Extr. de Censib. c. cum
Apostolus.
about An. 1180. Visitors are so directed to proceed in the execution of their
Visitations, as that Sumptuosas Epulas non quaerant, sed cum gratiarum action
recipiant quod honest and competenter illis fuerit ministratum. That these
Procurations were originally paid in Victualibus, appears by several
Constitutions of the Canon Law. Extr. de Censib. c. cum Apostolus, and de
Censib. c. Romana,. Procurationes. Consuetudo tamen (says Lindwoods Gloss)
operatur in pluribus locis, ut Procuratio hujusmodi sumatur in pecunia; quae
Consuetudo been potest procedere, ut sumatur a Volentibus sic in pecunia
Solvere, non autem a Nolentibus. Extr. Benedict. 12. etc. Foelicis, and gl.
Lindw. ubi supr. But that was only where the Custom prevailed, the Canon
anciently being peremptory to the contrary; for in the Sext. there is a
Constitution made by Innoc. 4. (who became Pope An. 1243.) and afterward
ratified by a General Council at Lions under Greg. 10. about An. 1273.
forbidding ( sub poena Maledictionis aeternae) the taking of money in lieu of
Procurations (vel a Volentibus sic solvere) C. 1.. Procurationes, etc. exigit.
eod. in sexto, and ibi Gloss. in casu; and the ordinary penalty practiced in
this case against Visitors of any rank inferior to Patriarchs, Archbishops, or
Bishops, that should presume to receive Procurations otherwise than in
Victualibus, was suspension ab officio and beneficio. And this way of paying
Procurations ex antiquo, continued till the time of Boniface 8. who succeeding
in the Papacy about twenty two years after Gregory, made a Constitution about
the year 1295, That it should be lawful to any Visitor ( Volentibus Visitatis,
not otherwise) vice Victualium to receive, not to exact, Money toward the
defraying of their Visitation-Charge. Gloss. in ver. dispendia, c. Foelicis,
eod. in sexto: Which by Benedict. 12. in the second year of his Popedom, about
1337. was by a Canon or Constitution limited to a certain sum, according to the
quality of the Visitor, and the condition of the Visited, which may take place,
where it is not otherwise limited by Custom; the Procurations of Archdeacons
being in Lindwood's time, as he informs us, (which was in Henry the Fifths
Reign, above two hundred years since) the sum of seven shillings six pence,
according to the number of his Attendants, viz. twelve pence to each man, and
eighteen pence to the Archdeacon himself, which (comparing the value of Money
Then with the times Now) was considerable.

(4.) The Question is not, whether Procurations are due Ratione Visitationis;
but whether they are only due Ratione Visitationis, and not otherwise? It is
supposed that they are and may be due otherwise than Ratione Visitationis, Vid.
Hist. Disc. of Procurationt* p. 25, 26.
and that therefore Archdeacons may receive Procurations in the L. Bishop's
Triennials, and yet Visit not; for Custom seems to lay a just claim to this
Ecclesiastical payment of Procurations sine Visitatione, where the Custom is
Rationabilis and Legitime praescripta. Time was, when Archdeacons had jus
Visitandi quolibet anno, and so accordingly did Visit, and ea ratione received
Procurations. Lindw. de Offic. Archid. c. 1. gl. in ver. Visitation. and Extr.
de Offic. Archid. c. Mandamus, gl. in ver. saepius Visitare. And sometimes they
Visit not, as in the Episcopal Triennials, yet by the Custom do and may
receive their Procurations; P. ubi supr, etc.
understand this only of some, not all Archdeacons.

(5.) The Canonists define Procuration to be an Exhibition sumptum
Necessariorum paid to the Prelates, qui Dioeceses peragrando Ecclesias
subjectas Visitant. And it is a Rule in the Canon Law, Quod nulla est adversus
Procurationem praescriptio. Inst. Ju. Can. l. 2. de Censib. And by the same Law
the Archdeacon is to go personally to the place that is to be Visited, and
ought not for that purpose to send another; which if he does not so do, he is
not to receive in denariis the Procurations due ratione Visitationis. Extr. de
Cens. c. Procurationes. Notwithstanding the person whom he Commissionates for
that purpose Nomine suo, shall receive the Procurations for himself and his
Attendants in Victualibus. Ar. ad hoc de Offic. Ord. c. si Episcopus, l. 7. and
de Censib. c. 1. etc. Foelicis, de Cens. Lindw. glo. de Offic. Archid. c. ut
Archidiaconi, ver. videant. These Procurations are called also Proxies, Cenag.
and Pentecostal. per. an. 64 l. 10 s. ita Archidiaconatus Glouc. valet clare in
Proxis Ex Record. Primit. 26 H. 8. vid. Dyer fo. 273. b. and Claus. Ro^. 31 E.
1. M. 15. dors. vid. Nomo. Lexicon, ubi supr.
, which is a profit of Jurisdiction. Archidiaconis inhibemus ne aliquo modo
Procurationes recipiant sine Causa Rationabili, nisi illo die quo personaliter
Visitant. Provin. Constit. de Offic. Archid.

(6.) The Ordinary may not receive above one Procuration, that is, he may not
of the same Church exact one Procuration from the Rector, another from the
Vicar; if he has the Procuration in Victualibus of the Rector, he ought to
receive nothing of the Vicar, nec e contra; for one Procuration of one Church
for one day is held sufficient: dict. c. Foelicis, de Censib. Nor do the Canons
allow above one Procuration, in case there be more Churches than one Visited in
one and the same day; the Reason whereof in Law, because the Visitation is the
Principal, the Procuration is but the Accessory, and the Visitation only of one
day ought not to have the Procurations of more, nor ought the Accessory to
exceed the Principal. Lindw. ibid. de Censib. c. quamvis, and gl. ib. ver.
Canones. Nor ought there to be paid above one Procuration for the Mother Church
and the Chapel thereto belonging, when they are Visited. Can. ibid. ver. una
Ecclesia. Yet there are Canonists of very good Authority, as Andraeas and
others, who holding the contrary, do positively assert, That every Chapel
dependent (if Peopled and of ability) shall pay its own proper Procuration at
times of the Ordinary Visitation, for that the Bishop is to have a respect to
every individual Member of his Diocese. It is therefore distinguished and
confessed, that this is true, when the Chapel dependent has a Curate proper
of its one, and distinct from, or other than the Curate of the Mother Church:
But otherwise when the Rector of the Superior Church, is Curate of both, only
does exercise the Cure in the said Chapel by a Vicar not Perpetual, but
Temporal and removeable ad Libitum. Gl. in d. ver. una Ecclesia. Lindwood on
this occasion puts the Question, Whether in case the Church be of one Diocese,
and the Chapel thereto annexed or united, or dependent thereon, of another;
whether in that case there shall at the Visitation be but one Procuration paid
for both? He resolves it thus, viz. That if the Ordinary of the place where the
said Chapel stands, has formerly had there his Visitation, and Procuration,
ratione Visitationis ejusdem, then and in that case the power of Visiting the
same, nor by consequence the Procuration due ratione Visitationis, is not taken
away from that Ordinary by such union or dependency. Gloss. ibid. in ver.
Ecclesia.

(7.) By the aforesaid Council of Lateran all Visitors were limited to a
certain number of Visitation-Attendants, according to their several qualities,
as Archbishops to the number of forty or fifty men with their Horses; the
Bishop to twenty or thirty; Cardinals to twenty five (though they could not
digest such an undervaluation) Archdeacons to five or seven; Deans (that is,
Archipresbyteri Rurales, as the Gloss expounds it) to Two only: Gl. in ver.
Decani. Extr. eod. c. cum Apostolus. Extr. Com. de Censib. c. vas Electionis.
And the truth is, the Archdeacon (according to the Canon) may not have in his
Ordinary Visitation above the number of seven persons; if he exceed that
number, there is not any Procuration due for the Supernumeraries. Lind. de
Cens. and Procurat. c. 1. ver. excedant, and glo. ibid. and gl. in ver.
Visitationis, and gl. ib. in ver. Debitam.

(8.) The word Synodale seems to have Three significations, as (1) it seems to
signify Conventus or a Meeting, in the same sense with Synodus, as being taken
for the Meeting or Synod it self, and so used by Gregory 3. in his Epistle to
the Bishops of the Provinces of Baiory and Almany, Catholica Sanctorum Patrum
Authoritas jubet, ut bis in anno pro salute populi Christiani seu exhortatione
adoptionis filiorum SYNODALIA debent celebrari, etc. This Epistle you have
cited by Cardinal Baronius, in the Eighth Tome of his Annals about the year
738. (2) It seems to signify the Acts done at a Synod, as well as the Synod it
self; and in this sense you have it in the Tripartite History, Hist. Tripart.
l. 7. so. 452.
where mention is made of a Synod of Bishops assembled at Antioch out of diverse
Provinces, who sent the Emperor Jovinian a Copy of the Nicene Creed, Hunc
Libellum (meaning the said Creed) in collectione Synodalium Sabini conscriptum
invenimus. Ibid. fo. 392.
In which place Synodalia seems to import the Acts of that Synod collected by
that Sabinus. (3) It signifies a Cense or Tribute in money paid to the Bishop,
or to some other for his use by the Inferior Clergy. The forementioned Author
of the Historical Discourse of Procurations, Page 78.
etc. acquaints us, That in the second part of the Appendix to the third
General Council of Lateran there is an Epistle of Pope Alex. 3. to certain
Archdeacons and Deans, reproving them for extorting of moneys from the Clergy
sub diversis nominibus, in a fraudulent kind of way; Et hujusmodi exactionem
(says that Epistle) ut eam Liberius videamini exigere; quandoque Consuetudinem
Episcopalem, quandoque SYNODALIA; quandoque Denarios Paschales appellantes. And
in this sense is the word Synodale here used and taken, which the Archdeacon
claims not so much Jure Communi Ecclesiastico, as by Composition with, or
Prescription from the Bishop.

(9.) This Synodal or Synodical duty was anciently known by two other Names
which now are grown obsolete, the one Cathedraticum, probably from the original
Cause thereof, being ob honorem Cathedrae Episcopalis: the other Synodaticum,
from the time of payment, both used promiscuously. The former of these, viz.
the Cathedraticum was a Cense of two shillings paid by the Inferior Clergy to
the Bishop, as appears by the Acts of certain Councils of Bracar and Toledo, as
also by the Constitutions and Rescripts of Popes, Ilud te volumus modis omnibus
custodire, ne qui Episcoporum Siciliae de Parochiis ad se pertinentibus, nomine
CATHEDRATICI, amplius quam Duos Solidos praesumant accipere. 10. q. 3. c.
illud, etc. placuit, ibi, etc. So Honorius 3. expresses Two shillings nomine
Cathedratici. Extr. de Offic. Jud. Ordin. c. conquerent. and gl. ibid. in ver.
Duos solidos; which is a Pension paid to the Bishop a qualibet Ecclesia
secundum Loci consuetudinem; as Panormitan. upon that Text, Abb. c. conquerent.
de Offic. Jud. Ord. The reason of this payment was (according to Hostiensis) in
argumentum subjectionis, and ob honorem Cathedrae. Hostiens. in Sum. de Censib.
ex quibus ver. Cathedraticum autem. And the Council of Bracar; Placuit ut
nullus Episcoporum per suas Dioeceses ambulans, praeter honorem Cathedrae suae,
id est, Duos Solidos, aliud aliquid per Ecclesias tollat? cited in the Decree,
10. q. 3. c. placuit. Note, that the Cistersians by virtue of their Order were
privileged from being present at the Synodical Meetings assembled by the
Bishop within his Diocese, and from the payments of those Synodals. Gloss. in
ver. Episcopus, c. Episcopus non debet, Did. 18. Extr. de Majoris and Obed. c.
9. Quod supr. and gl. ib. in ver. Diocoesana. This Cathedratick-payment began,
when the Revenues of the Church first came to be divided and allotted to several
Ministeries; then it was that this payment was first made to the Bishop by the
Beneficed Clergy within his Diocese. Duaren. ut supr. and l. 2. c. 1. fo. 53.
It is probable that this division of the Church Revenues was not far distant in
time from the first or original distinguishment of Parochial Bounds, upon which
affair Pope Euaristus, otherwise called Anacletus Graecus, did first enter
about the year 110. Volateran. l. 22. Anast. Biblioth. and Baron. Annal. ad An.
112. nu. 4, 5, 6. and was afterward carried on by Pope Dionysius, about the
year 260. Baron. Annal. ad An. 260. nu. 17. Parochial Distribution in England
was by Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 668. Spelm. Council.
152: But Speed says, by Honorius the fifth Archbishop also of Canterbury,
about the year 636. It may not hence be inferred, that this Cathedraticum or
Synodal was only paid ratione Synodi; for it was sometimes, and very anciently
paid also at Visitations, as appears by the seventh Council at Toledo,
mentioned in the Decree, 10. q. 3. c. inter caetera, and casus ibi, where there
is a Canon against the exacting of more than Two shillings only pro
Cathedratico in Episcopal Visitations. This Cense or payment, though it be Onus
Ecclesiasticum, yet it is not Onus innovatum, but Onus Ordinarium, and by
imposition of Law; as appears by the Provincial Constitutions, Solutio
Cathedratici, Synodatici, and Procurationum, ratione Visitationis, and alia
hujusmodi, de quibus non dubitatur quin sunt Onera Ordinaria, suum capiunt
effectum ab impositione Legis. Lindw. de Offic. Vic. c. quoniam. gl. in ver.
Onera Ecclesiastica. Yet Procurations differ from the other in this, that
Procurations are only Pensions, but the other are properly Census. The Synody
or Synodal is by the Stat. of 34 H. 8. reckoned as a Church-due, Rastall in
Pensions, etc.
for recovery whereof provision is made by that Act; and good reason, for the
said Synody or Synodal, is a Pension certain and valued in the King's Books.

(10.) The aforesaid Ingenious Author of the Historical Discourse touching
Procurations, Dict. Hist. Dis. of Procurations, p. 99.
etc. after his deep search into Antiquity, does conjecturally conceive, that
the Pentecostal, otherwise called Whitsonfarthings, is nothing else but the
Annual Commemoration, continuation or repetition of an Ancient payment or
pension, issuing out of the Oblations brought by the people long since,
specially at the time of the Foundation or Dedication of their several
Churches, or at some other Solemnity, viz. the moiety or Third part of the
Oblations then made. The same being reserved by the Bishop, and by a Contract (
seu quasi Contractu) between him and the Founder of such Church, or Priest
assigned to attend the same, settled in and upon the Episcopal See, and payable
yearly at or about the Feast of Pentecost. These Pentecostalia were not (as
some conceive) the Peter Pence here anciently paid, for they were usually paid
either at the Feast of St. Peter and Paul, or on Lammas day; but these
Pentecostals seem to be paid upon or about the time that does chiefly
denominate the same, viz. at the Feast of Pentecost; and in the nature thereof
seem to have reference to an Oblation frequently made by the Christians in the
Elder times of the Church, and to have some tendency to that Liberal Devotion
which was then as frequent, as Sacrilege is now. In Leg. 18 Guilielm.
Conquestor, De Denariis S. Petri, seu Vectigali Romano, viz. Liber homo qui
habuerit Averia Campestria 30 denariis aestimanda, dabit Denarium S. Petri. Pro
4 denariis quos donaverit Dominus, quieti erunt Bordarii ejus, and ejus Boner,
and ejus Servientes. Burgensis, qui de propriis Catallis habet id quod dimidia
Marca aestimandum est, det Denarium S. Petri. Qui in Lege Danorum est Liber
homo, and habet Averia Campestria, quae dimidia Marca in argento aestimantur,
debet dare Denarium S. Petro. Et per Denarium quem donaverit Dominus, erunt
quieti ii qui resident in suo Dominico. Vid. S^ldeni ad Eadmerum Notae and
Spicelegium, p. 179. Leg. 18. By this Law of William the Conqueror it appears,
that the Peterpence had no affinity with the Pentecostals. In Ancient times
when the Bishop did visit Ecclesiatim, his usage was to celebrate the Mass in
the Church which he visited, which indeed was every Parish within his Diocese,
and that by his Episcopal Authority, the whole Diocese in respect of the Bishop
being by the Law but Paroechia sua, 10. q. 3. c. Quia. and Duarenus, passim.
Antiq. Eccles. B^i^. p. 28, and 64.
as the whole Province is said to be in respect of the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. At this Mass the people used to make their Offerings to the Bishop,
and one of the causes or reasons, why or wherefore the people in Ancient times
were obliged to bring their Oblations to the Church, was propter Consuetudinem,
and that certis Festivitatibus, among which the Feast of Pentecost was and is a
most special one; at which Feast there was in many places here in England an
Oblation, Anciently made by inferior Churches and Parishes to the principal
Mother Church, and whence probably the word Pentecostalia had its original
denomination. These Offerings by the Canon Law were and are only due to the
Clergy, and interdicted to the Laity, sub districtione Anathematis. 10. q. 1.
c. Quia Sacerdotes, etc. Sanct. Patrum, ibi. In some places the Deans and
Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches have them; It is said, That in the Cathedral
Church of Salisbury there is a greater and a l^ss, Dict. Hist. Discourse of
Procurat. p. 116.
distinguished and known by this difference of Major and Minor pars Altaris.
And in some Diocesses they are settled upon the Bishop and Archdeacon, and made
part of their Revenue, for which the King has Tenths and Subsidies. The
Cathedral or the Mother Church of Worcester was Anciently, and before the
dissolution, a Priory, Ibid.
and among other Revenues had these Pentecostalia or Whitsonfarthings yearly
paid, sub nomine Oblationum or Spiritual Profits tempore Pentecostes: After the
Dissolution, when King H. 8. about the three and thirtieth year of his Reign
new-founded and reendo'wd the said Church, he restored these Pentecostalia
(after he had h^ld them about a year in his own hand) to the said Church, which
(as it is reported) the Dean and Prebendaries thereof receive at this day, and
as appears by the Letters Patent:

Henricus Octavus, etc. Sciatis quod Nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia, ac mero motu nostris dedimus and concedimus, ac per praesentes damus
and concedimus Decano and Capitulo Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi and beatae
Maria Virginis Wigorn. omnes illas Oblationes and Obventiones, sive Spiritualia
proficua vulgariter vocat, Whitson farthings annuatim collect. s^ve recepta de
diversis Viliatis in Comitat. nostris Wigorn. Warwic. and (...). infra
Archidiaconatum Wigorn and tempore Pentecost. oblata dicto nuper Prioratui
beatae Mariae Wigorn. modo dissolut. dudum spectan. and pertinen. etc. Ex
Archivis Decani and Capit. Wigorn.

But in Gloucester, it seems, it is otherwise; for there the Bishop and the
Archdeacon only receive them: nor can the Dean and Prebendaries that now are of
the Cathedral make any just claim to them. For before the Suppression these
Pentecostals were ( inter alia) valued to the Archdeacon in the Kings Books, as
part of the Revenue of the Archdeaconry. And as for Procurations aforesaid,
although they are (as Dr. Dr. C^sen. Polit. Eccles. Angl. tab. 8.
Cosen says) ratione Visitationis plerumque praestandae, yet not solummodo so;
and thence it is held, that they are in some places payable to the Archdeacon
jure Consuetudinario, even in the Bishops Triennial year, sine Visitatione, on
the Archdeacons part.

(11.) To this purpose Remarkable is that Case of Proxies, which Sir John
Davis, Trin. 2 Jac. in the Exchequer ^f Ireland, Enter le Roy and Sr. Ambr.
Forth, Dr. of Law. Davis Rep.
the Kings Attorney General in Ireland, reports to have been there Resolved and
Adjudged. The Case was this; The Bishop of Meth, before the dissolution of
Monasteries, had a Proxy of fifteen shillings four pence payable yearly out of
the Commandry of Kells in the County of Meth, parcel of the Possessions of the
Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in Ireland; and one other Proxy of twenty
shillings payable yearly out of the Impropriate Rectory of Trevet in the same
County, parcel of the possessions of the Abbey of Thomascourt in the County of
Dublin. In the thirty third year of King H. 8. the said Hospital and Abbey were
suppressed and dissolved, and all the possessions of both the said Houses were
vested in the actual possession of the Crown by Act of Parliament: But in the
said Act there is an Express, Saving the Proxies to all Bishops and their
Successors. Afterward the Bishop of Meth and his Clergy (for that Bishopric
has not any Dean and Chapter) by Deed Enrolled, Dated 16 March 36 H. 8.
granted to the said Proxies (inter alia) to King H. 8. his Heirs and
Successors; the King being at the time of the Grant, and after, in the actual
possession of the said Commandry and Rectory, out of which the said Proxies
were payable. Afterward Queen Elizabeth, by her Letters Patent dated Primo
November. in the thirty third year of her Reign, demised the said Commandry and
Rectory to Dr. Forth. And now whether he shall be charged with these Proxies,
and the Arrearages thereof, after the commencement of the Lease, was the
Question; And it was Adjudged, that he should be charged therewith. In the
Argument of this Case there were Three points moved and debated; (1) Whether
the Proxies were wholly extinct by the suppression and dissolution of the said
Religious houses, notwithstanding, the said Saving in the Act of Dissolution?
(2) Whether the Bishop could grant the Proxies to the King? (3) Whether the
Proxies in the hands of the King were extinct by the Unity of Possession? For
the First point, it was Objected by Sir Ambrose Forth's Counsel, That the
Proxies were extinct by the suppression and dissolution of the Religious
houses: For that the Visitation of the Religious houses were the sole cause of
the payment of the Proxies; Et cessante causa cessat effectus. For the
Religious houses being gone and dispersed, they shall not be afterward subject
to Visitation, and then when the Visitation does cease, the Proxies, being only
Exhibition given to the Visitor for his Traveling charges, shall cease also;
For Procuratio (as the Canonists define it) est Exhibitio sumptuum
necessariorum facta Praelatis, qui Dioeceses peragrando Ecclesias subject as
Visitant. Yet it was agreed, That the Visitation does not cease immediately
upon the Surrender, or by the Act of Parliament, which gives the Religious
houses and their Possessions to the Crown; for by that their Corporations are
not dissolved: as was held in the Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich. Co.
par. 3. 15 Ass. p. 8. 32 H. 8. Br. Corporations 78. But when the Religious
persons were dispersed and had relinquished their Habit, Rule, and Order, for
which they were Visitable, then their Corporation was utterly dissolved, and
thereupon the Visitation ceases. And in this case they resembled a Proxy due
for Visitation to an Annuity for Counsel or some other Service to be done: if
the Counsel or the Service be withdrawn, the Annuity determines. So if a
Rentcharge be granted for a Way, stop the Way and the Rentcharge shall be
stopped also, 9 Ed. 4. 19. 15 Ed. 4. 2. 21* Ed. 3. 7. So where a Corodie is
granted for certain Service to be done, the omission of the Service determines
the Corody, 20 Ed. 4. fo. ult. It was also said, That the duty is not Annual
but Contingent, and payable only upon every Visitation. And for the [ Saving]
they said, it was a Flattering Saving, which could not preserve the Proxies in
being, which the Law had extinguished; as was held 14 Eliz. Dyer 313. That the
tenures of the Obit or Chauntry-Lands held of the Subjects are extinct by the
Act of 1 Ed. 6. notwithstanding the Saving in the said Act, propter
absurditatem: So the Proxies in this Case shall be extinct propter
absurditatem. For as it is absurd, that the King should be subject to
Attendance in respect of a Tenure: so it is absurd, that the King should be
subject to Visitation, or to any duty in respect thereof. Of the same nature
there are many Savings put in Walsingham's Case. Plow. Com. 563. which are
there called Flattering Savings. As to the Second point it was objected, That
the Bishop could not grant these Proxies to the King for two Reasons; the one
drawn from the person of the King, the other from the person of the Bishop: (1)
For the King, Admit that he were capable of such a Spiritual Office, as to be a
Visitor of Religious persons, yet he shall not have Proxies, by reason of the
Inconveniency and Indecency, and also for the Impossibility thereof; For it is
neither Convenient nor Decent, that the poor Religious persons should bear the
Charges of the King; And it is also Impossible, for by the Canon Law,
Procuratio exhibenda est secundum qualitatem personae Visitantis; and the
Majesty of the person of the King, and the grandeur of his Train such, that by
presumption of Law no private person can bear his necessary charges, or make
him entertainment answerable to the quality of his person. (2) For the Bishop,
Although he may grant his Temporal possessions with the assent of his Chapter
or Clergy, yet those duties which he has by the prerogative of his Episcopal
Chair, or as incident to his Spiritual Function, he may not grant; And they by
the Rule of the Canon Law are of Three sorts, viz. (1) Subsidium Cathedrarium,
which is a duty of Prerogative and Superiority. (2) Quarta Episcopalis, which
was given to him for Reparation of Churches. (3) Procurationes, for his
Visitation, as aforesaid, which is a perquisite or profit of his Spiritual
Jurisdiction. As to the Third point, they said, That although a Proxy is a
Personal thing, payable only in respect of persons Visitable, yet admit that
these Proxies are become Real, and that the Commandry and Rectory are charged
with these Proxies, then the unity of possession does extinguish them in the
hands of the King, as a Seignory, Rentcharge, Common, and the like, are
extinguished by the purchase of the Terre-tenant, if he has the like Estate in
the Land, and in the thing which charged the Land. And to this purpose was
cited the Case of 2 H. 4. 19. a. where a Prior had an Annuity out of a
Parsonage by Prescription; the Parsonage is after appropriate to the Priory,
the Annuity is extinguimed for ever. But on the other side, it was answered by
the Kings Council, and Resolved by the Court, That the said Proxies were not
extinguished by the dissolution of the said Religious houses, but were well
preserved and saved to the Bishop; and the Bishop had well granted them to the
King, and the unity of possession in the hands of the King made but a
Suspension and no Extinguishment of the said Proxies. (1) As to the First
point, it was first observed, that these Proxies had not their original in the
primitive Church; for St. Paul, in visiting all the Churches which he had
planted in Asia and Europe, demanded not any Proxies, but labored with his own
hands for his subsistence, lest he should be burthensom to the Churches. Yet
long after this, the Canon Law, which declares that Proxies are due to Bishops
in their Visitations, says, that it is agreeable to the doctrine of St. Paul,
ut a quibus spiritualia recipimus, eisdem Temporaliae communicemus. Instit.
Jur. Can. l. 2. c. de Censib. It was also observed, that that which we call
Proxy or Procuracy, is called by the Canonists, Procuratio, for that upon
every Visitation the persons visitable procurant necessary Provisions for the
Visitors; which Provisions at first were made in Victuals, viz. in Esculentis
and Poculentis, but that was with moderation and temperance, Ne jejuniorum
doctrinam rubentibus buccis praedicant; But afterward, when the pomp and
excess of Visitors required such provisions as were grievous and intolerable to
the Churches and Religious houses, then every Church and such House was
reasonably Taxed, and for that every Proxy was reduced to a certain sum of
money, payable yearly, in the nature of a Pension, to the Ordinary, who had
power of Visitation de mero Jure, as is said 10 Eliz. Dyer 273. b. After the
Procuration of Victuals was reduced to a certain sum, the Churches and
Religious houses paid it to the ordinary yearly, albeit he made not any
Visitation: And so the Rule of Cessante causa cessat effectus does not hold in
this case. These certain sums of money which come in lieu of Proxies, and
retain the name of Proxies, are by ancient Composition made parcel of the
certain and settled Revenues of the Bishop, do remain for ever, and are not
subject to extinguishment. And at this day the King himself pays and allows
Proxies out of all the Impropriations which he has in his possession; for
which reason in every Lease made by the King of a Rectory Impropriate, there is
a Covenant on the Lessee's part, that he shall bear and pay all Proxies,
Synodals, Pensions, etc. And as for the [ Saving] in the Act of 33 H. 8. cap.
5. it is not an idle or Flattering Saving, but real and effectual: for it was
agreed before, that these Proxies were in being at the time of making the Act,
and are not extinguished by the Surrender of the Religious houses; for their
Corporations are not dissolved till the Religious persons have relinquished
their houses and are dispersed. And such things as were in being at the time of
making the Act, may well be preserved and saved by the Act; albeit the things
which were extinct before, cannot be revived by a Saving, without express words
of Grant and Restitution. As to the Second point, it was Resolved, That the
Proxies in their original nature being Duties payable for Visitation, are
grantable to the King, and the King is capable of such a Grant, specially when
the said duties are converted to a sum of money certain, in the nature of a
Pension or Annuity. For by the Ancient Law of the Realm, the King had power to
Visit, reform, and correct all Abuses and Enormities in the Church: And by the
Statutes made in the time of King H. 8. the Crown was but remitted and restored
to his ancient Jurisdiction, which had been usurped by the Bishop of Rome. 33
Ed. 3. tit. Aid del Roy 103, Reges sacro oleo uncti Spiritualis Jurisdictionis
sunt Capaces. And Proxies are profits of the Jurisdiction, 10 H. 7. 18. Rex est
mixta persona cum Sacerdote: So the King shall have Tithes by the Common Law,
whereof no mere Lay-person was capable, 22 Assis. pl. 75. 21 H. 7. 1. The King
himself may Visit his Free Chapels and Hospitals, 8 Ass. p. 29. N. Br. 42. a.
And Cassanae, in Catol. Glo. mund. par. 5. Cons. 24, cites a Text of the Canon
Law, viz. Quod omnes Reges dicuntur Clerici, also another Text, which faith;
Quod Causa Spiritualis committi potest Principi Laico. And whereas it was said,
that in respect of the grandeur of the King and his Train, competent Proxies
cannot be provided for him, and by consequence a Grant thereof cannot be made
to him; that Objection is removed, in that the Proxies at the time of that
Grant was reduced to certain reasonable sums of money. Also the Rule of the
Canon Law was not rightly and fully cited before; for the Rule is, Procuratio
exhibenda est secundum qualitatem personae visitantis, and substantiam
Visitatorum. It was also Resolved, that the Bishop with the assent of his
Clergy, might well grant the Proxies to the King, for that the Law has
qualified the person of the King to receive such a Grant, albeit it be such a
Prerogative of the Bishop as may not be assigned to any other person: As the
Creation-money of a Duke or Earl may be granted and surrendered to the King,
although it can be granted to a Subject. Also the Proxies being now reduced to
certain sums of money, and so made part of the certain settled and perpetual
Revenue of the Bishop, may be granted by him as well as a part of the Tithes,
or an Annuity, or any of his Rents, Services, or other Hereditaments Temporal.
And as to the Third point it was also Resolved and Adjudged, That the Unity of
Possession of the Proxies with the Rectories impropriate and religious Houses,
out of which the Proxies are payable, do not extinguish the Proxies in the
hands of the King, but suspends the payment of them tantum pro tempore,
quousque, or until the King by his Grant shall sever the one from the other. To
conclude, The Case of Tithes is parallel to the Case of Proxies, and agrees
therewith in all points; For as Instruction was the cause of the payment of
Tithes: So Visitation, which is ever accompanied with Instruction, Littl. ca.
de Frankalmoigne 30. b. was the cause of the Proxies. And as Tithes are now due
and payable to Lay-persons which have purchased Impropriate Rectories, although
they do not give any Instruction: So Proxies are due and payable to Ordinaries,
out of the Impropriations and Religious houses dissolved, although their
Visitation ceases. And as none can prescribe de non decimando, as is commonly
held in the Common Law: So the Canon Law has a Rule, Quod nulla est adversus
Procurationem praescriptio. Inst. Jur. Canon. lib. 2. cap. de Censibus. Also
Proxies, which resemble Tithes in other points, may be well compared to them in
this point, viz, That they shall not be subject to extinguishment by unity of
possession.

CHAP. X.
Of Diocesan Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, and Consistories.
1. A Description of the Office of such Chancellors, and how they differ from
the Bishops Commissaries. 2. The Antiquity and necessary use of such
Chancellors. 3. What the Canons Ecclesiastical require touching their Office.
4. Whether a Divine, that is not a Civilian, may be a Chancellor? 5. Where,
and before whom the Bishops Consistories are held. 6. What is meant or intended
by the word Consistory. 7. The great Antiquity of the Bishops Consistories. 8.
That Antiquity further confirmed and proved. 9. The difference between
Consistorium and Tribunal. 10. Incidents to the Chancellors Office, as he is
Oculus Episcopi. 11. A short digression touching Administrators. 12. The Laws
and Canons touching Summoners. 13. The Constitutions Provincial, what provision
there touching this Office of Summoners. 14. A Judgment at Common Law in Action
on the Case against an Apparitor or Summoner, for Citing a man wrongfully into
the Ecclesiastical Court. 15. What a Commissary is; how to be qualified; with
the Precincts of his Jurisdiction. 16. Whether a Commissary may Cite persons of
several Parishes to appear at his Visitation-Court? 17. A Case at Common Law
touching a Commissary made by a Dean. 18. Whether a mere Lay-person may be a
Commissary or Official; Other points in Law touching that Office; and the Grant
thereof. 19. Sufficiency or Insufficiency, or other defects in Chancellors,
Commissaries, etc. properly cognizable not in the Temporal, but Ecclesiastical
Courts. 20. The Office of Chancellorship (as to the Right of it) is held to be
of Temporal, but (as to the Exercise thereof) of Ecclesiastical cognizance. 21.
Whether the Offices of Chancellor, Register, etc. in Ecclesiastical Courts, be
within the Statute of 5 Ed. 6.
(1.) THe Chancellor of a Diocese is a Church-Lawyer, Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 15.
or the Bishops-Lawyer, or that person who is Commissionated to be aiding and
assisting to the Bishop in his Jurisdiction, not confined to any one place of
the Diocese, nor limited (as the Bishops Commissaries are) only to some certain
causes of the Jurisdiction; but every where throughout the whole Diocese
supplying the Bishops absence, in all matters and causes Ecclesiastical within
his Diocese. By the Statute of 37 H. 8. c. 17. a Doctor of the Civil Law
lawfully deputed, may exercise all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the
Censures thereof. By this Chancellor the Bishop within his Diocese keeps his
Court according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, in all matters pertaining to his
Jurisdiction, or otherwise relating more immediately to the Church or
Government of the Clergy. As Bishops in their Episcopal audience have had in
all Ages the cognizance of all matters Ecclesiastical, as well Civil as
Criminal, within the Jurisdiction of their Diocese: so they have ever had to
that end their Chancellors, whom the Law calls Ecclesiecdici or Episcoporum
Ecdici, persons experienced in the Civil and Canon Laws, to assist them in
matters of Judgment; and those whom we now call the Bishops Chancellours, are
the very self same persons in Office, that anciently did exercise
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under Bishops, and were called Ecclesiecdici.
Papias per Gothofred in L. omnem, C. de Episc. and Cler. and in. praeterea,
ibid. Dr. Ridl. View, par. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. Who (forasmuch as they have with
them the Bishops Authority every where within the Diocese for matters of
Jurisdiction, and in that the Bishops and They make but one Consistory) are
called the Bishop's Vicars General, both in respect of their Authority, which
extends throughout the whole Diocese, as also to distinguish them from the
Commissaries of Bishops, whose Authority, as it is restrained only to some
certain place of the Diocese, so also to some certain causes of the
Jurisdiction, limited unto them by the Bishops; for which reason the Law calls
them Officiales Foraneos, quasi Officiales astricti cuidam foro Dioeceseos
tantum. Dr. Ridl. ibid.

(2.) Dr. Ridley in his View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law says, that
Chancellors of Diocesses are nigh of as great Antiquity as Bishops themselves,
and are such necessary Officers to Bishops, that every Bishop must of necessity
have a Chancellor; and that if any Bishop should seem to be so complete within
himself, as not to need a Chancellor, yet the Archbishop of the Province, in
case of refusal, may put a Chancellor, on him, in that the Law presumes the
Government of a whole Diocese a matter of more weight, than can be well
sustained by one person alone; and that although the Nomination of the
Chancellor is in the Bishop, yet his Authority is derived from the Law.
Hostiens. Sum. de Offic. Vicar. nu. 2. For which reason the Law understands him
as an Ordinary, as well as the Bishop. Hostiens. ibid. It is most probable,
that the multiplicity and variety of Ecclesiastical Causes introduced the use
and Office of Chancellors originally; for after that Princes had granted to
Ecclesiastical persons their Causes and their Consistories, and Circumstances
varying these Causes into a more numerous multiplication, than were capable of
being defined by like former Presidents, necessity called for new Decisions,
and they for such Judges as were experienced in such Laws as were adapted to
matters of an Ecclesiastical Cognizance; which would have been too prejudicial
an Avocation of Bishops from the exercise of their more Divine Function, had
not the office of the Chancellor in determining such matters, been an expedient
to prevent the said prejudice or inconvenience.

(3.) By the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical Ed^^. 1603. Can. ^19, 120
121. 123, ^24. 127.
it is Ordered, That upon the days of the Visitation every Chancellor,
Archdeacon, Commissary and Official, as also at the ordinary time when
Churchwardens are Sworn, shall deliver them such Books of Articles as whereon
to ground their Presentiments. Also, that they shall not suffer any to be cited
into Ecclesiastical Courts by any General process of Quorum Nomina; nor the
same person to be cited into several Ecclesiastical Courts for one and the same
Crime, for which end the Chancellor and Archdeacon are within one month next
after the Bishops Visitation, mutually to certify each other under their Hands
and Seals, the Names and Crimes of all such as were Presented in the said
Visitation. Nor shall any Chancellor, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, suffer any
Judicial Act to be sped otherwise than in open Court, or in presence of the
Register, or his Deputy, or other person by Law allowed to speed the same; nor
shall have (without the Bishops consent) any more Seals of Office than one. Nor
shall any man be admitted a Chancellor, or to exercise any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, under the age of 26 years, and learned in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, and is at least a Master of Arts, or Bachelor of Law, and
shall first have taken the Oath of Supremacy in the Bishops presence, Edit.
1562.
or in open Court, and have subscribed the Articles of Religion, and swear that
to the utmost of his understanding he will deal uprightly and justly in his
Office, without respect, favor, or reward.

(4.) Sutton Chancellor of the Bishop of Gloucester moved for a Prohibition to
stay a Suit before the Commissioners Ecclesiastical, for that Articles were
there exhibited against him, because he being a Divine, and having a Rectory
with Cure of Souls, and never brought up in the Science of the Civil or Canon
Laws, or having any Intelligence in them, took upon him the Office of the
Chancellor of the Bishop of Gloucester, whereas there were diverse Canons and
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and also directions from the late King James, and
from the King that now is, That none should be admitted to have those Offices
of Chancellorship to a Bishop, unless he were instructed and learned in the
Canon and Civil Laws; because diverse Cases triable in the said Court are of
weight, and the Judges there ought to have knowledge of the Laws, otherwise
they cannot administer Right to the Kings Subjects. Upon these Articles Mr.
Sutton being examined, confessed that he was a Divine, and had a Spiritual
Living, and that the Office of the Chancellorship of the Bishop is grantable
for life, and that such a Bishop of Gloucester had granted to him the Office
for his life, which the Dean and Chapter had Confirmed, whereby he had a
Freehold therein, and ought to enjoy it during his life. And that
notwithstanding this Answer they intended to proceed against him, wherefore he
prayed to have a Prohibition, but the Court denied it; for if he be a person
unskilful in these Laws, and by Law ought not to enjoy it, they may
peradventure examine that; for although a Lay-person, by his Admission and
Institution to a Benefice has a Freehold, yet he may be sued in the Spiritual
Court, and deprived for that Cause; but if he has wrong, he may peradventure
by Assize try it; therefore a Prohibition was denied Hill. 2 Car. C. B.
Sutton's Case. Cro. Rep. Vid. dict. Case in Latch. Rep.
.

(5.) The Consistory Court of each Archbishop, and every Bishop of every
Diocese within this Realm, is holden before the Bishops Chancellor in the
Cathedral Church, Vid. Litt. Sect. 133. 136. 648.
or before his Commissary in places of his Diocese far remote and distant from
the Bishops Consistory, so as the Chancellor cannot call them to the Consistory
with any convenience or without great travel and vexation; 24 H. 4. c. 12.
for which reason such Commissary is called Commissarius Foraneus. From these
Consistories the Appeal is to the Archbishop of either Province respectively.

(6.) By this word [ Consistory] is commonly understood that place or
Ecclesiastical Court of Justice, held by the Bishops Chancellor or Commissary
in his Cathedral Church or other convenient place of his Diocese, for the
hearing and determining of matters and Causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance,
happening within that Diocese Vid. Litt. ibid. Vid. Co. Inst. p. 4. fol. 338.
. But when this word refers to the Province of Canterbury, then the chief and
most ancient Consistory is the Archbishops high Court of Arches, as the Court
of Appeal from all other Inferior Consistories within the said Province. The
same word sometimes refers to a Synod or Council of Ecclesiastical persons
convened together, or to a Cession or Assembly of Prelates; but most usually to
the Spiritual Court for the deciding of matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance.
The word Consistory ( Consistorium) is supposed to be borrowed of the Italians,
or rather Lombards, signifying as much as ( Praetorium) or Tribunal, being a
word utriusque juris, and frequently used for a Council-house of Ecclesiastical
persons, or the place of Justice in the Court Christian C^wel. Interp. verb.
Consistory.
.

(7.) The Consistories of Archbishops and Bishops are supposed to begin within
this Realm in the time of William the Conqueror Co. Instit. par. 4. cap. 53.
fo. 259. and cap. 74. fo. 338.
; which seems very conjecturable from that Charter of his, which Sir Ed. Coke
in the fourth part of his Institutes mentions to have found Enrolled, 2 R. 2.
nu. 5. Pro Decano and Capitulo Ecclesiae ^eat. Mariae de Lincoln.
. Which Charter, and Record of great Antiquity, asserting not only the
Episcopal Consistories, but also the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, it cannot be
supposed but that it ought to be recited here in terminis per extensum, viz.

Willielmus gratia Dei Rex Anglorum, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus and omnibus
Francigenis, and quibus in Episcopatu Remigii This Remigius was the first
Bishop of Lincoln; the See being removed from Dorchester to Lincoln.
terras habentibus, salutem. Sciatis vos omnes, and caeteri mei Fideles qui in
Anglia manent, quod Episcopales Leges, quae non been, nec secundum Sanctorum
Canonum Praecepta usque ad mea tempora in Regno Anglorum fuerunt, Communi
Concilio and Concilio Archiepiscoporum meorum and caeterorum Episcoporum, and
Abbatum, and omnium Principum Regni mei Emendandas judicavi. Propterea Mando,
and Regia authoritate Praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de
Legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundretto In Turno, ita Co. ubi sup.
Placita teneant, nec causam, quae ad Regimen animarum pertinet, ad Judicium
Secularium hominum adducant; sed quicunque secundum Episcopales Leges de
quacunque causa vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad locum, quem ad hoc Episcopus
elegerit, and nominaverit, veniat, ibique de causa sua respondeat, and non
secundum Hundrettum This is not intended of the Hund^ed Court, but that in
these times the Sheriff did h^ld his Tourn^ per H^^dreda. Ita Co. ubi s^pr.
vid. Mag. Chart. cap 35. and Exposi^. Co. thereon.
, sed secundum Canones and Episcopales Leges Rectum Deo and Episcopo suo
faciat. Si vero aliquis per superbiam elatus ad Justitiam Episcopalem venire
non voluerit, vocetur semel, and secundo, and tertio; quod si nec sic ad
emendationem venerit, Excommunicetur: and, si opus fuerit, ad hoc vindicand'
fortitudo and Justitia Regis vel Vicecomitis adhibeatur: Ille autem qui vocatus
ad Justitiam Episcopi venire noluit, pro unaquaque vocatione legem Episcopalem
emendabit: hoc etiam Defendo, and mea authoritate interdico, ne ullus Vicecom.
aut praepositus, aut minister Regis, nec aliquis Laicus homo de Legibus quae ad
Episcopum pertinent se intromittat: nec aliquis Laicus homo alium hominem sine
Justitia Episcopi ad Judicium adducat; Judicium vero in nullo loco portetur
nisi in Episcopali Sede, aut in illo loco quem ad hoc Episcopus constituerit

(8.) For the Confirmation of this Charter Sir Ed. Coke in the foresaid part of
his Institutes refers us to the Register of the Bishop of London. Willielmus
Dei gratia Rex Anglorum R. Bainardo, and S. de magna Villa P. de Vabines,
caeterisque meis Fidelibus de Essex and de Hertfordshire, and de Middlesex,
Salutem. Sciatis vos omnes, etc. In which Charter the Tenor of the foresaid
Charter is recited word by word in English. The like Charter he also there says
is in the Book of Charters of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Whereby it is most
evident, that the Bishops Consistories are of great Antiquity, and that they
were erected when Causes Ecclesiastical were removed from the Turn (which is
a Court of Record holden before the Sheriff) to the Consistory Co. Instit. 4
par. cap. 53. fo. 260.
. So that this Law, made by the Conqueror, seems (as Mr. Blount in his
Nomo-Lexi^on on this word well observes) to give the Original of the Bishops
Consistory, as it now sits with us distinct and divided from the Hundred or
County Court, wherewith it seems probable, in the time of the Saxons, to have
been joined Vid. Seld. Hist. of Tithes, p. 413, 414.
.

(9.) Lindwood in the Provincial Constitutions upon this word Consistorium
quoad Episcopos, puts this difference between Consistorium and Tribunal:
Tribunal (says he) est Locus in quo sedet Ordinarius inferior; but Consistorium
est Locus in quo sedet princeps ad Judicandum; Lindw. de foro Competent. c.
excussis. in ver. Consistoria. Albeit, according to the vulgar acceptance of
these words, we refer Tribunal to any place of Judicature, but Consistorium to
that only which is of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

(10.) This Chancellor of a Diocese, as he is Oculus Episcopi, ought to have an
eye into all parts of the Diocese, and has immediately under the Ordinary
Jurisdiction of all matters Ecclesiastical within the same; not only for
reformation of Manners, and punishment of Enormities of a Spiritual nature by
Ecclesiastical Censures; but also in Causes Matrimonial, and Testamentary as to
the Probat of Wills, and granting Letters of Administration of the Goods of a
person dying Intestate, where there are not Bona Notabilia; In which case the
Will shall be proved, or Administration granted by the Prerogative of the
Archbishop: And wherever there is an Administration duly granted, there the
Administrator does almost in all points represent the person of the Intestate
as legally, as any Executor can the person of his Testator Testamentarily. For
this Administrator, in construction of the Common Law, is that person to whose
trust, care, conduct, and management the Goods and Chattels, Real and Personal,
of the Intestate are committed by the Ordinary, or such other as under him is
duly Authorized to grant the same. But under this Notion or Appellation of
Administrator, neither the Civil nor the Canon Law knows any such Officer; only
they take notice of Administrators as Governors of Persons, Places, or Things.
Decret. Can. 23. q. 5. cap. 26. and Extra. Com. cap. 11. And it is most
probable, that the Common Law might (as some conceive) take its light, as to
this Officer under this notion as now practicable with us, from the
Constitution of the Emperor Leo. I. 28. nulli licere, C. de Episc. and Cler.
whereby it is Ordained, That the Bishop shall take care to see such Legacies
duly performed, as are bequeathed for the Redemption of Captives, in case the
Testator appoint not one to execute his Will in that particular. This power
given to the Ordinary of making Administrators in case of Intestation, and of
Authorizing them to act as Executors, is very ancient by the Statute Law Westminster.
2. An. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 19. and 31 Ed. 3. c. 1^. and 21 H. 8. cap. 5.
. And if any Ordinary, Chancellor, etc. having power by the Act of 21 H. 8. to
grant the Administration of the goods of him that dies Intestate, to the Widow
or next of Kin, shall take any Reward for the preferring any person before
another to the Administration, it is Bribery Co. I^st. par. 3. c. 68. Vid. 2 R.
2. Rot. Parl. nu. 46.
.

(11.) A lawful Administrator may render his own Goods liable to the Intestates
Debts either by a Devastavit, or by a False Plea Judicially; and his Executor
or Administrator shall not succeed him in the Administration to his Intestate
(unless qualified to require Administration of both Intestates) but the
Administration of the first Intestates goods is de novo to be committed to his
next of Kin, as de bonis non Adm. And if a Stranger by any Act make himself
Executor de son tort, the Creditors and Legataries may not sue him as
Administrator, albeit it be an Administration in Fact, but must sue him as
Executor in his own wrong; who notwithstanding is not any further liable, than
to the value of the Deceased's Goods, as Assets in his hands. But in case the
Ordinary shall, without granting any Letters of Administration, make his
Letters Ad Colligendum, in that case he makes himself liable to Actions pro
tanto, as if himself were actually possessed of the Goods of the deceased. And
here Note, That Funeral expenses, according to the degree and quality of the
Deceased, are to be allowed of his Goods before any debt or duty whatsoever,
for that is Opus pium, or Charitativum Co. Inst. par. 3. cap. 97.
.

(12.) And as in these Consistories there is a great variety of Ecclesiastical
Causes heard and determined, so also the Officers belonging thereto are many,
and of various qualities and degrees, whereof some seem to be magis
principales, others minus principales, but others (in the popular account) as
mere Animalia tantum Rationalia, by whom they understand Apparitors, who in
truth are Summoners, and whose Character in Law is this, viz. He is that
person, whose employment is to serve such Processes as issue out of the
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Courts, and as a Messenger to Cite Offenders and
others to make their appearance therein as occasion shall require. By the
Statute of 21 H. 8. c. 5. as also by the 138th Canon of the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, Apparitors are called Summoners or Sumners; by which Canon the
Abuses and Grievances pretended to be practiced by such Summoners or Apparitors
are sufficiently redressed: For as the multitude of them is thereby abridged
and restrained by Decreeing and Ordaining, That no Bishop or Archdeacon, or
their Vicars or Officials, or other inferior Ordinaries, shall depute or have
more Apparitors to serve their Jurisdictions respectively, than either they or
their Predecessors were accustomed to have Thirty years before the publishing
the said Ecclesiastical Constitutions: So it is likewise provided by the said
Canon, That the said Apparitors shall by themselves faithfully execute their
Offices, and not by any color or pretense whatsoever cause or suffer their
Mandats to be executed by any Messengers or Substitutes, unless upon some good
cause, to be first allowed and approved by the Ordinary of the place. It is
also further Provided by the said Canon, That they shall not take upon them the
Office of Promoters or Informers for the Court, nor shall exact more or greater
Fees than are prescribed by the 135th Canon of the said Ecclesiastical
Constitutions. And in case either the number of Apparitors deputed shall exceed
the aforesaid Limitation, or any of them offend in any of the Premises, the
persons deputing them (if they be Bishops) shall upon Admonition of their
Superior, discharge the persons exceeding the Number so limited as aforesaid:
But if they were deputed by Inferior Ordinaries, such Ordinaries shall be
suspended from the execution of their Office, until they have dismissed the
supernumerary Apparitors by them so deputed; and the parties themselves so
deputed shall for ever be removed from the Office of Apparitors: And in case
being so dismissed and removed, they do not desist from the execution of their
said Offices, they are by the first said Canon to be proceeded against and
punished by Ecclesiastical Censures as persons contumacious to the
Jurisdiction. And finally, if upon experience the number of the said Apparitors
be too great in any one Diocese, in the judgment of the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the time being; in that case he is by the said Canon empowered
to abridge them to such a number, as to himself shall seem meet and expedient.

An Apparitor came to the Church of a Parson, R^yner and Parkers Case* More's
Rep.
and said to him, He is to pay Tenths to such a one at such a place, four miles
distant from the Church, to whom the Parson did not pay them, and thereupon the
Bishop Certified, That he refused to pay them according to the Statute of 26 H.
8. It was Resolved, The Demand was not according to that Statute, and the
Summons to pay them not according to the Statute, for the Demand ought to have
been by one who has authority to receive them, which the Summoner had not; And
they held the Demand not good, although the Bishop certified it was duly made.
And in the Case between the Queen and Blanch it was Resolved, That the
Certificate of the Bishop, that the Incumbent refused to pay his Tenths, is not
Peremptory, but Traversable; and that the Demand of the Tenths must be at the
house of the Incumbent, and the Refusal there. More's Rep. 1225.

In a Action upon the Case against the Defendant, Poel and Godfrey's Case.
More's Rep.
the Case was this; A Summoner in the Ecclesiastical Court, having a Citation
against the Plaintiff, Returned, That he had Summoned the Plaintiff, whereas in
truth he never Summoned him; for which the Plaintiff was Excommunicated to his
great damage. It was adjudged that the Action did lie.

(13.) By the Premises it is manifest, that the Canon is very strict and exact
both in abridging the Number, and redressing the Abuses incident to the Office
of Apparitors; which Canon in most Circumstances seems to run very parallel
with that in the Provincial Constitutions, Lindw. Provin. Constit. de Censibus
and Procur. cap. cum Apparitorum; the light whereof did probably influence it
into that Form wherein we now find it; For by that Decree of the said
Provincial Constitunions it is Ordained, That a Bishop shall have unum
Apparitorem Equitantem duntaxat, where the Gloss well observes, that by this
non prohibetur Episcopo quin plures habeat pedites; And every Archdeacon one in
every Deanary, non Equitantem sed peditem, where the Bishop might also appoint
Apparitors, as also in Rural Deanaries: Gloss. ibid. verb. Duntaxat. And in
case more than these were Deputed, or they found to offend in their Office, the
Penalty was as abovesaid, Deputantes sint suspensi, donec, etc. and Deputatos
ab Officio Apparitorum perpetuo suspendimus ipso facto. Constit. ibid.

(14.) Action upon the Case; For that the Defendant being an Apparitor under
the Bishop of Exeter, maliciously and without color or cause of suspicion of
Incontinency, of his own proper malice, procured the Plaintiff Ex Officio, upon
pretense of Fame of Incontinency with one Edith (whereas there was no such
Fame, not just cause of Suspicion) to be cited to the Consistory Court of
Exeter, and there to be at great charges and vexation, until he was cleared by
Sentence, which was to his great discredit, and cause of great Expenses and
Losses, for which, etc. upon Not guilty pleaded, and found for the Plaintiff it
was moved by Ashley, Sergeant, in Arrest of Judgment, That in this Case an
Action lies not: For he did nothing but as an Informer, and by virtue of his
Office. But all the Court ( absente Richardson) held, That the Action well
lies: For it is alleged, That he falso and malitiose caused him to be Cited,
upon pretense of Fame where there was no offense committed: And avers, That
there was not any such Fame; so as he did it maliciously, and of his own head,
and caused him to be unjustly vexed, which was to raise gain to himself;
whereupon they conceived, That he being found guilty for it, the Action well
lies; And therefore Rule was given to enter Judgment for the Plaintiff, unless
other cause was shown. And upon a second motion, Richardson Chapter Justice being
present, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff Hill. 7. Car. rot. 1147. B. R.
Carlion verse. Mill. Cro. Rep.
. The Consistory of the Bishop may in some Cases enjoin Penance: Where Penance
is enjoined, there may be Commutation; but there may not be Commutation for
Penance, where none is enjoined. Commutation for Penance agrees with the
Customs used in the Ecclesiastical Law, justified in the Common Law, in the
Statute of Circumspecte agatis in the time of Ed. 1. and Articuli Cleri in the
time of Ed. 2. Vid. Mich. 21. Jac. B. R. Dr. Barker 's Case in Camera Stellata.
Roll's Rep.

(15.) Commissary [Commissarius] is a Title of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
adapted to such one as does exercise the same in such remote places of the
Diocese, and at such distance from the Bishops chief Consistory, as that his
Chancellor cannot without too great a prejudice conveniently call the Subjects
to the same. The duty of such Commissary or Officialis F^ranei, is to officiate
the Bishops Jurisdiction in the remoter parts of the Diocese, or in such
Parishes as are the Bishop's peculiar, and exempt from the Archdeacon's
Jurisdiction. The Authority of the Commissaries of Bishops is only in some
certain place of the Diocese, and some certain causes of the Jurisdiction,
limited unto them by the Bishops; for which reason the Law calls them
Officiales Foraneos, quasi Officiales astricti cuidam foro Dioeceseos tantum:
Gloss. in Clem. de Rescript. And by the Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, no person may be a Commissary or Official under the Age of 26
years, being at least a Master of Arts or Bachelor of Law Can. 127.
. Yet in the Argument of Buries Case for a Divorce, the 5 Rep. 98. there was
cited 35 Eliz. B. R. rot. 605. That if a Layman be made a Commissary by the
Bishop, it is good, until it be undone by Sentence; although that the Canon
says, That he ought to be a Doctor or a Bachelor of Divinity. But 21 H. 8. has
limited, That a Doctor of the Civil Law may be a Commissary Burye's Case. Noy
Rep.
.

(16.) Where a Commissary, citing many persons of several Parishes to appear at
his Visitation-Court, Excommunicated them for not Appearing, a Prohibition was
granted, because the Ordinary has not power to cite any to that Court, but the
Churchwardens and Sides-men, and those he may Impannel, and give Articles to
them, for to enquire as the Justices of Assize. Vid. N. B. 41. Vid. Noy Rep.
post Case Coke verse. Wall.
.

(17.) The Dean of the Deanary of Wolverhampton annexed to the Deanary of
Windsor, being a Peculiar, and having Ordinary Jurisdiction, makes a Commissary
by his Deed, which is Confirmed by the Chapter: The Dean dies. The question
was, if that was good to bind his Successor. By Doderidge, That such a
Jurisdiction is Judicial, and that Grant is but a Commission and Authority, all
times remaining in the Ordinary. True it is, That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
in Judicial Acts may be executed by a Substitute; but in Law they are the Acts
of them who Substitute the other. Vid. 11 H. 4. 64. a. 7 E. 4. 14. 20 H. 6. 1.
That a Commissary may Excommunicate, and prove a Testament: But that shall be
made in the name of the Ordinary, 20 E. 3. And a Grant of that by the Bishop is
not good, but during his life; and shall not bind the Succ^ssor: For the Law
has appointed, that he shall exercise that Jurisdiction ( Sede vacant, etc.)
The Grant being void, cannot be made good by the Confirmation of the Chapter.
Coke Chief Justice; If that should be a good grant to bind the Successor, then
the Successor cannot remove him; And yet the Successor shall answer for the
Acts and Offenses of the Commissary, which would be too hard The Prebend of
Hateberlies Case. Noy Rep.
.

(18.) In Walker's Action upon the Case against Sir John Lamb, For disturbance
of the Plaintiff in exercising of the Officialty of the Archdeaconry of
Leicester, granted by the Archdeacon of Leicester, and of the Office of
Commissary of the Bishop of Lincoln. Upon Not guilty pleaded a special Verdict
was found, That there were Ancient offices granted by, Whether the Office of a
Commissary may be granted to a Lay-person.
etc. and Offices of Judicature always granted to one person for life until
1609, and in 30 Eliz. so granted to Dr. Chippindale, and after in 1609 granted
to him and one Ed. Clerk for their Two lives, no Surrender being actually made
by Dr. Chippendale. Afterward, 1614 both Offices were granted, the one by the
Archdeacon, the other by the Bishop to Sir Jo. Lamb, and to the said Ed.
Clerk, and these Grants confirmed by the Dean and Chapter; That in An. 1622.
Dr. Chippendale died, and afterward the Archdeacon who granted that Office,
and the Bishop who granted the Office of Commissary, died; and the Bishop of
Lincoln who now is, and the now Archdeacon, by several Patents granted these
Offices to the Plaintiff, who was at the time of the Grant of the Patent a
Lay-person, and Bachelor of the Civil Law only: And they find the Stat. of 37
H. 8. c. 17. That Lay-persons married or unmarried, being Doctors of the Civil
Law, may be Commissaries, Officials, Scribes, or Registers, and that the
Plaintiff exercised these Offices, and the Defendant disturbed him. Upon this
the matter being argued at the Bar, was reduced only to these Two Questions:
(1) Whether the Patent to the Plaintiff, being a Lay-person, and not a Doctor
of the Law, were good, or restrained by the Statute of 37 H. 8. And as to that
point all the Court conceived, The Grant was good, for the Statute does not
restrain any such Grant: And it is but an affirmance of the Common Law, where
it was doubted, if a Lay or Married person might have such Offices; and to
avoid such Doubts this Statute was made; which explains, That such Grants are
good enough; and it is but an Affirmative Statute, and there is no restriction
therein: And although Doctors of the Law (though Lay-persons or Married) shall
have such Offices; yet this is not any restriction, That none others shall have
them but Doctors of the Law, and the Statute mentions as well Registers and
Scribes, as Commissaries, and that a Doctor of the Law shall have them; yet in
Common experience such persons as are merely Lay, and not Doctors, have enjoyed
such Offices. And for this very point was a Case in this Court, Hill. 35 Eliz.
Rot. 181. between Pratt and Stock, where, upon Demurrer, this Statute was
pleaded against the Plaintiff, to whom a Commissaryship was granted, being but
a Bachelor of Law; and he having granted Administration, the Grant was adjudged
good, and the Book of Entries, 484, and 489. was allowed good; wherefore they
Resolved the Grant was well enough. And it was also Resolved, That where an
Officer for life accepts of another Grant of the same Office to him, and to
another, it is not any Surrender of the first Grant. The Second point was,
Whether the office of the Officialty of the Archdeaconry, and the office of the
Commissary of the Bishop, be grantable by the Statutes of 1 Eliz. and 13 Eliz.
because it was pretended, they were not parcel of the Possessions of the
Bishopric or Archdeaconry, so as they could have any profits by them, and then
the Statute does not restrain the Grants of them. But all the Court Resolved,
They were within the words and intent of the Statutes; for they be
Hereditaments, and are pertaining unto them; And that a Grant of these Offices
to Two, where they were only grantable to One for life, and being granted in
Reversion, it is a void Grant by the Statutes against the Successors; For the
Statutes restrain all Grants of any thing to be avoidable against the
Successor, besides Grants of necessity and Leases for Three lives, or 21 years,
where the ancient Rent is reserved: And all other Grants, as well of Offices as
of other things, not warranted by the Statutes, are made void as against the
Successors, Vid. Coke 10. fo. 60. the Bishop of Salisbury's Case, Coke 5. fo.
14. and a Case betwixt Vaughan and Crompton, 14 Jac. at the Assizes before the
Justices of the Assize for the Office of the Registership in Suffolk, and
between John's and Powell for the Registers place of Hereford, where it was
Adjudged, That such Offices granted in Reversion were void: whereupon Rule was
given, That Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff, unless other cause
were shown. And afterward being moved again, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff Trin. 7 Car. rot. ^74. Wal^er verse. Sir J. Lamb. Cro. Rep.
.

(19.) Noy Attorney Reports the foresaid Case of Dr. Sutton in this manner,
viz. That he was deprived of the office of Official of Gloucester by the
Commissioners 3 Jac. appointed to examine the defects of Chancellors, and that
he was not read in the Canon or Civil Law. He said, That time out of mind, etc.
the Bishops have used in their Diocesses to bestow the Chancellorship, and that
A. the Bishop of, etc. had made him Chancellor by Deed; and that was Confirmed
by the Dean and Chapter, by which he had a Frank-tenement in that Office, etc.
And Mr. Glanvile moved for a Prohibition, but it was denied by the Court; for
it is lawful for the Commissioners to deprive for Insufficiency, that being
within their Commission; But in a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Profits of that Office, supposing the Grant of that by the Predecessor does not
bind the Successor; as it was in Dr. Barker's Case, there a Prohibition shall
be awarded, because the profits are Temporal. But we in the first Case cannot
try the Sufficiency: Pasch 3 Car. B R. Dr. Suton's Case, in N^y's Rep.
Vid. 8 E. 3. 70. 9 E. 3. 11. So it is if the Ordinary deprive the Master of a
Lay-Hospital, for there he is not a Visitor, nor is it Visitable by him; But
otherwise of a Spiritual Hospital.

(20.) The Bishop of Landaff granted the office of his Chancellorship to Dr.
Trevor and one Griffin, to be exercised by them either jointly or severally.
Dr. Trevor for 350 l. released all his Right in the said Office to Griffin, so
that G. was the sole Officer, and then after died. After this the Bishop grants
the said Chancellorship to R. (being a Practicioner in the Civil Law) for his
life. Dr. Trevor surmising, that himself was the sole Officer by Survivorship,
made Dr. Lloyd his Substitute to execute the said office for him, and for that,
that he was disturbed by R. the said Dr. Trevor being Substitute to the Judge
of the Arches, granted an Inhibition to inhibite the said R. from executing the
said Office. The Libel contained, That one R. hindered and disturbed Dr. Lloyd,
so that he could not execute the said Office. Against these proceedings in the
Arches a Prohibition was prayed, and day given to Dr. Trevor to show cause why
it should not be granted. They urged, that the Office was Spiritual, for which
reason the discussing of the Right thereof appertains to the Ecclesiastical
Courts. But all the Judges agreed, That though the Office was Spiritual, as to
the Exercising thereof, yet as to the Right thereof it was Temporal, and shall
be tried at the Common Law, for the party has a Freehold therein. Vid. 4 and 5
P. and M Dyer 152. 9. Hunt's Case, for the Registers Office in the Admiralty,
and an Assize brought for that: And so the Chief Justice said, was Adjudged for
the Registers Office to the Bishop of Norwich in B. R. between Skinner and
Mingey, which ought to be tried at the Common Law. And so Blackleech's Case, as
Warburton said, in this Court for the office of Chancellor to the Bishop of
Gloucester, which was all one with the principal Case. And they said, That the
office of Chancellor is within the Statute of Ed. Hill. 1610. 8 Jac. B. R.
Robotham verse. Trevor. Brownl. Rep. pa. 2.
6. for buying of Offices, etc. And so in the manner of Tithing, the
Prescription is Temporal, for which cause it shall be tried at Common Law. And
Prohibition was granted according to the first Rule. So that if a Bishop grant
the office of Chancellorship to A. and B. and after A. release to B. and after
B. die, and after the Bishop grant it to R. against whom A. sues in the
Ecclesiastical Court, supposing his Release to be void, a Prohibition will lie,
for that the office is Temporal as to the Right of it, though the office be
Exercised about Spiritual matters. Pasch. 3 Car. B. R. Chancellor of
Gloucester's Case. Resolved per Curia^, and Prohibition denied.
But if a Chancellor be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court to be deprived for
Insufficiency, as not having knowledge of the Canon Law, no Prohibition lies,
for that they are there the proper Judges of his ability, and not the Judges of
the Common Law.

(21.) In Dr. Trevor's Case, who was Chancellor of a Bishop in Wales, it was
Resolved, That the Offices of Chancellor and Register, etc. Hill. 8. Jac. Dr.
Trevor's Case. Coke lib. 12.
in Ecclesiastical Courts are within the Statute of 5 Ed. 6. cap. 16. which Act
being made for avoiding Corruption of Officers, etc. and advancement of Worthy
persons, shall be expounded most beneficially to suppress Corruption. And
because it allows Ecclesiastical Courts to proceed in Blasphemy, Heresy,
Schism, etc. Loyalty of Matrimonies, Probat of Wills, etc. And that from these
proceedings depends not only the Salvation of Souls, but also the Legitimation
of Issues, etc. and other things of great consequence; It is more reason that
such Officers shall be within the Statute, than Officers which concern Temporal
matters; The Temporal Judge committing the Convict only to the Jailer, Co. ibid.
but the Spiritual Judge by Excommunication, Diabolo: And there is a Proviso in
the Statute for them. And it was Resolved, That such Offices were within the
Purview of the said Statute.

CHAP. XI.
Of Courts Ecclesiastical, and their Jurisdiction.
1. The Antiquity of the Ecclesiastical Laws of England; and what the Chief
Ecclesiastical Courts are in general, anciently called Halimots; The Original
of the Popes Usurpation in England. 2. The Court of Convocation; and
Constitutions of Claringdon. 3. The High Court of Arches, why so called; the
highest Consistory; the Jurisdiction thereof. 4. The Judge of this Court,
whence called Dean of the Arches. 5. The great Antiquity of this Court; the
Number of Advocates and Proctors thereof Anciently limited; their decent Order
in Court. 6. The Prerogative Court of Canterbury. 7. The Court of Audience, to
whom it belonged, where kept, and what matters it took cognizance of. 8. The
Court of Faculties, why so called, what things properly belong to this Court;
As Dispensations, Licenses, etc. with the Original thereof in England. 9 What
the nature of a Dispensation is, and who qualified to grant it. 10. A Dean made
Bishop, the King may dispense with him to hold the Deanary with the Bishopric
by way of Commendam. 11. Whether a Prohibition lies to the Ecclesiastical
Courts, in case they do not allow of Proof by one Witness. 12. Diverse Cases at
the Common Law relating to Prohibitions to the Ecclesiastical Courts. 13. The
Court of Delegates. 14. The High Commission Court; what the Power thereof was.
15. The Court of Review, or Ad Revidendum. 16. The Court of Peculiars. 17. In
what Cases the Ecclesiastical Court shall have Jurisdiction of matters
Subsequent, having Jurisdiction of the Original Suit. 18. In what Case, the
party having allowed of the Jurisdiction, comes too late to have a Prohibition.
19. The difference between a Suit Ad instantiam partis, and that ex Officio
Judicis, in reference to a General Pardon. 20. Whether a Cle^k may strike his
Servant, or another in that case the Clerk and be blameless? 21. What manner of
Avoidance shall be tried at the Common Law, and what in the Ecclesiastical
Court. 22. In what Case a special Prohibition was awarded in a Suit of Tithes
after a Definitive Sentence. 23. A Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court in a
Suit grounded on a Custom against Law. 24. Prohibition awarded to the
Ecclesiastical Court, upon refusal there to give a Copy of the Libel. 25. Where
the Ecclesiastical Court has cognizance of the Principal, they have also of
the Accessory, though the Accessory of matters Temporal. 26. A Prohibition
denied, upon a Suggestion, That the Ecclesiastical Court would not admit of
proof by one Witness. 27. In what case the Ecclesiastical Court shall have the
Cognizance, albeit the bounds of a Village in a Parish come in question. 28.
How the Practice has been touching Prohibitions, where the Subject matter in
question has been of a Mixed nature in reference to Jurisdictions. 29. Certain
Reasons for denial of Prohibitions to the Ecclesiastical Court, in some Cases,
where they might lie. 30. Bounds of Parishes, in reference to the Tithes
thereof, whether Tryable by the Law of the Land, or by the Law of the Church.
31. Where the Question is, more touching the Right of Tithes, than the Bounds
of the Parish, the Ecclesiastical Court has had the cognizance. 32. The
Ecclesiastical Court has cognizance of Administrators Accounts, and no
Prohibition lies. 33. Modus Decimandi sued for by a Parson in the
Eccllesiastical Court, no Prohibition; Nor if he there sues for the Tithe of
things not Titheable. 34. In what cases a Custom, as also a Rent, may be sued
for in the Ecclesiastical Court. 35. If Question be touching the Grant of a
Registers Office in a Bishop's Court, or touching the Tenth after severance
from the Nine parts; In what Court, whether Temporal or Ecclesiastical, it
shall be tried. 36. A Woman exercising the Profession of a Midwife without
License, is therefore sued in the Ecclesiastical Court; whether a Prohibition
lies in that case. 37. The Bounds of a Parish, also whether such a Church be
Parochial or only a Chapel of Ease; In what Court this is to be tried. 38. A
Prohibition granted, upon the disallowance of an Executors Plea, of having
Assets only to pay Debts, in opposition to a Legacy sued for in the
Ecclesiastical Court. 39. A Prohibition awarded upon a Suit in the
Ecclesiastical Court for an account of the Profits of a Benefice; Otherwise in
case the Profits were taken during the time of a Sequestration. 40. A
Prohibition granted to a Party to stay proceedings in his own Suit, and
commenced by himself. 41. Pensions are sueable only in the Ecclesiastical
Court. 42. The right of Tithes coming in question between the Parson and the
Vicar, is a Suit properly belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court. 43. Whether,
and how far, and in what manner the Ecclesiastical Court may take cognizance of
a Modus Decimandi, at large debated. 44. When and how the Canon Law was
introduced into this Realm.
(1.) BEfore the time of King William the Conqueror all matters, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, were determined in the Hundred-Courts, where was wont to
sit one Bishop and one Temporal Judge called Aldermanus; the one for matters of
Spiritual, the other of Temporal cognizance: But that was altered by King
William (and it seems by Parliament, for it was by the assent of the Bishops,
Abbots, and all the chief persons of the Realm) for he Ordained, That the
Bishop or Archdeacon should not hold Plea of the Episcopal Laws, and quae ad
Regimen animarum pertinent, in the Hundred; but by themselves, and there
administer Justice, not according to the Law of the Hundred, but according to
the Episcopal Laws and Canons, as appears by King William's Charter. Roll's
Abridg. verb. Prerogative, lit. L.
Irrot. 2. R. 2. pro Decano and Capitulo Eccles. Lincoln, Jan. Angl. 76, 77.
The Principal Courts Ecclesiastical (whereof some are now out of use) were, and
are the Convocation Court, the High Commission Court, the high Court of Arches,
the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, the Court of Delegates, the Court of
Audience, the Court of Peculiars, the Court of Faculties, besides the Bishops
Consistories, the Archdeacons Courts, and the like, anciently called Halimots,
or holy Courts. And the Saxon Kings, long before William the Conqueror, made
several Laws for the Government of the Church: Among others St. Edward begins
his Laws with this Protestation, In the Case of Praemunire. Davis Rep.
that it is his Princely charge, Vt Populum Domini, and super omnia Sanctam
Ecclesiam, regat and gubernet. And King Edgar, in his Oration to his English
Clergy, Ego (says he) Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis: jungamus
dextras, and gladium gladio Copulemus, ut ejiciantur extra castra Leprosi, and
purgetur Sanctuarium Domini. But upon the Conquest made by the Normans the Pope
took the opportunity to usurp upon the Liberties of the Crown of England; for
the Conqueror came in with the Popes Banner, and under it won the Battle.
Whereupon the Pope sent two Legates into England, with whom the Conqueror
called a Synod, deposed Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, because he had not
purchased his Pall in the Court of Rome, and displaced many Bishops and Abbots
to make room for his Normans. Among the rest the King having earnestly moved
Wolstan Bishop of Worcester, being then very aged, to give up his Staff, was
Answered by him, That he would give up his Staff only to him of whom he first
received the same: And so the old Bishop went to St. Edward's Tomb, and there
offered up his Staff and Ring with these words, viz. Of Thee, O holy Edward, I
received my Staff and my Ring, and to thee I do now surrender the same again.
Which proves, that before the Norman Conquest the Kings of England invested
their Bishops per Annulum and Baculum. By this admission of the Pope's Legates,
was the first step or entry made into his usurped Jurisdiction in England; yet
no Decrees passed or were put in execution touching matters Ecclesiastical
without the King's Royal Assent; nor would he submit himself in point of Fealty
to the Pope, as appears by his Epistle to Gregory the Seventh, Vid. Da. Rep.
Case of Praemunire, fo. 89. yet in his next Successors time, in the time of
William Rufus, the Pope by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury attempted to draw
Appeals to Rome, but prevailed not. Upon this occasion it was, that the King
told Anselme, That none of his Bishops ought to be subject to the Pope, but
that the Pope himself ought to be subject to the Emperor, and that the King of
England had the same absolute Liberties in his Dominions as the Emperor had in
the Empire. Yet in the time of the next King H. 1. the Pope usurped the
Patronage and Donation of Bishoprics, and all other Benefices Ecclesiastical;
at which time Anselme told the King, That the Patronage and Investure of
Bishoprics was not his Right, Hist. For^alensis M. S. in Archiv. Rob. Cotton
Eq. Aur.
because Pope Urban had lately made a Decree, That no Lay-person should give
any Ecclesiastical Benefice. And after this in a Synod held at London, An.
1107. a Decree was made, Cui annuit Rex Henricus (says Matthew. Paris.) that from
thenceforth, Nunquam per donationem Baculi Pastoralis vel Annuli quisquam de
Episcopatu vel Abbathia per Regem, vel quamlibet Laicam manum, investiretur in
Anglia. Hereupon the Pope granted, That the Archbishop of Canterbury for the
time being should be for ever Legatus Natus: And Anselme, for the honor of his
See, obtained, That the Archbishop of Canterbury should in all general Councils
sit at the Pope's foot, tanquam alterius Orbis Papa. Yet after Anselme's death,
this same King gave the Archbishopric of Canterbury to Rodolph Bishop of
London (says Matthew. Paris.) Et illum per Annulum and Pastoralem Baculum
investivit, as before he had invested William Gifford in the Bishopric of
Winchester, contra novi Concilii statuta, as the same Author reports; And
this, because succeeding Popes had broken Pope Vrban's promise, Touching the
not sending of Legates into England; unless the King should require it. And in
the time of the next succeeding King, Stephen; the Pope gained Appeals to the
Court of Rome; For in a Synod at London Convened by Hen. Bishop of Winchester,
the Pope's Legate, it was Decreed, That Appeals should be made from Provincial
Councils to the Pope. Before which time, Appellationes in usu non erant (says
a Monk of that time) donec Henricus Winton. Episcopus malo suo, dum Legatus
esset, crudeliter intrusit. Thus did the Pope usurp Three main points of
Jurisdiction upon Three several Kings after the Conquest (for of King William
Rufus he could win nothing,) viz. upon the Conqueror, the sending of Legates
or Commissioners to hear and determine Ecclesiastical Causes: Upon Hen. 1. the
Donation and Investures of Bishoprics and other Benefices: and upon King
Stephen, the Appeals to the Court of Rome. And in the time of King H. 2. the
Pope claimed exemption of Clerks from the Secular Power.

(2.) The high Court of Convocation is called the Convocation of the Clergy,
and is the highest Court Ecclesiastical, where the whole Clergy of both
Provinces are either present in Person, or by their Representatives. They
commonly meet and sit in Parliament-time; consisting of Two parts, viz. the
Upper-house, where the Archbishops and Bishops do sit; and the Lower House,
where the Inferior Clergy do sit. Convocation a Convocando by the King's Writ.
This Court has the Legislative power of making Ecclesiastical Laws, is
commonly called a National Synod, Convened by the King's Writ, directed to the
Archbishop of each Province, for summoning all Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons,
Cathedrals, and Collegiate Churches, assigning them the time and place in the
said Writ; But one Proctor sent for each Cathedral and Collegiate Church, and
two for the Body of the inferior Clergy of each Diocese may suffice. The
higher House of Convocation, or the House of Lords Spiritual, for the Province
of Canterbury consists of 22 Bishops, whereof the Archbishop is President; the
Lower House, or House of Commons Spiritual, consisting of all the Deans,
Archdeacons, one Proctor for every Chapter, and two for the Clergy of each
Diocese, in all 166 persons, viz. 22 Deans, 24 Prebendaries, 54 Archdeacons,
and 44 Clerks representing the Diocesan Clergy. Both Houses debate and transact
only such matters as his Majesty by Commission allows, concerning Religion
and the Church. 8 H. 6. cap. 1^
All the Members of both Houses of Convocation have the same privileges for
themselves and Menial Servants, as the Members of Parliament have. The
Archbishop of York at the same time, and in the like manner, holds a
Convocation of all his Province at York, constantly corresponding, debating and
concluding the same matters with the Provincial Synod of Canterbury. The
Antiquity of this Court of Convocation is very great, for (according to Beda)
St. Augustine, An. 686. assembled in Council the Britain Bishops, and held a
great Synod. The Clergy was never assembled or called together at a Convocation
by other Authority, Coke, par. 4. Inst. cap. 74.
than by the King's Writ. Vid. Parl. 18 E. 3. nu. 1. Inter Leges Inae, An. Dom.
727. A Convocation of the Clergy called, Magna servorum Dei frequentia. The
Jurisdiction of the Convocation is only touching matters merely Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, wherein they proceed juxta Legem Divinam and Canones Sanctae
Ecclesiae. Ibid.
The Lord Coke cites some Ancient Records to prove, that the Court of
Convocation did not meddle with any thing concerning the Kings Temporal Laws of
the Land, and thence inferrs, That the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. (whereby it
is provided, That no Canons, Constitution, or Ordinance should be made or put
in execution within this Realm by Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy,
which were contrariant or repugnant to the King's Prerogative Royal, or the
Customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm) is but declaratory of the old
Common Law. And by the said Act, the Court of Convocation, as to the making of
new Canons, is to have the King's License, as also his Royal Assent for the
putting the same in execution. But toward the end of that Act there is an
express Proviso, that such Canons as were made before that Act, which be not
contrariant nor repugnant to the King's Prerogative, the Laws, Statutes, or
Customs of the Realm, should be still used and executed, as they were before
the making of that Act. And if any Cause shall depend in contention in any
Ecclesiastical Court, which shall or may touch the King, his Heirs or
Successors, the party grieved shall or may appeal to the Upper-house of
Convocation within fifteen days after Sentence given. Remarkable are the
Constitutions of Claringdon in the time of King H. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Co. ubi supr.
2. occasioned by the Popes claiming Exemption of Clerks from the Secular
power, so contended for by Thomas Becket, then Archbishop of Canterbury,
against the King, as occasioned a convening a Common Council, as well of the
Bishops as of the Nobility, at Claringdon in the time of H. 2. wherein they
revived and reestablished the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Kingdom for the
Government of the Clergy, and ordering of Causes Ecclesiastical. The principal
Heads or Articles whereof were these, In the Case of a Praemunire. Davis Rep.
fo. 91.
viz. (1) That no Bishop or Clerk should depart the Realm without the King's
License; and that such as obtained License, should give Sureties, That they
should not procure any damage to the King or Realm during their absence in
Foreign parts. (2) That all Bishoprics and Abbeys being void should remain in
the Kings hands as his own Demesns, until he had chosen and appointed a Prelate
thereunto; and that every such Prelate should do his Homage to the King before
he be admitted to the place. (3) That Appeals should be made in Causes
Ecclesiastical in this manner, viz. From the Archdeacon to the Ordinary, from
the Ordinary to the Metropolitan, from him to the King, and no farther. (4)
That Peter Pence should be paid no more to the Pope, but to the King. (5) That
if any Clerk should commit Felony, he should be hanged; if Treason, he should
be drawn and quartered. (6) That it should be adjudged High Treason to bring in
Bulls of Excommunication, whereby the Realm should be cursed. (7) That no
Decree should be brought from the Pope to be executed in England, upon pain of
Imprisonment and Confiscation of Goods.

(3.) Arches, So called in Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 19.
or alma Curia de Arcubus, so called of Bow-Church in London, by reason of the
Steeple or Clochier thereof raised at the top with Stone-pillars in fashion
like a Bow-bent Arch-wise, in which Church this Court was ever wont to be held,
being the chief and most Ancient Court and Consistory of the Jurisdiction of
the Archbishop of Canterbury; which Parish of Bow together with twelve others
in London, whereof Bow is the chief, are within the Peculiar Jurisdiction of
the said Archbishop in Spiritual Causes, and exempted out of the Bishop of
London's Jurisdiction. The Judge of this Court of Arches is styled the Dean of
the Arches, or the Official of the Arches-Court, unto whose Deanary or
Officialty to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in all matters and causes
Spiritual, is annexed the Peculiar Jurisdiction of the thirteen Parishes, as
aforesaid; Having also all Ordinary Jurisdiction in Spiritual causes of the
first Instance with power of Appeal, as the superior Ecclesiastical
Consistory, through the whole Province of Canterbury Stat. 24 H. 8. c. 12.
; yet the Lord Coke says Co. Inst. par. 4.. Court of Arches.
, his power to call any person for any Cause out of any part of his Province
within the Diocese of any other Bishop (except it be upon Appeal) is restrained
by the Stat. of 23 H. 23 H 8. cap. 9.
8. c. 9. Yet his Jurisdiction is Ordinary, and extends it self through the
whole Province of Canterbury, insomuch that upon any Appeal made to him from
any Diocese within the said Province, he may forthwith, without further
examination (at that time) of the Cause, issue forth his Citation to be served
on the Appealee, with his Inhibition to the Judge a quo.

In Mich. Mich. 6 Jac. C. B. Porter and Rochesters Case. Co. lib. 13. and ult.
6 Jac. C. B. there was a Case between Porter and Rochester; The Case was this:
Lewis and Rochester, who dwelt in Essex, in the Diocese of London, were sued
for subtraction of Tithes growing in B. in the said County of Essex, by Porter,
in the Court of Arches of the Archbishop of Canterbury in London: where the
Archbishop has a peculiar Jurisdiction of thirteen Parishes, called a Deanary,
exempt from the Authority of the Bishop of London, whereof the Parish of S.
Mary de Arcubus is the chief. And a great Question was moved, Whether in the
said Court of Arches holden in London, he might cite any dwelling in Essex, for
subtraction of Tithes growing in Essex? or whether he be prohibited by the
Statute of 23 H 8. c. 9? Which after debate at Bar by Council, and also by Dr.
Ferrard, Dr. James, and others in open Court, and lastly by all the Justices of
the Common Pleas: A Prohibition was granted to the high Court of Arches. And,
in this case, diverse points were resolved by the Court; (1) That all Acts of
Parliament are parcel of the Laws of England, and therefore shall be expounded
by the Judges of the Laws of England, and not by the Civilians and Canonists,
although the Acts concern Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. (2) Resolved by Coke
Chief Justice, Warburton, Daniel and Foster, Justices, That the Archbishop of
Canterbury is restrained by the 23 H. 8. cap. 9. to cite any one out of his own
Diocese: For Diaecesis dicitur distinctio, etc. quae divisa vel diversa est ab
Ecclesia alterius Episcopatus, and Commissa gubernatio unius, etc. And is
derived a Di, Duo, and Electio, quia separat duas Jurisdictiones: And because
the Archbishop of Canterbury has a peculiar Jurisdiction in London; for this
cause it is fitly said in the Title, Preamble, and body of the Act, that when
the Archbishop sitting in his Exempt peculiar in London, cites one dwelling in
Essex, he cites him out of the Bishop of London's Diocese; Therefore, out of
the Diocese. And in the clause of the penalty of 10 l. it is said, Out of the
Diocese, etc. where the party dwells; which agrees with the signification of
Diocese before. 2. The body of the Act is, No person shall be henceforth cited
before any Ordinary, etc. out of the Diocese or peculiar Jurisdiction, where
the person shall be dwelling; and if so, then a Fortiori, the Court of Arches,
which sits in a Peculiar, may not cite others out of another Diocese. And the
words [ out of the Diocess] are meant of the Diocese or Jurisdiction of the
Ordinary where he dwells. And from the Preamble of the Act the Lord Coke
observes and inferrs, That the intention of the Act was to reduce the
Archbishop to his proper Diocese, unless in these five Cases, viz. (1) For any
Spiritual offense or cause committed, or omitted, contrary to Right and Duty by
the Bishop, etc. which word [ omitted] proves there ought to be a default in
the Ordinary. (2) Except it be in Case of Appeal, and other lawful cause, where
the party shall find himself grieved by the Ordinary, after the matter there
first begun; Therefore, it ought to be first begun before the Ordinary. (3) In
case the Bishop or Ordinary, etc. dare not, or will not Convent the party to be
sued before him. (4) In case the Bishop or Judge of the place, within whose
Jurisdiction, or before whom the Suit by this Act should be begun and
prosecuted, be party, directly or indirectly, to the matter or cause of the
same Suit. (5) In case any Bishop or other inferior Judge under him, etc. make
Request to the Archbishop, Bishop, or other inferior Ordinary or Judge; and
that to be done in Cases only, where the Law Civil or Common does affirm, etc.
The Lord Coke takes notice also of Two Provisoes in that Act, which do likewise
explain it; viz. That it shall be lawful for every Archbishop, to cite any
person inhabiting in any Bishops Diocese in his Province for matter of Heresy:
By which ( says he) it appears, That for all causes not excepted, he is
prohibited by the Act. (2) There is a Saving for the Archbishop, calling any
person out of the Diocese where he shall be dwelling, to the probat of any:
Testament: Which Proviso should be vain, if notwithstanding that Act he should
have concurrent Jurisdiction with every Ordinary throughout his whole Province:
Wherefore it was concluded, That the Archbishop out of his Diocese, unless in
the Cases excepted, is prohibited by the 23 H. 8. c 9. to cite any man out of
any other Diocese: which Act is but a Law declaratory of the Ancient Canons,
and a true Exposition thereof, as appears by the Canon, Cap. Romana in Sext. de
Appellat. and c. de Competenti. in Sext. And (as the Lord Coke observes) the
Act is so expounded by all the Clergy of England, at a Convocation at London,
An. 1 Jac. 1603. Can. 94. who gives us further to understand in this Case
between Porter and Rochester, That the Archbishop of this Realm, before that
Act, had power Legantine from the Pope; By which they had Authority not only
over all, but concurrent Authority with every Ordinary, etc. not as Archbishop
of Canterbury, etc. but by his Power and Authority Legantine. Et tria sunt
genera Legatorum, Case Porter and Rochester. Co. (...) supr.
(1) Quidam de Latere Dom. Papae mittuntur, etc. (2) Dativi, qui simpliciter in
Legatione mittuntur, etc. (3) Nati seu Nativi, qui suarum Ecclesiarum praetextu
Legatione funguntur, and sunt Quatuor, viz. Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis,
Eboracensis, Remanensis, and Pisanis: Which Authority Legantine is now taken
away and utterly abolished.

(4.) It is supposed, that the Judge of this Court was originally styled the
Dean of the Arches, by reason of his substitution to the Archbishop's Official,
when he was employed abroad in Foreign Embassies, whereby both these Names or
styles became at last in common understanding, as it were, Synonym^us Cowel.
Interpr. verb. Arches.
. For the Official of this Court, and the Dean of the Arches by such
Substitution had both the same Juridical Authority, though with distinct styles
in several persons, as appears by that which comes next to the Preface to the
Ancient Statutes of that Court, ordained by Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of
Canterbury Temp. Ed. 1. An. 1295.
, in that Stat. touching the Form of the Judges Oath, where the words are, tam
Officalis dictae Curiae, quam Decanus de Arcubus, suus Commissarius Generalis,
etc. For he that was the Archbishops Official in this Court was heretofore
obliged to Constitute the Dean of the Arches as his Commissary General in his
absence; as also appears by another of those Statutes or Constitutions of that
Court, Ordained by John Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury An. 3 Eliz. 1583.
, the Title of which Statute is, De Decano Ecclesiae Beatae Mariae de Arcubus
Land. wherein we find, viz. Statuimus quod Officialis dictae Curiae teneatur
Decanum Ecclesiae suum Constituere in ipsius absentia Commissarium. Also by the
Statutes and Constitutions of this Court made by Matthew Parker Archbishop of
Canterbury Edit. Lambeth. 6 Maii Ap. 573. and Consecra. 14.
, it is expressly Ordained, That neither the Dean or Official of the Court of
Arches, nor the Auditor of matters and Causes in the Court of Audience of Cant.
nor the Judge of the Prerogative Court, shall exercise the Function or
Profession of an Advocate in any Court belonging to the Jurisdiction of the
said Archbishop, on pain of Excommunication and Suspension Vid. dict. Stat. M.
S.
. In this Court of the Arches the Proctors thereof do wear such Hoods, as
Bachelors of Arts use to wear in the Universities; which Habit or Formality was
first enjoined by Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1435.
Antiq. Brit. 6 H. 6. An. 1435.
. The style of this Court is, Alma Curia Cant. de Arcubus Land. And the Appeal
from it does lie to the King in Chancery 25 H. 8. 19.
.

(5.) This Court of the Arches anciently holden in Bow-Church of London, is of
very great Antiquity; the Lord Coke in the forecited place lets us to
understand, that he meets with it in a very Ancient Record of a Prohibition
Hill 7 E. 1. coram Rege. Rot. 8. Pasch. 12 E. 1. in Banco. Essex. Guliel. de
Mo^^us ma^i Clericus, etc. Vid. Dyer. 7 Eliz. 241.
, In Curia Christianitatis cotam Decano de Arcubus London. The Statutes and
Ordinances of which Court are very Ancient, and to which Those ordained by
Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury, above 380 years since, do referr:
Robertus Winchelse Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis descripsit Judicibus,
Advocatis, Procuratoribus, aliisque ministris Almae suae Curiae de Arcubus jura
quaedam and Statuta, Ant. Brit. fo. 201.
quae ipse in Templo Arcuato sedens pro Tribunali legit atque obligavit. Quinto
Idus November. Anno 1295. William de Sardinia being then his Official, and Henry
de Nassington Dean of the Arches, the said Officials Commissary General; By
which Statutes it was Ordained, That the Advocates belonging to the said
Consistory, should not exceed the number of Sixteen; nor the Proctors above the
number of Ten; nor should any of them, without the special License of the
President of that Consistory, absent themselves thence, by any attendance on
any other Consistory, at such times wherein Causes were to be heard in the
Arches M. S. Stat. Cur de Arcub.. de numero Advocat. and in final. Conclus.
Statut.
; And for the dispatch of the Causes of poor and indigent persons, the Judge
may by the said Statutes assign them Advocates and Proctors to prosecute for
them Gratis and Charitative, and that nothing be paid for the Process, Acts of
Court, Examinations, Sentence, or other Court-Fees in such Cases Dict. Stat..
Item Procuratores. Vid. Provinc. Constable. Lindw. De Offic. Jud. Ord. cap.
S^atuimus* gloss. verb. Ad Pauperes.
. In which Court the Senior Advocates by the same Statutes are to take their
places opposite to the Judge, the others on each side of him, nigher to, or
remoter from him according to their Seniority; the like Order in Court to be
observed also by the Proctors. And such was the devotion of those days in that
Consistory, That in order to an imploring of the Divine assistance on their
proceedings in Judgment, it was further Ordained, That Divine Service should be
celebrated in Bow-Church immediately before the first, and after the last
Cession of every Term, the Judge, Advocates, Proctors, and other Officers of
the Court to be present thereat.

(6.) The Prerogative Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury is that Court,
wherein all Testaments are proved, and Administrations granted of the Goods and
Chattels of such persons, as dying within his Province, had at the time of
their death Bona Notabilia in some other Diocese, than that wherein they dyed;
which Bona Notabilia regularly must amount to the value of Five pounds, save in
the Diocese of London, where it is Ten pounds by Composition. The Probat of
every Bishops Testament, Co. Inst. par. 4. cap. 74.
and the granting of the Administration of his Goods and Chattels, albeit he
has not Goods but within his own Jurisdiction, does belong to the Archbishop.
The like Court has the Archbishop of York. From this Court lies the Appeal to
the King in Chancery. If one make two Executors, one of seventeen years of Age,
Pigot and Gascoin's Case. Brownl. Rep. par. 1. Cases in Law, etc.
and the other under, Administration during the Minority is void, because he of
seventeen years old may execute the Will, if Administration during the Minority
in such case be granted; And if the Administrator brings his Action, the
Executor may well release the Debt. One was cited to appear in the Prerogative
Court of Canterbury, which lived out of the Diocese of Canterbury, and upon
that he prayed Prohibition upon the Statute of 23 H. Stat. 23 H. 8. cap. 9.
8. c. 9. which wills, that none shall be cited to appear out of his Diocese,
without assent of the Bishop, and Prohibition was granted: And yet it was said,
that in the time of H. 8. and Q. Ma. that the Archbishop of Canterbury had used
to cite any man dwelling out of his Diocese, and within any Diocese within his
Province, to appear before him in the Prerogative-Court, and this without the
assent of the Ordinary of the Diocese: But it was Resolved by the Court, that
this was by force of the power Legatine of the Archbishop, that (as Lindwood
says) ought to be expressed in the Prohibition, Trin. 8 Jac. Brown l. p. 2.
for the Archbishop of Canterbury, York, Pisa, and Reymes, were Legati nati,
and others but Legati a latere. The Lord Coke, in his Institutes, par. 3. cap.
69. gives us the Resolutions upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 5. That if a man
makes his Testament in paper, and dies possessed of Goods and Chattels above
the value of 40 l. and the Executor causes the Testament to be transcribed in
parchment, and brings both to the Ordinary, etc. to be proved; It is at the
Election of the Ordinary, whether he will put the Seal and Probat to the
Original in paper, or the Transcript in parchment, but whether he put them to
the one or to the other, there can be taken of the Executor, etc. in the whole
but 5 s. and not above; viz. 2 s. 6 d. to the Ordinary, etc. and his Ministers,
and 2 s. 6 d. to the Scribe for Registring the same: or else the said Scribe to
be at his liberty, to refuse the said 2 s. 6 d. and to have for writing every
ten Lines of the same Testament, whereof every Line to contain ten inches, one
penny. If the Executor desire that the Testament in paper may be transcribed in
parchment, he must agree with the party for the Transcribing; but the Ordinary,
etc. can take nothing for that, nor for the Examination of the Transcript with
the Original, but only 2 s. 6 d. for the whole duty belonging to him. Where the
Goods of the deceased do not exceed five pound, the Ordinary, etc. shall take
nothing, and the Scribe to have only for writing of the Probat six pence: so
the said Testament be exhibited in writing, with Wax thereunto affixed ready to
be sealed. Where the Goods of the deceased do amount to above the value of five
pound, and do not exceed the sum of forty pound, there shall be taken for the
whole but 3 s. 6 d. whereof to the Ordinary, etc. 2 s. 6 d. and 12 d. to the
Scribe for Registring the same. Where by Custom less has been taken in any of
the Cases aforesaid, there less is to be taken. And where any person requires a
Copy or Copies of the Testament so proved, or Inventory so made, the Ordinary,
etc. shall take for the Search, and making of the Copy of the Testament or
Inventory (if the Goods exceed not five pound) six pence; and (if the Goods
exceed five pound, and exceed not forty pounds) twelve pence. And if the Goods
exceed forty pounds, then two shillings six pence, or to take for every Ten
lines thereof of the proportion before rehearsed, a penny. And when the party
dies Intestate, Mich. 20 Jac. in Came. Stellat. Sr. Jo. Bennet's Case. Co. Inst.
par. 3. cap. 69.
the Ordinary may dispose somewhat in pious uses, notwithstanding the Act of 31
Ed. 3. but with these Cautions: (1) That it be after the Administration
granted, and Inventory made, so as the state of the Intestate may be known, and
thereby the sum may appear to be competent. (2) The Administrator must be
called to it. (3) The use must be public and godly. (4) It must be expressed
in particular. And (5) There must be a Decree made of it, and entered of Record.

(7.) The Court of Audience, Curia Audientiae Cantuariensis. The Lord Coke
touching the Jurisdiction of Courts, taking notice of this of the Audience
among other of the Ecclesiastical Courts Co. Inst. 4. par. cap. 74.
, says, That this Court is kept by the Archbishop in his Palace, and meddleth
not with any matter between party and party of any contentious Jurisdiction,
but deals with matters pro forma, and Confirmations of Bishops Elections,
Consecrations, and the like, and with matters of voluntary Jurisdiction, as the
granting of the Guardianship of the Spiritualties Sede vacant of Bishops,
Admissions and Institutions to Benefices, dispensing with Banns of Matrimony,
and such like. This Court did belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and was
in point of Authority equal with, but in point of Dignity and Antiquity
inferior to the Court of Arches. It seems that Anciently the Archbishop of
Canterbury did hear diverse Causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance
Extra-judicially, and at home in his own Palace, wherein, before he would come
to any final determination, his usage was to commit the discussion thereof to
certain persons learned in the Laws Civil and Canon, who thereupon were styled
his Auditors, whence in process of time it centered in one particular person
styled, Causarum Negotiorumque Audientiae Cantuariensis Auditor seu Officialis:
And from hence the Original of this Court is properly derived. With this office
of the Auditor the Chancery of the Archbishop is said to have been heretofore
commonly joined, not controverting any matters of contentious Jurisdiction in
any decisions of Causes between Plaintiff and Defendant, Vid. Hist. de Antiq.
Eccles. Britan.
but such only as were Voluntariae Jurisdictionis and ex Officio, touching such
things only as are fore-specified, and such like. By the Provincial
Constitutions it is Ordained, That for the ease of the People they may at times
convenient (to be assigned by the Bishop) have access to their Diocesan, Et
quod Praelati pers^^. liter Audiant quaerelas in his Cathedral, or next
Parochial Church, vel in aliqua Maneriorum suorum Capella, si talis fuerit.
Lindw. de Offic. Jud. Ord. cap. Statuimus. in gloss. verb. in Publico. It seems
not altogether improbable, but that from the practice hereof this Court of
Audience anciently had its Original, as aforesaid; And although it be not now
in use as heretofore, yet considering the Subject Matter it only took
cognizance of, it was a good Expedient to prevent many Suits at Law in Foro
Contentioso.

(8.) Faculty [or, Court of Faculties] in the sense here meant and intended,
must not be understood according to its original and genuine signification, but
as a term of Art according to a limited construction, restrained under that
peculiar notion and particular understanding which the Law has of it, in
reference to a branch of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: And so it is
understood and commonly used for that Privilege or especial Power, which is
legally granted to a man by License, favor, indulgence, and dispensation to
have or do that, which otherwise by the Canon Law he could not; as to eat Flesh
upon days prohibited; to Marry without Banns first published; to hold Two or
more Ecclesiastical Benefices incompatible; the Son to succeed the Father in
his Benefice, Vid. Vaugh. Rep. fo. 25.
and such like. A Faculty granted to one, who is not Incumbent, to take a void
Benefice, is void: But a Faculty to one, who is Incumbent of a Benefice to
retain the same, is good. It is called Faculties in the Statute of 28 H. 8.
cap. 16. Sir Ed. Coke makes mention of the Court of Faculties, although it
holds no Plea of Controversy Co. par. 4. Inst. cap. 74.
. It belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his chief Officer thereof is
called Magister ad Facultates, whose power is to grant Dispensations to the
ends and purposes aforesaid; and so may every Diocesan, as to that of Marriage,
and eating of Flesh on days prohibited. Faculty (according to Sir Ed. Coke in
the place forecited) signifies a Dispensation: so that Facultates (in this
sense) Dispensationes and Indulta are Synonyma. Who likewise there says, that
this Authority was raised and given to the Archbishop of Canterbury by the
Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. whereby Authority is given to the said Archbishop
and his Successors to grant Dispensations, Faculties, etc. by himself or his
sufficient and substantial Commissary or Deputy for any such matters, commonly
called the Master of the Faculties, and of all such matters as whereof
heretofore such Dispensations, Faculties, etc. then had been accustomed to be
had at the Sea of Rome, or by Authority thereof. Trin. 44 Eliz. C. B. Rot.
1525. lib. 4. fo. 117. Lib. pl. Co. p. 512, 513. Pascl. 9 J^c. C. B. en
Ireland, le Case de Commenda in Davis Rep.
For by the Stat. of 28 H. 8. c. 16. it appears, the Bishop of Rome did grant
Faculties and Dispensations to the Kings Subjects, as, Pluralities, Unions,
Trialities, Appropriations, Commendams, Exemptions. And the Judgment of
Parliament expressed in the Preamble of that Statute of Faculties is very
remarkable to this purpose; where it is recited, that the Bishop of Rome had
deceived and abused the Subjects of the Crown of England, pretendig and
persuading them, That he had full power to Dispense with all human Laws, Uses,
and Customs of all Realms, in all Causes which be called Spiritual: which
matter has been usurped and practiced by him and his Predecessors for many
years, to the great derogation of the Imperial Crown of England. For whereas
the said Realm of England, recognizing no Superior under God, but the King,
has been, and yet is, free from subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such
as have been devised, made, and Ordained within this Realm for the weal of the
same, or to such other as by sufferance of the King and his Progenitors the
People of this Realm have taken at their free liberty, and by their own
consent, to be used among them, and have bound themselves by long use and
custom to the observance of the same, not as to the observance of the Laws of
any Foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate; but as to the accustomed and ancient
Laws of this Realm, originally established as Laws of the same by the said
sufferance, consent, and custom, and not otherwise: it stands with natural
equity and good reason, that all such human Laws made within this Realm, or
induced into this Realm by the said Sufferance, Consent, and Custom, should be
Dispensed with, abrogated, amplified or diminished by the King and his
Parliament, or by such persons as the King and Parliament should authorize,
etc. Vid. 21 H. 7. 4. a. where it is said, That certain Priests were deprived
of their Benefices by Act of Parliament in the time of R. 2. whereby it has
been concluded, that the King of England, and not the Pope, before the making
of the said Statute of Faculties, might de jure Dispense with the
Ecclesiastical Law in that and other cases. For although many of our
Ecclesiastical Laws were first devised in the Court of Rome, yet they being
established and confirmed in this Realm by acceptance and usage, are now become
English Laws, and shall no more be reputed Roman Canons or Constitutions: As
Rebuffus speaking De Regula Cancellariae Romanae de verisimili notitia, Haec
Regula (says he) ubique in Regno Franciae est recepta, and est Lex Regni
effecta, and observatur tanquam Lex Regni, non tanquam Papae Regula; and Papa
eam revocare non potest. The Kings of England from time to time in every Age
before the time of H. 8. have used to grant Dispensations in Causes
Ecclesiastical; For whereas the Law of the Church is, That every Spiritual
person is Visitable by the Ordinary, King William the Conqueror by his Charter
Dispensed with the exempted the Abbey of Battle from the Visitation and
Jurisdiction of the Ordinary in these express words, Sitque dicta Ecclesia
libera and quieta in perpetuum ab omni subjectione Episcoporum, and quarumlibet
personarum dominatione, sicut Ecclesia Christi Cantuariensis, etc. whereby he
Dispences with the Law of the Church in that Case Vid. libr. De vera
differentia Regiae potestatis and Ecclesiasticae. Edit. 1534. where that whole
Charter is recited at large. The like Charter was granted to the Abbey of
Abingdon by King Kenulphus, 1 H. 7. 23, and 25. and Cawdry's Case, Co. par. 5.
fo. 10. a. So likewise every Appropriation does comprize in it a Dispensation
to the Parson Imparsonee, to have and retain the Benefice in perpetuity, as
appears in Grendon's Case. Plow. Com. 503. In which Act the King by the Common
Law shall be always Actor, not only as Supreme Patron, but also as Supreme
Ordinary; as is also observed in Grendon's Case. For the King alone without the
Pope may make Appropriations. 7 E. 3. Fitz. Quare Impedit 19. And in the Case
of Malum prohibitum, and Malum in se, in 11 H. 7. 12. a. it is held, That the
King may dispense with a Priest to hold Two Benefices; and with a Bastard, that
he may be a Priest, notwithstanding the Ecclesiastical Laws which are to the
contrary. And as he may dispense with those Laws, so he may pardon all Offenses
contrary to these Laws, and his Pardon is a bar to all Suits pro salute
Animae, or reformatione morum, and all Suits ex Officio in the Ecclesiastical
Court. Hall's Case, Coke 5. par. fo. 51. In all Faculties or Dispensations, for
the holding of Two Benefices, granted at the Court of Rome, there was always a
particular Derogation or Non obstante the right of Patronage of Lay-Patrons,
and of the right of the King by name express, where the Patronage belonged to
him, otherwise the Faculty was void; For by the Canon Law the Lay-Patrons ought
to be called to give their Consents in all Cases of that nature; And if such a
particular Non obstante were not added in the Faculty, then there was inserted
another Clause, viz. Dummodo Patronorum expressus accedat Consensus; also by
another Clause Authority was always given to the Official or Archdeacon, or
other Ecclesiastical Minister, to put him, to whom the Faculty is granted, into
possession of the Benefice cum acciderit. And because by the Canon Law the
Patron's consent was ever requisite in a Commenda, for that reason in every
Faculty or License granted by the Pope to make a Permutation, Union, or
Appropriation of Churches, these words were ever added, viz. Vocatis quorum
interest, which chiefly intends the Patron. And which Union and Approbation
shall not according to the Common Law be made without the Patron's assent. Vid.
11 H. 7. 8. 6 H. 7. 13. 46 Ass. p. 50. Ed. 3. 26. 40 Ed. 3. 26. Grendon's Case,
Plow. Com. 498. a. A Faculty or Dispensation is of such force, that if a Clerk
be presented to a Benefice with Cure, and be Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted
into the same, so that the Church is full of him, if afterward he be presented
to another Benefice Incompatible, or elected to a Bishopric, and before he is
Instituted to the second Benefice, or be created Bishop, he obtain a Faculty or
Dispensation to retain the first Benefice Perpetuae Commendae titulo, that is,
for his life, that Faculty or Dispensation shall be of such effect, that the
former Benefice shall not be void by acceptance of the Second, or by promotion
to the Bishopric; but he shall remain full and perfect Incumbent of the first
Benefice during his life. In the time of H. 6. when Henry Beaufort, Great Uncle
to the King, being Bishop of Winchester, was made a Cardinal, and after that
purchased from the Pope a Bull Declaratory, that notwithstanding he were made
Cardinal, yet his Bishopric of Winchester should not be void, but that he
might retain the same as before; yet it was held, That the Sea of Winchester
was void by assuming the Cardinalship, which exempts the Bishop from the
Jurisdiction of his Metropolitan; And for that the Cardinal fell into a
Praemunire, for which he purchased his Pardon, which is sound among the
Charters 4 H. 6. in Archivis Turr Land. 6, and 7 Eliz. Dyer 233. a. Jo.
Packhurst being elected to the Bishopric of Norwich, before that he was
created Bishop, obtained a Faculty or Dispensation from the Archbishop of
Canterbury (by force of the Statute of Faculties) to retain a Parsonage which
he had before in Commendam, for Three years, viz. a Festo Michaelis An. Dom.
1560. usque ad idem Festum, in An. 1563. Before the first Feast of St. Michael,
Packhurst is created Bishop, and afterward he resigned the Benefice. And the
Question was, whether that Benefice became void by the resignation of
Packhurst, or by his promotion to the Bishopric? And it was adjudged, That the
Church became void by his Resignation: Which proves, That by virtue of the said
Faculty or Dispensation he continued Parson until he had Resigned. Vid. N. Br.
36. h. If a Parson who has a Faculty or Dispensation to hold his Rectory, be
created a Bishop, and after the Patron present another Incumbent, who is
Instituted and Inducted, now the Bishop shall have a Spoliation against that
Incumbent; which proves that his real possession in the Parsonage always
continued by virtue of the said Faculty or Dispensation. And in this Case of a
Commendam in Sir Joh. Davis Reports, this difference is put between a Faculty
to take a Benefice, and a Faculty to retain a Benefice, viz. That a Faculty
granted to one who is not Incumbent to Take a void Benefice, is void: And a
Faculty to one who is Incumbent of a Benefice to Retain the same Benefice, is
good. By virtue of these Faculties, Dispensations, and Provisions from the
Pope, Edmond the Monk of Bury, who was a Minister in the Court of King Ed. 3.
had many Benefices; as appears in the foresaid Case of the Bishop of St.
David's, 11 H. 4. And Hankford said in the same Case, fo. 191. a. That by virtue
of such Faculty one and the same person had been Abbot of Glastenbury, and
Bishop also of another Church simul and semel, and had the Possessions and
Dignity of both at the same time. Likewise Hen. Chichley (who was afterward
Archbishop of Canterbury) being a Prebend in the Cathedral Church of Sarum, was
elected Bishop of St. David's, and before his Consecration, the Pope reciting by
his Bull, that he was elected Bishop of St. David's, granted him a Faculty and
power to hold and enjoy all his other Benefices, till the Pope should otherwise
order, etc. Vid. Nov. Decis. Rot. 331. And that these Faculties or
Dispensations to hold Benefices in Commendam, were granted in the Court of Rome
in the time of King H. 5. appears in Lindw. de Praeb. c. Audistis. ver.
Dispensatione. And although in case of Hen. Beauford aforesaid, it was held,
That the Dispensation came too late, it being granted after the Bishop was
created Cardinal; yet afterward in the time of King H. 8. Cardinal Wolsey,
having, before he was created Cardinal, obtained a Bull from the Pope, to
retain the Archbishopric of York as perpetual Administrator, and the Abbey of
St. Albans in perpetuam Commendam, he held both during his life by virtue of
the said Faculty or Dispensation. Vid. 27 H. 8. 15. b. By these Presidents and
Authorities it is evident, That before the making of the foresaid Statute of
Faculties, such Dispensations were had and obtained at the Court of Rome, to
hold in Commendam Ecclesiastical Benefices in England. But the Truth is (as in
the foresaid Case de Commenda. Davis Rep.) such Faculties or Dispensations
granted by the Pope touching Ecclesiastical Benefices in England were ever
contrary to the Law of the Realm, for it was a mere usurpation on the Crown of
England before the Statutes made against Provisors. And these Statutes were
made in declaration of the Common Law in that point. 12 Ed. 2. Fitz. Qua. Imp.
169. 19 Ed. 2. Eitz. Qua non admisit, 7. 15 Ed. 3. Fitz. Qua. Imp. 160. 21 Ed.
3. 40. 11 H. 4. 230. a. It is also meet to be known, That long before King H.
8. 25 Ed. 1.
the Statute of 16 R. 2. and diverse other Laws against Provisors, 16 R. 2.
and Appeals to Rome, and the Popes Usurpation upon the Rights of the Crown of
England, 38 Ed. 3 c. 1.
were made well-nigh as severe as any since. 27 Ed. 3. c. 1.
The first encroachment of the Bishop of Rome upon the Liberties of the Crown
of England was made in the time time of King William the Conqueror; 25 Ed. 3.
For before that time the Pope's Writ did not run in England, Davis Rep. i^ the
case of Praemunire. fo. 87.
his Bulls of Excommunication and Provision came not thither, nor were any
Citations or Appeals made from thence to the Court of Rome. Eleutherius the
Pope, within less than two hundred years after Christ, writes to Lucius the
British King, Ibid. fo. 88.
and calls him God's Vicar within his Kingdom. Pelagius the Monk of Bangor,
about An. 400. being cited to Rome, refused to appear upon the Pope's Citation,
affirming, That Britain was neither within his Diocese nor his Province And
when about the year 600, Augustine the Monk was sent by Gregory the Great into
England, to Convert the Saxons, the British Bishops then in Wales regarded
neither his Commission nor his Doctrine, as not owing any duty to, nor having
any dependence on the Court of Rome, but still retained their Ceremonies and
Traditions, which they received from the East-Church upon the first plantation
of the Faith in that Island. And though Ina the Saxon King gave the Peter Pence
to the Pope, partly as Alms, and partly in recompense of a House erected in
Rome for English Pilgrims, yet certain it is, that Alfred, Aethelstane, Edgar,
Edmond, Cauutus, and Edward the Confessor, and other Kings of the Saxon Race,
gave all the Bishoprics in England per Annulum and Baculum.

(9.) In the Case of Evans against Askwith, it was agreed Hill. 22 ^ c. B. R.
Rot. 2164. Evans and Riffin verse. A^kwith. Jones Rep.
, That the nature of a Dispensation is, for to derogate and make void a
Statute, Canon, or Constitution, as to that which it prohibites as to the
party, and it is as an Exception (as to him) out of the Statute or
Constitution. It is said, that a Dispensation is Provida Relaxatio mali
prohibiti necessitate vel utilitate pensata Cokes Rep. par. 11. and Jones ibid.
. And in the same Case it was also Resolved by all the Judges, That the King
has power to Dispense with Statutes and Canons in force within this Realm: By
the very Common Law, of right it was in the King; for the Canons are the
Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land, and do not bind, except they are received in
the Realm, as appears by the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. Dr. Standish's Case.
Relw. Rep.
. And by the Statute of Merton, touching one born before Marriage, as by the
Canon, yet at Common Law he is Legitimate. And 10 H. 7. 12. it is said, That
the King may Dispense with one to hold Two Benefices; and it seems the Pope de
facto and by Usurpotion did use to Dispense, and by the Stat. of 25 H. 8. cap.
21. the power is taken from the Pope and conferred Cumulative on the King Vid.
Cawdry's Case. Co. Rep. par. 5. 55. and Grendon's Case. Plow. Com.
: And by the Stat. of 25 H. 8. the Archbishop of Canterbury may Dispense in
diverse cases; but that does not exclude the power of the King.

(10.) In the same Case it was held per Curiam una voce, That where a Dean is
made a Bishop, with a Dispensation from the King to hold the Deanary
notwithstanding the Bishopric, such Dispensation continues him Dean as before,
by force and virtue of his former Title to all intents and purposes, so as that
he may confirm, or make Leases, or do any other Act as a Dean, as if he had not
been made a Bishop at all; For before the Cano nor Constitution made at the
Council of Laterall, for the voidance of the first Benefice by taking another
Benefice or Promotion, it was lawful and not forbidden so to do; and the nature
of the Dispensation is to exempt him from the penalty, and so it remains as if
the Canon had never been made, which appears by 11 H. 4. in the Case of the
Bishop of St. David's, That such a person that had such a Dispensation being
Defendant in a Quare Impedit counterpleaded the Title of the Plaintiff, which
he could not do by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. unless he had been the Possessor
thereof, and he in possession by 4 H. 8. Dyer 1. is one who is and continues
Incumbent by Institution and Induction: Therefore in this case the first Title
and Induction continues; And in the same Case it was also agreed, That such
Dispensation is not any Provision, for no new thing is done, but the ancient
Title continues. And in Fitz. N. B. Brief Spoliation, such a person may
maintain a Spoliation, and none can maintain that, unless he continue his
Institution and Induction, Parkhur's Case, 6 and 7 Eliz. Such a Commendam
continues to the person, be it that the Benefice be void by Resignation; And 21
Jac. in a Quare Impedit in C. B. by Woodley against the Bishop of Exeter and
Manwayring, it was so Resolved and Adjudged, and the words of that Dispensation
are sufficient; for it is to retain it during his life in Commendam, aut modo
quocunque de jure magis efficaci, and all the profits thereto belonging, ac
caetera facere and perimpl^re quae ad Deconatum pertinent in tam amplis modo
and forma, as if he had not been promoted to be a Bishop, with a Non obstante
to all Canons* etc. And so they all concluded, That the Dispensation continues
him Dean, enabling him to Confirm Leases made by the Bishop.

(11.) W. Libels for a Legacy in the Ecclesiastical Court against B. who moves
for a Prohibition, because he had there pleaded Plene Administravit, and proved
that by one Witness, and they would not allow it. Richardson, before the
Statute of Ed. 6. the proper Suit for Tithes was there, and if they allow not
one Witness to prove payment, a Prohibition shall be granted. And he put Morris
and Eaton's Case in the Bishop of Winchester's Case, where it was Ruled; if the
Ecclesiastical Court will not allow that Plea which is good in our Law, a
Prohibition shall be granted, as in the Case of Tithes. And he said, the Case
of a Legacy is all one. Crook, When one comes to discharge a thing by due
matter of Law, and proves it by one Witness; if it be not allowed, no
Prohibition shall be granted there. Richardson, Our Case is proof of Plene
Administravit pleaded, which goes in discharge: But if there be enough pleaded,
which goes in discharge, and proves that by one Witness, and not allowed, a
Prohibition shall be granted. Hutton said, That properly for a Legacy the Suit
is in the Ecclesiastical Court: although they may sue in the Chancery for it,
yet the proper Court is the Ecclesiastical Court. And they said, that they used
to allow one Witness with other good Circumstantial proofs, if they be not in
some Criminal causes, where of necessity there must be two Witnesses. In one
Hawkin's Case, Farmor of an Appropriation, Libels for Tithes of Lambs for seven
years: And there payment was proved by one Witness, and a Prohibition was
granted for Non-allowance. Yelverton, There may be a difference where the Suit
is merely Ecclesiastical for a Sum of Money, as for a Legacy, there the payment
of the Legacy is of the nature of the thing, and the Ecclesiastical Court shall
have Jurisdiction of the proof and matter. But if one gives a Legacy of twenty
Oxen, and the other pleads payment of as much money in satisfaction, there they
cannot proceed, but at Common Law, for that, that the Legacy is altered; And if
a proof of one Witness is not accepted, a Prohibition shall be granted, for now
it is a Legal Trial, 35 H. 6. If the Principal be proper for their Court, the
Accessory is of the same nature. Also the Suit is commenced for a Legacy, and
the other pleads Plene Administr. there they proceed upon the Common Law: For
they sometimes take that for Assets, which our Law does not take. It was
adjudged in the King's Bench. That where a Proof by one Witness of a Release of
a Legacy is disallowed, a Prohibition shall be granted. Crook, In this Case a
Proof of setting out of Tithes by one Witness disallowed, a Prohibition shall
be granted Pasch. 4 Car. C. B. Warner against ^arret. Hetley's Rep.
.

(12.) One was obliged in the Ecclesiastical Court not to accompany with such a
Woman, unless to Church or to a Market overt. And afterward he was summoned to
the Ecclesiastical Court, to say, whether he had broken his Obligation, or not?
And Ayliffe moved for a Prohibition, which was granted; for that, that the
Forfeiture is a Temporal thing; And it does not become them in the
Ecclesiastical Court, to draw a man in Examination for breaking of Obligations,
or for Offenses against Statutes Gammon 's Case. Hetley's Rep.
.

C. Administrator durante Minori aetate of his Brothers Son; the Son died, and
made the Wife of H. his Executrix, who called C. to account in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the Goods. And he pleads an Agreement between him and
H. and that he gave 80 l. in satisfaction of all Accounts: But they did not
accept the Plea; for that a Prohibition was prayed to be granted. Richardson,
If the party received the money in satisfaction, then there shall not be a
Prohibition granted; but if there were only an Agreement without payment of
money, then otherwise. Crook, It is a Spiritual matter, and they have
Jurisdiction to determine of all things concerning that. But the Agreement
prevents, that it cannot come into the Ecclesiastical Court (...) Case.
Hetley's Rep.
.

G. Libels against B. before the High Commissioners for an Assault made upon
him, being a Spiritual person. And Attbowe prayed a Prohibition; for that
although their Commission by express words gives them power in that case, yet
that Commission is granted upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. And it is not within the
Statute: and although it be within the Commission, yet they have not
Jurisdiction. The words of the Statute are, That such Jurisdictions and
Privileges, etc. as by any Ecclesiastical power have heretofore been, or
lawfully may be exercised for the Visitation of Ecclesiastical State and
Persons, and for reformation of the same, and for all manner of Errors,
Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities, etc. These
words extend only to men who stir up Dissentions in the Church, as
Schisimaticks, and new-sangled Men, who offend in that kind. Henden Sergeant,
The Suit is there for reformation of Manners; and before the new amendment of
the Commissions, Prohibitions were granted, if they meddled with Adultery, or
in Case of Defamations; but now by express words they have power of these
matters. And that matter is punishable by the Commissioners for two Causes: (1)
There is within the Act of Parliament by the words annexed, all Jurisdictions
Ecclesiastical, etc. (2) It gives power to the Commissioners to exercise that;
And that is merely Ecclesiastical, being only pro reformatione morum, etc. The
King by his Prerogative having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may grant
Commissions to determine such things, 5 Rep. Ecclesiastical Cases, fol. 8. And
Richardson said, The Statute de Articulis Cleri gave cognizance to the Ordinary
for laying violent hands on a Clerk. But you affirm, That all is given to the
Commissioners, and thereby they should take all power from the Ordinary: But by
the Court, the Commissioners cannot meddle for a stroke in Church-Land, nor pro
subtractione Decimarum. And yet they have express Authority by their
Commission; for by that course all the Ordinaries in England should be to no
purpose. And so upon much debate a Prohibition was granted Giles against (...).
Hetley 's Rep.
.

On an Arrest on Christmas Day, it was said by Richardson Chief Justice, That
upon Arresting a man upon Christmas Day, going to Church, in the Churchyard,
He who made the Arrest, may be censured in the Star Chamber for such an
Offense. Quod Nota. It was also said by Richardson, that if a man submit
himself out of the Diocese to any Suit, he can never have a Prohibition,
because the Suit was not according to the Statute, 23 H. 8. commenced within
the proper Dioc^ss, as it was Adjudged. Quod Nota Ibid. Hetley's Rep.
.

It the Ecclesiastical Court proceed in a matter that is mere Spiritual, and
pertinent to their Court, according to the Civil Law, although their
proceedings are against the Rules of the Common Law, yet a Prohibition does not
lie. As if they refuse a single Witness to prove a Will, for the cognizance of
that belongs to them. Vid the Stat. 24 E. 1.
And Agreed also, That if a man makes a Will, but appoints no Executor, that
that is no Will, but void: But if the Ordinary commits the Administration with
that annexed, the Legatary to whom any Legacy is devised by such Will, may sue
the Administrator for their Legacies in the Ecclesiastical Court. Note, P. 4.
Jac. B. R. Peep's Case, a Prohibition was denied where they in the
Ecclesiastical Court refused a single Witness in proof of payment of a Legacy
Chadron against Harris. Noy 's Rep.
. After Prohibition, if the Temporal Judge shall upon sight of the Libel
conceive, that the Spiritual Court ought to determine the cause, he is to award
a Consultation And by the Sta^. of 50 E. 3. c. 4. the Ecclesiastical Judge may
proceed by virtue of the Consultation once granted, notwithstanding any other
Prohibition afterward, if the matter in the Libel be not enlarged or changed.

B. Administrator of A. makes C. his Executor and dies; C. is sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court to make an Account of the goods of A. the first Intestate:
And C. now moves for a Prohibition, and had it; for an Executor shall not be
compelled to an Account: But an Administrator shall be compelled to Account
before the Ordinary Sparrow against Norfolk. Noy 's Rep.
.

Resolved by the Court, That a Prohibition shall not be awarded to the Admiral
or Ecclesiastical Courts after Sentence; Also that a Plea was there pleaded and
refused, which was Triable at Common Law Hollmasts Case. Noy's Rep.
.

Note, A Prohibition was awarded upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. because the party
was sued out of the Dioc^ss. And now a Consultation was prayed, because the
Interior Court had remitted that Cause to the Arches, and their Jurisdiction
also; yet a Consultation was denied Noy's Rep. post Dr. Cademan's Case verse.
Grendan.
.

A Suit was in the Ecclesiastical Court, and Sentence passed for one with
Costs, and nine months after the Costs are Assest and Taxed; and then comes a
Pardon of 21 Jac. which relates before the taxing of the Costs. But afterward
the Sentence and that Pardon was pleaded, and allowed in discharge of the
Costs. Then W. who had recovered, sues an Appeal, and P. brought a Prohibition,
and well, and no Consultation shall be awarded, because by the Court, that
Pardon relating before the Taxation of Cost, had discharged them. As 5. Rep.
51. Hall's Case Palmer verse. Warner. Noy's Rep.
.

B. and Two others sue upon three several Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court,
and they join in a Prohibition. And by the Court that is not good: But they
ought to have had three several Prohibitions; and therefore a Consultation was
granted. Mich. 26 and 27 Eliz. C. B. If A. Libels against B. for Three things,
by one Libel, B. may have One or Three Prohibitions. Note, Dyor 171. Post
S^adding's Case in Noy's Rep.
.

(13.) By the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. Appeals to Rome being prohibited, it
is Ordained, That for default of Justice in any of the Courts of the
Archbishops of this Realm, etc. it shall be lawful to Appeal to the King in his
High Court of Chancery, and thereupon a Commission shall be granted, etc. And
by a Proviso toward the end of that Statute, an Appeal is granted to the King
in Chancery on Sentences in places exempt in such manner as was used before to
the Sea of Rome. So that this Court grounded on the said Commission is properly
as well as vulgarly called, The Court of Delegates, for that the Judges thereof
are Delegated to fit by virtue of the Kings said Commission under his Great
Seal upon an Appeal to him in Chancery, and that specially in Three Causes: (1)
When a Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause by the Archbishop or his
Official. (2) When any Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause in places
exempt. (3) When a Sentence is given in the high Court of Admiralty in Suits or
Actions Civil and Maritime, according to the Civil Law. That this Court of
Delegates may Excommunicate H. 10 Jac. B. per Coke.
, was Resolved by all the Judges in the Archbishop of Canterbury's Case Roll.
Abridg. verb. Prerogative, lit. G.
. They may also commit or grant Letters of Administration H. 10 Jac.
. This Court of Delegates is the highest Court for Civil Affairs that concern
the Church, for the Jurisdiction whereof it was provided, 25 H. 8. That it
shall be lawful for any Subject of England, in case of defect of Justice in the
Courts of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to Appeal to the King's Majesty in his
Court of Chancery, and that upon such Appeal, a Commission under the Great Seal
shall be directed to certain persons, particularly designed for that business:
so that from the highest Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Co. Inst. par.
4. cap. 74.
there lies an Appeal to this Court of Delegates. Of this Subject of Appeals
the Lord Coke says, That an Appeal is a Natural defense, which cannot be taken
away by any Prince or power, and in every Case generally when Sentence is
given, and Appeal made to the Superior, the Judge that did give the Sentence
is obliged to obey the Appeal, and proceed no further until the Superior has
examined and determined the cause of Appeal. Nevertheless where this Clause (
Appellatione remota) is in the Commission, the Judge that gave Sentence is not
bound to obey the Appeal, but may execute his Sentence and proceed further,
until the Appeal be received by the Superior, and an Inhibition be sent unto
him: For that Clause Appellatione remota has Three notable effects; (1) That
the Jurisdiction of the Judge a quo is not by the Appeal suspended or stopped,
for he may proceed the same notwithstanding. (2) That for proceeding to
Execution or further process, he is not punishable. (3) That these things that
are done by the said Judge after such Appeal cannot be said void, for they
cannot be reversed per viam Nullitatis. But if the Appeal be just and lawful,
the Superior Judge ought of right and equity to receive and admit the same;
and in that case he ought to reverse and revoke all mean Acts done after the
said Appeal in prejudice of the Appellant. Dyer. Co. ubi supr.
At the Parliament held at Clarendon, An. 10 H. 2. cap. 8. the Forms of Appeals
in Causes Ecclesiastical, are set down within the Realm, and none to be made
out of the Realm, Ne quis appellat ad dominum Papam, etc. so that the first
Article of the Statute of 25 H. 8. concerning the prohibiting of Appeals to
Rome is declaratory of the ancient Law of the Realm. And it is to be observed
(says the Lord Coke) that the first attempt of any Appeal to the Sea of Rome
out of England, was by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Reign of
William Rufus, and yet it took no effect. Touching the power and Jurisdiction
of the Court of Delegates. Co. ibid.
Vid. le Case Stevenson versus Wood. Trin. 10 Jac. B. R. Rot. 1491. in Bulstr.
Rep. par. 2. wherein these Three points are specially argued, (1) Whether the
Judges Delegates may grant Letters of Administration? (2) Whether in their
person the King be represented? (3) Whether the Court of Delegates may
pronounce Sentence of Excommunication, or not?

(14.) The High Commission-Court in Causes Ecclesiastical was by Letters
Patents, and that by force and virtue of the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. the
Title whereof is, An Act restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, etc. the High Commissioners might, if they were competent, that
is, if they were Spiritual persons, proceed to Sentence of Excommunication Dyer
23 Eliz. 371. Co. Inst. par. 4. cap. 74.
. What the power of this Court was, and whether they might in Causes
Ecclesiastical proceed to Fine and Imprisonment, is at large examined by the
Lord Coke in the Fourth part of his Institutes, where he reports the Judgment
and Resolutions of the whole Court of Common Pleas thereon, Pasch. 9 Jac. Reg.
upon frequent Conferences and mature deliberation, set down in writing by the
order and command of King James. Likewise whom, and in what Cases the
Ecclesiastical Courts may examine one upon Oath, or not (there being a penal
Law in the Case;) and whether the saying, Quod nemo tenetur seipsum prodere, be
applicable thereunto. Vid. Trin. 13 Jac. B. R. Buroughs, Cox, etc. against the
High Commissioners. Bulstr. par. 3.

(15.) The Statutes of 24 H. 8. and 25 H. 8. do Ordain, That upon certain
Appeals the Sentence given shall be definitive, as to any further Appeal;
notwithstanding which, the King as Supreme Governor, may after such definitive
Sentence grant a Commission of Review or Ad Revidendum, etc. Co. Inst. par. 4.
c. 74.
Sir Ed. Coke gives two Reasons thereof, (1) Because it is not restrained by
the Statute. (2) For that after a definitive Sentence, the Pope as Supreme Head
by the Canon Law used to grant a Commision Ad Revidendum; and what Authority
the Pope here exercised, claiming as Supreme Head, does of right belong to the
Crown, and by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. cap. 1. and 1 Eliz. cap. 1. is annexed
to the same. Which accordingly was Resolved Trin. 39 Eliz. B. R. Hollingworth's
Case; In which Case Presidents to this purpose were cited in Michelot's Case,
29 Eliz. in Goodman's Case, Lib. (...) R^st. fo. 16. Appeal 10 (...). ib. Rome
389.
and in Huet's Case, 29 Eliz. Also vid. Stat. 8 Eliz. cap. 5. In the Case
between Halliwell and Jervoice, where a Parson sued before the Ordinary for
Tithes, and thence he appeals to the Audience, where the Sentence is affirmed;
then the party appeals to the Delegates, and there both Sentences are Repealed:
It was agreed, That in such case a Commission Ad Revidendum the Sentences may
issue forth; but then such a Reviewing shall be final without further Appeal:
But if the Commissioners do not proceed to the Examination according to the
Common Law, they shall be restrained by a Prohibition Mere's Rep.
.

(16.) The Court of Peculiars is that which deals in certain Parishes, lying
in several Diocesses, which Parishes are exempt from the Jurisdiction of the
Bishops of those Diocesses, and are peculiarly belonging to the Archbishop of
Canterbury: Within whose Province there are fifty seven such Peculiars; for
there are certain peculiar Jurisdictions belonging to some certain Parishes,
the Inhabitants whereof are exempt sometimes from the Archdeacons, and
sometimes from the Bishops Jurisdiction.

(17.) If a Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Modus Decimandi, if the
Desendant plead payment, it shall be tried there, and no Prohibition may be
granted, for that the Original Suit was there well commenced Mich. 14 Jac. B.
R. inter G^slin and Harden. Agreed per Curiam. Hob. Rep. Case 314.
. So if payment be pleaded in a Suit depending in the Ecclesiastical Court for
any thing whereof they have the original cognizance R^l. Abr. ver. Prohibition,
page 306.
. But if a man sue for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court against J. S. and
makes Title to them by a Lease made to him by the Parson; and J. S. there also
makes Title to them by a former Lease made to him by the same Parson: so that
the Question there is, which of the said Leases shall be preferred. In this
case a Prohibition shall be granted, for they shall not try which of the said
Leases shall be preferred, although they have cognizance of the Original; for
the Leases are Temporal M. 12. Jac. B. R. Wrots and Clifton. per (...). Roll.
ibid.
. If a man having a Parsonage Impropriate make a Lease for years of part of the
Tithes by Deed, and the Deed be denied in the Ecclesiastical Court, and Issue
taken thereon, a Prohibition shall be granted Pasch. ^ Jac. B. per Cur. Roll.
ibid.
. If a Parson compound with his Parishioner for his Tithes, and by his Deed
grant them to him for a certain Sum for one year according to Agreement, and
after he sue the Parishioner in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes in kind: no
Prohibition to be granted on that discharge by Deed: for they may well try
that, having cognizance of the Principal 8 E. 4. Roll ibid. nu. 6.
. If a Parson Lease all the Tithes of his Benefice to the Parishioner, and
after sue him in the Ecclesiastical Court for his Tithes in his hands; no
Prohibition to be granted, for the Lease is a good discharge there 8 E. 4. 14.
per Cho^^.
. Likewise, if the Parishioner grant Land to the Parson for and in lieu of his
own Tithes, and after the Parson sue him in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Tithes; no Prohibition to be granted, for that matter will be a good discharge
there Ibid.
. If a Parson sue for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Defendant
there plead an Arbitrament in Bar, they shall try that there; and no
Prohibition to be granted upon that, etc. for by intendment it is a good
discharge there P. 12 Jac. per cur. Prohibition denied. Tun. 12 Ja. B. R. inter
R^ynolds and H^yes. Adjudg. and Consultation granted.
. Likewise, if a Parson sue for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the
Defendant there plead a Lease of them by Deed by the Parson to him rendering
Rent; to which the Plaintiff says, the Rent was reserved upon condition of
Non-payment to be void, and averrs, that it was not paid at a certain day, and
the other pleads payment at the day: This shall be tried there, and no
Prohibition granted Tr. 16 Ja. B. R. inter Grishn and Bulsust. per Cur. Roll.
ibid. nu. 1 l.
. If a Parson Lease by Deed the Tithes of the Parish, and after sues for the
Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, and there the Lease is pleaded, where the
Question between them is, Whether it be the Tithes of the whole Parish, or only
of some particular things? yet no Prohibition lies, for they have cognizance of
the Original; but if they judge contrary to the Common Law, a Prohibition lies
after Sentence Mich. 13 Car. B. R. inter Dr. Peclington and St. Saint John.
. If a man sue for a Legacy in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Defendant
plead a Release in Bar, and the Plaintiff deny it; that shall be tried there,
for that it arises from the Original cause whereof they have the Jurisdiction
Mich. 15 ^re B. R. inter Percher and Wheble per Cur. Prohibition denied. Hob.
Rep. 255 Anonymus.
. If an Administrator sue for a Legacy due to the Deceased in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and the Defendant plead the Release of the Deceased in
Bar, and the Plaintiff avoid it, for that the Deceased was an Idiot; That
Ideocy shall be tried there, and no Prohibition granted, for that they have
Jurisdiction of the Original matter Dict. Cas. Percher and Wheeble. Prohibition
denied but against the Opinion of Warburton.
. If a Parson sue in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Defendant there plead,
that the Plaintiff was presented upon a Simonaical Contract against the Stat.
of 31 Eliz. That shall be tried there, for that they have Jurisdiction of the
Original thing Mich. 8 Jac. B. R. Pen's Case.
. But the Ecclesiastical Court can take no cognizance of a Custom whereby the
Inheritance is perpetually charged, although the thing Customable be cognizable
by them; And therefore if the Churchwardens of the Parish of S. Libel in the
Ecclesiastical Court against J. S. Farmer of the Farm of D. for a Contribution
to the Reparation of the Church, and allege, that part of the Farm lies in the
Parish of S. and part thereof in the Parish of W. and allege a Custom, that
the Farmers of the said Farm have used time out of mind to contribute to the
Reparation of the Church of S. throughout the whole Farm: if the Defendant
says, that part of the Land of the said Farm lies within the Parish of W. and
that it had used time out of mind, etc. for that part to contribute to the
Church of W. and not to S. and so deny the said Prescription: This shall not be
Tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, but at the Common Law, and for that a
Prohibition lies; for they shall not try a Custom in the Ecclesiastical Court,
by which the Inheritance is to be perpetually charged Tr. 16 Jac. B. R. Between
the Churchwardens of Steevenage and Green. Resolved.
. If A. the Parson of D. sue for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court against B.
who pleads a Lease for years made to him by the Parson; To which A. the Parson
Replies, That he was Non-resident, and absent 80 days and more in such a year,
etc. from his Benefice, by which the Lease became void: No Prohibition lies
upon that plea, for that it is grounded on the Statute of 13 Eliz. and although
it was Objected, That the Judges Ecclesiastical shall not have the Exposition
of a Statute; yet for that they have Jurisdiction of the Original cause, they
shall have power to try that which incidently does arise from thence; and the
Prohibition was denied Hill. 14 Car. B. R. inter St. Tho. Lucy and Dr. Lucy per
Cur. Roll. ubi supr. p. 308. nu. 22.
.

(18.) A Prohibition was prayed upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. for suing for a
Legacy of ten pounds in the Prorogative Court, whereas the party did dwell in
another Diocese; but because the Will was proved in that Court, Mich. 3 Car. C.
B. Smith and Executors of Poyndrell's Case. Cro. par. 3.
and there Sentence was given for the Legacy, and an Appeal upon the Sentence
to the Delegates, where it was affirmed, and endeavor was to stay the Suit by
the Statute, the party having so long allowed of the Jurisdiction of the Court;
Adjudged, the party came too late now to have a Prohibition.

(19.) In Norwood's Case it was held, That where a man is sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court for slanderous words, a General Pardon does not aid the
party, for staying the Suit there, which is for or ad instantiam partis; But
contrary, where the party is sued there ex officio Judicis.

(20.) In order to a Prohibition it was surmised, That the Defendant was a
Clerk, and assaulted his Servant, and he coming to keep the Peace and to aid
his Servant, Hill. 41 Eliz. B. R. Kelley and Walker's Case. Cro. par. 1. Vid.
More, Case 1227.
laid his hands peacably upon the Defendant; for which he sued him in the
Ecclesiastical Court, where he pleaded this matter, and they would not allow of
his plea: It was said by the Justices, That this Case was out of the Statute of
Articuli Cleri and Circumspecte agatis; for here the party had ( Quaere by what
Law? for this is not in the Case of Se Defendendo) good cause to beat the
Clerk, and a Prohibition was granted.

(21.) By the Justices, if Issue be joined, whether a Church be void by
Cession, Deprivation, Pasch. 6 Eliz. More's Rep.
or Resignation, it shall be Tried by the Country, because it is a thing mixed;
for the Avoidance is Temporal, and the Deprivation is Spiritual: But ability,
Bastardy, ne unque accouple en Loyal Matrimony shall be tried by the
Certificate of the Bishop but Bastardy pleaded in a Stranger to the Writ shall
be tried by the Country.

(22.) A Sentence was given definitive in the Ecclesiastical Court in a Suit
there for Tithes, Girrye's Case. More's Rep.
pro triplici valor; a Prohibition was prayed; a special Prohibition was
awarded, That they should not proceed to the Execution of the Sentence, as to
the treble value, because that Court is not to give the treble value, but the
double value only.

(23.) In a Case between a Parson and Churchwardens against one Reynolds, it
was suggested, That all those who had the House wherein the said Reynolds did
dwell, had used to find meat and drink for the Parson and them, Reynold's Case.
More's Rep.
going in Procession in Rogation-week, at his house; and because he did not
find them meat and drink, they sued him in the Ecclesiastical Court, and a
Prohibition was awarded, because the Custom was a custom against the Law.

(24.) In Babington's Case it was Resolved, That if one be sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court ex Officio, More. Case 1235.
or by Libel, and he demand the Copy of the Libel which is denied; That a
Prohibition lies in such case. Vid. Stat. 2 H. 4.

(25.) In a Prohibition upon a Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court, where the
Suit was for Tithe-Apples, in discharge of which he there pleaded an Award,
Pasch. 12. Jac. B. R. Parker against Remp. Bulstr. par. 2.
which was, That he was to pay so much for the Tithe; pleads there the
Arbitrament, the which plea they refused, supposing this to be void: upon this
a Prohibition prayed. Coke, We will not grant a Prohibition in this case: So in
a Suit there for a Legacy, if payment of the same be there pleaded, which is
not sufficient, the payment is Triable there by 1 R. 3. fol. 4. When the
Original begins in the Ecclesiastical Court, although that afterward a matter
happens in Issue, which is Triable at the Common Law, yet this shall be tried
there by the Ecclesiastical Law: As if one do sue there for a Horse to him
devised, the Defendant there pleads, that the Devisor did give this Horse unto
him in his life time; This is Triable by our Law, yet this shall be tried there
by their Law. In the same manner it is, where the Original does begin here, the
same shall be tried here by our Law, as in a Quare Impedit, able, or not able;
if it were otherwise, they should there try nothing, This is belonging to them;
But if they will there draw the matter, ad aliud examen, as upon proof of a
Deed, they judge otherwise than we do: As in case of a Lease for years to be
made, they hold the same to be Traditione, or void; And so a Grant of Goods to
be delivered, or not good. If they will judge in Common Law-matters, otherwise
than we do, there in such case a Prohibition lies: That which we call Orders,
they amongst them do call Acts: The Court all clear of Opinion, That this plea
of the Award there pleaded, Mich. 1. Car. B. R. Bulstr. par. 3.
and by them refused, no ground for a Prohibition; and so by the Rule of the
Court a Prohibition was denied. And in Dicke's Case against Brown a
Prohibition was denied, and a Consultation granted, because the Ecclesiastical
Court (as was then admitted) having cognizance of the Principal, has cause
also there to determine of the Accessory.

(26.) If a Parson sue upon the Stat. of 2 Ed. 6. in the Ecclesiastical Court
for the double value for not setting forth the Tithes, and the Defendant
surmize, That he did set them forth, and that they would not there allow or
admit the proof thereof by one Witness; no Prohibition lies for that, because
they have the cognizance of the matter Hill. 9 Car. B. R. inter Yelle and Sir
Ed. Powell. Vid. Roll. Ab^. P^ohibition, page 299. nu. 10.
. In this case the Prohibition was denied per Curiam.

(27.) If the Bounds of a Village in a Parish come in question in the
Ecclesiastical Court, in a Suit between the Parson Impropriate and the Vicar of
the same Parish, as if the Vicar claim all the Tithes within the Village of D.
within the Parish, and the Parson all the Tithes in the residue of the Parish;
and the question between them is, Whether certain Lands whereof the Vicar
claims the Tithe, be within the Village of D. or not, yet inasmuch as it is
between Spiritual persons, viz. between the Parson and the Vicar, although the
Parson be a Layman, and the Parsonage appropriate a Lay-see, yet it shall be
tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, and no Prohibition be granted; And in this
case the Prohibition was denied Hill. 15 Ca^. B. R. Between Ives and Weight.
per Cu^iam.
.

(28.) Where Suit has been in the Ecclesiastical Court for something Spiritual
mixed with other matter Triable at Common Law; In such case a Prohibition has
been granted as to the matter Triable by the Common Law, and not as to the
rest, if they may be severed Mich. 14 J^. B. R. Fish and Cham^erlain Resol.
Contra M. 8 Jac. per Cur. Jener's Case. Roll. Abr. p. 314.
. As if a Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court to avoid the Institution of one
is Instituted to A. his Chapel of Ease as he pretends; if the other suggest,
That A. is a Parochial Church of it self: a Prohibition lies as to a Trial,
whether it be a Parochial Church of it self or not, for that they shall not try
the Bounds of the Parish; but not as to a Trial concerning the Institution, for
that belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court to examine whether it be well done, or
not Case Fish and C^amberlai^.
. But Houghton said, they cannot well try the Institution without trying the
Bounds of the Parish Roll ubi supr.
. If a Testament be made of Lands and Goods, and there be a Suit in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the Goods, and the question be, whether the Testator
did revoke his Will in his life time, or not: a Prohibition lies as to the
Land, and not as to the Goods Mich. 13. Jac. B inter Athil and Ath^l. Resolv.
. So if a man sues for the Probat of a Testament in the Ecclesiastical Court,
and in the Testament there be Lands devised, and other personal Goods: a
Prohibition lies as to the Land, but not as to the rest Mich. 14. Jac. B. R.
Bancroft's Case.
. Upon an Allegation in such case, That the Devisor revoked his Will before his
death, a Prohibition was granted as to the Land Hill 14 Jac. B. R. Nevil and
Boyer verse. Winchcombe.
.

(29.) If a man be sued out of his Diocese, and there Answers without taking
Exception thereunto, and afterward Sentence be given against him, he shall not
after have a Prohibition, for that he did not take Exception to the
Jurisdiction before, but affirmed the Jurisdiction; In this case Prohibition
has been denied Pasch. 15 Jac. B. R. Inter Puds^y and Richardson. per Cur.
. If it appears in the Libel, that the Court has not Jurisdiction of the
cause, a Prohibition lies after Sentence; but otherwise it is, if it does not
so appear in the Libel, but by averment Mich. 8 Jac. B.
. Generally, if a Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court, and Sentence there given
for the Plaintiff, and thereupon the Defendant Appeals, and after pray a
Prohibition; no Prohibition is to be granted, although if he had come before
Sentence, it ought to have been granted, for that it is inconvenient, after so
much Expense and no Exception taken to the Jurisdiction, then to grant a
Prohibition Hill. 9 Car. B. R. Friz^well's Case.
. Where a man by intendment shall have remedy by Appeal, no Prohibition lies;
And therefore if a man devise a Legacy to B. to be paid him within one year
after his death, Provided, that if he die within the year, that then the Legacy
shall be void, and shall be divided between D. and E. and after B. die within
the year, and his Executor sue for the Legacy, and Sentence given for him, for
that they there held the Condition to be void: yet no Prohibition lies, for
that by intendment he has his remedy by Appeal; and in this case a Prohibition
was denied Mich. 21 Jac. B. R. Clak's Case Resolved.
. If a man has a Prohibition on a Libel for Tithes of Faggots, on a
Suggestion, that the Faggots were made of great Trees above twenty years
growth, and in the Suggestion the quantity of Faggots be mistaken; yet if it
appears that he made his Suggestion according to the Copy of the Libel given
him by his Proctor, no Consultation shall be brought, for by the Statute of 2
H. 5. he ought to have a true Copy of the Libel Mich. 4 Jac B. R. inter
Swine^^on and Man, Adjudged.
.

(30.) The Case was, where A. sued B. for Tithes within the Parish of C. -- B.
said, they were within the Parish of D. and the Parson of D. came pro interesse
suo, and they proceed there to Sentence. Question, if in such a Parish or such
a Parish, shall be tried by the Law of the Land or of the Church? Wray said, It
was Triable by the Common Law: Fenner said, the Pope has not distinguished of
Parishes, but Ordained, that Tithes shall be paid within the Parish Strans^am
and Cullington's Case. Cro. par. 1.
.

(31.) K. ^arson of S. sued C. in the Spiritual Court for Tithes of certain
Lands in the Parish of S. -- D. Plaintiff in the Prohibition, came pro
interesse suo, and said there was a Custom within the Parish of S. that the
Parson of H. shall have Tithes 13 Cheeses of the Lands in S. and in recompense
thereof the Parson of S. had 13 Cheeses for the Tithes of H. It was said, the
Right of Tithes were in question, and not the Bounds of the Parish, and
therefore no Prohibition; and of that Opinion was the Court, and a Consultation
awarded Dullingham and Ryfe^^y's Case. Cro. ib.
.

(32.) If an Administration be granted to A. where it ought not to be granted
to him, and after the Administration be Repealed, and granted to B. for that he
is the next of Kin; In this case B. may sue A. in the Ecclesiastical Court to
Account for the profits of the Goods and Chattels of the Deceased during his
time, and no Prohibition to be granted, for B. cannot have an Action of
Trespass against A. nor has he any remedy for them at the Common Law Hill. 15
Jac. B R. Wadsworth and Andrew's Case, Adjudg'd.
.

(33.) A Parson may sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Modus Decimandi, and
no Prohibition shall be granted, for it is in the nature of Tithes Co. 11. D^.
Grant, 16.
. But a Prescription cannot be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, for that it
ought to be tried by a Jury, which cannot be there Temp. E. 1. Roll. Abr. p.
283. nu. 16.
. Yet if a Parson Prescribe to have Tithes of things not Tithable, as of Rents
of Houses, he may sue for that in the Ecclesiastical Court, and no Prohibition
lies; yet no Tithes de jure ought to be paid of them Co. ubi supr.
. So he may sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of great Trees,
which he claims by Prescription, and no Prohibition lies, yet de jure they are
not Tithable. Quaere 9 H. 6. 46.

(34.) If there be a Custom, that after the Grass is cut and set into
Grass-cocks, the Tenth Cock be assigned to the Parson, and that by the Custom
it shall be lawful for him to make the same into Hay upon the Land, and the
Owner of the Land disturb him from making the same, he may sue for that in the
Ecclesiastical Court; and no Prohibition shall be granted, for that is incident
to the Custom to come there to make the same into Hay Mich. 14 Jac. B.
Reynold, and N^wbery. Roll. Abr page 284.
. Also the proper place to sue for a Legacy, is the Ecclesiastical Court, for
that it is not any Debt, but only due by the Will. If A. do owe to B. five
Marks, and he Devise by his Will, that whereas he does owe five Marks to B. his
Executor shall make it 10 l. The Suit for that 10 l. may be in the
Ecclesiastical Court, for that is not any Addition to the five Marks, but a new
Sum given in satisfaction of the five Marks, and so no part of the 10 l. any
Debt, but only a Legacy Mich. 22 Jac. B. R. Churley and Wood. Prohibition
denied.
. Also if a man devise a Rent out of his Stock and House which he has for
years, the Devisee may sue for that Rent in the Ecclesiastical Court, for that
it issues out of a Chattel, and no remedy for it at the Common Law Hill. 7 Jac.
B. May James Case. per Curiam. Prohibition denied.
. If a man possessed of a Lease for years, Devise that his Executor shall out
of the profits thereof pay 20 l. to each of his Daughters at their full Age,
the Executor may be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court to put in Sureties to pay
the Legacies, and no Prohibition shall be granted, for that is to issue out of
a Chattel Hill. 11 Jac. B. Prowe's Case. per Cur.
.

(35.) If there be a Question between two persons touching several Grants,
which of them shall be Register of the Bishop's Court; that shall not be tried
in the Bishop's Court, but at Common Law, for although the Subjectum circa quod
be Spiritual, yet the Office it self is Temporal Hill. 8 Jac. B. said by Coke
to be Skinn^ and Mingey's Case.
. Also if a man set forth his Tithes by severance of Nine parts from the Tenth,
and after carry away the Tenth part; the Parson cannot sue for that in the
Ecclesiastical Court, for that by the severance of the Nine parts it did become
a Chattel, for which he might have his Action of Trespass Dubitatur Pasch. 40
Eliz. B. R. inter Leigh and Wood.
.

(36.) It is Reported. That if a Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court against a
Woman for exercising the Trade of a Midwife without License of the Ordinary
contrary to the Canons, a Prohibition lies, for that is not any Spiritual
Function whereof they have cognizance. And in this case Prohibition was granted
to the Court of Audience Tr. 9 Car. B. R. Between Benskin and Cipes. Resolved.
.

(37.) The Ecclesiastical Court may not try the Bounds of a Parish, and
therefore if Suit be there on that matter, a Prohibition lies Mich. 14 Jac. B.
R. Fisher and Chamberlain.
. So if the Question there be, whether such a Church be a Parochial Church, or
but a Chapel of Ease, a Prohibition also lies Tr. 3 Jac. B. The Churchwarden's
Case of St. Sam^sons in Cornwall.
. In the Case between Elie vicar of Alderburne in the Country of Wilts and
Cook, Prohibition was granted, and thereupon Issue joined, whether several
Parishes, and tried by Verdict to be one Parish.

(38.) Where a man sued for a Legacy in the Ecclesiastical Court against an
Executor, and he there pleaded, that he had not Assets save only to pay the
Debts, and the said Court disallowed of that plea, a Prohibition was granted
Pas^^. 15 Jac. B. R. Between Sing^eten and Wade.
.

(39.) If a man sues in the Ecclesiastical Court to have an Account for the
profits of a Benefice, a Prohibition lies, for that it belongs to the Common
Law Hill. 3 Jac. B. Ad. judged.
. But if the Suit be for the profits taken during the time of Sequestration, no
Prohibition lies Ibid.
.

(40.) In Worts and Clyston's Case, where the Plaintiff sued for Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court by virtue of a Lease made by the Vicar of T. for three
years: The Defendant prayed to be discharged of Tithes by a former Lease: The
Plaintiff in the Ecclesiastical Court prayed a Prohibition to stay his own Suit
there; It was granted by the Court, because they are not to meddle with the
trial of Leases, or real Contracts there, although they have Jurisdiction of
the Original cause, viz. the Tithes Cro. par. ^.
.

(41.) In Collier's Case, upon the endowment of a Vicarage upon an
Appropriation, it was Ordained by the Bishop, That the Vicar should pay yearly
20 l. to the Precentor in the Cathedral Church of S. to the use of the Vicars
Chorals of the said Church: It was held by the Court, that this is a Pension,
for which Suit shall be in the Ecclesiastical Court Trin. 41 Eliz. B R.
Collier's Case. Cro. par. 1.
.

(42.) In the Case between Draiton and Cotterill against Smith for a
Prohibition, it was said by Coke Chief Justice, Mich. 11 Jac. B. R. Bulstr.
par. 2.
That if the Parson sues in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes, and the other
pleads a Modus to the Vicar, this Modus now can never come in question by this
Suit between the Parson and him, for Tithes due unto the Parson, but this is to
be questioned and determined there in the Ecclesiastical Court to whom the
Tithes do belong, whether to the Parson or to the Vicar? And this has been
diverse times Adjudged in this Court, and in the Court of C. B. in Bushe's Case,
for Pankeridge-Church; and it has always been clearly held, That if the Right
of Tithes come into question between the Parson and the Vicar, to which of them
the same does belong; This is a Suit properly belonging to the Ecclesiastical
Court to hear and determine the same, and in such case they are not there to be
ousted of their Jurisdiction. And this being now a Question between the Parson
and the Vicar, to which of them Tithes did belong, for which the Modus is
alleged to be paid; therefore no Prohibition is to be granted in this case,
though there be a Modus suggested to be paid unto the Vicar, for all Tithes
here due to the Vicar and Parson, the Parson suing for the Tithes there, as due
unto himself, and not unto the Vicar. And so the Question is as touching the
Right of Tithes between the Parson and the Vicar; which is a Suit proper for
the Ecclesiastical Court. And this is to be observed for a sure Rule, in such a
Case, never to have a Prohibition granted; The Reason of this is, because that
the Modus suggested to be paid, cannot come in question upon this Suggestion of
this payment unto the Vicar, but only the Right of Tithes, to whom they belong,
whether to the Parson or to the Vicar; and diverse Judgments have been
accordingly given in the like Case: And so by the Rule of the whole Court a
Prohibition was denied.

(43.) Whether, Mich. 14 Jac. B. R. Harding and others against Goseling.
Bulstr. par. 3.
and how far, and in what manner the Ecclesiastical Court may exercise its
Jurisdiction in cognizance of a Modus Decimandi is at large argued and debated
at the Bench in Harding's Case against Goseling, where in a Prohibition to stay
Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court, upon a Suit there for Tithes, where G.
Libelled against H. for a Modus Decimandi, being not paid, and there H.
alleged another Modus Decimandi, which Allegation the Ecclesiastical Court
refusing to admit, a Prohibition was thereupon prayed in B. R. In this case
Doderidge Justice said, That the Modus Decimandi is as well due to the Parson,
as Tithe is at the Common Law; and if the Parson do Libel in the Ecclesiastical
Court for a Modus Decimandi (as he may do) and another Modus is there alleged,
and this refused, the Ecclesiastical Court may try and determine this matter
touching this Modus, and no cause to grant a Prohibition for this Refusal: But
if the Ecclesiastical Court does deny to admit the Allegation for the Modus
upon this ground only, because the practice of the Ecclesiastical Law and our
Law do differ in the manner of Proof; as for default of two Witnesses, one
being allowed at Common Law, but not at the Ecclesiastical Law: In this Case a
Prohibition is grantable; but otherwise the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may as
well try the Modus Decimandi, as the Right of Tithes. But if a Parson does
Libel there for Tithes in kind, and a Modus is alleged and there pleaded, but
refused to be admitted or allowed: in that Case a Prohibition is grantable upon
such Refusal. Haughton Justice, In this Case a Prohibition ought to be granted,
otherwise in such cases, upon every small difference alleged in the Modus,
that Court may try and determine the validity of every Modus Decimandi, which
the Ecclesiastical Court cannot do by the Law: for that Court is not permitted
by our Law to try a Modus Decimandi; and therefore that Court proceeding to try
this Modus, which is determinable by Common Law, and not in the Ecclesiastical
Court, a Prohibition ought to be granted. But Doderidge Contra, No Prohibition
is in this case to be granted, for the Ecclesiastical Court may well try and
determine this Modus by that Law; The Libel being there originally for the
Modus: But if touching the Proof of this Modus, as aforesaid, the difference of
proceedings between the two Laws, (one Witness being sufficient at the Common
Law, not so at the Ecclesiastical) be the ground of the Refusal of the
Allegation, then a Prohibition is to be awarded, so is 1 R. 3. and 10 H. 7. but
if the Ecclesiastical Court only proceed to try the Modus, for which the Libel
was there, this by Proof may well be there examined. Croke Justice, at this
time delivered no opinion at all in this Case. Afterward, this Case being
moved again, Doderidge, If a Parson do Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court for a
Modus, whereas in truth there was no Modus, but only a composition of late time
between the Parson and the Parishioners, to pay so much yearly for Tithes, and
not otherwise: In this Case, because that the Common Law and the Ecclesiastical
do differ in the point of Prescription, (Ten years continuance being a good
Prescription by that Law, but not so by Ours) in this case a Prohibition is
grantable. Houghton, A Modus Decimandi is properly to be tried and determined
by the Common Law, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court, for that these two Laws
differ in many things, as in point of proof of a Modus, and in the point of
Prescription. Croke, A Special Modus being Libelled for in the Ecclesiastical
Court, is there to be tried. Doderidge, If the Ecclesiastical Court does refuse
to allow of the Proof, allowable at the Common Law, a Prohibition lies to stay
proceedings for Tithes there: And where there is a Modus, if they refuse to pay
this, the Parson may sue for this Modus in the Ecclesiastical Court, and this
is to be tried there; But if in such case where there is a Modus, if the Parson
will Libel to have his Tithe in kind, and the other shows there this Modus,
which they will not allow of, a Prohibition lies, and this shall be tried by
the Common Law. The Court declares, That they would see the Suggestion, and
therefore by the Rule of the Court they were to make their Suggestion, and to
show the same to the Court, as they would stand unto it; and in the mean time
the Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court to be stayed.

(44.) Pasch. 9 Jac. C. B. en Ireland, en le Case de Commendae, le Roy verse.
Cyprian Horsefall and Rob. Wale. Davis Rep.
To conclude this Chapter, it may not be impertinent to enquire, when and how
the Canon Law was introduced into this Realm of England; In the Case of a
Commendam that was Adjudged in Ireland it was observed, That after the Bishop
of Rome had assumed or tooken upon him to be the Spiritual Prince or Monarch of
all the World, he attempted also to give Laws to all Nations, as one real Mark
or Signal of his Monarchy; but they well knowing, Quod ubi non est condendi
authoritas, ibi non est parendi necessitas, did not impose their Laws at first
peremptorily on all Nations without distinction, but offered them timide and
precario. And therefore he caused certain Rules in the first place to be
collected for the Government of the Clergy only, which he called Decreta, and
not Leges vel Statuta; These Decrees were published in An. 1150. which was
during the Reign of King Stephen. And therefore what the Lord Coke observes in
the Preface to the Eighth part of his Reports, Quod Rogerus Bacon, frater ille
perquam Eruditus, in Libro De impedimentis Sapientiae, dicit, Rex quidem
Stephanus, allatis Legibus Italiae in Angliam, Publico Edicto prohibuit ne in
aliquo detinerentur, may probably be conjectured, to be meant and intended of
those Decrees which were then newly compiled and published: Yet these Decrees
being received and observed by the Clergy of the Western Churches only (for the
Eastern Church never received any of these Rules or Canons, Kelw. Rep. 7 H. 8.
fo. 184) the Bishop of Rome attempted also to draw the Laity by degrees into
obedience to these Ordinances: and to that purpose, in the first place he
propounds certain Rules or Ordinances for Abstinence, or days of Fasting, to be
observed as well by the Laity as the Clergy, which were upon the first
Institution thereof called by the mild and gentle name of Regationes, as
Marsilius Pat. lib. Defensor. Pacis, par. 2. cap. 23. has observed; and
thence, it seems, the Week of Abstinence, a little before the Feast of
Pentecost, was called the Rogation-week, that time of Abstinence being
appointed at the beginning by that Ordinance which was called Rogatio, and not
Praeceptum vel Statutum. Now when the Laity out of their devotion had received
and obeyed these Ordinances of Abstinence, then the Bishop of Rome proceeds
further ( De una praesumptione ad aliam transivit Romanus Pontifex, as Marsil.
Pat. there says) and made many Rescripts and Orders per Nomen Decretalium,
which were published in the year 1230. which was in the Fourteenth year of King
H. 3. or thereabout. Vid. Matthew. Par. Hist. mag. 403. and these were made to
bind all the Laity, and Sovereign Princes as well as their Subjects, in such
things as concerned their Civil and Temporal Estates; As that no Layman should
have the Donation of an Ecclesiastical Benefice: That no Layman should marry
within certain Degrees, out of the degrees limited by the Levitical Law: That
all Infants born before Marriage, should be adjudged after Marriage Legitimate,
and capable of Temporal Inheritance: That all Clerks should be exempt from the
Secular power; and others of the like nature. But these Decretals being
published, they were not entirely and absolutely received and obeyed in any
part of Christendom, but only in the Pope's Temporal Territory, which by the
Canonists is called, Patria obedientiae. But on the other hand, many of those
Canons were utterly rejected and disobeyed in France and England, and other
Christian Realms, which are called Patriae Consuetudinariae; As the Canon which
prohibited the Donation of Benefices per manum Laicam was ever disobeyed in
England, France, the Kingdom of Naples, and diverse other Countries and
Commonwealths; And the Canon, to make Infants Legitimate that were born before
Marriage, was specially rejected in England, when in the Parliament held at
Merton, omnes Comites and Barons una voce responderunt, Nolumus Leges Angliae
mutari, quae hucusque usitatae sunt, etc. And the Canon, which exempts Clerks
from the Secular power, was never fully observed in any part of Christendom.
Kelw. 7 H. 8. 181. b. which is one infallible Argument, That these Ordinances
had not their force by any Authority that the Court of Rome had to impose Laws
on all Nations without their consent, but by the approbation of the people
which received and used them. For by the same reason whereby they might reject
one Canon, they might reject all the other. Vid. Bodin. lib. 1. de Rep. cap. 8.
where he says, That the Kings of France, on the erection of all Universities
there, have declared in their Charters, that they would receive the Profession
of the Civil, and Canons, to use them at their discretion, and not to be
obliged by these Laws. But as to those Canons which have been received,
accepted, and used in any Christian Realm or Commonwealth, they by such
acceptance and usage have obtained the force of Laws in such particular Realm
or State, and are become part of the Ecclesiastical Laws of that Nation; And so
those which have been embraced, allowed, and used in England, are made by such
allowance and usage, part of the Ecclesiastical Laws of England; By which the
interpretation, dispensation, or execution of these Canons, being become Laws
of England, does appertain sole to the King of England, and his Magistrates
within his Dominions, and he and his Magistrates have the sole Jurisdiction in
such cases, and the Bishop of Rome has nothing to do in the interpretation,
dispensation, or execution of those Laws in England, although they were first
devised in the Court of Rome; No more than the Chief Magistrate of Athens or
Lacedemon might claim Jurisdiction in the Ancient City of Rome, for that the
Laws of the XII. Tables were thither carried and imported from those Cities of
Greece; and no more than the Master of New-Colledge in Oxford, shall have
Command or Jurisdiction in Kings-Colledge of Cambridge, for that the private
Statutes whereby Kings-Colledge is governed, were, for the most part, borrowed
and taken out of the Foundation-Book of New-Colledge in Oxford: And by the same
reason the Emperor may claim Jurisdiction in Maritime causes within the
Dominions of the King of England, for that we have now for a long time received
and admitted the Imperial Law for the determination of such Causes. Vid.
Cawdries Case, Co. par. 5. and Kelw. Rep. 184. a. Now when the Bishop of Rome
perceived that many of his Canons were received and used by diverse Nations of
Christendom, he under color thereof claimed to have Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in every Realm and State where these Canons were received, and
sent his Legates with several Commissions into diverse Kingdoms, to hear and
determine Causes according to these Canons: which Canons although neither the
Pope nor his Ministers, at the first venting and uttering thereof, dared to
call Laws, Ne committerent crimen Laesae Majestatis in Principes as Mar^il.
Pat. lib. Defensor. pacis, par. 2. cap. 23. observes) who also says, That these
Canons being made by the Pope, Neque sunt humanae Leges, neque divinae, sed
documenta quaedam and Narrationes; yet when he perceived that these Canons were
received, allowed, and used in part by several Nations, he compiled them into
Volumes and called them Jus Canonicum, and Ordained that they should be read
and expounded in public Schools and Universities, as the Imperial Law was read
and expounded, and commanded that they should be observed and obeyed by all
Christians on pain of Excommunication, and often endeavored to put them in
execution by Coercive power, and assumed to himself the power of interpreting,
abrogating, and dispensing with those Laws in all the Realms of Christendom at
his pleasure, so that the Canonists ascribe to him this prerogative, Papa in
omnibus jure positivis, and in quibusdam ad jus divinum pertinentibus,
dispensare potest, quia dicitur omnia Jura habere in Scrinio pectoris sui,
quantum ad interpretationem and dispensationem. Lib. 6. de Constable. cap. licet.
About the time of An. 25. Ed. 1. Simon a Monk of Walden began to read the Canon
Law in the University of Cambridge. vid. Stow and Walsingham in that year. Also
the Manusc. libr. 6. Decretal. in New-Colledge Library at Oxford has this
Inscription in the Front, Anno Domini 1298. which was in the year 26 Ed. 1. 19.
Novembr. in Ecclesia Fratrum Praedicator. Oxon. fuit facta publicatio lib. 6.
Decretal. whereby it appears when it was that the Canon Law was introduced into
England. But the Jurisdiction which the Pope by color thereof claimed in
England was a mere Usurpation, to which the Kings of England from time to time
made opposition, even to the time of King H. 8. And therefore the
Ecclesiastical Law which Ordained, That when a man is created a Bishop all his
Inferior Benefices shall be void, is often said in the Bishop of St. David's
Case, in 11 H. 4. to be the Ancient Law of England. And 29 Ed. 3. 44. a. in the
Case of the Prebend of Oxgate, it is said, That though the Constitution which
ousts Pluralities began in the Court of Rome, yet a Church was adjudged void in
the Kings Bench for that cause or reason; whereby it appears, That after the
said Constitution was received and allowed in England, it became the Law of
England: Yet all the Ecclesiastical Laws of England were not derived from the
Court of Rome; for long before the Canon Law was authorized and published in
England (which was before the Norman Conquest) the Ancient Kings of England,
viz. Edga^. Aethelstan, Alfred, Edward the Confessor, and others, have with the
Advice of their Clergy within the Realm, made diverse Ordinances for the
government of the Church of England; and after the Conquest, diverse Provincial
Synods have been held, and many Constitutions have been made in both Realms of
England and Ireland; All which are part of our Ecclesiastical Laws at this day.
Vid. Le Charter de William le Conqueror. Dat. An. Dom. 1066. irrot. 2 R. 2.
among the Charters in Archiv. Turris Land. pro Decano and Capitulo Lincoln.
Willielmus, Dei gratia, Rex Anglorum, etc. Sciatis, etc. Quod Episcopales Leges
quae non been, nec secundum Sanctorum Canonum praecepta, usque ad mea tempora
in Regno Angliae fuerunt, Communi Concilio Episcoporum meorum, and caeterorum
Episcoporum, and omnium Principum Regni mei, emendandas judicavi, etc. See also
Girald. Cambrens. lib. 2. cap. 34. in the time of King H. 2. a Synod of the
Clergy of Ireland was held at the Castle, wherein it was Ordained, Quod omnia
divina, juxta quod Anglicana observat Ecclesia, in omnibus partibus Hyberniae
amodo tractentur. Dignum enim and justissimum est, ut sicut Dominum and Regem
ex Anglia divinitus sortita est Hybernia, sic etiam exinde vivendi formam
accipiant meliorem. But the distinction of Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Causes
from Civil and Temporal Causes, in point of Jurisdiction, was not known or
heard of in the Christian World for the space of 300 years after Christ; For
the causes of Testaments, of Matrimony, of Bastardy, and Adultery, and the
rest, which are called Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Causes, were merely Civil,
and determined by the Rules of the Civil Law, and subject only to the
Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate; But after the Emperors had received the
Christian Faith, out of a zeal they had to honor the learned and godly Bishops
of that time, they singled out certain special Causes, wherein they granted
Jurisdiction unto the Bishops, viz. in Causes of Tithes, because they were paid
to men of the Church; in Causes of Matrimony, because Marriages were for the
most part solemnized in the Church; in Causes Testamentary, because Testaments
were many times made in extremis, when Churchmen were present, giving
Spiritual comfort to the Testator, and therefore were thought the fittest
persons to take the Probats of such Testaments. Howbeit these Bishops did not
then proceed in these Causes according to the Canons and Decrees of the Church
(for the Canon Law was not then known) but according to the Rules of the
Imperial Law, The Case of Praemunire in Davis Rep. fo. 97.
as the Civil Magistrate did proceed in other Causes; so that the Primitive
Jurisdiction in all these Causes was in the Supreme Civil Magistate, and though
it be now derived from him, yet it still remains in him as in the Fountain.

CHAP. XII.
Of Churches, Chapels, and Churchyards.
1. Ecclesia; what that word imports; the several kinds thereof. 2. Possessions
of the Church protected by the Statute-Laws from Alienation; the care of the
Emperor Justinian in that point. 3. To whom the Soil and Freehold of the
Church and Churchyard belong, to whom the use of the Body of the Church, to
whom the disposal of the Pewes or Seats, and charges of Repairs. 4. The Common
Law touching the Reparation of Churches, and the disposal of the Seats therein.
5. The same Law touching Isles, Pictures, Coats of Arms, and Burials in
Churches; also of Assaults in Churches and Churchyard. 6. The penalty of
quarreling, chiding, brawling, striking, or drawing a Weapon in the Church or
Churchyard. 7. Where Prescription to a Seat in a Church is alleged, the
Common Law claims the cognizance thereof. 8. The Immunities anciently of
Church-Sanctuary; as also of Abjuration now abrogated and taken away by
Statute. 9. The defacing of Tombs, Sepulchers, or Monuments in Churches,
punishable at the Common Law; also of Right to Pewes and Seats in the Church.
10. The Cognizance of Church-Reparations belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court.
11. A Prohibition upon a surmize of a custom or usage for Contribution to
repair a Church. 12. Churchwardens are a Corporation for the Benefit, not for
the Prejudice of the Church. 13. Inheritance cannot be charged with a Tax for
Repairs of the Church, nor may a perpetual charge be imposed upon Land for the
same. 14. When the use of Church-Books for Christnings first began. 15.
Chapel; the several kinds thereof; The Canonists Conceits touching the
derivation of that word. 16. Where two Parochial Churches are united, the
charge of Reparations shall be several as before. 17. The Emperor Justinian's
Law Provisional, touching the Building of new Chapels. 18. Whether a Seat in
the Church, and Priority in that Seat claimed by Prescription, be Triable at
the Common Law by Action upon the Case. 19. A Case in Law touching a Tax made
in a Parish for the making of new Bells for the Church. 20. Whether a Tax for
Repairs of the Church may be made by the Church wardens alone, without the
Major part of the Inhabitants. 21. Church-Seats in the generality are in the
Ordinaries power to dispose. 22. Diverse other Cases at the Common Law,
pertinent to the subject of the Premises. 23. In what respects an Inhabitant
in one Parish, having Land in another, may or may not be Taxed, as to the
Church of that Parish where the Land lies. 24. The difference in Law between a
Parsons grant to a man his own Tithes, and his grant to him the Tithes of
another man, as to the validity of the Grant. 25. Disposal of Seats in the Body
of a Church belongs of Common right to the Ordinary of the Diocese. 26. In what
respect a man inhabiting in one Parish, shall be charged toward the Reparation
of the Church of another, where he has Land, and in what respects not so. 27.
Rates for Reparation of Churches are cognizable only in the Ecclesiastical
Court; and no Prohibition, notwithstanding any inequality in the Rate. 28.
Repairers of a Chapel of Ease, not discharged thereby of Reparations of the
Mother Church. 29. Land in a Parish not to be Rated for the Ornaments of a
Church; That Rate to be according to the personal Estate. 30. In what case a
Prohibition lies to a Suit for Reparations of a Church; not so, as to a Rate
made by the Major part of the Parishioners for the Ornaments of the Church. 31.
The Bounds of a Parish not Triable in the Ecclesiastical Court, though the
difference be between two Spiritual persons. 32. Prohibition, where a Vicar
sued the Parson Impropriate for Damages, for cutting down the Trees growing in
the Churchyard. 33. Prescription of Repairing a Chapel of E^se, no discharge
from repairing the Mother Church. 34. The charge of Repairing a Church, refers
to Land; of providing Ornaments of the Church, to the personal Estate; and how
to be apportioned between Landlord and Tenant. 35. Action of Trespass lies for
the Heir of such, whose Coat-Armor or Monument in Church or Churchyard, is by
any defaced or demolished, be it by the Parson, the Ordinary, or by any other.
36. A Case in Law touching a disturbance of sitting in certain Seats in a
Chancel of a Church. 37. Certain Cases in Law touching striking in a Church and
Churchyard, and drawing a Weapon in the same. 38. The difference taken between
having a Seat in the Isle of a Church, and a Seat in the Body of the Curch. 39.
A Prohibition denied on a Prescription of not Repairing a Mother Church, in
regard such Prescription is merely Spiritual. 40. The Ecclesiastical Court not
to intermeddle with the Precincts of Parish-Churches. 41. Toward
Church-Reparations, all Lands within the Parish, as well of Foreigners as
Parishioners, are ratably liable. 42. Controversies touching Seats in Churches,
determinable in the Spiritual, not Temporal Courts; In what Cases the Common
Law has took cognizance thereof.
(1.) CHURCH [ Ecclesia] (...), from the old word (...), h. e. (...), or rather
(...), h. e. evocare, being an Assembly of men gathered out of all Mankind, or
evocatus per Evangelium; or from the Hebrew [ Cahal] h. e. Congregatio; the
true visible Church being a Congregation of Faithful men, in which the pure
Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments duly ministered according to
Christ's Institution, in all things necessary to the same. This in a
Theological sense; but the word [ Church] in a Legal sense, as here chiefly
intended, differs from the former as far as Dead Walls do from Living Saints;
there being no more here designed to be touched at, than what refers rather to
the Place, than to the Persons. Churches are of three sorts, Cathedral,
Collegiate, Parochial. The Bishop is the Incumbent of the first: Priors and
Abbots were, and Heads of Colleges are, Incumbents of the second: and Parsons
of the third; commonly called a Rectory, being either a Parsonage or a
Vicarage. And that either (1) Ratione dotationis. (2) Fundationis. (3) Fundi.

(2.) The Emperor Justinian Decreed, That the Lands of the Church should not
be sold, alienated, or exchanged, unless it were to the Prince's house, or to
or with another like Religious place, and that in equal goodness and quantity,
or that it were for the Redemption of Captives Auth. Coll. 2. and 9. and Coll.
5:
. But by the Statute of primo Jac. the Possessions of the Church are protected
from alienation or diminution in all respects, and so as that they shall remain
and continue, according to the true intent of their Foundation, to their
Successors for ever, to the uses and purposes therein limited 1 Jac. c. 3.
.

(3.) By the Common Law, the Church and Churchyard are it seems the Soil and
Freehold of the Parson; but the use of the Body of the Church, and the Repairs
and Maintenance thereof is common to all the Parishioners; In Eaton's Case
against A^liffe, it was said by Hutton, That Seats in the generally are in the
power of the Ordinary to dispose. Het^ey's Rep.
albeit the disposal of the Pewes in the Body of the Church, or an Isle or
Chapel joining to the Body, and the disposing of the charges of the Repairs
thereof, belong to the Ordinary; insomuch that no man can challenge a Seat in
the Body of the Church without showing some special reason for the same. All
which appears in the Case of Boothby against Baily, where Boothby being
Executor of Gilbert, brought a Prohibition against Baily, and his Surmize was,
That whereas Sir Bernard Whetston was seized of the Manor of Woodford-Hall,
and that he and those whose Estate he has in the same, had used time out of
mind, to have a peculiar Pew in the Body of the Church, and that the Defendant
by Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, sought to dispossess them of the same. And
by the Opinion of the whole Court, this was no sufficient ground of a
Prohibition; for though the Church and Churchyard be in Law the Soil and
Freehold of the Parson, yet the use of the Body of the Church, and the repair
and maintenance thereof is common to all the Parishioners. And for avoiding of
confusion, the distribution and disposing of Seats and charges of Repair belong
to the Ordinary, and therefore no man can challenge a peculiar Seat without a
special reason. But if it had been Prescribed, That Sir Bernard Whetstone, etc.
had used time out of mind at their own costs to maintain that Pew, and had
therefore had the sole use thereof, the Prescription might have stood and been
warrant for a Prohibition, though the Pew were in the Body of the Church. And
so it is in the like case of an Isle or Chapel adjoining to the Body of the
Church upon the same difference, whether it has been maintained by the whole
Parish, or by some particular persons, like unto the Reasons of a Chapel of
Ease Case Boothby verse. Baily. Hob. Rep. Parochiarum prima distributio fit per
Theodorum Cantuariensem. An. 668. Spelm. Tom. 1. in Council. Herefordens.
.

(4.) Touching the Reparation of Churches, it has been Ruled, That he who has
Land in a Parish, though he does not inhabit there, shall yet be chargeable to
the Reparation of the Parish Church, but not to the buying of the Ornaments of
that Church, for that-shall be levied of the Goods of the Parishioners, and not
of their Lands, by Sir Hen. Yelverton, and said to be so formerly adjudged
Mich. 19 Jac. Rot. 1791. Case Dodderidge verse. Anthony. Winch. Rep.
. And it has been holden, That if two Churches Parochial be united, the
Reparation shall be several as before The Parish of Ashton's Case ver.
Castle-Birmidge Chapel. Hob. Rep.
. And although the Lord of a Manor may prescribe to a certain Seat or Pew in
the Church, by having time out of mind maintained and repaired the same at the
proper costs of himself and Ancestors, yet as to the Common Seats of the Church
it is otherwise in respect of the Common Parishioners: As in the Case of Harris
against Wiseman, against whom Harris had procured a Prohibition, Wiseman having
Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against him for a Seat in the Church,
which did belong to his House; and it was said by Hobart and Winch only
present, That a man, or a Lord of a Manor, who had an Isle or a Seat in the
Church, etc. and he is sued for that in the Spiritual Court, he shall have a
Prohibition; but not every common Parishioner for every common Seat: yet in
that case a Supersedeas was granted to stay the Prohibition Case Har^^s verse.
Wiseman. Winch. Rep.
It has also been held, That the Grant of a Seat in a Church to one and his
Heirs is not good; for the Case of Brabin and Tradum was, That the
Churchwardens of D. had used time out of mind to dispose and order all the
Seats of the Chuch, whereupon they disposed of a Seat to one, and the Ordinary
granted the same Seat to another and his Heirs, and excommunicated all others,
who afterward should sit in the Seat, and a Prohibition was prayed and
granted, for this Grant of a Seat to one and his Heirs is not good, for the
Seat does not belong to the Person, but to the House, for otherwise when the
person goes out of Town to dwell in another place; yet he shall retain the
Seat, which is no reason, and also it is no reason to excommunicate all others
that should sit there, for such great punishments should not be imposed upon
such small Offenders, an Excommunication being Traditio diab^la Pasch. 16. Jac.
B. R. Bra^in and Fradum's Case. Poph. Rep.
.

(5.) In the Case of Day against Beddington and others, upon a Cross-Bill
between the parties, for pulling down of painted Glass, Pictures and Arms, in a
Window in an Isle of a Chapel in the Parish of Wellington in Somerset, these
points in the Case were Resolved: (1.) If an Inhabitant there, and his
Ancestors time out of mind, etc. have used to Repair an Isle in a Church, and
to sit there with his Family, etc. and to bury there, that makes that Isle
proper and peculiar for his Family; Otherwise if he had not used to Repair it
at his own costs, but with the charge of the Parish; then the Ordinary may
appoint who shall sit there from time to time, notwithstanding a use to sit
there, only, to the contrary. (2.) If any Superstitious Pictures are in a
Window of a Church, or Isle, etc. it is not lawful for any to break them, etc.
without License of the Ordinary; and if any does to the contrary, he shall bind
him to his good Behavior. And so it was in Prickett's Case. (3.) That the
Ordinary or Churchwarden cannot License a Parishioner to Bury within the
Church: But it ought to be Licensed by the Parson; for the Franktenement is in
him only. (4.) If Coats of Arms are put in a Window, or upon a Monument in the
Church or Churchyard, they may not be broken by the Ordinary, Parson, or
Churchwardens, or any other; for the Heir shall have his Action upon the Case
for that, 9 Ed. 4. 14. for they belong to him, 30 Ed. 3. 9. b. c. (5.) If one
be Assaulted in the Church, or within a Churchyard, he may not beat the other,
or draw a Weapon (although it be in his own defense) there; for it is a
Sanctified place, and he may be punished for that by 2 Ed. 6. And so if in any
of the King's Courts, or within view of the Courts of Justice; because a Force
in that case is not justifiable, though in his own defense Case Day verse.
Beddingten and others. Noy's Rep.
.

(6.) For the penalty of Striking or drawing a Weapon in the Church or
Churchyard. Vid. Stat. 5 Ed. 6. cap. 4. whereby it is enacted, That if any
person shall by words only quarrel, chide, or brawl in any Church or
Churchyard, it shall be lawful for the Ordinary of the place, upon proof by
two Witnesses, to suspend the Lay-Offender ab ingressu Ecclesiae, and the
Clerk-Offender from the ministration of his Office, for such time as to the
said Ordinary shall seem meet: Co. lib. 6. fo. 29. b. Green's Case. int. Leg.
Inae. cap. 6. Qui in Templo pugnaverit, 120 Solidis noxiam facito. Dyer. 23
Eliz. 177. Case ult.
And if any one shall smite or lay violent hands upon another in any Church or
Churchyard, in that case ipso facto, the Offender shall be deemed
Excommunicate. But and if any person shall maliciously strike another with any
Weapon in any Church or Church yard; or to the intent of striking another with
the same, shall but draw a Weapon in any Church of Churchyard; the Offender
being thereof duly convicted, shall lose one of his Ears if he has any, or in
one of his Cheeks with a hot-Iron be burnt and marked with the letter F, in
case he has no Ears, and besides shall stand ipso facto Excommunicated Stat. 5
Ed. 6. c. 4.
. Upon this Statute there was an Indictment against Jasper Colmley and John
Colmley of Hoxton in the County of Middlesex, for that they Insultum fecerunt
upon John Higham Dr. of Physic, in Ecclesia de Shoreditch praedicta; Et
praedict. Joh. Higham adtunc, etc. ibidem in Ecclesia praedict. de Shoreditch,
verbaraverunt, vulneraverunt, and male tractaverunt contra formam Statuti, etc.
Upon this the Grand Jury find Billa vera quoad Jasper Colmley, and Ignoramus
for John Colmley; And hereupon he appeared and pleaded Not guilty, and found
against him. Rolls now moved in an Arrest of Judgment, That the Indictment was
not good, being Fecerunt, whereas it is found only Billa vera against one. Sed
non allocatur, because it was exhibited against Two, and it is but false Latin.
Secondly, because the Indictment is contra formam Statuti, and this Offense is
not punishable by the Statute, unless that he smote with a Weapon, or drew a
Weapon in the Church or Churchyard, or drew a Weapon to that intent, which is
not mentioned in the Indictment: And by the Second clause in the Statute, For
smiting or laying violent hands, it is Excommunication ipso facto: and it is
not mentioned here how he struck, and thereof the Justices doubted. But Jones
said, That the Indictment is good for Battery at the Common Law. But all the
other Justices were against him therein; for the Indictment concluding contra
formam Statuti, It cannot be good as for an offense at the Common Law. But
afterward another Exception was taken by Grimstone, because the offense was
alleged to be done in the Church of Shoreditch aforesaid, and Shoreditch was
not named before: And upon view of the Indictment, it appearing to be so, all
the Court held, that the Indictment was void: And for this cause the Defendant
was discharged Trir. 12 Car. B. R. Cholmley's Case. Cro. Rep. 3.
. In the Ecclesiastical Laws of Ina King of the West- Saxons, cap. 6. Qui in
Templo pugnaverit, 120 Solidis noxiam Sarcito. Ibid. Aliud. Exemp. cap. 6. Si
quis in Ecclesia pugnet, centum viginti Sol. emendet, etc. [and alias 60.
emendet pro vita.] Also among the Ecclesiastical Laws of Hoel Dha King of
Wales, l. 10. De pugna quae in Coemiterio agitur, 14 Librae sunt reddendae.
Likewise in l. 1. LL. Eccles. Edovardi Sen. R. Angliae, and Guthurni R. Danorum
in East-anglia. Hoc primo Decreverunt, ut Ecclesiae pax intra suos parietes
inviolate servetur. And in Cap. 2 and 3. LL. Eccl. Canuti Regis, valde rectum
est, ut Ecclesiae pax intra parietes suos semper inconvulsa permaneat;
quicunque eam perfregerit, de vita and omnibus in misericordia Regis sit. Et si
quis pacem Ecclesiae Dei violabit, ut intra parietes ejus homicidium, hoc
inemendabile sit, etc. nisi Rex ei vitam concedat.

(7.) Where Prescription is alleged for Right to a Seat in a Church, or for
Priority in that Seat, the Common Law has took cognizance thereof, as in the
case of Carleton against Hutton, where C. claimed the upper place in a Seat in
the Church, and H. disturbed him in a violent manner; and the Bishop of the
Diocese sent an Inhibition to C. until the matter were determined before him.
And by the Court a Prohibition was awarded; because it does not belong ( as
Reported) to the Spiritual Court: And as well the priority in the Seat as the
Seat it self may be claimed by Prescription: and an Action upon the Case lies
for it at Common Law, Ve. Litt. 121, 122. Carleton verse. Hutton. Noy Rep. and
Latch. Rep.
. The Ordinary has in him the right of distribution of the Seats in a Church,
yet so as that prescription shall take place, whether it refers to the right of
any particular Parishioner, or to the power of the Churchwardens. The Case
was, G. brought an Action of Trespass for the breaking of his Seat in the
Church, and cutting of the Timber in small pieces, and carrying them away, etc.
The Defendant pleads in Bar, That they were the Churchwardens: and that the
Plaintiff had erected that Seat without the License of the Ordinary, and it was
an hindrance to the Parishioners, etc. and that, they as Churchwardens, the
said Seat, etc. the which is the same Trespass. The Plaintiff demurrs, and
Judgment for him: For admitting that the Churchwardens may remove Seats in the
Church at their pleasure, yet they cannot cut the Timber of the Pew. And
thereupon they confessed the Trespass. Ve. 6 E. 4. 7. 9 E. 4. 14. 8 E. 4. 6. 18
E. 4. 8. 21 H. 7. 21. 12 H. 7. 27. 11 H. 4. 12. Case W. Gilson verse. Wright and
alios. Noy Rep.
. Where there is a Parson Impropriate, he has the best right to the chief Seat
in the Chancel, as was Resolved in Sir William Hall's Case again Ellis, where
E. Farmor of a Rectory Impropriate Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court pro
Sedile in dextra part Cancellae, and in his Additional Libel he Libels pro
loco primo, and principally in dextra part Cancellae. The Defendant there
surmizes to have a Prohibition, Quod est antiqua Parochia and antiqua Cancella:
and that he is seized of an Ancient Message in that Parish, and that he and
all those, etc. have used to sit in dextra part Cancellae praedict. to hear,
etc. And it was Resolved by the Court, That of common Right, the Parson
Impropriate, and per consequens his Farmor, ought to have the chief Seat in the
Chancel; because he ought to repair it: But by Prescription another Parishioner
may have it. But in this case a Consultation was awarded, with a quoad, etc.
because the Libel and the Additional that now is all one, is pro primo Loco,
etc. and the Surmize is only pro Sedile in dextra part, and not pro loco primo
in it Trin. 7 J^c. B. R. Sir W. Hall verse. ^llis. Noy Rep.
.

(8.) The Church in construction of Law, is Domus mansionalis Omnipotentis Dei,
and therefore it is Burglary for a man to break and enter a Church in the
night, of intent to steal, etc. Co. Inst. par. 3. cap. 14. Brit. fo. 17. Dyer,
1 Mer. 99. 22 Ed. 3. tit. Cor. 264. 22 Ass. p. 95. 26 Ass. 19.
. And so sacred is the Church and Churchyard reputed in Law, That
Ecclesiastical persons, whilst they are doing any Divine Service in either of
them, or in any other place dedicated to God, may not be Arrested 50 E. 3. 5.
p. Arrests 1. Vid. St. 1 R. 2* c. 15 Dalt. Just. cap. 68. By the Ecclesiastical
Laws of Ina, K. of the W. Saxons, cap. 5. Si quis rei Capitalis reus ad Templum
confugerit, vita potitor.
. Yea Anciently the Church and Churchyard was a Sanctuary, and the foundation
of Abjuration; for whoever was not capable of this Sanctuary, could not have
the benefit of Abjuration; and therefore he that committed Sacrilege could not
Abjure, because he could not take the privilege of Sanctuary 8 E. 2. cor. 4^^.
Si quis sit mortis reus, and ad Ecclesiam confugiat, vitam habeat, In alio
Exemplari LL. Eccles. Inae, cap. 5.
. This Abjuration was, when one having committed Felony, fled for safeguard of
his life to the Sanctuary of a Church or Churchyard, and there before the
Coroner of that place within 40 days confessed the Felony, and took an Oath for
his perpetual Banishment out of the Realm into a Foreign (not Infidel)
Country, choosing rather Perdere patriam quam vitam Cust. de Norm. cap. 24. and
8. Inter Leges Inae, cap. 5. and int. Leg, (...) fo. 105. ca. 3. and Co. Inst.
p. 3. cap. 51.
. But this Abjuration founded upon the privilege of Sanctuary is wholly
abrogated and taken away by an Act made 21 Jac. Reg. whereby it is Enacted,
That no Sanctuary or privilege of Sanctuary should be admitted or allowed in
any case ^1 Jac. in the Continuance of Statutes. etc. Co ubi supr.
. And here Note, That this kind of Abjuration has no relation to that of
Recusants by force of the Stat. of 35 Eliz. cap. 1. because such Abjuration
has no dependency upon any Sanctuary Co. ibid. Ubi vid. plene de Abjur. and
Sanct.
. But as to the other Abjuration in relation to Felonies, Sacrilege excepted,
(no Abjuration or Sanctuary being allowed in cases of Treason or Petit Treason)
the Law was so favorable for the preservation of Sanctuary in the Church or
Churchyard, That if a Prisoner for Felony had before his attainder or
conviction escaped and taken Sanctuary, and being pursued by his Keepers or
others were brought back again to the Prison, he might upon his Arraignment
have pleaded the same, and should have been restored again to the Sanctuary of
the Church or Churchyard Lib. Int. 532. b. Sanct. 2. Hill. 43 E. 3. Rot. 115.
Back. W. Atwell's Case. Co. Inst. p. 3. cap. 101.
.

(9.) The defacing of Tombs, Sepulchers, or Monuments erected in any Church,
Chancel, Common Chapel, or Churchyard, is (it seems) punishable by the Common
Law; and for which the Erectors or Builders thereof during their lives, and
after their decease their Heirs, shall have the Action 9 E. 4. 14. the Lady
Wiches Case. and Mich. 10 Jac. C. B. Corven verse. Pym. Co. Inst. par. 3. cap.
97.
. But the Erecting thereof ought not to be to the hinderance of Divine Service.
And albeit the Freehold of the Church is in the Parson, yet if the Lord of a
Manor, or any other that has an House within the Town or Parish, and he and
all those whose Estate he has in the Mansion House of the Manor, or other
House, has had a Seat in an Isle of the Church for him and his Family only,
and have repaired it at his own proper charges, Actio datur, si quis Arma in
aliquo loco posita delev^t seu abrasit, etc. Cassanae Council. 29.
it shall be intended that some of his Ancestors, or of the parties whose
Estate he has, did build and erect that Isle for him and his Family only; and
therefore if the Ordinary endeavor to remove him, or place any other there, a
Prohibition (as was resolved in Corven's Case) will lie Mich. 10 Jac. C. B.
dict. Cas. inter Corven and Pym.
. It has also been further Resolved, That if any man has a House in a Town or
Parish, and that he and those whose Estate he has in the House, has had time
out of mind a certain Pew or Seat in the Church, maintained by him and them,
the Ordinary may not remove him (for Prescription, according to Sir Ed. Coke,
makes Certainty, the Mother of Quietness) otherwise a Prohibition will also
lie in the case 8 H. 7. 12. a. per Hussy accord. Pasch. 10 Jac. Came. Stell.
int. Hussy and Layton. Resol. per le Court. Co. Inst. par. 3. cap. 97.
. But where there is no Prescription, there the Ordinary for avoiding of
contention in the Church, may place the Parishioners in the Church or public
Chapel according to their qualities and degrees 8 H. 7. 12. a. acc. 12 H. 7.
12. per Hussy. Co. ubi supr.
. And until the Bishop has consecrated or dedicated Churches or public
Chapels new erected, the Law does not take knowledge of them qua tales; for
which reason it is, That a Church or not a Church; a Chapel or not a Chapel;
is Tried and Certified by the Bishop 8 H. 6. 32, 37.
.

(10.) Touching the Reparation of Churches, the cognizance thereof appertains
to the Ecclesiastical Court, as was Agreed by the Court in Buck's Case against
Amcotts, where in a Prohibition the Defendant said, That in Hornechurch in
Essex are Chapels of Ease, viz. Rumford and Haveringe Chapels, and that they
of Haveringe have used time out of mind, etc. to contribute to the Reparation
of Rumford: and that in the time of H. 4. virtute Literar. patent. and
concurrentibus iis, etc. And Rumford was pulled down, and erected in a more
convenient place within this precinct and circuit, viz. twenty eight foot
longer and fourteen foot broader. Noy, That it does not lie. (1) Virtute
Literar. patent. in general is not good. But the Patent ought to have been
shown in haec verba, or produced in Court; by which the Court might judge: For
a new Church cannot be erected without Letters Patents, because it is a
Sanctuary, Ve. 5 E. 3. 26. 1 H. 7. 25. and 22 E. 4. the Lord Lisle's Case. (2.)
The Prescription is gone, by the erecting in another place, and longer, etc. as
aforesaid, ve. 4. Rep. P. 6. And that shall be taken strict, Perkins 761. 7 E.
4. 27. 10 E. 3. 23. But the Court was on the contrary, because it is pro bono
Publico, and in such a case a Pleader, by Concurrentibus iis, is good. As in an
Union, 11 H. 7. 8. And that the Cognizance for Reparation of the Church;
appertains to the Spiritual Court; and is not like the Case of a Tenure, 4 Rep.
86. because the Tenant by that is put to a greater charge, and no profit or
benefit accrues to the Tenant, as it does to the Parishioner. And Easter Term
ensuing, a Consultation was granted by the Court Hill. 5 Jac. B. R. Buck
against Amco^ts. Noy Rep.
. He that has the Impropriation of a Rectory or Parsonage, ought to repair the
Chancel, and so he ought to contribute to the reparation of the Church, if he
has any Land in that Village. Mich. 18 Jac. B. R. Sergeant Davies Case. Roll.
Rep. par. 2.

(11.) The Churchwardens of Denford, an Ancient Church in the County of
Northampton, sue the Inhabitants of Kingstead in the same Parish, where there
was a Chapel of Ease, for contribution to repair the Church of Denford. And
they pray a Prohibition upon suggestion, That time out of mind, etc. they have
used to Repair their own Chapel, and only a part of the Wall of the
Churchyard of the said Church of Denford. And it seemed by the better opinion
of the Court, that it was not good. For their Ease shall not be a disease to
the rest of the Parishioners. For Popham said, That the Assent is not requisite
to build a Chapel of Ease, and then the Ordinary and the Parson cannot charge
the Parishioners with greater charge. By Yelverton, That the Parson ought to
repair the Wall of the Churchyard. But by Fenner, The Parishioners in the
Spiritual Court shall be compelled to do it, although that the Frank-tenement
be in the Parson. Yelvert. objected, and by Kemp secondary, That the
Parishoners of repair the Wall of the Churchyard. Yet now it was ordered, that
a Prohibition shall be granted, and the D^fendants if they please may demurr
upon it. Note also B. 5 Jac. B. R. a Derbyshire-Case, where a Prohibition in
such case was denied Pasch. 4 Eliz. The Churchwardens of ^enford's Case. Noy
Rep.
.

(12.) Two Churchwardens sue S. for Reparation of the Church according to the
Tax assest. S. pleads he always offered to pay. By which the Sentence in the
Ecclesiastical Court passed against them. Then they Appeal, and Sentence is
repealed, and 15 l. Costs given to them, and they sue for that 15 l. in the
Ecclesiastical Court. S. pleads a Release of one of the Churchwardens. And in
a Prohibition it seemed to the three Justices, That that Release is a Bar
against the other, and that if it be disollowed in the Spiritual Court; by the
Court it was said a Prohibition shall lie. 7 Jac. B. R. rot. 852. A
Consultation in such case was granted, for the Churchwardens in such a case
are a Corporation for the benefit, but not for the prejudice of the Parish. 13
H. 7. 9. 11 H. 4. 12. And they shall recover the Costs to the use of the
Church, and the Release shall be well enough determined there, where the Suit
was commenced Gore verse. Stark. Noy Rep.
.

(13.) In Heal's Case against the Churchwardens of Hobleton, it was agreed by
the Court, That for a Tax assest for the Reparation of a Church a Rate made
perpetuis duratura temporibus, it is not good to bind the Inheritance; but yet
it is good by way of direction, how and how much shall be levied as need
requires Case Heal's ver. Churchwardens of Hobleton. Noy Rep.
. And in Chamber's Case a Prohibition was awarded to the Court of the Bishop of
Oxford; for that, that Chambers was sued there for a perpetual charge imposed
upon his Land, for the Reparation of the Church. For by the Court, an
Inherritance cannot be charged with that Chamber's Case. Noy Rep.
.

In another Case one that was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for Rates to
reparation of the Church, alleged that they had overvalued his Land, Rating
them at the value of 100 l. per. annum, they being worth but 60 l. (2) He
alleged a Custom in the Parish, that they ought to be rated not according to
the value of their Farms and Houses, but only according to the value of their
Sheep-walks, and on that matter he prayed a Prohibition. As to the first, all
the Court (except Whitlock) Resolved, that it is not material, because the
Rates ought to follow the value of the Land, and for that the valuing of the
Land properly belongs to them. As to the second, Noy moved, That although the
Principal be a thing Spiritual, yet it is now mixed with a Custom, as in the
Case de modo Decimandi the Ecclesiastical Court is ousted of his Jurisdiction.
Houghton Justice, It seems so as to other things; but the Church being the
House of God, Mich. 22 Jac. B. R. Holland verse. Kirton. Roll. Rep.
is more to be regarded, and a custom in prejudice to the Reparations of the
Church, is void; for of common Right the House and all Lands are chargeable to
the Reparations. And the Court commanded him to make a Suggestion of the
Custom, omitting the value, and then they would consider, whether a
Prohibition should go or no.

In Stephenson's Case it was Resolved, that if one has Lands in one Town, Cro.
par. 1.
and does inhabit in another; he shall be compelled to be contributary to the
Reparation of the Parish Church where the Lands are.

(14.) Note, by Coke Chief Justice, That the keeping of a Church-Book for the
Age of those which should be Born and Christened in the Parish, began in the
Thirtieth year of Henry the Eighth, by the instigation of the Lord Cromwell
Tyrwhite verse. Kynastan. Vid. Noy Rep. post dict. Cas.
.

(15.) Chapel, Capella, of the French [ Chapellee, that is, aedicula]. Of this
there seems to be three sorts; the one such as adjoyns to the Church, as parcel
of the same, built by Persons of Honor, ut ibidem Familiaria Sepulchra sibi
constituant; Another, that which is separate from the Mother Church in a Parish
of a large extent, built for the better ease and convenience of such
Parishioners whose habitations are remote and far distant from the
Parish Church, and thence vulgarly called a Chapel of Ease, being served by
some inferior Curate at the charge either of the Rector, or of such as for
whose convenience it is, according to the custom or composition. A Chapel of
Ease is where there is a Parochial Church in the same Parish, wherein the
Sacraments are administered, and not in the Chapel. 8 H. 6. 32. which
appertains to the Parochial Church, and the Parson thereof. Ibid. And a
Parochial Church cannot be a Chapel. 8 H. 6. 37. The Third is that which is
called a Free-Chappel, which in point of Maintenance and endowment, as also in
respect of exemption from the Ordinaries Jurisdiction, seems to differ from
both the former, If the King grant a Free Chapel to one, he ought to be put
into possession by the Sheriff, 14 H. 4. 11. b. and Roll. Abridg. ver.
Presentment, lit. B. page 356.
and has perpetual maintenance toward the upholding thereof, by a charitable
Endowment thereof, without the charge of the Rector or Parish 37 H. 8. c. 4. 1
Ed. 6. c. 14.
. So that a Free-Chappel or Libera Capella is, according to the opinion of
some, no other than a Chapel founded within some Parochial precincts for
Divine Service, by the bounty of some well disposed person (over and above the
Mother Church) to which it was at the Parishioners choice or liberty (for whose
convenience it was erected) to repair or not, and endowed with Maintenance by
the Founder, and therefore called Free. Notwithstanding which others are of
opinion, and that more probable, That these only are Free Chapels, which are
of the Foundation of Kings, and by them exempted from the Jurisdiction of the
Ordinary; but the King may also License a Subject to Found such a Chapel, and
by his Charter exempt it from the Visitation of the Ordinary; in respect of
which exemption, and from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan, it appears by the
Register of Writs to be called Free Regist. of Writs, fo. 40, 41.
. H. 8 E. 3. B. R. Rot. 97. Episcopus Exon attachiat. ad respondendum Domino
Regi quare exerceret Jurisdictionem in Capella Regia Sanctae Burianae in
Cornub, etc.. Ibidem and T. 17 E. 1. Rot. 97. B. R.
The King himself Visits his Free Chapels and Hospitals, and not the Ordinary
Dav^ 1. Proxies 4. 27 E. 3. 85. F. N. B. 42.
. The Lord Chancellor executes it for the King. These Chapels were all of
them, together with Chantries given to the King 1 Ed. 6. c. 14.
: Of this kind is the Free Chapel of St. Martin le Grand 3 Ed. 4. c. 4.
. The Canonists are not agreed touching the derivation of this word; some take
it ( a capiendo Laicos,) others ( a Capra,) because they conceive that they
resemble those Cottages which were wont to be covered over with Goat Skins.
Others ( a cappa Divi Martini). Others ( e Chapellee, Gallic.) Rebuff. de
pacif. possess. nu. 104. Pet. Greg. Synt. lib. 15. c. 29. Jo. Andraeas de
Benef. c. 11. nu. 10.
.

(16.) In the Parish of Aston (in the County of Warwick) which has a Parish
Church, is a certain Chapel of Ease, called Castle-Birmidge Chapel, and a
certain Precinct called Castle-Birmidge, the Inhabitants thereof resort to the
said Chapel, and there Marry, Christen, and receive the Sacraments; there are
also Churchwardens, and the Inhabitants have a Perambulation there of it self;
notwithstanding all which, when it came in debate, whether the Parishioners of
the Chapel (the Parish Church of Aston being in decay) might be Taxed toward
the Reparation thereof, they obtained a Prohibition on a Surmize, which not
appearing to be true, a Consultation was awarded; yet in that case it was held,
That if two Churches Parochial be united, the Reparation shall be several as
before. And that a Chapel of Ease is part of the Parish, and de communi jure
liable to reparations of the Parish Church; that such as have a Chapel of Ease
may resort to the Parish Church, if they so please; and that the Parson of the
Parish Church may Officiate at the Chapel of Ease, if he will Case Aston
Parish verse, Birmidge Chapel. Hob. Rep.
.

(17.) The Emperor Justinian in the fifth Collation of his Novel
Constitutions, commonly called the Authenticks, emitted by him after the Digest
and the Code, has Ordained, That no man build a Chapel in his House without
the leave of the Bishop, and before he consecrate the place by Prayer, and set
up the Cross there, and make procession in the place; and that before he build
it, he allot out Lands necessary for the maintenance of the same, and those
that shall attend on God's Service in the place. In which Collation there is
also that which seems to bear some conformity with the Acts of Uniformity,
established in this Realm against Seditious Conventicles; For in that Collation
it is likewise Ordained by the said Emperor, That the sacred Mysteries or
Ministeries be not done in private Houses, but be celebrated in public places,
lest thereby things be done contrary to the Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
unless they call to the celebrating of the same such Clerks of whose Faith and
Conformity there is no doubt made, or those who are thereunto deputed by the
Bishop. But Chapels and places to pray in every man may have in his own House;
if any thing be done to the contrary, the House wherein these things are done,
shall be confiscate, and themselves punished at the discretion of the Prince
Auth. Coll. 5. Vid. Ridl. View, cap. 3. Sect. 6. par. 1.
.

(18.) A. the Father had all his life the chief place in a certain Seat in the
Church, and H. his Son likewise claimed the same, and C. disturbed him in a
violent manner; the Archbishop of York, in whose Jurisdiction this was, granted
an Inhibition against C, till the matter were determined before him, and
Excommunicated him for Disobedience. C. claimed the place by Prescription, and
for that Reason prayed a Prohibition: And it was said, That the Excommunication
was only for his Contempt: And it is lawful for the Bishop to grant such an
Inhibition for the peace of the Church. And Doderidge agreed, That if the
Bishop did Inhibit any from making a disturbance in the Church, it was good;
and therefore would not grant a Prohibition for well-doing. Crew and Jones,
etc. but here he had not done well. Doderidge e contra. Then it was said, That
here the Bishop had Inhibited till the matter were determined before himself.
And the whole Court agreed, That a Seat in a Church claimed by Prescription,
and the priority therein likewise claimed by Prescription, is Triable in this
Court by an Action upon the Case, and not in the Spiritual Court. And at last
it was agreed by the parties, that H. should remain in possession till the
matter were tried by Prohibition. And a Prohibition was awarded in the Case
Hutton's Case. Latch. Rep.
. Note, That a Prohibition may not be granted after a Consultation Gase Bowry
verse. Wallington. Latch. Rep.
. And as it seems, by the course of Proceedings in the Court of the King's
Bench, a Prohibition shall not be granted the last day of a Term, and such a
Motion ought not then to be made; but upon a motion there may be a Rule to stay
proceedings till the next Term Anonymus. dict. Rep. Latch.
.

(19.) It was moved in the King's Bench for a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical
Court at Worcester, and showed for cause (1) That the Suit there was for Money,
which by the assent of the greater part of the Parishioners of D. was Assessed
upon the Plaintiff for the Reparation, viz. for the Re-casting of their Bells;
The truth is, That the charge was for the making of new Bells, where there were
Four before, whereby it appears that it is merely matter of curiosity, and not
of necessity, for which the Parishioners shall not be liable to such Taxations,
and herein it was relied upon 44 E. 3. 19. by Finchden. (2) The party there is
overcharged, of which the Common Law shall judge. (3) The party has alleged,
that he and all those who have an Estate in such a Tenement, have used to pay
but Eleven shillings for any Reparation of the Church. But the Prohibition was
denied; and by Doderidge in the Book of 44 E. 3. there was a By-law in the Case
to distrain, which is a thing merely Temporal, for which the Prohibition was
granted and per Curiam; in this case the Assessment by the major part of the
Parishioners binds the party, albeit he assented not to it: And the Court
seemed to be of opinion, That the Custom was not reasonable, because it laid a
burden upon the rest of the Parish. Littleton of Counsel of the other side,
Suppose the Church falls, shall he pay but Eleven shillings? Whitlock, If the
Church falls, the Parishioners are not bound to build it up again, which was
not denied by Justice Jones Mic^. 2 Car. Poph. Rep.
.

(20.) Roberts and others of East-Greenwich were cited in the Ecclesiastical
Court to pay money that the Churchwardens had expended in Reparation of the
Church; Reparations.
and the Inhabitants alleged, That the Tax was made by the Churchwardens
themselves, without calling the Freeholders, and also that the Moneys were
expending in the Re-edifying Seats of the Churches, which belonged to their
several houses: And they never assented, that they should be pulled down. And
now the Allegation was not allowed in the Ecclesiastical Court, but Sentence
was given against them. And then they Appealed to the Arches, where this
Allegation was also rejected; and for that he prayed a Prohibition: And the
Court agreed, That the Tax cannot be made by the Churchwardens, but by the
greater number of the Inhabitants it may, and a Prohibition was granted. But by
Yelverton, if they be cited by Ex Officio, a Prohibition will not lie; for so
it was Ex insinuatione, etc. For the Wardens came and prayed a Citation, etc.
But by Richardson, Harvey, and Crook privately, a Prohibition will lie in both
Cases The Case of Roberts and others in Hetley's Rep.
.

(21.) E. Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court against A. pretending, that a
Seat, that the other claimed always in the Church, belonged to his House,
Seats in a Church.
and Sentence in that Court was given against E. and Costs pro falso clamore.
And he Appealed to the Arches, and there when they were ready to affirm the
Sentence, he prayed a Prohibition. And it was moved by Davenport, that it might
be granted; and he cited one Tresham's Case 33 Eliz. where in such a case a
Prohibition was granted after an Appeal. Richardson, There is no cause for any
Prohibition, but in respect of the costs. Hutton said it was a double vexation,
and the party shall not have Costs for that. Hitcham said, they came too late
to have a Prohibition for the Costs. Richardson, That is not like to the Probat
of a Will, where a thing may fall out Triable at the Common Law. But there the
Principal was tried at the Common Law; for they had it as in right. Hutton,
Seats in the generality are in the power of the Ordinary to dispose; It is the
Prescription which makes that triable at the Common Law; and if Prescription be
made there, and it be found, then he shall pay Costs. Richardson, All
Disturbances appertain also to them: if it be not upon the Statute of 5 Ed. 6.
But if a Title be made there by Prescription, it is merely coram non Judice;
and if they cannot meddle with the Principal, it is not reason that they should
tax Costs. And a Prohibition was granted Eaton against Ay^^ff^. Hetley 's Rep.
.

(22.) H. Farmer of a Manor; A. and other Churchwardens Libel against him in
the Ecclesiastical Court for a Tax for the reparation of the Church. Reparation
of the Church.
Henden moved for a Prohibition because that first the Libel was upon a
custom, That the Lands should be charged for Reparations, which Customs ought
to be tried at the Common Law. And secondly, Because the custom of that place
is, that Houses and Arable Lands should only be taxed for the Reparations of
the Church, and Meadow and Pasture should be charged with other Taxes. But the
whole Court on the contrary: First, although that a Libel is by a Custom, yet
the other Lands shall be dischargeable by the Common Law; but the usage is to
allege a Custom; and also that Houses are chargeable to the Reparations of
the Church, as well as Land. And thirdly, that a custom to discharge some
Lands is not good. Wherefore a Prohibition was granted Hill. 4 Car. C. B.
Andrews verse. Hutton. Hetley's Rep.
.

Note, that where a man sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, prescribing to have a
Seat in a Church ratione Messuagii where he inhabited; upon the motion of
Sergeant Henden, a Prohibition was granted, for it is a Temporal thing Noy's
Rep. post Cas. ^ore verse. Stark.
.

Note, By Coke Chief Justice, That the keeping of a Church-Book for the age of
those, which should be born and christened in the Parish, began in the 30th.
year of Henry the Eighth: by the instigation of the Lord Cromwell Post Case
Tyrwhite verse. Kynaston. Nay's Rep.
.

A man was indicted upon the Statute of Ed. 6. That in the Churchyard,
Striking in the Churchyard.
such a day, extraxit gladium against J. L. and ipsum percussit; and because
the Statute was, If any person maliciously strik another, or shall draw any
Weapon with an intent to strike any person: And the Indictment was quod
extraxit, but does not say ad percutiendum: And because it is quod percussit
without saying malitiose, the party was discharged upon Judgment Heart versus
Arrowsmith. Post dict. Cas. Noy 's Rep.
.

If there be a Parson Appropriate of a Church, Trees in the Churchyard.
and also a Vicar endowed of the same Church, the Trees in the Churchyard do
there belong to the Vicar, and not to the Parson; for that there the Vicar
ought to repair the Church, and he shall have the Trees which ought to repair
the Church. Dubitatur. Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. Bellamie's Case Roll. Abr. verb.
Parson, nu. 3.
.

The Lord Coke said, That for the Body of the Church, the Ordinary is to place
and displace; in the Chancel the Freehold is in the Parson, Seats in the
Church. Brownl. Rep. pa. 1. Cases in Law, etc.
and it is parcel of his Glebe; Trespass will lie by the Heir for pulling down
the Coat-Armor, etc. of his Ancestors, set up in the Church. A Pew cannot
belong to a House.

(23.) An Inhabitant of the Parish of D. has Land in his occupation in the
Parish of S. Reparations of the Church.
The Churchwardens of S. and other the Parishioners there make a Tax for the
Reparation of the Church, for Ornaments of the Church, and for the Sexton's
wages, amounting to the sum of 23 l. and the Tax of the Church being deducted,
comes but to 3 l. only. The Foreigner which dwells in D. is sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court by the Churchwardens of S. for his part of the said Tax;
and he prays a Prohibition. Henden said, he well agreed the Case of Jefferies,
5 Coke, that he should be charged, if this Tax had been for the Reparation of
the Church only; for this is in nature Real. But when that is joined with other
things, which are in nature personal, as Ornaments of the Church, or Sexton's
wages, with which, as it seems, he is not chargeable, then Prohibition lies for
all. Flemming Chief Justice, and Williams Justice, thought fit that he should
not have a Prohibition: for as well the Reparations of the Church, as the
Ornaments thereof, are merely Spiritual, with which this Court has nothing to
do; and Flemming said, That such Tax is not any charge issuing out of the Land,
as a Rent, but every person is taxed according to the value of the Land: But
Yelverton and Fenner to the contrary, that a Prohibition does lie, for the same
diversity which had been conceived at the Bar; and also they said, That he
which dwells in another Parish, does not intend to have benefit by the Ornaments
of the Church, Reparations of Church-Seats.
or for the Sexton's wages: And for that it was agreed by all, by the Chief
Justice, Williams, and the others, That if Tax be made for the Reparation of
Seats of the Church, that a Foreigner shall not be taxed for that, because he
has no benefit by them in particular; and the Court would advise Pas^h. 8 Jac.
B. R. Wagginer and Wood. Brownl. Rep. pa. 2.
. In Penner and Crompton's Case, it was held, That none shall be chargeable for
contribution to Church-reckonings if he do not inhabit there, or consent to
them. More's Rep.

(24.) Note, upon a motion for a Prohibition; That if a Parson contract with me
by word, Mich. 8 Jac. B. R. Brownl. ubi supra.
for keeping back my own Tithes for three or four years; This is a good Bargain
by way of Retainer: and if he sue me in the Ecclesiastical Court for my Tithes,
I shall have a Prohibition upon this composition. But if he grant to me the
Tithes of another, though it be but for a year; This is not good, unless it be
by Deed.

(25.) The disposal of Seats in the Body of the Church does belong of common
right to the Ordinary of the Diocese, S^ats in the Church.
so as he may place and displace at his pleasure. If a man and his Ancestors,
and all those whose Estate he has in a certain Message, have used time out of
mind, etc. to repair an Isle of the Church, and to sit there, and none other:
the Ordinary may not displace him; for if so, then a Prohibition lies, for that
he has it by prescription upon reasonable consideration Mich. 11 Jac. B. R.
per Cur. and Mich. 10 Jac. B. ^ym's Case, per Cur. Hob. Rep. 95. and More Rep.
: Likewise if a man prescribe, That he and his Ancestors, and all those whose
Estates he has in a certain Message, have used to sit in a certain Pew in the
body of the Church time out of mind, etc. in consideration that he, etc. have
used time out of mind to repair the said Seat. If the Ordinary remove him from
that Seat, a Prohibition lies, for in this case the Ordinary has not any power
to dispose thereof; for that is a good prescription, and by intendment there
may be a good consideration for the commencement of that prescription, although
the place where the Seat is be the Parson's Freehold. In this case a
Prohibition was granted to the Bishop of Exeter for one Cross Tr. 12 Jac, B
Cross's Case Resolved per Cu^. and M. 13 Jac. B. L^ugh and Hussy. Resol. and
M. 13 Jac. B. Boothby and Day. Hob. Rep. 95. Roll. Abr. page 288.
. But if a man prescribe to have a Seat in the Body of the Church, generally,
without the said consideration of repairing the Seat, the Ordinary may displace
him M. 11 J^c. B. R. per Cur. and dict. Case Boothby. Hob. 93.
. But with the Seats in the Chapels annexed to Noblemens Houses, it is said
the Ordinary has nothing to do Tr. 12 Jac. B. Agreed. Roll Abr. so. 288.
. If there be a custom in a Parish, that 12 of the Parishioners may choose the
Churchwardens, which Churchwardens have power by the custom to repair the old
Seats, and erect new in the Body of the Church, and to appoint who shall sit in
them; And the Churchwardens so elect, erect a New Seat in the Body of the
Church, and appoint a certain person to sit there; and after the Ordinary
decree, That another shall have the Seat: In this case it is said a Prohibition
lies, for the custom has fixed the power of disposing the Seats in this case
in the Churchwardens, and a Prohibition was granted: But it was also partly
granted, for that the Sentence of the Ordinary was, That T. should have the
Seat to him and his Heirs, and that none should disturb him on pain of
Excommunication, which is unreasonable; and by that Sentence he and his Heirs
shall have it, although they do not Inhabitants within the Parish Pasch. 16
Jac. B. R. inter Bra^in and Tredennick for a Seat in the Church of St. Breock
in Cornwall. Vid. Roll. Abr. verb. Prohibition page 288.
.

(26.) The Ecclesiastical Court has cognizance of the Reparations of the Body
of the Chuech Co. 5. Jeffrey 's Case 67. Resolved. Reparations of the Church.
. If a man that dwells in one Parish, has Land in another, the which he keeps
in his own hands and occupation, he shall be charged for that Land for the
Reparation of the Church of that Parish where the Land lies, for that he may
come when he will, and it is a charge in respect of the Land Co. ibid. and Tr.
11 Jac. B. Andrews Case, per Cur. Contra M. 40, 41. El. B. R. per Cur.
. But if an Inhabitant in one Parish, lease out his Land which he has in
another Parish, reserving Rent, he shall not be charged where the Land lies, in
respect of the Rent, because there is a Parishioner and an Inhabitant that may
be charged Co. ibid. Jeffrey's Case. Resol. M. 5 Jac. B.
. And a man cannot be charged in the Parish where he does inhabit, for Land
which he has in another Parish, to the Reparation of the Church, for that he
may then be twice charged, for he may be charged for that in the Parish where
the Land does lie Pasch. 16 Jac. B. R. Sr. H. Bu^ler verse. etc. Resol. Co. 5.
Jeffreys 67.
; in which case Prohibition has been granted.

(27.) If a Citizen of London erect a House in the Parish of A. with intent of
dwelling there in time of Sickness at London, and has not any Land in the
Parish, and after is Assessed 20 s. for Reparation of the Church, where others
who have 100 acres of Land in the same Parish, pay but 6 d. yet no Prohibition
shall be granted on a Suit for the said 20 s. in the Ecclesiastical Court, for
that they have Jurisdiction of the thing, and for which reason they may order
it according to their Law M. 5 Jac. B. Sr. To. Lee's Case. per Cur.
.

(28.) If there be a Chapel of Ease within a Parish, and any persons of the
Parish have used time out of mind, etc. alone and by themselves without others
of the Parishioners to repair that Chapel of Ease, and there to hear Divine
Service, and to Marry, and all other things, only they Bury at the
Mother Church; yet they shall not be discharged of Reparations of the
Mother Church, but ought to contribute to the same, for the Chapel was
Ordained only for their ease M. 13 Jac. B. the Case of the Churchwardens of
Ashton, and the Inhabitants of Castle Bromage. Hob. Rep. 91.
. But if Inhabitants within a Chappelry prescribe to be discharged time out of
mind, etc. of the Reparation of the Mother Church, and are sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the same, a Prohibition lies on that Surmize Hob. Rep.
92.
.

(29.) If a man be rated for the Ornaments of the Church according to the Land
which he has in the Parish, Ornaments of the Church.
a Prohibition lies, for the Rate for that ought to be according to the
personal Estate Mich. 20 Jac. B. R.
. Also if a man who is not any Inhabitant within the Parish, but has Land
there, be rated for the Ornaments of the Church according to the Land, a
Prohibition lies, for the Inhabitants ought to be rated for that Ibid. Resol.
per Cur.
; and it was said by Yelverton, That it had been often so Resolved.

(30.) If all the Parishioners are not rated for the Reparation of the Church,
but some are and some are not, and those that are rated be sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court, a Prohibition will lie Mich. 11 Car. B. R. per Cur.
. But if the major part of the Parishioners of a Parish, where there are four
Bells, does agree that there shall be a fifth Bell made, and it be made
accordingly, and a Rate made for payment of the same; it shall bind the lesser
part of the Parishioners although they did not agree to it, for otherwise any
obstinate persons may hinder any thing intended to be done for the Ornament of
the Church; and therefore in this case a Prohibition was denied Mich. 2 Car. B.
R. per Cur.
.

(31.) The Ecclesiastical Court may not try the Bounds of a Parish; if
therefore there be a Suit there depending for that, a Prohibition will lie; as
where the difference is between two Vicars concerning a Chapel of Ease; As
when the Vicar of a Parish Libels against another to avoid his Institution to
the Church of D. which he supposes to be a Chapel of Ease belonging to his
Vicarage: if the Defendant suggest, that D. is a Parish of it self, and not a
Chapel of Ease, a Prohibition lies, for they may not try the Bounds of a
Parish Mich. 14 Jac. B. R. Fisher and Chamberlayn, Resol. and Hill. 41 Eliz. B.
R. Piper and Barnaby, Adjudg'd. and Hill. 13 Jac. B. R. Foster and Hide,
Adjudg'd.
.

(32.) If a Vicar sue the Parson Impropriate for damages for cutting down the
Trees growing in the Churchyard, a Prohibition lies; for that if the Trees
belong to him, he may have Trespass at Common Law; And in this case a
Prohibition was granted Mich 12 Jac. B. R. Bellamy's Case, Resolved.
.

(33.) One being sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for money for reparation of
the Church, prayed a Prohibition and had it, and after it was moved for a
Consultation. The case was this, viz. The party that was sued, prescribed that
there is a Chapel within the same Village, in which they have had at all times
Sacramenta and Sacramentalia, and that he nor the Inhabitants of that Village
which resort to the said Chapel, have ever used to repair the said Church; the
first point in this case was, whether the Prescription were good; and the Chief
Justice said, that it is contrary to Common right, that they who have a Chapel
of Ease in a Village should be discharged of repairing the Mother Church; Hill.
19 Jac. B. R. Rot. 922. Peeter verse. Rose Edmonds Wid. Roll. Rep.
and it may be that the Church being built with Stone, it may not need any
Reparation within the memory of man, and yet that does not discharge them
without some special cause of discharge showed. The second point was the taking
away of an Objection, as they said, viz. That a Prescription which is incident
to Ecclesiastical things, shall be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, and so
that Objection removed, and commonly the Churchwardens are chosen in the
Ecclesiastical Court, yet the Lord of a Manor may prescribe for that, and then
it shall not be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, although it be a
Prescription of what appertains to a Spiritual thing.

(34.) Note, that in the case of Churchwardens, the Chief Justice said, That
for the repairing the Fabric of the Church the charge is real, Hill. 20 Jac.
B. R. Churchwardens Case. Roll'. Rep.
and charges the Land and not the person; but for the Ornaments of the Church
it is personal, and there if a man be not an Inhabitant within the Parish, he
is not chargeable in respect of his Land, for such Tax does charge the Goods
only. And to this Chamberlain Justice agreed, and none denied it; but where
there is a Farmor of the Land, there the Farmor alone shall not be charged, for
it is not reason that a poor Husbandman, who paies Rent for his Land, and
perhaps to the utmost value, should build Churches; but it may be unknown to
the Parishioner and the Churchwardens who has the Fee in reversion, and
therefore they may impose the whole Tax on the Farmor, and he by way of Answer
may allege in the Ecclesiastical Court that he is but the Farmor, and
thereupon the Tax shall be divided between him and his Landlord, according to
the Rate which the Land is worth more than the Rent, and on the Landlord
according to the quantity of the Rent; quod quaere, for in Jeofferie's Case 5
Coke it is Resolved, That the Farmor alone is chargeable, and that a
Consultation was granted, but not for that reason, but for that the Reversioner
had pleaded an insufficient plea in the Ecclesiastical Court, viz. That he was
not an Inhabitant within the Parish, which is not a good plea, as also for the
great delay which he had used, having made or brought two Appeals, and after a
Prohibition, and so had put the Parish to 60 l. charge for the recovery of 6 l.
and for that reason chiefly, and not on the matter in Law was the Consultation
granted.

(33.) In Frances and Ley's Case, Cro. par. 2.
it was Resolved by the Justices, That Coats of Arms placed in Windows, or a
Monument placed in the Church or Churchyard, cannot be beaten down and defaced
by the Parson, Ordinary, Churchwardens, or any other: And if they be, the Heir
by descent interessed in the Coat, etc. may have an Action of Trespass.

(36. Mich. 18 Jac. B. R. Dawney and Dee's Case. Cro. par. 2.
) In an Action upon the Case, D. showed he was seized of a Message and Land in
P. to the same belonging, and in the Parish of P. time whereof, etc. and yet is
a Chapel in the North part of the Chancel, called the Parsons Chancel, and the
Plaintiff and all those, etc. have used to sustain and repair the said Chancel,
and have used for him and his Family to sit in Seats of the said Chancel, and
to Bury there the persons dying in the said Message, Seats in a Chapel.
and that none other during all the said time, etc. without their License, have
used to sit there, or to be buried there, and that the Defendants Praemissorum
non ignari, malitiose impediverunt him to enter, and sit in the said Seats. The
Defendant said, That the Earl of N. was seized of the Honor of F. and the said
Chapel was parcel of the said Honor, and that the Defendants being Servants
of the said Earl, and resident within the said Honor, did diverse times in the
time of Divine Service sit in the Seats of the said Chancel, by the command of
the said Earl; upon which it was Demurred: Exceptions were taken to the
Declaration, because he prescribes to have a Liberty appertaining to his House,
and does not show it is an Ancient House. And (2) That the Allegation of the
disturbance was ill, being general, without alleding a special Disturbance, and
how he was disturbed. Resolved, That when it is supposed he is seized in Fee of
a Capital Message, and time, etc. it is there included, that it is an ancient
Message, and so might have such a privilege; And for the second, it is
sufficient to allege a general Disturbance, as is usual in the Case of a Fair
or Market.

(37. Pasch. 33 Eliz. B. R. Dethick's Case. Cro. par. 1.
) D. was Indicted upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. for striking in Paul's
Churchyard; he pleaded that he was by the Queens Letters Patents created
Garter King of Arms, and demanded Judgment because he was not so named: It was
the opinion of the Court, Striking in the Churchyard.
that because it was a parcel of his Dignity and not of his Office only, and
because the Patent is, Creamus, coronamus, and nomen imponimus de Garter Rex
heraldorum, that therefore in all Suits brought against him, he ought to be
named by this name; and thereupon he was discharged of the Indictment.
Penhall^'s Case. Cro. ibid.
And in Penhallo's Case, who was Indicted upon the same Statute, for drawing of
Dagger in the Church of B. against J. S. and does not say, with intent to
strike him; for which cause the Judgment was quashed. Likewise in Child's Case,
Child's Case. Cro. ibid.
who was Indicted for striking in the Churchyard; and it was apud generalem
Sessionem Pacis tent. apud Blandford, and it was not said [ in Comitatu
praedicto] for which reason the party was discharged, though the County was in
the Margin.

(38.) In Pym's Case beforementioned; Corven did Libel in the Ecclesiastical
Court against Pym for a Seat in a Church in Devonshire; Corven's Case. Co. lib.
10.
And Pym, by Sergeant Hutton, moved for a Prohibition upon this Reason, Right
to Seat^ in the Church.
That himself is seized of a House in the said Parish; and that he and all
whose Estate he has in the House, have had a Seat in an Isle of the Church:
And it was Resolved by the Court, That if a Lord of a Manor, or other person,
who has his House and Land in the Parish, time out of mind, and had a Seat in
an Isle of the same Church; so that the Isle is proper to his Family, and have
maintained it at their charges; That if the Bishop would dispossess him, he
shall have a Prohibition: But for a Seat in the Body of a Church, if a question
arises it is to be decided by the Ordinary, because the Freehold is to the
Parson, and is common to all the Inhabitants. And it is to be presumed, That
the Ordinary who has cure of Souls, will take order in such cases, according
to right and convenience; and with this agrees 8 H. 7. 12. And the Chief
Justice, Damc Wick her Case, 9 H. 4. 14. which was, The Lady brought a Bill in
B. R. against a Parson, Quare tunicam unam vocatam, A Coat Armor and Pennons
with her Husband Sir Hugh Wick his Arms, and a Sword, in a Chapel where he was
buried; and the Parson claimed them as Oblations: And it was there held, That
if one were to sit in the Chancel, and has there a place, his Carpet, Livery,
and Cushion, the Parson cannot claim them as Oblations; for that they were
hanged there is honor of the decased: The same reason of a Coat Armor, etc.
And the Cbief Justice said, The Lady might have a good Action, during her life,
in the case aforesaid, because she caused the things to be set up there; and
after her death the Heir shall have his Action, they being in the nature of
Heir-Looms which belong to the Heir. And with this agrees the Laws of other
Nations. Bartho. Cassanae, fo. 13. Con. 29. Actio datur si aliquis Arma in
aliquo loco posita deleat aut abrasit, etc. And in 21 Ed. 3. 48. in the Bishop
of Carlisle's Case. Note, That in Easter-Term it was Resolved in the
Star Chamber, in the case between Hussy and Katherine Leyton, That if a man
have a House in any Parish, and that he and all those whose Estate he has,
have used to have a certain Pew in the Church; that if the Ordinary will
displace him, he shall have a Prohibition; but where there is no such
prescription, the Ordinary will dispose of common and vulgar Seats.

(39. A Chapel of Ease taxed by the Mother Church for reparations thereof.
) In the County of Dorset there was a Mother Church and also a Chapel of Ease
within the same Parish; they of the Mother Church did rate and tax them of the
Chapel of Ease, toward reparations of the Mother Church, for the which, upon
their refusal to pay the same, being sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, they
prayed a Prohibition, and for cause alleged, That they themselves have used
time out of mind, etc. to repair the Chapel at their own proper cost, without
having any Contribution at all from them of the Mother Church, and that they
have been exempted from all charges and reparations of the Mother Church, and
yet for their refusal to pay this Tax, they were libelled against in the
Ecclesiastical Court, Hill. 7 Jac. B. R. Bulstr. par. 1.
and a Sentence there passed against them; they therefore prayed a Prohibition.
By the opinion of the whole Court a Prohibition lies not in this case, in
regard, that this Prescription is merely Spiritual, and therefore a Prohibition
denied per Curiam.

(40.) One was presented ex Officio in the Ecclesiastical Court, for the not
frequenting of his Parish Church; he there pleads, That this was not his
Parish Church, A Presentment ex Officio, for not frequenting his Parish Church.
Trin. 9 Jac. B. R. Bulstr. par. 1.
but that he had used to frequent another Parish Church, and to resort unto
that: And because they in the Ecclesiastical Court would not receive his plea,
the Court was moved for a Prohibition, for that by the Law, in the time of King
H. 3. Ed. 3. and Ed. 4. they in the Ecclesiastical Court have not any power to
intermeddle with the Precinct of Parish-Churches, neither are they there to
Judge, what shall be said to be a man's Parish Church: And so was the Opinion of
the whole Court, and therefore by the Rule of the Court a Prohibition was
granted.

(41.) Touching the Reparations of a Church, and who were liable thereunto,
Pasch. 8 Jac. B. R. Bulstr. par. 1.
this being a question coming in debate before the Judges: It was Resolved by
the whole Court, That for and toward the Reparation of a Church, the Land of
all, as well of Foreigners there not inhabiting, as of all others, is liable
thereunto, and this is so by the general custom of the place; and this is to
be raised by a Rate imposed according to the value of the Land, and that in the
nature of a Fifteen, and this is not merely in the Realty, Williams and
Yelverton Justices, and Flemming Chief Justice, Not the Land, but the person of
him who occupies the Land is to be charged. Yelverton Justice, A man is
chargeable for Reparations of a Church by reason of the Land; and for the
Ornaments in the Church, by reason of his coming to Church. Williams Justice
and Flemming Chief Justice, If the person have Land there he is chargeable for
both, whether he come to Church or not, for that he may come to Church if he
please.

(42. Seats in a Church.
) In a Prohibition the Case was this: The Defendant did Libel before the Bishop
of London in the Consistory Court, for a Seat in the Church; Sentence there
passed against the Defendant; whereupon he Appealed to the Arches. Mich. 11
Jac. B. R. May against Gilbert. Bulstr. par. 2.
The Court was moved for a Prohibition, in regard the Title to the Seat or Pew
was grounded upon a Prescription: The Court answered, etc. As for the Title we
are not here to meddle with it, this being for a Seat in the Church. Haughton
Justice, This Disposition of Pews in the Church belongs of right to the order
and discretion of the Ordinary; and to this purpose is the case of 8 H. 7. fo.
12, and Sir William Hall's case against Ellis. Doderidge Justice, I moved this
case in the Court of C. B. and it was for a Seat in the Church: An Action there
brought for Disturbance, and I there cited Hall's case; and 9 E. 4. fo. 14. The
Case of the Gravestone and Coat-Armor: for the taking of which an Action of
Trespass lies at the Common Law, and therefore by the same reason an Action of
Trespass should lie for such a Disturbance in a Seat of a Church; but there the
Judges did all of them say, That they would not meddle with the deciding of
such Controversies for Seats in the Church, but would leave the same to them,
to whom more properly it belonged. Croke Justice, Hall's case was this, where a
man did build an entire Isle in the Church, and was at continual charge to
repair it; if he be disturbed in the use of this, he shall for this Disturbance
have his remedy at the Common Law, and so it has been adjudged; But the Judges
all said, We are not here to meddle with Seats in the Church. Doderidge
Justice, This Appeal here is like unto a Writ of Error at the Common Law; but
it does differ in this, By the Appeal the first Judgment or Sentence is
suspended, but after a Writ of Error brought, the first Judgment still remains
until it be reversed. Coke Chief Justice, It was Pym's Case in the Common
Bench, and 8 H. 7. fo. 12. that the Ecclesiastical Court has Jurisdiction and
power to dispose of Pews and Seats in the Church; But if there be an Isle built
by a Gentleman, or by a Nobleman, and he has used to Bury there, and there
has his Ensigns of Honor, as a Gravestone, Coat-Armor, or the like, which
belongs not unto the Parson; if he take them, the Heir may well have an Action
of Trespass: Otherwise it is, where the same is repaired at the Common charge
of the Parish, there they have the disposing of them: Ellis and Hall's Case
remembered, a Kentish Case, there the Seat was repaired by him, and was
belonging to his Capital Message by Prescription, and so triable at the Common
Law: And so where the Case is Special, that the party does wholly and solely
repair the same, in such a case, if a Suit be there concerning such a Seat, a
Prohibition well lies, but not otherwise: But if a Nobleman comes to dwell in
the Country, he is now within the sole order and dispose of the Ordinary for
his Pew and Seat in the Church; and upon the former difference was Pym's case
adjudged in the C. B. in this principal Case, a Prohibition was denied by the
whole Court.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Churchwardens, Questmen, and Sidemen.
1. What such are in construction of Law; how the choice of them is to be made,
and wherein the Office does consist. 2. What Actions at Law may lie for or
against them. 3. Whether Actions lie for the New Churchwardens in Trespass done
in time of their Predecessors. 4. Certain things appertaining to the Church
within the charge and office of Churchwardens to provide and preserve. 5. Cases
in Law touching the Election of Churchwardens. 6. What Sidemen or Questmen are,
and their duty. 7. Action at Law against Churchwardens, touching Distress taken
by them for money for relief of the Poor. 8. A Churchwarden refusing to take
the Oath of Enquiry on the 39 Articles, Action thereon. 9. What remedy in case
the Archdeacon refuses to Swear the Churchwardens Elect. 10. The Injunctions of
King Ed. 6. touching all Marriages, Baptisms, and Burials to be Registered in
the presence of the Churchwardens. 11. Whether the Release of one Churchwarden,
shall be a Bar to his Companion, in an Ecclesiastical Suit commenced by them
both? 12. Prohibition, where Churchwardens have pretended a Custom to choose
the Parish-Clerk. 13. The like upon a Presentment by Churchwardens against one,
in matter more proper for a Leet, than the Ecclesiastical Court, to take
cognizance of. 14. The prevalency of Custom against a Canon, in choice of a
Churchwarden, in reference to a Vicar and the Parishioners. 15. If question be,
whether Lands next adjoining unto a Churchyard shall be charged with the
repairs of the Fences thereof, and Custom pleaded for it, in what Court
cognizable. 16. In Action of Account by Parishioners against Churchwardens, by
whom a Release of C^sts is pleaded, but disallowed in the Ecclesiastical Court;
whether Prohibition lies in that case? 17. Whether Churchwardens are a
Corporation qualified for Lands as well as Goods to the use of the Church? 18.
The Churchwardens disposal of Goods, belonging to the Church, without the
assent of the Sidemen or Vestry, void. 19. Churchwardens not Ecclesiastical
Officers, but Temporal employed in Ecclesiastical Affairs; Before whom are they
to Account? 20. Whether Churchwardens may have Action for Trespass done to the
Church in their Predecessors time? 21. Whether the Parishioners by force of a
Custom, or the Parson by virtue of a Canon, shall choose the Churchwarden; and
whether Prohibition lies in that case? 22. Whether Churchwardens, as a
Corporation, may prescribe to take Lands to them and their Successors, to the
use of the Church?
1. CHurchwardens, or Guardiani Ecclesiae, are certain Officers Parochial,
Oeconomi, vel Ecclesiae Guardiani.
annually elected or chosen by and with the consent of the Minister and a
select number of the chief Parishioners, according to the Custom of the place,
to look to the Church and Churchyard, and to take care of the concernments
thereof, and of such things as appertain thereto; as also to observe and have
an inspection into the Behavior, Lives, and Conversation of their
Parishioners, touching such faults and disorders as are within the cognizance
and censure of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. These Officers are a kind of
Corporation, enabled to sue and be sued for any matters or things belonging to
the Church or Poor of their Parish; Churchwardens, if elected by Vestry, where
good, and capable to pu^chase Lands. Vid. St. Savi^urs in S^uthwark 's Case.
Lane Rep.
and have as their Assistants, certain Sidemen or Questmen, who according to
the custom of the Parish are yearly likewise chosen, to assist the
Churchwardens in the Enquiry and presenting such offenders to the Ordinary as
are within the Ecclesiastical cognizance and censure aforesaid; for which they
are not to be sued or troubled at the Law by any such Offenders so presented as
aforesaid Can. 115.
; nor are they obliged to Present oftener than twice a year, except it be at the
Bishop's Visitation; yet they may present as often as they shall think meet, if
good occasion shall so require Can. 116.
; but they may not (on pain of being proceeded against by their Ordinaries, as
in cases of wilful Perjury in Courts Ecclesiastical) willingly and wittingly
omit to present such public Crimes as they knew to have been committed, or
could not be ignorant that there was then a public same thereof Can. 117.
. Moreover, the Old Churchwardens are to make their Presentiments before the New
be Sworn; till which time the Office of the old continues; the usual time for
the New Churchwardens to enter upon their Office, is the first week after
Easter, or some week following, according to the direction of the Ordinary;
before which, the old Churchwardens shall exhibit the Presentiments of such
enormities as happened in their Parish since their last Presentiments, and shall
not be suffered to transmit or pass over the same to those that are newly
chosen Can. 118.
. By the Ninetieth Canon the choice of Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, or
Assistants is to be yearly made in Easter-week; and that by the Joynt-consent
of the Minister and the Parishioners, if it may be; otherwise, the Minister to
choose one, and the Parishioners another; who at their years end, or within a
month next after, shall in the presence of the Minister and the Parishioners
make a just Account of what they have received and disbursed for the use of the
Church, and shall deliver over what remains in their hands belonging to the
Church, unto the next Churchwardens by Bill Indented Can. 89.
.

(2.) One brought Action on the Case against Churchwardens, for a false and
malicious Presentment of him in the Spiritual Court, and found for the
Defendants; They prayed double Costs on the Statute of 1 Jac. But Jones, Crook,
and Berkley, Justices, denied it, for that the Statute does not extend to
Churchwardens for things of their office in Ecclesiastical Causes Mich. 8 Car.
B. R. Case K^rcheval verse. Smith and alios. Jon^'s Rep.
. They have their Action of Trespass at the Common Law for such things taken
away out of the Church, as belonged to the Parishioners in reference to the
Church 11 H. 4. Tri^. 12 Jac. B. R. Bucksal^'s Case. Roll. Rep.
. And the Release of one of the Churchwardens, is no Bar in Law to the other 14
Jac. B. R. in Motam's Case. Roll ibid.
If one take away the Chalice or Surplice out of the Church, Action of Trespass
lies against him at Common Law, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court Per Dod.
Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. Bellamie's Case. Roll Rep.
. So if one lay violent hands on an Ecclesiastical person, an Action lies in
the Ecclesiastical Court, but he shall not there sue for damages Ibid.
. If the Organs, or Parish-Bible or the like, be taken away out of the Church,
the Action lies at the Common Law and not in the Spiritual Court for the same,
for the Churchwardens may have their Action at Common Law in that case Dict.
Bucksal^'s Case. It is Felony and Sacrilege to steal away the Parish-Bible cut
of the Church, and suable at Common Law.
: But if the Parson take away out of the Church the Scutcheon or Banner of some
person deceased, his Widow (if she did put it there, and it be taken away in
her life time) may have her Action of Trespass at Common Law, or after her
decease the Heir may have the same Action Co. 9 Ed. 4. and Trin. 12 Jac.
Bucksale's Case. Roll. Rep.
.

(3.) Trespass brought by the Churchwa^dens of F. and declared, That the
Defendant took a Bell out of the said Church, and that the Trespass was done 20
Eliz. It was found for the Plaintiffs. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
it appears by the Declaration, That the Trespass was done in the time of their
Predecessors, of which the Successor cannot have Action: and Actio personalis
moritur cum persona, Vid. 19 H. 6. 66. But the old Churchwardens shall have the
Action. Coke contrary, and that the present Churchwardens shall have the
Action, and that in respect of their Office, which the Court granted. And by
Gaudy, Churchwardens are a Corporation by the Common Law, Vid. 12 H. 7. 28. by
Frowick, That the New Churchwardens shall not have an Action upon such a
Trespass done to their Predecessors; Contrary by Yaxley. Vid. by Newton and
Paston, That the Executors of the Guardian in whose time the Trespass was done,
shall have Trespass Hill. 31 Eliz. C. B. The Churchwardens of Fetherstone 's
Case. Leon. Rep.
.

(4.) It is the duty of Churchwardens not only to take care of the Concernments
of the Church, and to present Disorders, as aforesaid, but also to provide
Bread and Wine against the Communion, the Bible of the largest Volume, the Book
of Common Prayer, a decent Pulpit, a Chest for Alms, Materials for repairing
the Church, and fencing the Churchyard, and the like, all at the
Parish-charge, and shall, what in them lies, prevent the profanation of
Churches by any usage thereof contrary to the Canons. It was agreed by the
Court in Robert's case, That a Tax for the Church cannot be made by the
Churchwardens only. Hetley's Rep.

(5.) In Butt's Case, Moore Sergeant moved at Court for a Prohibition, because
where the custom of the Parish or Village was, that the Parishioners have used
to elect two Churchwardens: and at the end of the year, to discharge one and
elect another in his room, and so alternis vicibus, etc. By the New Canon now
the Parson has the Election of one, and the Parish of the other; and that he
that was elected by the Parishioners, was discharged by the Ordinary at his
Visitation; and for that he prayed a Prohibition. Et allocat. as a thing usual
and of course. For otherwise (by Hubbard) the Parson might have all the
Authority of his Church and Parish But^'s Case. Noy Rep.
. The like Case to this we have elsewhere reported, viz. The Parson and
Churchwardens in London by the Custom are a Corporation, and the Parishioners
time out of mind, etc. have used at a certain day in the Vestry, from
Vestments, the place where the holy Vestments are kept. This is used once in
the Bible, and but on^^, 2 Ki^. 10. 22. where the Ba^li^es kept their Vestments.
Vestry to Elect Churchwardens; They elect A. and present him to the
Archdeacon, who refuses A. and forbids him to exercise the Office of a
Churchwarden, because the Parson pretended, that by the new Canon the Election
of a Churchwarden belonged to him to dispose, etc. and exercise the Office of
Churchwarden. And A. is sued ex Officio in the High Commission-Court, amongst
other things touching that: A. prays a Prohibition, because the Canon does not
take away the Custom. Also it would be very mischievous, if the Parson should
Elect whom he please to be Churchwarden. And the Parson and Churchwardens being
a Corporation, then they may dispose of the Goods and Lands of the Parish as
they please. Coke Chief Justice said, That a Convocation has power to make
Constitutions for Ecclesiastical Things or Persons, 20 H. 6. 14. 21 E. 4. 46.
But they ought to be according to the Law and Custom of the Realm. And they
cannot make Churchwardens that were Eligible, to be Donative without Act of
Parliament; and the Canon is to be intended where the Parson had nomination of
a Churchwarden before the making of the Canon. And now Rule was given for a
Prohibition, if cause be not shown to the contrary, etc. ex motione Sergeant
Foster Mich. 4 Jac. C. B. Noy Rep. These Sidemen were called Testes Synodales,
anciently styled Synods men, thence corruptly called now Sidemen.
.

(6.) As touching Sidemen, otherwise called Questmen, they are only such as are
annually chosen, according to the custom of every Parish, to assist the
Churchwardens in the enquiry and presenting such Offenders to the Ordinary, as
upon such Presentiments are prosecuted and punishable in the Ecclesiastical
Court.

(7.) In an Action of Trespass against the Churchwardens, where by the Statute
of 43 Eliz. cap. 2. if for a Distress taken by them, for money for the relief
of the Poor, Trespass be brought against them, and Verdict pass for them, the
Defendants shall recover treble Damages with their Costs; And that to be
assest, etc. by the same Jury, or by Writ of enquiry of Damages, it was
Resolved (1) That the Costs shall not be trebled, but only the Damages. (2)
That the treble Damages are well assest by the Jury, although that it be not
done by the Court. Because the words are [ by the same Jury to be assest] and
not Damages to be trebled by them Okely verse. Salter. Noy 's Rep.
.

(8.) Upon an Habeas Corpus the Case was returned to be, That H. being
Churchwarden, refused to take the Oath of Enquiry of the 39 Articles touching
Ecclesiastical matters. And the warrant of the Commitment of the High
Commissioners was to retain him, and until we shall give order for his
delivery. By the Court, etc. Until we, that is, All we, 12 Ed. 4. 3. a. 1 H. 7.
7. a. that is not good; for if then any of them dies, or be removed, The party
shall never be delivered by that means: But it ought to be, Until he shall be
lawfully delivered. But notwithstanding the Churchwarden was not out upon Bail,
because now also he refused to take that Oath: But with a So far forth as the
Articles do agree with the Law of God and the Land. Note, that such
subscription or consent to the Articles 13 Eliz, by a Parson is not good. As it
was Adjudged in 33, and 34 Eliz. B. R. Clark against Smithfield: But afterward
the Churchwarden was delivered by the High Commissioners Wharton's Case. Noy's
Rep.
.

(9.) If the Parishioners have time out of mind used to choose two Churchwardens
yearly, and to present them to the Archdeacon to be Sworn, and he have used to
Swear them, and upon such election and presentation to him to be Sworn he shall
refuse to Swear them, a Writ may issue out of the King's Bench, directed to the
Archdeacon, commanding him to Swear them, Mich. 15 Jac. B. R. such Writ was
granted for the Churchwardens of Sutton Valence in Kent; for although there was
a Canon made primo Jac. to the contrary, yet that cannot take away the custom,
Tr. 15 Car. B. R. The like Writ was granted for the Churchwardens of the
Parishes of Ethelborough and St. Thomas Apostles in London, after diverse
motions, and upon hearing of the Council on both sides, Pasch. 4 Car. B. R.
Rot. 420. between Draper and Stone. The like Writ was granted for the
Churchwardens of Holberton in Devon Roll. Abr. verb. Prerog. lit. L.
. If one be chosen Churchwarden, and the Official of the Bishop refuse to
Administer his Oath to him, he shall have a Special Writ directed to the
Official, commanding him to give him his Oath. Trin. 17 Jac. B. R. Bishop's
Case. Roll Rep. Note, That an Attorney cannot be a Churchwarden: if he be
chosen, and refuse, and be sued for such a Refusal in the Ecclesiastical Court,
he may have a Prohibition. Pasch. 14 Car. 1. B. R. in Wilson's Case, and Trin.
15 Car. 1. B. R. Barker's Case. Roll's Cases, 2. par. fo. 272.

(10.) By the Injunctions of King Ed. 6. An. 1547. to all the Clergy as well as
Laity of this Realm, it is required, That the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and
Parishioners of every Parish within this Realm, shall in their Churches and
Chapels keep one Book or Register, wherein they shall write the day and year
of every Wedding, Christning, and Burial, made within their Parish, etc. and
therein shall write every persons Name that shall be so Wedded, Christened, or
Buried. And for the safe keeping the said Book, the Parish shall be bound to
provide of their common charges, one sure Coffer, with two Locks and Keys,
whereof the one to remain with the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the other with
the Wardens of every Parish Church or Chapel, wherein the said Book shall be
laid up: Which Book they shall every Sunday take forth, and in the presence of
the said Wardens, or one of them, write or record in the same, all the
Weddings, Christnings, and Burials made the whole week before; and that done,
to lay up the Book in the said Coffer, as before. And for every time that the
same shall be omitted, the party that shall be in the fault thereof, shall
forfeit to the said Church three shillings four pence, to be employed to the
Poor men's Box of that Parish Vid. Bishop Sparrow's Collection, etc. pa. 5.
.

(11.) A man taxed by the Parish for Reparation of the Church, was sued for the
Tax by the Churchwardens in the Ecclesiastical Court: Hill. 7 Jac. 1609. B. R.
Barton's Case. Brownl. Rep. p^r. 2.
Depending this Suit one of the Churchwardens released to the Defendant all
Actions, Suits, and Demands; the other Churchwarden proceeded in the
prosecution of the Suit, and upon this the Defendant procured a Prohibition;
upon which matter showed therein was a Demurr joined. Davenport moved for a
Consultation. The Question was, where two Churchwardens sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court for a Tax, and one of them Release, whether that Release
shall bar his Companion or not? It seemed to him, that this Release shall not
be any bar to his Companion, or impediment to sue; for he said, That
Churchwardens are not parties interessed in the Goods of the Church, but are a
special Corporation for the benefit of the Church; for which he cited the Case
in 8 E. 4. 6. The Churchwardens brought Trespass for the Goods of the Church
taken out of their possession, and they counted Ad damnum Parochianorum, and
not to their proper damage; and the 11 H. 4. 12. 12 H. 7. 27. 43 H. 7. 9.
where it is said expressly, That the Wardens of a Church are a Corporation only
for the benefit of the Church, and not for the disadvantage thereof; but this
Release sounds to disadvantage of the Church, and therefore seems to be no
Bar: Also this Corporation consists of Two persons, and the Release of one is
nothing worth; for he was but one Corpse, and the moiety of the Corpse could not
Release; and for these Reasons he prayed a Consultation. Yelverton to the
contrary, and he took a difference and said, That he agreed, that if the
Wardens of the Church have once possession of the Church, there in Action of
Trespass brought for these Goods one Warden cannot Release: But this Tax for
which they Sue is a thing merely in Action, of which they have not any
possession, and there he cannot Sue alone; and therefore this Release shall
bar his Companion. The Court interrupted him and said, That clearly
Consultation shall be granted; Fleming Chief Justice, We have not need to
dispute this Release, whether it be good or not? and there is a difference
where Suit is commenced before us, as if Churchwardens brought Trespass here
for Goods of the Church taken, and one Release, then we might dispute whether
this Release were good or not; but when the matter is originally begun before
them in the Ecclesiastical Court, and there is the proper place to sue for this
Tax, and not any where else, we have nothing to do with this Relase; for which
reason by the whole Court a Consultation was granted. In an Action in the
Ecclesiastical Court by two Churchwardens, if the Defendant plead the Release
of one of them, that shall be tried there, and no Prohibition shall be granted.
Vid. Roll. Abr. ver. Prohibition, page 306. nu. 3.

(12. Mich. 22 Jac. B. R. Between Walpoole and Coldwell for the Clerk of S.
Tho. Apost. Land. Intratur Hill. 22 Jac. Rot. 466. P. 19 Jac. B. R. Rot. 177.
P. 11 Car. B. S^i^h and Pannel's Case. Hob. Rep. Case 311.
) If the Churchwardens of a Parish have used time out of mind, etc. to choose
the Parish-Clerk, and Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court to remove him, and to
put in one of the Parson's choice, a Prohibition lies, as in Walpool's case;
but there the Prohibition was granted by the consent of parties, to try the
custom. The like Prohibition was granted between Brown and Crawshawe for
White-Chappel Parish. And the like granted between Beaumont and Westley for the
Parish of St. Cuthberts in Wells.

(13.) If a Presentment be made by the Churchwardens of a Parish in the
Ecclesiastical Court, That J. S. one of the Parishioners is a Railer and sower
of Discord among his Neighbors, a Prohibition lies; for that belongs to the
Leet, and not to that Court, unless it were in the Church or such like place.

(14. P. 5 Jac. B. R. The Parishioners of Rolvendon in Kent. Adjudg'd. Tr. 7
Car. B. R. between Shirley and Brown. Rot. 1, 91. P. 4 Car. B. R. Rot. 420.
Draper and Stone.
) Where the Parishioners of a Parish have used time out of mind, etc. to choose
one Churchwarden, and the Vicar another; and afterward a Canon is made, That
the Vicar shall choose both, and so he does accordingly, and the Parishioners
shall choose one according to the custom, and the Ordinary disallow him, and
confirm the Two chosen by the Vicar, a Prohibition has been granted in this
case. So likewise a Prohibition was granted against the Churchwardens, chosen
by the Parson of St. Magnus near London Bridge by force of the Canon, on a
surmize, That the Parish had a custom to Elect both Churchwardens. The like
also was granted for Abchurch in London.

(15.) Where the Churchwardens sued in the Ecclesiastical Court J. S. supposing
in their Libel, that he and all those whose Estate he has in certain Land next
adjoining to the Churchyard, Mich. 14 Car. B. R. The Churchwardens of Claydon
and Duncombe. Roll. Abr. page 287.
have used time out of mind, etc. to repair the fences of the Churchyard next
adjoining to the said Land: In this case it was said, that a Prohibition lies,
and that it ought to be tried at Common Law, for that it is a charge to the
Temporal Inheritance.

(16.) If the Parishioners sue the Churchwardens of the Parish in the
Ecclesiastical Court to make an Account, and in that Suit costs of Suits are
Taxed for the Parishioners against the Churchwardens, and after the
Churchwardens pay the costs to one of the Parishioners, and thereupon he that
receives the costs gives a Release to the Churchwardens for the said costs, and
that Release is after pleaded by the Churchwardens against the other
Parishioners in the Ecclesiastical Court, Mich. 15 Car. B. R. inter Homes and
Go^d in per Cur.
and they there disallow it; yet no Prohibition granted, for that they have
cognizance of the Original, viz. the costs, they shall have cognizance also
what shall be a sufficient payment thereof. And in this case a Prohibition was
denied.

(17.) The Churchwardens cannot prescribe to have Lands to them and their
Successors, Pasch. 37 El. B. inter Longley and Meredine.
for they are not any Corporation to have Lands, but for Goods for the use of
the Church. And therefore it seems at the Common Law, if a Feoffment be made to
the use of the Churchwardens of D. it is a void use, for they have no capacity
for such purchase.

(18.) The Churchwardens gift of Goods in their custody without the assent of
the Sidemen or Vestry, is void. If a man take the Organs out of the Church, 38
El. Methold and Win^'s Case, cited by Coventry.
the Churchwardens may have Action of Trespass for them, for the Organs belong
to the Parishioners, and not to the Parson; therefore the Parson cannot sue him
in the Ecclesiastical Court that takes them away. Trin 12 Jac. B. R. per Cur.
Adjudg'd. Mich 37, 38 Eliz. B. R. Mithold and Winn's Case, ut sup^. Adjudg'd.
The Churchwardens by the assent and agreement of the Parishioners may take a
decayed Bell, and deliver it to the Bell-Founder, and that by their agreement
he shall have 4 l. for the casting thereof, and retain it until the 4 l. be
paid; and that Agreement of the Parishioners shall excuse the Churchwardens in
a Writ of Account brought against them by their Successors Churchwardens; for
the Parishioners are a Corporation to dispose of such personal things as
appertain to the Church.

(19.) B. Churchwarden of the Church of S. was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court
to Account for the Moneys which he had received and expended by reason of his
Office the last year past, and for obtaining a Prohibition he suggested, That
per Legem terrae, he ought to Account before the Minister of his Parish, the
succeeding Churchwardens, and a great number of the Parishioners; and that he
had Accounted accordingly. Henden, the Ecclesiastical Judge ex Officio may
compel him to Account before him: I agree that Churchwardens for all personal
things concerning the Church are a Corporation 8 E. 4. 6. and for Goods of the
Church they may have Action, Hill. 16 Jac. B. R. Bishop's Case. Roll's Rep.
and count to the damage of the Parish, and the succeeding Churchwarden may
have Action against his Predecessor as against a Stranger, but not as against
an Officer for what he did ratione Officii, and then if he shall not be
enforced to Account in the Ecclesiastical Court, then there will be no remedy
against him, vid. 12 H. 28. (2) He is an Ecclesiastical Officer, and therefore
proper to the Ecclesiastical Judge to have Jurisdiction of his Account; And a
Clerk of a Parish may sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for his Fees, which are
called Largitiones Charitativae, vid. Register fo. 52. for he is quodammodo an
Officer Spiritual, 21 E. 4. 47. But notwithstanding this, a Prohibition was
granted; And Mountague Chief Justice said, That a Churchwarden is not an
Ecclesiastical Officer, but Temporal employed in Ecclesiastical business;
Quaere, Whether in that case the Minister may require him to render an Account?
and if he refuse, Whether the Ecclesiastical Judge may compel him to Account.

(20.) Hadman and Ringwood's Case. Cro. par. 1.
In Trespass by Churchwardens, for taking a Bell out of the Church in the time
of their Predecessors, it was Adjudg'd, That the Action did lie, whereas it was
declared ad damnum ipsorum; which shall be supposed ad damnum Parochianorum.

(21.) Warner's Case. Cro par. 2.
The Parishioners of the Parish of Al-Hallowes in London, did prescribe to
choose their Churchwardens every year, and they chose W. their Churchwarden; The
Parson by virtue of a late Canon, that he should have the Election chose C. to
be Churchwarden, and procured him to be Sworn in the Ecclesiastical Court; and
a Prohibition was prayed, for that it being a Special custom the Canons cannot
alter it, and if every Parson might have Election of the Churchwardens without
the assent of the Parishioners, they might be much prejudiced: And so it was
said, That it had been Adjudg'd, Pasch. 5 Jac. in the case of the Parishioners
of Walbrook in London.

(22.) ^inch. lib. 2. cap. 17. p. 179. Roll's Cases. par. 1. fo. 393.
Although (as aforesaid) the Law does make Churchwardens a kind of Corporation,
and enables them by that Name to take moveable Goods and Chattels, and to sue
and be sued at Law concerning such Goods for the use and benefit of their
Parish; yet they cannot take an Estate of Lands to them by name of
Churchwardens; nor can Churchwardens prescribe to have Lands to them and their
Successors, for they are no Corporation to have Lands, but for Goods of the
Church only.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Consolidation or Union of Churches.
1. Consolidation, what; whence so called; by whom, and in what cases it may be
made. 2. The several kinds of Consolidation. 3. The reasons and grounds thereof
in the Law. 4. The Requisites of Law in order to a Consolidation. 5. How
Consolidation is practiced here with us, and how in France. 6. The division or
distinction which the Canon Law makes of Consolidation.
(1.) COnsolidation is the uniting, combining, or consolidating of two Churches
or Benefices in one Broo. tit. Union. 37 H. 8. c. 21.
. This cannot be done without the consent of the Bishop, the Patron, and the
Incumbent. This word thus used in an Ecclesiastical sense, takes its
denomination from what the Civil Law intends by consolidating the Interest of
Possession and Property together, which in that Law is called, Consolidatio
ususfructus and proprietatis; As when a man having the Usufruct of certain
Lands by way of Rent, Devise, or otherwise, does then and at the same time
purchase the Fee or Inheritance thereof; hoc casu Consolidatio fieri dicitur.
Instit. de Vsufruct.. 3. So that in such Secular concerns, according to that
Law, it properly signifies an Uniting of the possession, occupation, or profit,
with the Property of the thing so prepossessed; which is sometimes called an
Unity of possession, 37 H. 8. c. 21. 1 Ed. 6. c. 9. 17 Car. 2. c. 3.
being a Joynt-possession of two Rights in the same person by distinct and
several Titles. By the Statute of 37 H. 8. cap. 21. it was lawful to make an
Union or Consolidation of two Churches in one, whereof the value of the one was
not above six pounds in the King's Books of the First Fruits, and not above one
mile distant from the other. And by a late Statute of 17 Car. 2. cap. 3. it may
be lawful for the Bishop of the Diocese, Mayor, Bailiffs, etc. of any City or
Town Corporate, and the Patron or Patrons, to unite two Churches or Chapels in
any such City, Town, or the Liberties thereof; provided the Churches so united
exceed not the annual value of an hundred pounds, unless the Parishioners esire
otherwise. St. 17 Car. 2. c. 3.
See the Statute at large.

(2.) By this Consolidation or Union of Churches one of the Benefices becomes
void, yea extinct in Law, Illud enim quod alteri unitur, extinguitur, neque
amplius per se vacare dicitur. DD. in c. cum access^ssent. de Constit. and
Iudo. Gomez. in Regul. Cancel. Gall. de Trien. possess. q. 8. Jo. Andr. ad
Clem. 1. de Supplen. Neglig. Praelat. Again, the Law in express terms says,
That intereunt Beneficia Union, quando duo vel plura Beneficia in unum in
perpetuum conjunguntur. c. Sicut unire. de Excess. Praelat. Of this
Consolidation or Union the Law makes a threefold distinction, or it may be done
three several ways in construction of Law, (1) When one and the same person is
set or appointed over two Churches. Can. and temporis qualitas. 16. q. 1. c. 1.
Ne Sede vacant. This with us amounts to a Plurality, but not unto a
Consolidation or Union. (2) When one Church is so united to another, that that
which is United, amittit jus suum, and eo utitur cui fit unio. c. Recolentes..
sin. de Stat. Monac. and Lindw. de Locat. and Conduct. c. licet glo. verb.
Appropriationum. (3) When Two or more Churches or Benefices are so united
together, as that the one is not subject to the other, in which case Quod
melius est, retinetur. arg. c. Medicamentum. de poenit. did. 1. gl. in regu.
11. Cancel. Innoc. 8.

(3.) There are several Causes or Reasons in the Law for this Consolidation,
Incorporation, Annexation, or Union of Churches; and they are chiefly these
five, (1) An unlawful dividing of those Churches or Ecclesiastical Benefices,
precedent to their reintegration or intended reconsolidation, as when such as
had been formerly united, were illegally divided. Otho. Constit. Ne Ecclesia
una, c. cum sit ars. gl. ib. in ver. Reintegrentur. (2) For the better
Hospitality, and that the Rector might thereby be the better enabled to relieve
the Poor. 25. q. 2. posteaquam.. his ita. and dict. gl. Otho. Constable. (3) The
overnighness of the Churches each to other in point of Situation, insomuch
that one Rector may commodiously discharge the Cure of both, by reason of the
vicinity of the places. Arg. extr. de Praebend. c. Majoribus. (4.) For or by
reason of a want or defect of Parishioners, as when one of the Churches is
deprived of her people by some incursion of an Enemy, or by some mortal Disease
or Sickness, or the like. 11. q. 1. Vnio. and gloss. ubi supra. (5.) For and by
reason of the extreme Poverty of one of the Parishes. Extr. de eta. and qua.
eam te. Extr. de Praebend. vacant. in fin. vid. Tholos. Syntagm. jur. lib. 17.
cap. 5. nu. 7. All which Causes or Reasons of Consolidation are enumerated out
of the Canon Law by John de Aton in his Gloss upon Cardinal Otho's
Constitutions, and whatever other causes of Consolidation are asserted by the
DD. may be all referred to one or other of the foresaid Reasons. Likewise,
there are certain Solemnities required by the Canon Law, to be used and
observed in the consolidation and union of Churches and Ecclesiastical
Benefices, the impracticability whereof in this Realm, having otherwise
provided in such cases, can have no such malign influence in Law, as to
invalidate the thing for want of some Circumstantials, so long as there is a
retention of the Essentials, according to the Laws and Constitutions of this
Kingdom. Vnio facta ab Episcopo debet intervenire Consensus Capituli sui. Clem.
si Vna. de reb. Eccl. non aliend. Item requiritur Consensus Patroni. Clem. in
agro.. ad haec de Stat. Mona. Item, Nullum habet effectum vivente Beneficiato.
Card. Zab. in dict. Clem. Si una, etc. Item, Verus valor Beneficiorum Exprimi
debet, etc.

(4.) In all Consolidations regularly there ought to be Causa Necessitatis vel
Vtilitatis: Also the just and true value of the Benefices ought to be known, as
well of that which is to be united, as of that to which the other is unitable;
in order whereunto there ought to issue a Commission of Enquiry touching the
said cause and value, at which all persons pretending Interest, are to be or
may be present upon Summons or Notice thereof timely given them to that end;
for no Consolidation or Union of that kind ought to be made non vocatis
vocandis. Rebuff. Resp. 195.

(5.) This Form touching Consolidations and union of Churches and
Ecclesiastical Benefices is practiced in France; which, though there appears
nothing therein but what seems consonant to Reason, yet the Statute-Laws of
this Realm have herein made other provision in this matter: And that which we
now commonly call Consolidation, the Canon Law, which is best and most properly
acquainted with this matter, calls Union; Touching which there are in use and
practice many things in diverse Nations and Countries, which were Incognita to
the Interpreters of that Law, and not in all things consonant to each other;
thereby rendering this Subject the more perplexed by reason of the several modes
of practice, diversified according to the various Constitutions of several
Nations respectively; for which reason the Interpreters of the Canon Law are
the less positive in reducing the state of this matter to such a point of
certainty, as may be said Infallible in Law; only they all agree in some
certain Essentials to an Union, as also (for the most part) in this Definition
thereof, viz. That Vnio est Beneficiorum seu Ecclesiarum ab Episcopo, vel ab
alio Superiore facta annexio. To which this also may be added by way of
description, though not by way of definition, That quando fit unio, Ecclesia in
proprietatem concedi solet. Cap. in cura. de jur. Patronat. and it must be Vnio
Beneficiorum, for there cannot be an Union unless there be plura Beneficia in
the case. L. 1. and per totum. ff. de Optio. Legate. Also it is Beneficiorum seu
Ecclesiarum, because the word [ Benefice] is in it self a general term
comprehending all Benefices, great and small, Regular and Secular, Dignities
and Offices: C. 1. de reg jur. in 6. c. extirpandae.. qui vero. de Praebend. So
that Bishoprics, as well as other Benefices, may be united and annexed; But a
Bishopric, which the Law calls culmen Dignitatis, does not regularly fall
under the name or notion of Benefice: c. pen. de Praebend; and yet two
Bishoprics may be united. c. Decimas, and seq. 16. q. 1. Rebuff. de Union.
Benefic. nu. 4, 5.

(6.) This Consolidation or Union at the Canon Law, is either Perpetual or
Temporal; if Perpetual, then it must be so expressed in the Union, that in
perpetuum univimus: c. exposuisti, de Praeb. if Temporal, then it is only for
his life in whose favor the Union is made, c. 1. ne Sede vacant, and at his
death it expires, c. quoniam Abbas, de Offic. Delegat. But the Practice with us
knows nothing of the Temporal Member of this distinction; nor is the practice
thereof at this day received in France, Rebuff. ubi supr. nu. 9. such Temporal
Unions being only in contemplatione personae, non Ecclesiae, whereas the Law
is, Ecclesiae magis favendum est, quam personae. Dic. c. 1. and c. requisisti,
de Testa. and Oldr. Consil. 257. And where two Parochial Churches are
consolidated or united, that Church to which the other is united, shall be the
Superior and principal, the other which is united, is the Inferior and
Accessory, yet shall enjoy the Privileges of that Church to which she is
united. c. recolentes, in fin. de stat. Monach. Lastly, The more worthy
Benefice is never united to the minus digno, and therefore a Parochial Church
may not be united to a Chapel, sed e contra. Sic c. exposuisti, de Praebend.

CHAP. XV.
Of Dilapidations.
1. What Dilapidation signifies; how many ways it may happen; the Remedies in
Law in case thereof; and to what Court the cognizance thereof properly belongs.
2. Provision made by the Canon for prevention of Dilapidations. 3. Dilapidation
twofold in construction of Law; An Exposition of the said Canon; the Bishops
power of Sequestration in case of Dilapidation. 4. By whom the Body of the
Church, and by whom the Chancel shall be kept in repair; How the charge of
Repair in the case of Dilapidations shall be apportioned; and what the Law in
such cases, where one Parish is divided into Two. 5. Dilapidation of
Ecclesiastical Edifices, a good cause in Law of Deprivation. 6. The Injunction
of King Ed. 6. for prevention of Dilapidations 7. Leases made by a Parson, void
by Statute for Non-residence, to prevent Dilapidations. 8. The wasting the
Woods of a Bishopric, a Dilapidation in Law; such Woods being the Dower of the
Church. 9. A Vicar felling down Timber Trees and Wood in the Churchyard, is a
Dilapidation, and good cause of Deprivation.
(1.) DIlapidation is the Incumbents suffering the Chancel or other the
Edifices of his Ecclesiastical Living to go to ruin or decay, neglecting to
repair the same; It extends also to his committing or suffering to be committed
any wilful Waste in or upon the Glebe-woods or other Inheritance of his Church.
Against which provision is made by the Provincial Constitutions, whereof Sir
Simon Degge takes notice in his Parsons Counselor Pars. Couns par. 1. cap. 8.
; though in truth the Canon there provides rather as to satisfaction for, than
prevention of such Dilapidations. Lindw. c. si Rector alicujus Ecclesiae, and
Gloss. ibid. But the Canon Law is express and full in all respects relating to
this implicit Sacrilege, nor does the Custom of England or the Common Law
leave the Church without sufficient Remedy in this case, albeit it postpones
the satisfaction of damages for Dilapidations to the payment of Debts, as the
Canon Law prefers it before the payment of Legacies. Sir Simon Degge in the
forementioned place makes mention of the Inhibition out of Chancery to the
Bishop of Durham by order of Parliament in Edward the First's time, for wasting
the Woods belonging to that Bishopric Co. 11. 49. 2.
. Also of the Archbishop of Dublin's being Fined three hundred Marks for
disforresting a Forest belonging to his Archbishopric Rot. Pa. 14 H. 3. in. 8.
. Likewise, that by several Books of the Common Law, a Bishop, etc. wasting the
Lands, Woods, or Houses of his Church, may be deposed or deprived by his
Superior 20 H. 6. 46. a. 2 H. 4. 3. b. Co. 11. 94. b. 29 E. 3. 16. a. 9 E. 4.
34. a.
. And in case any Parson, Vicar, etc. shall make any Conveyance of his Goods,
to defraud his Successor of his Remedy in case of Dilapidations; in that case
it is provided by the Stat. of 13 Eliz. c. 2. that the Spiritual Court may in
like manner proceed against the Grantee, as otherwise it might have done
against the deceased Parson's Executors or Administrators St. 13 El. c. 2.
: and all such Grants to defraud any person of their just actions, were made
void by a later Statute St. 13 El. c. 5.
. It is agreed, That the cognizance of Dilapidations properly and naturally
belongs to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and no Prohibition to lie in the
case; or if such happen to be granted, then the same to be superseded by a
Consultation F. N. B. 51. f.
: yet it seems Actions upon the Case grounded upon the custom of England, have
been brought in this case at Common Law, and Damages recovered Vid. Pars.
Couns par. 1. cap. 8.
. It is also enacted by the Statute of 14 Eliz. That that Moneys recovered upon
damages for Dilapidations, shall be expended in and upon the Houses, etc.
dilapidated St. 14 El. c. 11.
.

(2.) Cardinal Othobon in his Canon [ De Domibus Ecclesiarum resiciendis] has
constituted and ordained, That all such Ecclesiastical persons as are
Beneficed, take special care, that from time to time they sufficiently repair
the Dwelling-houses and other Edifices belonging to their Benefices as often as
need shall so require; unto which duty they are earnestly and frequently to be
exhorted and admonished, as well by their Diocesans as by the Archdeacons. And
if they shall for the space of two months next after such Monition neglect the
same, the Bishop of the Diocese may from thenceforth cause it to be effectually
done at the Parson's charge out of the profits and fruits of his Church and
Benefice, taking only so much and no more as may suffice for such Repairs; And
the Chancels of Churches to be in like manner repaired by those who are obliged
thereto. And as to Archbishops, Bishops, and other inferior Prelates, they are
by the said Canon enjoined to keep their Houses and Edifices in good and
sufficient Repair sub divini Judicii attestatione. Constit. Othobon. de dom.
Eccl. re^i^. Sub divini Judicii attestatione (h. e.) damnationis aeternae in
extremo Cal^ulo. glo. in ver. Sub divini. Constable. Othobon. de resident.
Archiepisc.

(3.) By the Gloss on that Canon it is inferred, That a Parson may be guilty of
Dilapidations, or of a Neglect in that kind two ways, viz. either by not
keeping the Edifices in good repair, or by not repairing them being gone to
decay. That Canon chiefly refers to the Mansion-houses of all Benefices
Ecclesiastical, and that not only of all Parsonages and Rectories, but also of
all Bishoprics, and of all Curates and Prebends, and of all others having
Ecclesiastical Livings; but not specially (by the words of this Canon) unto
their Farm-houses, though they also are by the Canon Law provided for in case
of Dilapidations. And such as neglect the Reparations aforesaid, may be accused
and convicted thereof before the Diocesan, who has power to sequester the
Fruits of such Benefice for the Reparations aforesaid, Gloss. in ver.
cessaverit. in dict. Can. such Fruits thereof being in construction of Law, as
it were tacitly hypothecated by a certain kind of Privilege for such
Indemnity; and for that reason the Bishop in some cases may for that end
sequester the same.

(4.) And whereas in the abovesaid Canon it is said, That Chancels shall be
kept in repair by such as are thereunto obliged, it is to be understood, that
that is spoken by way of allusion to the common Custom in England, whereby the
Body of the Church is usually repaired by the Parishioners, and Chancels by the
Rectors, who notwithstanding ought to be at the care, though not at the costs,
of the other also; he being annually accountable to the Bishop for the same, if
the Bishop so please; for which reason the Rector has power to audit the
Accounts of the costs and charges about the same, as also what shall be given
or bequeathed by way of Legacy for that end and purpose. And where this custom
prevails, That the Parishioners shall repair the Body of the Church, it is not
to be understood, that this is incumbent on them as a Real, but as a Personal
duty or burden; yet every Parishioner proportionably to that quantity of Land
which he holds within the Parish, and number of Cattle he feeds on the same:
Gloss. ibid. in ver. ad hoc tenentur. And in case one Parish be by legal
Authority divided into Two, in that case, if such division were made by and
with the consent of these Four, viz. the Bishop, the Patron, the Parson, and
the Parishioners, then the more Ancient Church shall not contribute to the
Reparations of the New, for that now they are two dictinct Parishes. Gloss.
ibid.

(5.) Co. Inst. pa. 3. cap. 97. 29 E. 3. 16. 2 H. 4. f. 3. 9 E. 4. 34.
Sir Ed. Coke in the third part of his Institutes, having spoken of erecting of
Houses and Building, etc. tells us what he finds in the Books of the Common Law
and Records, touching Dilapidations and decay of Buildings, and having Margined
as here in this Margent, says, That Dilapidation of Ecclesiastical Palaces,
Houses, and Buildings is a good cause of Deprivation.

(6.) By the Injunctions of King Ed. 6. An. 1547. to all his Clergy, it is
required, That the Proprietors, Parsons, Vicars, and Clarks, having Churches,
Chapels, or Mansions, shall yearly bestow upon the same Mansions or Chancels
of their Churches being in decay, the fifth part of their Benefices, till they
be fully repaired; and the same so repaired, shall always keep and maintain in
good estate Bishop Sparrow's Collect of Articles, etc. pa. 5.
. Consonant to which is the Thirteenth Article of Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions,
given to all the Clergy, An. 1559.

(7.) The Case was, where the Parson made a Lease to the Plaintiff for 21 years
after the Statute of 13 Eliz. of Lands usually Let, rendering the ancient Rent,
the Patron and Ordinary confirmed it, Hill. 31 Eliz. B. R. Mott and Hal^'s
Case. Cro. par. 1.
the Lessee let part of the term to the Defendant, the Parson died, the
Successor entered and leased to the Defendant; against whom the Lessee brought
Debt upon the former Lease, who pleaded the Statute of 13 Eliz. which made all
Leases void, where the Parson is not resident, or absent for 80 days: It was
Adjudged, That the Lease was void by the death of the Incumbent; for the
Justices said, The Statute does provide against Dilapidations, and for
maintenance of Hospitality; and therefore provided the Leases shall be void not
only for Non-residence, but by death or resignation; for otherwise
Dilapidations should be in the time of the Successor, and he cannot maintain
Hospitality.

(8.) The wasting of the Woods belonging to a Bishopric, is in the Law
understood as a Dilapidation, as was formerly hinted. Note, By Coke Chief
Justice, a Bishop is only to fell Timber for Building, What Timber a Bishop may
fell, and for what purposes.
for Fuel, and for his other necessary occasions, and there is no Bishopric
but the same is on the Foundation of the King; the Woods of the Bishopric are
called the Dower of the Church, and these are always carefully to be
preserved; and if he fell and destroy this, upon a motion thereof made to us
(says the Lord Coke) we will grant a Prohibition: And to this purpose there was
a great Cause which concerned the Bishop of Duresm, who had diverse Cole-Mines,
and would have cut down his Timber Trees for the maintenance and upholding of
his Works; and upon motion in Parliament concerning this, for the King, Order
was there made, that the Judges should grant a Prohibition for the King; and we
will here (says he) revive this again, for there a Prohibition was so granted.
And so upon the like motion made unto us in the like case, we will also for the
King grant a Prohibition by the Statute of 35 E. 1. If a Bishop cut down
Timber-Tres for any cause, unless it be for necessary Reparations (as if he
sell the same unto a Stranger) we will grant a Prohibition: And to this purpose
I have seen (said he) a good Record in 25 E. 1. where complaint was made in
Parliament of the Bishop of Duresm (as before) for cutting of Timber Trees for
his Cole-Mines, and there agreed that in such a case a Prohibition did lie;
Mich. 12 Jac. B. R. Chapman verse. Jane Barnaby. Bulstr. Rep.
and upon motion made a Prohibition was then granted; and the Reason then
given, because that this Timber was the Dower of the Church; and so it shall be
also in the case of a Dean and Chapter; in which cases, upon this ground we
will grant (as he said) Prohibitions; and the whole Court agreed with him
herein. Also in Sakar's case, against whom Judgment being given for Simony, yet
he being by assent of parties to continue in the Vicarage for a certain time,
this time being now past, and he still continuing in possession, and committing
of great Waste, by pulling down the Glass-windows, and pulling up of Planks,
the Court granted a Prohibition, and said, That this is the Dower of the
Church, Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. The King against Zakar. Bulstr. par. 3.
and we will here prohibit them, if they fell and waste the Timber of the
Church, or if they pull down the houses: And Prohibition to prevent
Dilapidations, and to stay the doing of any Waste, was in that case awarded
accordingly.

(9.) In a Prohibition, the Case was this: A Vicar lops and cuts down Trees
growing in the Churchyard; the Churchwardens hinder him in the carriage of the
same away, Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. Knowll and All. verse. Harvey. Bulstr. par. 3.
and they being in Trial of this Suit: The Churchwardens by their Counsel,
moved the Court for a Prohibition to the Vicar, to stay him from felling any
more. Coke Chief Justice, This is a good cause of Deprivation, if he fell down
Timber Trees and Wood, this is a Dilapidation; and by the Resolution in
Parliament, a Prohibition by the Law shall be granted, if a Bishop fells down
Wood and Timber Trees. The whole Court agreed clearly in this, to grant here a
Prohibition to the Vicar to inhibit him not to make spoil of the Timber, this
being (as it is called in Parliament) the Endowment of the Church. Coke, we
will also grant a Prohibition, to restrain Bishops from felling the Wood and
Timber Trees of their Churches. And so in this principal Case, by the Rule of
the Court a Prohibition was granted.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Patrons, and de jure Patronatus.
1. What Patron properly signifies in the Law; the Original thereof; and how
subject to corruption. 2. In what case the Bishop may proceed de jure
Patronatus, and how the Process thereof is to be executed. 3. How the
Admittance ought to be, in case the same Clerk be presented by two Patrons to
the same Benefice. 4. In what cases of Avoydance, Notice thereof ought to be
given to the Patron; and what course in that case the Bishop is to take, in
case he knews not the true Patron. 5. Several Appellations in Law, importing
Patron. 6. How many ways a Church may become Litigious. 7. Whether an Advowson
may be extended? 8. In what case the Patron may Present, where the King took
not his turn upon the first Lapse. 9. A Patron may not take any benefit of the
Gl^be during a Vacancy. 10. In what case the Patron shall not by bringing the
Writ of Qua. Imp. against the Bishop, prevent the incurring of the Lapse to the
Ordinary. 11. The King is Patron Paramount, and Patron of all the Bishoprics
in England: The Charter of King John, whereby Bishoprics from being Donative
became Elective.
(1.) PATRON, by the Canon Law, as also in the Feuds, (wherewith our Common Law
does herein accord) does signify a person who has of right in him the free
Donation or Gift of a Benefice, grounded originally upon the bounty and
beneficence of such as Founded, Erected, or Endowed Churches with a
considerable part of their Revenue. De Jur. Patronat. Decretal. Such were
called Patroni a patrocinando, and properly, considering the Primitive state of
the Church; but now according to the Mode of this degenerating Age, as
improperly, as Mons a movendo; for by the Merchandise of their Presentations
they now seem, as if they were rather the Hucksters than Patrons of the Church.
But from the beginning it was not so, when for the encouragement of Lay-persons
to works of so much Piety, it was permitted them to present their Clerks where
themselves or their Ancestors had expressed their Bounty in that kind; whence
they worthily acquired this Right of Jus Patronatus, which the very Canon Law
for that reason will not understand as a thing merely Spiritual, but rather as
a Temporal annexed to what is Spiritual: Quod a Supremis Pontificibus proditum
est, Laicos habere Jus Praesentandi Clericos Ordinariis: hoc singulari favore
sustinetur, ut allectentur Laici, invitentur, and inducantur ad constructionem
Ecclesiarum. Nec omni ex part Jus Patronatus Spirituale censeri debet, sed
Temporale potius Spirituali annexum. Gloss. in c. piae mentis, 16. q. 7. Coras.
ad Sacerdot. matter, par. 1. cap. 2. Yet not Temporal in a Merchandable sense,
unless the Presentor and Presentee will run the hazard of perishing together;
for prevention whereof, provision is made by that Solemn Oath enjoined by the
Fortieth Canon of the Ecclesiastical Constitutions; whereof there was no need
in former Ages less corrupt, when instead of selling Presentations they
purchased Foundations; and instead of erecting Idol-Temples (for Covetousness
is Idolatry) they Founded, Built, and Endowed Churches for the Worship of the
True God. Patroni in jure Pontificio dicuntur, qui alicujus Ecclesiae
extruendae, etc. Authors fuerunt, ideoque Praesentandi and Offerendi Clericum
jus habent, etc. Acquirunt autem hoc jus, qui de Episcopi consensu vel fundant
Ecclesiam, vel aedificant, vel ante Consecrationem dotant, ut non valde sit
Obscurum, Jus Patronatus, etc. jus esse Praesentandi Clericum ad Ecclesiam
Vacantem ex gratia ei Concessum, qui Consentiente Episcopo, vel Construxit, vel
dotavit Ecclesiam. Corasius ibid. par. 4. cap. 6. And it is gratefully provided
by the Canon Law, if a Patron, or his Posterity being Patrons, do fall to
decay, the Incumbent of the Fruits of the Church by Compulsary censure of the
Ordinary, according to that Law, is to be enforced to make Contribution to
them: For which reason it is, that the Law holds Vtilitas to be one of the
three fruits or effects of a Patronage, viz. Honos, Onus, Vtilitas.

(2.) If two Patrons, both pretending to the same Church, present unto the
Ordinary their Clerks respectively, who insist on their Admission, and the
Bishop by admitting the one rejects the other, he that is rejected, at least
his Patron, may have his Action against the Bishop, not in the Ecclesiastical,
but Temporal Court, by a Quare Impedit, or the like. In such cases therefore
the Bishop is wont to decree a Process commonly called Negotium de Jure
Patronatus (that is) A day fixed and certain is appointed by the Bishop to sit
in the Church that is void, and a Monition decreed to be served on the Patrons
presenting, and the Clerks presented, then and there to be present, to see
proceedings in the said business according to Law; to which end a Citation
issues to 22 H. 6. 29. b. If they refuse, being duly Summoned to Appear, the
Commissioners of the Bishop may proceed against the Clergymen by
S^questration, and the Laymen by Ecclesiastical Censures.
Twelve persons, whereof six of the Clergy, and six of the Laity, all of the
Neighborhood of the said vacant Church, to be then and there also present by
way of an Enquest, and on their Corporal Oaths to It is an Inquest of Office in
nature of a Writ De proprietate probanda, and does not bind the parties Right
and Title.
enquire on certain Articles, then ministered to them, touching the right of
Presentation to the said Benefice. These Articles consist chiefly of these Four
heads, viz. (1) Who last presented to the said Church when it was last void, as
also for the last two or three times when it was void. (2) Whether the person
or persons who last presented, or these last two or three times or turns, at
the time and times of Vacancy of the said Church, did present in his or their
own proper right and title. (3) Whether either of the Clerks now presented be
known or suspected of any Notorious crime, or of Heresy, Simony, Perjury,
Adultery, or Drunkenness. (4) Whether either of the Clerks now presented has
given or promised, either by himself, or any other for him and in his name, or
by or with his consent or knowledge, any money or other gratuity directly or
indirectly, for obtaining of his Presentation to the said Benefice, to the
Patron thereof, or to any other who presented the said Clerk, or caused him to
be presented. On which Articles if it be found by the Verdict of the said Jury,
that such or such of the said Patrons was in the possession of the Presentation
at that time when the Church was last void, then is his Clerk to be Admitted,
if there be no other legal impediment to hinder it, that is, nothing to affect
him with, contained in the third or fourth last precedent Articles.

(3.) If two Patrons, each pretending a right or title to the Presentation,
shall present one and the same person severally to the Bishop to be Admitted
and Instituted to the Church; the Bishop cannot Admit him generally, but must
in his Admittance of the Incumbent, admit him Incumbent of the Presentation
only of one of them: And if they make such several Presentations, claiming by
several Titles, the Bishop is to direct his Writ de Jure Patronatus; for that
in such case the Church is become Litigious; yet the Bishop is not to award the
said Writ, but at the instance and request of the said parties. And here Q. at
whose charge the said Writ of Jure Patronatus shall in this case be su^d forth,
whether at the charge of the Bishop, or of the parties: for that the old Books
(as the Reporter gives us to understand) do differ in this point. Mich. 8 Jac.
C. B. in Danby and Linley's Case. Vid. 7 Ed. 4. Quare Imp. 100. 34 H. 6. 41. 21
H 6. 43. and 22 H. 6. 28. It is supposed (and commonly practiced) it is sued at
the instance and cost of one of the parties, or of both if they join. 35 H. 6.
18. b. 1. 9. a. 34 H. 6. 12. a. Hob. 317. 34 H. 6. 38. 5 H. 7. 22. a.

(4.) Suppose that a Parson be deprived by the Ordinary, or reads not his
Articles: In which cases the Church is void, yet notice must be given to the
true Patron for that time, or else the Lapse incurs not (which is inconvenient
for the Church, and a prejudice to the Ordinary) for how shall he in this case
assure himself of a sufficient Notice? For if he give notice to him that is not
Patron, for this very turn, his Notice is vain, and the true Patron perhaps
knows not of the Deprivation, or if he knows it, needs not Present without
notice given him. In this Case Sir H. Hobard Chief Justice holds, That his way
is to award a Jure Patr^natus, with solemn Premonitions Quorum Interest; And
then enquiry being made who is Patron, to give him Notice, and if he Presents
not within six months, then the Ordinary may Collate, though that shall not
bind the very Patron, yet it shall excuse the Bishop from Disturbance upon
Special matter showed: But if the other supposed Patron present, and the six
months incur, Quaere if the true Patron be bound, since there was no Notice
given him. And the Opinion of Hob. is, that though without Notice the Patron is
not bound by the Lapse; yet that is nothing to save the Usurpation of another
pretended Patron, who is not subject to give Notice Pasch. 17 Jac. C. B. Rot.
877. Case Sir W. Elvis verse. Archbishop of York, and others. Hob. Rep.
. Also if a Suit be depending between Two parties touching the right of
Presentation, and it be not determined within Six months, the Bishop may
present by Lapse, and he that has right to Present, shall recover his
Damages, as by the Statute appears St. Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Terms of Law, verb.
Quare Impedit.
.

(5.) The Patron or he that has right to Present to a Benefice, is sometimes
termed Adowe alias Avowe (Advocatus) 25 Ed. 3. 5.
. There is also Advowe Paramount, or the highest Patron, which is meant only of
the King. Advocatus est ad quem pertinet jus Advocationis alicujus Ecclesiae,
ut ad Ecclesiam, Nomine proprio non alieno, possit Praesentare Fle^a, l. 5.
cap. 14. F. N. B. fo. 39.
. Britton says, That Avowe is he to whom the right of Advowson of any Church
appertains; so that he may present thereunto in his own Name: And is called
Avowe, for a difference from those that sometime present in another man's Name,
as a Guardian that presents in the name of his Ward; and for a difference also
from those who have the Lands to which an Advowson appertains, but only for
term of their lives or of years, by Intrusion or Disseism Britton, cap. 29.
.

(6.) A Church may become Litigious both before, and by, and after a Jure
Patronatus: Before, as by a plurality of Presentations: By, as when in case of
plurality of Presentations upon a plural Jure Patronatus the one Jury gives a
Verdict for the Title of one Patron, the other for the Title of the other
Patron: 41 H. 6. 45. a.
After, as when after a Jure Patronatus awarded, and Verdict thereupon given
for one of the parties, a third person presents before Admittance of his Clerk
for whom the Verdict was given. Upon a plural Jure Patronatus if one Jury give
a Verdict for the Title of the one, the other for the Title of the other
Patron, it is conceived in that case the Ordinary may refuse the Clerks of both
Patrons, and suffer the Church to Lapse Callis Re^d. 3. 21 H. 6 44. ^. Sed
Quaere. 21 H. 6. per Newton and Paston.
. And where a Third person presents after a Verdict, as aforesaid, but before
the Clerk be Admitted, whereby the Church becomes Litigious de Novo, in that
case the Bishop may award a new Jure Patronatus. Also if the Bishop doubt the
Patrons Title that presents, he may (as some conceive) award a Jure Patronatus
albeit the Church be not Litigious 21 H. 6. 44. Callis's Reading 29. Hob. 319.
; which is a safe way for prevention of any surprise to the rightful Patron or
other Pretenders; in which case if the Right of Patronage be found for another
that had not before presented, his Clerk may be admitted by the Ordinary 34 H.
6. 40. ^.
; who is no Disturber if he admit a Clerk that is presented before the Church
becomes Litigious by a Second presentation Hob. 317.
; for by the Verdict of the Jury aforesaid, he is sufficiently warranted to
admit and institute the Clerk for whose Patrons Title the Verdict is given, in
doing whereof he is no Disturber, albeit the other Patron, against whom the
Verdict is given, should after recover in a Quare Impedit. And after a Verdict
in a Jure Patronatus found for a Patron, he ought to renew his Request to the
Ordinary for the admission of his Clerk; otherwise the Bishop may Collate, in
case the Church Lapse after Six months.

(7.) Sir John Arundell and his Wife brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop
of Gloucester and others, who pleaded in Bar, that William Sturton was seized
of a Manor to which the Advowson was appendent, and bound himself in a
Statute-Merchant of 200 l. to one Long, and the Statute was extended, and
conveyed the interest of the Statute to one of the Defendants, and then the
Church became void: And by the Court the Advowson may be extended, and if it
become void during the Conusees Estate, the Conusee may present Mich. 32 and 33
Eliz. Sir J^. Arundell's Case. post Cas. Kent verse. Wichall, in Owen's Rep.
.

(8.) In Beverley's Case against the Archbishop of Canterbury, where the
question was, Whether the Queen might take her turn to Present, in regard she
took not her turn when the first Lapse happened immediately at the first
Avoidance, by reason of the Incumbents having Two Benefices, within the Stat.
of 21 H. 8. And all the Justices of the Common Pleas after long and serious
debate, did Resolve, That the Queen shall not now have her Presentation, but
the Patron, because the Queen has such Presentment by Lapse as the Bishop had,
and no other, and could Present but to the present Avoydance then void: And
although Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, yet we must distinguish it thus, for
where the King is limited to a time certain, or to that which in it self is
Transitory, there the King is to do it within the time limited, or in that time
wherein the thing to be done has Essence or Consistence, or while it
remains, for otherwise he may not do it afterward: So where a Second
presentment is granted to the King, and he does not Present, he may not after
Beverley against the Archbishop of Canterbury. Owen's Rep.
.

(9.) During a Vacancy the Freehold of the Glebe is in Abeiance Littl. 144.
, and not in the Patron 8 H. 6. 24. b.
; who can take no benefit thereby in that time Ibid.
, nor can he have any Action for Trespass done thereon in the time of such
Vacancy 11 H. 6. 4. b.
: Yet if a man has an Annuity out of a Parsonage, and he in the Vacancy
thereof Release to the Patron, it shall extinguish the Annuity. 21 H. 7. 41 Co.
5. Forde, 81. b.

(10.) If a Church becomes void by the death of the Incumbent, or otherwise,
and the Patron within Six months bring a Quare Impedit against the Bishop, and
then Six months pass without any Clerk presented by the Patron to the Bishop;
in that case the Lapse shall incur notwithstanding the pendency of the Writ,
for it is not reasonable that the Ordinary should lose his Title of Lapse
without any wrong done by him, by a fraudulent Action brought without cause by
the Patron, and whereby the Ordinary is put to Expenses without cause, and by
such fraudulent means the Patron might keep the Church perpetually void. Hob.
Rep. 270. and Roll. Abr. verb. Presentment, lit. X. page 366.

(11.) The Jus Appellandi in defect of Justice, and the Jus Praesentandi in
case of Lapse, seem to have a parallel resemblance with one another in their
gradations; for as they both primarily meet in the Ordinary: so they both pass
from him to the Metropolitan, and from him to the King, not only as Supreme
Ordinary, but also as Patron Paramount of all the Bishoprics in England;
which, as they were originally Donative per Annulum and Baculum: so now since
King John's time, they are by Canonical Election; for King John by his Charter
dated the 15th of January in the 16th year of his Reign, granted this
privilege to the Church in these words, viz. Quod qualiscunque Consuetudo
temporibus Praedecessorum nostrorum hactenus in Ecclesia Anglicana fuerit
observata, and quicquid juris nobis hactenus Vindicaverimus, de caetero in
universis and singulis Ecclesiis and Monasteriis, Cathedralibus and
Conventualibus, totius Regni Angliae, Liberae sint in perpetuum Electiones
quorumcunque Praelatorum, majorum and minorum; Salva Nobis and haeredibus
nostris Custodia Ecclesiarum and Monasteriorum vacantium, quae ad nos
pertinent. Promittimus etiam quod Nec impediemus nec impediri permittemus per
Ministros nostros, nec procurabimus, quin in universis and singulis Monasteriis
and Ecclesiis, postquam vacuerint Praelatur^^, quemcunque voluerint Libere sibi
praeficiant Electores Pastorum, petita tamen a Nobis prius and haeredibus
nostris Licentia Eligendi, quam non denegabimus nec differemus. Et similiter,
post celebratam Electionem, noster requiratur Assensus, quem non denegabimus,
nisi adversus eandem Rationale proposuerimus, and legitime probaverimus propter
quod non debemus consentire, etc. Vid. Davis Rep. in the case of Praemunire,
^o. 92, 93.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Parsons and Parsonages.
1. Parson, what he is in the intendment of Law. 2. What is meant by Parson
imparsonee. 3. The Freehold of Church and Glebe is in the Parson, what interest
he has in the Churchyard, and the Trees there growing; and whether he has
any in the Bells or Ornaments of the Church? 4. How he must be qualified that
will be a Parson; and who is rendered incapable of being such. 5. Whether the
Parson may demand any thing by Custom, upon the Burial of one who dying in his
Parish, was Buried elsewhere. 6. The words Parsonage, Church, Rectory,
frequently used Synonymously; Pensions of Ecclesiastical cognizance. 7. A Case
in Law touching a Parsons Obligation for Resignation. 8. Whether a Parsons
acceptance of Rent makes his Predecessor's Lease good. 9. Prohibition to the
High Commissioners of York, touching Articles exhibited before them against a
Parson. 10. A Case in Law touching the Confirmation of a Lease made by a
Parson. 11. Other Cases at the Common Law; relating to Parsons. 12. The Patron
nothing to do in the Church during Plenarty. 13. By what words a Resignation of
a Parsonage may be, or not. 14. Whether the Resignation of a Donative may be to
the Donor, or how it may be departed with? 15. Whether the Parson may appoint
the Parish Clerk? 16. A Bishop, Archdeacon, and Parson, are Spiritual
Corporations and have a double Capacity. 17. All differences between Parsons
and Vicars concerning the endowment of the Church, are cognizable in the
Ecclesiastical Court. 18. Privileges of the Clergy.
(1.) THere is Parson [Persona] and Parson imparsonee [Persona impersonata:]
Parson properly signifies the Rector of a Parochial Church; because during the
time of his Incumbency he represents the Church, and in the eye of the Law
sustains the person thereof, as well in Suing, as in being sued in any Action
touching the same Vid. Flet^. lib. 9. cap. 18.
. Originally the Parson was he that had the charge of a Parochial Church, and
was called the Rector of that Church; but it seems he is most properly so
called, that has a Parsonage where there is a Vicarage Endowed. And yet it is
supposed that Persona is the Patron, or in whom the Right of Patronage is, for
that before the Lateran Council he had Right to the Tithes in regard of his
having erected and endowed the Church which he had Founded. The Pastors of
Parishes are called Rectors, unless the Praedial Tithes be Impropriated; and
then they are called Vicars, Quasi vice fungentes Rectorum: and Curates are
they who for certain Stipends assist such Rectors and Vicars, that have the
care of more Churches than one.

(2.) Parson Imparsonee, is he that as lawful Incumbent is in actual possession
of a Church Parochial, and with whom the Church is full, be it Presentative or
Impropriate N. B. of Entries, verb. Aid in Annui^y.
; and seems also to be that person to whom the Benefice is given in the Patrons
Right; for in some Books Persona impersonata is taken for the Rector of a
Benefice Presentative and not Appropriated Register Judicial. fo. 34. b.
: Yet Dyer says, That a Dean and Chapter are persons Imparsonees of a Benefice
Appropriated to them Dyer, fo. 40. nu. 72.
; and in another place plainly shows. That Persona impersonata is he that is
Inducted and in possession of a Benefice Idem, fo. 221. nu. 19.
. So that persona seems to be termed impersonata, only in respect of the
possession which he has of the Benefice or Rectory, be it Appropriate or
otherwise by the Act of another Vid. Co* on Litt. fo. 300. b.
.

(3.) The Parson has a Right unto the possession of the Church and Glebe,
having the Freehold in himself, and may receive the profits, Tithes, Oblations,
Obventions, and Offerings to his own use, without the Patrons or Ordinaries
consent, who without his consent and agreement can do nothing during his
incumbency to charge the Church or his Successors. And not only is the Freehold
of the Church in the Parson, but he has also the Right of the Churchyard and
Glebe in him, whereof if he be put out of possession or disseised, he may have
an Assize Vid. 28 H. 6. 19. by Marcham.
. Or if he be Ejected, he may have Trespass; and so may the Vicar have against
a Stranger, if he be disseised of the Churchyard, but not against the Parson
himself 13 R. 2. Fitzh. tit. Jurisdiction, 19.
. For the Parson shall have an Assize or an Action of Trespass, of such things
as are annexed unto the Church or Glebe, or for cutting down of the Trees, or
doing of Trespass in the Churchyard or Glebe, the Right and interest thereof
being in the Parson 11 H. 4. 12. and 17 H. 3. Prohib. 26.
. But if the Bells in the Steeple, the Ornaments of the Church, or the like, be
taken away, in that case the Action does not belong to the Parson, but to the
Churchwardens 11 H. 4. 12. acc.
. Notwithstanding the Parsons Right and interest as aforesaid, yet he cannot
cut down the Trees growing in the Churchyard of his Parish, save for the
Repair of the Church Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. in Bellami^'s Case. Roll. Rep. By the
Stat. of 3^ El. 1. Parsons are prohibited from felling down Trees in the
Churchyard, save to repair the Chauncel or Body of the Church.
. Or if a mere Stranger cut them down, no Suit can be thereon in the Spiritual
Court for Damages; for if Suit be there commenced in that Case for Damages,
no Consultation shall be Ibid.
. Nor can the Parson have Action for Seats in the Church taken away by a
Stranger, because they are not fixed to the Freehold; but the Churchwarden may
have Action in that case 8 H. 7. 12.
.

(4.) No man can be a Parson until he be a Priest in Orders, which he cannot be
until he has attained the Age of 24 years; Consequently therefore he must be
of that Age ere he can be a Parson St. 13 El. ^. 12.
; and is commonly called (when Inducted into a Church) the Rector thereof, and
shall be accounted Proprietor of the Tithe of the Parish whereto the Church
belongs, if the contrary be not showed Style's Register 327.
. A man that is guilty of some Crime that is malum in se, as Murder, Perjury,
Forgery, or the like, though not convict thereof, yet if the Truth thereof be
certainly known to the Ordinary, may be rejected by him from being Person of a
Church, if thereunto presented by the Patron Lindw. cap. Imprimis and infra.
: Otherwise it is, in case he be guilty only of malum prohibitum, and not malum
in se, as to play at unlawful Games, to frequent Taverns and Alehouses, or the
like Co. 5 58. a.
. Also the Son is by the Canons rendered incapable of succeeding his Father in
his Parsonage Lindw. ^. Cum a jure inhibitum, etc.
; And if a man presented to a Living be not in Orders, the Bishop may refuse
him, but not for want of a Testimonial Leon. 130.
; for if any person shall be Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted into any Living
before he is in Holy Orders, his Admission, Institution, and Induction are void
by the late Act of Uniformity St. 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.
; whereby his Subscription, and thereof the Bishops Certificate, also his
Reading the 39 Articles of Religion in the same Parish Church on some Sunday or
the Lord's Day ( tempore Divinorum) within two months next after his Induction,
the declaration of his unfeigned Assent and Consent thereunto, his Reading the
Book of Common Prayer, or Service appointed for the Church that day, within two
months next after his Induction, with the declaration also of his Assent and
Consent to all things therein contained, are required, otherwise the Church
becomes void, and the Parson will be put to the proof of all the Premises, in
case ^e Sue the Parishioner refusing to pay his Tithe, if he shall insist
thereon. The Statute of 13 El. cap. 12. Ordained, That the Articles agreed by
the Archbishop and Bishops of both Provinces, and all the Clergy in the
Convocation held at London, etc. shall be read by the Incumbent, otherwise he
is ipso facto deprived. Or admitting all these Requisites have had their due
performance, so that he is a complete Parson to all intents and purposes of Law
whatever, yet he may not under pretense of this or that Custom extend the
Lines of his Parsonage beyond its due limits or bounds, out of an Avaricious
design to advance the perquisites of his Parsonage.

(5.) Edward Topsall Clerk, Parson of St. Botolphs without Aldersgate, London,
and the Churchwardens of the same, Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against
Sir John Ferrers; and alleged, that there was a Custom within the City of
London, and specially within that Parish, That if any person, being Man or
Woman, die within that Parish, and be carried out of the Parish to be Buried
elsewhere, that in such case there ought to be paid to the Parson of this
Parish, if he or she be buried elsewhere, in the Chancel so much, and to the
Churchwardens so much, being the Sums that they alleged were by Custom
payable unto them, for such as were buried in their own Chancel; And then
alleging, that the Wife of Sir John Ferrers died within the Parish, and was
carried away and buried in the Chancel of another Church, and so demanded of
him the said Sum. Whereupon, for Sir John Ferrers a Prohibition Note, That in
Prohibition it was Resolved, that the Six months for proof of the Surmize,
shall not be counted by 28 days to the Month, but according to the Calendar. In
Case Copley against Collins. Hob. Rep.
was prayed by Sergeant Harris, and upon debate it was granted: For this
Custom is against Reason, That he that is no Parishioner, but may pass through
the Parish, or lie in an Inn for a night, should (if he then die) be forced to
be Buried there, or to pay as if he were; and so upon the matter to pay twice
for his Burial Trin. 15 Jac. C. B. Ed. Topsall and others verse. F^rrers. Hob.
Rep.
.

(6.) The words Parsonage, Church, and Rectory are frequently in the Law used
Synonymously and promiscuously; but the word Advowson is another thing, and
distinct from each of them: And as to some Parsonages there are certain Rents
due and payable, so out of some Parsonages or Rectories there are issuing
certain Rents or Pensions, which Pensions are not suable at the Common Law, but
in the Ecclesiastical Court, as was said in Crocker and York's Case against
Dormer, against whom they had a Recovery in a Writ of Entry in the Post, among
other things of a yearly Rent or Pension of four Marks, issuing out of the
Church or Rectory of F. In which Case it was agreed by Clench and Fenner, that
a Pension issuing out of a Rectory is the same with the Rent; of which Popham
seemed to make some doubt; for there being in that Case a Demand for Rent in
the Disjunctive, viz. a Rent or Pension, he moved that the greatest difficulty
in the Case was the Demand made in the Disjunctive, viz. of an Annual Rent or
Pension; for if a Pension issuing out of a Rectory shall be said to be a thing
merely Spiritual, and not to be demanded by the Common Law, or merely of
another nature than the Rent it self, with which it is there conjoined by the
word [ or,] that then it is Erroneous Pascl. 35 Eliz. Crocker and York verse.
Dormer. in Poph. Rep.
.

(7.) B. brought an Action of Debt against W. upon an Obligation of 600 l. the
Condition was, That if W. Resign a Benefice upon Request, that then the
Obligation should be void. And the Condition was Entered; the Defendant
Demurred, and Judgment in B. R. pro Querente. And upon Error brought, Judgment
was Affirmed in the Exchequer; for this Obligation is not voidable by the
Statute of 14 Eliz. which makes Obligations of the same force, as Leases made
by Parsons of their Glebes, viz. per Non-Residency: And it does not appear by
the Plea of the Defendant, that it was not an Obligation bona fide, which might
be lawful; As if a Patron which has a Son, which is not yet fit to be
presented for default of Age, and he present another with an Agreement, that
when his Son come to the Age of 24 years he shall Resign it, it is a good
Obligation. And this Case, viz. an Obligation with Condition to Resign had been
Adjudged good in the Case of one Jones, An. 8 Jac. And the Counsel said, That
he who is presented to a Church is Married thereto, and it is like as if a man
who has married a Wife, should be bound to be divorced from her, or not
cohabit with her, these Conditions are void. But these resemble not our Case
Babbington verse. Wood. Hutt. Rep.
.

(8.) It was said in Johnson's Case, That if a Parson Leases his Rectory for
years, or parcel of his Glebe, reserving a Rent, and dies, if his Successor
accepts the Rent, that Acceptance does not make the Lease good; because by his
death the Franktenement is in Abeyance, and in no Man. And also a Parson cannot
Discontinue: And by consequence, That that he did without Livery, is determined
by his death. And it is not like to the Case of an Abbot, Prior, or Tenant in
Tail Johnson's Case. Hetley's Rep.
.

(9.) Hendon moved for Dr. Clay, Vicar of Hallifax, That a Prohibition might be
granted to the High Commissioners of York, for that, that these Articles by one
Smith were exhibited against him, viz. 1. That he read the Holy Bible in an
irreverent and undecent manner, to the scandal of the whole Congregation. 2.
That he did not do his duty in Preaching; but against his Oath and the
Ecclesiastical Canon, had neglected for sundry Mornings to Preach. 3. That he
took the Cups and other Vessels of the Church, consecrated to holy use, and
employed them in his own House, and put Barm in the Cups, that they were so
polluted, that the Communicants of the Parish were loath to drink out of them.
4. That he did not observe the last Fast (Proclaimed upon the Wednesday) but on
the Thursday, because it was an Holy Day. 5. That he retained one Stepheson in
one of the Chapels of Ease, who was a man of ill Life and Conversation, viz.
an Adulterer and a Drunkard. 6. That he did not Catechize according to the
Parish-Canon: but only bought many of Dr. Wilkinson's Catechisms; for every of
which he paid 2 d. and sold them to the Parishioners for 3 d. without any
examination or instruction for their benefit. And that he, when any Commissions
were directed to him, to compel any person in his Parish to do Penance, he
exacted money of them, and so they were dismissed, without inflicting any
penalty upon them, as their Censure was. And that he and his Servants used
diverse Menaces to his Parishioners, and that he abused himself, and disgraced
his Function by diverse base Labors, viz. He made Mortar, having a
Leathern-Apron before him, and he himself took a Tithe-Pigg out of the Pigsty,
and afterward he himself gelded it. And when he had diverse Presents sent him,
as by some Flesh, by some Fish, and by others Ale, he did not spend it in the
invitation of his Friends and Neighbors, or give it to the Poor; but sold the
Flesh to Butchers, and the Ale to Ale-wives. And that he commanded his Curate
to Marry a Couple in a private House, without any License: And that he suffered
diverse to Preach, which peradventure had not any License, and which were
suspected persons, and of evil Life. It was said by Henden, That they cannot by
the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. meddle with such matters of such a nature, but
only examine Heresies, and not things of that nature; and that the High
Commissioners at Lambeth certified to them, that they could not proceed in such
things, and advised them to dismiss it; but they would not desist. And the
Judges ( Richardson being absent) granted a Prohibition, if cause were not
shown to the contrary Smith against Dr. Clay. Hetley's Rep.
.

(10.) A Parson makes a Lease for 21 years, the Patron and Ordinary confirm his
Estate for 7 years; the Parson dies: The Question is, Whether that Confirmation
made the Lease good for 21 years, or but 7 years. And it seemed to Hutton, That
the Lease was Confirmed but for 7 years. But Richardson was of the contrary
Opinion, and took a difference, where they Confirm the Estate, and where they
Confirm the Land for 7 years; That Confirmation confirms all his Estate: But
where they confirm the Lease for 7 years, That Confirmation shall not enure but
according to the Confirmation. And that difference was agreed by Crook, and all
the Sergeants at the Bar. And afterward Hutton said, That that was a good
Cause to be considered, and to be moved again Tomlinson's Case. Hetl. Rep.
.

(11.) In a Replevin: And the Title was by Lease made by a Parson; And the
Avowry was, That A. was seized of the Rectory of H. and made the Lease, without
showing that he was Parson. And by the Court, That that should have been a good
Exception, if it had not been said in the Avowry moreover, That A. was seized
in ju^e Ecclesiae, which supplies all Bold against Waters. Noy's Rep.
.

(12.) During the time of the Parson, the Patron has nothing to do in the
Church 11 H. 64. b.
. And therefore if the Patron grant a Rent by Fine out of the Church, the
Church being then full, and afterward the Incumbent dies, that charge shall
not bind the Successor, for that the Parson and the Ordinary were no parties to
it 38 E. 3. 4.
.

(13.) If a Parson would Resign, the word [ Resignare] is not it seems the only
proper word in the Law for Resignation, but [ Renunciare, Cedere, and
Demittere] are the usual words or terms of Resignation D. 13 El. 294 b. The
Cognizances of Resignation properly belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court. Mich.
10 Jac. B. Manknol^ 's Case, per Cur, Roll. Abr. fo. 294.
. Yet if a Prebend does give, grant, yield, and confirm his Prebendary and the
Possessions thereunto belonging unto the Ordinary, To have and to hold to him
and his Successors in Fee, subjecting and submitting to him Omnia jura by
reason thereof qualitercunque acquisita; these words it seems are sufficient
and amount to a Resignation, albeit the proper words are not therein Ibid.
: Which Resignation ought to be made to the Immediate Ordinary, and not to the
Mediate; for which reason a Prebend may not Resign to the King, for that
although he is Supreme Ordinary, yet he is not the Immediate Ordinary, and he
is not bound to give Notice to the Patron, as the Ordinary ought, nor of
himself can Collate, but is to present to the Ordinary Ibid. and Roll. Abr.
ver. Presentment, lit. E. page 358.
.

(14.) In Trespass: The Case was, Hill. 2 Jac. B. R. Fairchild and Gayer's
Case. Cro. par. 2.
) The Defendant being Incumbent of the Church of B. (M. and G. having the
Donation thereof) made an Instrument, whereby Concessit and Resignavit to M.
and omnibus ad quos in hac part pertinet ad acceptandam Ecclesiam suam de B;
and thereupon the two parties gave it to the Plaintiff, who being disturbed by
the Defendant brought Trespass. The Question was, whether a Resignation of a
Donative could be to the Donor, or how it might be departed with. Resolved (1)
That this being a Donative, begun only by the Foundation and Erection of the
Donor; he has the sole Visitation, and the Ordinary has nothing to do
therewith; and as the Parson comes in by the Donor, so he may restore it to
him; and although the Presentee, when he is in, has the Freehold, yet he may
revest it by his Resignation, without any other Ceremony, and the Ordinary has
nothing to do with it: For Admission and Institution are not necessary in case
of a Donative. (2) Resolved, That the Resignation to one of the parties is
good, for it does enure to both as a Surrender shall do. (3) Resolved, That
although the Resignation was de Ecclesia, yet it shall extend to all the
Possessions.

(15.) At a Synod in 44 Ed. 3. a Canon was made, That the Parson of every
Church in England shall appoint the Parish-Clerk. And at another Synod held in
An. 1603. a Canon was made to the same effect; and yet it does not take away
the Custom where the Parishioners or Churchwardens have used to appoint the
Clerk, because that is Temporal, which cannot be altered by a Canon M. 24 Jac.
B. R. Walpole and Gale, per Cur. and Roll. Abridg. ver. Prerogative, lit. Y.
. If the Clerk of a Parish in London has used time out of mind to be chosen by
the Vestry, and afterward Admitted and Sworn before the Archdeacon, and he
refuse to Swear such Clerk so Elect, but Admits another chosen by the Parson:
In this Case a Writ may be awarded, commanding him to Swear the Clerk chosen by
the Vestry. 22 Jac. Walpool's Case. The like Writ was granted for the Clerk of
the Parish of St. Fosters, London. Mich. 16 Car. B. R. between Orme and
Pemberton Roll. ib. lit. L.
. The Parishioners of the Parish of Alphage in Canterbury prescribed to have
the Nomination and Election of their Parish-Clerk, and the Parson of a Parish
by force of a Canon, upon voidance of the place of the Parish-Clerk elected one
to the Office: The Parishioners by force of their Custom elected C. the
Parson, Pasch. 8 Jac. C. B. Gaudy verse. Dr. Newman. Brownl. Rep. par. 2
supposing this Election to be Irregular, for that it was against the Canon,
Sued C. before Dr. Newman Chancellor of Canterbury, and the said C. was by
Sentence deprived of the Clerkship of the Parish, and another Clerk of the
Parish Admitted. C. moved for a Prohibition, and had it granted by all the
Court; for it was held, That a Parish-Clerk is a mere Layman, and ought to be
deprived by them that put him in, and no others; and the Canon which wills
that the Parson shall have Election of the Parish-Clerk, is merely void to take
away the Custom, that any person had to Elect him. Vid. Stat. 25 H. 8. That a
Canon against Common Law, confounding the Royal Prerogative of the King, or Law
of God, is void; and Custom of the Realm cannot be taken away but by Act of
Parliament, vid. 21 Ed. 4. 44. And it was Resolved, That if the Parish-Clerk
misdemean himself in his Office, or in the Church, he may be Sentenced for that
in the Ecclesiastical Court to Excommunication, but not to Deprivation: And
afterward a Prohibition was granted by all the Court; and held also, That a
Prohibition lies as well after Sentence, in this case as before. And in
Jermin's Case, Whereas the Churchwardens and Parishioners of K. surmized they
had a Custom to place a Clerk there by the Election of the Vestry: Trin. 21
Jac. B. R. Jermin's Case. Cro. par. 2.
the Parson sued them in the Ecclesiastical Court, to have his Clerk placed
there, according to a late Canon made: It was the Opinion of the Court, that it
was a good Custom, and that the Canon could not take it away; wherefore a
Prohibition was granted.

(16.) A Bishop, Archdeacon, Parson, are Spiritual Corporations at the Common
Law; for the Parson (and this is meant also of the others) has two Capacities
40 E. 3. 17. Br. Dean, etc. 2. 14 H. 8. 30. b.
, The one to take to him and his Heirs; the other to him and his Successors,
and in that respect he is seized jure Ecclesiae. If J. S. be Parson of D. and
Land be granted to J. S. Parson and his Successors, and to J. S. Clerk and his
Heirs, in this case he is Tenant in Common with himself 14 H. 8. ibid. Finch,
Nomoternia, p. 138.
.

(17.) Note, That it was agreed in Bushie's Case, That if a Parsonage be
Impropriate, and the Vicarage be endowed, and difference be between the Parson
and the Vicar concerning the Endowment, that shall be tried by the Ordinary,
for the Persons and the Cause are both Spiritual: And there the Vicar sues the
Parson for Tithes, and suggests the manner of Tithing, and prays a Prohibition,
and it was granted, Bushie's Case. Brownl. par. 2.
and after upon solemn Argument Consultation was granted, insomuch that the
manner of Tithing did not come in question, but the Endowment of the Vicarage
only; for that is the elder Brother, as the Lord Coke said: This was cited to
be Adjudged by Coke. Also there is much difference between Prebends and
Parsons; Watkinson and Man's Case. Cro. par. 1.
for it was Adjudged in Watkinson and Man's Case, That a Lease made by a
Prebend is good by the Statute of 32 H. 8. for he is not excepted, but only
Parsons and Vicars; and so it was said it had been Adjudged in Doctor Dale's
Case.

(18.) It will not be denied, but that the Clergy of England have had in all
Ages certain Privileges, which the Laity never pretended to: To which purpose
there have been Laws Enacted, and Cases Ruled by persons learned in the Laws.
In An. 22 H. 8. cap. 5. it is Enacted, That the decayed Bridges in every
County, where it cannot be known who in right ought to repair the same, shall
be repaired by the Inhabitants of the said County, Town Corporate, or Riding
where the Bridge is, by the Assessment of the Justices of Peace, who may
appoint Collectors to levy the same by Distress. Now the Question is, Whether
the Parsons and the Vicars may be charged by the general word of the
Inhabitants, and Distress taken on their Spiritual Livings? In order to a
Resolution of this Question, it must be premised, That it is most evident, that
the Clergy are by the Common Law of this Kingdom a divided Estate both for
their Persons and Spiritual promotions from the Laity of this Land. (1) For
their Persons, Fitz. N. B. fo. 175. That Clerks shall not be chosen Bailiffs or
Beadles for the Lands in their possessions, although the Land before it came to
the hands of the Clerk, was charged therewith by tenure. (2) A Clerk arraigned
before a Temporal Judge for Felony, may plead the Jurisdiction of the Court;
The Clergymen, by reason of their Resiance, are not bound to the Leet; nor to
follow Hugh and Cry. (3) That their Spiritual Livings are also discharged from
the general charge of this Realms Laity, appears by the Register, fo. 260. and
F. N. B. fo. 227. That Spiritual persons shall not be charged to pay Toll,
Pontage, or Murage, but may discharge themselves by Writ. Also the Sheriff, who
by the Law is the King's general Officer to serve Processes in every County,
may not intermeddle with the Clergy in respect of their Spiritual promotions,
but return Quod Clericus est Beneficiatus in Episcoparu, non habet Laicum
foedum in baliva mea; and then the Process must be to the Bishop, as appears 34
H. 6. and 21 H. 6. This Privilege is confirmed to them by Magna Charta, and
diverse Grants and Statutes, viz. Articulis Cleri, 9 Ed. 2. cap. 9. Likewise no
Distress shall be taken in the Ancient Donations of the Church. The like Grant
is made unto them by King Ed. 1. 24. Protestation 2. That the Sheriff or
Minister of the King shall not meddle with the Goods, Chattels, or Carriages of
the Clergy; and in Purveyors, 12. An. 14 Ed. 3. there is a Statute, that
Purveyors shall not meddle with the Clergy, etc. Ed. 1. cap. 1. 1 R. 2. cap. 2.
1 H. 4. cap. 3. Statute Spiritualties 2. Privileges, Grants, Immunities of the
Clergy are confirmed. So that it appears both by the Common Law and the
Statutes, that the Clergy are not to be burdened in the general charges with
the Laity of this Realm, neither to be troubled or encumbered, unless they be
especially named and expressly charged by some Statute. And diverse Statutes
heretofore expressing themselves with the like general words, have never been
expounded to extend to the Clergy, as by the usage of them appears by the
Statute of Winton. An. 13 Eliz. 1. Again, the people dwelling in a Hundred
where any Robbery is committed, shall either bring forth the Felon, or agree
with him that is robbed, yet has it never been taken, that Parsons and Vicars
should be Contributors thereunto; yet the words [ Gentes demorantes] viz. the
People dwelling, are as general words as [ Inhabitants]. In the same Statute
there are the like general words [ Watching, etc.] yet the Clergy thereby are
never charged. Also the Statute made for the Highways, An. 2 and 3. P. and M.
charge every Householder; yet this general [ Housholder] has never been taken
by usage to charge the Clergy, viz. the Parson or Vicar. Fitz. in his Not. Bre.
fol. 131. says, that a Clerk being bound in a Statute-Merchant, shall not be
taken by his Body: And the Writ founded upon the Statute-Staple, 27 Ed. 3. cap.
9. has this special Proviso, Si Laicus Sit, capias. Also the Statute whereupon
this Writ is founded, is general, and no Exception made at the Clergy. And 33
H. 8. cap. 2. there is a Statute that charge all Resiants within any County^
where there is no Goal, to be Taxed by the Justices for the Building of one,
yet have the Clergy never been charged by reason of these general words [
Resiants, etc.] 1 Ed. 1. 18 Ed. 3. 4. 1 R. 2. 1. For these Reasons it is
supposed, that the general words in the aforesaid Question will receive in Law
the like Exposition, as the other said recited Statutes have done; And the
Parsons and Vicars shall not thereby be charged, the rather for that the
Statute sets down the Inhabitants of the County, where the certain persons that
should do it, cannot be known, which is to be intended such Inhabitants as are
chargeable to Pontage, which Spiritual persons are not, but excepted, as
aforesaid.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Vicars, Vicarages, and Benefices.
1. The Vicar and Vicarage described according to Law. 2. What difference
between Vicarage and Parsonage; their several Rights and Interests
respectively. 3. Whether a Vicarage Endowed may be Appropriated, and how? 4.
The Chaplain of the Vicar of Hallifax his Case for his Salary. 5. Vicars may
Sue in the Ecclesiastical Courts for Pensions. 6. How a Vicarage may be
created. 7. The Resolution of Court touching the Vicar's Tithes, in reference
to the Parson's Glebe. 8. Cases in Law touching the Parsons and the Vicar's
Tithes, where Composition or Prescription is in the Case. 9. Who is Patron of
the Vicarage, whether the Parson or the Patron? 10. In what case the Vicar may
Sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for an addition or increase of Maintenance. 11.
In what case a Vicarage shall determine; and what shall be an union of
Parsonage and Vicarage. 12. Benefice how defined by the Canon Law, with the
Reasons of that definition. 13. Benefices Ecclesiastical extend to
Ecclesiastical Dignities by the Canon Law, but not so within the Statute of 21
H. 8. 14. Of what an Ecclesiastical Benefices consists according to the
Canonists. 15. Cautionary Laws relating to Benefices; by what marks or signs an
Ecclesiastical Benefice is known at the Canon Law. 16. The common distinction
of Ecclesiastical Benefices at the Common Law. 17. A Case in Law touching a
Vicarage, whether Dissolved, or not? 18. Vicarages of Two sorts, how compared
to a Commendam.
(1.) VICAR is he who has that Spiritual Living called a Vicarage, being no
other than a certain part or portion of a Parsonage, allowed to the Minister
for his Maintenance, introduced at that time when Impropriations first began;
both which Livings as they are commonly called the Church: The Parson, Patron
and Ordinary may create a Vicarage. 8 R. 2. annuity 53. Omnis Vicaria est
Ecclesia, per Coke, in the Kings Case against Zakar. Bulstr. par. 3.
so both such as serve in them, are called the Patron's Clerks. The Vicar is
usually appointed and allowed to serve the Cure, by him who has the
Impropriation of the Parochial Tithes; for at the Original of such
Impropriations a certain portion of the Parsonage was allotted and set apart
from the rest to maintain the Vicar, who was to serve the Cure Plow. 495.
; So that now the Priest of a Parochial Church, where the Predial Tithes are
Impropriated, is called the Vicar, h. e. vice Rectoris. And it seems Anciently
they did sometimes style themselves Perpetual Vicars, because every Vicarage,
Corporation-like, has a constant Succession.

(2.) A Parsonage and a Vicarage (as appears in Britton and Wade's Case) are
two distinct Benefices, and both have Curam animarum, the Parson habitualiter,
the Vicar actualiter; and although the Vicarage be Spiritual, yet the
Corporation is Temporal, which the Pope could not dissolve Mich. 16 Jac. B. R.
Britton and Wade's Case. Cro. 2. par. 516, 517, 518.
: And in the Case between Parry and Banks, it was Resolved, That after the
Statute of 31 H. 8. which made Parsonages Lay-Fees, the Ordinary could not
dissolve a Vicarage, when the Parsonage is in a Temporal hand; for that were to
destroy the Cure 12 Jac. in the Excheq. Parry and Bank's Case. Hugh. Abr. verb.
Appropriations.
. Vicarages being originally endowed out of Parsonages, the Vicar was to have
aid of the Parson, if he were impleaded for any thing touching the Vicarage,
and the Parson was subject to every charge of the Vicarage 31 H. 6. 13. by
Yelverton.
. And anciently the Vicar was not held as Tenant of the Freehold of the Glebe
of the Vicarage 8 Ass. 3^. 15 Ass. 8. acc.
, but the Freehold thereof was in the Parson, and the Vicar could not maintain
an Assize in his own Name 12 E 3. Fitzh. tit. Brief, 256.
. But now it seems the Freehold of the Glebe of the Vicarage is in the Vicar
himself, and not in the Parson, for that the Possessions of the Vicar and
Parson are severed, and each of them shall have several Writs concerning their
respective Rights, and shall not join in one Writ Parson's Law, cap. 23.
: and the Vicar shall have and maintain a Writ of Juris Vtrum against the
Parson, who is the Patron of the Globe of the Vicarage, for the same Glebe Ibid.
. This Vicarage being a certain portion of a Parsonage allowed to the Vicar for
his Maintenance as aforesaid, is in some places a sum of Money certain, in
others a part of the Tithes in kind, commonly the smaller Tithes, and in some
places a part of the great Tithes also: And Vicarage-Lands occupied by the
Vicar, do in some places pay no Tithe to the Parson Cro. J^r. 60. Cro. 2. 44.
Broo. Disme^ 10.
.

(3.) In Ward's Case it was said by Mountague. That a Vicarage endowed might be
Appropriated, but not to the Parson, to which Haughton and Doderidge agreed, 31
H. 6. Fitz. tit. Indicavit, is, that such a Vicarage may be dissolved: An
Appropriation may be by the King sole where he is Patron, but there is no Book
that it might be by the Patron sole. Grindon's Case in Plowden, and 17 E. 3.
39. an Appropriation cannot be without the King's License. In that case it was
agreed, That Tithe-Lamb and Wool was included within small Tithes Trin. 16
(...) B. R. Nicholas -- and W. Ward's Case. Poph. Rep.
, which Tithe belongs to the Vicar.

(4.) A Chaplain that was under the Vicar of Hallifax, Libells against him in
the Ecclesiastical Court for his Salary. And he prescribes, That the Vicar
ought to pay the Chaplain four pounds a year; and the Vicar prays a
Prohibition, (1) for that he alleges, That the Chaplains were Eligible by
himself; and because that Chaplain was not Elected by him, he is not Chaplain;
but he is in of his own wrong, etc. (2) That Prescription for Salary was
Triable at the Common Law. Yelverton, The Salary is Spiritual as the Cure it
self is Spiritual, for which it is to be paid. As the Case in Dyer, 58. Pl 4.
But a Prohibition was granted, until it was determined to whom the Election
appertained; and that now depends by Prohibition in this Court Trin. 3 Car. C.
B. The Vicar of Hathfax C^se. Hetley's Rep.
.

(5. Pension.
) G. Vicar Sues in the Ecclesiastical Court the Dean and Chapter of Wells,
Parson of a Church, for a Pension, and they pray a Prohibition, and it was
denied; For that Pension is a Spiritual thing, for which the Vicar may sue in
the Spiritual Court Goodwin verse. Dean and Chapter of Well. Noy's Rep.
.

(6.) The Parson, Patron, and Ordinary may Create a Vicarage and Endow it
without the Assent of the King; but the Ordinary cannot Create a Vicarage
without the Patrons Assent. 16 E. 3. Quare Impedit, 145. And in or during the
Vacancy, the Patron of a Parsonage and the Ordinary may Create a Vicarage. 8 R.
2. Annuity 53. per Belk. And before the Statutes of Dissolutions, a Parson
Impropriate and the Ordinary might Create a Vicarage, for the Parson was Parson
and Patron. Ibid. Roll's Abridg. verb. Vicarage.
.

(7.) It was Resolved per Curiam, That if a Vicar be endowed out of a Parsonage
of all the white Tithes growing and renewing within the Parish on all the Land
of the Parish; the Vicar shall not therefore have the Tithe of the Parson's
Globe, for that is excepted; nor the Tithes of the Land, which at the time of
the Endowment of the Vicarage was parcel of the Glebe, but since severed from
the Glebe, for that at the time of the Endowment that Land was exempted out of
the Endowment Trin. 38 Eliz. B. R. Elen^o and Ma^ston. Rollib. verb. Vi^^
Endowment. ^^3.
.

(8.) If there be a Composition made between the Parson and the Vicar, That the
Parson shall have all the Tithe of Corn and Hay, and the Vicar the other
Tithes, and afterward the Parishioners sow certain Lands with Saffron, or the
like, the Parson shall not have the Tithe of the Saffron, but the Vicar. By
Coke so Adjudged Trin 7 Jac. B. R. Roll. ib. nu. 4.
. It has als^ been Resolved, It a Vicar be Endowed of the Small Tithes by
Prescription, and afterward the Land which had been Arable time out of mind,
is converted from Arable, and there grow small Tithes, the Vicar shall have
them, for his Endowment does not go to the Land, but Minutis Decimis in every
place within the Parish Pasch. 38 Eliz. B. R. inter Bedingfield and Freak.
. And if a Vicar be endowed of the third part of all the Tithes of a Manor, he
shall have Tithes as well of the Freehold as Copyhold, for all makes the Manor
P. 38 El. B. R. Higham and Best. Adjudged.
.

(9.) The Parson, and not the Patron of the Parsonage, of Common right is
Patron of the Vicarage, for that it is derived out of the Parsonage. Dubitatur
17 E. 3. 51. b. Contra, 5 E. 2. Quare impedii, 165. per Pass. And if a Parson
Appropriate create a Vicarage, he shall be Patron thereof. 17 E. 3. 51. he is
both Parson and Patron Roll. Abr. verb. Vicarage.
. So likewise if there be a Vicar and a Parson Appropriate, the Ordinary and
the Parson Appropriate may in time of vacation of the Vicarage reunite the
Vicarage to the Parsonage Mich. 7 Jac. B. R. Stafford's Case.
.

(10.) If there be a Parsonage Appropriate in an Ecclesiastical person, which
never came to the King by the Statute of Monasteries, and a Vicarage Endowed be
there also; and the Parson make a Lease of the Parsonage for Lives, according
to the Statute of 32 H. 8. The Vicar may in that case sue in the Ecclesiastical
Court against the Parson and his Lessee, who comes in by the Statute for
Addition of Maintenance, and the Ordinary may well compel them to increase his
Maintenance, for over all Appropriations such power of increasing the Vicar's
Maintenance was reserved to the Ordinary, and the Lessee comes in subject to
that charge Hill. 9 Car. B. R. inter Hitchcock and Thornborough.
.

(11.) If the Vicarage be diminished, he shall have more of the Parsonage, if
what remains be not sufficient. And if the Parsonage be impoverished and so
decayed, that the Parsonage by it self, nor the Vicarage, have sufficient to
sustain them, in that case the Vicarage shall determine and be restored to the
Parsonage: And to this the Doctors also do accord 31 H. 6^4. Roll. Abr.
. It has been also held, If a Parson Appropriate, who is Patron of the
Vicarage of the same Church, by Agreement between him and the Ordinary, present
the Vicar to that Parsonage, it is an union of the Parsonage and Vicarage; but
if a Lessee of a Parsonage present the Vicar to the Parsonage, that shall not
bind the Lessor 44 E. 3. 33. b. 44 Ass. 37.
. And if there be a Vicarage and Parsonage (and both void) and one present his
Clerk as Parson, and he is so Inducted; that shall unite the Parsonage and
Vicarage again 11 H. 6. 33.
. And in case that there be a Vicar Endowed who is Presentative, and also a
Parson Presentative, it seems that the Parson has not the Cure of Souls, but
the Vicar 5 E. ^. Quare impedit, 165. per Pass*.
.

(12.) Benefice [ Beneficium] according to a general acceptance may comprehend
all Ecclesiastical Livings, be they Dignities or other, as in the Statute of 13
R. 2. where they are divided into Elective and Donative 13 R. 2. St. 2. cap. 2.
: But according to a more strict and proper acceptance, Duarenus seems to give
it an apt definition, where he says, it is Res Ecclesiastica, quae Sacerdoti
vel Clerico, ob Sacrum Ministerium utenda, in perpetuum concedatur Duaren. de
Benef. lib. 2. cap. 4.
. [ Res] because it is not the Ministry it self or the Office, but rather the
profit thence arising that is the Benefice. [Ecclesiastica] because such profit
is dedicated to God and his Church. [ Sacerdoti, etc.] because where a thing
Ecclesiastical is granted to Laymen, it is not properly said to be a Benefice
in this sense. [ Ob Sacrum Ministerium] because as Dedicated to God, they are
for the use of such as wait on his Altar. [ Vtenda] because they have rather
the Usuf^uit thereof, than any Fee or Inheritance therein. [ In perpetuum]
because they are annexed to the Church for ever. Benefices with Cure of Souls
seem most properly to be the Parsonages and Vicarages of Parochial Churches.
Sir H. Hobart Chief Justice, in Colt and Glover's Case against the Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, says, (speaking of the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 25.)
That Bishoprics are not within the Law under the word [ Benefices]: So that if
a Parson take a Bishopric, it avoids not the Benefice by force of that Law of
Pluralities, but by the Ancient Common Law, as it is holden, 11 H. 4. 60.

(13.) This word Beneficium Ecclesiasticum extends not only to Churches
Parochial and the Benefices thereof, but also to Dignities and other
Ecclesiastical promotions; as to Deanaries, Archdeaconries, Prebends, etc.
Coke's Inst. par 3. cap. 71.
. Lindw. de vit. and hon. Cle. c. Exterior. Sir Edw. Coke affirms, that it
appears in the Books of their Law 9 E. 3. 22. 29 E. 3. 44. 10 E. 3. 1. Regist
58. 21 H. 8. c. 13. verse. finem.
, That Deanaries, Archdeaconries, Prebends, etc. are Benefices with Cure of
Souls; but they are not comprehended under the Name of Benefices with Cure of
Souls within the Statute of 21 H. 8. by reason of a special Proviso; which they
had been, if no such Proviso had been added Such in any Collegiate or Cathedral
Church or any Parsonage with a Vicar Endowed, or any Benefice perpetually
Impropriate, are no^ Benefices with Cure of Souls within the Stat. of 21 H. 8.
against Pluralities.
, viz. Deans, Archdeacons, Chancellors, Treasurers, Chaunters, Prebends, or a
Parson where there is a Vicar endowed Coubi supra.
.

(14.) The Canonists do hold, That an Ecclesiastical Benefice consists of the
Sacred Function, and of the Provinces thereunto belonging ^an. si quis (...) q.
3.
; It is a distinct portion of Ecclesiastical Rights joined to the Spiritual
Function, and until it be set apart, separate, and distinguished from Temporal
Interests, it is not properly an Ecclesiastical Benefice; it is termed a
portion, in that it includes Fruits, for a Benefice without Fruits cannot
properly be so called.

(15.) By the Jus Commune no man can at once and at the same time possess two
Benefices with Cure of Souls, as incompatible. Tot. decis. Rotae 445. tit. de
Praeb. in novis. Non datur Beneficium nisi propter Officium, he that performs
not the one, ought to be deprived of the other. C. fin. de Rescript. in 6. Can.
Eos. Cano. si quis Sacerdotum 81. distinct. All p^cuniary Contracts, all
mercenary Trading and Merchandising for Benefices is to be abhorred;
Ecclesiastical Benefices are of such a Spiritual Constitution, that they are
not capable of being bought or sold; they fall not within the walk of human
Commerce, but ought to be conferred gratis. And for Non-residence the Parson
ought by the very Letter of the Law to be deprived of his Benefice and the
Fruits thereof. c. Vni. de Cleric. non residen. in 6. Panormitan observes Six
signs whereby an Ecclesiastical Benefice may be known: As (1) That according to
the Jus Commune it ought to be bestowed by one who has a right and power in
him so to do, meaning the true Patron. (2) That he who does give or bestow it,
do reserve nothing thereof or therein for himself, directly or indirectly. (3)
That it be given purely as a provision and maintenance for the Clerk. (4) That
it has ever something of Spiritualty annexed to it. (5) That in its nature it
be perpetual. (6) That all manner of Contracts and Bargains concerning it be
utterly rejected. Panorm. Consil. 47. Anchor. de Regul. prim. de reg. jur. in
6. q. and Decius in Rub. de Rescript.

(16.) Whatever is enjoyed as a Benefice, is had and obtained either by way of
Title, or Canonical Institution: Lindw. de cohabit. Cle. and Mulier. c. ut
Clericalis. verb. Beneficiati. Ecclesiastical Benefices being commonly
distinguished into Presentatives and Donatives; for a Parochial Church may be
Donative, and exempt from all Ordinaries Jurisdiction. For if the King does
found a Church or Chapel, he may exempt the same from the Ordinaries
Jurisdiction; in which case the Lord Chancellor and Lord Keeper shall Visit the
same. 20 E. 3. Excommeng. 9. 21 E. 3. 60. Parsons Law, cap. 28. Or if the King
by his Letters Patents does License a Common person to Found a Church or
Chapel, exempt from the Ordinaries Jurisdiction, the same shall be Visited by
the Founder, and not by the Ordinary: 6 H. 7. 4. per Keble, 8 Ass. 29. F. N. B.
42. acc. And if such Clerk Donative be disturbed in his Incumbency, the Patron
or Founder shall have a Quare impedit Praesentare, and declare upon the Special
matter. But if a Patron of a Church Donative does once present unto the
Ordinary, and his Clerk be Admitted and Instituted, it is now become
Presentable, and it shall never be Donative after, and then the Ordinary shall
Visit the same, a Proxy shall be paid, and Lapse shall incur to the Ordinary,
as in all other Benefices presentable Co. 1. par. Inst. 344. and 22 H. 6. 26.
; but so long as it remains Donative, it is without the Jurisdiction of the
Ordinary. For a Donative is a Benefice merely given and collated by the Patron
to a man without either Presentation to, or Institution by the Ordinary, or
Induction by his Order F. N. B. 35. E.
. All Bishoprics were anciently Donative by the King Coke, l. 3. fol. 75. b.
: and it is said, that there are certain Chauntries, which may be given by
Letters Patents F. N. B. fo. 33. c. and 42. b.
. The Original Donatives in England is supposed to be from what Mr. Guinn
mentions in the Preface of his Readings, viz. That as the King might anciently
Found a Free Chapel and exempt it from the Diocesan's Jurisdiction: So he
might also by his Letters Patents License a Common person to Found such a
Chapel, and to Ordain that it shall be Donative and not Presentable, and that
the Chaplain shall be deprivable by the Founder and his Heirs, and not by the
Bishop Cowell, Interpr. verb. Donative.
. Whether such Donatives are properly Benefices Ecclesiastical may well admit
of an Enquiry; for where Petr. Gregorius speaks of Chapels Founded by Laymen,
not approved by the Diocesan, nor by him as it were Spiritualized, he there
says plainly, that they are not accounted Benefices, nor can they be conferred
by the Bishop; but the Founders and their Heirs may give such Chapels, if they
so please, without the Bishop: Petr. Gregor. de Benefic. cap. 11. nu. 10. and
Guide. Pap. Decis. 187. And Lindwood makes a very prolix question on the same
reason, whether St. Martins Le Grand Land. be Ecclesiasticum Beneficium, or
not, Arguing it pro and con, but concludes in the Affirmative. Lindw. de Cohab.
Cler. and Mul. cap. ut Clericalis.

(17.) The Prior of D. was seized of the Advowson of the Church of N. Mich. 16
Jac. B. R. Britton and Wade's Case. Cro. par. 2.
appropriated to his Priory, and also of the Vicarage of N. endowed with small
Tithes: The Appropriation and Endowment were both in the time of King John, and
continued till the time of Hen. 6. when the Pope granted by his Bulls, That the
Prior should appoint one of his Monks to officiate the Cure, who should be
removed ad nutum Prioris: The point was, Whether the Vicarage was dissolved?
Resolved (1) That a Vicarage Perpetual could not be dissolved after the Statute
of 4 H. 4. and that the Pope could not make any Ordinance against that Statute,
nor Dispense by his Bulls with the Law, though they tend in Ordine ad
Spiritualia. (2) There were no words that amount to a Dissolution, but the
words only are, That the Vicar should be ad nutum Prioris. (3) The Parsonage
and Vicarage are two distinct Benefices, and both have Curam animarum, the
Parson habitualiter, and the Vicar actualiter; and although the Vicarage be
Spiritual, yet the Corporation is Temporal, which the Pope cannot dissolve. (4)
That in this case the Vicarage was not Dissolved: vid. 12 Jac. in the
Exchequer, Parry and Bank's Case accordingly, there vouched.

(18.) In the Canon Law there are two sorts of Vicarages, viz. Vicaria
Temporalis and Vicaria Perpetua; En le Case de Commenda. Davis Rep. fo. 83.
; The Vicaria Temporalis is compared to the Commenda Temporalis, for that such
Temporal Vicar non habet Titulum, sed servit alieno nomine, and proprie Curam
non habet: otherwise it is de Vicaris perpetua, quae est incompatibilis cum
alio Beneficio, and habet Curam animarum, and talis Vicarius habet Titulum
Canonicum; And a Quare Impedit lies against such perpetual Vicarage. F. N. B.
32. h. Regist. 31. a. And such a Vicar shall have a Juris Vtrum of Lands annexed
or given to him in perpetuity, by the Statute of 14 Ed. 3. cap. 17. vid. 40 Ed.
3. 28. b. where Finchden said, That although it had been held, that a Vicar
should not have Action of his Possessions against any person, yet that now the
Law is changed in that point; and good reason, when he is endowed to him and
his Successors in perpetuity.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Advowsons.
1. Advowson, what; and why so called. 2. Advowsons twofold. 3. The great
Antiquity of Advowsons; the Original thereof. 4. How it was in this Kingdom
under the Saxons. 5. The word Advowson applicable to other Ecclesiastical
Foundations, as well as Churches; what the Famous Lindwood was. 6. Advowsons
are Temporal, not Spiritual Inheritances. 7. Reasons in Law, proving it to be a
Temporal Inheritance. 8. The difference between Advowsons in Gross and
Appendant. 9. How Advowson Appendant may remain in the King as in Gross. 10. By
what words in a Grant an Advowson may pass or not. 11. How an Advowson may be
recontinued to the Rightful Patron, where he was ousted by Usurpation. 12. A
Case in Law touching three Avoydances of a Church granted to one man. 13. A
Question in Law, whether upon such matter of Fact an Advowson remains
Appendant, or not? 14. Advowsons are devisable by Will, as well as grantable by
Deed; what Actions may run in prejudice to the Advowson, or not. 15. Whether an
Advowson may be Assets; and under what words it may pass, or not? 16. A Case in
Law touching the Advowson of a Vicarage. 17. In what case the Writ of Right of
Advowson lies, or not. 18. In what case the Crown shall be put to that Writ, or
not, in case of Usurpation by a Common person. 19. A point in Law, whether the
King or his Grantee shall have the Presentation, where the King having a Manor
with the Advowson appendant, the Church void, grants the Manor with the
Advowson. 20. Of Advowsons there are three Original Writs at the Common Law.
21. The Advowson of a Vicarage, whether it belongs to the Patron or the Parson.
22. Whether an Advowson may properly be said to be a Demesne; several matters of
Law in reference to Advowsons Appendant and in Gross, in respect of the King
and Common persons. 23* Whether a Donative in the Kings Gift may be the Cure of
Soul? 24. Whether by the Grant of a Vicarage the Advowson of the Vicarage shall
pass; The grant of a next Avoydance during an Avoydance, is void.
(1.) ADvowson is a kind of Reversionary right of Presentation to an
Ecclesiastical Benefice in a man and his Heirs for ever. It is the same which
the Canon Law understands by Jus Patronatus, or the Right which a man and his
Heirs have to present their Clerk to the Ordinary, for a Parsonage or other
Spiritual Benefice when it becomes void; and he in whom such Right resides, is
called the Patron Term. Law, verb, Advowson. Westminster. 2. 13 Ed. 3. ^.
. Jus Patronatus est Potestas Praesentandi aliquem Instituendum ad Beneficium
Ecclesiae Simplex and vacans. Hostiens. de jure Patronat. Jus Patronatus est
jus Honorificum, Onerosum, and Vtile. It is a Right to present to the Bishop or
Ordinary a fit person, by him to be Admitted and Instituted into a Spiritual
Benefice when it becomes void. The unlawful Possessor is the Usurper, against
whom only lies three Writs; one of the Right, as the Writ of Right of
Advowson; and the other two of the Possession, As a Quare Impedit, and Darrein
Presentment. And the Incumbent, as to his Right for his Rectory, has the Writ
of Juris Vtrum. And Advowson is not Haereditas corporata, as a Message, Land,
or Pasture, etc. But it is Haereditas Incorporata; as Ways, Common, Piscaries,
Courts, etc. which are and may be Appendant to Inheritances Corporate. Advowson
is a kind of Bastard-French word, sometimes called Advocatio Ecclesiae, either
because the Patron thereof, claiming his J^s Patronatus therein, Advocat se in
his own Right unto the same, eamque esse sui quasi Clientis Loco, or rather
because the Patron in his own right Advocat alium to the Church being vacant,
and presents him unto it Loco alterius, veluti Defuncti Ske^o. d^ verb. Sig.
. Thence called sometimes Patron, sometimes Advocati; for they who originally
obtained a Right to present to any Church, were either the Founders, or
Builders, or Benefactors of the same. Decretal. c. 4. and 24. de jure Patronat.
and Plow. 495. Die. 48. Co. 1. 102. 4. 37. 6. 39. Litt. 119, 120. Patronum
faciunt Dos, Aedificatio, Fundus. And although Advowsons are now, as other
Temporal Inheritances, grantable by Deed, and so in that respect cognizable at
the Common Law; yet inasmuch as they are the same which the Canon Law calls Jus
Patronatus, it cannot be denied, but that they are within the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; and therefore although the Patron may have his Action against the
Ordinary in a Temporal Court by a Quare Impedit for rejecting his Clerk, yet
the Ordinary may Decree a Process de Jure Patronatus in the case, to enquire by
a Mixed Jury of Ecclesiastical and Laymen touching the said Advowson or Right
of Patronage according to the Laws and Customs of the Church.

(2.) There is an usual difference taken, between Advocatio medietatis
Ecclesiae, and Medietas Advocationis Ecclesiae: The former is where two Patrons
be, and every of them having Right to Present a several Incumbent to the
Bishop, to be Admitted into one and the same Church, (for diverse may be several
Parsons, and have Cure of Souls in one Parish) and such Advowson is alike in
every of these Patrons, but every of their Presentiments is to the moity of the
same Church; and therefore it is called Advocatio Medietatis Ecclesiae, or as
the case may be, Advocatio Tertiae partis Ecclesiae, and the like. The latter,
viz. Medietas Advocationis Ecclesiae, is after partition between Parceners; for
although the Advowson be entire, amongst them, yet any of them being disturbed
to present at his Turn, shall have the Writ of Medietate, or of Tertia, or of
Quarta part Advocationis Ecclesiae, as the Case is* And this difference is
taken and observed only in the Writ of Right, which is altogether grounded upon
the Right of Patronage. But in the Quare Impedit, which is only to recover
Damages, no such diversity is considered, but the Writ is general, Praesentare
ad Ecclesiam. Doderidge, of Advowsons, Lect. 4. Of Advowsons there are two
sorts, The one that in Gross, which is Sole or Principal, not adhering or
belonging to any Manor, or to any part or parcel thereof, as of the Right
thereof: The other Appendant or Dependant, or depending on a Manor, as
appertaining or belonging thereto, which is by Kitchen termed an Incident that
may be separated from the Subject. Again, Sometimes the word Advowe or Avowe is
also used for him who has a Right in his own Name to present to a Benefice or
other Ecclesiastical Living, 25 Ed. 3. Stat. 5. c. Vnic.
where you have also ( Advowe paramount) or the highest Patron, an Appellation
peculiar to the King. So that this Advocatus is he to whom such jus
advocationis alicujus Ecclesiae belongs, as that he may Present to the Church
in his own, but not in another Name ^leta, l. 3. c. 14. 1.
. And Fitzherbert uses it in the same signification Fitzh. N. B. fo. 39.
.

(3.) Consonant to the practice at this day touching Advowsons, was the
Emperor's Novell, Decreed about 1100 years since, toward the end of the Fifth
Century, to this purpose, That if any man shall erect an Oratory, and his
desire be to Present a Clerk thereunto, by himself or his Heirs; if they
furnish the Clerk with a Competency, and Nominate to the Bishop such as are
worthy, they may be Ordained: But if those who are intimated by them be
rejected by the Canons, as unworthy of the Ministry, then let it be the care of
the most Reverend Diocesan of the place, to Present such as in his discretion
he shall conceive better of Novell.
. And Panormitan clearly interprets the Emperor's mind herein, and gives us
the very meaning and original of the Patron's Right in this point of Advowsons;
he says, That this is Jus honorificum, onerosum, and utile, belonging to any in
the Church, for that with the Diocesans consent he has Founded, Built, and
Endowed a Church, he has given a piece of Ground* C. nobis, c. de jur.
Patronat. and erected a Church thereon, 16. q. 7. c. Monasterium. and Endowed
it, C. Piae mentis, ibid. and was therefore qualified with the Right of
Patronage. And indeed the Diocesans consent herein is so requisite, that by the
Canon Law it seems scarce feazable for a man to be a Patron without it, Si quis
Ecclesiam cum assensu Dioecesani construxit, ex eo Jus Patronatus acquirit.
Clement. c. Nobis de Jur. Patron. And when a Church so erected is by the
Consecration thereof actually delivered up and made over (as it were) to God
himself, it thenceforth ceases to be of any man's property, or of any Human
Dominion; for Quod Divini Juris est, id nullius est in bonis:. nullius, Inst.
de Rer. Divis. And by what is Recorded in the Life of Bishop Vlrick, it should
seem as if the Right of Presentation originally were in the Diocesan; for the
Author there says, That if any Erected a Church the Bishop consented, Si
legitimam Ecclesiae dotem in manum ejus Celsitudinis dare non differret, etc.
And after the Endowment and Consecration thereof, the care of the Altar was
committed by him to the Priest, and the Advowson firmly conveyed to the lawful
Heir, by the putting on a Robe: Author. vitae* Udalrici, c. 7. p. 52. Edit.
August. Vindel. 1595. But the Bishops understanding this as a matter more of
Care than of Power, as appears by these moderate expressions of Nominare,
Praesentare, or Commendare, they were willing the Lay-Patron (for his better
encouragement to such Pious works) should share with them in this privilege,
which Panormitan calls Jus ^onorificum, yet so, as that this transference of
the Bishops unto Lay-Patrons, should still remain under such a Limitation, as
that it should be necessary for the Patron to have recourse to the Bishop for
the qualifying his Clerk for the Rectory by Ordination; And the Bishop's
prudent compliance with Lay-Patrons in this matter was not in those days
without good reason, if we consider what a paucity of public Churches there
then were, insomuch that for want or instead thereof they frequently then said
Prayers under a Cross in the open Field, as is reported of our own Ancestors in
the Peregrination of Wilibald, Sic mos est Saxonicae gentis, etc. non Ecclesiam
sed Sanctae Crucis Signum, etc. diurnae Orationis sedulitatem solent habere.
Hodaeperic. Hierosolym. Wilibald. Extat ad Canisium, Tom. 4. Antiq. Lect. par.
2. page 486. Edit, Ingolst. 1603. Yea, and where perhaps some Churches were,
many of them were no better than those mentioned by Asser Bishop of Shirburne
in King Alured's days, which were of so mean a structure, that frequently the
wind entering per parietum rimulas, did blow out the Candles set before the
Relics; which gave occasion to that ingenious Prince to teach us by his
dexterity the mystery of making Lanthorns Ex Lignis and Bovinis Cornibus.

(4.) In the Infancy of the Christian Faith in this Island under the Saxons,
several particular Lords of Grand Seignories ( Regis ad Exemplum) erected
particular Churches, and having Endowed them with Lands, reserved to themselves
and their Successors for ever a right and power to confer them on such as were
meetly qualified for the same; And this they did in imitation of those Kings,
who then Reigning here, erected Cathedrals, Abbeys, Priories, Churches, etc.
Co. 2. par. Instit. Dod. Treatise of Advows.
.

(5.) An Advowson, being a right of Presentation (as aforesaid) reserved by a
Founder to himself, his Heirs and Successors, is applicable to other
Ecclesiastical Foundations, as well as those of Churches, as appears by the
several Quare Impedits brought on several occasions As in case of Disturbance
to a Prebendary. 7. R. 2. Qu. Impedit 21. 13 R. 2. Bre. 643. Or of Disturbance
in a Presentation to a Vicarage, 5 Ed. 3. Quare Imp. To a Provostry, 17 E. 3.
20. To a Chapel, 17 E. 3. 12.
: so that albeit it has been said, that by the Grant of a Church the Advowson
passed Per Parning, 7 Ed. 3. f. Qu. Imp. 9.
, and when he gave the one, he gave the other; yet is the word Advowson not
improperly applicable to any thing wherein a Quare Impedit will lie. And he in
whose Right such Presentation is rested, is by the Provincial Constitutions of
this Realm termed Advocatus Ecclesiae, because (as the Constitution has it)
tueri and defenders Ecclesiam and ejus jura tenetur, ad instar Advocati qui in
Judicio Causam alicujus defendit. Lindw. Provin. Constable. de Foro Comp. cap.
Circumspecte, ver. Advocatus. Which every Patron is obliged to do; whence
Patronus and Advocatus Ecclesiae are in effect Synonymous; yet in Lindwood we
have the Question put, whether there be any difference inter Patronum and
Advocatum Ecclesiae. Lindw. Constable. Prove. de homicidio, cap. Sacri, Gloss. ibid.
Where though the prevailing opinion be for the Negative, yet you will also
there find very Orthodox Authority for the contrary, and that Advocatus
intelligitur non pro Patrono, sed pro Defensore Ecclesiae: Gloss. ibid. as
appears there by Lindwood that Famous Canonist totius Orbis Britannici, who
being Doctor of Laws, Chaplain and Official to the Archbishop of Canterbury in
the time of H. 5. was by reason of his great Experience and Abilities in
National Laws as well as Provincial Constitutions, sent as his Ambassador to
the Crowns of Spain and Portugal; and at his Return about An. 1422. compiled
what now is extant to his Immortal Memory, and Dedicating the same to the said
Archbishop, it was after about An. 3505 (being first revised by Wolfgangus
Hopylius) printed at Paris, at the cost and charges of William Bretton Merchant
of London. Mention hereof is here made, in regard of the plentiful use here
made of this Eminent Author in this Ecclesiastical Abridgment, and that rather
in the midst of this Subject touching Advowsons, as presuming, that for the
reason aforesaid a Quare Impedit will not lie in the case of this digression.

(6.) The Right of Patronage is, it seems by the Common Law, a real Right fixed
or vested in the Patron or Founder in the Church, wherein he has as absolute a
property and Ownership as any man has to his Lands and Tenements, or any
Freehold whatever Vid. 8 Ass. 29. 13 Ass. 22. 11 H. 4. 84. Pasch. 9 Ed. 3.
Quare Imp. 30. Co. 2. par. Instit. acc. and 38 Ass. 22. The Prior of Plymton 's
Case. Co. 2. par. Inst. acc.
: And that the Advowson or Patrons Right to Present is a Temporal and not a
Spiritual Inheritance. For at the first Creation of a Manor, if Lands were
given to erect a Church thereon, the Advowson thereof became appendant to that
Manor, and reputed as parcel thereof, which being Temporal, the other became
so also, as an Accessory to the Principal; for which reason such an Advowson
passes by the Grant of the Manor cum pertinentiis 9 Ed. 4. 39. 33 H. 6. 33.
Co. 10. par. Whistler's Case.
. Yea, it has been adjudged, That by the Grant of a Manor, without making any
mention of the Advowson, the Advowson also passed, because it was parcel of,
and appendant to the Manor Co. ibid. vid. acc. Trin. 8 Jac. C. B. Walter and
Bould's Case. Bolstr. 1. par. 32, 33, 34.
. And it has been ever held, That by the Common Law an Advowson is a Temporal
Inheritance, for that it lies in Tenure, and may be holden either of the King,
or of a Common person; and has been held of the King in Capite, or in Knights
Service Vid. 12 H. 17. 19. 21 Ed. 3. 5.
. And were a Quare Impedit has been brought, the Plaintiff has counted, that
the Defendant held the Advowson of him by Homage and Fealty The Abbot of
Webback's Case.
. And it has been agreed, that an Advowson does lie in Tenure, and that the
Lord may distrain in the Glebe-Lands for Rents and Services, the Patron's
Cattle, if any be there found upon the Land, but not the Cattle of a Stranger
The Prior of Castle-Acre's Case verse. the Prior of Butley. Hugh. Abridg verb.
Advowson. Sect. 3.. 4.
.

(7.) Other Reasons, it seems, there are at the Common Law, which prove, That
an Advowson is a Temporal Inheritance; for that a Writ of Right of Advowson
lies for him, who has an Estate in an Advowson in Fee-simmple, or Right of an
Estate therein to him and his Heirs in Fee-simple. Which Writ being Quod clamat
tenere de te 15 H. 8. per omnes Justiciarios, and vid. F. N. B. tit. Droit de
Advowson.
, does suppose a Tenure, and lies not only for the whole Advowson, but also
for some part thereof. As also because a Praecipe quodreddat lies for it, as
has been Adjudged 20 Ed. 4. 15.
. As also that a Common Recovery may be suffered of an Advowson, as has been
likewise Adjudged 35 Eliz. C. B. Crocher and Dermer's Case. Poph. 22. vid. Co.
5. par. 40. and 2. par. 74. and 1. par. 56. acc.
. As also because an Advowson, as other Temporal Inheritances, may be forfeited
by Attainder of Treason or Felony, or lost by Usurpation, six months Plenarty,
Recusancy, Outlawry, Negligence or Lacks of Presentment, Translation, or
Cesser, and given away in Mortmain Vid. 9 H. 6. 57. Co. 10. par. 55. The
Chancellor of Oxford 's Case.
. As also for that the Wife shall be endowed thereof, and have the third
Presentment; and the Husband shall be Tenant thereof by the Courtesy; also it
is successively devisable among Coparceners, that the priority of Presentment
shall be in the eldest Sister; likewise it may pass by way of Exchange for
other Temporal Inheritance; and albeit during the vacancy of the Church it be
not in it self valuable, yet otherwise it is as to an Incumbent; and by Great of
all Lands and Tenements an Advowson does pass, if not by Livery, yet by Deed is
transferable as other Temporal Inheritances Parsons Law, 39, 40. vid. the
Authorities there vouched.
, and pass with the Manors whereunto they are appendant by Prescription,
unless there were before a severance by Grant, Deed, Partition, or other Legal
Act Co. Inst. 1. par.
; which Prescription is so requisite to Appendancy, as without which it cannot
well be at all 13 Eliz. Dyer 299. in Evileigh's Case.
.

(8.) An Advowson in Gross is understood as under a more beneficial
qualification, than that which is Appendant; and that which is Appendant, may
by severance become an Advowson in Gross: And therefore in the Case, where a
man being seized of a Manor whereto an Advowson was Appendant, and by Deed
granting one Acre belonging to that Manor una cum Advocatione Ecclesiae, did
further by the same Deed give and grant the said Advowson; the Question was,
whether the Advowson did pass as Appendant to the Acre, or as an Advowson in
Gross? And the better Opinion was, That by that Grant the Advowson was severed
from the Manor, and was become in Gross; for that the Deed shall be taken most
beneficial for the Grantee to have the Advowson in Gross, and not as Appendant
to the Acre. But in that case it was Agreed, If the whole Manor had been
granted, then the Advowson had passed as Appendant, and not in Gross 33 H. 8.
Dyer 48. vouched per ^ughs in his Abridg. verb. Adv^^son,. 4. ubi, To what
things Advowsons may be Appendant, and to what, not and how in several select
Cases. vid. Hughes, ubi supr.
. Yet an Advowson Appendant to a Manor, descending to diverse Coparceners,
making Partition of such Manor without mentioning the Advowson, remains
Appendant notwithstanding such Division and Severance from the Manor Co. 8.
par. 8. Wiat Weild's Case.
: Yea, although the Manor of D. to which an Advowson is Appendant, be granted,
and by the same Deed the Advowson also of the Church of D. So, as it is named
no otherwise than in Gross, yet it shall thereby pass only as Appendant By the
Opinion of Finehden, in 48 Ed. 3. Hughes, ibid.
.

(9.) If the King makes a Lease for life of a Manor, to which an Advowson is
Appendant, without making any mention of the Advowson, the Advowson remains in
the King as in Gross; as was granted by the Justices: And it was said by them,
That in such case by Grant of the Reversion, Habendum the Reversion with the
Advowson, the Advowson passes not to the Patentee, for that the Advowson was
severed, and became in Gross as to the Fee Co. 11. par. 47. Liford's Case.
. And in another Case, where it was found before Commissioners, That A. was
seized of a Manor, to which an Advowson was appendant, and that he was a
Recusant convict; whereupon two parts of the Manor were seized into the Kings
hands, who leased the Manor, with Appurtenances, and all profits and
commodities, and Hereditaments to the same belonging, unto J. S. for 21 years,
if A, etc. and afterward the Church became void. In this Case it was held,
That albeit there was no mention in the seizure of the Advowson, yet the
Presentment belonged to the King, and that the King alone should Present.
Secondly, That there were no words in the Kings Grant to J. S. to carry away
the Advowson from the King, and that notwithstanding that Grant, the Advowson
remained still Appendant to the Manor Mich. 14 Jac. C. B. rot. 651. The
Chancellor of Cambridge and Walgrove's Case. Hobb. 127.
.

(10.) By words implying merely matter of profit or things gainful, as Cum
omnibus commoditatibus, Emolumentis, proficuis, advantagiis, and the like, an
Advowson will not pass, because it is contrary to the nature of an Advowson
regularly; and therefore the Advowson of a Vicarage appendant to a Prebend,
passed not by a Lease with such words of several parts of the Prebend to which
such Advowson was appendant Mich. 16 Jac. C. B. rot. 1877. Jo. London, and the
Collegiate Church of St. Mary Southwell's Case. Hob. Rep.
. Not will an Advowson appurtenant to a Manor, pass by the Grant of an Acre of
Land parcel of that Manor cum pertinentiis; otherwise, if the Grant be of the
Manor it self cum pertinentiis Trin. 8. Jac. B. R. Walter and Bold's Case.
Bolstr. 1. par. fol. 35.
. Yet in a Case where the King being seized of a Manor to which an Advowson
was appendant, granted the Manor to J. S. for life, and then granted the
Manor to J. D. after the death of J. S. Habendum cum Advocatione, and then by
Parliament the King reciting both the Grants, confirmed them by Parliament: yet
it was Adjudged in that Case, That the Advowson did not pass 33 H. 6. 33.
vouched in Colt and the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfields Case Mich. 10 Jac. C.
B. Rot. 2642. Hob. Rep.
. Nor will an Advowson (if once Appendant) pass without special words of Grant
thereof, which may not be strained in the construction thereof to an unusual or
unreasonable sense, for which reason an Appropriation will not pass by the name
of an Advowson; but (as aforesaid) an Advowson of a Vicarage may be Appendant
to a Prebend; All which has been Resolved in the forecited Case Mich. 16 Jac.
C. B. dict. Londons Case.
. And if Tenant in Tail be of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, the
Church being full, and he grants proximam Advocatione, and then dies; by his
death the Grant becomes merely void, as was also Resolved in Walter and Bould's
Case Trin. 8 Jac. B. R. Bolstr. 1. par. 35.
.

In a Quare Impedit, The Case was between the Chancellor and Scholars of
Oxford, and the Bishop of Norwich, and others. The Plaintiff counted upon the
Statute of 3 Jac. That J. S. being Owner of an Advowson, 2 Jac. was a Recufant
convict, and that afterward the Church became void, and so they by the Statute
ought to Present. More's Rep.
One of the Defendants pleaded, That the Advowson was appendant to a Manor,
and that two parts of the Manor were seized into the Kings hands by Process
out of the Exchequer, and that the King by his Letters Patents granted the Two
parts to the Defendant with the Appurtenances, and granted also all
Hereditaments (but Advowsons were not mentioned in the Letters Patents) and so
said, the Presentation did belong to the Defendant: It was Resolved, That the
Advowson did not pass by the word [ Appurtenances] without mention of Advowson
or words Adeo plena and integra, and in tam amplo modo and forma; as the
Recusant had the Manor.

(11.) In case a Patron be Outlawed, and the Church becoming void a Stranger
does usurp, and presents his Clerk to the Avoidance, and Six months pass, and
afterward the King, being entitled to the Avoidance by reason of the Outlawry,
bring a Quare Impedit against the Incumbent as being in wrongfully, and remove
him: By this means the Advowson is recontinued again to the Rightful Patron,
whereof he was ousted by the Usurpation, who upon the reversal of the Outlawry
shall Present, in case the Church becomes void again Co. 1. par. Instit. 363.
.

(12.) A man has Three Avoidances granted him of one Church at one time and by
one Deed; The Church becomes void; the Grantor by Usurpation presents his
Clerk, who is Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, afterward the Church becomes
void again. In that case the Grantee shall present to the Second Avoidance, for
that the former Presentation made by the Grantor usurping, did not put the
Grantee out of all the Avoidances; and Adjudged accordingly Mich. 18 Eliz. C. B.
.

(13.) A. seized of a Manor with an Advowson appendant, presented B. who was
Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted; afterward A. fells the Manor to which the
Advowson was appendant, unto J. S. The Church becomes void by the death of B.
whereupon the Queen 15 Feb. 1588. Present J. D. by these words, viz. Per mortem
naturalem Incumbeatis ibid. vacant. who thereupon 20th of the said Feb. was
Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted by Letters of Institution, Per Dominam
Reginam veram and indubitatam Patronam. The said J. D. dies: The King presents
R. in these words, viz. Ad nostram Praesentationem sive ex pleno jure, sive per
Lapsum Temporis, sive alio quocunque modo spectant. The only Question was,
Whether, notwithstanding all this matter, the Advowson did remain Appendant or
not? And it was Adjudged by the Court, That the Advowson remained Appendant,
notwithstanding the Queens presentation of J. D. For it appeared, there was no
color of Title to the Queen to present; no Lapse, for the Presentation,
Institution, etc. were all in the same month, wherein the Advoidance was: And
it was no Usurpation by the Queen, because the Presentation supposed a Right
where none was, and so was void; for the Queen meant to do no wrong: And upon
the same reason the Presentation of R. afterward by the King was void. And it
was then further holden by the Court, That the Presentation of J. D. being
void, it was but a Collation of the Bishop, which makes no disappendancy, nor
so much as a plenarty against the Rightful Patron, but that he may bring his
Quare Impedit when he will; and if the Bishop receive his Clerk, the other is
out ipso facto Hill. 17 Jac. C. B. rot. 1840. Gaudy and the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Rone's Case. Hob. 301. Hugh Abridg. ver. Advows. Sect. 6.. ult.
.

(14.) Although an Advowson be a kind of Reversion of a right of Presentation
to a Living or Benefice called Spiritual, yet it is now in the nature of other
Temporal Inheritances; and therefore he that has this Right in him, may either
devise it by Will, or grant it by Deed, in Fee, or for life, or for years, as
other things Co. 5. 56. 15 H. 7. 8.
. And in regard an Advowson or Jus Patronatus refers to and respects not the
Oblations and Tithes belonging to the Church, but rather the Building thereof,
with the Ground whereon it is built, and the Endowment thereof; if therefore
any debate or controversy should happen to arise touching any of these last
mentioned, it might prejudice the Patron as to his Right to the Advowson; but
if the controversy be only touching the other, viz. the Oblations or Tithes,
whether Great or Small, the Jus Patronatus will remain good and entire to the
Patron notwithstanding such Controversy, provided the Suit does not extend and
be for a fourth part of the whole belonging to the Church, Lindw. de Foro Comp.
cap. Circumspecte, verb. Item si Rector, and gl. ibid. verb. quarta pars. And
he to whom the Right of Advowson of any Church appertains, is termed Avowe for
distinctions sake, to discriminate him from those who sometime Present in the
Name of another, as a Guardian that presents in the Name of his Minor: as also
to difference him from such as have only for term of their Lives, or of years,
or by Intrusion or Disseisin, the Lands to which an Advowson appertains; the
Avowe, properly and strictly taken, being only he who may Present in his own
Right and in his own Name Britton, cap. 29.
.

(15.) It has been Adjudg'd, That an Advowson belonging to a Prebend will not
pass by a Lease thereof, albeit it has in it these words, viz. Commodities,
Emoluments, Profits and Advantages; because all these four words being of one
sense and nature, imply things gainful, which is contrary to the nature of an
Advowson regularly, as aforesaid; yet an Advowson may be yielded in value upon
a Voucher, and may be Assets in the hand of an Executor Dict. Cas. London verse.
the Collegiate Church of St. Mary Southwell.
; and in the foresaid Case of London verse. etc. it is said, That an
Appropriation, nor the Advowson of it, will not pass by the name of an
Advowson, yet an Advowson will be contained under the name of a Tenement 44 Ed.
3. 33. cited in dict. Cas.
. And where the King granted that Monks should have all their Possessions of
the Abbey in the Vacation for their sustentation; Ruled, that they should not
have the Advowsons, because no sustentation arose from them 39 H. 6. cited in
dict. Cas.
; nor will an Advowson, though it be appendant, pass in the Kings Grant,
without special words Mich. 14. Jac. C. B. Rot. 647. Chancellor, etc. of
Cambridge verse. Walgrave. Hob. Rep.
; yet in the Case of a Recusant convict, to whose Lands an Advowson is
appendant, the seizure of Two parts of his Land for the King is a Seizure by
consequence of two parts of the Advowson, without mention of it Cas. ibid.
; and if the King have but Two parts of an Advowson, yet he shall Present
alone, for no Subject can be Tenant in Common with the King; who (though he be
no party to a Quare Impedit) yet if his Title appear clear for him against both
parties, shall have a Writ awarded for him to the Bishop Ibid.
. Or if the King join issue in a Quare Impedit, which is not found fully for
him, yet if a Title do any way appear, the Court must award a Writ to the
Bishop for him Dom. Rex verse. Bishop of Rechester, and Jackson his Clerk. Hob.
Rep.
.

(16.) A. brought Quare impedit against D. The Plaintiff counted that the
Defendant had disturbed him to Present ad Vicariam de D. and showed, That the
Queen was seized of the Rectory of D. and of the Advowson of the Vicarage of D.
and by her Letters Patents gave unto the Plaintiff Rectoriam praedictam cum
pertinentiis, and etiam Vicariam Ecclesiae praedict. And it was holden by the
whole Court, That the Advowson of the Vicarage by these words does not pass;
nor so in the Case of a Common person, much less in the Case of the King: But
if the Queen had granted Ecclesiam suam of D. then, by Walmsley Justice, the
Advowson of the Vicarage had passed Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. C. B. Rot. 458. Case
Ashegell verse. Dennis. Leon. Rep.
.

(17.) Although he, who after the death of a Parson Incumbent has Right of
Presentation in him, does not upon a Disturbance bring a Quare Impedit not
Darrein Presentment, but suffers a Stranger to usurp upon him; yet he may
have a Writ of Right of Advowson; but this Writ lies not for him, unless he
claim to have the Advowson to him and his Heirs in Fee-simple Term. Law verb.
Quare Impedit.
; which Advowson is valuable, though the Presentment be not Trim. 31 Eliz. C.
B. Smalwood verse. Bishop of Lichfield. Leon. Rep.
.

(18.) The Queen seized of an Advowson being void, the Ancestor of P.
Presented, and so gained it by Usurpation, and then the Church being void he
Presented again, his Clerk dies, and then the Queen grants the Advowson to Y.
the Plaintiff, who brings a Quare Impedit in the Queens Name, supposing that
this Usurpation did not put the Queen out of Possession: It was argued, That
the Grant could not pass without special words, because it is in the nature of
a Chose in Action: And Dyer, Mead, and Windham held, That this Usurpation did
gain possession out of the Queen, and that she should be put to her Writ of
Right of Advowson; but the Opinion of Anderson Chief Justice was clearly, That
the Queen was not out of Possession; for he said, That it was a Rule in our
Books, that of a thing which is of Inheritance, the act of a Common person will
not put the Queen out of possession: But if she had only a Chattel, as the next
Advowson, then perhaps it is otherwise. But Mead and Windham very earnestly
held the contrary, relying on the Book of 18 E. 3. where Shard said, That if
the King had an Advowson in his own Right, and a Stranger, who had no Right,
happen to Present, it puts the King out of Possession. And the King shall be
put to his Writ of Right, as others shall Vid. 47 E. 3. 14. b. 18 E. 3. 16.
. The Defendant alleged Two Presentations in his Ancestor after the Title of
the King, and demanded Judgment if the King should have a Writ of Possession,
and the Plea was admitted to be good. But after Pasch. 25 Eliz. Judgment was
given for the Queen, for that she might very well maintain a Quare Impedit, and
the two Presentiments did not put her out of possession Pasch. 28 Eliz. C. B.
Yardly verse. Pesean. Owens Rep:
.

(19.) In a Quare Impedit by G. against the Bishop of L. and D. Incumbent: The
Case was, That a Manor with the Advowson Appendant was in the hands of the
King, and the Church became void, and the King grants the Manor with the
Advowson: If the Grantee shall have the Presentation, or the King, was the
question. All the Justices held clearly, That the Avoidance would not pass,
because it was a Chattel vested. And Periam said, that in case of a Common
person without question an Advowson appendant would not pass by such Grant; for
if the Father die, it shall go to his Executor: but if it be an Advowson in
Gross, in case of a Common person there is some doubt: But in the Principal
Case all the Judges held ut supra, and said, That so it was in 9 E. 3. 26.
Quare Impedit 31. and in Dyer in the Case of the Church of Westminster: But F.
N. B. is contrary, 33. N. Mich. 29. and 30 Eliz. Sr. Tho. Gorge. verse. Bishop
of Lincoln, and Dalton Incumbent. Owen Rep.
.

(20.) Of Advowsons there are three Original Writs, whereof one is a Writ of
Right, the other two of Possession, viz. Darrein Presentment, and Quare
Impedit. And where an Advowson descends unto Parceners, though one Present
twice, and usurpeth upon his Coheir; yet he that was negligent shall not be
clearly barred, but another time shall have his turn to Present when it falls
St. 13 E. 1. cap. 5. Vid. Rast. pla. fo. 101, 144, 496. and Stat. 2 and 3 Ed.
6. 13.
. And by the Statute of 3 Jac. 5. every Recusant Convict is utterly disabled to
Present to any Ecclesiastical Living, or to Collate or Nominate to any Donative
whatsoever, the Advowson of every such Recusant being left to the disposition
of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge St. 3 Jac. c. 5.
. Also by the Statute of 13 E. 1. 5. it is directed, what Action shall be
maintained by him in the Reversion, who is disturbed to Present after the
Expiration of a particular Estate; where there is also provided a Remedy for
him in the Reversion or Remainder, or others that have right, where there is an
Usurpation of an Advowson during any particular Estate: And that Judgments
given in the Kings Courts touching Advowsons shall not be avoided by Surmizes,
but by lawful means St. 13 E. 1. cap. 5.
. Likewise it is Statute Law to hold, That Advowsons shall not pass from the
King but by Special words; for when the King does give or grant Land or a
Manor with the Appurtenances, unless he make express mention in his Deed of
Advowsons of Churches, when they fall, belonging to such Manor or Land, they
are reserved to him, notwithstanding the word [ Appurtenances,] albeit among
Common persons it has been otherwise observed St. 7 Ed. 2. 15. and Co. lib.
10. fo. 63. and Dyer, fo. 350.
; nor is it lawful to purchase an Advowson, during the dependancy of a Suit at
Law concerning the same St. 13. Ed. 1. c. 49.
.

(21.) If a Feme Covert be seized of an Advowson, and the Church becomes void,
and the Wife dies, the Husband shall Present Dyer 26. 9 Ed. 4. 47. a. Co.
supr. Lit. 120. 14 H. 4. 12.
. Where Parson and Vicar be Endowed in one Church, and the Vicarage becomes
void, the question is, To whom the Advowson of the Vicarge does belong, and who
in that case shall be said to be the Patron of the Vicarage? Whether the Patron
of the Parsonage, or the Parson? It seems the Books at Common Law, the Judges
and the Court, were divided in Opinion touching this point 17 E. 3. 51. Parsons
Law, cap. 23.
; some of the Judges were of Opinion, That the Advowson of the Vicarage
appertains to the Parson; Others, that it belongs to the Patron: Such as
inclined, that it is in the Patron Mich. 16 E. 3. Fitz. Q. Imp. 145. by
Parninge and Hill.
, gave for reason, That the Ordinary cannot make a Vicar without the assent of
the Patron, 5 E. 2. Quare Impedit 165. puts the Case, That although the
Vicarage be Endowed with the assent of the Patron and Ordinary, yet the
Advowson of the Vicarage does remain in the Parson, because the same is parcel
of the Advowson of the Parsonage Parsons Law, c. 23.
. And 16. E. 3. Grants. 56. it was a question, Whether by the Grant of the
Advowson of the Church, the Advowson of the Vicarage did pass? and there it was
said by Stone, That it does pass as Incident to the Parsonage Ibid. 17 E. 3.
Grants, 66. 13 R. 2. Jurisdiction, 19. 16 E. 3. Man's Defaults, 166.
. And in regard the Vicar is as the Parsons Substitute, and his Endowment
originally only as a Maintenance for him in officiating the Cure for the case
of the Parson, whose Concern it is to see that he be a fit and able person
sufficient for the Cure, it should thence seem rational that the Parson should
be his Patron, to Present such an one to the Vicarage as shall be sufficient
for the Cure; for which reasons the Patronage of the Vicarage should seem
rather to belong unto the Parson, than to the First Patron of the Parsonage
Appropriate.

(22.) An Advowson cannot, it seems, at the Common Law be called a Demesne, for
that it is not such a thing as a man has a Manual occupation or possession of,
as he has of Lands, Tenements, and Rents, whereof he may say in his Pleading,
That he was seized thereof in his Demesne as of Fee, which he cannot say that
has only the Advowson of a Church, because it lies not, as the other, in
Manual occupation: And therefore in the case of Advowson of a Church, he may
only say that he was seized as of Fee, and not in his Demesne as of Fee Littl.
Tenures, l. 1. c. 1. verse. fin.
, whether it be an Advowson in Gross or Appendant, which Appendancy is held to
be for the most part by Prescription, and must relate to such things as are in
their own nature of a perpetual continuance; for which reason it is, That
Advowsons cannot be said to be Appendant to Rents, Services, and the like,
because such things are extinguishable Co. 4. Terringham's Case.
. And although an Advowson be not properly said to be a Demesne, yet it may be
Appendant to a Demesne, as of Lands or things Corporeal and Perpetual, and
therefore (as supposed) not to a House of habitation, merely quatenus such, yet
to the Soil, whereon the House is erected; whereby the Law (which has the
clearest prospect of Casualties at a distance) has provided, that the Advowson
shall stand, though the House fall 10 H. 7. 13. b. by Reeble. Pars. Law, cap 8.
Ubi, 16 H. 7. 9. by Read.
; but an Advowson Disappendant and in Gross, which in man has alone, and not
by reason of any other thing, but severed from the Lands to which it was
Appendant, such an Advowson is exempt from diverse prejudicial Incidents which
the other, viz. the Appendant, cannot well avoid. And where a Subject or Common
person has an Advowson Appendant to a Manor, and there be an Usurpation upon
him, by a Presentation made by a Stranger, whose Clerk is in for Six months,
though this makes the Advowson of such Common person Disappendant to his
Manor; yet it is otherwise in case of the King, who may grant the Advowson
notwithstanding such Usurpation; for a man cannot put the King out of
possession either by Presentation or Usurpation, as has been Adjudged Mich.
13, 14 Eliz. Bendioes, dd. ^'Opinion del Curl. Hob. Rep. vid. 16 E. 3 F. Q^.
Impedit, 67.
. Nor does the King's Presentation by Lapse sever the Advowson from the Manor,
or cause it to become disappendant, as in Gawdy's Case against the Archbishop
of Canterbury and Others, was likewise Adjudged; in which Case it was also said
by Habard Chief Justice, That neither does a wrongful Collation of the Bishops
make any Disappendancy, nor any binding Plenarty against the true Patron; but
that he may not only bring his Quare Impedit when he please, but also Present
upon him seven years after Hill. 17 Jac. rot. 184. Case Gaudy verse. Archb. of
Cant. and dies. Hob. Rep.
. Also, whereas it was said before, That an Advowson cannot be Appendant to
things Extinguishable, as to Rents, Services, and the like, so it seems at the
Common Law an Advowson in Possession cannot be Appendant to a Reversion
expectant upon an Estate for life; for the Case was, The King seized of a
Manor with an Advowson Appendant, granted the Manor to J. S. for life, and
then granted the Manor to J. D. after the death of J. S. Habendum una cum
Advocatione; and then by Parliament the King reciting both the Grants,
confirmed them by Parliament, yet the Advowson passed not Case of the Abbess of
Sion, 38 H. 6. 33. Cit. in Colt and Glovers verse. Bishop of Coventry and Lichf.
Mich. 10 Jac. Rot 2642. Hob. Rep.
. Finally, whereas also it has been Adjudged (as aforesaid) that the King
cannot be put out of possession either by Presentation or Usurpation, this
seems to refer only as to the Kings Advowson, and not as to his present
Presentation; for the Opinion of Sir H. Hobart Chief Justice is, That although
the King may be dispossessed of his present Presentation, he cannot be so of
his Advowson, and therefore he may still grant it, notwithstanding the
Usurpation, as was Judged in a Writ of Error, upon a Judgment given to the
contrary, between the King and Campion for the Vicarage of Newton Valence
Pasch. 14 Jac rot. 1030. Lord Stanhope verse. the Bishop of Lincoln, and others.
Hob. Rep.
.

(23.) A Donative in the Kings Gift may be with Cure of Souls, as the Church of
the Tower of London is a Donative in the Kings Gift with Cure; as in the Case
of Fletcher and Mackaller, where Information was brought upon the Stat. 31
Eliz. of Simony for procuring him to be promoted to the Church of the Tower for
money; and per Curiam, it well lies Mich. 9 Car. B. R. inter Fletcher and
Mackaller.
.

(24.) The Queen has the Advowson of the Vicarage of H. and grants the
Vicarage to J. S. It was the Opinion of all the Justices, that the Advowson
passes not; for that the Vicarage is another thing than the Advowson of the
Vicarage Cro. par. 1.
. The Queen seized of a Manor, to which an Advowson was appendant, granted the
Manor cum Advocatione Ecclesiae, the Church being then void: It was Adjudged
the Avoidance did not pass, but the Queen should Present pro hac vice Hill. 29
Eliz. Sir Tho. Gorges Case. Mores Rep.
. And in the Queen and Hussie's Case it was Resolved, That a double
Presentation would not put the Queen out of possession, if she has Right Mores
Rep.
. And in Stephens and Clarks Case it was Resolved, That the Grant of the next
Avoidance to one during the Avoidance, is void in Law More. ib.
.

CHAP. XX.
Of Appropriations.
1. The great Antiquity of Appropriations; a Conjecture of their Original;
whether Charles Martell was the occasion thereof? they were prohibited in
England anciently by the Pope; whether they can be otherwise than by the King,
or some Authority derived from him? 2. How the End and use of Appropriations is
changed at this day from what it was in the Original Institution thereof. 3.
Appropriators why called Proprietarii; The care of R. 2. in making Provision
for the Vicar in case of Appropriations; Requisites of Law to make an
Appropriation. 4. A further discovery of the Original, use, and ends of
Appropriations, and under what qualifications. 5. Whether Appropriations were
anciently grantable to Nunneries? 6. Appropriations not now to be questioned,
as to their Original. 7. A Vicarage endowed may be Appropriated, but not to a
Parson. 8. Three considerable Points of Law resolved by the Justices touching
Appropriations. 9. Whether an Advowson may be Appropriated without a
Succession? Appropriations usually were to Corporations or Persons Spiritual.
10. How a Church Appropriate may be disappropriated. 11. In Appropriations the
Patron and his Successors are perpetual Parsons. 12. Whether an Appropriation
of a Parsonage without endowment of the Vicarage be good? Also, whether an
Appropriation may be made without the Kings License?
(1.) IT is a question at this day undecided, Whether Princes or Popes were the
first Authors of Appropriations? the practice whereof by each of them is of
great Antiquity; but whether in imitation of Charles Martell's Sacrilegious
President (the first by whom Tithes were ever violated in the Christian World)
is but a Supposition rather than any Assertion among Historians. It was long
since Traditionally Recorded in History, that about the year 650. when the said
Charles Martell, Father of Pipin, after King of France, in defense of his
Country against the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandals, had slain no less than 34500
of those Infidel Sarazens in one Battle, he did not restore to such of the
Clergy of France their Tithes, as from whom under a fair pretense of supporting
the charges of the War thereby, he had (upon a Promise of Restitution thereof
so soon as the War should cease) obtained the same; but instead thereof
gratified such of the Nobility, as had assisted him in the War, by the grant
thereof to them and their Heirs for ever. But whether this Sacrilege (if it be
true) had such a malign influence upon succeeding Princes in After-ages, and
other Kingdoms, and also upon the Popes, as some Historiographers do more than
conjecture, is not so evident as that which is reported by Ingulphus Abbot of
Crowland, touching Eight Churches to have been Appropriated to that Abbey by
several Saxon Kings; and though by their Charters, yet whether by such
exclusively to all Ecclesiastical Authority, is not so certain, as that William
the Conqueror, without asking leave of the Pope, Appropriated three
Parish-Churches to the Abbey of Battle, which he built in memory of his
Conquest; and his youngest Son H. 1. nigh twenty in one day to the Cathedral of
Sarum by his Letters Patents, together with the Tithes of those Parishes which
his elder Brother William, Surnamed Rufus, had depopulated and disecclesiated
in New-Forrest in Hantshire. Notwithstanding which, the Pope (who understood
his Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical better than to part with it upon any
Presidents of Temporal Usurpations) does frequently in his Decretals, without
any contradiction, rather assume than arrogate this Right unto himself, as a
Prerogative of the Apostolic See, and granted to several Religious Orders this
Privilege of taking Ecclesiastical Benefices at Laymens hands by the
mediation of the Diocesan, who at a moderate and indifferent rate (as one Moity
of the Annual profits of the Benefice) was to be a Medium or Expedient between
the Religious House and the Incumbent; but in process of time, partly by the
remisness of the Bishops in that point, and partly by the Covetousness of the
Monks and Friars in those days, the Incumbents proportion became at last so
inconsiderable, that Pope Urban the Fifth by his Legate Othobon, about the year
1260 was forced to inhibit all the Bishops here in England from Appropriating
any more Churches to any Monastery or oaths Religious Houses, save only in such
cases where Charity might prevail in derogation of Law; and under this Proviso
also, That the Bishops should assign a competent proprotion of the Parochial
Fruits for the Maintenance of the Incumbent, according to the annual value
thereof, in case the new Appropriators did it not within Six months next after
such Appropriation; but this Constitution not taking the effect expected, a
convenient Maintenance for the Vicar was otherwise provided for by Two
Statutes, the one made by R. 2. the other by his Successor H. 4. So that upon
the whole it may be rationally inferred, that these Appropriations originally
came, partly by the Act of Ecclesiastics, and partly by the Laity. But what
way soever they came, this is and has been held for Law within this Realm,
That albeit the Pope takes upon him to be Supreme Ordinary, yet no
Appropriations made by him, or by any Authority derived from him, Coke. 5. par.
11, 2, 13. acc.
were ever allowed or approved of by the Laws of this Realm; it being held,
That no Appropriations within this Realm can be made but by the King, or by
Authority derived from him, and by his License, and that all other
Appropriations are void in Law. An Appropriation may be by the King Sole where
he is Patron, but it may not be by the Patron Sole: Grendon's Case in Plowden.
and 17 E. 3. 39. An Appropriation cannot be without the King's License. Ward's
Case Poph. Rep. Nor will the Objection hold against the King, Coke 5 par. 10.
in Cawde^'s Case.
to say, No man can make an Appropriation of any Church, having Cure of Souls
(the same being a thing merely Ecclesiastical, and to be made by some
Ecclesiastical person) but he only who has Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; Coke
ib. and 11. par. in Fridle and Napper's Case.
for such Jurisdiction the King has, and is such a Spiritual person, as may of
himself Appropriate any Church or Advowson, because in him resides the
Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction. T^m. 11 H. 4. 87. vouched in Davie's
Reports, as per Hugh Abridg. verb. App^ (...). Vid. 22. E. 3. (...) Coke 5.
par. vouched in Cawdri's Case.
And therefore in a Case of Commendams it was long since held, That an
Appropriation made by the Pope, could not be good without the King's License.
The like in a Case of Avoidance was vouched in Cawdrie's Case, That the Entry
into a Church by the Authority of the Pope only, was not good, and that he
could not Appropriate a Church to Appropriatees to hold to their own use. And
in Gyendon's Case it was Resolved by the Justices, That the Ordinary, Patron,
and King, ought to be assenting to every Appropriation; and that the Authority
which the Pope had usurped in this Realm, was by Parliament, 25 H. 8.
acknowledged to be in the King, Pasch. 19 El. C. B Plowd. Comment. 496. 497
etc. Grendon's Case.
who as Supreme Ordinary may Appropriate without the Bishop's Assent.

(2.) It seems therefore without any contradiction most evident, That
Appropriation or Impropriation, at the Original thereof was, when the Religious
Houses of the Romish Church, and the Religious persons, as Abbots, Priors, and
the like, had the Advowson of any Parsonage to them and their Successors,
obtaining License of their Holy Father the Pope, as also of Kings, and of their
Ordinaries, that they and their Successors should from thenceforth be the
Parsons thereof, that it should thenceforth be a Vicarage, and that a Vicar
should serve the Cure. So that at the beginning of this Spiritual Monopoly of
Appropriations, they were made only to such Spiritual persons as were qualified
to Administer the Sacramental Ordinances, and perform Divine Service.
Afterward the Grant thereof was gradually enlarged, and extended to Deans and
Chapters, though Bodies Politic, and as such not capable of performing such
Divine Services; yea, and (which was most Ridiculous as well as Impious) to
Nunus, which were Prioresses to some Nunnerics, but not Female-Preachers, as in
these days. All which was under a Pretense of maintaining Hospitality; and to
supply all defects hereby occasioned, there must be the Invention of a Vicar,
as the Appropriators Deputy, to serve them and the Cure, for which he had and
has the Tithe of Mint and Cummin, and such other small ossals of Tithes, as
might be spared out of the weightier Granaries thereof without breach of the
Laws of Hospitality, thereby Sacrilegiously robbing the Church to enrich
themselves. Thus the poor Vicar shall have something like a certain portion of
the Benefice, whilst the Abbot and the Covent, and their Lay-Successors, shall
be the Parsons, and receive the main Profits, and so live by the Altar without
waiting on it, and be Rebaptized by the Law with the name of Parsons
Imparsonces. This was that Anciently, which we now call Appropriation, which
cannot be made to begin in the Parson's Lifetime without his Assent; and is so
called, because they hold the Profits ad proprium suum usum; but if such
Advowsons happen to be recovered by Ancient Title, then and in such case the
Appropriation of the Parsonage is annulled Terms of Law, verb. Appropriation.
.

(3.) So that from the Premises it is evident, That this Appropriation or
Impropriation is an Annexation of an Ecclesiastical Benefice (which originally
was as it were in nullius Patrimonio) to the proper and peculiar use and
benefit of some Religious House, Bishopric, Dean and Chapter, College, etc.
Quod Divini juris est, id nullius est in bonis. Instit. de Rer. Divis..
Nullius. And it is supposed, That such as are Impropriators are so denominated,
for that now and hereby they are as Owners of a Feesimple by reason of the
perpetuity of their Title, whence called Proprietarii, whereas the Parsons of
any Ecclesiastical Benefice are properly, regularly, and ordinarily accounted
but Vsusructuarii, nor were they any other Originally, and not Domini as having
any Right of Fee-simple in them Litel. cir. Discontionance.
. It is further asserted by Dr. Cowell Cowel's Interpreter, verb. Approp.
, That before the Reign of R. 2. it seemed to be lawful to appropriate all the
Provenues of an Ecclesiastical Benefice to an Abbey or Priory, provided they
found one to serve the Cure; but then withal, that King, though he did not
suppress such Spiritual Monopolies, yet made a Law whereby he Ordained, That in
every License of Appropriations to be thenceforth granted in Chancery, it
should expressly be appointed and contained, That the Diocesan of the Place
should take care to provide an Annual competency or convenient sum of Money, to
be yearly issuing and paid out of the Parsonage-Fruits of that Parish toward
the maintenance of the Poor thereof, and for a sufficient subsistence and
endowment of the Vicar 15 R. 2. cap. 6.
. By the Statutes of 15 R. 2. pl. 6. and 4 H. 4. cap. 12. it is Provided, That
where a Church is Appropriated, a Vicar ought to be Endowed. If the Church be
full, the consent of the Diocesan, Patron, and Incumbent are necessary to an
Appropriation, after the Kings License first had and obtained in Chancery: But
if the Church be void, then the Diocesan and the Patron, upon such License from
the King, may conclude it Plowd. in Grendon's Case. fo. 496. b. etc.
. And as to the Dissolution of an Appropriation, the Patron's Presentation of
his Clerk to the Ordinary, with his Institution and Induction thereupon, is
sufficient to effect it, and puts the Benefice instatu quo F. N. B. 35. c. and
Co. l. 7. fo. 13.
.

(4.) Although Appropriations at their Original were tolerated only to persons
Ecclesiastical, and that in order to their better Hospitality, yet now they are
become as Lay-Inheritances, and adapted as well to persons Secular as
Ecclesiastical, and to Bodies Corporate as well as to persons Private or
Individual, who by virtue of their Right and Title to a Parsonage or Spiritual
Benefice, may take the Profits thereof to their own proper use, maintaining
only a Vicar upon the place to serve the Cure. Anciently and Originally these
Appropriations came from the Pope, afterward tolerated by Kings, and with the
consent and approbation of the Ordinary. So that now Appropriators and
Appropriations are no other than Lay-Parsons and Lay-Parsonages; which
Lay-Parsons as they are the Proprietaries, the Common Law allows them to be
called the Incumbents, and him, that has the Church by Appropriation, Parson
Imparsonee; and although they are said to be perpetually Appropriate Co. 11.
10. Plow 49. 6.
; yet may be Dissolved and become Propriate again, as in case a Corporation to
which it belonged, should be Dissolved; or in case the Advowson should be
Recovered by a Title more Legal and more Ancient than that of the
Appropriation; which as it was originally tolerated only to Spiritual persons,
so never without the Ordinary's Consent and approbation; consonant whereunto
are the Seventh and Eighth Canons of the Council held at Gangra, where a Curse
is pronounced upon all such as shall presume to give or receive the
Church-Fruits, otherwise than by the Bishops Dispensation, or of such other as
by the Bishop shall be appointed thereunto. Nor was it ever in the Primitive
times held lawful for mere Laymen and Secular persons to have any thing to do
with the Church Revenues; It was an Observation of Stephen Bishop of Rome, in
the second Century in his second Epistle, Laicis quoque, quamvis Religiosi
sint, nulla tamen de Ecclesiasticis Facultatibus disponendi legitur unquam
tributa facultas; which long after was also repeated in the Council of Lateran
under Innocent the Third, c. 44. And in the filling of such vacant
Appropriations as were granted to Religious Houses, the Bishop was empowered by
Law to oblige the Proprietaries to set out for the Vicar Incumbent such a
convenient Portion, as the Bishop in his Judgment should be pleased to allot.
Vid. Alex. 3. ad Epise. Wigorn. De Praeb. and Dig. c. de Monach.

(5.) Whereas it has been formerly hinted,. 5. that Appropriations have
heretofore been granted to Nunneries, Hobard Chief Justice is express against
it, That a Benefice with Cure could not be Approprietated to a Nunnery, though
the Pope made many de facto, Citing Dyer in Grindon's Case, saying, That it was
a thing Abominable, both against the Law of God 1 Cor. 14. 34.
, and the Law of this Realm; 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
for Beneficium non datur nisi propter Officium. Nor is it a sufficient Answer
to say, the Cure might be served by a Curate for them; for the question is not,
How they might make a Curate, but how themselves were capable; for it must
radically vest in the first Grantee, before it can go in title of Procuration
or Deputation to any other: For the proper and operative words which make an
Appropriation, are such as must make the Patron and his Successors perpetual
Parsons; yet if a mere Layman, or one wholly illiterate be Presented,
Instituted, and Inducted: this is not a mere Nullity, but he is a Parson de
facto, as having all the Ceremonies to make him such, and his Insufficiency
must receive Examination, yet no Dispensation can make him a lawful Parson, not
subject to Deprivation, because it is Malum in se; but in the other Case the
Incapacity appears in it self Mich. 10 Joc. rot. 2642. C. B. Coli and Glover
verse. Bishop of Cov. and Lichfield. Hob. Rep.
. Nor are Appropriations regularly grantable over, neither can they endure
longer than the Bodies, whereunto they were first Appropriate; because it
carries not only the Glebe and Tithes (which may be granted away) but it does
also give them the Spiritual Function, and does make the Parsons of the Church,
and does supply (so Hobart Chief Justice) Institution and Induction, which
being the highest parts of Trusts, cannot be estranged: And therefore the
Instrument of Appropriation runs in these words, viz. That they and their
Successors (not their Assigns) shall be Parsons, or by Periphrasis hold the
Church in proper use Hill. 15 Jac. Rot. 1510. W. Wright verse. Gilbert Gerrand
and Hildersham. Hob. Rep.
. Likewise when an Appropriation was made by the King as the Supreme Ordinary,
or by a Bishop as the Ordinary under him, the Instrument thereof did run in
these or the like words, viz. (if by the King) Authoritate nostra Regali; (if
by the Bishop with the King's Assent) then it was Authoritate nostra Ordinaria,
Ecclesiam Parochialem de B. tali, etc. Annectimus Appropriamus, and unimus per
Praesentes.

(6.) Appropriations of Ancient time are not now in these days to be
questioned as to the Original of them, if they have ever been so reputed and
taken for Impropriations Trin. 37 Eliz. in Can. Scace. Crimes and Smith's Case.
Co 12. par. 4.
. To which purpose it was Resolved in the time of Queen Elizabeth in Chancery
by Egerton Lord Chancellor of England, being assisted with the Principal
Judges, That although an Advowson does not pass by the Grant of the King in
strictness of Law, by the words cum pertinentiis; yet it shall be intended in
respect of the Ancient and continued possession, that there was a lawful Grant
of the King to H. B. etc. and all shall be presumed to be done, which might
make the Ancient Appropriation good: And the Reason thereof there given is, for
that if the Appropriation had been drawn in question in the Lifetime of any of
the Parties to it, they might have showed the truth of the matter: But after so
many Successions of Ages, in which the Church was esteemed to be rightfully
Appropriated, the Appropriation shall not now be drawn in question Hill. 4 Jac.
in Chancery, Predle, and Beard, and Wingfield's Case. Co. 12. par. 5.
. For the same reason a Procedendo was refused to be granted in Chancery in the
Case of the Lord St. John of Bletso and the Dean and Chapter of Gloucester, the
Court then giving for Reason, because the Defendant and those from whom he
claimed, time out of mind had had the possession of a Parsonage as Impropriate
(saving for some short time;) and because it shall be a dangerous President for
Owners of Impropriations, to maintain the Appropriations to be Perfect in all
points and circumstances requisite to an Absolute Appropriation, the
Appropriations being made of Ancient time Trin. 29 Eliz. in Chancery. Lord St.
John and the Dean and Chapter of Gloucester's Case. Vid. Co. 12. par. 3. acc.
. The like Resolution was given by the Court in Hunston and Cockett's Case,
viz. That whether an Appropriation be good or not, cannot now be called into
question, but shall be intended to be good, and to all requisite Circumstances
Mich. B Jac. B. R. Hunston and Cockett's Case. Cro. 2. par.
.

(7.) An Appropriation cannot in any case be made by the Patron himself only;
yet where the King is Patron, it may be made by him Sole. And although upon
every Appropriation there ought to be an Endowment of a Vicar, yet a Vicarage
it self Endowed, may (as has been held by the whole Court) be Appropriated,
but not to the Parson, and (as in the Book 21 H. 6.) is such a Vicarage, as may
afterward be dissolved Trin. 16 Jac. B. R. Ward's Case. Poph. 144, 145.
. And if a Lease be made of a Parsonage Impropriate by one, who has not any
thing therein during the life of the Incumbent, it will be void; nor can an
Appropriation be made to a Church which is Full of an Incumbent, but by Special
words Mich. 8 Eliz. Dyer 244. Bishop of. Cov. and Lichf Case. Vid. ibid. Jobson
and Michael's Case. Adjudg. in Chanc. acc. Vid. Co. 11. par. a. Co. 10. par.
48. in Lampitt's Case. Vid. 19 Eliz. Plow. Com. 500. The Opinion of Manwood in
Grendon's Case. acc. Hugh. Abridg. verb. Appropriations.
. It has also been held, That a Vicarage Perpetual could not be dissolved
after the Statute of 4 H. 4. and that the Pope had not any power to make any
Ordinance against that Statute, by which he has not any Right to meddle with
Advowsons, Benefices, etc. and that by his Bulls he cannot dispense with the
Law, though they tend in ordine ad Spiritualia Mich. 16 Jac. B. R. Britton and
Wade's Case. Cro. 2. par. 516, 517, 518.
.

(8.) Touching Appropriations there were Three considerable Points in Law,
Resolved by the Justices in Grendon's Case: (1) That none is capable of
Appropriation but a Body Corporate or Politic Spiritual, which has a
Succession: For that the effect of an Appropriation as to the first Institution
thereof, was to make the Body Politic perpetual Incumbent, and to have the
Rectory, and that he has the Cure of all the Souls of the Parishioners: and
therefore he must be a Spiritual person. (2) That the King, Ordinary, and
Patron, ought to be assenting unto every Appropriation; and that the Authority
which the Pope had usurped in this Realm, was by Parliament, An. 25 H. 8:
acknowledged to be in the King; and the King being Supreme Ordinary, might of
his own Authority and Jurisdiction make an Appropriation without the Assent of
the Bishop. (3) That an Appropriation may be made by Apt words, when the Church
is Full (as to say) That the Parson who is a Spiritual person, after that the
Church shall be void, shall be Parson, and may retain the Glebe, and the Fruits
of the Church to his proper use; and that the same shall be a good
Appropriation, when the Church shall be void by death or otherwise Pasch. 19
Eliz. C. B. Plowd. Com. 496 to 501, etc. Grendon's Case.
.

(9.) It is brought by way of Report to us, That it was the Opinion of the
Master of the Rolls in the great Case of Consultation, which was argued in the
Exchequer Chamber, the 18 H. 6. 21. a. That an Advowson could not be
Appropriate without a Succession, although that the Incumbent purchased the
Advowson by License to hold to his Own use. Where it was further said, That if
a Prior were seized of an Advowson to him and his Heirs, and he purchase
License of Appropriation, and that he and his Successors might hold the
Advowson to their own use; yet the Advowson shall descend to his Heirs: But in
such case, if he would have the Appropriation to be good, it were best to alien
the Advowson, and after to re-purchase it to him and his Successors; and then
the Appropriation will be good Hugh. Abridgm. verb. Appropriat.
. All Appropriations have been usually to Corporations or persons Spiritual,
and not to Bodies Politic, consisting of mere Laymen, or Lay-Corporations.
And in Alden and Tothil's Case it was in question, Whether the King, since the
Statute of 25 H. 8. might by his Letters Patents Appropriate a Church
Parochial, which was before Presentative, unto a Lay-Corporation, all the
Members of the Corporation being mere Laymen: which Case was not then Resolved
Trin. 9 Car. B. R. in Alden and Tathi^'s Case. Hugh. ibid.
.

(10.) As a Church Parochial might be Appropriated: so a Church which is
Appropriated to a Spiritual Corporation, may become disappropriate, if the
Corporation be-dissolved Vid. 3 E. 7. 4. Finch. Comment. 14. acc.
. Also if the Advowson of a Church were by License granted to a Prior and his
Successors, and afterward the same Church were Appropriated to him and his
Successors, so as thereby they became perpetual Parsons Imparsonees: In that
Case if the Wife of a Grantor were endowed of the Advowson, and Presented a
Clerk, who was Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, the Appropriation would be
defeated for ever; for the whole Estate of the Parson Imparsonee is thereby
avoided: And so it was Adjudged, 2 E. 3. 8. sed Quaere. For in the Case of
Lancaster and Lucas Pasch. 33 Eliz. B. R.
, it was held by the Court, That in such Case the Church was Disappropriated
but during the life of the Wife: and after her death it should remain as
Appropriated 33 Eliz. in B. R. Leon. 235.
.

(11.) Sir H. Hobart Chief Justice, in the Case of Colt and Glover against the
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield Mich. 10 Jac. rot. 2642.
, says, That the proper and operative word that does Appropriate, is to make
the Patron and his Successors Perpetual Parsons; and in the Case of Wright
against Gilbert Gerrard and Richard Hildersham Hill. 15 l. c. rot. 1510.
, That the Instrument of Appropriation runs in these words, That they and their
Successors (not their Assigns) shall be Parsons, or by Periphrasis hold the
Church in proper use; and the words of Appropriating are, that they may hold
Ecclesiam and Rectoriam in proprios usus, as in Grindon's Case; and says
further, that Appropriations cannot endure longer than the Bodies, whereunto
they were first Appropriate, because it carries not only the Glebe and Tithes,
but does also give the Spiritual Function, makes the Parsons of the Church, and
supplies Institution and Induction.

(12.) A Prior was seized of the Advowson of a Parsonage; the Church being
void, the Bishop gave him License to hold it to his proper use, and there was
not any Endowment of the Vicarage. The Jury found the Statute of 4 H. 4. of
Appropriations: and of 27 H. 8. which gives Priories, etc. to the King: Whether
the Appropriation were good, there being no Endowment of the Vicarage: And,
whether the Appropriation without the King's License was good, was the
Question. Resolved, That whether the Appropriation be good or not, cannot now
be called in question; but it shall be intended to be good, and have all
requisite Circumstances: But in this Case, because the Defendant claims per
Praesentationem Regis ratione Lapsus; Whereas the King, if he had any Title to
Present, it was Jure Coronae, the Presentment of the Plaintiff was utterly
void, and the Plaintiff had no Title, who brought an Action upon the Statute of
2 Ed. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes Mich. ^ Jac. B. R. Hunston and
Cocket's Case.
.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Commendams.
1. What a Commendam is, or the Legal description thereof. 2. The King may
dispense with the holding of diverse Benefices in Commendam, notwithstanding the
Canon of the Lateran Council against Pluralities. 3. Three Degrees of
Commendams by the Canon Law. 4. A description of a Semestral and Temporary
Commendatory. 5. The provision the Pope made in granting Commendams; certain
Benefices in the Church of Rome never given in Commendams. 6. What the Canon
Law in Commendams ad Tempus or Perpetuo. 7. The grand Case of a Commendam at
the Common Law, between Kiffin and Ascough, and therein great variety of
Learning touching that Subject. 8. Several Considerations in Law touching
Commendams. 9. An Irish Case, with great variety of Learning, in reference to
this Subject.
(1.) COmmendam (Ecclesia Commendata) is a Benefice or Ecclesiastical Living,
which being void, is commended to the charge and care of some sufficient Clerk,
to be supplied until it may be conveniently provided of a Pastor: And this was
the Original of what we now commonly call Commendams. Durand. de Benefic. lib.
5. cap. 7. That person to whom the Church is thus Commended, has the Fruits
and Profits thereof only for a certain time; whereby the nature of the Church
is not changed, but is as a thing deposited in his hands as it were in Trust,
being concredited only with the care and custody thereof, which may be revoked.
Thus when a Parson of a Parish is made the Bishop of a Diocese, there is a
Cession of his Benefice by the Promotion; but if the King gives him power to
retain his Benefice, he shall continue Parson thereof, and shall be said to
hold it in Commendam Hob. Rob. fo. 144. Latch. Rep. fo. 236, 237.
. So that it may properly be thus defined, Commenda est Ecclesiae Custodia
alicui Commissa in tempus gratia evidentis necessitatis and utilitatis. Gloss.
in verb. Commendare, c. Nemo deinceps, de Elect. in lib. 6. and Andr. in dict.
Gloss. For hereby the Bishop commits the care and custody of a Vacant Church to
some one, whom he Constitutes as a general Administrator thereof. Corras. de
Sacerd. matter, p. 1. c. 6. nu. 3. and dict. c. Nemo. for Commendare in this
sense is no other than Deponere. l. Publius, ff. Depositi, and l. Commendare,
ff. de verb. Sign. And he to whom the same is so committed is in the Law termed
Commendatarius, having the custody of a Vacant Church and the Fruits thereof
only for a time; and the Beneficium Commendatum we call Commendam. Petrus
Gregorius makes this Commendam of a Church to be on a double account, viz.
either in utilitatem Ecclesiae, or Commendatarii; In the former case, he says,
the Commenda gives no Title to the Commendatary of the Benefice, but is only a
Custody or Trust which may be revoked, and consequently repugnant to the nature
of a Benefice, which is Perpetual: In the other Case, the Benefice is held to
be a Commenda made in utilitatem Commendatarii, which he may hold and possess
as long as he lives. Petr. Greg. de Benef. cap. 10. nu. 13.

(2.) By a Canon of the Lateran Council no person Ecclesiastical could hold Two
Benefices with Cure of Souls simul and semel, but by the taking of a Second the
former would be void. Cons. Later. and F. N. B. 34. L. and Co. par. 4. 75. and
Lindw. Consil. Provin. de Praebend. cap. Audistis; yet might the King it seems
by the Common Law, notwithstanding that Canon, grant Dispensations to hold
diverse Benefices in Commendam; as at this day he may notwithstanding the Stat.
of 21 H. 8. For the Statute of 25 H. 8. that takes away the Popes usurped power
of granting Commendams, etc. in this Realm, does vest it in the Crown de jure,
as also does the Statute of 1 Eliz. and (from and under the Crown) in the
Archbishop of Canterbury, his Commissaries, etc. And as heretofore the Pope did
by Usurpation in this Realm, so now de jure and ex Regali Authoritate, may the
King grant unto a Consecrated Bishop a Dispensation Recipere and obtinere
Beneficium cum Cura animarum, and to hold the same in Commendam Co. par. 4. 75.
Holland's Case.
.

(3.) In the Case of Colt and Glover against the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, according to Sir Hen. Hobart Lord Chief Justice, out of the Canons,
Commendams are said to be of Three Degrees, one Semestris, another Perpetua vel
ad vitam, a third Intermedia or Diuturna, sed Limitata; and sometimes called
Temporaria or Temporalis, vel ad certum Temporis spatium Limitata. Clem. v.
Extra. l. 3. de Praebendis, c. 2. The Commenda Semestris did arise out of
natural equity, that in the time of the Patrons respite given him to Present,
the Church should not be without a Provisional Pastor, which was a Law of
Necessity agreeable to the Law of Nature. But after the Lapse justly incurred,
the Commendam is to cease, or then the Ordinary may Collate. The Commenda
Perpetua vel ad vitam, is that which cannot be for a less time than for the
life of the Commendatary absolute. And the Commenda Intermedia, diuturna, or
Temporalis, vel ad certum temporis spatium Limitata, is, when a Commenda is to
a person not for his life absolutely, but so long as he shall be Bishop of such
a place, or the like. Each of which Degrees of Commendams does refer to the
Commendam obtinere, capere, and apprehendere. A Dispensation Commendam
recipere, which shall make a Title, ought to have three Incidents; (1) It ought
to be, Recipere and convertere in usus proprios. (2) It ought to be ad
utilitatem Ecclesiae, vel Parsonae. (3) It ought to have the Assent of the
Patron. And he that is but mere Commendatarius is Accountable to the Ordinary.
Vid. Case Evans and Ascough, in Latch. Rep. And not to the Commendam retinere,
which in truth is no Commendam, though commonly so called; but is only a
Faculty of Retention and Continuation of the Benefice in the same person and
state wherein it was, notwithstanding something intervening, as a Bishopric or
the like, which without such a Faculty would have avoided it.

(4.) The Semestral Commendatary is not reputed Praelatus, but Procurator and
Administrator, habens titulum Canonicum; It does make Fructus suos, but ad
providendum sibi and Ministris; and what remains, is to be converted to the use
of the Church. Greg. X. in Council. Lugd. An. 1275. Gloss. in cap. Nemo. 15. De
Electione in Sexto. And John d'Atbon, An. 1248.
upon Othobou's Canon or Constitution De Commendis Ecclesiarum, says, That
Commendare idem est quod Deponere, seu Custodiae Committere: And all agree that
such a Commendatary is not Praelatus, but Procurator; habet tamen Legitimam
Administrationem ad Colligend. and providend. Ministris; ea vero quae
supersunt, ad utilitatem Ecclesiae convertenda. Commendare (ut ait Papin) nihil
aliud est quam deponere. l. Lucius, ff. Deposit. and l. Commendare, ff. de
verb. Sig. and l. Publia, ff. Deposit. and Gloss. ibid. But as to a Perpetual
Commendam, Perpetuity, and the disposal of the Fruits must concur Gomez. in
Regul. de Trien. poss.
. And as a Patron cannot Present to a Church Full, so neither can a Commendam
be made to a Church certain that is then Full; for there is no difference
betwixt a Commendam and a Presentation, but that the one Presents the Parson to
the Church, the other commits the Church to the Parson, both being incompatible
when the Church has his proper Rector; The Canons also speaking of Commendams,
rely much upon Ecclesias vacantes, necessitatem and utilitatem Ecclesiae
vacantis. And Commendams were not made anciently in general terms, to any
Churches uncertain, but to some certain Church then void. Also the Patrons
consent is necessary to a Commendam, secundum omnes, Patroni consensus, and
omnium qui laedi possunt, requiritur; And again. Quod satis observant Praelati,
qui nisi Praesentati per Patronos, non faciunt Commendas. Gloss. in Council.
Lugd. and Othob. Provin. Hob. Rep. in dict. Cas. Colt and Glover, verse. Bishop
of Covent. and Lichfield. Likewise, it is further asserted by Sir Hen. Hobart
in the Case aforesaid, That the Temporary Commenda brings with it so many
Incongruities, Inconveniences, and Absurdities in Law, as cannot be born; for
thereby the Church is neither altogether void, as it remains in the Case of a
Commendam Semestris, which is but a Sequestration of Fruits and Cure till the
Patron Presents; neither is the Church absolutely Full, for then it should be
Plena and Consulta, h. c. plena de possessore, and consulta de Rectore Hob. ubi
supr.
.

(5.) Commenda in the Canon Law has a nigh affinity to Collation: Rebuff. in.
Statuimus, in ver. conferantur. de Collat. and is a Canonical Institution, or a
Canonical Title: cap. Dudum, in 2. de Elect. Etsi in titulum non detur
Ecclesia, and when the Commendatary dies, the Benefice is void, ut alia in
titulum possessa: Rebuff. de pacif. Possess. nu. 42, 43, 44. The Pope was wont
to provide by a Commendam, when he gave a Benefice in Custodiam, that he that
had the Custody thereof, should not thereof have fructus suos: cap. Nemo, de
Elect. in 6. but should restore the same: Can. placuit 10. q. 3. unless he
expressed in the Grant (as he often did) that the Commendatary should convert
the Fruits thereof to his own use. It is in Law provided by the Commendam, that
the Commendatary shall not be, nor said to be Titularius Ecclesiae concessae,
because he has another at the same time, and together with that he cannot
aliam habere in titulum: cap. dudum, in 2. de Elect. cap. fin. 21. q. 1. For
the Law compares the Relation that is between a Rector and his Church to that
of Man and Wife, and in express terms calls it Matrimonium; cap. sicut vir. q.
1. and says, it is as odious to have more Benefices than one at once, as more
Wives than one at once; cap. de multa de Praebend. whence it may aptly be
inferred, That Plurality is a kind of Spiritual Bigamy or Polygamy. Moreover,
by the Canon Law a Commendam may be either for a certain time, or for life:
cap. Extirpandae,. quia vero. De Praeben. and c. nemo. de Elect. in 6. And
during the vacancy of a See the Chapter may grant the Commendam ad tempus: c.
significatum. de Praeb. and dict. c. nemo. If the Commendam be granted in
Perpetuity or for life, it is vice tituli: Nam ad tempus Collatio fieri nequit
Beneficii: c. si gratiose. de Rescript. and c. satis perversum. 66. Did. In
the Church of Rome there are certain Benefices which were never wont to be
given in Commendam, such as that of the Holy Ghost in Sicily, St. John of
Jerusalem, St. Anthony, the Blessed Virgin Mary, and others; and this by a
Constitution of Pope Alexander the Sixth as a mark of grace; because they were
given to the Fraternity of these Orders in titulum. Rebuff. de Commendis, nu.
41. Prox. Benef.

(6.) Whether any man Inferior to a Bishop, may Ecclesiam Commendare, is a
Question moved by Rebuffus, who holds it in the Affirmative, provided it be a
Commenda only ad Tempus, that is, only for Six months: Rebuff. Respon. 71. de
Commenda. which opinion Panormitan seems to be of, by saying, Inferiorem a Papa
non posse Perpetuo Commendare, sed ad Tempus sic: Panorm. in c. si constiterit,
in 1. notab. de Accusat. For the Canonists of the Romish Church do hold, That
Commendare in perpetuum potest solus Papa, Ad tempus sex mensium quilibet
Ordinarius potest: Likewise Panormitan says further, That a Chapter ( Sede
vacant) possit usque ad sex menses Commendare: Panor. and Felin. in c. cum
olim, 11. q. de Major. and obed. and Jo. Francisc. in Tract. de Offic. and
potest. Capituli Sede vacant. in 2. part. q. 3. whence Rebuffus concludes,
that any other qui Beneficia confer potest may do the like; it being as a
Rule in Law, That illud videtur permissum, quod non est prohibitum: c. nam
concupiscentiam. de Consti. and L. praecipimus. C. de Appellat. The Canon Law,
to which only we are beholding for the clearest apprehensions we can possibly
have of Commendams, allows a very extensive Latitude to the Pope in the
granting and revoking thereof; but this does not concern us, further than as
the Popes Ecclesiastical power, heretofore exercised in this Realm by way of
Usurpation, is now vested in the King de jure; yet it will be agreed on all
hands, That a Commendam in the very nature of it, is merely and properly
Custodial, that Church or Benefice being then granted in Commendam, quando in
custodiam, seu Custodiae causa datur: c. nemo. de Elect. in 6. And as he who
has only the Custody of a thing, non facit fructus suos: so neither he
(according to the Canon Law) who has a Commendam, without the Popes special
grant thereof to the Commendatary: c. placuit. 10. q. 3. Rebuff. de Commenda,
who yet by the same Law possit expensas facere ex reditibus Beneficii
Commendati, sumere ex eo alimenta, and debita persolvere, sicut is qui titulum
habet: c. 1. de Solutio. hoc afferit Archidiac. in cap. qui plures. 21. q. 1.

(7.) The grand Case of a Commendam was that of Evans and Kiffin against
Ascuth, which being two days argued by the Judges, and by Noy Attorney, is
acutely and succinctly Reported thus, viz. In Trespass: Dr. Thornbury being
Dean of York was chosen Bishop of Limbrick in Ireland: But before Consecration
or Confirmation, he obtained a Patent with large words, Non obstante retinere
valeat in Commendam the said Deanary, etc. And afterward he was chosen Bishop
of Bristol; and then also before Installation he obtained another Patent, with
a more ample Dispensation of retaining the Deanary in Commendam. It was Agreed
by all, That the Church or Deanary, etc. in England shall be void by Cession,
if the Parson, or Dean, etc. be made a Bishop in Ireland. For the Canon Law in
that is one through all the World. Also Ireland is governed by the Laws of
England, and is now as part of England by Subordinacy. Note well 45 E. 3. 19.
b. Confirmation under the Great Seal of England is good in this Case;
Confirmation under the Great Seal of England of Presentation to a Church in
Ireland, of the Heir of the Tenant of the King; and that a Dispensation under
the Great Seal of England is good in this Case, without any Patent of it in
Ireland, vid. 8 Ass. 27. 10 E. 3. 42. An Exchange of Land in England for Land
in Ireland is good. Note 20 H. 6. 8 Scir. fac. sued in England to Repeal a
Patent under the Great Seal of Ireland, vid. the Irish Statute 2 Eliz. cap. 4.
That an Irish Bishop may be made under the Great Seal of England. Note, Stat. 1
E. 6. the Irish Bishops shall be Donative by Patent of the King, under the
Great Seal of England; yet the King may let them be chosen per Conge d'Eslire,
etc. (1) Noy Attorney Argued at Bar, and so stated the Points of the said Case
by themselves: If a Commendatary Dean by a Retinere in Commendam may well
Confirm a Lease made by the Bishop; for it is Agreed, That a Commendatary Dean
by Recipere in Commend. cannot Confirm, because he is but a Depositarius. Note
19 H. 6. 16. 12 H. 4. 20. 27 H. 8. 15. a Commendatary shall be sued by that
Name, and by such a Commend. he may take the profits, and use Jurisdiction, and
yet is not a Dean complete. Note, he may make a Deputy for Visitation, but not
for Confirmation of Leases. Note, if there be two Deans in one Church, both
ought to Confirm. Vid. Die. 282. Co. Inst. 30. a. (2) The Second point, if such
a Bishop be chosen to another Bishopric, if now the first Church in Commend.
(admitting that there was a Full Incumbent) be void presently by the Election
and assent of the Superior ( viz.) the King: And it seemed to him that it was,
because there need not be a new Consecration; and he vouched Panormitan, 2.
par. 101. The Bishop of Spires was chosen Bishop of Trevers, and had the assent
of the Pope, and that he came to Trevers, and there found another in
possession; and he would have returned to the former Bishopric, and could not.
He also Cited 8 Rep. Trollop's Case, That the Guardianship of the Temporalties
cease by the Election of a new Bishop. Note, that Sergeant Henden, who argued
on the contrary, vouched Mich. 4 Jac. May, Bishop of Carlisle made a Lease to
the Queen, and a Commission issued out of the Exchequer to take it, and the
Dean and Chapter Confirmed it before the Inrolment of it; and yet Adjudged
good: That Case was for the Castle of Horn. First, the Judges having Argued
two days, Hill. 22 Jac. B. R. rot. 1169. Evans and ^iffin against Asc^ugh.
Noys Rep.
Resolved (1) That all Commendams are Dispensations, and that Cession commenced
by the Canon and Council of Lateran. (2) That the King may dispense with that
Canon, 11 H. 7. 12. For the Pope might, and now by the Statute 21 H. 8. that
power is given to the King cumulative by way of Exposition veteris, and not by
Introduction novi Juris; and by that Statute a concurrent power is given to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and may be granted to the King, or by the Archbishop,
etc. (3) That the Dispensation after Election to the first Bishopric and
before Consecration, etc. and also the Dispensation after Election to the
second Bishopric, and before Confirmation, is good enough in both Cases, and
he remains a good Dean to Confirm, etc. and afterward the Judgment in the
Case, being an Action of Trespass, was given accordingly.

(8.) A Commendam is to be granted Necessitate evidenti, vel utilitate
Ecclesiae suadente, and in the Infancy of the Church quando defuerunt Pastores
they were necessary: A Commendam ordinarily is but for six months, and he that
has it is Custos only; the other is extraordinary, and that is for life, and
he is an Incumbent: The King by his Prerogative Royal may grant a Commendam
without any Statute; Hill. 14 Jac. in the Exchequer, Colt verse. Glover. Roll.
Rep.
yet if such Commendam shall be good, it may be very mischievous to the Patron:
It is it seems agreed in the Books of the Common Law, that the use of
Commendams in their first Institution was lawful, but not the abuse thereof;
and that a perpetual Commendam, Hill. 39 Eliz. B. R. Armiger and Holland's
Case. Cro. par. 1.
viz. for life, was held unlawful, and condemned by a Council of 700 Bishops.
It is likewise Reported to us, That where the Incumbent of a Church was created
a Bishop, and the Queen granted him to hold the Benefice which he had in
Commendam: It was the Opinion of the Justices, That the Queen had the
Prerogative by the Common Law, and that it is not taken away by the Stat. of 35
H. 8.

(9. Pasch. 9 Jac. C. B. in Ireland, between the King and Cyprian Horsefall and
Robert Wale. Davis Rep.
) In a Quare Impedit brought by the King against Cyprian Horsefall and Robert
Wale, on a Special plea pleaded by Wale the Incumbent, the Kings Attorney
demurred in Law: The Case in substance was this, viz. the Corporation of
Kilkenny, being Patrons of a Vicarage within the Diocese of Ossery, Presented
one Patrick Fynne thereunto, who was Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted. After
that, during the Incumbency of the said Fynne; Adam Loftus Archbishop of
Dublin, and Ambrose Forth Doctor of the Civil Law, being Commissioners
Delegates for granting of Faculties and Dispensations in the Realm of Ireland,
according to the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 16. by their Letters Dated 9 October.
33 Eliz. granted to John Horsefall, then Bishop of Ossery, That the said Bishop
unum vel plura Beneficia, curata vel non curata, sui vel alieni
Jurispatronatus, non excedentia annuum valorem quadraginta Librarum, adtunc
vacantia vel quae per imposterum vacare contigerint, perpetuae Commendae titulo
adipisci, occupare, retinere, omnesque fructus ad Familiae suae sustentationem
convertere, possit, juribus sive institutis quibuscunque in contrarium non
obstantibus. Which Faculty or Dispensation was after ratified and confirmed by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of Ireland, according to the Statute of 28
H. 8. c. 16. After this, viz. 20 May, An. 38 Eliz. Patrick Fynne the Incumbent
died, whereby the said Vicarage being void, and so continuing void by the space
of Six months, whereby the Bishop had power to Collate thereunto by Lapse, the
said Bishop by virtue of the said Faculty or Dispensation adeptus est,
occupavit, and retinuit the said Vicarage perpetuae Commendae titulo, and took
the Fruits thereof to his own use, until the 13 Febr. An. 1609. on which day
the Bishop died: After whose death the said Cyprian Horsefall, having purchased
the next Avoidance of that Vicarage, Presented the said Wale, who was Admitted,
Instituted, and Inducted: And afterward the King Presents one Winch, who being
disturbed by the said Horsefall and Wale, the King brought a Quare Impedit.
Whether the said Bishop, when he obtained and occupied that Vicarage by virtue
of that Faculty or Dispensation, were thereby made complete Incumbent thereof,
so as the Church being full of him, no Title by Lapse could devolve to the King
during the life of the Bishop, was the Principal point moved and debated in
this Case. And in the Argument of this point (which was argued at the Bar first
by the Counsel at Common Law, and then by two Advocates well versed in the
Canon Law, and at the Bench by all the Justices) Two things were chiefly
considered by those who argued for the Kings Clerk: (1) Whether the Bishop
could by any Law have and hold that Benefice without such Dispensation or
Faculty. (2) What effect or operation that Faculty or Dispensation shall have
by the Law. As to the First, they held clearly for Law, That a Bishop by the
Ancient Ecclesiastical Law of England, may not hold another Benefice with Cure
in his own Diocese: and if he has such Benefice before his promotion to the
Bishopric, that it becomes void when he is created a Bishop. And this is the
Ancient Law of England, as is often said in the Bishop of St. David's Case, 11
H. 4. and 41 Ed. 3. 5. b. agrees therewith. The Reason is, for that the Bishop
cannot visit himself, and he that has the Office of a Sovereign shall not hold
the Office of a Subject at the same time; as Hankeford said in the said Case of
11 H. 4. And on this Reason it is said in 5 Ed. 3. 9. That if a Parson be made
a Dean, the Parsonage becomes void, for that the Dignity and the Benefice are
not compatible. So no Ecclesiastical person, by the Ancient Canons and
Councils, could have Two Benefices, with Cure simul and semel, but the first
would be void by taking asecond. And this was the Ancient Law of the Church
used in England long before the Statute of 21 H. 21 H. 8. c. 13.
8. cap. 13. which was made in Affirmance of the Ancient Law, as appears in
Holland's Case. Co. par. 4. And with this agrees the Books of 24 Ed. 3. 33. 39
Ed. 3. 44. a. and N. Br. 34. l. And the Text of the Canon Law, which is the
proper Fountain of this Learning, proves it fully; Decretal. de Praeben. and
Dignit. c. de multa: Where it is said, De multa providentia fuit in Lateranensi
Concilio prohibitum, ut nullus diversas Dignitates Ecclesiasticas, vel plures
Ecclesias Parochiales reciperet, contra Sanctorum Canonum instituta, etc.
Praesenti Decreto statuimus, ut quicunque receperit aliquod Beneficium, curam
habens animarum annexam, si prius tale Beneficium habebat, eo sit ipso jure
privatus, and si forte illud retinere contenderit, etiam alio spolietur, etc.
And with this agrees the Text in Decret. Cause. 21. q. 1. viz. In duabus
Ecclesiis Clericus conscribi nullo modo potest. So that it is evident, that the
Bishop could not by any Law have or retain that Benefice within his Diocese
without a Dispensation, which is Relaxatio Juris, and permits that to be done,
which the Law had before prohibited. It is to be observed, That Commenda est
quaedam provisio, and therefore Gomez. in Reg. de Idiomate, says, That
Commendare est Providere, and quod Commenda comprehenditur sub quibuscunque
regulis de Provisione loquentibus. And by the Canon Law the Consent of the
Patron is requisite, where a Benefice is given in Commendam. Lib. 6. Decretal.
c. Nemo. where the Gloss says, Ad Commendam vacabitur Patronus, and si qui
alii ex tali Commenda laeduntur. Also in Constit. Othob. de Commendis it is
said expressly, That Consensus Patroni ad Commendam requiritur. The Canon Law
holds these Commendams as very prejudicial, and that in diverse respects; and
therefore says, That Experientia docet, occasion Commendarum cultum Divinum
minui, Curam animarum negligi, hospitalitatem Consuetam and debitam non
servari, ruinis aedificia supponi, etc. 6. Extra. cap Pastoris. And whereas it
is said of a Bishop, That he is to be unius uxoris vir; the Canonists expound
it, That he shall have but one Bishopric, or only one Cure, for they say, that
per Commondam Bigamia contrahitur in Ecclesia: Therefore it was well Resolved
by that good and pious Bishop, who (when another Benefice was offered him to
hold in Commendam) said, Absit ut cum Sponsa habeam Concubinam. But for the
clearer understanding of the nature and difference of these Commendams, it is
further to be considered, That Commenda Ecclesiae is nothing else but
Commendatio Ecclesiae ad Custodiam alterius; and therefore Decret. cause. 21. q.
1. Qui plures, the Gloss there says, Commendare nihil aliud est quam deponere.
This Commenda or Commendatio Ecclesiae is diverse, according to the nature of
the Church, and the Limitation or Continuance of the Commenda: for a Commenda
may be of a Church either Curatae or non Curatae; and it may be either
Temporanea, viz. for a time certain, as for Six months, or Perpetua, viz.
during the life of the Commendatary. A Church with Cure may not be given in
Commendam, unless upon evident necessity, or the benefit of the Church, viz. to
supply the Cure till provision be made of a sufficient Incumbent: And therefore
by the Council of Lions it was provided, That a Parochial Church should not be
given in Commendam, nisi ex evidenti necessitate, vel utilitate Ecclesiae; and
quod talis Commenda ultra semestris temporis spatium non duraret: and quod
secus factum fuerit, sit irritum ipso jure, etc. 6. Decretal. c. Nemo. But a
Benefice without Cure may be given by the Canon Law for the subsistence of the
Commendatary, vel ad mensam: In that sense the Canonists say, That Commenda is
quasi comedenda, quia Ecclesiae quae traditur in Commendam quasi comeditur and
devoratur, and such a Benefice may properly be given in perpetuam Commendam.
Summa summar. tit. Commenda, art. 1, and 2. And by the Rule of the Canon Law,
he that comes in per Commendam, is not Praelatus, sed Procurator tantum, and
est nisi Custos, seu Administrator, and jus in Ecclesia non habet. 6. Decretal.
c. Nemo. and Constit. Othobon. de Commendis, fo. 65. And therewith agrees 27 H.
8. 15. where it is said, That the Cardinal of York had the Abbey of St. Albans
in Commondam, and yet was not the Abbot. In this Case of a Commendam in Davis
Rep. the Original or invention of a Commendam is ascribed to Pope Leo 4. An.
Dom. 848. aut eo circiter, as appears lib. Decretal. cause. 23. q. 2. where it
is said, Vnde Leo 4. scribit, Qui plures Ecclesias retinet, unam quidem
Titulatam, alteram vero sub Commendatione tenere debet: For by the Ancient
Canons and Councils a man could have but one Benefice, and yet it is by
experience found convenient, that sometimes, viz. in case of Necessity or
Vtility of the Church, a man may have the Charge and Fruits of more Benefices
than one; therefore was that Distinction invented and allowed, that although a
man shall have but one Benefice in Titulo, yet he may have other Benefices in
Commenda, viz. That another Benefice may be commended and committed to his
Custody and Cure, until it be provided with an able Incumbent. But afterward,
there being great Abuses found in the granting of these Commendams by the
Ordinaries (for omnium rerum quarum est usus, potest esse abusus, virtute solum
excepta, says Aristotle) another Canon was made in the Council of Lions, An.
Dom. 1274. for reformation thereof, as appears lib. 6. Decretal. de Elect. and
Elect. potesta. c. Nemo. Nemo deinceps Parochialem Ecclesiam alicui non
Constituto in legitima aetate vel Sacerdotio Commendare praesumat; nec tali,
nisi unam, and evidenti Necessitate vel Vtilitate Ecclesiae suadente. Hujusmodi
autem Commendam rite factam declaramus ultra Semestre temporis spatium non
durare, etc. But the Gloss there says, That Ista Constitutio non comprehendit
Romanum Pontificem, ideo Romanus Pontifex potest Perpetuo Commendare. So that
the Pope, notwithstanding that Canon, had power to give Benefices in perpetuam
Commendam. And indeed after the said Council of Lions, as the Pope had reserved
to himself the sole power of giving Benefices in perpetuam Commendam, so he
reduced that power into act, and used and practiced the same in all Realms of
Christendom: Specially the Popes that were resident at Avignon in France in the
times of King H. 2. Ed. 1. Ed. 2. Ed. 3. were very liberal not only in granting
these Provisions (contrary to our Statutes made in the times of King Ed. 1. and
Ed. 3.) but in giving all sorts of Ecclesiastical Benefices in Commendam
perpetuam. And as at first it was done for the support of the Dignity of
Cardinals, as Pope Clement. 6. professed in his Epistle to Ed. 3. Hist.
Walsingham, fo. 150. b. yet afterward these Favors were purchased by other
Ecclesiastical persons of all degrees, in all Nations, specially in England and
Ireland. And whereas the Canon Law says, That a man has a Cononical Title by
virtue of a Commendam, that must be understood de Commenda perpetua, and not de
Commenda Temporali; for the Commenda Temporalis is but a kind of Sequestration,
and may be granted by every Ordinary pro tempore Semestri; and therefore such a
Commendatary non est Praelatus, nec Maritus Ecclesiae, nec facit Fructus suos,
sed est Administrator tantum, and Custos Ecclesiae. And such a Commenda non est
titulus, nec facit titulum, sed est quoddam depositum, until the Church be
provided with a sufficient Incumbent; and therefore such a Commenda is commonly
granted when the Patron does not Present an able person, or when the Church is
Litigious. But the Commenda perpetua, which continues during the life of the
Commendatary, cannot be granted by any inferior Ordinary, but only by the Pope
in such Countries where he has Jurisdiction, or by the King or his Delegates
in this Realm, or such whose power therein is derived from him or confirmed by
him. And this Commenda est titulus Canonicus; nam militat eadem ratio in
perpetuis Commendis, quae in aliis Titulis. Lib. 6. de Electionib. c. Nemo. And
so it has been often adjudged in Rota, as Gomez affirms in Regul. de Trien.
Possess. where he argues this point Pro and Con at large, and where he says,
That the Faculty of a perpetual Commendam is amplissima dispositio, and habet
ubertatem verborum, viz. Licentiam and Facultatem fructus omnes percipiendi,
and in proprios usus Convertendi, etc. Quae verba important Collationem and
Titulum, and non Simplex Depositum.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Lapse.
1. What a Lapse is; the gradations, and Original thereof. 2. The difference
between the Canon and Common Law, as to the time of Lapse; and when the Six
months shall begin. 3. The King is Patron Paramount of all tbe Churches in
England. 4. In what Cases the Patron is to take notice of the Avoidance at his
peril, or not; and how the Six months is to be computed by the days. 5. A Lapse
is not an Interest, but a Trust or Administration, and may not be transferred
or granted over. 6. How or from what time the Six months shall be computed
before the Lapse incurr. 7. Whether a Bishop may Collate by Lapse after Six
months, upon failure of the Clerks showing his Letters of Orders, or his
Letters Missive or Testimonial? 8. In what case Tempus occurrit Regi in point
of Lapse. 9. In what cases the King having Title of Lapse may lose his
Presentment.
(1.) LApsus, or Lapse, is a slip or departure of a Right of Presenting to a
void Benefice, from the Original Patron neglecting to Present (within Six
months next after the Avoidance) to the Ordinary. Whence it is commonly said,
That that Benefice is in Lapse or Lapsed, whereunto he that ought to Present,
has omitted or slipped his opportunity An. 13 Eliz. c. 12.
. This Lapse may happen and be, the Patron being ignorant of the Avoidance, as
well as if he were acquainted therewith or privy thereto, except only upon the
Resignation of the former Incumbent, or the Deprivation upon any cause
comprehended in the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. In which cases the Bishop
ought to give notice thereof unto the Patron. In this matter of Lapse there are
Three gradations, ab Inferiore ad Superiorem, after the neglect of the true
Original Patron, upon whose default (1) the Bishop of the Diocese, within whose
precincts the vacant Benefice lies, shall Collate, unless the King be Patron.
(2) If the Bishop Presents not within the next Six months, then the
Metropolitan shall Present: And (3 ly) if he Present not within the time by Law
limited, Dr. and Stud. 125. Co. par. 4. 17. and par. 5. 58. Specot's Case.
Action.
then the King shall Present, for that he is Patron paramount of all the
Benefices within his Realms; as also because the King and his Progenitors,
Kings of England, have had Authority time out of mind to determine the Right of
Patronages in this Realm in their own Courts, whence lies no Appeal to any.
Foreign pretended Power. The Rosell Summist indeed makes more Gradations in
this matter, as from the Patron to the Chapter, from the Chapter to the Bishop,
from the Bishop to the Metropolitan, from the Metropolitan to the Patriarch,
and if none such, then to the Pope. Sed hoc nihil ad nos, part of whose
happiness is an Index Expurgatorius of the last recited Premises. And although
the Law is, That the Ordinary shall Present, in case the Patron does not within
Six months; yet the Law withal is, That if the Patron Present before the
Ordinary put in his Clerk, the Patron of right shall enjoy his Presentation Dr.
and Stu. cap. 36.
. And if the Ordinary surcess his time limited, he loses his power as to that
Presentation, specially if it be devolved to the King: And when the
Presentation is in the Metropolitan, he shall put in the Clerk himself, and not
the Ordinary; and so there is no default in the Ordinary, though he Present not
the Clerk of the Patron, if his time be past, in which case there is no remedy
for the Patron against the Ordinary Dr. and Stu. ibid.
. This matter of Lapse is of very ancient practice, for Mich. 3. E. 1. B. Rot.
105. Staff. the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield pleaded a Collation by Lapse
Authoritate Concilii against the Prior of Landa to the Church of Patingham. And
6 E. 1. Rot. Paten. membra 25. in a Quare non admisit by the Abbot of St. Mary
Eborum against the Bishop of Norwich, the Bishop made a Title by Lapse, viz.
That he Collated Authoritate Concilii post Lapsum semestre, etc. And there
afterward in the Judgment it is said, Quia tempus semestre Authoritate
Concilii non incipit versus Patronum nisi a tempore. scientiae, mortis, etc.
(Q. what Council is here meant or intended) For P. 9 E. 1. B. Rot. 51. it
appears that Lapse was given per Concilium Lugdunense post tempus semestre: The
like also in a Writ in the time of E. 2. cited by Sir Ed. Co. 6. in Catesby's
Case, 62 Roll. Abr. verb. Present. lit. O. p. 354.
; yet in Bracton the Lapsus temporis is de Constitutione Lateranensi Bract.
lib. 4. fo. 241.
. And yet Britton, fo. 225. speaks of the Tempus Semestre or the Six months
according to the Council of Lions; But Mr. Seldom in his Book of Tithes, 390.
says, That the Manuscripts of Breton have Lateran for Lions; and in fol. 388.
holds, That this Lapse was received in the Laws of this Realm out of the
General Council of Lateran, held in the year 25 H. 2. as the Learned Sergeant
Roll observes in his Abridgment on this word of Lapse, where he also cites
Hovenden, fo. 326. asserting, That among the Canons of the Council of Lateran
under Alex. 3. held under Alex. 3. An. 1118. in the time of King Hen. 2. there
is a Canon in these words or to this effect, viz: Cum vero Praebendas Ecclesias
seu quaelibet Officia in aliqua Ecclesia vacare contigerit, vel si etiam mod^
vacant, non diu maneant in suspenso, sed infra Sex menses personis, quae digne
administrare valiant, conferantur; si autem Episcopus, ubi ad eum spectaverit,
confer distulit, per Capitulum Ordinetur. And before the said Council the
Patron was not limited to any time, but might Present at his pleasure without
any Lapse Seld. de D^cimis, 387. and Bract. lib. 4. 241.
. Touching other Presidents of great Antiquity relating to this Subject of
Lapse, the Reader is here referred to that Learned Sergeant Roll, in the
forecited place of his Abridgment. And although according to the Gradations
aforesaid the Lapse devolves from the Patron to the Bishop, from the Bishop to
the Archbishop, from the Archbishop to the King; yet if after Lapse incurr to
the Metropolitan, and before Collation by him made the Patron Present, he may
Present to the Ordinary of the Diocese, without Presenting to the Metropolitan.
Contra H. 41 El. B. R. per Popbam Roll. Abr. ver. Presentm. lit. N.
; for thereby he seems to redeem his neglect. But yet if Lapse devolve to the
King, and then the Inferior Ordinary Collate by the Lapse, and his Clerk be
Instituted and Inducted, it seems this does not make a Plenarty against the
King to put him to his Quare Impedit, but he may notwithstanding Present and
oust the Clerk of the Ordinary; for when Lapse incurrs to the King, it cannot
be taken away by the Ordinary: And then when the Ordinary Collates without good
Title, it makes not any Plenarty against him who has the right as the King
has to Present; for a Lapse incurring to the King is not like that which
incurrs to the Metropolitan Roll. ibid. lit. Q. nu. 21.
. But if a Patron Present, and his Clerk be Instituted, and remain Eighteen
months without Induction, in that case there does not any Lapse incurr to the
King; for the King has not any Lapse, but where the Ordinary might have had it
before Hob. Rep. 20^.
. But if a Bishop dies, whereby the Temporalties are in the Kings hands, if
during that time the Six months pass, whereby a Lapse happens, the King shall
have it, and not the Guardian of the Spiritualties Bract. l. 5. fo. 404.. 10.
. Nor does an Admittance of a Resignation by Fraud, take away the Kings Title;
for in Comber's Case against the Bishop of Cicester, where the Issue in a Quare
Impedit was, If S. R. by covin between him and C, and R. did Resign into the
hands of the said Bishop, if the King has Title of Lapse, and a Resignation be
made by fraud, and one Admitted, this shall not take away the Kings Title, for
if the Kings Title appear upon Record, then shall go out a Writ for the King;
but otherwise it is upon matter of Evidence, the King does lose his
Presentation as well by resignation as by death, where he has Title to Present
by Lapse, and does not, except the Resignation be by Fraud Trin. 6 Jac. Rot.
1629. Comber verse. Episc. Cicest, Brownl. Rep. par. 1. Actions on Q. Imp.
. And in the Case of the Queen and the Archbishop of York and Bucks, it was
Resolved by the Justices, That a Collation, although double or treble, cannot
be an Usurpation against the King to put him out of an Advowson Trin. 33 El. B.
R. Cro. par. 1.
.

(2.) The Canon Law allows Two months more to an Ecclesiastical, than to a
Lay-Patron, ere the Lapse shall be incurred; the former having by that Law Six
months to Present, the latter but Four. Sum. Angel. tit. Jus Patronat.. 16. So
the Law of Scotland: Pars. Couns. par. 1. c. 2. We need not enquire into the
Reason of that difference or disproportion; let it suffice the Laity, That it
was the Canonists pleasure to have it so, for reasons best known to their own
interest; the Common Law impartially levels them both to one and the same equal
standard of Six months. By the Common Law of England, as well Clerks as Laics
have Six months to Present before the Lapse incurr: Dr. and Stu. 116. b. Per la
Com. Ley De Scoce Laici Patroni quadrimestre, Ecclesiastici vero Sex mensium
spatium habent sibi concessum ad Praesentandum personam idoneam Ecclesiae
vacanti. Skene. Regiam Majestatem, 10. b. But Jac. 6. pl. 1. cap. 7. Pl. 7.
cap. 102. pl. 12. cap. 119, 158. Concedit Patrono Laico spatium Sex mensium,
infra quod Praesentare debet. The Question is not so much, when the Term shall
end and determine, as when it shall commence, and from what time the Six months
shall be computed. The Answer falls under a double consideration, or is
diversified according to the diverse manners of Avoidances; for if by Death,
Creation, or Cession the Church be void, then the Six months shall be computed
from the Death, Creation, or Cession of the last Incumbent, whereof the Patron
is to take Notice at his peril: But if the Avoidance be by Resignation or
Deprivation, then the Six months shall begin from the time of Notice thereof
given by the Bishop to the Patron, who is not obliged to take knowledge thereof
from any other, than by signification from the Bishop Dr. and S^ cap. 31.
. But in case the Avoidance were caused by an Union (for so it might be) then
the Six months should be computed from the time of the Agreement upon that
Union; for in that case the Patron was not ignorant of, but privy to the
Avoidance; for there could be no Union made, but the Patron must have the
knowledge thereof; and then it was to be appointed who should Present after the
Union, as whether one or both, either jointly or by turns one after another, as
the Agreement was upon the Union Dr. and 3. ibid.
.

(3.) The Continuance of a Voidance of a Church by the several Lapses of
Patron, Bishop, and Archbishops, derives the Title of Presentation at last to
the King as Patron paramount of all the Churches in England; and wherever the
Original Patron by Law ought to take notice of a Voidance at his peril, there
and in such case by a Non-Presentation within Six months from the time of such
Voidance the Lapse will ever incurr: And generally by the Admission,
Institution, and Induction to a Second Benefice, Prima Ecclesia vacat de
persona of the Incumbent, and vacans continuat till new Induction Mich. 9 Car.
C. B. rot. 441. The King and the Bish. of Canterbury and Pryst's Case. Cro. 1.
par. 258.
. But when an Archbishop, Bishop, or other Ordinary has given a Benefice of
right devolute unto him by Lapse of time, and after the King Presents, and
takes his Suit against the Patron, who possibly will suffer that the King
shall recover without Action tried, in deceit of the Ordinary or the possessor
of the said Benefice; In such and all other like cases, where the Kings Right
is not tried, the Archbishop, Bishop, Ordinary, or Possessor, shall be received
to counterplead the Title taken for the King, and to have his Answer, and to
show and defend his Right upon the matter, although that he claim nothing in
the Patronage An. 25 Ed. 3. cap. 7.
: so that the Ordinary may Counterplead the Kings Title for a Benefice fallen
to him by Lapse. Also when the King does make Collation or Presentment to a
Benefice in another Right, the Title whereupon he groundeth himself, may be
well examined, that it be true; which if before Judgment it be by good
information found to be otherwise, the Collation or Presentment thereof made
may be Repealed, whereupon the true Patron or Possessor may have as many Writs
out of Chancery as shall be needful. There are some St. 25 Ed. 3. c. 3. St. 13
R. 2. 1. St. 4 H. 5. 21.
Statutes (the King not being bound by Lapse of Time, for nullum Tempus
occurrit Regi) which are good remedies and reliefs for the Ordinary that has
Collated by Lapse, as also for the Clerk that is Collated; for otherwise a
Common person might by Practice have turned out a lawful Collatee: to which
purpose the Lord Hobart does instance in a Case; A Common person no true Patron
Presents within Six months, and the true Patron himself Presents not in time,
whereupon the Ordinary Collates by the Lapse, against whom the Pretender brings
a Quare Impedit, because his Clerk was refused, wherein he must needs prevail,
if his Title be good: and it must be taken for good, because neither Ordinary
nor Incumbent could deny it; for de non apparentibus, and de non existentibus
eadem est ratio; which Inconvenience is remedied by the said Stat. of 25 E. 3.
c. 7. Note, that Lapse does not incurr to the Ordinary by reason of his not
examining the Clerk within Six months. Trin. 3 Jac. B. R. inter Palmer and
Smith. Resolved per Cur.

(4.) If a Plea be depending between Two parties, and it be not discussed and
determined within Six months, the Bishop may Present by Lapse, and he that has
the Right to Present, shall according to the Statute recover his Damages
Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Term. Law, verb. Quare Imp.
. But it is expressly provided by the Statute of 13 Eliz. 12. That no Title to
Collate or Present by a Lapse shall accrue upon any Deprivation ipso facto, but
after Six months after Notice of such Deprivation given by the Ordinary to the
Patron Dyer, fo. 346, 369, 377. Co. li. 6. fo. 29.
. But if the Church become void by Death, Creation, or Cession of the last
Incumbent, the Patron is at his peril to take Notice of such Avoidances within
the next Six months thereof 22 H. 6. 29. b.
. But if it become void by Deprivation or Resignation, the Clerk is not obliged
to tender his Presentation to the Bishop, nor the Patron obliged to Present his
Clerk, but within Six months next after Notice legally given him by the
Ordinary of the Avoidance by such Deprivation or Resignation Dr. and St. l. 2.
c. 31. Roll. 2. 364, etc.
; which Six months are to be calculated or computed by 182 days, and not by 28
days to the Month Yelv. 100. and Co. 6. 61. b. 62. a.
. Nor is there any Addition of time over and above the Six months allowed the
Patron to Present from the Vacancy a Second Clerk, in case the former were
legally refused by the Bishop Kelw. 50. b. and 14 H. 7. 21. a. Dyer 227. p. 7.
. Yet the Ordinary may not take advantage of the Lapse, in case the Patron
Present his Clerk, before the other has Collated 13 E. 4. 3. b. and 11 H. 4.
80. a. and Hutton 24.
; though it be otherwise with the Canonists: Lindw. c. Si aliquo evincente,
etc. verb. Injuria. But if the Bishop Collate, and the Patron Present before
Induction, in that case it seems he comes too late Dyer 270, p. 56.
. And at the Common Law Sir Simon Degge in his Parsons Counselor makes it a
doubtful Question, if the Church Lapse to the King, and the Patron Presents
before the King take advantage of the Lapse, whether this shall avoid the Kings
Title by Lapse? This (says he) is a Question by Dyer Die. 277. p. 55.
, though Hobart seems to be clear in it, that the King shall not have the
benefit of the Lapse Hob. 15^. Hut 24.
; but adds that diverse Authorities are against them Cro. Eliz. 119. Cro. Jac.
216. a. Owen 3, and 5, Roll. 2. 368. b. 27 E. 3. 84. b. Co. 7. 28. Dr. and
Stud. lib. 2. cap 31. Pars. Counsel. par. 1. cap. 2.
. And in the Cases aforesaid, wherein Notice of Avoidance ought to be given to
the Patron before the Lapse can incurr, the Patron is not obliged to take
Notice thereof from any person other than the Bishop himself, or other Ordinary
Dr. and Stu. ubi supr.
; which also must be given to the Patron personally, if he live in the same
County; and if in another County, then Publication thereof in the
Parish Church, and affixed on the Church-Door, will serve turn, if such Notice
does express in certain (as it ought to do) the cause of the Deprivation, etc.
Co. 6 19. b. and Cro. El. 119. Dyer 328. a.
: As upon Deprivation of an Incumbent for not Reading the 39 Articles of
Religion, the Ordinary is to give the Patron Notice thereof, which Notice ought
to be certain and particular 18 Eliz. Dyer 346. Trin. 41 El. B. R. Baker and
Brent's Case. Cro. par. 3. acc. 679.
. Before Lapse can incurr against a Patron, Notice of his Clerks being refused
by the Ordinary for Insufficiency, must be given to the person of the Patron,
if he may be found, and it is not in that Case sufficient to fix an Intimation
thereof on the Door of that Church to which he was Presented. D. 16 El. 327. 7.
b. Adjudged.

(5.) It is said, That a Lapse is not an Interest naturally, as is the
Patronage, but a mere Trust in Law. And if the Six months be incurred, yet the
Patrons Clerk shall be received, if he be Presented before the Church be Filled
by the Lapse 13 E. 4. 3. B^ook Plenarty, 15 43 E. 3. 11. 11 H. 4. 80.
. Observe 7 Eliz. Dyer 241. for it seems by that case, that the Patron should
Present against the Kings Lapse, for he has damage but for half a year. And
Hob. Chief Justice says, That a Lapse is an act and office of Trust reposed by
Law, in the Ordinary, Metropolitan, and lastly in the King; the end of which
Trust is to provide the Church of a Rector, in default of the Patron; and yet
as for him, and to his behoof. And therefore as he cannot transfer his Trust to
another, so cannot he divert the thing wherewith he is entrusted to any other
purpose. Nor can a Lapse be granted over, as a Grant of the next Lapse of such
a Church, neither before it fall, nor after. If the Lapse incurr, and then the
Ordinary die, the King shall Present, and not the Executors of the Ordinary:
For it is rather an Administration than an Interest; and the King cannot have a
Lapse, but where the Ordinary might have had it before Mich. 10 Jac. rot. 2642.
C^lt and Glover verse. the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. Hob. Rep.
If an Infant-Patron Present not within Six months, the Lapse incurrs. The Law
is the same as against a Feme-Covert, that has right to Present. 33 E. 3. Qua.
Impedit, 46.

(6.) In the first Paragraph of this Chapter it is said, That Tempus Semestre
authoritate Concilii non incipit versus Patronos nisi a tempore Scientiae
mortis personae, that is, of the last Incumbent 6 E. 1. Rot. Pat. membr. 25.
And so Adjuged upon a Writ in the time of E. 2. Co. 6. Cates by 62.
, and said to be per Legem and Consuetudinem Regni hactenus usitatas. As if the
Incumbent die beyond Sea, the Six months are not computed from the time of his
death, but from the time of the Patrons knowledge thereof; and so it was
Adjudged in a Quare non admisit between the Abbot of St. Mary Eborum and the
Bishop of Norwich, as aforesaid dict. 6 E. i.
For the Six months are not reckoned from the death of the Last Incumbent, but
from the time the Patron might (according to a reasonable Computation, having
regard to the distance of the place where he was at the time of the Incumbents
death, if he were within the Realm at that time) have come to the knowledge
thereof; for he ought afterward to take notice thereof at his peril, and not
before, for that he was in some other County than that wherein the Church is,
and wherein the Incumbent died 5 E. 1. 75. Adjudg. Q. Eleano^s case. Contra Co.
6. C^^sby, 62. b.
. And if the Ordinary refuse a Clerk for that he is Criminous, in that case the
Patron shall not have Six months to Present after Notice thereof given him, but
of the Avoidance 14 H. 7. ^^. Curia. 18 H. 7. Kell. 50. b. Quaer^.
. The Law is the same in case of Refusal by reason of Illiterature D. 15, 16.
El. 227. 7. per Curiam.
: But if the Church be void by Resignation or Deprivation, the Six months shall
be computed from the time of Notice thereof given to the Patron, and not from
the time of the Avoidance 1 H. 7. 9. b. D. 15, 16 El. 327. 7. Dr. and Stu. 16.
5 E. 4. 3. b.
: Yet if the Ordinary refuse a Clerk because he is Criminous, he is to give
notice thereof to the Patron, otherwise the Lapse does not incurr 38 E. 3. 2.
. So likewise, if he be refused for Common Usury, Simony, Adultery, or other
Notorious Crime, Notice thereof ought to be given to the Patron, otherwise the
Lapse does not incurr 18 H. 7. Kell. 50. b. Contr. per Frowick.
. A Lay Patron ought to have Notice ere the Lapse shall incurr, in case his
Clerk be refused for Illiterature, otherwise as to a Spiritual Patron, because
the Law presumes, he might well know of his insufficiency before he presented
him 18 H. 7. Kell. 49. b.
. And if the Bishop who took a Resignation dies, the Lapse does not incurr to
his Successor without Notice to the Patron Ibid.
.

(7.) In a Quare Impedit the Defendant pleaded, That he demanded of J. S. the
Presentee of the Plaintiff to see his Letters of Orders, and he would not show
them, and also demanded of him his Letters Missive or Testimonial, testifying
his ability; and because he had not his Letters of Orders, nor Letters Missive,
nor made any proof of them to the Bishop, he desired leave of the Bishop to
bring them, who gave him a week; and he went away and came not again, and the
Six months passed, and the Bishop Collated by Lapse: It was Adjudged in this
Case, That these were no Causes to stay the Admittance of the Clerk, for the
Clerk is not bound (understand it only at Common Law) to show his Letters of
Orders and Letters Missive to the Bishop, but the Bishop must try him upon
Examination Trin. 33 Eliz. B. R. Palmer and the Bishop of Peterburghs Case.
Cro. par. 1.
.

(8.) A Parson of the Church of S. of the value of Ten pound, took a Second
Benefice without a Dispensation, and was Instituted and Inducted, and continued
so for twelve years: The Patron presented J. S. who was Instituted and
Inducted, and so continued diverse years, and died. The Queen presented the
Defendant C. ratione Lapsus in the time of A. who was Instituted and Deducted.
B. the Patron brought a Quare Impedit against the Ordinary and C. Mich. 27 and
28 Eliz. C. B. B^verly and Cornwall's Case.
It was held by the Justices, That the Writ did well lie; and that Tempus
occurrit Reginae in this Case, and that last Clerk should be removed. And it
was held by the Justices, That upon a Recovery in a Quare Impedit, any
Incumbent that comes in pendente Lite should be removed.

(9.) In the Case between Cumber and the Bishop of Chichester, it was Resolved
(1) If Title of Lapse accrues to the King, and the Patron Presents, yet the
King may Present at any time as long as the Presentee is Parson; but if he
dies, or Resigns before the King Presents, he has lost his Presentment. (2.)
If the King has Title by Lapse, because a Parson has taken a Second Benefice,
if the Parson dies, or Resigns his First Benefice, and the Patron Presents,
whose Presentee Resigns upon Covin and dies, the King has lost that
Presentment Hill. 6 Jac. B. R. Cro. par. 2.
.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Collation, Presentation, and Nomination.
1. What Collation is, and how it differs from Presentation. 2. Collation gains
not the Patronage from the Crown. 3. The Ordinary's Collation by Lapse is only
in the Patron's right. 4. What Presentation is, and how in ease of Coheirs, or
Joynttenants, or Tenants in Common. 5. Whether the Grantee of the next
Presentation, not Presenting at the First Avoidance, shall lose the benefit of
his Grant? 6. The Right of Presentation is not an Ecclesiastical, but Temporal
Inheritance, and cognizable at the Common Law. 7. The power of the Ordinary in
case of Coparconers, Joyntenants, or Tenants in Common, as to Presentation. 8.
In what Case the Bishop has Election, whose Clerk he will Admit. 9. Whether a
Presentation is revokable before Institution? 10. Whether the Son may succeed
his Father in the Church? and who may vary from, or repeal his Presentation.
11. What Nomination is, and the Qualifications thereof. 12. In what Case the
Presentation is the Nomination, or both as one in Law. 13. In what case the
Nominator shall have a Quare Impedit, as well as he that has Right of
Presentation; And there may be a Corrupt Nomination, as well as a Corrupt
Presentation. 14. Whether the Collatee be Incumbent, if the Bishop Collate him
within the Six months? And in what Case the Kings Presentation within the Six
months may be an Usurpation or not. 15. Where the Ordinary Collates, the Patron
is to take notice of it at his peril. 16. Who shall Present in case the
Ordinary, to whom a Lapse is devolved, be within the Six months translated to
another Bishopric. 17. A Resignation to a Proctor, without the Bishops
Acceptance, makes not the Church void. 18. A Parochial Church may be Donative,
exempt from the Ordinary's Jurisdiction, and is Resignable to, and Visitable by
the Patron, not the Ordinary. 19. Where Two are to Present by Turns; what
Presentation shall serve for a Turn, or not. 20. By the Canons the Son may not
succeed the Father in the same Church. 21. To what a Presentation may be made.
22. The Kings right of Presentation as Supreme Patron. 23. In what case the
Kings Prerogative to Present does not take place. 24. In what Cases it does.
25. To whom the Patronage of an Archbishopric belongs. 26. Whether Alien
Ministers are Presentable to a Church in England? 27. In what Cases the Patron
may Present de novo. 28. Difference between the King and a Common person in
point of Presentation. 29. A Collation makes no Plenarty where it is tortious.
30. Presentation may be per parol as well as by Writing. 31. What amounts to a
Revocation of the King's Presentation. 32. Causes of Refusal of the Clerk
Presented. 33. Certain Law Cases pertinent to this Subject. 34. Whether
Institution granted after a Caveat entered, be void? 35. What shall be held a
Serving of a Turn, and good Plenarty and Incumbency, against a Patron in
Severalty. 36. A Clerk refused by reason of his not being able to speak the
Welsh Language. 37. What is the best Legal Policy upon every Presentation by
Usurpation. 38. One of Two Grantees of an Advowson, to whom the other has
released, may Present alone, and have a Qua. Imp. in his own Name. 39. A Clerk
refused for Insufficiency by the Bishop, may not afterward be Accepted.
(1.) COllation in its proper signification, is the bestowing of a Benefice by
a Bishop that has it in his own proper right, gift, or patronage;
distinguished from Institution only in this, That Institution into a Benefice
is at the instance, motion, or Presentation of the Patron, or some other having
pro tempore the Patrons Right, performed by the Bishop. Extra. de Instit. and
de Concess. Praeben. etc. But Collation is, not only when the person is
Admitted to the Church or Benefice by the Bishop or other person
Ecclesiastical, but also when the Bishop or that other Ecclesiastical person is
the rightful Patron thereof; or when the Bishop or Ordinary has right to
Present for Lapse of the Patron: and yet sometimes Collation is and has been
used for Presentation St 25 Ed. 3. 6.
. And so Presentation, Nomination, and Collation, are commonly taken for one
and the same thing in substance, though at times distinguished 14 H. 7. 22. by
Kingsmill.
: And whereas it has been a Question, If one has the Nomination, and another
the Presentation, which of them shall be said to be the very Patron; it has
always been taken to be the better opinion, that he who has the Nomination,
is Patron of the Church. And where an Abbot had the Presentation, and another
the Nomination, and the Abbey surrendered to the King; he that has the
Nomination shall now have all; for the King shall not Present for him, that
being a thing undecent for the King 1 Car. B. R. Dickenson and Green^^^ Case.
Pop^. 1^8.
. But as to Collation and Presentation, they were in substance one and the same
thing, as aforesaid 27 E. 3. 64.
: But to speak properly, Collation is where the Bishop himself does freely give
a Benefice, which is of his own Gift by right of Patronage or Lapse 25 Ed. 3.
6. 1 Ed. 4.
. This word [ Collation] seems also to be frequently used when the King
Presents; and hence it is that there is a Writ called [ Collatione facta uni
post mortem alterius, etc.] directed to the Justices of the Common Pleas,
Commanding them to direct their Writ to a Bishop, for the Admitting one Clerk
in the place of another Presented by the King, which Clerk (during the Suit
between the King and the Bishops Clerk) is departed this life: For Judgment
once given for the Kings Clerk, and he dying before his Admission, the King may
bestow his Presentation on another Reg. of Writs, fo. 31. b.
. This Collation, Presentation, and Nomination, are in effect Synonima, being
distinguished only in respect rather of Persons, than of Things.

(2.) Yet there may be a great difference betwixt Presentation and Collation,
which gains not the Patronage from the King, as appears in the Case of the
Queen against the Bishop of York, where the Queen brought a Quare Impedit
against the said Bishop, and one Monk, and counted upon a Presentment made by
King Hen. 8. in the right of his Duchy of Lancaster, and so conveyed the same
to the Queen by Descent: The Bishop pleaded, That he and his Predecessors have
Collated to the said Church, etc. and Monk pleaded the same Plea, upon which
there was a Demurrer. And it was moved by Beaumont Sergeant, That the Plea is
not good, for a Collation cannot gain any Patronage, and cannot be an
Usurpation against a Common person, much less against the Queen, to whom no
Lapses shall be ascrib^d: and although the Queen is seized of this Advowson in
the right of her Duchy, yet when the Church becomes void, the right to Present
vests in the Royal person of the Qu. and yet vid. the Old Regist. 31. Quando
Rex praesentat non in jure Coronae, tunc incurrit ei Tempus. Hamm. Serj. By
these Collations the Queen shall be put out of possession, and put to her Writ
of Right of Advowson; but the same ought to be intended, not where the Bishop
Collates as Ordinary, but where he Collates as Patron, claiming the Patronage
to himself, for such a Collation does amount to a Presentation; and here are
two or three Collations pleaded, which should put the Queen out of possesion,
although she shall not be bound by the First during the life of the first
Incumbent. Vid. Br. Quare Impedit, 31. upon the abridging of the Case of 47 E.
3. 4. That two Presentiments the one after the other shall put the King out of
possession, and put him to his Writ of Right of Advowson, which Anderson
denied. And it was holden by the whole Court, here is not any Presentation, and
then no possession gained by the Collations: and although the Bishop does
Collate as Patron, and not as Ordinary, yet it is but a Collation. And there is
a great difference betwixt Collation and Presentation; for Collation is a
giving of the Church to the Parson, but Presentation is a giving or offering of
the Parson to the Church, and that makes a Plenarty, but not a Collation Pasch.
33 Eliz. C. B. The Queen and the Bishop of York' s Case. Leon. Rep.
.

(3.) The Collation of the Ordinary for Lapse is in Right of the Patron, and
will serve him for a Possession in a Darrein Presentment, as appears by Colt
and Glover's Case against the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, where it is
said, That the Ordinary, or he that presents by Lapse, is a kind of Attorney
made by Law, to do that for the Patron, which it is supposed he would do
himself, if there were not some let; and thefore the Collation by Lapse is in
right of the Patron, and for his turn, 24 E. 3. 26. And he shall lay it as his
possession for an Assize of Darrein Presentment, 5 H. 7. 43. Mich. 10 Jac. rot.
2642. Colt and Glov. verse. Bish. of Cov. and Lichf. Hob. Rep.
. It seems also by Gawdy's Case against the Archbishop of Canterbury and
others, That although a Bishop Collate wrongfully, yet this makes such a
Plenarty as shall bar the Lapse of the Metropolitan and the King Hill. 17 Jac.
rot. 1840. Case Gaudy verse. Archb. of Can^. and al. Hob. Rep.
And this Collation by Lapse is an act and office of Trust reposed by Law in
the Ordinary, Metropolitan, and King; the Title of Lapse being rather an
Administration than an Interest, as in Colt's Case aforesaid; which Title of
Collating by Lapse may be prevented by bringing a Quare Impedit against the
Bishop: Also where and in what Cases the bringing of that Writ against the
Bishop shall or shall not prevent such Collation, appears in the Case of
Brickhead against the Archbishop of York, as Reported by Sir Hen. Hobart Chief
Justice Mich. 15 Jac. Brickhead verse. Archb. of Y^^k. Hob. Rep.
.

(4.) Presentation is the Nomination of a Clerk to the Ordinary to be Admitted
and Instituted by him to a Benefice void, and the same being in Writing, is
nothing but a Letter Missive to the Bishop or Ordinary, to exhibit to him a
Clerk to have the Benefice voided, the Formal force hereof rests in these
words, viz. Praesento vobis Clericum meum. Thus Presentation properly so
called, is the act of a Patron offering his Clerk to the Bishop, to be
Instituted in a Benefice of his Gift The Form whereof vid. Reg Orig. fo. 3^ 2.
a.
. It is where a man has a Right to give any Benefice Spiritual, and presents
the person to the Bishop, to whom he gives it, and makes an Instrument in
writing to the Bishop in his favor; and in case there be diverse Coheirs, and
they not according in the Presentation, that which is made by the eldest of the
Coheirs, shall be first Admitted; but if it be by Joyntenants, or Tenants in
Common, and they accord not within Six months, the Bishop shall present by
Lapse Terms of Law, verb. Presentment.
. By the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. a Presentation of an Infant to a Benefice
is void. And although a Presentation, being but the Commendation of a fit
person by the Patron to the Bishop or Ordinary to be Admitted and Instituted
into a Benefice, may be done either by word alone, or by a Letter or other
writing, yet the Grant of a next Avoidance is not good without Deed Mich. 31
and 32 Eliz. C. B. Cripps and the Archb. of Canterbury's Case. Owen 47.
. But a Presentation, being no other than a Commendation of a Clerk to the
Ordinary (as aforesaid) and only a thing concerning an Advowson, without
passing any interest of the Inheritance of the Advowson, may be done by word
only; upon which ground it was Resolved by the whole Court, That the Kings
Presentation unto an Advowson Appendant to a Manor parcel of his Duchy, under
the Great Seal of England, without the Seal of the Duchy, was well made, and
good 11 Jac. C. B. The King and the Bishop of Linc. Case. Also Mich. 8 Jac. C.
B. Case betwixt the King and the Bishop of Chichester, then vouched and
affirmed for Law.
: Yea, and for the same Reason, for that a Presentation is but a Commendation,
and touches not the Inheritance, was the Kings Presentation to the Deanary of
Norwich held good, albeit in the said Presentation he mistook and mis-recited
the Name of the Foundation of the Deanary Stephen Gardener's Case there vouched
by Cook, Chief Justice Vid. Mich. 3 Car. B. R. Stephens and Potter 's Case.
Cro. 1. par. 70, 71. acc. Vid Trin. 8 Jac. C. B. rot. 18 11. Cro. 2. par. 247.
the same Case.
.

(5.) A. seized of an Advowson in Fee, Grants Praesentationem to B:
quandocunque and quomodocunque Ecclesia vacare contigerit, pro unica vice
tantum; in the Grant there was further this Clause, viz. Insuper voluit and
concessit, That the Grant should remain in force quousque Clericus habilis and
idoneus shall by his Presentation be Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted.
Afterward A. grants away the Advowson in Fee unto S. The Church becomes void.
S. Presents. The Church becomes void again. S. Presents G. upon a Disturbance
of M. the Presentee of B. the First Grantee, a Quare Impedit is brought. The
Question was, Whether B. the First Grantee, not Presenting upon the First
Avoidance, had lost the benefit of his Grant? In this Case it was Adjudged by
the whole Court, That although A. the Grantor grants Donationem and
Praesenta^ionem, quandocunque Ecclesia vacare contigerit, pro unica vice
tantum; yet B. ought to have taken the first Presentation that happened, and
has not Election to take any turn other than the First, when the Church first
became void; and by his neglect in not Presenting then, had lost the benefit of
his Grant; and the subsequent words in the Grant are but only an Explanation of
the words precedent, and relate to the next Avoidance Tr. 8 Jac. B. R. Starkey
and Pole's Case. Bulstr. 1. par. 26, 27. Hughes Abr. ver. Advowson, Sect. 6..
13.
.

(6.) The Right of Presentation is a Temporal thing, and a Temporal
Inheritance, and therefore belongs to the Kings Temporal Laws to determine,
as also to make Laws who shall Present after Six months as well as before, so
as the Title of Examination of Ability or Nonability be not thereby taken from
the Ordinary. The Law is the same touching Avoidances, for it shall be judged
by the Kings Temporal Laws, when and whether the Church may be said to be void
or not; the cognizance whereof does not belong to the Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws; and therefore where a Parson is made a Bishop, or accepts another
Benefice without License, or Resigneth, or be Deprived: In these cases the
Common Law would hold the Church void, albeit there were any Ecclesiastical Law
to the contrary Dr. and Stu. cap 36.
: And it is sufficient for the Ordinary's discharge, if the Presentee be able,
by whomsoever he be Presented; which Authority is acknowledged on all sides to
have been ever inherent in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: But as to the Right
of Presentation it self, to determine who ought to Present, and who not, and at
what time, and when the Church shall be Judged to become void, and when not,
all these appertain to the Kings Temporal Laws. And in case it happen that the
King Present not, where of Right he may, in such case the Ordinary may pro
tempore depute a fit person to serve the Cure; as in like case he may, where
there is a default or neglect in other Patrons to Present, and do not Dr. and
Stu. ibid.
.

(7.) If the Patrons be Joynt-tenants, or Tenants in Common of the Patronage,
and they vary or differ in their Presentations, the Ordinary is not in that
Case bound to Admir either of their Clerks, nor him that is Presented by the
Major part: And if the Six months expire ere they agree, the Ordinary may
Present by the Lapse; but within the Six months he may not; for if so, and the
Patrons accord, they may bring a Quare Impedit against him as a Disturber, and
remove his Clerk. But in case the Patrons have the Patronage by Descent as
Coparceners, then is the Ordinary obliged to Admit the Clerk of the Eldest
Sister, who has the precedence by Law in the Presentation, if she so please,
after which and at the next Avoidance the next Sister shall Present, and so in
order by turn one Sister after another till all the Sisters or their Heirs have
Presented, and then the Eldest Sister shall Present again, and this is called a
Presenting by Turn, which holds always between Coparceners of an Advowson,
unless they agree to Present together, or in some other manner by way of
Composition, which if so, then the Agreement ought to hold good. Yet here note,
That if after the death of the Common Ancestor, the Church happening to be
void, the eldest Sister together with another of the Sisters, Presents, and the
other Sisters severally and each in her own Name, or jointly and altogether; In
this case the Ordinary is not obliged to receive any of their Clerks, but may
suffer the Church to run into the Lapse; for there is no obligation on the
Ordinary to admit the Clerk of the Eldest Sister, but where she Presents in her
own Name only. And in such case of variance or difference among the Patrons
touching the Presentation, the Church is not properly said Litigious, obliging
the Ordinary at his peril to direct a Writ to enquire de jure Patronatus, which
Writ lies only where Two or more Present under pretense of several Titles, but
in this case all the Patrons present under one and the same Title; for which
reason the Ordinary may, if he please, suffer it to pass into the Lapse Dr. and
Stu. cap. 30.
.

(8.) Suppose a Patron presents to a Church void, and before the Admission of
the Clerk the Patron dies; after his Executors (before such Admission) Present
another Clerk. Q. Whether the Archdeacon ought to receive the Clerk of the
Testator, or of the Executors? The Opinion of the whole Court: was, That the
Bishop should have Election therein Trin. 13 Eliz. C. B. Smalwood verse. Bishop
of Lichfield. Leon. Rep.
. And in case an Agreement be made by way of Composition between diverse
claiming one Advowson, and Enrolled, or by Fine, that one shall successively
after another Present in such an order certain; and after one has Presented,
he to whom at the next Avoidance the Second Presentation does belong, is
disturbed by any that was party to the said Fine, or by some other in his
stead: In such case it is provided, That such so disturbed shall not be put to
the Quare Impedit, but their resort to the Roll or Fine shall be sufficient,
where if the Concord or Agreement be found, the Sheriff shall be commanded,
That he give knowledge to the Disturber, that he show by such a time certain
(as fifteen days, or three weeks) if he can allege any thing, wherefore the
party that is disturbed, ought not to Present; and if he appear not, or
appearing allege nothing sufficient in Bar, he shall recover his Presentation
with Damages Stat. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 5.
.

(9.) In the Case of Evans and Ascough it was the Opinion of Doderidge, That a
Bishop has no more in a Church by Election, than a Parson has by
Presentation. And that if a man Present to a Church, yet any time before
Institution he may revoke it, and Present another; and if in that case the
Bishop will Institute the First, a Quare Impedit will lie against him Case
Evans and Ascough. Latch. Rep.
. But if the Patron present one, and he be Admitted by the Ordinary, he cannot
in that case vary from his Presentation: as was also held by Doderidge in
Stoke's Case against Styles Stoke verse. Styles. Latch. Rep. fo. 253.
; where he further said, That it was out of all question at the Common Law,
that before Admission by the Ordinary the Lay-Patron may revoke his
Presentation; because a Presentation is no other than a Commendation, which may
be by word only: And if the Case be, that one has the Nomination, another the
Presentation, the Presentation and Nomination are all one. It was then said by
Whitlock, That in the Canon Law it is allowed to a Layman to vary, but not to
a Spiritual man; but at the Common Law it is all one. Doderidge and Jones
seemed to give the Reason thereof, when they said, That it may be intended,
that a Layman cannot at first so well judge, or is able to discern of the
sufficiency of the party Presented, but a Spiritual-man may. Quaere; If after
Admission of the Patrons Presentee he does afterward again Present another to
the Ordinary, and the Ordinary Admit, Institute, and Induct the last Presentee,
what Remedy for the first? So if a Spiritual Person change his Presentation by
the consent of the Ordinary, what remedy for the First after Induction of the
Second Case. ibid.
?

(10.) To the same purpose with the premises is that which is Reported in
Stoke's Case against Sykes; the Case is this, viz. A Lay-Patron, having the
next Avoidance of a Church after the death of one Stokes, See this Case in
Noy's Rep.
Father of the Plaintiff, then Incumbent of the said Church, after the Fathers
death presented Stokes's Son, whom the Bishop refused, for that by the Canon
Law Filius Patri non potest in Ecclesia succedere. Whereupon the Patron
presented Sykes; And now Stokes obtains a Dispensation Non obstante the Canon.
Notwithstanding the Ordinary does Institute Sykes, and causes him to be
Inducted. Whereupon Stokes does Sue Sykes and the Ordinary in the Delegates;
and now Banks prays a Prohibition, and by all the Justices it was granted. And
Jones said, That he had known it to be Thrice so granted in the like Case, (
viz.) in the time of Justice Gaudy, as also in the time of Justice Coke in the
Common Pleas, where both Parsons claimed by one Patron: But Doderidge there
held, That the Canon beforementioned does not hold in this Church; and so said
Doderidge was the Opinion of a Learned Civilian: So by the Canon Law a man
cannot have that Woman in Marriage, whom he had in Avowry before; yet that
Canon does not hold in our Church. Doderidge said, that the Civilians hold,
That a Lay-Patron cannot revoke his Presentation, but he may cumulando variare,
and so the Ordinary has Election to Institute which of them he will; but that
a Spiritual Patron cannot vary at all. But he said, that at the Common Law it
is out of question, That a Patron before Institution may revoke his
Presentation: And if the Patron present one, and the Ordinary admit him, but
will not give him Institution, Duplex Quaerela lies against the Ordinary, to
enforce him to do his duty: But if both Parsons claim by one Patron, and the
one sues a Duplex Quaerela, a Prohibition lies not before Institution. But
Jones denied it, and said, That it had been Resolved to the contrary. Doderidge
said, That in that case the Induction was pendente Lite Stokes verse. Sykes.
Latch. Rep.
And in Calvert's Case against Kitchen it was said, that they King may revoke
his Presentation, and by the same reason may Present another, before his
Presentee is Instituted; for proof whereof it was said, That a Common person
may recall his Presentation before the Institution, etc. for which was vouched
the Book of 31 E. 1. tit. Quare Impedit, 185. the Abbot of Leicesters Case,
although that Dyer citing it, 12 Eliz. fo. 292. conceives the Book contrary;
but it seems to be in reason that the Law is clear, That a Lay-Patron may
change, although that a Spiritual Patron cannot, and the reason is (as
aforesaid) because a Lay-person did not know his Sufficiency perhaps at the
first; but a Spiritual person by intendment may inform himself thereof well
enough, and therefore was vouched 18 H. 7. and 1 H. 8. Kellway's Reports, which
plainly proves that diversity: And by the 19 Eliz. fo. 360. in Coleshil's Case
it is said, That when the King has Presented, a Repeal by him ought not to be
admitted after Institution: And by Dyer 339. in Yatton's Case, the King may
Repeal his Presentation by a new Presentation, without mention made of the
former, except that the Second Presentation be obtained by Fraud. Also the King
may Present by Paroll, as was said by Sir Ed. Coke in the Lord Windsors Case,
and as appears by 17 Eliz. Dyer, as was vouched by Bromley Baron in the
foresaid Case of Calvert against Kitchen; where it was said by Altham Baron,
That by the Kings death his Presentation determines (understand it, before
Institution;) and so it is said in 34 E. 3. 8. tit. Quare Impedit, 11. That a
Presentment made by a Bishop becomes null and void by his death. And in 38 Ed.
3. 3. if a Bishop Present and die before, etc. the King shall Present anew
Kitchen verse. Calvert. Lanes Rep.
.

(11.) Nomination, is a power, that by virtue of a Manor or otherwise a man
has to Nominate or Appoint a Clerk to a Patron of a Benefice, by him to be
Presented to the Ordinary for the same; where Note, (1) That it may be in right
of a Manor, or otherwise. (2) That the Clerk Nominated ought to be a person
fit, able, and worthy. (3) That it may be to a Parsonage, Vicarage, or other
Spiritual promotion. (4) That it ought to be to another than the Ordinary,
which other shall present him to the Ordinary Terms of Law verb. Nomination.
. And if one has a Right to have the Nomination of a Clerk to a Benefice, and
another Disturbs him, he cannot have a Quare Impedit ipsum Nominare ad
Ecclesiam; but the Writ shall be Quod permittat ipsum Praesentare: And the
Count shall be, That of Right he ought to Name a Clerk to such as one who ought
to Present him to the Bishop, and that a Stranger does disturb him of his
Nomination; and in case he does Recover, the Judgment shall be Quod Episcopus
admittat Clericum ad Nominationem suam 21 H. 6. 17. by Fulthorp.
.

(12.) If A. B. does Grant unto J. S. That he shall Name a Clerk to him to the
Church of C. when it shall become void, and that A. B. shall present unto the
Bishop the Clerk which J. S. shall Nominate to him; in that case the
Presentation is in J. S. and he shall have a Quare Impedit, for all the Profit
is in him: and the Grant of the Nomination and Presentation is all one. But if
A. B. does Grant unto J. S. That he shall Nominate to him Two Clerks, whereof
A. B. shall Present one; in that case the Presentation is not given to J. S.
the Grantee, because it is in the Election of A. B. which of the Two shall have
the Benefice: And this was the Opinion of the Justices in Smith and Clayton's
Case 14 Ed. 4. 2. Smith and Clayton's Case.
.

(13.) If A. has the Nomination to an Advowson, and B. the Presentation, if A.
Nominates C. for his Clerk, and B. that should present C. does present D. for
the Clerk; A. that has the Nomination, shall have a Quare Impedit, and the
Writ shall be Quod permittat eum Praesentare, albeit A. had but the Nomination:
otherwise he should be without remedy; for in such cases where the party can
otherwise have no Right done him, the Law will admit such Writ, albeit the
words therein be improper Fitz. N. B. 33. b.
. And if he who had but a Nomination, corruptly agree to make a Presentation,
or Nomination, this Nomination shall be forfeited to the King, within the
Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 6. as was said in Calvert's Case against Kitchen and
Parkinson Dict. Cas. Lane Rep.
; and as it is said in Plowden, in Hare, and Bickley's Case, He who has the
Nomination, has the effect of the Advowson. Yet (as in the said Case of
Calvert) this diversity seems to be good, That if A. has the Presentation, and
B. the Nomination to a Benefice, and the Presentor upon a Corrupt agreement,
make a Presentation unknown to the Nominator, here the Nominator shall not be
prejudiced within the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 6. Trin. 7 Jac. in the
Exchequer. Calv. against Kitchen and Parkinson. Lane's Rep.
.

(14.) In Green's Case vouched by Atthowe Sergeant in the Case of the King
against the Archbishop of Canterbury and one Thomas Prust, upon a Quare Impedit
brought by the King, it is said, That if the Bishop Collate before the Six
months incurr, the Collatee is Incumbent, but the Patron may Present at any
time aster, for that fills the Church, but not against the Patron, and hinders
that no Lapse may incurr to another. In Sir Hen. Gawdy's Case for the Church of
W. the Church there became void, and within fourteen days after the King
Presented one to it jure Prerogativae; the Presentee continues possession above
thirty years, and then the Manor and the Advowson came to Sir Henry Gaudy; the
Church is void, and the King Presents again, and was disturbed by Sir Henry.
For that the King brought a Quare Impedit: and Adjudged, That the Presentation
of the King within the Six months was not an Usurpation: But if he had
Presented in his own right, there should have been an Usurpation. When a Title
by Lapse is in the King, if any Present, the King may remove him during his
life by Quare Impedit. All this appears by Baskervil's Case; but if the
Incumbent die, the term of the King is gone; and if he Resign not, the King may
Present during the life of the Incumbent: And that was a grand inconveniency,
that after so long possession in that manner, the Incumbent may be removed by
the King, etc. Vid. the Case of the King against the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Thomas Prust, Clerk. Trin. 4 Car. Hetley's Reports.

(15.) If an Incumbent Resign, and the Usurper Present within Six months, and
is in for Six months, no Notice being given to the Patron of the Resignation;
yet that shall bind him, and he shall be put to his Right of Advowson.
Otherwise if the Ordinary had Collated; because the Induction is notorious to
the Country, and the Patron ought to take notice of it at his peril, to prevent
the Usurpation of an Estranger Servien agaiest the Bishop of Lincoln. Noy's Rep.
.

(16.) There was a Question upon a Demurrer in Law, If a Lapse devolves to the
Ordinary, and within those Six months the Ordinary is Translated to another
Bishopric; Whether the King or his Metropolitan shall Present to that Lapse,
in default that the Patron does not Present? Noy Attorney, That the Guardian of
the Spiritualties shall Present whosoever he be. Vid. Dyer 78. Pl. 103. In
Robbino Case. Noy's Rep.
.

(17.) In a Quare Impedit, It was Resolved and Agreed by all upon Evidence at
Bar, That a Resignation to a Proctor, does not make the Church void, until it
be Accepted by the Bishop, and acknowledged before him. So that a Presentation
in the mean time was void Smith agaiest ^^avis Noy's Rep.
.

(18.) A Parochial Church may be a Donative, and exempt from the Ordinaries
Jurisdiction, and the Incumbent may resign to the Patron, and not to the
Ordinary; nor may the Ordinary Visit, but the Patron by Commissioners to be
appointed by him. Co. Lit. 144. Cite Hill. 1 Jac. B. R. Rot. 601. between
Fairchild and Gaier in Trespass for the Parochial Rectory Donative of St.
Burien in Cornwall; so Resolved in that Case Hill. 1 Jac. B. R. rot. 601.
Fairchild and Gaier.
. But in such case of a Parochial Donative, a mere Layman is not capable
thereof, but a Clerk in Holy Orders is; for although he comes in by way of a
Lay-donation, and not by Admission and Institution, yet his Function is
Spiritual. As was Resolved in the said Case of St. Burien Co. Lit. 601.
. So that a Donative may pass by the Gift of a Lay-Patron, without Institution
or Induction Da. 1. 46. b. and Roll. Abr. verb. Present. lit. B.
.

(19.) In a Quare Impedit the Case was this; A. seized of Two parts of an
Advowson, and B. of the Third part: A. presented one who died, afterward he
presented again C, who is deprived 1 Mar. because he is a Favourer of the
Religion of E. 6. B. presented D. who after is deprived, and C. restored. The
Church void by the death of C. B. presents, and A. brings a Quare Impedit. It
was Adjudged that it did not lie: And it was Agreed, That if Two have Title to
present by turns, and one presents one who is Admitted and Instituted, and
afterward deprived for Crime; yet he shall not present again; but it shall
serve for his Turn, because the Church was full, till a Sentence of Deprivation
came: But when the Admission and Institution are merely void, the same shall
not serve for a Turn: But in this case, although the Clerk of B. was Incumbent
for a time to all purposes, yet when the second Sentence came, C. was Incumbent
again by force of the first Presentment, and then when he was dead, B. ought to
present at his Turn Trin. 41 Eliz. B. R. Windsor and the Archb. of Cinterb.
Case. Cro. par. 1.
. In another Quare Impedit the Case was this, viz. The Bishop of Lincoln,
Patron and Ordinary Collated to a Benefice in 8 Eliz. The Incumbent took
another Benefice without Qualification, by which the first was void: The
Successor Bishop 18 Eliz. presented one E. but non constat, whether by
Avoidance, Death, or Resignation: E. being in, the Bishop was translated or
removed to Winchester: the Bishop that then was, certified that E. did not pay
his Tenths, upon which the Church was void, and the Bishop Collated J. S. to
the Church. The Question was, Whether the Queen might now avoid the Incumbent,
to have her Presentment, which accrued to her upon the avoidance of the first
Incumbent, who took a second Benefice without Qualification. The Justices at
the first doubted it, but afterward it was Adjudged for the Queen against the
Bishop. Pasch. 30 Eliz. The Queen and the Bishop of Lincolns Case. More' s Rep.

(20.) It is out of the Canon Law, one of Cardinal Otho's Canons, That Ne
succedat in Ecclesia Filius Patri, the Son may not succeed the Father in the
same Church; or in case such happen to be so Instituted or Admitted, they are
forthwith to be deprived thereof by the said Constitution. Constable. Othon. Ne
succedat in Ecclesia Filius Patri. This is indeed according to the Canon Law,
though with us not practicable; by the same Law also the Son is prohibited to
succeed the Father immediately in the same Prebendy, albeit to have another he
is not prohibited; but if it be where the number of Prebends be not definite
and certain, there he is not at all by that Law prohibited, Extr. de si. Praes.
c. dilectus; yea, by that Law the Son may not be a Vicar in that Church, where
the Father was Rector last, Extr. ib. ad Extirpandas, etc. Michael. But this
might be omitted; for the Question, An Filius possit Beneficiari in Ecclesia
Paterna? is with us grown too obsolete to admit a Negative Solution.

(21.) A Presentation may be to a Deanary 17 E. 3. 40. Adjudg'd.
, to an Hospital 21 E. 3. 6. b.
, and to a Chapel 14 H. 3. Quare I. ped. 183. Adjudg.
. And if a Stranger Present to a Donative, and his Clerk be thereupon
Instituted and Inducted, yet it is merely void Co. Litt. 344.
; for which reason such Institution and Induction upon such a Presentation
shall not make that Presentative, which before was Donative. But if he that is
the true Patron of a Parochial Rectory Donative, shall Present to the same, and
his Clerk be thereupon Admitted and Instituted, that now makes it to become
Presentative, and it shall never afterward become Donative Co. Litt. ibid.
.

(22.) If a Church become void, to which a Bishop has right to Present in
respect of his Temporalties, in this case, if the Bishop happen to die before
he has presented to that Church void, the King shall have the Presentation,
and not the Bishops Executors 50 E. 3. 26. 9 H. 6. 16. b. admit. 24 E. 3. 26.
b. Curia.
. Also if during the vacancy of the Archbishopric of York, and the
Temporalties being in the Kings hands, the Deanary becomes void, the King shall
Present to that Deanary, albeit there be a Composition between the Archbishop
and the Chapter, that the Chapter shall choose him; for de jure the Patronage
thereof belongs to the Archbishop, yet the Composition cannot bind the King,
who comes in paramount as Supreme Patron 17 E. 3. 40. Adjudg.
.

(23.) Although it be admitted, that where a Common person Incumbent is Created
a Bishop, there the King shall have the Presentation of the Church for that
turn by his Prerogative; yet it seems, if the King grant to an Incumbent,
before he is Created Bishop, a Dispensation retinere the Church with his
Bishopric, and afterward is Created Bishop and dies Incumbent; it seems the
King shall not Present to the Church by his Prerogative, for that the Church is
not void by his being made a Bishop, in which case the Prerogative gives the
Presentation to the King, but by the death of the Incumbent, in which case the
Prerogative does not take place. Co. Ent. 474. Hele's Case; there pleaded, that
in such case the Church is void by death, and admitted, that it belongs to the
Patron to present upon his death Roll. Abr. ver. Prese^um. D. m. 2.
.

(24.) If a Church, whereof a Bishop in right of his Bishopric is the Patron,
becomes void after the death of the Bishop and before the Seizure of the
Temporalties, yet the King shall have the Presentation 12 E. 3. Quare Imp. 56.
per Schard.
. And if a Church belonging to the Patronage of a Bishop become void, and the
Bishop Present and die before Institution, the King shall have that
Presentation by his Prerogative Liber Parliamentorum, 21 E 1. the Prior of
Bermu^dsey's case adjudg'd in Parl. 24 E. 3. 30. adjudg'd. Roll. ubi supr. lit.
E. nu. 5.
. So if a Bishop die after Institution of the Clerk, and before Induction, the
King shall have the Presentation by his Prerogative 11 ^. 4. 9. ly^all the
Justices. ^. N. B. 34. K. 36. K. 38 E. 3, 4. Hob. Rep. 208.
. Also if Lapse incurr to the Ordinary, and before the Six months pass the
Ordinary is Translated or dies, it seems the King shall have the Presentation,
and not the Ordinary, or his Executors, or the Guardian of the Spiritualties.
P. 40 El. B. Dubitatur, Hob. Rep. 208. in case of death. But if a Bishop having
right to present to a Prebend, and present his Clerk, who is Instituted and
Inducted in the Morning, and Afternoon the same day the Bishop dies, whereby
the Temporalties come into the Kings hands, yet the King in that case may not
have the Presentation 43 E. 3. 3.
.

(25.) The Patronage of the Deanary of an Archbishopric does of Common right
belong to the Archbishop, and he shall Present to the Avoidance 17 E. 3. 40. b.
. But by Composition it may be Elective by the Chapter, and yet the Patronage
remain in the Archbishop Ibid.
. And where a Parson ought to present to a Vicarage, if the Vicarage become
void during the vacancy of the Parsonage, the Patron of the Parsonage shall
present 19 E. 2. Qua. Imp. 178.
.

(26.) An Alien, who is a Minister, may be presented to a Church, and Anciently
it was usual for Aliens to have Spiritual promotions here, and Priors Aliens
had great possessions in England, and were Parsons Appropriate Roll. Abr. ver.
Presentm. lit. L. 4.
; yet by the Statutes of 13 R. 2. and 1 H. 5. Frenchmen are disabled from
having Benefices in England, and Frenchmen Denizon'd: Sed Qu. whether they
continue of force at this day Roll. ibid.
. And if a mere Layman, or a man altogether illiterate, be presented,
Instituted, and Inducted, it is not in Construction of the Common Law a mere
Nullity, but such are Parsons de facto; but if a Woman be Presented, Instituted
and Inducted, it is a mere Nullity at that Law, because her Incapacity is
apparent Ibid. and Hob. 209.
.

(27.) If a man present his Clerk to the Bishop, and he die before he is
received, he may present another; and although a man has presented his Clerk
to the Bishop, yet he may present another at any time before the Bishop shall
have received such his Clerk 38 E. 3. 36 b. Roll. Abr. ubi supr. lit. O.
.

(28.) If J. S. Present, and his Clerk be Admitted and Instituted; before
Induction J. D. cannot Present his Clerk, for the Church was Full before as to
a Common person, for by the Institution he had Curam animarum: But where a
Common person Presents, and his Clerk be Admitted and Instituted, yet before
Induction the King (if he has Right) may Present, and his Clerk shall be
Instituted; for the Church is not Full as against the King before Induction
Vid. Roll. ibid. lit. Q.
. But if the King has not right to the Church, in that case the Church is Full
by the Admission and Institution of a Common person's Clerk without Induction,
as against the King, so as that he may not in that case Present Ibid. nu. 3.
.

(29.) If a Bishop Collate without any good Title of Lapse or otherwise, and
then the Patron die after the Six months claps'd, and his Executor bring Quare
Impedit by force of the Statute of 4 E. 3. and the Bishop and Incumbent plead
Plenarty by Six months, it was Adjudged no Plea on Demurrer, for that the
Collation is not any Plenarty, being Tortious P. 32 El. B. R. Rot. 2065. inter
Executors of Smalwood and the Bish. of Coventry and Lichfield.
. Also if a Bishop Collate without a good Title of Lapse, it puts not the
Patron out of possession; but he may Present afterward, albeit the Bishop's
Clerk were Instituted and Inducted Co. 6. Green 29. b. and Boswell 50. Co. Lit.
344.
.

(30.) A Common person may Present to a Church per Parol; and if it be by
Writing, yet it is not any Deed, but only in nature of a Letter to the Bishop
Co. Lit. 120.
. Also the King may Present either by his Letters 2 E. 1. Rot. Patentium
membran. 5.
, or per Parol without Writing 19 E. 3. Quare Imp. 60. Agree. Co. Lit. 120.
. But if the King be deceived in his Title, it will be a void Presentation Co.
6. Green 29. b. Dubitatur. D. 16 El. 327. 6. Co. 6. Green 29. b. adjudg.
. And if the King grant a Presentation by his Letters by the words [ damus
Concedimus] without other words of Presentation, yet it seems it shall amount
to a Presentation, and be a sufficient Warrant for the Bishop to Institute him.
Dubitatur 19 E. 3. Quare Impedit, 60. A Common person by his Letter or his Word
may make a Presentation to a Benefice to the Bishop; the King may Present by
Word, if the Ordinary be present; if the King under any Seal present, it is
good: And Mich. 10 Jac. it was held by the whole Court, that a Presentment
under the Great Seal, to a Church parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster is good,
and needed not to be under the Dutchy-Seal Dom. Rex verse Emerso. Tri^. 8 Jac.
rot. 1811 Brown^. Rep. par 1. Act on Qu Imp.
. Where a man accepts a Second Benefice with Cure, without a Dispensation or
Qualification, the First Benefice is void, and the Patron may Present; but if
he does not Present, then if it is under value, no Lapse shall incurr until
there is a Deprivation and Notice: But if it be above value, then the Patron
must Present within Six months. Hill. 22 and 23 Car. 2. C. B. Rot. 680. Shute
verse. Higden. Vaugh. Rep. and Arguments.
.

The King seized of an Advowson in the Right of his Duchy of Lancaster,
Presented to it under the Great Seal, and not under the Seal of the Duchy. And
Resolved, That the Presentation was good, for the Presentation is but a Fruit
fallen from the Tree, and the King may Present by word, because a Presentation
is but a Commendation of the Clerk to the Ordinary The King and Bish. of
Lincoln and King, Case. More's Rep.
.

A man seized of an Advowson in Fee granted to another and his Heirs, that when
the Church should become void, that the Grantee and his Heirs should Nominate a
Clerk to the Grantor and his Heirs, and he and his Heirs should Present him to
the Ordinary. Resolved, Mich. 5 Eliz. More's Rep.
That if he who has the Nomination Present, he which ought to Present shall
have a Quare Impedit against him, and e contra.

In Beverley and Cornwell's Case it was Resolved, That if any Advowson comes to
the Queen for Forfeiture by Outlawry, and the Church becomes void, Pasch. 30
Eli. More's Rep.
and the Queen Presents, and then the Outlawry is reversed for Error, yet the
Queen shall enjoy the Presentment, because it came to the Queen as a profit of
the Advowson; but if the Church be void at the time of the Outlawry, and the
Presentment be forfeited as a Chattel principal and distinct, and then the
Outlawry is reversed, the party shall have Restitution of the Presentment.

(31.) If the King dies before his Clerks Admission and Institution, it is a
Revocation in Law of his Presentation M. and H. 8 Jac. in Scac. inter Calvert
and Kitchen, pe^r Cur.
. Or if the King Present one to a Benefice, and then Present another to the
same without Revoking the former, or making any mention thereof; yet this also
is a Revocation in Law of that former Ibid. and D. 12 El. 292. 70. 16 El. 327.
4.
, unless the Second were by fraud or surreptitiously obtained. Likewise, if the
Kings Presentee dies after Institution, and before Induction, that also is a
Revocation in Law, because the King had not the effect of his Presentation, and
so shall Present again Dubitatur, D. 18 El. 348. 12. Co 9. Holt. 132. Said to
be Resolved in the said Case of 18 El. D. 20 El. 360. 7. admit.
. Or if the King Present, and then before Institution revoke the same, but
before Notice thereof to the Ordinary, the Ordinary Institute and Induct him;
yet it seems that Presentation is well Revoked in Law, and the Notice thereof
to the Ordinary is not material as to the substance of the Revocation, but only
to discharge him from being a Disturber. D. 12. El. 292. adjudg'd. Dyer makes a
Quaere thereof. Dubitatur D. 16 El. 328. Vid. 25 E. 3. 47. and Roll. Abr. ubi
supr. lit. U.

(32.) If the Patron, who Presents his Clerk, be Excommunicated, it is a good
cause of Refusal of the said Clerk 15 H. 7. 7. b.
; it is also said to be so hold in the Books of the Common Law Co. 5. Spe^ot.
58. Roll. ibid.
. And where there are Three Joyntenants of the same Advowson, or of the next
Avoidance, and only one or two of them Present, the Bishop is no Disturber if
he refuse the Clerk so Presented; for he is not bound to Admit the Clerk,
unless all the Joyntenants join in the Presentation D. 14 El. 3. 4. 54. Roll.
ib. lit. Y.
. But where there are Three Grantees of the next Avoidance, and the Church
become void, and Two of them Present the Third being a Clerk, the Ordinary in
that case is to Admit him, for that he cannot join in a Presentation of
himself, and he may relinquish his Title, and accept the Presentment of the
others 2. D. 14 El. 304. 54. Roll. ibid.
.

(33.) A. the Defendant had been Parson for Three years, and pleaded Plenarty
generally by Six months of the Presentation of one Styles, a Stranger to the
Writ: and the Court held the Plea to be naught, because the Defendant showed no
Title in Styles Cronwel verse. Lister. Brownl. Rep. pa. 1. Actions on Qua. Imp.
.

(34.) In the Case between Phipps and Hayter Prohibition was granted for the
Church of T. the Suit being in the Arcbes after Induction to avoid the
Institution, for that the Institution was made after a Caveat entered, Not to
grant Institution, etc. for that does not make the Institution void at the
Common Law Mich. 15 Car. B. R. between Phipps and Hayter, per Cur. and Hutton's
Case. Hob. Rep.
.

(35.) In a Quare Impedit; A. and B. severally Patrons of the Moity of the
Church of S. in Fee to Present by Turns; A. Presents his Clerk, who is Admitted
and Inducted. The Church is void again, B. Presents his Clerk, who is likewise
Inducted, and after is deprived. The Bishop Collates without giving notice of
the Deprivation. A. grants his Advowson to J. S. in Fee; the Clerk Collated by
the Bishop died: B. Presents, and is disturbed. Resolved, (1) When A. had
right to Present upon the Deprivation, as in his Turn (although the Collation
of the Bishop was not good) yet it was but a thing in Action; and when he had
granted the Advowson over, the Grantee could not have this thing in Action, nor
the Grantor could not have it, for he had destroyed it, and so none could have
it. (2) Resolved, although the Grant was sufficient to pass the Advowson in
Fee, yet the Collation of the Bishop was good against all, but against the very
Patron, so as he might have removed the Incumbent by a Quare Impedit; but when
he does not remove him, so as he dies Incumbent; this is as a serving of his
Turn, and a good Plenarty and Incumbency against him Hill. 40 El. B. R. Leak
and the Bishop of Coventry's Case. Cro. par. 1.
.

(36.) In a Quare Impedit the Defendant pleaded, That the Divine Service there
was in the Welsh Tongue, and the Parishioners understood not the English; and
the Presentee could not speak Welsh, and therefore he refused him: It was the
Opinion of all the Justices, That it was a good cause of Refusal of him, for he
cannot instruct his Flock according to his duty and charge. Albany and the
Bishop of St. Asaph's Case. Cro. par. 1.
. But in this Case it was held, That Notice ought to be given to the Patron
himself, if he be within the County, if not, public Intimation to be on the
Church-door.

(37.) In a Quare Impedit brought in a Case between La. and Le. it was held,
That the King cannot be a Disturber; but the Bishop may be a special Disturber;
and in that case it was said, It is good policy upon every Presentation by
Usurpation, to bring a Quare Impedit as speedily as may be; and it is as good
policy to name the Bishop in the Writ, Mich. 3. Jac. B. R. Lancaster and Low's
Case. Cro. par. 2.
for then he shall not Collate for Lapse, if the Church remain void Six months;
nor shall the Metropolitan Collate, if the time come to him, for the same
Lapse: For it was said to be a Rule, That the Metropolitan shall never Collate
for Lapse, but when the immediate Ordinary might have Collated, and has
surceased his time: and in such case the Ordinary cannot Collate, because he is
made party to the Writ.

(38.) In a Case between Benet and the Bishop of Norwich it was Adjudged, Cro.
par. 1.
That if the next Avoidance of a Church be granted to A. and B. and A. Release
to B. and after the Church become void; in that case B. may Present, and upon
Disturbance have a Quare Impedit in his own Name.

(39.) If the Bishop shall for Insufficiency refuse the Clerk that is Presented
to him, Pasch. 26 El. B. R. the Bish. of Hereford's Case. Cro. par. 1.
he may not afterward Admit him: and therefore where the Patron Presented J.
S. his Clerk to the Bishop, and upon Notice by the Bishop given to the Patron
of the Insufficiency of the Clerk, the Patron Presented another Clerk, and then
the Bishop Admits the first Clerk which was Presented within Six months: In
this case it was Adjudged, That the Bishop was a Disturber for having once
refused him for Insufficiency, he cannot afterward accept of him.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Examination, Admission, Institution, and Induction.
1. What is here meant by Examination, where enjoined, how, and by whom, and at
what times to be performed. 2. In what case the Bishop is held at Common Law a
Disturber, in refusing one Clerk and Admitting another. 3. The Ordinary, as he
is not obliged to Examine the Clerk at some certain times; so he may not refuse
to examine him during all the Six months. 4. Although the Six months be
Elapsed, yet if the Patron Present, the Church not being Full, the Bishop ought
to Admit his Clerk. 5. How an Usurpation upon a Lease for years puts the very
Patron out of possession. 6. Admission what; and under what qualifications it
ought to be. 7. What the Remedy, where the Ordinary does refuse to Admit the
Clerk; the Form of such Admission. 8. What Institution is, and the Form thereof
according to the Canon Law; what required of the Clerk in order thereto, and
his Remedy in case the Ordinary denies him such Institution as he may claim by
Law. 9. Matters of Institution properly cognizable in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, yet in certain Cases not exclusively to the Common Law or Temporal
Jurisdiction. 10. Institution gives the Parson jus ad rem, not jus in re. 11.
Whether Institution without Induction works a Plena^ty? also whether it be
good, being Sealed with another Seal, and done out of the proper Diocese? The
difference between the Common Law and the Canon Law as to a Coveat entered
before Institution. 12. Whether Suit may be in the Ecclesiastical Court to
remove an Incumbent after Induction? 13. Whether the First Fruits be due upon
the Institution before Induction? 14. A Case at Common Law touching
Resignation; and whether it may be made Conditionally? 15. A Case touching the
Rightful Patron's Presentation, after the Induction of another by Usurpation.
16. What Induction is, and the Bishop's Order therein. 17. Induction is a
Temporal, not Spiritual Act: In what manner it is to be executed. 18. A Caveat
entered in the Lifetime of an Incumbent is void. 19. In what Case an Induction
made by a Minister not resident within the Archdeaconry, may be good. 20.
Institution to a Minor and Vnder-age is merely void. 21. Whether after
Induction, the Institution may be questioned in the Ecclesiastical Court. 22.
Whether Incumbency be triable only at Common Law. 23. In what Court the
validity of Induction is determinable.
(1.) EXamination is that Trial or Probation, which the Bishop or Ordinary
makes before his Admission of any person to holy Order or to a Benefice,
touching the qualification of such persons for the same respectively. So that
there are Two certain times or seasons especially, wherein this Examination is
required; the one before an Admission to Holy Orders, the other before an
Admission to a Benefice. The former of these is expressly enjoined by the 35th
Canon Ecclesiastical, whereby it is required, That the Bishop, before he Admit
any person to Holy Orders, shall diligently Examine him in the presence of
those Ministers that shall assist him at the Imposition of hands, or in case of
any lawful Impediment of the Bishop, then the said Examination shall be
carefully performed by the said Ministers, provided they be of the Bishops
Cathedral Church, if conveniently it may, otherwise by at least Three
sufficient Preachers of the same Diocese. And in case any Bishop or Suffragan
shall Admit any to Sacred Orders, who is not Examined as is before ordained,
then shall the Archbishop of the Province, having notice thereof, and being
assisted with one Bishop, suspend the said Bishop or Suffragan from making
either Deacons or Priests for the space of Two years Canon 35. Ecclesiastical.
. So also when the Clerk is Presented by the Patron of the Advowson, before he
be Admitted as Clerk to serve the Cure, the Ordinary is to Examine him of his
Ability: For if upon his Examination he be found unable to serve the same, or
be Criminous, the Ordinary may refuse to Admit and Institute him into the
Benefice Co. 5. par. Specot's Case.
. By the Ancient Cannons the Bishop has Two months time to enquire and inform
himself of the sufficiency and quality of every Clerk Presented to him, as
appears by the Canon in 1 Jac. cap. 95. But by the said Canon it is Ordained,
That the said Two months shall be abridged to 28 days only Roll. Abr. ver.
Prese^tm. lit. X.
. Upon sufficient enquiry and Examination the Ordinary may accept or refuse the
Clerk Presented, and regularly all such matters as are causes of Deprivation,
are also causes of Refusal Co. 2. Specot. 58.
; but for a Presentce to have another Benefice, is no cause of Refusal, for
that is at his own peril; and possibly the Second Benefice is more worth than
the former, which only is void in such case 14 H 7. 28. b. Cariae.
.

(2.) If the Bishop does demand of the Clerk his Letters of Orders, and Letters
Testimonial of his good behavior, and the Clerk requires time to show them, as
the space of a week or the like, because he has them not there with him; and
the Bishop does thereupon Refuse him to the Church, and Presents another: the
Bishop in such case has been adjudged to be a Disturber; for the Statute of 13
Eliz. does not compel the Clerk to show his Orders, nor Letters Testimonial of
his good Behavior: And so it was Adjudged Pasch. 33 Eliz. C. B. (...) and the
Bishop of Peterborough's Case. Leon. 230.
. Yet by the 39th Canon it is by way of Caution expressly Ordained, That no
Bishop shall Institute any of a Benefice, who has been Ordained by any other
Bishop, except he first show unto him his Letters of Orders, and bring him a
sufficient Testimony of his former good life and behavior, if the Bishop shall
require it.

(3.) Examination of the Clerk is to be done at a convenient time within the
Six months; for the Ordinary cannot refuse to Examine the Clerk during all the
Six months, and so suffer a Lapse to incurr to himself; for by so doing the
Patron should lose his Presentation, and the Ordinary take advantage of his own
wrong. But if the Ordinary, when the Clerk comes to be examined, Sedet circa
curam Pastoralem, he is not then obliged to leave the business in hand, and
presently Examine the Clerk; but he may appoint a convenient time and place for
the Examining of him Mich. 15* Jac. C. B. Adjudg'd. vid. acc. 5 H. 7. 7. C^. 5.
par. Spec^t's Case.
. This Examination by the Diocesan, touching the Conversation and Ability of
such as were ordained to Peach the Word of God, or Presented to a Benefice, is
enjoined by the Provincial Constitutions. Lindw. de Haereticis, cap. 1.

(4.) A Quare Impedit was brought by B. against the Bishop of Rochester, who
pleads, that he claims nothing but as Ordinary; and yet pleads further, That
the Clerk which the Plaintiff Presented, had before contracted with the
Plaintiff Simmiacally, and therefore because he was Simoniacus he refused, and
that the Church was then void, and so remained void; whereupon the Plaintiff
had a Writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who returned that before the coming
of this Writ, viz. 4. July the Church was Full of one Dr. Grant, ex Collatione
of the said Bishop of Rochester, who had Collated by Lapse, and this Return was
adjudged Insufficient: First, it is clear, That though the Six months pass, yet
if the Patron Present, the Bishop ought to Admit, although it be after the
Title devolved unto the Metropolitan: And it seems also Reason, that he ought
to Admit, though that the Title by Lapse be accrued to the King, for he claims
it as Supreme Ordinary. Vid. Dyer 277. quaere. But in this Case the Bishop who
is the Defendant is bound by the Judgment, and the Writ is, notwithstanding the
claim of the Bishop, that he Admit the Clerk; for the Bishop ought to execute
the Process of the Court. It was urged by Sergeant Henden, that there is a
Canon in Lindwood, That if the Church be vacant when the Writ comes to the
Bishop, that he is bound to execute the Writ; but if it be Full, then he
certifies the Justices: And the Archbishop is Sworn to the Canons, and he
vouched 22 H. 6. 45. Coke, lib. 6. 49, and 52. Dyer 260. F. N. B. 47. Dyer 364.
14 H. 7. 22. 34 H. 6. 41. 9 E. 3. Quare non admisit. 18. E. 4. 7. ^^oton
against the Bishop of Rochester. Hutt. Rep.
.

(5.) In Rud's Case against the Bishop of Lincoln, it was among other things
Resolved by the Court, in a Quare Impedit, That when one usurps upon a Lease
for years, that this Usurpation gains the Fee, and puts the very Patron out of
possession; and though by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. he in reversion
after the Lease may have a Quare Impedit when the Church is void, or may
Present and if he Present, and his Clerk be Admitted and Inducted, that then he
is Remitted; yet until it be recovered, or his Clerk be in, the Usurper has
the Fee, and against him lies the Writ of Right, etc. Also that the Patron,
which has recovered in a Quare Impedit, may Present, and that being accepted,
and Institution and Induction ensuing thereupon, it is good Rud. verse. the
Bishop of Lincoln. Hutt. Rep.
.

(6.) Admission is when the Bishop upon Examination of the Clerk Admits him to
be able and sufficient, saying, Admitto te habilem Co. on Lit. fo. 334. a.
The Lord Coke in the Fourth Part of his Institutes says, That upon
consideration had of the several Statutes 3 R. 2. 7 H. 4. 1 H. 5. and Rot. Bar.
6 H. 4. nu. 48. and 4 H. 6. nu. 29.
(whereof mention is there made,) If an Alien or Stranger born be Presented to
a Benefice, the Bishop ought not to Admit him, but may lawfully refuse him Co
4. par. Instit. cap. 74.. Consistory Courts.
. There are several things which the Statute Law of this Realm does require in
him, which shall be Admitted to a Benefice; for no person may be Admitted to
any Benefice with Cure, except he then be of the Age of 23 years at least, and
a Deacon, and shall first have subscribed the 39 Articles in the presence of
the Ordinary, and publicly read the same in the Parish Church of that
Benefice, with Declaration of his unfeigned Assent thereunto; and except he be
Admitted to Minister the Sacraments within one year next after his Induction
(if he were not so Admitted before) he shall upon every such default be ipso
facto deprived. And none shall be made a Minister, or Admitted to Preach or
Administer the Sacraments under the Age of 24 years, and unless he bring with
him to the Bishop a sufficient Testimonial, and be able to render an Account of
his Faith in Latin. All which appears by the Statute of the 13th of Eliz.
whereby it is likewise Provided, That none shall be Admitted to any Benefice
with Cure, of or above the yearly value of Thirty pounds in the King's Books,
unless he shall then be a Bachelor of Divinity, or a Preacher lawfully allowed
by some Bishop within this Realm, or by one of the Universities of Oxford or
Cambridge; and that all Admissions to Benefices, Institutions, Inductions,
Tolerations, Dispensations, Qualifications, and Licenses whatsoever, made
contrary to the Premises, shall be utterly void in Law St. 13 El. cap. 12.
. And by the Three and thirtieth Canon of the Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
Ratified and Confirmed by King James under his Letters Patents, An. 1603. it is
in Conformity to many Decrees of the Ancient Fathers, further Ordained, That no
person shall be Admitted into Sacred Orders, except he shall at the same time
Exhibit to the Bishop a Presentation of himself to some Ecclesiastical
Preferment then void in that Diocese; or bring to the said Bishop a True and
undoubted Certificate, that either he is provided with some Church within the
Diocese, where he may attend the Cure of Souls, or of some Ministers place
vacant, either in the Cathedral of that Diocese, or in some other Collegiate
Church therein also situate, where he may exercise his Ministry: Or that he is
a Fellow, or in right as a Fellow, or to be a Chaplain in some College in
Oxford or Cambridge: except he be a Master of Arts of Five years standing, that
lives of his own charge in either of the Universities: or except by the Bishop
himself that does Ordain him Minister, to be shortly after to be Admitted
either to some Benefice or Curateship then void. And in case any Bishop shall
Admit any person into the Ministry, not qualified as aforesaid, he is to keep
and maintain him, till he prefers him to some Ecclesiastical Living, on pain of
Suspension for one year from giving or Orders, by the Archbishop assisted with
another Bishop Canon Ecclesiastical 33.
.

(7.) If a Bishop shall refuse to Admit the Clerk, the Writ of Quare non
Admisit may lie in the Case Hill. 8 Car* B. R. rot. 454. Cort verse. Episc. St.
Dav. Croke.
; yet the Ordinary, before he Admits the Clerk Presented, may take a reasonable
time to examine him; and if upon Examination there be just cause of Exception
in respect of the Clerk Presented, or otherwise in respect of the Patron
Presenting, he may justify the non- Admission of him, for this Admission is no
other than the Ordinary's Allowance of a Clerk Presented to a Church that is
void. But if the Bishop refuse to Admit the Clerk Presented to him by the
Patron, as scrupling the said Patron's Right of Presentation, and the said
Patron after recover his Right of Presentation against the Bishop in the Common
Bench, he shall then have the Writ of Admittendo Clerico F. N. B. fo. 38 and
Regist. of Writs, fo. 33. a.
. Hobart Chief Justice, in the case of Colt and Glover against the Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, compares this Admission and such Acts of the Ordinary
to the Admittance of a Copyholder upon Surrender, specially where the Admission
of one be upon the Resignation of another Incumbent: And he is there of
opinion, That if a Parson Appropriate (which is Patron) Present, and his Clerk
be not Admitted, but refused for just cause and Notice given, the Lapse shall
incurr Mich. 10 Jac. rot. 2642. Colt and Glover verse. Bish. of Cov. and Lichf.
Hob. Rep.
. The usual Form or Tenor of an Admission into a Rectory or Parsonage runs in
this manner, viz. (...) A. B. by virtue of this Instrument from John Lord
Bishop of L. in his Triennial Visitation, To all Clerks, Rectors, Vicars,
Ministers, Chaplains, and Curates whatsoever within this Diocese directed, do
Admit F. G. into real, actual, and corporal possession of this Church of R.
together with all the profits, dues, members and appurtenances whatsoever
thereunto belonging, In the presence of those whose Names are underwritten.

(8.) Institution according to the Canon Law, is no other than a Verbal
Collation to a Benefice or some other Ecclesiastical Living, De Instit. lib. 4.
Decretal, and Sexti. and is by that Law taken for an Investure, c. ad haec, de
Offic. Archid. c. cum venisset. dic. tit. de Inst. For when among the Romans a
Clerk was Instituted, the Custom was, that by a Verbal Collation the Clerk was
invested in the Benefice by the delivery to him of a Ring, Staff, Cap, Pen, or
the like, in the nature of Livery and Seisin, in token of his possession of the
thing to which he was so Instituted: c. cum olim, de re Judic. cap. ex ore, de
iis quae si a Praelat. and cap. ut nostrum, de Office. Archidiac. Somewhat in
resemblance to our Tenants by the Verge, or such as are Admitted by the Rod in
a Court of ancient Demesne. But this Institution, as practicable with us,
consists in the Letters of Institution directed from the Bishop or Ordinary, in
whose Diocese the Church is, to the Clerk the Presentee, by which he Admits him
as lawful Incumbent to that vacant Church whereto he is Presented by the Patron
thereof; the said Clerk having not only first taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, with Renunciation of all Foreign Powers and Jurisdictions, according
to the Laws and Statutes in that behalf provided, but also of Canonical
Obedience to the Bishop of that Diocese and his Successors, and that he has
made no Simoniacal Contract, for or concerning the said Presentation; whereupon
the said Bishop or Ordinary does by his said Letters of Institution constitute
and invest the said Clerk Rector of the Rectory of the said Parochial Church,
cum cura animarum Parochianorum, together with all Rights, Privileges, and
Emoluments belonging to the same, Juribus and Consuetudinib^s Nostris
Estiscopalibus, and Ecclesiae nostrae Cath, etc. Dignitate and honor in
omnibus semper salvis. Dioecesis idem significat in effectu quoad
Jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, quod Territorium quoad Jurisdictionem
Temporalem. Ita Andrae, and DD. in c. cum Episcopus, de Offic. Ord. lib. 6.
Dioecesis significat locum Spiritualem, sicuti Territorium locum Temporalem.
Alberic. in suo Dict. ver. Dioecesis. This Institution to a Benefice may not,
by the 39th Article of the Canons, be to any person preordained, except he
first show the Bishop his Letters of Orders, as also (if he require it) a
Testimonial of his former good life and behavior. Moreover, by the Law he is
obliged to subscribe the Articles of Religion, to Swear Canonical Obedience to
the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Successors, and to his Diocesan; and for
his Personal Residence, if it be a Vicarage. Juram entum de Canonica
Obedientia, viz. Ego A. B. juro, quod praestabo veram and Canonicam Obedientiam
Episcopo Londinensi ejusque Successoribus, in omnibus licitis and honestis. Sic
me Deus adjuvet. If a Clerk should kill his Prelate, to whom he has Sworn
Canonical Obedience, it is Pety Treason. Vid. 19 H. 6. 47. b. vid. Stat. 25 E.
3. De Prodic. cap. 2. But if the Diocesan, notwithstanding the exhibiting the
Presentation before him, or his Vicar General, having power to Institute, and
notwithstanding Requisition made him by the Clerk Presented in order to
Institution, shall refuse to Institute and Admit him, he may thereof enter his
Complaint before the Dean of the Arches, who thereupon sends his Letters to the
said Bishops, which Letters or Rescript is termed Duplex Querela: So that as to
the substance of the Premises touching this Subject, the practice with us at
this day does well nigh correspond with the Ancient Canon Law, whereby it is
expressly Ordained, lib. 3. Decretal. That all Ecclesiastical Livings and
Benefices shall be had by Institution, to be by the Bishop or his Chancellor,
or such other as has Episcopal Jurisdiction, positively declaring, That
without such Institution neither any Benefice is lawfully obtained, nor can be
lawfully retained: Adding withal, That Benefices void ought to be granted
within Six months after knowledge of the Voidance thereof, otherwise the Grant
thereof devolves and comes to the Superior; and that he who does cause or
procure himself to be Instituted into a Benefice, the Incumbent thereof being
alive, shall be deposed from his Orders. Decretal. ibid.

(9.) Albeit the Cognizance of this matter of Institutions is so properly and
connaturally inherent in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, yet the Temporal and
Common Law it seems has in some cases took notice thereof* for it is there
Reported, That every Rectory does consist upon Spiritualty and Temporalty: As
to the Spiritualty, viz. Cura animarum, the Presentee is complete Parson by
Institution; for when the Bishop upon Examination finds him able, then he does
Institute him in these words, viz. Instituo te ad tale Beneficium and habere
Curam animarum, of such a Parish, Accipe Curam tuam and meam 4^ El. B. R. Co.
4. par. 79. (...) Case.
. And the very Institution to a Benefice the Law understands as an Acceptance
and the having of a Benefice; as in that Case of Digby; where it is held, That
if a Clerk be Presented, Admitted, and Instituted to a Benefice with Cure, to
the value of 8 l. and afterward and before Induction he accepts of another
Benefice with Cure, and is Inducted in the same; the First Benefice is void by
the Statute of 21 H. 8. For the words of the Statute are, A Parson, having one
Benefice with Cure, etc. Accept and take another, etc. And he who is Instituted
to a Benefice, is said to have Accepted a Benefice, and to have a Benefice Co.
ibid. Digh. Case.
. And he that is Instituted, may enter into the Glebe-Lands before his
Induction, and has Right to have it against any Stranger whatever Pasch. 13
Jac. B. R. per. Co. Roll. Rep.
. And albeit by the Civil and Canon Law an Institution granted after a Caveat
Entered is void, yet by the Common Law it is otherwise P. 13 Jac. B. R. Case
Hitchin and Glover. Roll. Rep.
,

(10.) By the Institution the Parson has only Jus ad rem, he has not Jus in
re until he has Induction; and therefore if a Prebendary, Parson, or Vicar,
after he is Admitted and Instituted, and before he be Inducted, grant an
Annuity out of his Prebend, Parsonage, or Vicarage, and the same be Confirmed
by the Patron and Ordinary, or by the Dean and Chapter, yet this shall not
charge the Glebe, or the Successor of the Prebendary, Parson or Vicar; for
although by his Institution he has (as aforesaid) Jus ad rem, yet he has not
Jus in re, but the charge in such case shall lie upon the person of the
Prebendary, Parson, or Vicar, and not upon the Lands 5 Eliz. Dyer 221. vid.
Hare and Birkley's C. Plow. Com. 528. acc.
.

(11.) The Church at this day, since the Statute of Westminster. 2. is not Full by
Institution of the King; and therefore if the King has a Title by Lapse to
Present pro hac vice, and he Presents, and his Clerk be Instituted, but dies
before Induction, the King in that case may Present again; and so it has been
Adjudged 18 Eliz in Giles Case. vid. Co. 10. par. 132. in Holts Case. vid. 18
Eliz.
. Which plainly shows, that Institution without Induction does not work a
Plenarty. It has also been held, That the Letters of Institution Sealed with
another Seal, and made out of the Diocese, is good Dyer, 348. Weston's Case.
acc. enough Hill. 8 Cha. rot. 454. B. R. Cort verse. Bishop of St. David's. Cro.
Rep.
. Of if a Caveat be Entered with a Bishop, and he after grant Institution, yet
the Institution is not void by the Common Law; otherwise by the Spiritual Law
Pasch. 13 Jac. B. R. Hitchings verse. Glover. Roll. Rep.
. Notwithstanding what was just now said, it is Adjudged in Digbie's Case, That
a Benefice is taken, received, and had by Institution only; and therefore a
Qualification or Dispensation following comes too late Co. lib. 4 7 9.
. So that if a man having one Benefice with Cure by Institution only, accept
another by Institution only, without Dispensation, the Common Law makes
Avoidance Actual, if the Patron will Mich. 10 Jac. rot. 2642. Colt and Glover
verse. B. of Cov. and Lichf. Hob. R.
.

(12.) Proceedings being in the Ecclesiastical Court to remove an Incumbent
after Induction, a Prohibition was granted to stay the same: One Oliver sued a
Quare Impedit against Hussy, and while that depended, Hussy was Instituted
and Inducted, and Oliver sued Hussy in the Spiritual Court to remove him. Noy
prayed a Prohibition, First because he may not sue in Two Courts for the same
cause: Secondly, because it is a Suit after Induction; and upon that last point
the Court granted a Prohibition Oliver verse. Hussy. Latch. Rep.
.

(13.) In the Case of Dennys against Drake it was said, That if a man be
Instituted to a Benefice, he ought to pay the First Fruits before Induction by
the Statute: But by the Common Law it was otherwise; for he is not to have the
Temporalties until Induction, and therefore he could not pay the First Fruits;
but another person cannot be Presented to his Benefice during the continuance
of the First Institution. And an Institution to a Second Benefice is a present
Avoidance of the First Case Dennys verse. Drake. Lane's Rep. Vid. Co. lib. 4.
Digbie's Case fo. 79.


(14.) G. Parson of the Church of E. did by Instrument in Writing Resign his
Benefice before a Notary Public, and others, into the hands of the Bishop; and
the Resignation was absolute and voluntary, and to the use of M. and B. or
either of them. And it was further in^erted in the said Instrument of
Resignation, Resignation of a Benefice.
Protestatione and sub Condition, quod si aliqui eorum non Admissi fuerant per
assentum Episcop. infra Sex menses, quod tunc haec praesens Resignatio mea
vacua and pro nulla habeatur, and nunc prout tunc, and tunc prout nunc; and
Cestuy que use came within the time limited to the Bishop, and did offer to
Resign to him, which the Bishop refused to accept, etc. Crook for the
Plaintiff: Forasmuch as the Plaintiff may Resign on Condition as well, as a
particular Tenant may Surrender upon Condition: And Two Parsons may Exchange,
and if the Estate be Executed on the one part, and not on the other, that
Parson whose part was not Executed, may have his Benefice again, as it is
Adjudged in the 46 E. 3. But Coke Sollic. and Godfrey were on the contrary
Opinion: For that the Incumbent may not Transfer his Benefice to another
without Presentation, as appears in the recited Case of 46 E. 3. Also the
Resignation is not good, and the Condition void, because it is against the
nature of a Resignation, which must be Absolute, Sponte, pure, and Simpliciter,
and is not like to a Condition in Law, as in the said Case of Exchange of 46 E.
3. for the Law does annex a Condition to it, but a collateral Condition cannot
be annexed by the parties themselves: Also this is an act Judicial, to which a
Condition cannot be annexed, no more than an Ordinary may Admit upon Condition,
or a Judgment be confessed on Condition, which are Judicial Acts. But admitting
the Condition to be good, yet a new Induction ought to be made by the Ordinary,
for the Church became one time void, and is not like to the Case in 2 R. 2.
Quare Impedit, 143. Where Sentence of Deprivation was given, and the Sentence
presently reversed by Appeal, there needs no new Institution, for that the
Church was never void. And upon Arguments given in Writing by the Civilians to
the Judges, the Judgment was entered, Quod querens nihil capiat per Billam 34
Eliz. C. B. Gayton's Case. Owens Rep.
.

(15.) In Rud's Case against the Bishop of Lincoln, it was ( inter alia)
Resolved by the Court, That when one having a good Title to Present, and an
Incumbent by Usurpation is Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, and after that
the Patron Presents, and the Bishop refuse, and after the Patron recover, and
then he which had this Presentation, exhibits it to the Bishop; this is now a
good Presentation; and the Patron cannot revoke or give him a new Presentation:
But if the Patron before the death of the Incumbent make Letters of
Presentation, that is void, because he had no Title to Present The aforesaid
Case of Rud verse. the Bishop of Lincoln. Hutt. Rep.
.

(16.) Induction is nothing else but the putting of the Parson into Actual
possession of the Church and Glebe, which are the Temporalties of the Church;
or the making of a Clerk complete Incumbent of a Church: This is Induction 15
H. 4. 76. b. 14 H. 6. Qua. Imp. 162. 38 H. 6. 15.
, and it is by Letters from the Bishop of the Diocese directed to all and
singular the Clerks, Rectors, Vicars, etc. within the said Diocese, to put the
Clerk or his lawful Attorney for him, and in his name into the Actual
possession of the Church to which he had been Presented and Instituted,
together with all the profits, dues, members, and appurtenances whatsoever
thereunto belongings or appertaining; of the due execution whereof a
Certificate endorsed on the Instrument of Induction, and Subscribed by a
competent number of Witnesses ought to be returned to the said Bishop or
Ordinary; who may appoint the Archdeacon to give Induction ^8 E. 3, 3. b.
, yet by Prescription it seems the Dean and Chapter of Paul's, as also the Dean
and Chapter of Lichfield may give Induction 1^ H. 4. 9.
. It is also said, That an Induction made by a Bishop is void, where it belongs
to a Dean and Chapter by Prescription Ib. Contr. 14 H. 6. Qua. Imp. 162.
adjudg'd of a Prebend.
: But an Induction by the Patron is void 11 H. 4. 10.
; yet the King's Grantee of a Free-Chappel shall be put into possession by the
Sheriff of the County, and not by the Ordinary of the place 14 H. 4. 11. b. and
Roll. Abr. ver. Presentem. lit. C.
.

(17.) This Induction is not a Spiritual, but a Temporal Act; and therefore if
after the Clerk has been Presented by the Patron, and Admitted and Instituted
by the Bishop, the Archdeacon shall refuse to Induct him into the Benefice, an
Action upon the Case lies for the Clerk against the Archdeacon Pasch. 23.
Eliz. C. B. ad* judge. Godb. 23. vid. Fitz. N. B. 47. 26 H. 8. 3. by Knigh^ly.
. And after the Incumbent is thus Inducted, he may then plead any Plea in Bar
of a Quare Impedit brought against him which concerns his Possession; and so
may plead a Release in Bar, because he has the Freehold in him, which shall
not be lost without his Answer 4 H. 8. Dyer 1.
: For by this Induction or being led into the Church he has, as it were,
Livery and Seisin thereof given him as the lawful Incumbent by delivery of the
Keys of the Church to him, and that by order of the Bishop; whereof Publication
is then made to the Parishioners by ringing one or more the Bells Vid. Cro. Rep
par. 3. fo. 258.
: And albeit a Parson has his Presentation, Admission, and Institution, and
that upon a lawful Title, yet he is not a possessor of the Parsonage according
to the Letter of the Law till his Induction Pasch. 17 Jac. C. B. Sir W. Elvis
verse. Archbishop of York, and others. Hob. Rep.
. Which Induction is (as aforesaid) a Temporal Act, and (as the Opinion of the
Court was in Hutton's Case) Triable by Temporal Law; and since by Induction the
Church is Full, it is not to be avoided, but by a Suit of Quare Impedit or the
like, at the Common Law, and not to be undermined by alleging Insufficiency in
the Institution in the Court Ecclesiastical, for that may come in question upon
the Trial of the Induction at the Common Law, which will not be good, if the
Institution were not good: All which was also the Opinion of the Court in the
Case aforesaid Sir Tim. Hutton's Case. C. B. Hob. Rep.
; for if the Question be, whether Parson or no Parson, which comprehends
Induction, it is Triable at the Common Law Trin. 13 Jac. B. R. Glover against
Shedd. Roll. Rep.
. And although by the Institution the Church if Full against all persons save
the King, yet he is not complete Parson till Induction; for though he be
admitted ad Officium by the Institution, yet he is not entitled ad Beneficium
till Induction Plow. 52^ b.
.

(18.) In an Ejectione Firmae brought by the Lessee of Rone, Incumbent of the
Church of D. it was found by Special Verdict, that the King was the true
Patron, and that Wingfield entered a Coveat, in vita Incumbentis, he then lying
in Extremis, scil. Caveat Episcopus ne quis admittatur, etc. nisi Convocatus
the said Wingfield; the Incumbent dies; Naunton a Stranger Presents one Morgan,
who is Admitted and Instituted; afterward the said Wingfield Presents one
Glover, who is Instituted and Inducted, and afterward the said Rone procures a
Presentation from the King, who was Instituted and Inducted: And then it came
in^ question in the Ecclesiastical Court, who had the best Right; and there
Sentence was given, That the First Institution was Irrita, Vacua, and Inanis,
by reason of the Caveat, and then the Church being Full of the Second
Incumbent, the King was put out of possession, and so his Presentation void:
But it was Adjudged and Resolved by all the Court for Rone: For (1) it was
Resolved, That this Caveat was void, because it was in the life of the
Incumbent. According to the Common Law, if a Caveat be entered with the Bishop,
and he grant Institution afterward, yet it is not void: After a Caveat
entered, Institution is not void by the Common Law. Pasch. 13 Jac. B. R.
Hitching verse. Glover. Roll. Rep. and Cro. par. 2. (2.) The Church upon the
Institution of Morgan was Full against all but the King, and so Agreed many
times in the Books, and then the Presentation of Glover was void by reason of
the Super-institution, and therefore no obstacle in the way to hinder the
Presentation of Rone, and therefore Rone had good Right: And if the Second
Institution be void, the Sentence cannot make it good; for the Ecclesiastical
Court ought to take notice of the Common Law, which says, That Ecclesia est
plena and consulta upon the Institution, and the person has thereby Curam
animarum. And as Doderidge Justice said, He has by it Officium, but Beneficium
comes by the Induction: And although by the Ecclesiastical Law the Institution
may be disannulled by Sentence, yet as Lindwood says, Aliter est in Angl. And
Doderidge put a Case out of Dr. and Student. lib. 2. If a man Devise a Sum of
Money to be paid to J. S. when he comes to Full age, and he after sue for it in
the Spiritual Court, they ought to take notice of the Time of Full age, as it
is used by the Common Law, viz. 21. and not of the time of Full age as it is in
the Civil Law, viz. 25. So in this case; for when these Two Laws meet together,
the Common Law ought to be preferred: And when the Parson has Institution, the
Archdeacon ought to give him Induction. Vid. Dyer 293. Bedingfield's Case,
cited by Haughton to accord with this Case Mich. 15 Jac. B. R. Rones Case.
Poph. Rep.
.

(19.) By the Court, That if an Archdeacon make a general Mandate for the
Induction of a Parson, viz. Universe. personis Vicariis Clericis and Literatis
infra Archidiaconat. meum ubicunque Constitut. That if a Minister or a Preacher
who is not resident within the Archdeaconry, makes the Induction, yet it is
good. And the Opinion of four Doctors of the Civil Law was shown in the Court
accordingly, upon a Special Verdict Chr. Deans Case. Noy's Rep.
.

(21.) In the Case of Strange against Foot, the sole Point upon the Special
Verdict was, If one Prideoux being Admitted and Instituted to a Prebendary,
with the Cure, 4 Eliz. be being but Nine years of age; notwithstanding the
Statute it is merely void. Note 4 H. 6. 3. That if a Feme who is an Infant
under 14 years has issue, it is a Bastard Pasc. 2 Jac. C. B. ret. 1320.
Strange verse. Foot. Noy's Rep.
.

(21.) It is said at the Common Law, that after Induction, the Admission and
Institution ought not to be drawn into question in the Ecclesiastical Court
Mich. 12 Jac. B. between Sir Tim. Hutton and the Bish of Chester.
; for they say, That after Induction the Ecclesiastical Law may not call into
question the Institution: That by Institution the Church is full against Common
persons, but not against the King; and that by Induction the King may be put
out of possession Hill. 15 Jac. B. R. Hitcham and Glover's Case. Roll. Rep.
. And in the Case between Rowrth and the Bishop of Chester, it was Resolved,
That after an Induction, an Institution is not to be examined in the
Ecclesiastical Court, but by a Quare Impedit only: But yet the Justices, if
they see cause, may write to the Bishop to Certify concerning the Institution
More's Rep.
.

(22.) Two Patrons pretended Title to Present; the one Presented, and the
Bishop refused his Clerk. He sued in the Audience, and had an Inhibition to the
Bishop, and after he there obtained Institution and Induction by the
Archbishop: Afterward the Inferior Bishop, Instituted and Inducted the Clerk
of the other; for which Process issued out of the Audience against him; he upon
that prayed a Prohibition, and a Prohibition was awarded as to the Incumbency,
because the Ecclesiastical Courts have not to meddle with Institution and
Induction (as was there said) for that would determine the Incumbency, which is
triable at Common Law Middleton and Lawte's Case. More's Rep.
.

(23.) In a Prohibition prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, the Case appeared
to be this, viz. Holt was Presented, Instituted and Inducted to the
Parish Church of Storinton: afterward Dr. Wickham draws him into the
Ecclesiastical Court, questioning of him for some matters, as touching the
validity of his Induction, and upon this a Prohibition was by him prayed: Trin.
9 Jac. B. R. Holt's Case, in Bulstr. par. 1.
Williams Justice, A Prohibition here in this Case ought to be granted, this
being directly within the Statute 45 Ed. 3. cap. 3. for here the very Title of
the Patronage comes in question, with the determination of which they ought not
to intermeddle; also matter of Induction, and the validity thereof is
determinable at the Common Law, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court, and
therefore a Prohibition ought to be granted, and the whole Court agreed with
him herein, and therefore by the Rule of the Court a Prohibition in this Case
was granted.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Avoidance and Next Avoidance; as also of Cession.
1. What Avoidance is; how Twofold. 2. The difference in Law between Avoidance
and next Avoidance. 3. How many ways Avoidanee may happen; what Next Avoidance
is: The word Avoidance falls under a double Acceptance in Law. 4. The Next
Avoidance may not be granted by a Letter, it cannot be granted but by Deed. 5.
Grant of a Next Avoidance by the Son, Living the Father Tenant in Tail, is
void. 6. How Avoidance may be according to the Canon Law, which yet is
otherwise by Statute Law. 7. The Release of the Next Avoidance, made after the
Church becomes void, is void. 8. A wide difference between the Common Law and
the Canon, in respect of Plenarty and Voidance. 9. What Cession is; and who
shall Present in that case. 10. A Parson Beneficed accepting an Archdeaconry,
falls not under this Cession. 11. In case of Cession the Ordinary is to give
Notice to the Patron, otherwise the Lapse does not incurr against him. 12. In
what case the former Benefice is not void by Cession, notwithstanding the
taking of another Incompatible, and without Dispensation; And in what case a
Church void is held Void as to all persons, except an Usurper. 13. In case of
Three Grantees of the Next Avoidance, whether Two of them may Present the
Third, being a Clerk. 14. What difference between an Avoidance by Parliament,
and an Avoidance at the Ecclesiastical Law. 15. In what case an Advowson
granted to a man, shall enure to him only for his life, and not go to his
Executors. 16. A man having an Advowson in Fee of the Church, whereof himself
is Incumbent, Devises that his Executors should next Present; Whether such
Devise of the Next Avoidance be good. 17. A grant of a Next Avoidance to one is
not after grantable by the same Grantor to another. 18. Whether the Greating of
an Incumbent a Bishop in Ireland be a sufficient cause of Avoidance. 19. Where
a Next Avoidance is granted to Two, whereof the one Release to the other, that
Other may after bring a Quare Impedit in his own Name. 20. If one Grantee of
the Next Avoidance Present the other Grantee of the same Avoidance, whether
such Grant be void or not?
(1.) AVoidance is, when a Benefice or other Ecclesiastical Living is void of a
lawful Incumbent: which generally may be said to be Twofold; either in Fact and
in deed, as when the Incumbent is dead, or actually deprived: or in Law, as
when the same person or Parson has more Benefices than one Incompatible,
having no Dispensation, nor qualified for Plurality Bro. tit. Quare Imp. nu. 51.
. Or an Avoidance is either Temporal or Spiritual: (1) Temporal, as by death of
the Incumbent. (2) Spiritual, as by Resignation, Deprivation, Creation,
Cession. The Temporal is an Avoidance de facto; the Spiritual is an Avoidance
de jure. Of this latter or Spiritual Avoidance the Ecclesiastical Court takes
cognizance and determines, and therefore the Supreme Head may so dispense
there, that such Avoidance in Law shall never come to be an Avoidance in Deed;
and of this Avoidance in Law no Title accrues to the Patron, unless something
be thereupon done by the Ecclesiastical Court, as a Declaratory Sentence, or
such like. But upon Avoidance in Deed, Presentment accrueth to the Patron
presently. Anciently when a Bishop was also the Parson of any Benefice, either
in right of his Bishopric, or that the Benefice was annexed to his See, for
the provision of his Table, or the better maintenance of Hospitality, the
Fruits of such Benefice or Parsonage, during every vacancy or Avoidance of such
Bishopric, where the Bishop was both Lord of a Manor, and Parson of a
Parsonage thereto annexed, did not come to the King (as they now do, whereby
the Parsonage and Manor are both consolidated into one, being now both holden
to be Temporalties,) but the Parsonage came to the Archbishop of the Province,
as a Spiritualty granted to his See by Privilege, during the vacancy of the
Sees of such Bishops as were in his Province, as may appear by the Records of
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Ex Registro Archi-episc. Cant. and Ridl.
View. cap. 6. Sect. 1.

(2.) There is in operation of Law a wide difference between Avoidance and Next
Avoidance; the former is in esse, the other is only in pass; the former is the
want of an Incumbent upon a Benefice de praesenti: the other is the Grant of a
supply of that want de futuro, and is the Grant of a Next Avoidance in a
Parsonage or other Spiritual promotion, which is Grantable whiles there is an
Incumbent actually in being, and is in the nature of a thing in Action, and
therefore will not pass without Deed. But a present Avoidance, though it be not
merely a thing in Action, yet it is not Grantable in that kind as the other:
The present Avoidance is not valuable, and therefore shall not be Assets; it
may be otherwise with a Next Avoidance in some Cases, for the Next Avoidance is
but a Chattel Pasch. 28 El. C. B. (...) verse. (...). Owen Rep.
, the Grant whereof is not good without Deed Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. Cr^^^s Case.
Rep. ibid.
. For an Advowson or the Patron's Right of Presentation to a Church, is not a
Spiritual, but a Temporal Inheritance, grantable by Deed, and (if Appendant) as
the Manor it self to which it is Appendant, as an Accessory to its Principal.

(3.) The Cognizance of Voidance of Benefices is Ecclesiastical by the Statute
25 Ed. 3. cap. 8. it being the want of an Incumbent on a Benefice (as
aforesaid) and is opposed to Plenarty. This Voidance may be either by Death,
Deprivation, Law or Act of Parliament, Cession or Plurality, Resignation,
Creation, Incapacity, Union, Nonpayment of Tenths, etc. So that a Voidance may
happen to be such either in Law, or in deed; virtually, or actually.
Resignation is Juris proprii spontanea Refutatio, or the voluntary yielding up
of the Incumbent (into the hands of the Ordinary) his interest and right, which
he has in his Benefice. Touching the Form of Resignation, and Protestation,
which must be when the party will Resign, vid. Regist. fo. 302. F. N. B. fo.
273. and this Resignation, which is one of the causes of Avoidance, is to be
made to the Ordinary; for it is a Rule in the Canon Law, Apud eum debet fieri
Renunciatio, apud quem pertinere dignoscitur Confirmatio. The Next Avoidance is
only a Power legally granted to another by the right Patron to Present a Clerk
to the Church, when it shall next become void Broo. tit. Quare Imp. nu. 51.
. And during such Voidance of a Parsonage, the Franktenement of the Glebe
thereof is said so be in no man, but is said to be in Abeyance, that is, only
in the remembrance, intendment, and consideration of the Law, that though for
the present, during the time of such Vacancy, it be not actually in any person,
yet it is by way of Abeyance) in hope and expectation belonging to such one as
shall next enjoy the same. The word Avoidance has Two significations in the
Law; the one (and that here intended) is when a Benefice or any Ecclesiastical
Living becomes Void of an Incumbent; the other may be that, which is understood
by what we intend in Pleadings in Chancery, when we say Confessed or Avoided,
Traversed or Denied, etc. which has no relation to the matter in hand.
Likewise after the death of a Bishop, or Parson, the Freehold is in Abeyance of
necessity Colt and Glover's Case verse. B^^. of C^v. and Lich f. Hob. Rep.
; but the Law will not admit the framing of Abeyances needless and in vain, as
in Vacations of Bishops, Parsons, or the like, as in case of Single
Corporations, Bishops, Deans, and Parsons, which must die, and leave a Vacuum
of the Freehold 13 Jac. in Scaccar. Rot, 96. Sheffeld verse. Ratcliff Hob. Rep.
. And this Next Avoidance is a Chattel locally, where the Advowson is, not
where the Deed is; for it was Resolved in the Case of Holland verse. Shelley,
That the Advowson had such a Locality in the Rape, where the Church was, that
it accrued to the Plaintiff, wheresoever the Deed of Grant, or the Grantee
himself was Mich. 17 Jac. C. B. Rot. 2710. Holland verse. Shelley. Hob. Rep.
.

(4.) C. brought a Quare Impedit against the Archbishop of Canterbury and
others, and Declared upon a Grant of the Next Avoidance, and the Defendant
demanded Oyer of the Deed; and the Plaintiff showed a Letter, which was written
by his Father to the true Patron, by which he had Writ to his Father, that he
had given to his Son, that was the Plaintiff, the next Avoidance; and upon this
there was a Demurr: And the whole Court for the Demurr, For that such Letter
was a Mockery, for the Grant was not good without Deed: and Judgment was given
accordingly Mich. 31 and 32 Eliz. C. B. Cripps verse. the Arch^. of Cant. and
others. Ower. Rep.
. But by Deed it is Grantable, whereby Advowsons are also Grantable, as other
Inheritances are, and the delivery of the Deed of Grant of it shall be instead
of Livery made of the Church it self, according to Sir Edward Coke, in the
first Part of his Institutes Co. 1. par. Instit. 46. and 335.
.

(5.) If a Tenant in tail and his Son join in a Grant of the Next Avoidance, it
is void against the Son, and no Confirmation; for in the case of a Quare
Impedit brought by Sir Marmaduke Wivel, the Point was this: Tenant in tail of
an Advowson, and his Son and Heir joined in a Grant of the Next Avoidance. The
Tenant in tail died; and it was Adjudged, that the Grant was utterly void
against the Son and heir that joined in the Grant, because he had nothing in
the Advowson, neither in possession or right, nor in Actual possibility at the
time of the Grant Sir Marmad. Wivel's Case. Hob. Rep.
.

(6.) The Acceptance of an Archdeaconry by one who has a Benefice with Cure of
Souls, may work an Avoidance at the Canon Law as to such Archdeaconry; yet an
Archdeaconry, and the Promotion thereof, as being not any Cure of Souls, though
an Ecclesiastical Preferment, seems not to be within the Statute of 21 H. 8.
13. And the Opinion of Wray Chief Justice, in Vnderhill's Case upon that
Statute was, that he conceived the Law there to be qualified in that case, by
reason of a Proviso in the said Statute, viz. Provided, that no Deanary,
Archdeaconry, etc. be taken or comprehended under the name of a Benefice having
Cure of Souls, in any Article above specified Pasch. 31 Eliz. B. R. Underhill
and Savage's Case. Leon. Rep.
.

(7.) In a Quare Impedit the Case was, The Plaintiff counted, that R. B. was
seized of an Advowson, and granted the Next Avoidance to the Plaintiff and H.
B. and that afterward the Church became void, and after during the Avoidance
H. B. released to the Plaintiff, and so that it belongs to him to Present. Upon
this Count the Defendant did demurr in Law; for it appears upon the
Plaintiffs own showing, that H. B. ought to have joined with the Plaintiff in
the Action, for the Release being made after the Church became void, is not of
any effect, but utterly void. So is the Grant of the Presentment to the Church
where the Church is void, for it is a thing in Action. Vid. the Lord Dyer, 28
H. 6. 26. 3 M. Dyer 129. 11 Eliz. Dyer 283. And afterward Judgment was given,
that the Release was void Mich. 30 and 31 El. C. B. Case Brckesby against
Wickham and the Bishop of Lincoln.
.

(8.) Touching Avoidances there is a wide difference between the Judgment of
the Common Law, and that of the Canon; for if a mere Layman, not having holy
Orders, be Presented to a Benefice, the Church remains void according to the
Canon Law, notwithstanding such Presentation; but at the Common Law, albeit
this be a mere nullity there also, and void, yet it does adjudge the Church to
be Full according to the public Admission, Institution, and Induction, and not
according to the capacity of the person, which is a thing secret, until such an
one be deprived for it by Sentence in the Spiritual Court; and so the Church in
construction of Law (understand it of the Common Law) is held void but from the
time of Deprivation, of which notice ought to be given to the Patron Hill. 36
Eliz. B. R. Poph. Rep.
. So that according to the Canon Law there cannot be a Plenarty by the
Presentation, Admission, Institution, and Induction of a mere Layman to a
Church; it is otherwise at the Common Law, which does not so much consider the
Capacity or Incapacity of the person Instituted and Inducted, as the
Institution and Induction it self, until such time as there is a Sentence of
Deprivation in the Ecclesiastical Court.

(9.) Cession is when an Ecclesiastical person Beneficed is Created a Bishop;
or when the Parson of a Parsonage takes another Benefice without Dispensation,
not being otherwise qualified for Plurality: In both which cases their first
Benefices become void, and are said to be so void by Cession; insomuch that the
King shall Present pro hac vice (whoever be Patron) to that Benefice, which he
had who was Created Bishop; and in the other Case the Patron may Present Terms
of Law verb. Cession.
. So that if a Parson or Dean in England take and accept of a Bishopric in
Ireland, it will cause that the First Church shall become void by Cession
Latch. Rep. fo. 234.
. Resolved in Holland's Case, and in Digby's Case, 4. Rep. That the Patron may
Present, as soon as the Incumbent is Instituted in a Second Living, without
Deprivation.

(10.) By the Council of Lateran it was Ordained, That whoever having a
Benefice with Cure of Souls, should accept of another cum Cura, should ipso
jure be deprived of the former, the Patron whereof might Present as to a
Benefice void Conc. Lat. An. 1215. Innoc. 3. Pap.
; and this without any Sentence Declaratory of the First Church being void, if
there were no License or Dispensation to the contrary in the case 24 E. 3. 30,
and 24 E. 3. 26. b. acc. and F. N. B. 24. l.
, to prevent a Cession of the former Benefice. For it has been Resolved, That
the Acceptance of a Second Benefice voids the former by Cession, without any
Sentence Declaratory by the Statute of 21 H. 8. 13. but if having a Benefice
cum Cura he Accept of an Archdeaconry, the same is not such a Benefice with
Cure of Souls within the said Statute, as to make the former void, as was then
also Resolved Pasch. 31 Eliz. B. R. Underhill and Savage's Case. Leon. 1. Rep.
316.
.

(11.) In case of Cession in this kind, it is requisite that Notice thereof be
given by the Ordinary to the Patron, otherwise the Lapse will not incurr
against him, in case he Present not within the Six months Co. 4. par. 77. in
Holland's Case.
. Nor do the Courts at Common Law take notice of such Cession, until the same
be certified unto them by the Ordinary. And wherever an Ecclesiastical Dignity
and a Benefice with Cure are Incompatible, there the Acceptance of the one will
be a Cession of the other; For which reason, if the Incumbent of a Parsonage or
Vicarage with Cure, be made Dean of a Cathedral, his Parsonage or Vicarage
becomes void by Cession 5 Ed. 3. 3. Qu. Imp. 35. 24 E. 3. 38. Pars. Law, c. 16.
, unless he be qualified for Plurality. Or if a Dean be made a Bishop, yea,
though a Dean or Parson in England be made a Bishop in Ireland (as aforesaid)
his Benefice becomes void, as was Resolved in Evans and Askwith's Case; for
that the Constitution or Council, which makes it void, is general, and not
limited to any place: And so it was also Resolved, 3 E. 3. Fitz. Trial, and so
adjudged, 21 Jac. C. B. in the Case between Woodley and the Bishop of Exon and
Manwaring Tri^. 3 Car. B. R. Evans and Kiffin verse. Askwith. Jones Rep.
.

(12.) The case may so happen, that albeit a man having a Benefice with Cure of
Souls accept another, and be Instituted and Inducted into the same; yet his
First Benefice shall not be void by Cession, though the Benefices be
incompatible, though there be no Dispensation in the case, and although himself
be not otherwise qualified for Pluralities: For it has been Resolved, That if
a man having one Benefice, accept another, and be Instituted and Inducted into
the Second, and then read not his Articles; that yet the First Benefice voids
not by Cession, because the Second is as not taken Die. on St. 13 Eliz. the last
Case vouched, in Case S^ubely verse. Bu^ler. Hob. Rep.
. Notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, but that where a man having a Benefice
with Cure of Souls, above the value of Eight pounds per Ann. does take another
with Cure, and is thereto Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, the First
Benefice (without Dispensation) becomes void, as in the Case of the King
against George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury: In which Case it was held, That
the Church was absolutely void in facto and jure by taking of a Second
Benefice, and that by the express words of the Statute of 21 H. 8. So that by
the Acceptance of a Second Benefice the Church is void facto and jure, quoad
the Patron and all others Trin. 4 Car. Rot. 441. the King verse. George Archb.
of Cant. and The. P^yst. Cro. Rep.
. Sed Q. whether void as to an Usurper; for in some cases a Benefice may be
void as to some persons, and not void as to others: As in the Case of Simony,
whereby as well as by Cession a Church becomes void; yet in that case although
it be void to all men quorum interest, to the King and his Incumbent, and all
that claim under him, and to the Parishioners, to the Ordinary, and to the
like, yet (according to Sir Hen. Hobart Chief Justice) it is not void to an
Usurper; for a man without Right cannot Present unto it as to a Church void,
nor the Ordinary so discharge himself, if he receive the Clerk of an Usurper;
for he is none of them quorum interest. Pasch. 14 Jac. Rot. 1026. Case of
Winchcombe against the Bishop of Winchester and Rich. Pulleston. Hob. Rep.

(13.) If the Next Avoidance be granted to Three persons, and after the Church
become void, and then Two of the Three Present the Third Grantee, being a
Clerk; in this case the Presentation is good, and the Bishop may not refuse
him, inasmuch as all Three were Joynt-tenants thereof by the Grant, and only
Two of them join in the Presentment, for that the Third person cannot Present
himself; but if only one of these Three Grantees Present the Third, the Bishop
has power to refuse him D. 13, 14 Eliz. 304. 54. Roll. Abr. ver. Presentment,
lit. M.
. And if an Incumbent having the Advowson, do Devise the Next Avoidance, it
seems it is good. Trin. 13 Jac. B. R. Harris verse. Austen. Roll. Rep.

(14.) In Holland's Case it was Resolved, That before the Statute of 21 H. 8.
c. 13. if he which had a Benefice with Cure, accept another with Cure, the
First was void; but this was no Avoidance by the Common Law, but by
Constitution of the Pope, of which the Patron might take Notice if he would,
and Present, without Deprivation: But because the Avoidance accrued by the
Ecclesiastical Law, no Lapse incurred without Notice, as upon a Deprivation or
Resignation; so that the Church was void for the benefit of the Prtron, not for
his disadvantage: But now if the First Benefice be of the value of Eight pounds
per annum, the Patron at his peril ought to Present, for to an Avoidance by
Parliament every one is party, but if not of Eight pounds, it is void by the
Ecclesiastical Law, of which he needs not take Notice Co. 4. Holland's Case. 39
Eliz.
.

(15.) In a Quare Impedit The Defendant said A. was seized of the Advowson of
the Church of D. and by Deed 19 Jac. granted to J. S. the Next Avoidance, and
that J. S. died, and made his Executor, who Presented the Plantiff to the
Church being void. Upon Non concessit it was found, That A. granted to J. S.
durante vita ipsius J. S. primam and proximam Advocationem, and that he died
before the Church became void. Whether this was an absolute Grant of the Next
Avoidance, as is pretended, was the Question. And Resolved, it was not; but it
is limited to him to Present to the Advowson if it becomes void during his
life, and not that otherwise it should go to his Executors; and therefore it
was Adjudged against the Defendant Trin. 14 Car. B. R. Mann and the Bishop of
Bristol and others. Cro. par. 3.
.

(16.) The Incumbent of a Church purchased the Advowson thereof in Fee, and
devised that his Executor should Present after his decease, and devised the
Inheritance to another in Fee. It was said, the devise of the Next Avoidance
was void, because when his Will should take effect, the Church was instantly
void. But the Court held the devise was good, for the Law is so, and it shall
be good, according to the intent of the party expressed in his will Pynchin and
Dr. Harris. Cro. par. 2.
. The Grant of the Next Avoidance during the Avoidance, is void in Law.
Steephens and Clark's Case. More's Reports.

(17.) In a Quare Impedit the Case was, The Corporation of B. being seized of
an Advowson, granted the Next Avoidance to J. S. and afterward granted primam
and proximam Advocationem to the Earl of B. who granted it to the Plaintiff:
The Church became void, J. S. Presented his Clerk, who was Inducted, and then
the Church became void again. It was Resolved, that the Second Grant was void,
so as the Plaintiff had no Title, for when he had granted primam and proximam
Advocationem to one, he had not Authority to grant it after to another; but if
the First Grant had been lost so as it could not have been pleaded, there
perhaps the Second Grand had been good Williams and the B. of Lincolns Case.
Cro. par. 1.
.

(18.) In a Quare Impedit the Case was, H. being Incumbent of a Church, was
Created a Bishop in Ireland, and the Queen Presented the Defendant. It was the
Opinion of the Justices, That this Creating of the Incumbent a Bishop in
Ireland was a good cause of Avoidance, and that the Queen should have it by her
Prerogative: But if the Queen does not take the benefit of the First Avoidance,
but suffers a Stranger to Present, and the Presentee dies, she may not have
Prerogative to Present to the Second Avoidance Mich. 42 and 43 Eliz. B. R. Sir
R. Basset and Gee's Case. Cro. par. 1.
.

(19.) The Next Avoidance of a Church was granted to A. and B. A. releases to
B. and after the Church became void: It was Adjudged in this Case, That B. may
Present, and upon Disturbance have a Quare Impedit in his own Name Benet and
the Bishop of Norwich's Case. Cro. par. 1.
. Or thus: The Next Avoidance was granted to Two, the one Released to the
other, who brought a Quare Impedit in his own Name; and it was adjudged
maintainable, because it was before the Church was void Jews and Benet's Case.
More's Rep*
.

(20.) A. seized of the Manor of D. to which an Advowson was Appendant,
granted the Next Avoidance to B. and D. and eorum cuilibet conjunctim and
divisim Haered. Executor. and Assignatis suis. The Church void, B. Presents D.
to the Church: Adjudged, that the Presentment of him was good, though he were
one of the Grantees Sir Godfr. Foliamb's Case. More's Rep.
.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Pluralities.
1. Pluralities condemned by the Council of Lateran; yet dispensed with by
Kings and Popes. 2. What in this matter the Pope anciently exercised by way of
Usurpation, the King may now do de jure; The difference between them in the
manner how. 3. What persons are qualified for granting or receiving
Pluralities. 4. Several Laws relating to Pluralities, Dispensations, and
Qualifications. 5. How the 8 l. annual value of a Benefice shall be understood,
whether as in the Kings Books, or according to the true value of the Benefice.
6. The Lord Hobart's Opinion touching the Statute of 21 H. 8. relating to
Pluralities. 7. What the Pope's Power in England was before the making of the
said Statute; And whether the taking of a Bishopric in Ireland by a Dean in
England, makes the Deanary void by Cession? 8. The Chaplains of Persons of
Honor, having diverse Benefices, shall retain them for their Lives, though they
be discharged of their Service. 9. Whether the Ecclesiastical Court may take
cognizance of Plenarty or Voidance, after Induction; And whether the cognizance
of Cession or no Cession, belongs to the Temporal or Spiritual Count. 10.
Difference between Voidance by Act of Parliament, and Voidance by the
Ecclesiastical Law. 11. A Prohibition granted upon Sequestration of a Benefice
by the Bishop. 12. The Fifth Paragraph aforesaid Adjudged and determined. 13.
How the Voidance in case of Three Benefices in one person. 14. Benefice not
void, if the King License the Incumbent to be an Incumbent and a Bishop. 15.
How the taking of a Second Benefice is a Voidance of the First. 16. Whether so,
in case of a Chaplain of the King. 17. Whether so, in case of a Si modo or Modo
sit, by way of a Limitation in the Dispensation. 18. Whether the word
Dispensamus be necessary in the Letters of Dispensation for a Plurality? 19.
The Kings Retainer of a Chaplain by Word only qualifies him for a Plurality
within the Statute of 21 H. 8. 20. Whether a Third Chaplain retained by a
Countess Widow, is qualified to purchase a Dispensation for Plurality. 21. In
reference to Plurality, whether regard is to be had to the value mentioned in
the Statute of 25 H. 8. or to the true value of the Benefice. 22. Whether
Admission and Iustitution makes the First Benefice void without Induction. 23.
Whether before the Statute of 25 H. 8. the Pope might here grant Dispensations
for Pluralities. 24. Whether the Retainer of a Chaplain may be good and
sufficient without a Patent. 25. In what case a Dispensation for Plurality may
come too late, though before Induction. 26. Three Resolutions of Law in
reference to Avoidance by reason of Plurality.
(1.) PLurality, according to the Common acceptance of the word, is where one
and the same person is possessed of Two or more Ecclesiastical Benefices with
Cure of Souls, simul and semel. It was long since condemned by the general
Council of Lateran An. 1215.
, whereby it was Ordained, That whatever Ecclesiastical person, having one
Benefice with Cure of Souls, does take another such, shall ipso jure be
deprived of the former; and if he contest for the retaining thereof, shall lose
both Council. Later. To. 4. 221. cap. 29. 24 E. 3. 33. 39 E. 3. 44. F. N. B. 34.
L. Co. 4. par. 75.
. Notwithstanding which Canon, it was heretofore usual with the Pope to usurp a
power of Dispensation in this matter, the which de jure was anciently practiced
by Kings, as Supreme, and as the original Donors of Benefices and
Ecclesiastical Dignities; witness Edmond that Monk of Bury, who by virtue of
such Dispensations held several Ecclesiastical Benefices at one and the same
time. The said Canon (as to the substance thereof, relating to Pluralities) is
now Confirmed by the Statute of 21 H. 8. 13. which limits the former Benefice
with Cure of Souls to the yearly value of Eight pounds or upwards, and the time
of Avoidance thereof to be immediately after possession, by Induction into the
other with Cure of Souls; with power of Presentation de novo granted to the
Patron of the former Benefice, and all benefit of the same to the Presentee, as
if the Incumbent had died or resigned. Q. Whether the said yearly value of
Eight pounds or above, ought to be computed according to the valuation in the
Kings Books, as returned into the Exchequer, and now used in the First Fruits
Office, or according to the just and true value of the Benefice Dyer 237. p.
29. Cro. Eliz. 853.
. Q. likewise, Whether a Parson of a Church Impropriate, with a Vicar
perpetually endowed, accepting of a Presentation unto the Vicarage without
Dispensation, be a Pluralist within the Canon and Statute aforesaid? The
Negative is supposed to give the best Solution to the Question Vid. Parss Law,
cap. 21.


(2.) The same power of granting Faculties, Pluralities, Commendams, etc. which
anciently the Pope exercised in this Realm by Usurpation, is by the Statute of
21 H. 8. cap. 13. and 1 Eliz. transferred unto and vested in the Crown de jure;
also from and under the King, in the Archbishop of Canterbury and his
Commissaries by Authority derived from the Crown: The Pope anciently granted to
Bishops after Consecration, Dispensations Recipere and obtinere Beneficium cum
cura animarum, to hold the same in Commendam, the which he did in this Realm by
Usurpation, and which the Crown may now do de jure; for the same power (as
aforesaid) which the Pope had, is by the Acts of Parliament in 25 H. 8. and 1
Eliz. in the King de jure. But there is a very material difference between the
Dispensations anciently here granted by the Pope, and those at this day by the
King and Archbishop, Confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents, which are not good
otherwise than to such as are Complete Incumbents at the time of granting
thereof, Ibid*
whereas it was sometimes otherwise with the other; whence it is observable,
that in Digbie's Case the Dispensation came too soon: A. is Instituted and
Inducted into a Benefice with Cure, value Eight pounds per ann. Afterward the
King presenting him to another with Cure, he is Admitted and Instituted:
Afterward the Archbishop of Canterbury grants him Letters of Dispensation to
hold Two Benefices; the King confirms the same: Afterward he is Inducted into
the Second Benefice. In this case the Dispensation comes too late, because by
the Institution into the Second Benefice the First Benefice was void by the
Stat. of 21 H. 8. Co. 4. par. 79. Digbie's Case.
.

(3.) The Acceptance of a Second Benefice, with a Dispensation, comes not under
the notion of prohibited Pluralities, in case the First were under the annual
value of Eight pounds, or sine cura. And what persons are qualified either for
the Granting or receiving Pluralities, appears by the Stat. of 21 H. 8. c. 13.
In which there is not any limitation of Number of Chaplains to be retained by
the King, Queen, and Prince, and other the King's Children; for which reason
they may retain as many Chaplains as they please, and each of them qualificable
by a Dispensation for Plurality: But if either of the King's Chaplains be Sworn
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, such may purchase a
Dispensation to hold Three Benefices with Cure of Souls. The Persons specially
qualified by Dispensations for Pluralities, are either (1) Such as are retained
as Chaplains to Persons of Honor: Or (2) Such as are qualified thereto in
respect of their Birth: Or (3) Such as are dignified with some certain Degrees
in either of the Universities of this Kingdom. In reference to the first of
these, every Archbishop and Duke may have Six Chaplains; Marquess and Earl,
Five; every Viscount and other Bishop, Four; Lord Chancellor, Three; Knight of
the Garter, Three; Baron, Three; Duchess, Marchioness, Countess, and Baroness
(being Widows,) Two; Treasurer and Controller of the Kings House, Two; the
Kings Secretary and Dean of his Chapel, the Kings Almner and Master of the
Rolls, Two; the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and Warden of the Cinque
Ports, One. In reference to the Second qualification, viz. By Birth, the
Brothers and Sons of all Temporal Lords, and of Knights, born in Wedlock, may
purchase Dispensations to hold Two Parsonages, etc. with Cure of Souls. In
reference to the Third, all Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity, Doctors and
Batchelors of Law, Presented to any of these Degrees, not by grace only, but by
any of the Universities of this Realm, may purchase and hold as aforesaid. Vid.
Statute 21 H. 8. cap. In the Parsons Counselor, par. 1. chap. 4. Chaplains.
Archbishop 8 Duke 6 Marquess 5 Earl 5 Bishop 6 Viscount 4 Lord Chancellor 3
Knight. of the Garter 3 Baron 3 Duchess, Marchioness, Countess, Baroness,
Widows, each 2

Treasurer, Controller, of the Kings House, each 2

Kings Secretary 2 Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Kings Almner, Clerk of the Closer,
Master of the Rolls, each 2

Chief Justice B. R. -- 1 Warden of the Cinque Ports -- 1

13.

(4.) Although by the Letter of which Act the First Living is not void until
Induction into the Second, the words being [ If the party be Instituted and
Inducted in possession of the Second Living, that then the first shall be
void:] yet to avoid the great inconveniency (as Sir Simon Degge observes in his
Parsons Counselor) that otherwise would ensue, Par. 1. chap. 4. Co. 4. 79. b.
Hob. 166.
it has been held, That the First Living is void upon the bare Institution into
the Second; and so it should seem the Law was before the making of this Act,
where the party had no Dispensation. The sufficiency of qualification for
Plurality relates as well to the Dispensation as to the Person; for if the
Dispensation, after its being had from the Master of the Faculties, be not
confirmed under the Great Seal of England, other qualifications will not
suffice. Nor are the supernumerary Chaplains of any person of Honor, retained
by him above the Number allowed by the Statute, qualified for Plurality. Co. 4.
90. B. versus the Bishop of Gloucester, and Saveacre. Anders. More, 561. The
death, attainder, degradation, or displacing of a Chaplains Lord, or his
discharging his Chaplain, unqualifies him for a Plurality of incompatible
Livings Co. 4. 17. b.
; otherwise of the Chaplain of a Duchess, Marchioness, Countess, or Baroness,
in case of After-marriage Id. 4. 118.
. A double Capacity in one and the same person of Honor to qualify his
Chaplains, does but capacitate him to qualify his Number of Chaplains only
according to his best qualification Ibid.
. A Person of Honor having retained his full Number of Chaplains, and
discharging them after their preferment, may not during their Lives qualify
others Co. 4. 90. a.
.

(5.) The Question was formerly put, Whether the 8 l. yearly value, intentioned
in the Statute of 21 H. 8. c. 13. shall be understood according to the Taxed
value in the Kings Books, or according to the very true value of the Benefice?
Mr. Hughes in his Parsons Law reports a Case in King James's time, wherein this
Question was debated pro and con, the Judges equally divided, the Case for
difficulty and variance of Opinion adjourned, and afterward (as he there
speaks de auditu) by order of the King compounded Pasch. 8. Jac. C. B. the King
and the Bish. of Bristol and Bauleighs Case. vid. Hughe's Pars. Law, cap. 18.
. In that Case Two Presidents it seems were showed in proof of that Opinion,
which inclined to have it taken according to the very value of the Benefice 40
El. C. B. Pus^ and Sm^h's Case. and Trin. 43 El. B. R. rot. 564. Bond and
Triket's Case. Cro. par. 3. p. 858.
; notwithstanding, when the same point came again several years after into
question, the Court then seemed to incline against the Opinion, which was for
the very value of the Benefice: But ( says he) the Case was not then resolved
or adjudged, but remains a Question undetermined Vid. Pa^s. Law ubi supr.
Under P^pe Innocent. 3.
. Quaere the Law. Foster and Walmesley Justices held the value should be taken
according to the Taxed value, as in the Book of First Fruits: but Warburton and
Coke Chief Justice, Contra. It has been Resolved in Holland's Case, and
likewise in Digby's Case, Rep. 4. and often before since the Council of
Lateran, An. Do. 1215. That if a man have a Benefice with Cure, whatever the
value be, and is Admitted and Instituted into another Benefice with Cure, of
what value soever, having no Qualification or Dispensation, the First Benefice
is ipso facto so void, that the Patron may Present another to it, if he will.
But if the Patron will not Present, then if under the value, no Lapse shall
incurr until Deprivation of the first Benefice, and Notice: But if of the
value of eight pounds, or above, the Patron at his peril must Present within
Six months by the Statute of 21 H. 8. Shute verse. Higden. Vaugh. Rep. vid.
Anders. 1. pa. f. 200. b. p. 236. vide Moor's Rep. C^s. Larg. ad eund. effect.
. And in that Case of Digby it was adjudged, That when a man has a Benefice
with Cure above eight pounds, and afterward takes another with Cure, and is
Presented and Instituted, and before Induction procures the Letters of
Dispensation, that this Dispensation comes too late: For by the Institution
Ecclesia plena and consulta existit against all persons except the King; for
every Rectory consists upon Spiritualty and Temporalty. And as to the
Spiritualty, viz. Cura animarum, he is complete Parson by the Institution; for
when the Bishop upon Examination had, admits him able, then he does
Institute him, and says, Instituo te ad tale Beneficium, and habere curam
animarum of such a Parish, and accipe curam tuam, etc. Vide 33 H. 6. 13. But
touching the Temporalties, as the Glebe-Lands, etc. he has no Freehold in them
until Induction: For by the General Council of Lateran, Anno Dom. 1215. it
appears, That by the acceptance of two Benefices the first is void, Aperto
jure; for upon this Council are the Books of the Common Law in this Ca^e
founded. And it was in this Case Resolved, That this was an Acceptance of a
Benefice cum Cura within the Statute of 21 H. 8. Institution is an Acceptance
by the Common Law Co. 4. Digby's Case. 41 Eliz. f. 78.
.

A man was Presented to a Church with a Vicarage endowed; the Parson accepted
of a Presentation to the Vicarage without Dispensation: Whether this were a
Plurality by the Canon Law, and by the Statute of 21 H. 8. was the Question.
Hobart Chief Justice was of Opinion, That notwithstanding they were several
Advowsons, and several Quare Impedits might be brought of them, and several
Actions maintained for their several Possessions, yet the Presentment of one
man to the Parsonage and Vicarage was no Plurality, because the Parsonage and
Vicarage are but one Cure: And there is a Proviso in the Statute, That no
Parsonage that has a Vicar endowed, shall be taken by the Name of a Benefice
with Cure within the Statute, as to make it a Plurality Mich. 22 Jac. B. R.
Woodley and the Bishop of Exeter and Manwaring's Case. Cro. par. 2.
.

(6.) The Lord Hobart in Colt and Glover's Case against the Bishop of Coventry
and Lichfield is clear of Opinion, That Bishoprics are not within the Law
under the word [ Benefices] in the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. So that if a
Parson take a Bishopric, it avoids not the Benefice by force of this Law, but
by the ancient Common Law, as it is holden 11 H. 4 60. But withal he holds it
as clear, That if a Bishop have or take two Benefices, Parsonages, or
Vicarages, with Cure, either by Retainer, or otherwise de novo* he is directly
as to these Benefices within the Law; for he is to all purposes for those not a
Bishop (whether it be in his own Diocese or not) but a Parson or Vicar; and by
that Name must sue and be sued, and Prescribe and Claim. For if any person,
having one Benefice with Cure, etc. take another, etc. whosoever will hold two
Benefices, must have such a Qualification, and such a Dispensation, as the Law
21 H. 8. requires: Whereupon the Lord Hobart in the foresaid Case is clear of
Opinion, That if a man be qualified Chaplain to any Subject, and then be made a
Bishop, his Qualification is void, so as he cannot take two Benefices de novo
after by force of that Qualification: But if he had lawfully two Benefices
before his Bishopric, he may by Dispensation of Retainer (besides his former
Dispensation, to take two Benefices) hold them with his Bishopric. And if a
man, being the King's Chaplain, take a Bishopric, he holds that he cease to
be the King's Chaplain; and Bishops are not in that respect Chaplains to the
King, within the meaning of the Statute: So that the Clause of the Statute that
gives the King power to give as many Benefices as he will of his own gift to
his Chaplain, will not serve them Mich. 10 Jac. Rot. 1642 Colt and Glover verse.
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. Hob. Rep.
. In this Case of Colt, etc. against the Bishop of etc. he is of Opinion, That
if a man have a Benefice with Cure worth above 8 l. he cannot without
Qualification and Dispensation procure another with Cure, to be united to it
after, though they make but one Benefice; for this Cautel of Union is provided
for by Name: But of Unions before, he is of another Opinion* Case Colt, Hob.
Rep.

(7.) In ancient times the Pope used to grant Dispensations of the Canons in
this Realm, and so might the King have done. The first Statute that restrained
the power of the Pope, was that of 21 H. 8. of Pluralities: That the Church
shall be void, notwithstanding any Grant of the Pope: Also the power of the
Pope was taken away by the Statute of 25 H. 8. Before that of the 21 H. 8. the
Pope might have dispensed with a man to have twenty Benefices; and so might the
King. The 21 H. 8. was the first Statute, or Law, which gave allowance for
Pluralities; afterward by the 28 H. 8. the power of the Pope was given to the
King: But as it was said and agreed in the Case of Evans and Ascough, that was
not by way of Introduction, but Cumulutive and by way of Exposition. And by
that Statute the Archbishop of Canterbury had in this matter a concurrent power
with the King, and Dispensation granted by the King, or by the Archbishop, is
good Hill. 22. Jac. B. R. rot. 1164. Evan^ verse. Ascough. Latch. Rep.
. Also in the said Case it was agreed by all the Justices, That if a Parson or
Dean in England does take a Bishopric in Ireland, it makes the first Church
void by Cession; because Ireland is a Subordinate* Realm to England, and
governed by the same Law: For it was there agreed by all, as well by the
Justices as those of the Bar, That if a Parson or Dean in England take a
Bishopric in Ireland, the first Church is void by Cession. Justice Whitlock
gave this Reason for it, Because there is but one Canon Law per totam
Ecclesiam; and therefore wherever the Authority of the Pope extended it self,
be it in one or diverse Realms* the taking of a Bishopric made the Deanary or
Parsonage void. Nemo potest habere duas Militias, nec duas Dignitates, and est
impossible quod unus homo potest esse in duobus locis uno tempore. And 5 R. 2.
F. Trial 54. the whole Spiritual Court is but one Court; which Book is very
remarkable to that purpose, That the Canon Law is but one Law: Which Reason was
also given by Justice Doderidge in the same Case, and upon the same point, who
said, That the Law of the Church of England is not the Pope's Law, but that all
of it is extracted out of Ancient Canons; as well General as National. Another
Reason which he then gave was, Because Ireland is a Subordinate Realm, and
governed by the same Law: Because although before the time of H. 2. they were
several Kingdoms or Realms, yet the Laws of England were there Proclaimed by
King John, and is subject to the Laws of England. And if the King, having a
Title to Present to a Church in Ireland, confirm it to the Incumbent under the
Great Seal of England, it is good. 45 Ed. 3. 70. Ibid. f. 234.
.

(8.) In Savacre's Case it was adjudged in the Common Pleas, That if a Baron,
or others mentioned in the Statute of 21 H. 8. take diverse Chaplains which have
many Benefices, and after they discharge their Chaplains from their Service,
they shall retain their Benefices during their Lives, and if the Baron takes
others to be his Chaplains, they cannot take many Benefices during the Lives of
the others, which are Beneficed and Discharged of their Services; for if the
Law were otherwise, the Lords might make any capable of holding Benefices by
admitting them to be their Chaplains Sava^re's Case. Owen's Rep.
.

(9.) T. prayed a Prohibition to the Arches; the Case was this, One had a
Recovery in a Quare Impedit, and he had a Writ to the Bishop against T. upon
which A. his Clerk was admitted, etc. and after the Recovery died, and T.
supposing his heir to be in the Ward of the King, and that the said A. took
another Benefice without sufficient Qualification, by which the Church was void
by Cession, and he attained a Presentation of the King, and he was Admitted,
etc. by the Lord Keeper, being within the Diocese of Lincoln, and A. sued him
in the Ecclesiastical Court, and T. prayed a Prohibition, and it was granted
per totam Curiam; for without question there ought nothing to be questioned in
the Ecclesiastical Court after the Induction of the party: And whether it is a
Cession or not, does properly belong to the Common Law: And Jones cited a
Judgment in William's Case according. Note, that by the Constitution of Otho
and Othobon, That Institution and Induction is voidable in the Ecclesiastical
Court, if no Prohibition be prayed Thornton's Case. Whinch. Rep.
.

(10.) In the Case of the King against the Archbishop of Canterbury and Thomas
Prust Clerk in a Quare Impedit, was vouched Holland's Case in Cok. 41, 51. to
show that there is a difference between Voidance by Act of Parliament, and
Voidance by the Ecclesiastical Law: For before the Statute by the taking of the
second Benefice, the first Church was void; but not so that the Lapse incurred
upon it. And as for Pluralities, the words of the Statute are, That it shall be
void, as if he were naturally dead; and therefore if a man takes a second
Benefice and dies, Issue ought to be taken, whether the first vacavit per
mortem; And it is found, That Not: For it was void before the death of the
Incumbent The King against the Archbishop of Canterbury and Prust. Hetley's Rep.
.

(11.) P. was Collated, Instituted, and Inducted by the Bishop of Exeter,
Patron Dr. Hall; the Bishop Collates another, pretending that the first
Incumbent had taken a second Benefice, whereupon the first was void; and revera
the first Incumbent had a Dispensation: And notwithstanding that, the Bishop
Sequesters the Benefice; and upon Discovery thereof to the Court, a Prohibition
was granted Pinson's Case in He^ley's Rep.
.

(12.) In Bene's Case against Trickett, the point was, Whether the value of the
Church for Plurality by 21 H. 8. shall be eight pounds according to the Book of
Rates and Valuation in the First Fruits Office, or according to the very value
of the Church per Annum. Atkinson, That according to the value of the King's
Books: For the Parliament never thought that any man could live upon so little
as eight pounds per Annum, which is not six pence a day. Note, 38 E. 3, 4. and
Dyer 237. but by the Court, That it shall be according to the very value of the
Church in yearly value in the Statute of 21 H. 8. And by Gaudy and Fenner, to
whom agreed Yelverton, That the eight pound shall be accounted according to the
very value of the Church per Annum Trin. 43. Eliz. B. R. Been verse. Trickett.
Noy's Rep.
.

(13.) In a Quare Impedit it was doubted, If A. having two Benefices with the
Cure by Dispensation, and then takes a third Benefice with Cure, If now both
the first Benefices, or the first of them only be void. Hieron said, That it
was adjudged that both of them should be void The King against the Bishop of
Chichester. Noy 's Rep.
.

(14.) If the King grant a License to an Incumbent to be an Incumbent and a
Bishop* and he afterward be made a Bishop, the n^^ice is not void 11 H. 4. 60.
H. 39. El. B. R. inter A^miger and Holland per Cur. Resolved.
. Henry de Blois, Brother to King Stephen, was Bishop of Winchester, and Abbot
of Glassenbury Liber Successionis 19.
.

(15.) It seems that at the Common Law, if an Incumbent had taken a second
Benefice with Cure, neither the first nor the second had been void Co. 4.
Holland. 75. b.
. But by the General Council of Lateran, held in the year 1215. it was
ordained, That if a man took diverse Benefices with Cure of Souls, the first
should be void, unless he had a Dispensation from the Pope Co. 4. Digby 79.
. This Constitution of the said General Council is ratified and confirmed in
Pecham's Constitutions, at a Provincial Synod held in this Realm Lindw^ (...)
81.
. Also if an Incumbent take a Second Benefice with Cure, whereby the first is
void by the Canon as to the Patron, so as he may Present before any
Deprivation, yet until Deprivation it is not void as to a Stranger; for if he
sues a Parishioner for Tithes, the taking of a second Benefice is not any bar
to him. Trin. 13. Car. B. R. per Justice Bark. which Justice Yelverton in his
Argument in Prust's Case said, That it had been so Adjudged Roll. Abr. ve^b.
Presentment. lit. L. page 353.
. And if an Incumbent of one or more Benefices with Cure be consecrated Bishop,
all his Benefices are ipso facto vold; upon which Voidance the King, and not
the Patron, is to Present to the Benefices so void by Cession; and any
Dispensation after Consecration comes too late to prevent the Voidance; for the
Pope could formerly, and the Archbishop now, can sufficiently Dispense for a
Plurality by the Statute of 25 H. 8. ^des ver^. the Bishop of Oxf^^d, in Vaugh.
Rep.
. The chief Text of the Canon Law against Pluralities seems to be that of the
Decretal de Praebend. and Dign. c. de multa, where it is said, That in Concilio
Lateranensi prohibitum, ut nullus diversas Dignitates Ecclesiasticas, vel
plures Ecclesias Parochiales, reciperet, contra Sanctorum Canonum Instituta,
etc. Et praesenti decreto statuimus, ut quicunque receperit aliquod Beneficium
curam habens animarum annexam, si prius tale beneficium habehat, sit ipso jure
privatus, and si forte illud retinere contenderit, etiam alio spolietur, etc.
Consonant to which is that in Decret. Cause. 21. q. 1. In duabus Ecclesiis
Clericus conscribi nullo modo potest.

In the Case of a Commendam adjudged in Ireland, the Original and Inconvenience
of Dispensations and Non obstante's was well weighed and considered; Pasch. 9.
Jac. (...) en Ireland en le Case de Commenda enter le Rey and ^yprian Horsfall
and Robert Wale. Davis Rep.
where it was said, That the Non obstante in Faculties and Dispensations was
invented and first used in the Court of Rome; for which Marsil. Pat. pronounced
a Vae against the said Court, for introducing that clause of Non obstante, That
it was an ill President, and mischievous to all the Commonwealths of
Christendom. For the Temporal Princes perceiving that the Pope dispensed with
Canons, in imitation thereof have used their Prerogative to dispense with their
penal Laws and Statutes, when as before they caused their Laws to be
religiously observed, like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which could not
be dispensed with. See the Case of Penal Statutes Co. 7. fo. 36. h. For this
Reason it was that a Canonist said, Dispensatio est vulnus quod vulnerat jus
commune. And another says, That all abuses of this kind would be reformed, Si
duo tantum verba, viz. [Non obstanie] non impedi^ent. And Matthew, Par. in Anno
Dom. 1246. having recited certain Decrees made in the Council of Lions, which
were beneficial for the Church of England, Sed omnia baec and alia (says he)
per hoc repagulum [Non obstante] infirmantur.

(16.) In a Quare Impedit the Case was, Dr. Playford being Chaplain of the
King, Hill. 1610. 8 Jac. C. B. Wallop against the Bishop of Exeter and Murrey,
Clerk Brown^^ pa. 2.
accepted a Benefice of the Presentation of a common person; and he after
accepted another Presentation of the King, without any Dispensation, both being
above the value of eight pounds per Annum. The Question was, Whether the first
Benefice was void by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. For if that were void by
the acceptance of the second Benefice without Dispensation, then this remains a
long time void, so that the King was entitled to present by Lapse, and
presented the Plaintiff. The Statute of 21 H. 8. provides, That he who is
Chaplain to an Earl, Bishop, etc. may purchase License or Dispensation to
receive, have, and keep two Benefices with Cure, provided that it shall be
lawful for the King's Chaplains, to whom it shall please the King to give any
Benefices or Spiritual Promotions, to what number soever it be, to accept and
receive the same without incurring the danger, penalty, and forfeiture in this
Statute comprised; upon which the Question was, Whether by this last Proviso, a
Chaplain of the King having a Benefice with Cure above the value of eight
pounds per Annum, of the Presentation of a Common person, might accept another
Benefice with Cure over the value of eight pounds also of the Presentation of
the King without Dispensation^ The words of the Statute, by which the first
Church is made void, are, That if any Parson having one Benefice with Cure of
Souls* being of the yearly value of eight pounds or above, accept or take any
other with Cure of Souls, and be Instituted and Inducted into possession of the
same, that then, and immediately after such possession had thereof, the first
Benefice shall be adjudged in the Law to be void; Vide Holland's Case, 4 Co.
75. ^. This Case was not argued, but the point only opened by Dodesidge,
Sergeant of the King, for the Plaintiff.

(17.) A. was Parson of M. which was a Benefice with Cure, of the value of
eight pounds, T^^^. 13. (...). B. R. Dodj^^^ and Lyn^'s Case. ^ro. par. 3
and was Chaplain to the Earl of S. and obtained a Dispensation to accept of
another Benefice, modo sit within Ten miles of the former, which was confirmed
under the Great Seal* He accepted of another Benefice Seventeen miles distant
from the first, and was Instituted and Inducted, both Benefices being within
the Diocese of Lincoln. The Archbishop in his Visitation Inhibited the Bishop
of Lincoln not to execute any Jurisdiction during his Visitation: It was found
that the Patron had neglected to present to the first Benefice within the Six
months; and that the Bishop of Lincoln within the second Six months Collated
one to the first Benefice, who was Admitted and Inducted. The points were,
Whether (1) Si modo was a Condition in this License, and made the first
Benefice void when he took the Second? (2) Whether the Bishop Collating, during
the time of the Archbishop's Visitation, and after his Inhibition, was good?
Resolved, That in the principal Case, Si modo should not be taken for a
Condition, and that the Benefice should not be void quoad the Patron, as the
taking of a second Benefice is by the Statute of 21 H. 8. and then the second
point of the Collation by the Bishop, in the time of the Visitation, and also
the Inhibition, will not be material.

(18.) Quare Impedit, Mich. 41 and 42 Eliz. B. R. The Queen and Page's Case.
Cro. p. 1.
pretending the Church void for Plurality; The Defendant said he was Chaplain
to the Lord M. and pleaded a Dispensation from the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Confirmation thereof. In the Letters of Dispensation the words were
(mentioning the two Benefice to be of small value) unimus anneximus and
incorporamus, the second Benefice to the first without the word of Dispensamus
thereof: The Court held it a sufficient Dispensation; for it is not of
necessity to have the word Dispensamus; and if the Circumstances prove it, it
is sufficient.

(19.) In the Case between Whetstone and Higford, it was held by the Justices,
That if the Queen retains a Chaplain by word only, yet he is such a person as
may have a Plurality within the Statute of 21 H. 8. of Pluralities, and is a
person able to make a Lease. Cro. ibid.
And in a Quare Impedit it was Resolved, That if there be two Parsons of one
Church, and each of them has the entire Cure of the Parish, and both the
Benefices be of the value of eight pounds, Cro. ibid.
and the one dies, and the other be presented, it is a Plurality within the
Statute of 21 H. 8.

(20.) The Countess of K. being a Widow, retained two Chaplains, and after
retained a third; the third purchased a Dispensation to have two Benefices with
Cure, The Queen and Darcte's Case Cro. p. 1. Or ^Di^rte's Case. vide Mo^^r's
Rep.
and he was advanced accordingly, whereof the first was above the value of
eight pounds: It was adjudged in this Case, and afterward affirmed in a Writ
of Error, That he was not lawfully qualified within the Statute of 21 H. 8. by
which the first Benefice, by acceptance of a second, was void; and that the
Title did accrue to the Queen to present; for it was Resolved, That the Statute
gives power to a Countess to retain two Chaplains and no more, and when the
Statute is executed she cannot retain a third Chaplain; and the Retainer of the
third cannot divest the capacity of Dispensation which was vested by her
Retainer in the two first Chaplains.

(21.) A Parson having a Benefice of the value of eight pounds, Mi^h. 43 and 4^
Eliz. B. R. Bond and Tickett's Case. Cro. par. 1.
took a second Benefice without Dispensation, being above the value of eight
pounds: The Court took no consideration of the Statute of 26 H. 8. and the
value there mentioned, but regarded only the true value of the Benefice.

(22.) For Title to an Avoidance the Statute of 21 H. 8. was pleaded, Agar and
the Bishop of (...)'s Case. Moor's Rep.
touching the taking of a second Benefice with Cure; Issue was upon the
Induction; by which it seemed to be admitted, That Admission and Institution
did not make the first Benefice void without Induction.

(23.) Quare Impedit brought, the Defendant pleaded the Statute of 21 H. 8.
cap. 13. of Pluralities, 21 H. 8. c. 13.
that the last Incumbent had a Benefice with Cure of the value of eight pounds,
and took another Benefice and was Inducted 1 Eliz. upon which the Queen did
present the Defendant by Lapse: The Plaintiff showed the Proviso in the Statute
of 25 H. 8. cap. 21. 25 H. 8. c. 21.
That Chaplains qualified might purchase Dispensations and take two Benefices,
and that 1 Eliz. before the Parliament he purchased a Dispensation from the
Pope, and after he took the second Benefice, and died. The Question was,
Whether before the Statute of 25 H. 8. the Pope might grant Dispensations?
Dolman and the Bishop of Salisbury's Case. Moor's Rep.
It was Resolved, he could not; for that the King's of England had been
Sovereigns within their Realms of the Spiritualties; and the Justices held,
That the Dispensation in question was made 1 Eliz: and so out of the Statute of
25 H. 8. cap. 21. and that this Dispensation to retain a second Benefice was
against the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

(24.) The Countess of K. had two Chaplains by Patent, a third had no Patent of
Chaplainship, The Queen, Bishop of Lincoln and Skiffing's Case Moor's Rep.
but he was first Retained, and took two Benefices by Dispensation: It was
Adjudged, he was lawful Chaplain; for the Patent is not of necessity, but only
in case where he has cause to show it, and here he has no cause to show it,
because her Retainer was good without a Patent.

(25.) The Case between Robins, Gerrard, and Prince was in effect this, viz. A
man is Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted into a Benefice with Cure of the
value of eight pounds, and afterward the King presents him to the Church of D.
which is a Benefice with Cure, and he is Admitted and Instituted. The
Archbishop grants him Letters of Dispensation for Plurality, which Letter the
King Confirms, and afterward he is Inducted to the Church of D. In this Case
it was Adjudged, That the Dispensation came too late, because it came after the
Institution; for by the Institution the Church is full against all persons
except the King; and as to the Spititualties, he is full Parson by the
Institution. (2.) Resolved, That admit the Church was not full by the
Institution until Induction, yet the Dispensation came too late; for that the
words of the Statute of 21 H. 8 of Pluralities are [ may purchase License to
receive and keep two Benefices with Cure of Souls,] Moor ibid.
and the words of Dispensation in this case, were recipere and retinere* and
because by the Institution the Church was full, he could not purchase License
to receive that which he had before, and he cannot retain that which he cannot
receive.

(26.) In the case of a Prohibition it was Resolved, That by the Common Law
before the Statute of 21 H. 8. the first Benefice was void without a Sentence
Declarative, A^miger and Holland 's Cas. Moor 's Rep.
so as the Patron might present without notice. (2.) That the Statute of 21 H.
8. of Pluralities is a general Law of which the Judges are to take notice
without pleading of it. (3.) That the Queen might grant Dispensations as the
Pope might, in case where the Archbishop had not Authority by the Statute of 25
H. 8. to grant Dispensations, because all the Authority of the Pope was given
to the Crown by the Statute. But yet the Statute, as to those Dispensations
which the Archbishop is to grant, has Negative words, and the Bishop shall
make the Instrument under his Seal.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Deprivation.
1. What Deprivation is, and in what Court to be pronounced. 2. The Causes in
Law of Deprivation. 3. In what Cases Deprivation ipso facto, without any
Declaratory Sentence thereof, may be. 4. A Cardinal 's Case of Deprivation by
reason of Miscreancy. 5. The Papal Deprivation by reason of Marriage. 6. What
the Law is in point of Notice to the Patron, in case of Deprivation by reason
of mere Laity or Nonage. 7. The difference of operation in Law between Malum
prohibitum and Malum in se; and in what Cases of Deprivation Notice ought to be
given to the Patron. 8. Deprivation by reason of Degradation; which Degradation
at the Canon Law may be two ways. 9. Cawdry's Case of Deprivation for
Scandalous words against the Book of Common Prayer, sentenced by the High
Commissioners. 10. Deprivation for Nonconformity to the Ecclesiastical Canons,
by the High Commissioners, agreed to be good. 11. Deprivation for not Reading
the Articles of Religion according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. 12. Deprivation
by the High Commissioners for Drunkenness. 13. The Church is not void by the
Incumbents being Deprivable, without Deprivation. 14. For an Incumbent to
declare his Assent to the Articles of Religion, so far as they agree with the
Word of God, is not that unfeigned Assent which the Statute requires. 15. A
Church becomes void presently upon not Reading the Articles, and there needs
not any Deprivation in that Case. 16. A Case wherein a Sentence declaratorie
for Restitution makes a Nullity in the Deprivation. 17. An Appeal from a
Sentence of Deprivation, prevents the Church's being void pro tempore. 18. Upon
Deprivation for mere Laity or Incapacity the Lay-Patron must have Notice ere
the Lapse incurrs against him. 19. An Incumbent Excommunicated, and so
obstinately persisting 40 days, is Deprivable.
(1.) DEprivation is a discharge of the Incumbent of his Dignity or Ministry,
upon sufficient cause against him conceived and proved* for by this he loses
the Name of his First Dignity, and that either by a particular Sentence in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or by a general Sentence by some positive or Statute Law
of this Realm: So that Deprivation is an Ecclesiastical Sentence Declaratory,
pronounced upon due proof in the Spiritual Court, whereby an Incumbent being
legally discharged from Officiating in his Benefice with Cure, the Church pro
tempore becomes void: So that it is in effect the Judicial incapacitating an
Ecclesiastical person of holding or enjoying his Parsonage, Vicarage, or other
Spiritual promotion or dignity, by an Act of the Ecclesiastical Law only in the
Spiritual Court, grounded upon sufficient proof there of some Act or Defect of
the Ecclesiastical person Deprived. This is one of the means whereby there
comes an Avoidance of the Church, if such Sentence be not upon an Appeal
repealed. The causes of this Deprivation by the Canon Law are many, whereof
some only are practicable with us in the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, and
they only such as are consonant to the Statutes and Common Law of this Kingdom.

(2.) All the Causes of Deprivation may be reduced to these Three Heads: Vid.
Dederidg. de Advows. Co par. 5. Cawdrie's Case.
(1) Want of Capacity. (2) Contempt. (3) Crime. But more particularly, It is
evident, that the more usual and more practicable Causes of this Deprivation
are such as these, viz. a mere Laity or want of Holy Orders according to the
Church of England, Illiterature or inability for discharge of that Sacred
Function, 5. Ed. 4. 3. 5 H. 7. 19. 38 E. 3. 2. b. Dyer 8. and 9. p. 254.
Irreligion, gross Scandal, some heinous Crime, as Murder, Manslaughter,
Perjury, Forgery, etc. Villainy, Bastardy, Schism, Heresy, Miscreancy, Co. 558.
a. Dyer 293. p. 1 and 2.
Misbelief, Atheism, Simony, 2 H. 4. 37.
Illegal Plurality, Allen verse. Nash. Pasch. 13 Car. 1. B. R. Vid. Pars. Co.
par. 1. c. 9.
Incorrigibleness and obstinate Disobedience to the approved Canons of the
Church, as also to the Ordinary, Cro. Jac. 37.
Nonconformity, Refusal to use the Book of Common Prayer, or Administer the
Sacraments in the order there prescribed; the use of other Rites or*
Ceremonies, order, form, o^ celebrating the same, or of other open and public
Prayers; the preaching or publishing any thing in derogation thereof, or
depraving the same having formerly been convicted for the like offense St. 1
Eliz. c. 2. 14 Car. 2. 4.
the not Reading the Articles of Religion within Two months next after
Induction, according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. The not Reading
publicly and solemnly the Morning and Evening Prayers appointed for the same
day according to the Book of Common Prayer, within Two month; next after
Induction on the Lord's Day; the not openly and publicly declaring before the
Congregation there Assembled his unfeigned assent and consent (after such
Reading) to the use of all things therein contained, or in case of a lawful
Impediment, then the not doing thereof within one month next after the removal
of such Impediment 14 Car. 2. c. 4.
; a Conviction before the Ordinary of a wilful maintaining or affirming any
Doctrine contrary to the 39 Articles of Religion, a persistance therein without
revocation of his Error, or reaffirmance thereof after such Revocation 13 El.
c. 12. 5. Br. 2. tit. Trial 54. Drunkenness, after Admonition, is cause of
Deprivation. Hill. 9 Jac. Rot. 2001. Mortimer verse. Freeman. Brownl. Rep. par.
1. Actions, etc.
; likewise Incontinency, Drunkenness, and 40 days Excommunication: To all
which might also be added Dilapidation, for it seems anciently to have been a
Dilapidator was a just cause of Deprivation, whether it were by destroying the
Timber Trees, or committing waste on the Woods of the Church Lands, or by
putting down or suffering to go to decay the Houses or Edifices belonging to
the same 29 E. 3. 16. 20 H. 6. 46. 2 H. 4. 3. by Thirwit. Co. 11. p. 72. 20 H.
6. 36.
; as appears by Lyford's Case Co. 11. par. 40. 49. in Lyford's Case.
, as also in the Bishop of Salisbury's Case Mich. 12 Jac. B. R. vid. Pars. Law,
cap. 17. Co. 11. 98. b. 9 E. 4. 34.
. Conviction of Perjury in the Spiritual Court according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws, which although (as aforesaid) it be a just Cause of Deprivation, must yet
be signified by the Ordinary to the Patron 38 E. 3. 2 and 3. 5 H. 7. 14. acc.
; so also must that Deprivation, which is caused by an Incapacity of the party
Instituted and Inducted for want of Holy Orders 13 El. Dyer 292. acc. St. 21 H.
8. c. 13.
.

(3.) By the Statute of 21 H. 8. if an Incumbent having a Benefice with Cure of
Souls, value 8 l. per ann. take another with Cure, immediately after Induction
thereunto, the former is void, and void without any Declaratory Sentence of
Deprivation in the Ecclesiastical Court, in case the Second Benefice were taken
without a Dispensation; and of such Avoidance the Patron is to take notice at
his peril Mich. 9 Car. C. B. rot. 441. The King and the Bishop of Cant^r. and
Pryst 's Case. Cro. 1. p. 258. acc.
. And as Avoidance may be by Plurality of Benefices incompatible, without
Dispensation: so also by not Subscribing unto, and not reading the 39 Articles
(as aforesaid) which by the Statute of 13 Eliz. c. 12. is a Deprivation ipso
facto, as if the Incumbent were naturally dead* insomuch that upon such
Avoidance there need not any Sentence Declaratory of his Deprivation, but the
very pleading and proof of his not Reading the said Articles, is a sufficient
Bar to his claim of Tithes, without any mentioning at all his being deprived
in the Ecclesiastical Court 31 Eliz. Morris and Eaton's Case, adjudg. vid.
Pars. Law, c. 18. Shut^ and Higden's Case in Vaugh. Rep.
. Yet Sir Simon Degge in his Parsons Counselor putting the Question, What
shall be intended by the words [Deprived ipso facto,] as whether the Church
shall thereby immediately become void by the Fact done, or not till Conviction
or Sentence Declaratory? modestly waives his own Opinion, and says it is a
Quaere made by Dyer, what shall be intended by the words [ ipso facto
Excommunicate] for striking with a Weapon in the Churchyard Dyer 275. b. p. 48.
, albeit by the Canon Law, which condemns no man before he be heard, requiritur
sententia Declatoria Pars. Co. p. 1. cap. 9.
.

(4.) Touching Deprivation by reason of Miscreancy, the Cardinal, who by the
Bishop of Durham was Collated to a Benefice with Cure, is (it seems) the
standing President; in which case it was Agreed, that notwithstanding the
Cardinal's being deprived for his Miscreancy in the Court of Rome, yet whether
he were Miscreant or not, should be tried in England by the Bishop of that
Diocese where the Church was Vid. 5 R. 2. Fitz. Trial 54. Hughe's Abridg. verb.
Deprivation.
.

(5.) Among the many Causes of Deprivation forementioned you do not find that
of Marriage in the Priest, which was anciently practicable, as appears by what
the Lord Coke reports touching an Incumbent in the time of King Ed. 6. who
being Deprived in Queen Mary's days, partly because he was a Married person,
and partly because of his Religion, was restored again in the time of Queen
Elizabeth. In whose Case it was Adjudged, That his Deprivation was good until
it was voided by a Sentence of Repeal, whereby he became Incumbent again by
virtue of his First Presentation without any new Presentation, Institution, or
Induction Co. 4. par. 102. Windsor's Case.
. In those days it was held, That the Marriage of a Priest was a sufficient
cause to deprive him of his Benefice. Mich. 4. Ma. Die. 133.

(6.) In the Case where a mere Layman is Presented, Instituted, and Inducted,
he is (notwithstanding his Laity) such an Incumbent de facto, that he is not
Deprivable but by a Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court; but then the Ordinary
is in that case to give Notice of such Deprivation to the Patron; otherwise, in
case the Ordinary for that cause refused him, when he was Presented by the
Patron 13 Eliz. Die. 292.
. But where Nonage is the cause of Deprivation, as when one under the age of
23 years is Presented, Notice is to be given, it having been Adjudged, That no
Lapse shall incurr upon any Deprivation ipso facto without Notice, seeing the
Statute of 13 Eliz. 12. says nothing of Presentation; which remaining in force,
the Patron ought to have Notice Trin. 18. Car. B. R. the B. of Hereford and
Okoley's Case. Marsh. 119. Huge's Abridg. verb. Deprivation.
.

(7.) As in the Admission of a Clerk to a Benefice whatever is a Legal
impediment, will also be a sufficient cause of Deprivation: so in reference to
both, the Law takes care to distinguish between that which is only Malum
prohibitum, and that which is Malum in se; and therefore does not hold the
former of them, such as frequenting of Taverns, unlawful Gaming, or the like,
to be a sufficient cause of a Clerks Non-admission to a Benefice, or of his
Deprivation being Admitted 9 Eliz. Dyer 294.
: Otherwise, if you can affect him with that which is Malum in se; in which
case Notice is to be given the Patron by the Ordinary, of the Cause of his
Refusal or Deprivation 12 Eliz. Dyer 293. (...).
; as also it is in case of Deprivation for not Subscribing or not Reading the
39 Articles of Religion according to the foresaid Statute of 13 Eliz. 12. which
Notice ought to be certain and particular, a general Notice of Incapacity not
sufficing; in which case an Intimation of such particular Incapacity affixed on
the Church-door (if the Patron be in partibus long remotis, or may not easily
be affected therewith) will answer the Law. Vid. 18 Eliz. Dyer 346. 22 Eliz.
Dyer 369. and 16 Eliz. Dyer. 327. and Co. par. 6. 29. Green 's Case.

(8.) It is evident from the Premises, That a Deprivation from an
Ecclesiastical Benefice will follow upon a Disgrading or Degradation from the
Ecclesiastical Function or Calling, for this Degradation is the Incapacitating
of a Clerk for discharge of that holy Function, for it is the punishment of
such a Clerk, as being delivered to his Ordinary, cannot purge himself of the
Offense, whereof he was convicted by the Jury: And it is a Privation of him
from those holy Orders of Clerkship which formerly he had, as Priesthood,
Deaconship, etc. Stanf. Ple. Cor. fo. 130, and 138.
. And by the Canon Law this may be done Two ways, either Summarily, as by Word
only; or Solemnly, as by devesting the party degraded of those Ornaments and
Rites, which were the Ensigns of his Order or Degree Vid. Seld. Tit. of Hon.
fo. 787.
. But in matters Criminal Princes anciently have had such a tender respect for
the Clergy, and for the credit of the whole profession thereof, That if any man
among them committed any thing worthy of death or open shame, he was not first
executed or exposed to Public disgrace, until he had been degraded by the
Bishop and his Clergy; and so was executed and put to shame, not as a Clerk,
but as a Lay-Malefactor; which regard toward Ecclesiastics in respect of the
dignity of the Ministry, is observed by a Learned Author to be much more
Ancient, than any Papistical Immunity Ridl. View. p. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 3.
; and is such a Privilege as the Church, in respect of such as once waited on
the Altar, has in all Ages been honored with.

(9.) Robert Cawdry Clerk, Rector of the Church of L. was deprived of his
Rectory by the Bishop of London and his Colleagues, by virtue of the high
Commission to them and others directed, because he had pronounced and uttered
slanderous and contumelious words against and in depravation of the Book of
Common Prayer; but the Form of the Sentence was, That the said Bishop by and
with the assent and consent of Five others of the said Commissioners his
Companions, and namely which Deprived him. It was not sound that the
Commissioners were the Natural born Subjects of the Queen, as the Statute
Enacts that they should be. And it was moved, That the Deprivation was void;
(1) Because, that whereas the Commission is to them, or any Three of them, of
which the said Bishop to be one amongst others, it ought to have been the
Sentence of them all (according to the Authority given to them, which is equal)
and not of one with the assent of the other. (2) Because it is not found, that
the Commissioners are the Natural born Subjects of the Queen, as by the words
of the Statute they should be. (3.) Because the punishment, which the Statute
provides for those of the Ministry which deprave this Book, is to lose the
profits of all their Spiritual promotions but for a year, and to be Imprisoned
by the space of Six months, and not to be Deprived till the Second offense,
after that he had been once committed; and therefore to deprive him for the
First offense was wrongful and contrary to the Statute. But the whole Court,
for the Form of the Deprivation, it is that which is used in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, which always names the chief in Commission, that are present at the
beginning of the Sentence, and for the other they mention them only as here;
but of their assent and consent to it, and in such cases we ought to give
credit to their Form, and therefore it is not to be compared to an Authority
given at Common Law by Commission. And it is to be intended, that the
Commissioners were the Natural born Subjects of the Queen, unless the contrary
appear: But here at the beginning it is found, That the Queen Secundum tenorem
and effectum Actus praedict. had granted her Commission to them in causis
Ecclesiasticis, and therefore it appears sufficiently, that they were such as
the Statute wills them to be. And for the Deprivation, they all agreed that it
was good, being done by Authority of the Commission; for the Statute is to be
understood, where they prosecute upon the Statute by way of Indictment, and not
to restrain the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, being also but in the Affirmative.
And further, by the Act and their Commission they may proceed according to
their discretion to punish the Offense proved or confessed before them, and so
are the words of their Commission warranted by the Clause of the Act. And
further, the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is saved in the Act. And all the
Bishops and Popish Priests were deprived by virtue of a Commission warranted by
this Clause in the Act. Vid. Hill. 33 Eliz. Rot. 315. Cawdry verse. Atton. Poph.
Rep. Vid. this Case Coke lib. 5. 1.
.

(10.) Before many Noblemen, Archbishops and Bishops, and the Justices and
Barons of the Exchequer, (1) agreed, That the Deprivation of Minsters for
Nonconformity to the last Canons was lawful by the High Commissioners: For by
the Common Law the King has such a power in Causes Ecclesiastical; and it is
not a thing de novo, given by the First of Eliz. For that is Declaratory only,
etc. and the King may delegate it to Commissioners: And the King without a
Parliament may make Constitutions for the Government of the Clergy: and that
such a Deprivation ex officio, without Libel, is good. (2.) That the Statute of
5 H. 5. c. 4. is to be intended, when they proceed upon Libel, and not when ex
officio, Read the Statute. (3.) When their Petition is Subscribed by a great
number, with intimation, That if the King denies their Suit, that many
thousands of his Subjects shall be discontented; That this is an Offense
Finable at discretion, and is near to Treason, by raising Sedition by
Discontent, etc. Hill. 2 Jac. 13. Feb. in Noy's Rep. post. Cas. Rye versus
Fullcombe.
. Vid. More 's Rep. Trin. 2 Jac. in the Star Chamber.

(11.) By the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. it is Enacted, That every person,
etc. to be Admitted to a Benefice with Cure, except that within Two months
after his Induction, he publicly Read the said Articles The 39 Articles of
Religion.
in the same Church whereof he shall have Cure, in the time of Common Prayer
there, with declaration of his unfeigned assent thereto, etc. shall be upon
every such default ipso facto immediately deprived. Then follows afterward a
Proviso relating to this clause, viz. Provided always, That no Title to
conferr or Present by Lapse, shall accrue upon any Deprivation ipso facto, but
after Six months after Notice of such Deprivation given by the Ordinary to the
Patron. Thus the Patron immediately upon such Deprivation may Present, if he
please, and his Clerk ought to be Admitted and Instituted; but if he does not,
no Lapse incurrs until after Six months after Notice of the Deprivation given
to the Patron by the Ordinary, who it seems is to supply the Cure until the
Patron Present. In the last Case of the Lord Dyer 23 El. it was Resolved, That
where a man having a Living with Cure under value, accepted another under value
also, having no Qualification or Dispensation, and was Admitted, Instituted and
Inducted into the Second, but never Subscribed the Articles before the
Ordinary, as the Statute of 13 of El. requires. Upon Question, whether the
First Living vacavit per mortem of him or not? the Court Resolved, That the
First Living became vacant by his death, and not by accepting the Second,
because he was never Incumbent of the Second, for not Subscribing the Articles
before the Ordinary, whereby his Admission, Institution, and Induction into the
Second Living became void, as if they had never been. This differs from the
Case of not Reading the Articles within Two months after Induction: For the not
Subscribing the Articles makes, that he never was Incumbent of the Second
Living, and consequently no cause of losing the First; but the not Reading the
Articles within Two months after Induction, does cause a deprivation of that
whereof he was Incumbent. For as an Incumbent, that without qualification or
dispensation does take a Second Living, does thereby lose the First: so the
same Incumbent for not Reading the Articles within Two months after his
Induction into the Second may lose the Second, and thereby lose both, viz. the
First by taking a Second without qualification or dispensation, and the Second
for not Reading the Articles, as aforesaid, whereof he was Complete Incumbent
by Admission, Institution, and Induction of the Second Living full Two months
before he lost it for not Reading the Articles Vid. Shate and Higden's Case, in
Vaugh. Rep.
.

(12.) Parker, being Parson of a Church was deprived by the High Commissioners
for Drunkenness, and moved for a Prohibition, but it was not granted; and he
was directed to have Action for the Tithe, Mich. 8 Jac. Parker's Case. Brownl.
Rep. p. 2.
and upon that the validity of the Sentence shall be drawn in question. If a
man be Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted to a Church, and afterward is
deprived for that he was Instituted contrary to the course of the
Ecclesiastical Law, such Sentence of deprivation is void at the Common Law, for
that it is as a Lay-Fee by the Induction Hill. 15 Jac. B R. inter Hitchin and
Glover. Adjudg'd.
. If a Town erect a Common School, and allow Maintenance to the Schoolmaster,
the Bishop may not remove him and put in another at his pleasure: But if he be
a Recusant, he may remove him by the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Mich. 13 Jac.
B The Bish. of Carl^sle's Case. per Curta^.
.

(13.) Although an Incumbent be deprivable, yet the Patron cannot Present
another until he be deprived, for till then the Church is not void. Also if the
Visitor by the Kings Command return into Chancery good matter for deprivation
of the King's Clerk, yet the King cannot Present another to the Church, until
he be deprived. Contra 17 E. 3. 59. b. Roll. Abr. ver. Present^n. lit. P.
.

(14.) Where Two Incumbents were of one Church, one sued the other in the
Ecclesiastical Court to be deprived for not Reading the Articles, and giving
his Assent to them according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. The issue was, whether
he gave his Assent, the Jury found he read the Articles, and said, I give my
assent to them as far as they agree with the Word of God: And it was Adjudged,
That it is not such an unfeigned Assent as is within the intent of the Statute
Smith and Clerk's Case. Cro. par. 1.
.

(15.) In a Prohibition the Case was, J. S. seized in Fee of the Advowson of
the Church of C. Presented thereunto D. who was Instituted and Inducted, but
did not read the Articles according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. Afterward came
the General Pardon of 18 Eliz. Afterward D. was deprived by Sentence for not
Reading the Articles; he Appealed, and depending the Appeal B. the Plaintiff
obtained a Presentation from the Queen, and was Instituted and Inducted. D.
died, and he that had the Advowson Presented R. the other Defendant, who sued
in the Ecclesiastical Court to be Admitted. It was Resolved, That the Church
became void presently by the not Reading of the Articles, and there needed not
any Deprivation, and the Pardon in this case works nothing; for the Church
being once void for not Reading the Articles, he cannot by the Pardon be
restored, and the Pardon will not reach to it; for the punishment is to lose
his Benefice: Adjudged, the Prohibition to stand Trin. 41 Eliz. B. R. Baker and
Brent's Case.
. But if a man be deprived for an offense done Tempore Parliamenti, and the
Offense be after pardoned by the same Parliament, and then the Parliament
ends. In this case the Deprivation is void in it self, and the party need not
sue to reverse it; for the Parliament relates to the First day thereof: As was
Resolved in Foxe's Case Trin. 27 Eliz. C. B. Foxe's Case. Cro. p. 1.
.

(16.) In a Quare Impedit the Case was, That L. had Two Presentations, and W.
the Third, of Inheritance perpetual: L. Presented P. who was Instituted and
Inducted, and afterward in the time of Queen Mary was deprived, because a
Married man; wherefore he again Presented D. who was Inducted. Afterward P.
was restored, with Declaration that he had good Title: Afterward P. died, W.
Presented H. L. brought the Quare Impedit. It was Adjudged for the Plaintiff,
because the Sentence declaratory for the Restitution made a Nullity in the
Deprivation, and so avoided the Incumbency of D. and so L. had good Title to
Present at his Second Turn, and W. had no Title to Present as yet Lovedon and
Windsor's Case. Mores Rep.
.

(17.) In Hornigold's Case against Brian it was said, That if a Judgment of
Deprivation be given in the Ecclesiastical Court, against a Parson for his
Benefice; if presently upon this Judgment he makes his Appeal, the Church is
not void, but he remains Parson during all the time of this Appeal; for if by
this he does reverse the Judgment, Trin. 13 Jac. B. R. Hornigold verse. Bryan.
Bulstr. par. 3.
he shall need no new Institution and Induction: As if a Judgment be given of a
Divorce in the Ecclesiastical Court; and this is after reversed by an Appeal,
there shall need no new Marriage. And in this Case Coke Chief Justice said,
That 39 E. 3. has the same Case: And that if an Appeal be from a Sentence of
Divorce, they are now by this Baron and Feme again: So if a Parson be deprived,
and Appeals, he is by this Parson again, and may have an Action of Trespass.
And as touching Appeals in reference to Deprivation, there was a famous Case in
the Court of C. B. about 5 or 6 Jac. a Worcestershire Case, between Lechmere
Plaintiff and Carr Defendant, in an Action of Trespass, and upon Non Culp.
pleaded, a Special Verdict was found, viz. That Bonner was made Bishop of
London, in the time of King H. 8. and so continued until 2 Ed. 6. at or about
which time a Commission issued forth to the then Lord Chancellor and others, to
Convent Bishop Bonner before them, and to examine him; and if they found him to
be Contumacious, and would not Answer them, the Commissioners were impowerd
then to Imprison him, or to Deprive him: The Commissioners upon this did first
Imprison him, and afterward proceeded further against him, to Deprivation:
Bonner from this Appealeth (and his Appeal not heard) Nicholas Ridley is made
Bishop of London, who makes a Lease of the Park and Manor of Bushley, under
which Lease the Defendant claimed. Afterward, viz. Primo Mariae, Ridley is
declared to be an Usurper, and Bonner by a Sentence Definitive is restored
again to the Bishopric of London, and makes a Lease of the Premises demised
to the Plaintiff. Upon which Special Verdict the Points stirred were these: (1)
Whether the Deprivation of Bonner was lawful or not; the Authority by the
Commission being in the Disjunctive, viz. to Imprison or to Deprive him; and
(as it was urged) they first Imprisoning of him, had thereby executed their
Authority, and so then the Deprivation void. (2) Admitting the Deprivation
void, then Bonner still continued Bishop of London: And then Ridley was never
Bishop; for that there could not be two Bishops of London simul and semel, and
so the Lease by him made to the Defendant was a void Lease. (3) Admitting the
Deprivation good, then Quid operatur by the Appeal, whether it did not suspend
the Sentence of Deprivation: And if so, then again, Ridley was no lawful
Bishop; and so the Lease, under which the Defendant claimed, was void. This
Case was Learnedly Argued by Common Lawyers, and also by Civilians, and the
Judges inclined to be of Opinion for the Plaintiff. But the Defendant
perceiving this, preferred his Bill in Chancery, and there obtained a Decree
against Lechmere.

(18.) If a mere Lay-person, who is altogether incapable of a Benefice, be
Presented, Instituted, and Inducted; yet the Church is not therefore said by
the Common Law to be void, as if no Presentation had been, but is still by that
Law full of an Incumbent de facto, licet non de jure, until by Sentence
Declaratory in the Ecclesiastical Court for want of Capacity the Church be
Adjudged void; and upon this no Lapse shall incurr against the Lay-Patron,
without Notice (of such Incapacity and Sentence of Deprivation thereupon) to
him given. King H. 4. Presented one that was Incapable of his Presentation, and
the Presentee was thereby Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, Doderidge of
Advowsons, Lect. 14.
and afterward the Pope enabled the Presentee by his Bull; yet the King had a
Scire facias, and thereby recovered his Presentation again, because the
Incumbent was not capable when he was Presented.

(19.) If the Parson or other Incumbent be Excommunicate, and he so remains
in his Obstinacy for the space of 40 days, he is for this deprivable of his
Benefice, and yet the Church is not void in Deed, without Sentence of
Deprivation given against him; and if before such Deprivation, the King as
Supreme Ordinary grant him a Dispensation, he shall hold his Benefice. Also
Dilapidation, or spoil of the Church Benefice has at Common Law been held
worthy Doderigd. ib.
of Deprivation; which Law as it adjudgeth not the Church actually void (Death
excepted) without a Sentence of Deprivation: So though such Sentence of
Deprivation be merely wrongful, yet by that Law, as well as by the Canon, the
Dignity is void, and the Sentence remains in force until it be reversed by
Appeal; and therefore if the party deprived within due time Appeal (upon such
Sentence of Deprivation given against him) such is the nature thereof, that it
will hold the Sentence (upon which it was first brought) in suspense: so that
if it be brought upon Deprivation, it voideth the vigor thereof, and reviveth
the former dignity; for such Church shall not be void until the first Sentence
of Deprivation happen to be affirmed in the Appeal. Touching Deprivation by
Statutes and Positive Laws, vid. 13 Eliz. cap. 12. 26 H. 8. cap. 3. revived by
1 Eliz. cap. 31. or 3.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Incumbents; as also of Residence and Non-Residence.
1. Incumbent, who properly such; why so called, and what things preparatory to
a complete Incumbent. 2. The Rights of a Complete Incumbent. 3. The Rights of
an Incumbent's Executor as to the Glebe. 4. The Resident Incumbents duty, that
keeps a Curate. 5. Whether he be an Incumbent, who is in by the Kings
Presentation, where the King mistakes his Title. 6. Whether an Incumbent may
plead (as such) who was not Incumbent ante impetrationem Brevis. 7. Whether the
Non-Residency of an Incumbent were punishable by the High Commissioners. 8. How
the 80 days absence in a year shall be understood to include Non-Residency,
according to the Statute, etc. 9. The Laws in force concerning Residence and
Non-Residence, and who are qualified for Non-Residence. 10. The Canon in the
Provincial Constitutions touching the Non-Residence of Vicars on their
Vicarages. 11. The Form of the Oath of Residence on a Vicarage. 12. Whether a
Parson inhabiting in a Message very nigh adjoining to the Parsonage-house,
which he keeps also in his own hands, be a Resident within the intent of the
Statute. 13. What the Law requires for Residence; and what are the just Causes
of Non-Residence. 14. An Incumbent stands charged with the Arrerages of a
Pension, issuing out of his Church, that were behind in his Predecessor's time,
as well as those accruing in his own time. 15. The Constitution touching the
Oath of Residence; as also how the Incumbent may be out of his Parish, and yet
be reputed as Resident. 16. What shall be accounted such an Absence or
Non-Residence within the Statute, as to avoid a Lease made by the Incumbent.
17. Indictment against a Common Informer, exhibiting an Information against Two
Parsons; one for Non-Residence, the other for taking a Farm. 18. Covenants as
well as Leases made void by the intent of the Statute of 13 and 14 Eliz. by
reason of Eighty days Absence.
(1.) INcumbent, from incumbere (signifying as well to possess and keep safely,
as to endeavor earnestly) is a Clerk duly Possessed of and Resident on his
Benefice with Cure Co. on L. fo. 119. b.
. For the faithful discharge whereof he is to employ his study and utmost
endeavor 10 H. 6. 7.
: For which reason especially he is so denominated. There are Four things
preparatory to the being of a Complete Incumbent: (1) The Patron's
Presentation, or his free Gift or Commendation of his Clerk to the Parsonage or
Vicarage by writing in his favor to the Bishop. (2) The Bishop's Admission of
such Clerk by his allowance or approbation of him after due Examination, and by
making a Record of his Name accordingly. (3) The Clerks Institution to such
Benefice or Vicarage by the Bishops words, Instituto te, etc. (4) The Clerk's
Admission or Induction, whereby he is put into Actual possession thereof by the
Archdeacon's or others delivery to him of the Ring or Keys of the Church-door,
ringing the Bells, etc. And until these things be done, he is not a Complete
Incumbent Art. Cle. chapter 13, 14 H. 7. 28. Dyer 326. Co. 5. 58. 4. 79.
. After which, and possession Six months, there is such a Plenarty as gives
such a Title to that Presentation, as will bar pro hac vice any others in a
Quare Impedit 21 El. 4. 34. and Kelw. 88. Co. 4. 79. 7. 38. on Litt. 344.
. So that those things that are to make a perfect Incumbent (after Presentation
had) do depend upon the duty of the Ordinary; as (1) Admission, which requires
Examination of the Clerk; whereupon sometimes ensues Refusal, and thereupon
either Notice or no Notice (as the case requires) is to be given to the Patron.
(2) Institution. (3) Induction. Upon the Patron's not Presenting within the
time limited, the Lapse incurrs to the Bishop, from him to the Metropolitan,
and from him to the Crown, where it rests. But if the Bishop take his time,
then is his Presentation a Collation, and in the Right of the Patron himself.

(2.) The Incumbent is that person in Law, to whom the Fruits of any
Ecclesiastical Benefice do belong, insomuch that the Fruits taken during the
vacation or vacancy of a Benefice, shall be restored to the next Incumbent St.
28 H. 8. c. 11.
, who stands charged to the King for the First Fruits, to be accounted
immediately from and after the Avoidance or Vacancy of any such Benefice or
Spiritual promotion Ibid.
; and for that end, and toward the payment of the said First Fruits, the next
Incumbent shall have a restitution, of the Tithes, Fruits, Oblations,
Obventions, Emoluments, Commodities, Advantages; Rents, and all other Revenues,
Casualties, and Profits whatsoever, certain and uncertain, belonging to any
Archdeaconry, Deanary, Prebend, Parsonage, Vicarage, Hospital, Wardenship,
Provostship, or other Spiritual promotion, Benefice, Dignity, or Office,
growing or arising during the vacancy of any of the said Spiritual promotions
Stat. ibid. and Coke pla. fo. 368.
; and every Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, Ordinary, or any other person,
having to his or their uses received the same, that shall refuse to render and
restore the same to the next Incumbent, shall forfeit the treble value of what
he has so received St. ibid.
.

(3.) If any Incumbent happening to depart this life during the Incumbency or
Plenarty, shall before his death have caused any of his Glebe Lands to be
manured and sowed at his proper cost and charges with any Corn or grain, he may
in that case make his last Will and Testament of all the profits of the Corn
growing upon the said Glebe-Lands by him so manured and sown Ibid. 21 H. 6 fo.
20. 34 H. 6. fo. 38.
. And if one be put into a Place, then removed, and another put in, the first
shall have the Tithe happening in such Vacancy Hill 18 Jac. Wood's Case.
; for the succeeding Parson shall have the Tithes happening during the Vacancy,
deducting the charges of collecting the same, and serving the Cure during such
Vacancy. Also if an Incumbent be removed in a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff
shall not have the main profits Per Co. Mich. 12 Jac. B. R. Case Gratnge and
Howlett. Roll. Rep.
. And an Incumbent being in by Usurpation, he cannot be removed but by a Quare
Impedit Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. Case of the King verse. Bish. of Norwich.
.

(4.) An Incumbent Resident that keeps a Curate, is obliged to read the Common
Prayers in his Parish Church once a month in his own person, on pain of
forfeiting Five pounds for every omission St. 14 Car. 2. c. 14.
.

(5.) In Thomson's Case, where T. Libelled for Dilapidations against the
Executors of his Predecessors, and Henden moved for a Prohibition; for that
that T. is not Incumbent, for his Presentation was by the King ratione
Minoritatis of one C. and the King had not any such Title to Present: for where
the King mistakes his Title, the Presentation is void, and he is no Incumbent.
6. Rep. 26. Green's Case. And Sir Tho. Gawdy's Case, where the King Presented
jure Prerogat. when he had another Title; and the present Action was adjudged
void, and whether he is Incumbent or not, that shall be tried. But by the Court
a Prohibition was denied, because that he was now Incumbent. And the Judges
would not take notice of the ill Presentation of the King: But in case of
Simony the Statute makes the Church void, and then the Judges may take notice
of that, and grant a Prohibition, if the Parson sues for Tithes. But if a Quare
Impedit be brought, and appears that the King had not cause of Presentation,
then a Prohibition may be granted: which was also granted by all the other
Justices. Mich. 3 Car. C. B. Thomson 's Case. Hetley's Rep.

(6.) In Dame Chichleys Case against the Bishop of Ely it was said by Henden,
That an Incumbent by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. c. 7. cannot plead ( quatenus
such) unless he be Incumbent ante diem impetrationis Brevis, unless he be
Incumbent pendente lite he cannot plead, etc. Hutton, If one be Presented,
Instituted, and Admitted before the Writ, and Inducted after, and before his
Pleader, he may plead well Pasch 3 Car. C. B. in dict. Cas. Chichley. Hetley's
Rep.
.

(7.) A Libel was against H. Vicar of S. in the High Commission-Court at York,
because that he was not Resident, but lived at Doncaster, and neglected to
serve his Cure; and that diverse times he, when the High Court visited, spoke so
loud, that he was offensive to many, and being reproved for that, he gave a
Scornful Answer: And that there was one Wright in the Parish, who had a Seat in
the Church, and that the Vicar would Spit in abundance into the said Seat, and
that when Wright and his Wife were there. And that in his Sermon he made Jests,
and said, That Christ was laid in a Manger, because he had no money to take up a
Chamber, but that was the knavery of the Innkeeper; he being then in
contention with an Innkeeper in the Parish. And that in time of Divine Service
he thrust open the door of Wright's Seat, and said, That he and his Wife would
sit there, in disturbance of Divine Service. And for that a Prohibition was
prayed and granted; for the High Commission cannot punish Non Residency, nor
breaking the Seat in Divine Service: And the other were things, for which he
shall be bound to the good behavior; and the Complaint ought to be to the
Ordinary Howson 's Case. Herl. Rep. 13 Eliz. c. 20 That Statute speaks of
Absence not above 80 days in a year in the Parson; 40 days in a Curate.
.

(8.) Note, by Tanfield, that by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 20. of
Non-Residency, That if the Parson be Absent 80 days in a year, although it be
at several times ( viz.) ten days at one time, and twenty days at another
time, until eighty days, etc. That is within the Statute, by which it has
been Adjudged Sidner verse. Calver. Noy's Rep.
.

(9.) The personal Residence of all Ecclesiastical persons on their Cures
respectively is a duty so incumbent on them for the better discharge of their
Sacred Function, the prevention of Dilapidations, and the maintenance of
Hospitality, that it is enacted, That every Spiritual person promoted to any
Archdeaconry, Deanary, or Dignity in any Church Cathedral or Collegiate, or
Beneficed with any Parsonage or Vicarage, shall be personally Resident and
abiding in, at, or upon such Dignity, Prebend, or Benefice, or one of them at
the least; and that if any such person wilfully Absent himself from his said
Benefice, etc. by the space of a Month at one time, or two Months at several
times in any one year, to be accounted at several times, that such person so
absenting shall forfeit ten pounds for every such default St 21 H. 8. cap. 13.
. It is also further provided, That the Parson or Vicar shall be Resident in
and upon his Parsonage or Vicarage-House (if he have any) and not at any other
House in the Parish; but if he has no House on his Glebe, or be removed
without fraud for his Health, or without fraud Imprisoned, or be beyond Sea in
his Majesty's Service, or without fraud abide in any University within this
Realm to study, or be a Chaplain qualified for Plurality by the Statute of 21
H. 8. either of these may excuse his Residence for the time Co. 6. 21. b.
. Also the King may give a License to any of his own Chaplains to be
Non-Resident 21 H. 8. c. 13.
: And any Ecclesiastical person may be Non-Resident for such time as without
fraud he is attending a Suit in Chancery. There are also other Chaplains of
other persons that are qualified for Non-Residence 25 H. 8. cap. 16. 33 H. 8.
c. 28. 21 H. 8. c. 13. Vid. Pars. Couns. p. 1. cap. 7.
, which for brevities sake are here omitted. And where a Chaplain is qualified
in respect of his Service for Plurality, if his Lord die, or be Attainted, or
be removed from his place, it will not it seems suffice that he be Resident
only upon one of his Livings, without the King's Special License with a Non
obstante Co. 4. 119. a.
.

(10.) The Canon made by Cardinal Otho, and afterward Confirmed and de novo
Established by Othobon, seems very severe as to Vicars in case of
Non-Residence; for in their Constitutions it is Ordained, That if any
Non-Resident shall receive the profits or Fruits of a Vicarage, he shall
restore the one Moity thereof to the Church, one half of the other Moity to the
Poor of that Parish, and the rest to the Archdeacon of the place, if he
discharge his duty in making a diligent Enquiry yearly herein, and shall
forthwith make it known to the Bishop; and whoever shall disobey the Premises
by one Month, shall also be deprived of his other Benefices, if he have any,
and be rendered incapable of ever having that Vicarage again, or any other
Benefice for Three years: And in case the Archdeacon shall neglect what herein
is enjoined him, he shall be deprived of that part allotted him as aforesaid,
and suspended ab ingressu Ecclesiae. Constit. Othobon. de Residentia Vicariorum.

(11.) The Oath of Residence on a Vicarage is as follows, viz. Ego A. B.
juro, Quod ero Residens in Vicaria mea, nisi aliter dispensatum fuerit a
Dioecesano meo. What Spiritual persons may be discharged of Residence, and by
what means, vid. St. 21 H. 8. 13.

(12.) In an Information upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. of
Non-Residency, Hill. 8 Jac. 1610 Canning verse Dr. Newman. Brownl. pa. 2.
it was found by Special Verdict, That Dr. N. was Incumbent, invested in the
Rectory of S. and that he was also seized of a House in S. aforesaid, situate
within twenty yards of the Rectory, and that the Mansion House of the said
Rectory was in good Repair, and that Dr. N. held that in his hands and
occupation with his own proper Goods, and did not Let it to any other, and
that he inhabited in the said Message, and not in the Parsonage. The Statute
of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. provides, That every Parson promoted to any Parsonage,
shall be Personally resident, and abiding in, at, and upon the said Benefice:
And in case any such Spiritual Parson keep not Residence at his Benefice, as
aforesaid, but Absent himself wilfully by the space of a Month together, or two
Months to be accounted at several times in any one year, and makes his
residence or abiding in any other places by such time, that then he shall
forfeit for every such default Ten pounds, the one half to the King, the other
half to the Informer. The Question was, Whether the said Dr. N. were
Non-Resident, and incurred the penalty of this Statute? It was Argued by
Houghton, that he had incurred the penalty of the Statute, and was Non-Resident
within the intent thereof; he said, that to some intent all the Parish may be
said the Benefice of the Parson, for that he has Benefit out of it, and he is
called Parson of such a Town or Parish; but this is not the Benefice that the
Statute intends, upon which he ought to be Resident, etc. Also he said, That
there were Seven causes of making the said Statute, whereof but Two are to our
purpose; the one is Hospitality, the other Relief of the Poor, and these are to
be done in the Parsonage-house, for this is the Free Alms of the Church: And so
it was Adjudged, 34 Eliz. B. R. Broom and Hudson; and 40 Eliz. B. R. between
Butler and Goodall. Coke 21. b. That he ought to be Resident upon the
Parsonage-house, and not elsewhere; and he agreed, That Imprisonment without
deceit, and Sickness, are good Excuse. For the Defendant, Barker Sergeant
argued, That it appears by the Special Verdict, that Dr. N. held the
Parsonage-house in his own hands, and did not Let it; whence he inferred, That
his Servants were resident upon it, etc. and that by the Council of Lateran all
the Parish is made the Benefice of the Parson, etc. Also, that before the said
Statute every Spiritual man was obliged and compellable by the Ecclesiastical
Law to be Resident; yet if he were in the Kings Service, or an Officer of the
Chancery, he should be excused, as appears in the Register, fo. 51. b. though
that he were Dean, the which Office merely requires his Personal Residence, as
it is there said. This Case was compounded by the Lord Coke, but he intended
this was no Residence within the Statute, for this was not his Benefice, but
the Tenants part of that, as he said has been Adjudged in the Exchequer.

(13.) In Butler and Goodall's Case, Vid. More's Rep. Co. 5. Butler and
Goodall's Case. 40 Eliz. B. R.
it was Resolved upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. That a Parson of a Church ought
to stay and be commorant upon his Rectory ( viz.) upon the Parsonage-house, and
not in any other House, although it be within the Parish; but lawful
Imprisonment without Covin, is a good cause of Non-Residence: Also, if there be
no Parsonage-house (for impotentia excusat Legem) also Sickness without fraud,
if the Patient remove by advice of his Counsel in Physic, bona fide, for
better air and recovery of his health. The Statute is intended not only for
serving the Cure, but also for maintaining the habitation of the Parson, for
him and his Successors, and for Hospitality. Vid. Co. 6. pa. 21. and Cro. par.
1.

(14.) In the Case between Trinity College and Tounstall it was Resolved, Cro
par. 1.
That an Annuity by Prescription for a Pension issuing out of the Church lay
against the Incumbent, as well for the Arrearages due in the time of his
Predecessor, as in his own time; for that the Church it self is charged with it
in whose hands soever it comes.

(15.) By Cardinal Otho's Constitution [ De Institutione Vicariorum] it is
Ordained, That none shall be Admitted to a Vicarage, unless he first take his
Oath, that he will have his personal and constant Residence thereon; otherwise
his Institution thereto to be null and void, and the Vicarage to be conferred
on another. Constable. Othon. de Instit. Vicarior. From which Canon the Gloss
thereon does raise this Question, viz. Whether a Vicar not having possibly any
Dwelling House yet built for his habitation in the Parish, and living for that
reason in some neighbour-place, and at another man's Table out of his Parish,
may according to the Oath aforesaid enjoined by the said Canon, be said to be
Resident? where the Question though argued in the Negative, yet is Resolved in
the Affirmative; and that he shall be reputed as Resident, if he be so nigh
situate to his Parish, that the Inhabitants thereof may conveniently have
access to him, as often as the Parishioners have need of his Ministry, and so as
on all requisitions he be ready to administer the Sacraments within the Parish;
for in construction of Law, he is said to make his residence sufficiently there
or in that place, where he does discharge his work and duty, albeit he lives
elsewhere: L. cum quidam facit. ff. defun. instruct. Likewise, the Law in
requiring such Residence aims as well at Hospitality as at the discharge of the
Ministry. Also, he that is Absent only about the affairs of the Church, is
reputed in Law as Present and Resident: Also the Bishop may dispense with his
Non-residence notwithstanding such Oath aforesaid: Glo. in ver. Residentiam.
dict. Constable. Otho. Yea, he may also be sometimes Absent not only upon
necessary, but also upon his Family-occasions, with License from the Bishop, as
also for his Recreation, where it is for recovery of his health, or prevention
of Sickness. Gloss. ibid.

(16.) In an Action upon the Case, for a Promise, upon a Non assumpsit pleaded,
a Special Verdict was found, upon which the Case appeared to be this: The
Defendant by Indenture did Demise unto the Plaintiff all his Tithe of Corn and
Hay, and the Agreement between them was this, Pasch. 7 Jac. B. R. Shepherd
verse. Twolsie. Bulstr. Rep. par. 1.
the Plaintiff should pay him for the Tithe fifty five shillings, and this by
agreement was to be paid at a day certain, then following: The Defendant having
this Tithe, passed the same in this manner to the Plaintiff, and upon this
Agreement and Promise, being not performed, the Plaintiff brought his Action.
It was found, that the Defendant confessed the Agreement to be so, but in Bar
he pleaded the Statutes of 13 Eliz. cap. 20. and of 14 Eliz, cap. 11. for the
avoiding of Leases made by a Parson, by his Absence from his Living by the
space of eighty days in one year, and also shows that one Stallowe who was
Parson of Sharrington, to whom these Tithes did belong (and in whose Right the
Defendant claimed them) was Absent from his Parsonage by the space of eighty
days in one year, and shows in what year, and so by this his interest
determined, and Agreement with the Plaintiff by this made void; but they found
further (as the Plaintiff made it to appear) That Stallowe the Parson of
Sharrington was not Absent in manner as it was alleged, for that they found,
that he did dwell in another Town adjoining, but that he came constantly to his
Parish Church, and there read Divine Service, and so went away again: They did
also find, hat he had a Parsonage-house in Sharrington fit for his habitation;
and whether this were an Absence within the Statute, as to avoid his Lease,
they left that to the Judgment of the Court. Yelverton Justice, This is a good
Non-Residency within the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. but not an Absence to
avoid a Lease made within the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 20. It cannot be said
here in this Case, that he was Absent, for he came four days in every week,
and in his Parish Church did read Divine Service. Williams Justice, upon the
Statute of 13 and 14 Eliz. the Parson ought not to be Absent from his Church
eighty days together in one year ( a Rectoria sua;) but this is not so here,
for he came to his Church, and read Divine Service there every Sunday,
Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and therefore clearly this cannot be such an
Absence, within the scope and intention of these Statutes, as thereby to avoid
his Lease. Yelverton Justice, he ought to be Absent eighty days together, per
spatium de Octogin. diebus and ultra, and this to be altogether at one time,
and so the same ought to have been laid expressly, the which is not so done
here, for that it appears here, that he was at his Parsonage-house, and did
read Prayers every Sunday, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday; and so the whole
Court were clear of Opinion, that this Absence here, as the same appeared to
be, was not such an Absence by the space of eighty days in one year, to avoid
his Lease within the said Statute, and so the Defendants Plea in Bar not good,
and therefore by the Rule of the Court Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff.

(17.) An Information was Exhibited against Two Parsons by J. S. Mich. 10 Jac.
B. R. J. S. against Mar^yn and Gunnystone. Blustr. par. 2.
upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. against one of them for Non-Residency,
and against the other for taking of a Farm; the one of them pleaded Sickness,
and that by the Advice of his Physicians he removed into better Air, for
Recovery of his health; and this is justifiable by the whole Court: vid. more
for this Coke 6. par. fo. 21. in Butler and Goodall's Case. The other pleaded,
That he took the Farm for the maintenance of his House and Family: And this
also is justifiable by the Opinion of the whole Court. Crook moved the Court
for the Defendants, That the Plaintiff was a Common Informer, and that he did
prefer this Information against them, only for their vexation, and so to draw
them to compound with him, as formerly he has so done by others, for which
they prosecuted an Indictment in the Country, upon the Statute of 18 Eliz.
cap. 5. made to punish Common Informers for their Abuses. The whole Court did
advise them to prosecute this Indictment against him. Crook moved for the
Defendants, That in regard the Informer is a man of no means, that the Court
would order him to put in sufficient Sureties to answer Costs, if the matter
went against him, and that then the Defendants would presently answer the
Information. Williams Justice, nullam habemus talem legem, this is not to be
done; but the Rule of the Court was, That the Defendants should not answer the
Information, until the Informer appeared in person.

(18.) In an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff in his Declaration sets forth,
Trin. 14 Jac. B. R. Rudge verse. Thomas. Bulstr. par. 3.
that the Defendant was Parson of D. and did Covenant, That the Plaintiff
should have his Tithes of certain Lands for thirteen years; and that afterward
he Resigned, and another Parson Inducted, by which means he was ousted of his
Tithes, and for this cause the Action brought. The Defendant pleads in Bar the
Statutes of 13 Eliz. cap. 20. and 14 Eliz. cap. 11. for Non-Residency, upon
which Plea the Plaintiff demurred in Law. It was urged for the Plaintiff, That
the Plea in Bar was not good, because it is not averred, that the Defendant
had been Absent from his Parsonage by the space of Eighty days in a year, for
otherwise the Covenant is not void by the Statutes. For the Defendant it was
alleged, That the pleading of the Statute of 13 Eliz. is idle, but by the
Statute of 14 Eliz. this Covenant is made void; for by the Statute, all
Covenants shall be all one with Leases, made by such Parsons: And in this case,
if this had been a Lease, this had been clearly void by Surrender of the
Parson; and so in case of a Covenant. Doderidge and Houghton Justices, The
Statutes of 13 and 14 Eliz. do not meddle with Assurances at the Common Law,
nor intended to make any Leases void, which were void at the Common Law; and
therefore this Covenant here is not made void by the Statute, unless he be
Absent Eighty days from his Parsonage. Coke Chief Justice agreed with them
herein. They all agreed in this Case for the Plaintiff, and that by the
Preamble of 14 Eliz. it is showed, the intent of the Statute to be to make
Covenants void, within the Provision of 13 Eliz. by Absence for Eighty days:
And Judgment in this Case was given for the Plaintiff.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Abbots and Abbeys; also of Chauntries; and of the Court of Augmentations.
1. Abbot, what; why so called; the several kinds thereof; and how many
anciently in England.

2. A famous Abbot anciently in Ireland: The manner of their Election
prescribed by the Emperor Justinian: Anciently the Peers of France were
frequently Abbots.

3. The ancient Law of King Knute concerning Abbots.

4. The Abbot, with the Monks, making a Covent, were a Corporation.

5. Abbots were either Elective or Presentative; they were Lords of Parliament:
How many Abbeys in England, and which the most Ancient, Founded by King
Ethelbert.

6. Chaunter and Chauntries, what, and whence so called; their use and end; 47
belonging anciently to St. Paul's in London; when and by what Laws their
Revenues were vested in the Crown.

7. Before King John's time Abbots and Priors were Presentative, afterward
Elective.

8. Six Differences taken and Resolved in a Case at Law touching Chauntries.

9. Certain Cases in Law touching Lands, whether under pretense of Chauntries
given by the Statute to the King, or not.

10. What the Court of Augmentations was, the end and use thereof, when
Erected, how Established, and by whom Dissolved.

(1.) ABba and Abbas have one and the same signification, therefore Abbots are
called Patres. c. ult. de Regular. Tuseh. Concl. 3. nu. 7. It is either an
Hebrew or Syriack word, signifying Pater with the Greeks and Latins, from the
two first Hebrew Elements or Letters, Aleph and Beth inverted; which Name the
Monks first assumed at their Original in Syria and Egypt. And although now in
this Kingdom we know no more of this word [ Abbot] than the very Name thereof;
Marsil. Calvin.
yet for his Antiquities sake he has the Alphabetical precedence in the Index
of this Abridgment, whether he be Archimandrita, Novel. Constable. 115. or
Coenobiarcha, or Archimonachus. Hottom. in ver. Feuda. Marsil. colum. de
Eccles. redit. c. 15. nu. 5, 6. whether Miter'd, and thereby exempt from the
Diocesan's Jurisdiction, as having within their own Precincts Episcopal
Authority in themselves, and being Lords in Parliament, whence called Abbots
Sovereign, 9 R. 2. c. 4. Or not Miter'd, but subject to the Diocesan in all
Spiritual Government. c. Monasteria. 18. q. 2. c. Abbas, etc. Visitandi, cum 4.
seq. ibid. Omnes 16. q. 7. and c. cum Venerabilis. Extra. de Relig. Dom. vid.
Stow. Ann. p. 442. So called Abbas, because he is Pater Monachorum, Januen. in
suo Cathol. glo. Jo. Andr. de Rescript. c. 1. verb. Abbates. in Clem: and Coke
de Jure Ecclesiast. fo. 28. and has the chief government of a Religious House,
and who with the Monks makes a Covent; of these Abbots, together with two or
three Priors there, were heretofore in England about the number of Thirty in
all. What Consecration is to a Bishop, that Benediction is to an Abbot, but in
diverse respects; for a Bishop is not properly such until Consecration; but an
Abbot being Elected and Confirmed, is properly such before Benediction. cap. de
Suppl. negl. Prael. lib. 1. and 10. Clem.. Statuimus, de Stat. Monach. in Clem.
and cap. Meminimus, de Accusat.

(2.) The Venerable Mr. Bid speaks of an Island in Ireland, which ever had an
Abbot vested with such power and authority, that every Province, yea, and the
Bishops themselves were under his Government, and subject to his Jurisdiction:
Beda, lib. 3. de Gestis, cap. 3. Spelm. de Prim. Eccles. Angl-Sax. An. 603. The
Emperor Justinian in the First Book of his Codes has expressly ordained and
prescribed the manner and form of the Election and Confirmation of an Abbot,
and what persons they ought to be, and how qualified, that shall be accounted
worthy of that Ecclesiastical Dignity. C. l. 1. tit. 3. l. 47. and l. 40. De
Episc. and Cler. and Novel. 5. cap. 9. and Novel. 123. c. 34. Mr. Blount in his
Nomo-Lexicon takes notice of the word [ Abbacy] and says, it is the same to an
Abbot, as Bishopric is a Bishop, resembling it to the word Paternity, and a
very Ancient Record wherein that word is used. An. 34, and 35 H. 8. c. 17, 18.
Sciant.... quod Ego Isabella Comitiss. Penb. pro Salute Animae meae Dedi Deo
and Abbathiae de Nutteleg. totam Wicham juxta dictam Abbathiam, etc. In these
latter Ages the Abbots, through the savor of Princes, and their respect to the
Church, have been reputed as Peers and Secular Lords, to whom the granted the
Provenues of Abbacies proportionable to such Dignity for the support thereof:
Thus many of the Peers of France have very anciently and frequently been
Abbots, as appears by Paradine, who wrote the Annals of Burgundy nigh Seven
hundred years since, and then affirmed, that he had seen very Ancient Records,
wherein the Peers of France used these styles and distinctions, viz. Duke and
Abbot, Earl and Abbot, etc. Guil. Paradin. Annal. Burgund. lib. 2. sub. An.
1103. and Prat.

(3.) Notwithstanding the ill opinion, which in these days not without cause
is conceived of the Ancient Abbeys, yet it cannot without some breach of
charity be well supposed; but that such Houses, commonly called Religious, were
in the primitive and true intent thereof better purposed by the Founders, than
after practiced by their Inhabitants; for by the Law made in the days of K.
Knute nu. 6. i: is evident, what strict Devotion and blameless Conversation the
Ancient Princes of this Realm expected from such as then possessed these
Abbeys: The Law was this, viz. We will that Gods Ministers, the Bishops,
Abbots, etc. do in a special manner take a right course, and live according to
Rule; that they call to Christ night and day, much and often, and that they do it
earnestly: And we Command them, that they hearken to God, and love Chastity:
Full truly they wit, that it is against the Right, to meddle with Women for
Lusts sake: Annot. Ridl. View, etc. cap. 4. Sect. 1. Whereby it seems these
Spiritual Fathers were suspected of old to incline to the Flesh all days of
the week. An Abbot might be Presented to a Church, for he was capable of an
Appropriation, whereby he was perpetual Parson Imparsonee, and had Curam
Animarum. 34 H. 6. 15.

(4.) The Abbot, or the chief Head of Abbeys, being together with the Monks of
the same House, a Covent, made a Corporation, and was not by the Common Law
further charged with his Predecessors Acts, than for such things as were for
the use of the House, or such Acts as were done under the Common-Seal thereof
Terms Law, verb. Abbot.
. And albeit a Creditor had a Specialty against a Monk; yet not the Abbot, but
the Monk's Executors were chargeable for his Debt contracted before his entry
into Religion, unless it were for some such thing as came to the use of his
House Ibid.
.

(5.) Of these Abbots some were Elective, others Presentative; and under this
Title were comprehended other Corporations Spiritual, as Prior and his Covent,
Friars, Canons, and such like: And as there were Lord-Abbots: so there were
also Lord-Priors, who had exempt Jurisdiction, and were Lords of Parliament:
Co. de Jur. Ecclesiast. fo. 28. a. It is supposed, that the Abbot of St.
Austins in Canterbury was the Ancientest of any in this Kigdom, Founded by King
Ethelbert in An. An. 602.
602. And next to him in Antiquity the Abbot of Westminster, Founded by Seabert
King of the West Saxons, An. 604. Some difference there is among Authors
touching their Number in this Realm, whereof some reckon but Twenty six. Sir
Edw. Coke says they were Twenty seven Abbots and Two Priors Co. on Litt. fo. 97.
. But a very Modern Writer gives us a Catalogue of no less than Thirty three
Abbots and Priors Mr. Bl^unt in his (...) Lox.
; whereof some were Priors Alie^s born in France, Governors of Religious
Houses, erected for Foreigners here in England, suppressed by Henry the Fifth
after his Conquests in France, and their Revenues after given by Henry the
Sixth to other Monasteries and Houses of Learning, specially for the crecting
of Kings College in Cambridge and Eaton, Stow, Annals, p. 582. 1 H. 5. c. 7.

(6.) Chaunter [Cantator] A Singer in the Quire An. 13 El. cap. 10.
. At St. David's in Pembrokeshire, the Chaunter is next to the Bishop, there
being no Dean Camb. Bri.
. Chauntry [Cantaria] Aedes sacra; ideo instituta and dotata praediis, ut Missa
ibidem cantaretur pro anima Fundatoris and Propinquorum ejus. These were
commonly Little Chapels; or particular Altars in some Cathedral or Parochial
Church, endowed with Lands or other Revenues, for the maintenance of one or
more Priests, to officiate as aforesaid; whereof mention is made in certain
Statutes of this Realm 37 H. 8. cap. 4. 1 Ed. 6. c. 14. 15 Car. 2. c. 9.
, though not to such Superstitious uses as aforesaid. A man might make a
Chauntry by License of the King without the Ordinary, for the Ordinary had
nothing to do there with: 9 H. 6. 16. It might be Founded in a Cathedral
Church, also in any other Church: 9 H. 6. 17. Roll. Abr. ver. Chauntry, lit. A.
Q. 387. Of these Chauntries there were (it seems) 47 belonging to St. Paul's
Church in London v. Dugdales Hist. Eccl.
. The Superstitious main use and int^nt of these Chauntries originally was for
Prayers for Souls departed, under a supposition of Purgatory, and of being
released thence by Masses Satisfactory; and as in Adam's Case, fo. 112.
mentioned by Sir Hen. Hobart Chief Justice in the Case of Pitts against James,
That Prayer for such Souls was the general matter of all Obits, Anniversaries,
and the like, which were but several Forms of Prayers for Souls: And (as in the
said Case of Pitts) if a man give Land to a Parish Priest to pray, or say Mass
for his Soul; this is within the Law, that is within the Statutes of 37 H. 8.
c. 4. and 1 Ed. 6. c. 14. as it is held 16 Eliz. Dyer, 337. for to this purpose
he is a Souls-Priest, not a Parochial Trin. 12 Jac. rot. 2187. Case Pitts verse.
James. Hob. Rep.
. By which Statutes all Chauntries, and all their Lands and Hereditaments are
given to the Crown, and all Lands, Rents, and Profits given to the finding of a
Priest for the Superstitious ends aforesaid, to continue for ever, are vested
in the actual possession of the King, and of his Heirs and Successors for ever,
who shall also have by the said Statute of 1 Ed. 6. all the Common Goods of
such Chauntries, and the Debts thereof shall be paid to the Kings Treasurer;
and shall also have all Lands, and all such Sums of money, and part of the
issues of Lands given for the maintenance or for the finding of any
Anniversaries, Obits, Lights, Lamps, etc. Only the said Act does not extend to
such Lands, as whereof the Governors of such Colleges as were mentioned
therein, or Chauntries, were seized to their own uses, nor to any Lands or
Rents given by the King for the term of his life only, nor to any
Copyhold-Lands; and all Rents and yearly profits due to any Patron, Donor, and
Founder of any of the said Chauntries, etc. and the Right of others (except the
Governors of Houses) are by the said Act saved to them St. 1 Ed. 6. c. 14.
: All Chanteries, Colleges, Free-Chappels and Hospitals, were by Parliament
given to King H. 8. for the carrying on the War against France and Scotland.
Toward the Charges of which Wars the King obtained a Grant in Parliament of
the same, with the Lands thereto belonging, to be united to the Crown: But
dying before he took the benefit thereof, he left that to such of his
Ministers, who had the managing of Affairs in his Son's Minority: Heyl. Hist.
Eccles. page 12. In the Reign of King Ed. 6. one of the great Affairs was the
retrieving of a Statute made in the 27th year of King H. 8. by which all
Chanteries, Colleges, Free-Chappels, and Hospitals, were permitted to the
disposing of the King for term of his life; but the King dying before he had
taken many of them into his possession, it was set on foot again in the time of
King Ed. 6. and by Parliament during his Reign it was Enacted, That all such
Colleges, Free-Chappels, and Chanteries, as were in being within Five years of
the present Session, which were not in the Actual possession of the said late
King, etc. other than such as by the Kings Commissions should be altered,
transported, and changed; together with all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Tithes, Pensions, Portions, and other Hereditaments, to the same belonging,
after the Feast of Easter then next coming, should be adjudged and deemed, and
also be in the Actual and Real possession and Seisin of the King, his Heirs and
Successors for ever. And although the Hospitals, being at that time 110, were
not included in this Grant, as they had been in that to the King deceased, etc.
yet there were 90 Colleges within the compass of that Grant (those in the
Universities not being reckoned in that Number) and no sewer than 2374
Free-Chappels and Chanteries; the Lands whereof were thus conferred upon the
King by Name, but not intended to be kept together for his benefit only. In
which respect it was very strongly insisted on by Archbishop Cranmer, That the
dissolving of these Colleges, Free-Chappels, and Chanteries, should be
deferred until the King should be of Age; to the intent that they might serve
the better to furnish and maintain his Royal Estate, than that so great a
Treasure should be consumed in his Nonage, as it after was. These Chanteries
consisted of Salaries allowed to one or more Priests, to say daily Mass for the
Souls of their deceased Founders and their Fri^rds: which not subsisting on
themselves, were generally incorporated and united to some Parochial,
Collegiate, or Cathedral Church. No fewer than 47 in Number being (as
aforesaid) found and Founded in St. Paul's Free Chapels, though Ordained for
the same intent, were independent of themselves of stronger Constitution and
richer Endowment, than the Chanteries severally were. All which Foundations
having in them an admixture of Supers^^tion (as presupposing Purgatory, and
Prayers to be made for the deliverance of the Soul from thence) were therefore
now suppressed upon that account. Heyl. Hist. Eccles. in temp. Ed. 6. page 50,
51.

(7.) Before King John's time the King and other Founders and Patrons of
Priories and Abbeys, were wont to present Priors and Abbots 11 H. 4. 68. ^.
: But by King John there was a Free Election granted unto Priors Ibid.
.

(8.) In Adams and Lambert's Case, touching Chanteries these differences were
taken: (1) If one give 20 l. per annum for the Finding of a Priest, and limit
to the Priest 10 l. per annum; all is given to the King, for the residue shall
be intended for the finding of Necessaries: otherwise it is, if a Condition be
annexed to the Gift, to give 10 l. per annum to a Priest, there the King shall
have but 10 l. (2) Land of 20 l. per annum is given to find a Priest, with 10
l. per ann. thereof, and that the other 10 l. shall be to the Poor, the King
shall have but 10 l. But if it be for finding a Priest and maintenance of Poor
men, without limiting how much the Priest shall have, the King shall have the
Land, for otherwise he shall have nothing. (3.) If Land of 20 l. is given for
finding Salary for a Priest with 10 l. of it, and also a good use is limited,
there the King shall have but 10 l. although the other Necessaries are to be
found for the Priest, because a good use in certain shall be preferred before a
Superstitious uncertain use; but if nothing in certain be limited to the
Priest, the King shall have the Land. (4) If Land be given to find a Priest,
the King shall have it; but if a Priest have but a Stipend, the King shall have
but the Stipend. (5.) When a certain Sum is limited to a Priest, and other good
uses are also limited, which depend upon the Superstitious use, all is given to
the King. (6.) If all the uses be Superstitious, of what certainty soever they
are, the Land is given to the King; otherwise it is, if there be any good use
Co. 4. ^dams and Lamber^'s Case. 4^ and 45 Eliz. B.
.

(9.) The Case was where A. devised to the Dean and Chapter of Y. 400 l. to the
intent to find a Chantery in their Church perpetually, and an Obit for the Soul
of D. and that the Chantery-Priest should have 40 Marks yearly; King H. 4. gave
License to the Dean and Chapter to purchase diverse Lands in F. ad onera and
opera pietatis: In the Will of A. they purchased Houses in F. and made
Ordinances how the Priests should be maintained, and obliged themselves and
omnia bona sua ad performandum; and they employed 8 l. for the maintenance of
the Priest, and other Sums for the Obit: Resolved, That this was not a
Chauntery, either in truth or in reputation, within the intent of the Statute
of 1 Ed. 6. because here are not any Lands given by A. and his Intent cannot
make a Chauntery, nor appoint any Lands thereunto, but obliged their Goods for
the payment of an Annual Sum to a Priest; and when no Lands are given, nor
employed to that purpose, it is not reason they should be given to the King
Mich. 2 Jac. B. R. H^ll^way and Watkins Case. Cro. par. 2.
.

A Freeman of London seized of Messuages of the value of 9 l. 4 s. per ann. out
of which a Quit-rent of 42 s. per ann. was paid, 6 H. 7. devised the same to
the Parson and Churchwardens of the Parish of S. and their Successors, That the
Churchwardens should receive the Profits thereof, and therefore should find a
Chaplain for ever, to pray for the Soul of him and his Ancestors, and to find
an Anniversary, expending yearly on it 13 s. 4 d. and the Residue of the
profits thereof to be expended and employed about the Reparations of the said
Church; which were done accordingly. The Question now was, Whether these
Messuages were given to the King by the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. of Chaunteries. It
was said, part of the Profits were given for a good use, and that should save
the Lands: But Resolved, because that was uncertain, for it is ( si quid
fuerit) and also for that it appears, That the Superstitious uses and the
Quit-rent did amount to the full value of the Messuages; and the value shall be
taken as it was at the time of the making of the Will, and not to be of any
greater value; that the said Messuages were given to the King by the said
Statute Pasch. 12 Car. B. R. Humphreys and Knight's Case. Cro. par. 3.
.

A man devised two Houses in L. to the Churchwardens of S. (1) To find an Obit,
and to bestow 3 s. per annum upon the same Obit. (2.) The residue of the
Profits to Repair the said Church of S. and to provide Ornaments in the said
Church. In this Case it was Adjudged, That by the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. no more
of the Land was to the King, than was given to the Obit; and the Devise to the
other uses of the rest was good Heart and Brewer's Case. Cro. par. 1.
.

A Citizen and Freeman of London seized of diverse Messuages and Tenements of
the yearly value of 30 l. 6 s. 8 d. by his Will before the Statute of 1 Ed. 6.
Devised the same to the Corporation of Skinners of London, and that 42 s. 8 d.
thereof should be employed upon an Obit, and 12 Marks yearly thereof upon the
Priest, and the residue to be employed upon Poor men of the Corporation decayed
by Misfortune, who inhabited the said Messuages and Tenements, and appointed
the said Poor men to pray for his Soul, and further with the Profits to repair
the Messuages and Tenements, and after the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. was made of
Chanteries. It was the opinion of the Court, (1) That Lay-Corporations are
excepted out of the Statute for their Lands, which they have to increase their
Treasure for the good of the Corporation, but not for Lands which they have to
employ to Superstitious uses. (2) Resolved, That all the money which was given
for the Obit, and the finding of a Priest, was a Superstitious use, and given
to the King by the Statute; but that which was given for the maintenance of the
Poor men, and although it was appointed them to pray for his Soul, which was a
Precept suitable for that time, and which was given for the Reparation of the
Messuages, was not given to the Crown by the said Statute: And Turner's Case
was vouched to be Adjudged, where Land was given to the intent, that his
Feoffees should keep an Obit with so much of the Profits of it as they should
think fit in their discretion, that the Land thereby was not given to the
Crown, but so much of the yearly Rent as the Feoffees employed to that purpose;
and if they had employed nothing that way, then nothing was given to the Crown:
In the principal Case it was Adjudged against the Queen and Informer The Case
of the Skinners of London.
. And in the Case between the Queen and Palmer it was said by Anderson Chief
Justice, That where a Gift is made to sustain Poor men and Mass-Priests,
without limiting a certain quantity, how much to one use, and how much to the
other use, there the Queen shall have the whole Land: But if the quantity was
appointed as to one use, and how much to the other use, there the Land is not
forfeited, but only so much as is employed to the Superstitious uses Pasch. 30
Eliz. More's Rep*
.

(10.) In order to the better execution of the Premises, there was a Court
established, commonly called the Court of Augmentations, erected as a Court of
Record, by Authority of Parliament An. 27 H. 8. which was to have one Great
Seal, and one Privy Seal; consisting of a Chancellor as the chief and principal
Officer thereof, a Treasurer, Attorney, Solicitor, Clerk, Usher, and
Messenger. All Lands, etc. belonging to Monasteries, Priories, and other
Religious Houses, and Purchased Lands were within the survey and government of
this Court; which (as the Lord Coke says) could not be erected but by
Parliament, because a Chancellor and a Court of Equity were constituted Co.
Inst. p. 4. cap. 15.
. There were also other Ministerial Officers that had relation to this Court;
for there were Ten Auditors, called Auditors of the Revenues of the said
Augmentations, and Seventeen particular Receivers of the said Revenues St. 27
H. 8. c. 27.
. This Court of Augmentations, together with the Court of General Surveyers,
being repealed, dissolved, extinguished, and determined by King H. 8. by his
Letters Patents in the 38th year of his Reign, a new Court of Augmentations was
erected by his Letters Patents; which Repeal and Dissolution thereof was held
void in Law, because they had been erected by Authority of Parliament: For
which reason also the new Erection of the new Court of Augmentations was held
likewise void; and therefore the said Letters Patents, as well for the
dissolution of the former, as for the erecting of the latter new Court of
Augmentations, were after confirmed and established by a Statute enacted by
King Ed. 6. St. 7 E. 6. c. 2. vid. the Re^earsal of the Stat. and Coke ubi
supr. c. 16.
. But afterward Q. Mary, according to the power given her for dissolution of
the said Court by Act of Parliament, did dissolve the same by her Letters
Patents, Dat. 1. Jan. in primo Regni, and the day next following by other
Letters Patents united the same to the Exchequer, which was utterly void,
because she had dissolved the same before: So as she pursued not her Authority;
and so it was Resolved by all the Judges Co. ibid. and Dyer 4 Eliz. 16.
. The end and intent of this Court was, that the King might be justly dealt
with touching the profit of such Religious Houses; and the Court took its name
from this, that the Revenues of the Crown were so much augmented by the
suppression of the said Religious Houses and their Lands; for by the
suppressing of some, and the surrendering of other Religious Houses, the Royal
Intrado was so much increased in the time of H. 8. that for the better managing
of it, the King erected first the Court of Augmentations, and afterward the
Court of Surveyors* But in short time, what by the profuseness of some, and the
avariciousness of others, it was at last so retrenched, that it was scarce able
to find work enough for the Court of Exchequer. Hereupon followed the
dissolving of the said Two Courts in the last Parliament by this King Heyl.
Hist. Eccl. p. 135.
.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Annates or First Fruits; as also of Tenths; of Aumone or Frank Almoign.
1. Annates, what; why so called; paid anciently to the Pope; when and by what
Laws translated to the Crown; a Court thereof, when erected* and by whom
dissolved. 2. The great Antiquity of Annates or First Fruits; the great Revenue
it brings to the Papal See; often complained of as a great grievance anciently.
3. The Popes receiving of Annates compared to Aaron the High Priest's receiving
Tithe of Tithes: The Original, Antiquity, and Equity thereof controverted by
some of the Ancient Canonists. 4. What the Tenure of Aumone or Frank Almoigne
is; a description thereof, with its use and end. 5. The difference between
Statute and Common Law touching Annates or First Fruits, whether due and
payable upon Institution, or not till Induction. 6. To whom the Tenths of
Spiritualties were anciently paid, and how they came to the Crown originally.
(1.) BY the Statute of 25 H. 8. 20. Annates and First Fruits of
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics seem to be one and the same thing, and were
Anciently paid to the Sea of Rome, and that throughout all Christendom, as were
also the Primitiae, First Fruits, or Profits of every Spiritual Living, but
were afterward by another Statute translated from the Pope to the Prince St.
26 H. 8. cap. 3.
. For the due regulation whereof there was a Court purposely crected by a Third
Statute St. 32 H. 8. c. 45. St. 34 H. 8. 17. 7 Ed. 6. 2. 1 Eliz. 4.
, whereby it was made a Court of Record, and commonly called the Court of the
First Fruits and Tenths, and so continued until it was dissolved by Queen Mary
St. 1 Mar. S^ss. 2. cap. 10.
; since which time it was never restored, albeit the Profits were reduced again
to the Crown by Queen Elizabeth dict. St. 1 Eliz. 4.
, and the matters thereof to be transacted, were transferred to the Exchequer.
The First Fruits after the last Avoidance were probably called Annates, because
they took their measures from the rate or proportion of one years profit of all
Spiritual Livings and Promotions, and accordingly are to be compounded for: so
that these Annates, Primitiae, and First Fruits are all one; and it was
anciently the value of every Spiritual Living by the year, which the Pope,
claiming the disposal of all Ecclesiastical Livings, Mich. 5 Jac. Co. lib. 12.
reserved. These and Impropr^ations began about the time that Polydore Virgil,
lib. 8. cap. 2. makes mention of, vid. Concilium Viennense, quod Clemens
Quintus indixit pro Annatibus. These First Fruits were given to the Crown, ^0
H. 8. cap. 3. Sir Ed. Coke cites an Ancient Record of this Subject, ^ill. 34
Ed. 1. An. 1307. At a Parliament held at Carlisle, great complaint was made of
Oppressions of Churches, etc. by William Testa (called Mala Testa) and Legate
of the Pope; in which Parliament the King, with the assent of his Barons,
denied the payment of First Fruits; and to this effect he writ to the Pope:
whereupon the Pope relinquished his Demand, and the First Fruits for Two years
were by that Parliament given to the King. These First Fruits or Annates,
Primitiae, are the First Fruits after Avoidance of every Spiritual Living for
one whole year (except Vicarages not exceeding 10 l. Co. Inst. par. 4. ^ap. 14.
and Parsonages not exceeding 10 Marks) but all are to pay Tenths. Which Tenths
Ecclesiastical, Decimae, are the Tenth part of the value of all Ecclesiastical
Livings yearly payable to the King, his Heirs and Successors, by the said
Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 3. and 1 Eliz. to be valued according to the value of
Ecclesiastical Livings, which were sometimes valued by a Book of Taxation made
in 20 Ed. 1. which remains in the Exchequer, and by another Taxation in 26 H.
8. which also remains in that Court. And according to this latter Taxation
are the values of Ecclesiastical Livingss computed for the First Fruits and
Tenths. Co. ibid.
The Lord Coke says, That the Bishop of Norwich had in 19 Ed. 3. by
Prescription time out of mind, etc. First Fruits within his Diocese of all
Churches after every Avoidance. But these were also given to the Crown by the
Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 3. And as for the Tenths the Can^nists do hold, That
the Pope pretended to have them Jure Divino, as due to the High Priest by
pretense of these words, Number. 18. 26, etc. vid. Jerome. in Ezekiel. c. 44. v. 28,
etc.
Praecipe Levitis atque denuncia, cum acceperitis a filiis Israel Decimas quas
dedi vobis, Primitias earum offerte Domino, id est, decimam partem Decimae, ut
reputetur vobis in Oblationem Primitiarum tam de areis, quam de torcularibus,
and universis quorum accipietis Primitias offerte Domino, and date ea Aaron
Sacerdoti. But the Parliaments in 25 H. 8. and 26 H. 8. were not of opinion
that these Tenths did belong to the Bishop of Rome, as appears by the several
Preambles of the Statutes then enacted: And had they been due Jure Divino to
the Pope, it is not probable that Queen Mary by the Act of 2 and 3 Ph. and M.
c. 4. would have exonerated and discharged the Clergy thereof, nor refused to
have had them paid to the Pope; nor could the Bishop of Norwich (as aforesaid)
have prescribed to have First Fruits within his Diocese, if they had been due
to the Pope de jure Divino, speeially for that Anthony de Beck, for whom the
Prescription was made, was a Reteiner to the Court of Rome, and made Bishop of
Norwich by the Pope. Vid. Co. Instit. par. 4. cap. 14.

(2.) It was an old Observation, and of no less truth than Antiquity, that
there never was any Invention that ever brought more Treasure to the Bishop of
Rome, than this of Annates, which is of far greater Antiquity than some Modern
Writers suppose: so Polydore Virgil. Pol. Virg. de invent. rerum, lib. 8. cap.
2. Et Annates more suo appellant Primos fructus unius Anni Sacerdotii vacantis,
aut dimidiam eorum partem. Historians do not agree, what Pope first imposed
First Fruits: Walls. An. Do. 1316. Trivet. Ranulphus Cistrensis, lib. 7. c. 42.
Polyd. Virg. ubi supra. Platina, Fox, etc. This Tribute or Revenue long since,
when the Bishop of Rome had not such large possessions as now he has, yet at
vast expense and charge to uphold and maintain his Dignity, was gradually by
little and little imposed on such vacant Benefices as himself conferred and
bestowed, which, as Hostiensis (contemporary with P. Alex. the Fo^rth) does
affirm, was often complained of as a very great Grievance: so that after this
Labarell declared in the Council at Vienna, That Clement the Fifth, who was
made Pope in the year 1305. forbad the receiving thereof; and that laying the
same aside, the Twentieth part of the Sacerdotal Revenues should instead
thereof be annually paid to the Bishop of Rome; but this not taking effect, the
Pope so retained the said Annates to his Exchequer, as that to this day it
remains one of the considerablest parts of his Revenue. Polyd. Virg. ubi supr.

(3.) The Canonist Gammarus, in favor of the Apostolic See, asserts that
Annates are very justly required by the Pope pro Conservando decenti statu, and
compares it to Aaron the High Priest's receiving the Tithe of Tithes, the Tithe
of such Tithes as were given to the other Priests; adding withal, that Annates
are of very great Antiquity; Gammar. in Extr. Julii 2. de Simon. Papae Elect.
nu. 253. in Repet. Jur. Can. To. 6. par. 2. fo. 54. as appears by the
Concessions of Jo. And^aeas, and of Hostiensis; Jo. Andr. and Hostiens. in c.
inter caetera, de Offic. Ordin. the which Tho. Aquinas does not deny, saying,
That it is but consonant to Natural reason, that he qui omnium curam habet, de
Communi alatur; and thence concludes, That the Pope may require Tithes and
Annates from the Clergy; Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 87. artic. 4. As to the Original
of these Annates, Platina and Blondus report them to have been first exacted by
Pope Boniface the Ninth: Others assert it to be in the time of Pope John the
Two and twentieth, which was above Seventy years before that Boniface. But
Johannes Eccius in his Enchiridion against the Lutherans, says, that both
Blondus, Platina, and Gravaminus, whom he there nicknames ( Ecclesiae
Consarcinatores) were all in an Error in ascribing the original of Annates to
this Boniface or that John; for says he (quoting Johannes And^aeas for his
Author) in the Council at Vienna, An. 1311. whereof P. Clement the Fifth was
President (which was long before Boniface or John the 22d) there was a Debate
concerning Annates; Jo. Andraeas ubi supr. and Gam. ubi supr. But their
supposing Clement the Fifth to have been after John the 22d. was the ground or
reason of their Error.

(4.) Aumone or Frank Almoign is the same which we call Libera Eleemosyna, or
Free Alms, whence that Tenure is known by the Name Tenure in Aumone, which is a
Tenure by Divine Service Britton. fo. 164.
. It is a certain Tenure or Title of Lands at the Common Law, as when Lands or
Tenements are freely given in the way of Alms, to some Church or Religious
House, upon this condition or consideration, That Divine Service shall be
offered, and Prayers made pro bono animae Donantis, or the like: So that this
Aumone or Frank Almoign is no other than a Tenure or Title of Lands or
Tenements bestowed upon God, by giving them to such as devote themselves to the
Service of God, for pure and perpetual Alms: whence the Feoffors or Donors
cannot demand any Terrestrial Service from the Feoffors, so long as the said
Lands and Tenements remain in their hands Britt. c. 66. nu. 5.
. With this agrees the Grand Customary of Normandy, cap. 23. and whereof
Bracton writes at large Bract. l. 2. c. 5, and 10. vid. F. N. B. fo. 211. and
New Book of Entries, verb. Frank Almoigne.
. But Britton makes another kind of this Land, which is given in Alms, but not
in Free Alms, because the Tenants in this are obliged to certain Services to
the Feoffor Britt. ubi supr.
.

(5.) In the Case of Dennis against Drake it was said, That if a man be
Instituted to a Benefice, he ought to pay the First Fruits before Induction by
the Statute; but by the Common Law it was otherwise, for he is not to have the
Temporalties until Induction, and therefore he could not pay the First Fruits:
But another person cannot be Presented to this Benefice during the continuance
of the first Institution. And an Institution to a second Benefice is a present
Avoidance of the first In Case Dennis verse. Drake. Lane's Rep. Vid. Co. lib. 4.
Digbie's Case. fo. 79. Mich. 5 Jac. Co. l. 12.
.

(6.) Decimae, id est, Tenths of Spiritualties were perpetual, and paid to the
Pope, till Pope Urban gave them to R. 2. to aid him against Charles, King of
France, and others, who supported Clement the Seventh against him. And 5 H. 3.
by the Pope's Bulls all Tenths were paid to H 3. for years: These were given to
the King 26 H. 8. cap. 3. Vid. Lambert de prist. Angl. etc. fo. 128. cap. 10.
St. ibid. inter Leges Inae, fo. 78. cap. 4.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Altarage.
1. The genuine signification of the word Altarage, what is comprehended under
that word: Two Cases at the Common Law touching Altarage. 2. A severe Canon
made by Cardinal Otho against the gross abuse of Altarage; an Artifice to
defeat that Canon: And whether Altarages may be let to Farm. 3. Whether
Tithe-Wool will pass by the word Altaragium? 4. The word Altaragium shall be
expounded according to the use and eugome of the place. 5. Whether Tithe-wood
may pass to the Vicar by the word Altaragium.
(1.) ALtarage or Altaragium, a word though now somewhat obsolete, yet in
signification of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and in the intent thereof
practicable at this day. Mr. Blount in his Nomo-Lexicon takes notice thereof,
as a word which comprehends not only the Offerings made upon the Altar, but
also all the profit which accrues to the Priest by reason of the Altar,
Obventio Altaris. And for further proof and illustration of this matter, there
cites a President out of the Orders and Decrees of the Exchequer in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth to this effect, That upon hearing of the Matter between R.
T. Vicar of West-Haddon, and E. Andrews, it was ordered, That the said Vicar
should have, by reason of the words ( Altaragium cum manso Competenti)
contained in the Composition of the Profits assigned for the Vicars
Maintenance, all such things as he ought to have by these words, according to
the Definition thereof made by the Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of
London, upon Conference with the Civilians, viz. etc. all Doctors of Law, h. e.
by Altaragium, Tithes of Lamb, Wool, Colt, Calf, Piggs, Goslins, Chicken,
Butter, Cheese, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Fruits, Herbs, and such other small Tithes,
with Offerings that shall be due within the Parish of West-Haddon Mich. 21
Eliz. in Scac. inter Turner and Edwards.
. The like Case was for Norton in Northamptonshire, heard of late years in the
said Court, and upon the Hearing ordered in like manner as aforesaid. Thus all
Oblations, whether in Money or Bread, to such or such an Altar, either out of
Devotion or Custom, made either by the Parishioners or Strangers, are esteemed
to be offered nomine Altaragii Gloss. in Matt. Par. Blount's Nomo-Lex, ver.
Altaragium.
. Under which Notion may be comprehended Oblations, Obventions, and Offerings,
which in effect seem to be but as one and the same thing, and that which may be
called merely Spiritual, the Oblations being such things Real or Personal as
are offered or dedicated to God and his Church, which seem to be included in
Obventions; the other Profits consisting in the Tithes Predial or Personal, as
also in the Glebe. John ^e Aton in his Gloss upon Cardinal Otho's
Constitutions, describing the Proventus ex Altari, says, that they are
Offerings either in Bread or in Money, or consisting in other minute Oblations,
vulgarly called Altaragium. Constable. Otho. cap. Auditu, verb. Proventus, Gloss.
ibid. Which word extends it self also to all things pertaining to the Altar,
and relating to the Ornaments thereof, which were by the Canons and
Constitutions of King Edgar, An. 967. to be Mundissima and apprime Concinnata:
Canon. 42. Edgar. Reg. e Veterrimo MS. Codice Saxonico, Colleg. Corp. Christi
Cantabrig. But this cannot referr properly to the word Altaragium otherwise
than in sensu largo; for by the genuine signification thereof is meant only the
Obventions, Oblations, and Profits of the Altar, not the Ornaments thereof.

(2.) In Cardinal Otho's days, about 170 years since, this Provenue of
Altarage was most grossly abused by many of the Clergy insomuch that he made a
most severe Canon or Constitution against the Offenders in that kind; for in
these days (as he observes in the Canon) these Miserable Priests (for so he
there calls them) to advance the profits of their Vicarages out of their
ravenous Covetousness, by the excessive gain of their Altarages, would admit
none to their Penitential Confessions, unless they first deposited some Money,
in pursuance of a precedent Compact (as the Gloss has it) by way of a
Simoniacal extortion, far exceeding the allowed and accustomed Altarages or
Oblations of the Altar: And therefore, first declaring them not only unworthy
of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, but also of the Kingdom of God, did Decree,
That the Bishops in their respective Diocesses should make a most exact Enquiry
touching this horrid abuse, and that all such as were sound guilty thereof,
should be removed from and deprived of the Benefices they possessed, and for
the future be rendered incapable of all Ecclesiastical Preferments, and wholly
suspended from their Function for ever. Constit. Otho. Ne aliquid exigatur pro
Sacramentis, fol. 6. verb. Auditu. Notwithstanding which there being then in
use and practice another kind of Simoniacal Artifice to advance the excess of
Altarages, by Letting them and other Ecclesiastical Revenues and Profits of the
Church to Farm, another Canon or Constitution was then also Decreed, inhibiting
and forbidding all such Farms of Altarages in any kind for the future: Where
John de Aton in his Gloss upon that Canon says, it was Constituted for the
prevention of Simony; and there takes the occasion to put the Question, Whether
it be lawful to allow a Parochial Chaplain for his stipend the Annual
Obventions of Altarage in whole, or in part? the Negative seems (says he) to be
in^err'd from the Text of that Canon; but in his own opinion he is of another
judgment, because it matters not, whether his Salary be paid in Money or any
other Ecclesiastical thing; and concludes, that an Assignment of such Altarages
may safely be tolerated; and that the Priest to whom Altarages are due, may
appoint his Proctor to collect the same, and being so Collected, may lawfully
be assigned him for his Stipend: And although the Canon forbids the Letting to
Farm the Altarages, and other profits of the Church, yet the Gloss holds that
the Temporal Provenues of an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may be sold or let to
Farm; but not the Spiritual Right of the Jurisdiction it self. Ibid. Constit.
N^ Dign. tradantur ad firmam, verb. Ecclesias, and Gloss. ibid.

(3.) Note, upon Evidence to a Jury, between Brett and Ward, upon the
dissolution of a Vicarage in the County of Warnick, which was part of the
Priory of Dantry, where the Pope by his Bull gave to the Vicar Minutas Decimas
and Altaragium. And it was certified by the Doctors, That Altaragium will pass
to the Vicar Tithe-wool, etc. and the usage was showed in Evidence, and the
Copy of the Popes Bull; and the Court would not credit that without seeing the
Bull it self: And so the Plaintiff was Nonsuit, and the Jury was discharged
Brett and Ward's Case* Winch* Rep.
. Bulla, h. e. properly Vesicula aquae superfluens: But in this case a more
reverend esteem was had of the Popes Bull. Bulla is also taken for the Boss of
a Nail or Bridle: Hinc Bulla pro Sigillo and pro obsignato Diplomate, in primis
literis Pontificum plumbeo sigillo notatis. Has literas Bullam vocant, quia
plumbea bulla arctentur; quemadmodum apud Romanos bulla erat Ornamentum aureum,
quod jungebat vestes: Est enim bulla tumor, and ornamentum illud, hoc Bullae
nomen retinuit, quamvis in figuram Cordis esset fabricatum, ut refert Macro. in
1. Satur. quare aliquoties vestis ipsa Bullata Bulla nuncupatur; ita and
liter^^ Apost. Bulla plumbi munitae, Bullae nuncupantur. Gammar. Extra. Cum tam
Divino.

(4.) W. Libels against G. in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of Wool,
Wood, and Apples, etc. and he shows that he was Vicar there; and that the 8 E.
1. there was a Composition, That the Parson should have the Tithes of Grain and
Hay, and praeterea the Vicar should have Altaragium: And for that that those
Tithes did not belong to the Vicar, he prayed a Prohibition. And Henden
objected, That the Parishioner ought to set forth his Tithe, and not dispute
the Title of the Parson or the Vicar; but the Vicar ought to come into the
Ecclesiastical Court pro interesse suo: But notwithstanding that, and
notwithstanding the Vicar refuses to claim those Tithes, and that always
within memory they have been paid to the Parson, yet a Prohibition was granted:
And in the end (upon the Composition) power is reserved to the Ordinary, if any
doubt or obscurity be in the Composition, to expound or determine it; and if he
please, to increase the part of the Vicar; and there was not power of
diminution: As by Hutton, It is also usual in such Compositions; and they say,
That the word Altaragium shall be expounded according to the use; as if Wood
had always been paid to the Vicar by virtue of this word, so it shall
continue, otherwise not: And so it had been Ruled in the Exchequer; and upon
that President it was Ruled accordingly so in this Court: And by them Wood is
Minuta decima, as in the case of St. Albans it was Ruled Dr. Wood and
Gree^wood's Case. Hetl. Rep.
.

(5.) In a Trial at the Bar in an Action of Trespass, the Question arising
between the Parson and the Vicar, as touching Tithe-Wood, and to whom the same
belonged: As to this by the Opinion of the whole Court clearly, the Parson de
mero jure ought to have the Tithe-Wood, if the Vicar be not Endowed of the
same, Mich. 10 Jac. B. R. Reyn^lds verse. Gree^. Bulstr. par. 2.
or claims to have it by Prescription; but without such a Dotation or
Prescription the same belongs to the Parson. Another Question was propounded
for the Vicar, who entitles himself unto the Tithe-wood by these words [
Altaragium] and Minutae Decimae, whether these words will carry the Tithe-Wood
unto him or not: As to this, the exposition and true definition of this word [
Altaragium] is considerable, and to whom this is due. [ Altaragium] as was
observed, is that which is due to be served at the Altar. Wil^iams Justice,
Altaragium is that only and properly which is offered at the Altar, and Minutae
Decimae are the Small Tithes; also the word [ Altaragium] will not carry
Tithe-Wood: And this is the Question here, Whether the Vicar by this word [
Altaragium] has Title to the Tithe-Wood? Crook Justice, This word Altaragium
does not carry the Tithe-Wood, which are great Tithes, but Minutas Decimas,
which are petit small Tithes; Minutae Decimae and Altaragia, the Vicar, as was
urged, is to have them by his Composition, and that by these words he is to
have Tithe-Wood. Fleming Chief Justice, There is an Usage here laid in the
Vicar to have the Tithe-Wood, by reason of these words, Altaragia and Minutae
Decimae, the which the Vicar can no ways have, but by Prescription or by such
a Usage; and so the same may pass by these words Altaragia and Minutae Decimae,
and the Usage had accordingly: Also Sheaves of Corn have passed by Usage to the
Vicar, by the words Altaragia and Minutae Decimae, and so it was Adjudged in
the Court of Exchequer. The Judges all agreed in this, That by these words
Altaragia and Minutae Decimae, by Usage, Tithe-wood may well pass; and so has
the Opinion of all the Civilians been. Fleming Chief Justice, and the rest of
the Judges agreed in this, That by Usage, the word Altaragia shall be accounted
inter Minutas Decimas. Williams Justice, By the word Altaragia Tithe-Wood does
not pass; but if the Vicar have used to have the same, time out of mind, This
is good, and shall pass under the words of Minutae Decimae. Fleming Chief
Justice, Though the Law be against it, that Tithe-Wood does not pass by these
words, yet by Usage it has been allowed good, to carry Tithe-Wood by these
words, being of small value; and by such Usage Tithe-Wood may pass, though the
Law be against it.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Tithes.
1. What Tithes are; the Original thereof in England; with the Division and
Subdivision thereof. 2. Whether the Quotity be Moral, or only of the Ceremonial
or Judicial Law? The Institution of Tithes; the lawfulness thereof under the
Gospel; it is Sacrilege, Theft, and Robbery to withhold them. 3. The Common
Arguments against the payment of Tithes, Answered. 4. A Fourfold Division of
Tithes under the Levitical Law. 5. The Schoolmens conceit touching the Division
of Tithes in allusion to the Division of the Law of Moses. 6. Tithes anciently
Ecclesiastical are now Temporal Inheritances; several Laws touching Tithes in
general. 7. What the Common Law of England understands by Tithes: The first
obstruction thereof by Charles Martel. 8. The supposed Reason, why Tithes
before the Lateran Council might be paid to any Church or any Priest: The
original Division of England into Parishes. 9. The Exact provision anciently,
as well before as since the Conquest, made by the Sovereign Kings and Princes
of this Realm for the due payment of Tithes. 10. The Supposition of the
Par^chial Right of Tithes to be settled by a Canon of the Council of Lateran,
Contradicted. 11. Whether a Parson may make a Lease parol of his Tithes. 12.
Tithes discharged by Unity of possession. 13. A Covenant between Parson and
Parishioner touching Nonpayment of Tithes. 14. Whether Proof by one Witness in
case of Tithes, ought to suffice in the Ecclesiastical Court. 15. Tithe-Wool,
and Rotten Sheep; Tithe-Calves. 16. Tithe-Headlands; Tithe-Wool; Lamb and Wool
included in Samll Tithes. 17. Tithe-Wool of Sheep depastured in one Parish and
shear'd in another. 18. Suit for the Tithe-Grass of a Riding Nagg. 19. Modus
decimandi touching Tithe-Wool, and Lamb. 20. Park-Tithes; Buck and Do not
tithable; what Partridges and Pheasants are not tithable. 21. Saffron, whether
it be Small Tithes; Venis^n not tithable. 22. Prohibition for not allowing
Proof by one Witness. 23. An Action of the Case lies against a Parson, that
takes not away in due time his Tithe-Corn set out. 24. The Parishioner not
obliged to divide the Tithes into Moities, where two persons have portion of
Tithes by halves. 25. A Custom of not tithing the odd Sheafs, good. 26.
Whether Tithes shall be paid of the Glebe leased to a Farmer. 27. Whether
Tithes may be Leased or Released without Deed? 28. A Parson may Sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court pro modo Decimandi. 29. Whether that Court may proceed
therein in case the Modus be denied. 30. In what case the Right of Tithes is
triable in the Exchequer. 31. A Case in Law touching Prescription, and of
Tithes of a Park Disparked. 32. What things are reputed Majores, what Minores
Decimae, and how they may vary according to the Circumstances. 33. Whether
Tithes are payable of Cattle for the Dairy or the Plough? 34. Whether a Dean
and Chapter be capable de non decimando their Lands? 35. Touching Tithe-Herbage
of young Cattle, of Hedge-stuff, of Orchards, and the Custom of Hearthy-peny.
36. Tithe-Fish, Customary Tithe; whether Prohibition or not. 37. Acorns
tithable, if sold; whether Pigeons, if spent in the house. 38. Several Cases
touching Discharges of Tithes. 39. Hay of Headlands, whether tithable? 40.
Prescription for discharge of Tithes upon payment of 10 s. per ann. 41. A
Forest in the Kings hands is privileged of Tithes, not so in the hands of a
Subject: The Right of Tithes between Parson and Vicar, triable in the
Ecclesiastical. 42. Whether Tithe shall be paid for Hedge-boot and Fire-boot?
43. Touching Tithe of young Cattle, of Hedging and Fencing, of the Herbage of
Heifers and Horses, of Dry-Cattel, and of Gardens; how far tithable, or not.
44. Apples stolen out of the Orchard, not tithable; no Tithes of Pasture of
Milch-kine grown dry* unless kept for Sale. 45. Composition for Tithes for
life; not good without Deed. 46. Estovers burnt in the house, not Tithable. The
Hearth-peny good by Prescription. 47. A Composition for Tithes de anno in
annum. 48. The Modus decimandi is Suable in the Ecclesiastical Court, as well
as the Tithe it self. 49. Pro^ibition in case of Libel to prove in perpet. rei
memo. 50. Custom of Tithe-Grass Cocks as to both Mathes. 51. In a Prohibition
upon matter at Common Law, and not within the Stat. of 2 E. 6. 13. the
Suggestion need not be proved in Six months. 52. Tithe-Hay of Headlands;
Custom and Prescription. 53. Tithe-Hay of Heathlands; also Tithe of Pigeons.
54. Minute Tithes to the Vicar. 55. Tithes to Parson and Vicar may amount but
to one Action. 56. The Curate may not Prescribe in Tithes against the Parson.
57. Curates may sue for Pensions in the Ecclesiastical Court. 58. By the Civil
Law, the Parson to have Notice when Tithes set out. 59. Action on the Case
against a Compounder for Tithes Suing in the Ecclesiastical Court. 60. Modus
decimandi by one may hold as to others for a Prohibition. 61. Composition for
one year good without Deed, not if for years. 62. Tithe-Hasel, Holly, Willow,
Whitethorn: Whether the Parishioner shall preserve the Parsons Tithe for him.
63. Testis Singularis not sufficient to prove payment of Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court. 64. Composition for Tithes, and a Prohibition thereon.
65. Tithes taken away by a Stranger after they are set out, the Parsons remedy
lies at the Common Law. 66. In what Case no Costs upon failure of Proof of the
Suggestion within the Six months. 67. Modus Decimandi may be Sued for in the
Ecclesiastical Court, where if denied, they are to surcease. 68. Custom in
Cornwall touching Tithes of Sea-f^sh. 69. In what Case an Agreement for Tithes
for years may be good without Deed. 70. In what Court Tithes of Rents in London
may be Sued. 71. A Collector of Tithes cannot License a Parishioner to carry
away his Corn. 72. Whether Debt lies for Treble damages upon Fraudulent
setting forth of Tithes. 73. Tithes, whether they belong to the Parson or the
Vicar, cognizable in the Eccles^astical Court, where the Right of Tithes is
confessed. 74. The Ecclesiastical Court not Judges of the Bounds of a Parish.
75. Modus Decimandi in reference to a Park. 76. A Fr^udulent setting out of
Tithes, is no setting them out at all. 77. The Vicar shall have Tithe of
Rape-Seed, being within a Prescription, though a new thing in England. 78. What
the word Garba signifies. 79. Whether Wood in its own nature be great Tithes;
and in what case it shall pass by the words de minutis Decimis. 80. If two
Titles of Tithes unite in one person, there need but one Action for them. 81. A
Parson may not set a Lease for years of Tithes per parol only. 82. If a Parson
be disturbed in carrying away his Tithes se^ out, his Remedy lies properly in
the Ecclesiastical Court.
(1.) TITHES [Dismes, Decimae] probably an abbreviation from the Saxon,
Teo^un^, or Tithing, properly Decuria in that Language. Lamb. Expl. of Sax.
words, verb. De^uria. That the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem were
competently supplied by the Contributions of the Jewish Proselytes, is very
conjecturable in that they sold their possessions, and brought the price
thereof and laid it down at the Apostles feet; and such as then planted the
Gospel, and labour^^ in the Word and Doctrine, had their maintenance by the
Contributions of their Converts. Vid. Council. Grang. Can. 7, and 8. And St.
Cyprian writing to his Church of Carthage, Epist. 33, and 34. to receive
Aurelius and Cellerinus, Confessors, says in Epist. 34. Presbyterii honorem
designasse nos il^is jam sciatis, ut and sportulis iisdem cum Presbyteris
honorentur, and Divisiones Mensurnas aequatis quantitatibus partiantur, Know
you, that we have already designed to them the Dignity of Presbytership, that
they might be honored with such allowances as Presbyters have, and receive
equal shares in the Monthly Dividends. So that Sportulae were the allowances,
Cawdrey's Discourse of Patronage, p. 8.
which in this Infancy of the Gospel the Presbyters had out of the
Contributions of the Converts. And the Fratres Sportulantes mentioned by him in
Epist. 66. were the Clergy which received such allowance. These Converts (after
the Conversion of Constantine the Emperor) many of them being Governors and
Nobles, settled great and large Demesn-Lands upon those who Converted them; and
that (according to Mr. Seldens conjecture) the first Oratories or places of
Public Worship, were built in the Lands bestowed on them; which first
Oratories were called Cathedrals, Sees, or Seats, from their constant Residence
thereon. That the Christian Church even in times of Persecution laid claim to
Tithes as due Jure Divino, is partly confessed by Mr. Seldom himself, citing
some passages in the Ancient Fathers to that purpose. But when the Empire
became Christian, then the Christian Clergy did more earnestly press the
Donation of Tithes; and in process of time they prevailed, not only by
Preaching and Canons, but by the Edicts of Emperors and Kings, to have Tithes
given to the Church. And it appears, that the Roman Empire, wherever it did
reduce any Conquered Country in formam Provinciae, appointed the Farmers of
the Customs, to collect among other Impositions the Tenths of the Tenants of
the Empires; that is, ^bid p. 10.
of all who occupied any Land in the Conquered Province, either as immediate
Tenants to the Empire, or as Sub-Tenants under them. The Publicans therefore
who collected these Tributes were called Decumani, as Mr. Seldom, page 39. of
his History of Tithes does observe out of Appian. But whether these Tenths were
received by the Senate or Emperors, upon a Civil or Religious account, is not
liquid and clear: For the Emperors always till Christianity came in (nay
Constantine and other Emperors even after Christianity was received, till
Gratian's time, as the Noble and Learned Duplessy in his Mystery of Iniquity
observes out of Zosimen) continued the chief Pontifice or High Priesthood in
their own persons. And as touching us here in England, Dr. Heylin, P. H.
Treleyny, in his Treatise touching Tithes, p. 3. says, Tithes are not given to
the Ministers by the People; for Sr. Ed. Coke on Litt. Tenures, lib. 1. c. 9.
Sect. 73. fo. 58. asserteth, That it appears by the Laws and Ordinances of
Ancient Kings, and especially of King Alfred, That the first Kings of this
Realm had all the Lands of England in Demesne, and Les Grande Manors and
Royalties they reserved to themselves, and with the Remnant they for the
defense of the Realm enf^offed the Barons of the Realm with such Jurisdiction
as the Court Baron now has. And at this time, when all the Lands of England
were the King Demesns, that Ethelwolph the Second Monarch of the Saxon race
(his Father Egbert being the first, which brought the former Heptarchy under
one sole Prince) conferred the Tithes of all the Kingdom upon the Church by his
Royal Charter. Of which Ingulph Abbot of Crowland, An. 855. says, That King
Ethelwolph with the consent ( gratuito consensu) of his Prelates and Princes,
did first enrich the Church of England with the Tithes of all his Lands and
Goods. Many other Laws of the Saxon Kings for the payment of Tithes are recited
by Mr. Seldom, as entirely the Gift of Kings: And so says King Elred, Nemo
auferat a Deo, quod ad Deum pertinet, and Praecessores nostri concesserunt. The
whole Bishopric Anciently was in a large sense a Paroecia, and the income of
it (by Contributions first, and by Tithes also afterward) was the Common stock
of all the Clergy of the Diocese; and Mr. Seldom asserts it to be the general
Opinion of all the Common Lawyers, That before the Lateran Council, under
Innocent 3. every man might have given his Tithes to what Church he would
(probably within the Diocese) because they were not the Propriety as yet of any
one Presbyter, but the Common Patrimony of all the Diocesan Clergy. So that
Tithes are a Tenth part of all increase Tithable, due to God (...) ^0.
, and consequently to his Ministers that wait on the Altar. These are divided
into Three sorts, 1. Praedial Tithes, arising only either of the Fruits of the
Ground, as Corn, Hay, Hemp, and the like; or of the Fruits of Trees and
Orchards, as Apples, Pears, and the like. 2. Personal Tithes, arising of the
profits that come by the labor and industry of Man, either by Handicrafts, as
Carpenters, Masons, and the like; or by Buying, Selling, or Merchandising. 3.
Mixed Tithes, arising partly of the Ground, and partly of the Industry of Man,
as of Calves, Lambs, Piggs, Milk, Cheese, and the like (...) Jac. R^ C. B.
. No Tithes shall be paid for such things as do not increase and renew year by
year, by the Act of God ^o. Gra^^, Rol^ 6.
. Of Praedial Tithes some are called Majores, vulgarly termed the Great Tithes:
others Minores vel Minutae, vulgarly the Small Tithes. The Great, such as
Wheat, Rye, Hay, etc. The Small, such as Min^, Annis, Cumin, etc. (...) 42.
. And commonly with us here in England we compute Flax in the number of Small
Tithes (which is a Praedial Tithe) as also Wool, Milk, Cheese, Eggs, Chicken of
all kinds, Lambs, Honey, Beeswax, and the like, Vid. Lindw. cap. de Decimis.
In Ancient times the Laity were so far from subtracting their Tithes, as is the
common practice of these days, that ofttimes they would give more than was due
or demanded; and were so Conscientious in the payment thereof, as at their
death they usually bequeathed a Soule-Sceat to their Parochial Priest in lieu
of any Tithes forgotten; and at their Funerals caused their best Ox or Horse to
be led with the Corpse, and as a Mortuary or Oblation given to the Priest in
recompense of any Tithes, which possibly in their lifetime might have been
omitted to be paid. But in these latter Ages (not regarding what S. Hierom
says) That Fraudare Eccelsiam est Sacrilegium (...) 14. ^ 2.
, all Artifices imaginable are put in practice to subduct the Tithes; and
therefore to enforce the due payment thereof were the Statutes of H. 8. and Ed.
6. made and enacted (...) St. 8. 20. 32 ^ 8 and 2 Ed
.

2. Covarruvias, with other Canonists and Schoolmen, holds, That by the Moral
Law the rate or proportion of Tithes is not necessarily to be the Tenth part of
the Fruits; which the more received Opinion holds to be both Erroneous and
Mischievous; and that by the Law of God and Nature, no Custom deviating from
the exact rate and proportion of the Tenth of the Fruits, ought to prevail any
longer than by the free and mutual consent of Parson and Parishioner: For which
reason it is supposed, That the paying of a Halfpeny for a Lamb, or a Penny for
a Calf, by such as have under Seven in one year, is now become an unreasonable
Custom, in regard the value of such Lambs and Calves is now raised four times
higher, than in Ancient times. This seems far remote from Tithes, the very
Quotity whereof seems to be Moral Levit. 27. 30.
, rather than Ceremonial or Judicial; and not only allowed or approved, but
even commanded by our Savior himself Matt. 23. 23. and Luke 11. 42.
: Yea, by the very Law of Nature (which is the ground of the Moral Law, and
long before the Levitical) Tithes appear to be due, in that Abraham paid it to
Melchisedec: And God himself (who is the best Interpreter of his own Law) calls
the detention of Tithes Sacrilege Mal. 3. 8, 9. 10. vid. Pro. 3. 9, 10.
. And that Command of Christ, affirming that Tithes ought to be paid of all,
even to the very Herbs, spoken by him at the period of the Levitical Law, ought
not to be restrained only to the Priesthood of Aaron; for it does now remain in
force as to Priests under the Gospel, as that other part of the Moral Law, Thou
shall not steal, the withholding of Tithes being expressly interpreted Theft and
Robbery by the Prophet Mal. ibid.
. And lest it should be thought a mere Human Interest, or in the power of Man
to alienate, God himself has vouchsafed to take Tithes upon his own account in
his Ministers behalf. These Tithes could not be merely Ceremonial (as some
would have it) for they prefigure nothing, nor are they repealed by any one
Text in the Gospel, but reinforced as aforesaid: so that whatever was commanded
in the Old Testament, and grounded on the Law of Nature, and being not Repealed
in the New, must yet stand in force, as a Duty of the Moral Law. And if it be
Objected, That Tithes were not paid in the Primitive times of the Christian
Church; the Reason is, not because they were not then due, but because there
was not then any such settled Order for things of this or the like nature in
the Church.

(3.) Wherefore all the Common Objections made against the payment of Tithes in
the Christian Church may be reduced to one of these Four: (1.) That our Savior
gave no Command to his Apostles to take Tithes, but rather on the contrary
said, Freely ye have received, freely give. -- Answ. Yet our Savior says,
These things (speaking of Tithes) ought you to have done Matthew. 23. 23. and
Luke 11. 42.
. And says, The workman is worthy of his meat Mat. 10. 10.
. And St. Paul says, The Labourer is worthy of his Reward 1 Timothy 5. 18.
. Where has Christ in totidem verbis forbidden Sacrilege? will thou therefore
commit it, because he has not in terminis terminantibus forbidden it? Thou
that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege Romans 2. 22.
? (2) Tithes were not paid till about three hundred years after Christ, as
Tertullian, Origin, and S. Cyprian do testify. Answ. These Fathers do withal
acknowledge, that during that time the Churches Maintenance was the Peoples
free Contribution; which probably might have continued to this day, had not
that Contribution in process of time turned into a Sacrilegious Century by
Covetousness, instead of a Commanded Decuma as a Duty Morally enjoined. (3.)
That Tithes came first into this Kingdom by the power of the Pope, as by Pope
Adrian in the time of Offa King of Mereia, during Englands Heptarchy, in An.
786. -- Answ. Possibly it might be so; what follows thence? does a thing lawful
in it self become unlawful, because a Pope enjoins it? what if he had commanded
Alms to be given instead of Tithes? must we therefore be neither honest in
payment of the one, nor charitable in giving the other, because there was a
Command of a Pope in the case? (4.) That AEthelstane, Edmond, Edgar, Canutus,
and AEthelwolfe, Kings of England, Ordained the payment of Tithes merely to
pacify their Consciences, and thereby to make Atonement for their Blood-guilty
Souls. -- Answ. Admit it were Historically true, yet the final Cause of any
Action, or the End for which a thing is done, alters not that quality that is
inherent naturally in the thing: A thing lawful in it self commanded for a
wrong End, perverts the Action, not the thing; if a man gives Alms that the
Poor may be drunk, though that be no Alms, yet it does not render Alms as
unlawful, nor alter that quality of Charity which is inseparable from Alms.

(4.) Tithes Anciently were Fourfold, as (1) That which the People paid to the
Levites Hierom. sup. Ezekiel. 14 45. and Number. 18. 26.
. (2) That which the Levites thence paid to the Priests Deuteronomy. 14. 22.
. (3) That which the Jews reserved for Expense in their Solemn Feasts, when
they went to the Tabernacle or Temple Deuteronomy. 14. 23.
. (4) A Third years Tenth, which was then laid up for the Levite and the Poor
Deuteronomy. 14* 28.
. The first of these is held a Natural, Moral, and Divine Tribute; the second
and third Ceremonial; the fourth Judicial. The Jews had also their Theruma,
which was not properly Tithe, but a second kind of First Fruits: There were two
kinds hereof, the one called the Great Theruma, the exact quantity whereof was
not defined by Moses; but the Ancient Lawyers determined, that it might not be
less than the fourtieth, fiftieth, or at least the sixtieth part of the kinds
already dressed and prepared, as Wheat Fanned, Oil and Wine, Corn in the Ear
taken from the heap and given to the Priests Hierom. ^ubi sup^.
. The other was the Lesser Theruma, which was, that when the former was taken
away for the Priests, the rest of the Heap was Tithed for the Levite, the tenth
part whereof the Levites gave to the Priests, which was called the Tithe of the
Tithe, or the Theruma of the Tithe.

(5.) Because the Law of Moses has been divided into Three parts, viz. Moral,
Judicial, and Ceremonial, some of the Schoolmen have thence conceived, That
Tithes admit the like division, whereof the Moral part was only a necessary
Maintenance for the Minister, and therefore natural and perpetual: The Judicial
part was the number of Ten, as fit only for the Jews, and therefore positive
and remotive: The Ceremonial part was the Mystery contained in this Number of
Ten, which being (as they taught) but a shadow only, was vanished and abolished
with the Law it self; and thence inferred, that the Quotity or precise number
of Ten being taken away by reason of the Ceremony, a competency now only
remains for the Minister out of the Tithes: This Conceit has occasioned no
small prejudice to the Church, although it has no more probability of truth in
it, than that whereon it is grounded, viz. That the Number of Ten is a type of
Christ, and that the inferior Digits do signify the People. Levi himself paid
Tithes to the first Priest we ever read of, that is, he paid them in Abraham,
which being urged by the Apostle against the Levitical Ceremonies, argues, that
they are more than merely Levitical and Ceremonial; indeed if we consider their
assignment to Levi's Tribe, they are such, but not otherwise. The Sabbath and
Tithes were both before the Law in their very Numbers respectively Genesis 2. 3.
and 14. 20. and 28. 22. Heb. 7. 4.
, and were but repeated by Moses under the Law, because they had been approved
of God before the Law in the self-same Numbers. The Sabbath is said to have a
Moral and a Ceremonial part: The Moral is perpetual and unalterable, which is,
that God should have a Seventh day; the Ceremonial being Typical of our Rest in
Heaven is only positive, and not so unalterable, but that it might be (as it
is) changed from the Seventh day of the Creation, to the Seventh after our
Saviors Resurrection: So Tithes, they also have a Natural and a Positive part;
the Natural is permanent and unalterable, which is, that God has reserved to
himself a Tenth of the increase, etc. for the Maintenance of his Ministers; in
which sense immediately after the dissolution of the Jews policy, the
Christians of the Primitive Church, as soon as they could get any outward form
of a Church, and peace from Persecution, received it in the very Quotity: the
Positive is, That the Lord annexed those Tithes by Moses to the Priests and
Levites for their maintenance, during the dispensation of the Mysteries under
the Law, and therefore changed by the Christians in the Primitive Church to the
Christian Ecclesiastics Dr. Ridley's View. cap. 4. Sect. 7.
; so that how this Quotity can be changed into a Competency, s^^ms neither
demonstrable nor warrantable by the Word of God, but that the Quotity ought to
remain as a perpetual Right due to God and his Church. And if any shall argue,
that Tithes are not to be paid or required in a Protestant Church, because they
have been ever so upheld in the Church of Rome; such may as well argue, they
ought not to be paid in a Christian Church, because they are paid to Mahumetan
Princes, for so they are, and that because they were Priests; for every
Husbandman is bound to pay for Tribute the Tenth part of all his Corn to the
Patriarch for the use of the Prince, the relief of Impotent people, and Widows,
and for maintenance of War against the Enemy. Purch. Pilgr. lib. 6. cap. 1.. 3.
p. 803. nu. 10.

(6.) Tithes, which anciently were merely Ecclesiastical, are now made Temporal
Inheritances; therefore are they Assets in the hands of the Heir, the Wife
endowed of them, and the Tenant by the Courtesy shall hold them Co. 11. ^4. on
Lit^. 159. Bulstr. 2. 184. Hob. 250. ^96. Co. 2. 4 and Dod* of Advowsons.
. They are not grantable for life, or years, or for a longer term than one
year, but by Deed Latch. 176.
. They cannot be extinguished by a F^offment of the Land, nor pass by a Devise
of Lands, with all profits and commodities thereto belonging; and yet may be
exchanged for Temporal Inheritances Co. 2. 13.
. Anciently and at the Common Law there were none qualified to receive them,
but either an Ecclesiastical person, or a mixed person as the King. They are not
extinct by their coming into any hands, but of the Parson himself Dyer 43.
. And that which is given in lieu of them is turned into a Spiritual Fee Hob.
42.
. It is not paid more than once for one and the same thing in one and the same
year, and that only for the neat and clear profit of the thing Tithable Poph.
197.
. It must be paid in kind, if there be Corn now where Wood grew before, or Wood
planted now where Woodlands formerly were. And the Law allows the Parson a
convenient time to remove the Tithe; which circumstance of Time and the
convenience thereof is triable by a Jury; and if the Parson exceed the Time,
the Parishioner may have his Action against him as a Trespasser ab initio
Bulstr. 3. 336. Godb 329.
. And some conceive, that the Parishioner is not bound to give the Parson
Notice when he does set forth his Tithe Noy 59.
. By the Civil Law the Parishioner ought to give the Parson Notice when the
Tithes are set forth; but it has been Adjudged, that the Common Law does not
so oblige a man Noy's Rep. in Spencer's Case.
. But a severance of Nine parts from the Tenth part there must be, for such
Severance is so necessary, and in a kind so essential to Tithes, that they are
not due, nor is it Tithe within the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. until such Severance be
made. Yet the Parson may Grant his Tithes growing upon the Land, before
Severance; which ought to be made by the Owner of the Land: for though the
property of Tithes set out by the Owner of the Land belongs to the Parson, yet
it is otherwise if they be set out by a Stranger Latch. 8.
. And in case the Land be not in any Parish, then the King shall have the Tithe
thereof by his Prerogative and by the Custom of England Hill. 14 Jac. in C^m.
Scacc. Colt verse. Glover. Roll. Rep.
. But where Lands in themselves Tithable, are not manured or ploughed,
specially in prejudice to the Parson, in such case he may notwithstanding Sue
the Occupier thereof in the Spiritual Court for the Tithes of that Land Vid.
Hugh. Abridg. 689. case. 8.
. But if the Parishioner duly sets forth and severs the Tithe in convenient
time, and after Damage happen to him by the Parsons not taking the same away
in like convenient time, in that case the Parishioner may have his Action on
the Case against the Parson Dr. Bridgman's Case. Noy. Rep. 31. and Pasch. 20
Jac. B. R. Rot. 286. and Latch. 8.


(7.) The Common Law of this Realm takes notice of Tithes by the word [ Dismes]
(Decimae) of the French ( Decimes) signifying Tithe, or the Tenth part of all
the Annual Fruits, either of the Earth, or of Beasts, or Man's labor and
industry, due unto God, and consequently to him that is of the Lords Lot, and
has his share by his special appointment: It signifies also the Tenths of all
Spiritual Livings, yearly given to the Prince, called a perpetual Disme 2 and 3
Ed. 6. c. 15.
, which anciently were paid to the Pope, until Pope Urban gave them to K.
Richard the Second, to aid him against Charles the French King, and such others
as upheld Clement the Seventh against him as aforesaid Pol. Virg. Hist. Angl.
lib. 20.
. It signifies likewise a Tribute levied of the Temporalty Holinsh. in Hen. 2.
fo. 111.
. But here it is to be understood, as Quota pars omnium bonorum licite
quaesitorum, Deo Divina Institutione debita; which though according to the
Canon Law is a Tenth of Annual and lawful Increase commanded to be paid to the
Sons of Levi for their maintenance in consideration of their Ministry; yet at
the Common Law it is an Ecclesiastical Inheritance collateral to the Estate of
the Land, and of its own nature due only to Ecclesiastical persons by the
Ecclesiastical Laws Co. 11. 13. b.
. The Practice whereof never met with any considerable interruption in any Age,
until Charles Martel's Sacrilegious Infeudations of Tithes, about the year 650.
which ushered in such a President into the Christian World, as could never to
this day grow obsolete and out of use. Notwithstanding from the beginning it
was not so, nor did any Lay-persons pretend to Tithes originally, nor legally
till the Statutes of Dissolutions of Abbeys made them capable thereof, whereby
the Tithes appropriated to such Houses of Religion as were dissolved became a
Lay-Fee, and Suable by the Laity in the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts.

(8.) Where in the Books of the Common Law it is Reported, That before the
Council of Lateran, every man might give his Tithes to what Church he pleased,
and might have bestowed them upon what person he thought best; there it is also
asserted for reason, That before that Council there were no Parishes, nor
Parish Priests that could claim them. But by a Canon made in that Council,
every man is since compellable to pay his Tithes to the Parson or Vicar of that
Parish where the Tithes arise Co. 2. par. 44. ^. E. 3. by (...) 7 E. 3. 5. by
Parot. Mich. 15 Jec. it. C. B. Slade and (...) Case. Hob. 296. ^cc. High. (...).
. Here may arise a question, Whether there were not Parishes long before any
Council at Lateran? For admitting that the Second Lateran Council was held in
the year 1120, as S. Tho. Ridley computes it View. par. 3. cap. 4. 5.
, or that the general Council of Lateran was held in the year 1179, as Sir
Simon Degge calculates it Law of Tithes. cap. 2. p. 147.
, yet there seems of be a division into Parishes some Centuries of years before
either of these: For it is said, That Cities and Countries were divided into
several Parishes by an Ordinance of Pope Dionysius about the year 266 Ridl.
ibid. p^r. 3. cap. 2. Sect. 4.
, and from him derived into this and other Realms: Also, that Ecclesiastical
persons first in this Kingdom made Divisions of Parishes, as appears by our own
Chronicles Regis^^. Eccl. Christ. Cant. Stow. Ridl. ibid.
; and that the first Practice thereof came from Honorius the 4th Archbishop of
Canterbury after Augustine, who died in the year 693 Ridl. ibid.
. And such as have followed the course of Antiquity in this matter, conceive
that the original of Parishes had its President from the practice of some
Ancient Roman Bishops, it being (as some would have it) recorded in the
Pontifical of Damasus; but in Anastasius's Bibliothecar, it is found, That when
Peter had appointed and ordained Priests, etc. and Cletus had reduced them to a
certain number, Pope Euarist assigned to each of them his Parish; and as to the
time when those Parishes were assigned by Euarist, it must be about the
beginning of the second Century, which was many Centuries before the C. of
Lateran, as also was the practice thereof here in England by Honorius, as
aforesaid, the truth whereof is approved by Cambden. But Cavendum, etc. says
Marsil in his Book De Red. Eccl. c. 12. heed must be taken as to the word
Parish, for it is equivocal, having various acceptations, as sometimes when
nothing is named but a Parish, the whole Diocese is understood, which notion of
the word often occurs in the Councils; in which sense Barbatia spoke a wide
word for the Pope in his Tract. de praest. Card. when he said, that in respect
of his Holiness, the whole world was but one Parish. Sometimes a Parish is
taken for such a part of the Diocese, as was assigned to some Priest,
arbitrarily sent and maintained by the Bishop; to whom such a Parish paid all
their dues, and he to his Clergy* about which time this custom was introduced,
that all Church-dues should be at the Bishops disposal, to be divided into four
portions, whereof he should have^ part for himself, another for his Clergy, a
3d for the Poor and Strangers, and the 4th to be reserved to the Parishioners
for the repairing of Churches; the collection of which dues was committed to
the care of the Chorepise. from which Quadripartite division probably came that
custom whereby the Bishop of every Diocese might before the C. of Lateran make
distribution of the Tithes within his Diocese, where he thought convenient to
Spiritual persons, for their necessary maintenance Bid, lib. 1. cap. 28.
. If the original of a Parish in the 2 former acceptations were a device of the
ancient Romans Bish. and from them derived to other Nations, then probably from
the inconveniences thereof might be the beginning of a Parish, as it is taken
for such a part of the Diocese, as is limited to some Residentiary Incumbent,
allowed by the Bishop, and maintained by the Church-dues in his own Right;
which consideration of a Parish seems most of all agreeable with those which we
now have, and were in use with us before Edgar's days, as appears by the Saxon
Laws of that time.

(9.) The Ancient Kings and Sovereign Princes of this Realm, Vid. Edgar's Laws,
cap. 1.
both before and since the Conquest, have ever made special Provision for the
due payment of Tithes unto the Church, and that ever since there was any
Church Government in this Land; witness that Law made before the Conquest by
King Aethelstane, That every man should pay his Tithes in manner as Jacob did,
that is, of all that God should give him. The like did King Edgar and King
Edmund command on pain of Excommunication. And about the Seventh Century Ina
King of the West Saxons made a Law, That the Church-Sceat be paid at
Martlemass, on pain of paying twelve times as much in case of Refusal: this
Church-sceat Fleta interprets Church-seed, and therefore calls it Certa
mensura bladi Tritici, etc. Others read Church-scet, that is, the Church-shot
or Church-due: Also the said King Aethelstane in the Ninth Century made a Law
by the Advice of Walfehelme his Archbishop, and his other Bishops, Commanding
all his Reeves throughout all his Kingdom in the Lords name, and of all Saints,
that in the first place they pay the Tithe of his own Revenues, as well in
Living Cattle as the yearly Fruits. Likewise King Edmund at a Synod holden in
London, at which Oda and Wul^^tan Archbishops, and many other Bishops were
present, made a Law, Commanding all Christian men by their Christianity to pay
Tithes, Church-sceat, and Almes-fee; if any refuse to do it, let him be
accursed. This Alms-fee or Alms-money was that, which was called the
Peterpence; for when Ina the West Saxon King went in Pilgrimage to Rome, he
made it a Law to his Subjects; That every House should pay a penny to the Pope;
and this was to be tendered at St. Peters-tide, as appears by Edgar's Law, nu.
4. In the Laws also of King Edgar it was Decreed in the first place, That Gods
Church should have all her Rights, and that every man should pay his Tithes to
the Elder Minister (or Mother Church) where he hears the Word, cap. 2. of
Edgar's Laws. And in the Eighth Chapter of King Rnutes Laws it is Ordained,
That care be taken rightly to pay Gods Rights every year, viz. the Plough-Alms
fifteen Nights after Easter, the Tithe of young Cattle by Whitsontide, and the
Fruits of the Earth by Allhallentide; otherwise, the Kings Reeve, and the
Bishop may take the Tenth part whether he will or no, and give it to the
Minister whereunto it belongs. Also by the Laws of Edward the Confessor, nu.
8. and 9. it was Decreed particularly, that Tithes should be duly paid De
Garba, Grege Equarum, Hoveden, par 2. cap. de Decim. Eccl^s.
Pullis, Vaccis, Vitulis, Caseo, Lac^e, Vellis, Porcellis, Apibus, Bosco,
Prato, Aquis, Molendinis, Parcis, Vivariis, Piscariis, Virgultis, Hortis,
Negotionibus, in a word, omnibus rebus quas de derit Dominus; which Decree was
afterward ratified by the Conqueror. Afterward King Edward the First at the
Petition of the Clergy, established the Articles of the Clergy, which his Son
Ed. 2. Confirmed by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal, and by Consent of
Parliament, at the Petition of the Clergy in the Ninth year of his Reign. And
by the Statute of 1 R. 2. cap. 14. it is Acknowledged, That the Cognizance of
Tithes of right does, and of Ancient time was wont to pertain to the Spiritual
Court. Also the Cistercians, 15 Ed. 3. 5 H. 4. 11.
who had purchased Bulls from the Pope to be discharged of Tithes, in the
Second year of H. 4. were by Act of Parliament after reduced to the state they
were in before. And in the Fifth year of H. 4. it was Ordered, That such as
held Lands belonging to any Friers-Aliens, should pay all manner of Tithes to
the Parsons and Vicars of the Parishes wherein the same were, notwithstanding
their being seized into the Kings hands or any Prohibition to the contrary: For
before the dissolution of Monasteries, etc. by King H. 8. Laymen were not
capable thereof, nor indeed after the Dissolution, notwithstanding the Statute
of 27 H. 8. c. 20. could the People be well brought to pay their Tithes to the
Lay-Purchasers thereof, not qualified to Sue for the same, until the Statute of
32 H. 8. c. 7. enabled them to Convent the Refusers before the Ordinary or
other competent Judge, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, without the
Reserve of any cognizance for the Temporal Judge therein, otherwise than as to
what refers to the Inheritance or Freehold of such Tithes, or in case of
disseisin thereof; which was not only ratified and confirmed by a subsequent
Statute made in the time of Edward the Sixth, but it was also then Enacted,
That the Tithes should be paid as the Usage or Custom had been within forty
years next before, and that under certain penalties and forfeitures in case of
detention or substraction (and of treble Damages in some cases) the party so
subtracting to be prosecuted in the Spiritual Court according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws.

(10.) Sir Simon Degge in his late useful Treatise, entitled The Parsons
Counselor, par. 2. or Law of Tithes, cap. 2. discovers a vulgar Error touching
the Original Settlement of the Parochial Right of Tithes: 10 H. 7. 1^* 43 E. 3.
5. Dr. and Stu^^. c. 55. Co. 2. 44. b. Dyer 84. (...)
For whereas it is frequently said in the Books of the Common Law, That before
the General Council of Lateran every one was at liberty to give his Tithes to
what Spiritual Ecclesiastical or Religious person he pleased, and that the
Parochial Right thereof was settled by the said Council; he says, there is not
any Canon of that Council to any such purpose, Seld. Hist. Decim. 231. Co. 2.
par. Inst. 641.
whereby the Parochial right of Tithes was settled: Nor could it then be, for
that the said Council was in An. 1179. but the Parochial Right of Tithes was
not settled till the year 1200. and then not by any Canon, but by a Decretal
Epistle of Pope Innocent the Third, a Brief whereof he there inserts out of Mr.
Seldom and Sir Ed. Coke. If this were an Error in them, it was so also in
Lindwood, c. locat. and conduct. verb. portion. But possibly not such an Error
in either as is conceived, for whether the Canon for the settling of Parochial
Right of Tithes, made in the Council of Lions, 1274. were an Original Decree,
or only a Confirmation of some former Canon to the same effect or not, clear it
is, that the said Decretal Epistle of P. Innocent 3. obliged only the Province
of Canterbury, to whose Archbishop it was directed: Lindw. c. nuper Abbates, de
Decim. And in the Second Lareran Council, holden An. 1120. (being nigh 60 years
before that abovesaid) it was Decreed by the said Innocent 3. That the
Religious persons, viz. the Cistertians, Hospitallers, Templers, Sir Tho.
Ridley's View of, etc. par. 3. c. 4. Sect. 5.
and those of St. John's of Jerusalem (which by the Popes Paschal. and Adrian
were exempted from payment of Tithes) should pay the same unto the Parochial
Incumbents; whereby a Parochial Right of Tithes is settled by a Lateran Council.

(11.) At the Common Law it seems a Parson cannot make a Lrase Parol of his
Tithes, Lease of Tithes per parol.
but may discharge them per parol; for in Bellam's Case against Belthrop it was
Ruled by Doderidge, Jones, and Whitlock Justices, That where the Defendant in a
Trover and Conversion of certain Loads of Fetches, justified under the Lord
Clare by a Demise per parol for Tithes of Grain for one year made in April,
that the Lease was not good, but altogether void; but the Parson may discharge
the Parishioner of Tithes per parol, or Lease the Rectory consisting of Glebe
and Tithes per parol for years Mich. 2 Car. Rot. 179. Bellamy verse. Balthrop.
Latch. Rep.
.

(12.) In Skelton's Case against the Lady Airie it was said that it was
Adjudged Mich. 34 and 35 Eliz. That a perpetual union of the Parsonage, and the
Land charged, is a sufficient discharge of the Tithes, Tithes, where discharged
by Unity of Possession.
and a Prescription may be well enough to be discharged of the payment of
Tithes, as it appears by a Case put in the Archbishop of Canterbury's Case,
Coke lib. 2. G. Crook Counsel e contra conceived that a perpetual Unity was no
perpetual discharge, and said there was no Judgment given in the Case cited
before; he also cited 10 H. 7, or 6. where the manner of Tithing is set down;
he also cited the Bishop of Winchester's Case, Coke lib. 2. also the Prior of
D. to be Resolved in 40 Eliz. That a Copyholder may Prescribe to be discharged
of Tithes by pleading, That he was always Tenant by Copy to a Spiritual
Corporation: and he said, That it was Adjudged in Sheddington's Case, That if a
man Prescribe to be discharged of payment of Tithes by reason of payment of
another kind of Tithe, that this is not good Skeleton and the Lady Airies Case.
Lanes Rep.
.

(13.) The Parson of D. Covenanted with one of his Parishioners that he should
pay no Tithes, for which the Parishione^r Covenanteth to pay to the Parson a
certain Annual Sum of money, and afterward the Tithes not being paid, A Parson
Covenants, that his Parishioner shall pay no Tithe.
the Parson sued him in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the other prayed a
Prohibition: And it was agreed, That if no Interest of Tithes pass, but a bare
Covenant, then the party who is sued for the Tithes has no remedy, but a Writ
of Covenant: And the better opinion of the Court in this Case was, That this
was a bare Covenant, and that no Interest in the Tithes pass Pasch. 16 Jac. B.
R. Fulcher verse. Griffin. in the Additions to Poph. Rep.
.

(14.) In Warner's Case against Barrett in the Ecclesiastical Court, it was
said by Richardson, That before the Stat. of Ed. 6. the proper Suit for Tithes
was there, and if they allow not one Witness to prove payment, a Prohibition
shall be granted. And he put Morris and Eaton's Case in the Bishop of
Winchester's Case; where it was Ruled, if the Spiritual Court will not allow
that Plea, which is good in our Law, a Prohibition lies, as in case of Tithes
Warner against Barret. Herl. Rep. Tithe-Wool and Rottensheep.
.

(15.) It was moved for a Prohibition; because a Parson had Libelled against a
Parishioner for Tithe-wool of Rotten-sheep, which he ought not to have, because
he shall have Tithe for the same thing at Shearing-time afterward; as where
Tithe is paid for the Cuttin^s of Grass, it shall not be afterward paid for
the After-math. It seemed otherwise to Doderidge and Jones, because it is for
the same thing there, but here the Parson has no recompense for the Wool. And
Jones said, That if the Parishioner sell Sheep, the Parson shall have allowance
of the Tithes thereof after the shearing: and upon this point a Prohibition was
denied. Secondly, there is a Custom, that if a Parishioner has three Calves,
he shall pay a penny for the Tithe thereof; if seven Calves, then one Calf.
Tithe-Calves.
The Parson sued for one Calf, because the Parishioner had three one year and
four another, and for that he had no Tithe for the first three. And thereupon a
Prohibition was granted Anonymus. Latch. Rep.
.

(16.) In Huddleston and Hills Case it was said, That if a man Sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of Headlands, Headland.
the Defendant may have a Prohibition; but he ought then to suggest, That they
are but small Headlands, and that there is a Custom of Discharge in
consideration that he paid Tithes in kind of Meadows. Tithe-Wool.
And in this case Williams said, That if a man keep Sheep in one Parish until
shearing time, and then sell them into another Parish; in this case the Vendee
shall pay the Tithe-wool to the Parish where they were depastured in the
greater part of the time of the growing of the Wool Huddleston. and Hills C,
Lane^ Rep, Lamb (...) Wool included in Small Tithes.
. And in the Case of one Nicholas and W. Ward, it was agreed, That Tithe Lamb
and Wool was included within Small Tithes (...)
.

(17.) In Banco Regis a Prohibition was prayed, because a Parson had Libelled
in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tenth part of a Bargain of Sheep, which had
depastured in the Parish from Michaelmass to Lady Day: and the party surmized,
Tithe Sheep.
that he would pay a Tenth of the Wool of them, according to the Custom of the
Parish. But the Prohibition was denied; for as Doderidge Justice said, By this
way the Parson shall be defrauded of all, if he shall not have his Recompense,
for now the Sheep are gone to another Parish, and he cannot have any Wool at
this time, because it was not the time of shearing. Nota, per Whitlock, de
animalibus inutilibus, the Parson shall have the Tenth part of the Bargain for
Depasturing, as Horses, Oxen, etc. But de animalibus Vtilibus, he shall have
the Tithe in specie, as Cows* Sheep, etc. Michal. 2 Car. B R. Poph. Rep.
.

(18.) The Rector of the Church of D. Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for
the Tithes of a Riding-Nagg, where the Case was, Tithes for a Riding Nagg.
That a man let his Land, reserving the running of a Horse for some time, when
he had occasion to use him there: The Desendant showed this matter in the Court
by his Council, and prayed a Prohibition, and abetts that for the same Land in
which the Horse went he paid Tithes. And by the Court, nigh London, a man will
take 100 or 200 Horses to Grass; now he shall pay Tithes for them, otherwise
the Parson shall be deseated. But in this Case, if the Desendant allege and
prove that it was a Nagg for labor, and not for profit, a Prohibition lies
Trin. 15 Jac. B. R. La^^king and Wild's Case. Poph. Rep.
.

(19.) In the Case of Bowry against Wallington, where W. had Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court against B. for the Tithes of Wool and Lamb, and B. upon
suggestion of a Modus Decimandi obtained a Prohibition, and had an Attachment,
and declared upon it, Tithes of Wool and Lamb.
and are at issue upon the Modus* which is found for the Defendant, and
Consultation granted; whereupon Judgment was given in the Ecclesiastical Court
against Bowry, upon which B. appealed, and prayed a new Prohibition, and Noy
moved for a Consultation; because that a Prohibition and an Attachment upon it
are but one Suit, for the Contempt of the party in bringing his Suit in another
Court, and translating this from the Kings Court, and when it is once Tried for
the Desendant, the same thing shall not be Tried again. Note, That in this Case
upon the Statute of 50 E. 3. 4. it was agreed by the Court, That a Prohibition
awarded, and afterward Consultation granted, Where several Prohibitions may be
granted in the same Case, and where not.
that upon the same Libel no Prohibition shall be granted again; but if there
be an Appeal in this Case, then a Prohibition may be granted, but with these
differences, (1) if he that Appe^ls pray the Prohibi^ion; there he shall not
have it; for then Suits shall be deferred in infinitium in the Ecclesiastical
Courts. (2) if the Prohibition and Consultation were upon on the body of the
matter, and the substance of it, for otherwise he shall be put many times to
try the same matter Pasch. 1 Car. B. R. B^wry verse. Wa^^ington in the Additions
to Poph. Rep.
.

(20.) The Lord Rich was seized of Hadley Park, and of all the Tith^s thereof,
and paid for the Tithes but one Buck in the Summer, and a Do in the Winter
for 30 years past. The Park was disparked and turned into arable Land, and the
Parson would not receive this Fee-Buck and Do, but would have Tithe-Corn, and
thereupon sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, Tithes of Park
and he brought a Prohibition. And Catlin said, That ^e need not pay other
Tithes, but Buck and Do* for although they be not Tithable, yet may they be
paid by Composition, Buck and Do. not Tithable. What Partridges and Pheasants
not Tithable.
and he may not take them, but they ar^ to be delivered to him: And in like
manner Partridges and Pheasants in a Garden are not Tithable, yet may they be
paid in lieu of Tithes, and shall be brought dead to the Parson; and although
there be no Park, yet may he give a Buck out of another Park, and perhaps it
may be made a Park again Tri^. 31 Eliz. post Winter and Lovedaies Case. Owen's
Rep.
.

(21.) The Case was, A Church in which there had been a Parson and Vicar time
out of mind, and the Parson used to have the Great Tithes, and the Vicar the
Small, and for the space of forty years last past, it was proved that the
Parson had Tithes paid him out of a Field of twenty acres of Corn, and now the
Field is sowed with Saffron, and the Vicar sued for the Tithes of Saffron in
the Ecclesiastical Court, and the Parson had a Prohibition. Coke, I conceive
the Parson shall have the Tithes, Tithe of Saffron.
for by the Statute of 2 H. 6. it is Enacted, That Tithes shall be paid as has
been used the last forty years, and this has been always Tithable to the
Parson, and although the ground be otherwise employed, yet the Parson shall
have the Tithes: And so was it in Norfolk in the case of a Park, where the
Parson prescribed Pro modo Decimandi to be paid 3 ^. 4 d. for all Tithes
arising out of the said Park, and although the Park was afterward converted to
Arable, yet no other Tithes shall be paid. Popham, It has been adjudged
otherwise in W^oth's Case in the Exchequer. But the Law is clearly as has been
said; and the difference is, Tithes of a Park. Venison not Tithable.
when the Prescription is to pay so much money for all Tithes, or when the
Prescription is to pay a shoulder of every Buck, or a Do at Christmas; for
there if the Park be disparked Tithes shall be paid, for Tithes are not due for
Venison, and therefore they are not Tithes in specie. Saffron is small Tithes.
And I conceive, that Tithes of Saffron-heads shall be comprehended under Small
Tithes; and although the Tithes of this Field have been paid to the Parson, yet
it being converted to another use, whereof no gross Tithes do come, the Vicar
shall have the Tithes: And so if arable Land be converted into an Orchard, the
Vicar shall have Tithes of the Apples; and so if the Orchard be changed to
Arable, the Parson shall have Tithes. Quod Fenner concessit Pasch. 38 Eliz. B.
R. The Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich* Owen's Rep.
.

(22.) In one Hawkin's Case, Libel was in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes
for Lambs for seven years: And there he proved payment by one Witness, and a
Prohibition was granted for Non-allowance of that Proof Warner against Barret.
Hetl. Rep.
.

(23.) On the Stat. of 2 Ed. 6. c. 13. for setting out of Tithes, the Case was
this: Corn was set out ^or Tithes, and the Owner of the Land took the Corn
Damage feasant* but in the Declaration it is not shown how long the Corn
remained on the ground. Tithe Corn.
And by the Court, it is not good, inasmuch as it does not appear that the
Owner of the Land had any Damage at all, for he does not show how long the
Corn remained on the ground. And the usual course in such cases is, if Tithe be
set out, and the Parson take it not away in due time, the party shall have an
Action on the Case. By the Court, a man cannot distrain Shocks of Corn, but he
may distrain a Stack Damage feasant. But in this case it is not shown how long
it remained on the ground, and therefore it does not appear that he was
damnified. And so after the Tithe is clearly set out, the Parson may by the
Statute have an Action of Trespass, if any take them away; but if only a mere
Stranger set out the Tithe, that settles no property in the Parson, so as that
he cannot have any Action for the taking thereof away Hill. 1 Car. 1. B. R.
Stilman verse. Chanor. Latch. Rep.
.

(24.) It seemed clear to Noy, that if Two persons have portions of Tithes by
halves in one Parish, the Stat. of Ed. 6. that appoints Tithes to be set out,
does not in that case oblige the Parishioner to divide the Tithes by halves,
and to set out their parts singly; but the Parishioner ought only to set out
the Tenth, insomuch that if the Tithe be of one Lamb, the Parishioner cannot
divide it Case Stilman verse. Cremer.
. And it has been Adjudg'd, that the Parishioner is not bound to divide the
Tithe into Moities, but the Parsons shall divide it between themselves Dict.
Cas. in alia Nar^at. Latch. fo. 228.
.

(25.) Noy surmized against a Libel for Tithe-Sheaves, that the Parishioners
are at the charges to bind the Corn in Sheaves, and for the better dividing
thereof they use to make it up into Sheaves: and when it is made into Shocks,
they put thereof into a Stack for the Tithes. And for that the Parishioners
have been at this pains, they have used to be discharged of Tithes for the odd
Sheaves, No Tithe of odd Sheaves.
when they will not make a Stack. Adjudg'd a good Custom: and a Prohibition
was granted, because the Parishioners therein do more than of Common right they
are obliged unto Anonymus. Latch. Rep.
.

(26.) The Case touching Tithe of Glebe-Land, Reported (as aforesaid) by
Leonard to be between Style and Miller, is the same with that Reported by Owen
to be between Style and Miles, misprinted: But the Case was this; Style Parson
did suggest, That the Land was parcel of the Glebe of the Parsonage, Tithe of
Glebe.
and that the said Style did Let the said Glebe, being twenty four acres to
Miles for years, rendering thirteen shillings four pence Rent: and in a Prohibit
on the Case was, if Tithes were to be paid. And Wray said, That although it was
parcel of the Glebe, yet when it was Leased out Tithes ought to be paid without
question: But there may be a doubt where the Rent is reserved to the true value
of the Land; but here the Rent is of small value, wherefore Tithes shall be
paid also. And the Reservation of the Rent was Pro omnibus exactionibus and
demandis; yet the Justices took no regard of these words. But Godfrey said,
that those words would discharge him: But Wray on the contrary, for that this
Tithe is not issuing out of the Land, but is a thing collateral; and if a
Parson do Release to his Parishioners all demands in the Land, yet Tithes are
not thereby Released, for such general words will not extend to such a Special
matter Case Style against Miles. Owens Rep.
.

(27.) A. Parson of B. in consideration of 120 l. paid by C. one of his
Parishioners, did accord and agree with him, That he and his Assigns should be
discharged of Tithes during the time that he should be Parson. C. made a Lease
to D. -- A. did Libel against him for Tithes, and D. prayed a Prohibition upon
the said Contract. And if this were sufficient matter for a Prohibition, was
the question, because it was by word only, and without writing, which amounts
only to a Cause of Action upon a Promise for C. but no Action for his Lessees:
neither can this amount to a Release of Tithes; for as Tithes cannot be Leased
without Deed, so they cannot be Released or discharged without Deed. Gaudy
Justice, Tithes cannot be discharged without Deed, unless by way of Contract
for a Sum of money, and he cited the 21 H. 6. 43. Fenner, for that year in
which the Discharge was made, it was good by way of Discharge without Deed,
because the Parson for that year had as it were an Interest, but such Discharge
can have no continuance for another year, for default of a Deed: and so a
Promise being no Discharge, it is no cause of a Prohibition. But Gaudy held as
before. And the Court ( Popham succeeding Wray Chief Justice, upon his death)
held, that the Agreement being by parol, was not good: and Fenner then said,
That without Writing the Agreement could not be good between the parties, but
for one year. And the Court awarded a Consultation. But upon search made no
Judgment was entered in the Roll Pasch. 5 Eliz. B. R. Woodward against Nelson.
.

(28.) Note, That in Layton's Case it was said by the Court, Owens Rep.
That a Parson may sue pro modo Decimandi in the Ecclesiastical Court. As if a
Parishioner will not put his Tithes into Cocks, Modus Decimand.
when he ought by the Custom so to do. But then the Suit ought to be Special
for not putting it in Cocks, and not generally for not setting forth the Tithe
Layton's Case. Latch. Rep.
.

(29.) It was likewise agreed by the Court in Clark's Case against Pro^se, that
the Ecclesiastical Court may take cognizance of a Modus Decimandi: The Case was
this; Clark a Parson sued Prowse, one of his Parishioners per mod. M^dus
Decima^d.
Decimandi in the Ecclesiastical Court, and alleged a Custom in his Bill ( so
called in the Report) to have two shillings of the pound for every House and
Shop in the Town: and upon that Suit the Defendant there answered to the
Custom, Quod non credit esse vera. And so to have here a Prohibition it was
alleged, That the Defendant was a Butcher, that set open Stall in the Market
only to fell Flesh there, and that he had not any other Shop or House. And it
was agreed by the Court, That a Parson may sue per mod. Decimandi in the
Ecclesiastical Court: But if it be denied, the Chief Justice as also Jones
said, That in that case they could proceed no further; because they cannot try
matters of Prescription there, and if they proceed, a Prohibition: But in this
Case the Prohibition was denied, because Doderidge said, That for the Reasons
supra, power is given to the Spiritual Court to examine that matter; because it
is not a denial of the Prescription, but it ought to be by Allegation Clark
verse. Prowse. Latch. Rep.
.

(30.) It was said in Catesby's Case, That if a Copyholder of the Kings Manor
pretends Prescription for a Modus Decimandi against the Parson, Modus
Decimandi.
the Right of Tithes shall be tried in the Exchequer, and a Prohibition was
granted to the Ecclesiastical Court in this Case Pasch. 7 Jac. in the
Exchequer, Catesbie's Case. Lano's Rep.
.

(31.) In Pool's Case against Reynold, Prescription to have Deer out of a Park
in discharge of all Tithes, and after the Park is disparked: P. brought a
Prohibition against R. the Surmise was, That de temps d'ont memory, etc. within
the Parish of C. there was a Rectory appropriate, and the Chapel of S. annexed
therewith. Et una Vicaria perpetua ejusdem Ecclesiae de C. Prescription. Tithe
of a (...).
dotat. And whereas the said P. ^or six years last past had occupied one House,
100 acres of Land, 20 of Meadow, 40 of Pasture, called Shute-Park within the
said Parish of C. which said Tenements were anciently a Park, and now
disparked, etc. and converted into the said House, 100 acres, etc. And that all
the Occupiers of the said Park de temps d'ont memory, until the Disparking had
paid to the Vicar there, one Buck of the Summer-season, and one Do of the
Winter-season, etc. in discharge of all Tithes of the said Park, until the
Disparking; and after the disparking in discharge of all Tithes of the said
Tenements, which they had accepted for all the time aforesaid, until the
Disparking and after, or otherwise agreed with the Vicar for them: and
traversed this Prescription, and found for the Plaintiff. In Arrest of Judgment
it was moved by Henden, That this Prescription extends to the Land quatenus it
is a Park, and that being destroyed, the Prescription is gone, etc. and if it
be to be paid or delivered out of the Park, then it is determined. vid.
Lutterel's Case, Coke lib. 4. Also this Prescription is against the benefit of
the Church, and shall not be enlarged; and the Wood which is sold out of the
Park, Prescription. Tithe of H^^. ground.
shall not be discharged 14 Jac. Conyer's Case in C. B. Prescription, That the
Parson had two acres of Meadow given in discharge of all Tithes of Hay-ground,
viz. of all the Meadow in the Parish, if any Arable Land be converted into
Meadow, it extends not to discharge that. vid. Lutterel's Case, Coke lib. 4.
fo. 8^. That an Alteration in prejudice to the Parson determines the
Prescription. vid. Terringham's Case, lib. 4. He which has Common purchased
part of the Land, all is extinct, for it is his own Act: but vide the principal
Case in that of Lutterel adjudged, That building of new Mills in the same
place, and converting of Fulling-Mills into Corn-Mills, Tithe of Mill^^
alter not the Prescription: And he cited a Cause which was in this Court
argued at Bar, and afterward at Bench, between Cooper and Andrews, Mich. 10
Jac. Rot. 1023. for the Park of Cowhurst. Vid. 32 E. 1. Fitz. Avowry 240. 5 E.
2. Fitz. Annuity 44. 20 E. 4. 14. 14 E. 4. 4. But this Case was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, Quod stet Prohibitio: and that which is by the name of Park is
for the Land, and is annexed to the Land by the name of Park; if the
Prescription had been to pay a Buck or a Do out of the Park, then it would
alter the Case: But it is general, and had been paid also after the Park
disparked. And the Case of Cooper and Andrews, was a shoulder of every third
Deer that was killed in the Park, and two shillings in money, and that Case was
never Adjudged Mich. 10 Jac. C. B. Ro^. 64^ Pool verse. Reynold. Hu^^. Rep.
.

(32.) V. brought Trespass against T. Clerk, Vicar of A. for taking Bona and
Catalla, and count for the taking of two Carectac. glaci, Anglice Wood: And
upon Not guilty pleaded, the Jury gave this Special Verdict, viz. Tithe Wood,
What th^^gs are Small^ Tithes, and what Great.
for the Moity of a Load of Wood, Si videbitur Curiae quod Decimae glaci ne
sunt Minutae Decimae, then the Defendant Not guilty; but Si sunt Minutae
Decimae, then he is Guilty. This Case was argued at Bar by Bridgman and Henden
Sergeants: And the Court Vnement agreed, That for ought that here appears, this
Verdict being found without any Circumstance, that this Wood shall be taken to
be Minutae Decimae. It was agreed by Henden, That if it had been found Wood
growing in a Garden, then Minutae Decimae. And it was agreed by the Court, That
it might have been so found, that it should be Majores Decimae, and Praedial;
as if all the profits of the Parsonage consist of such Tithes. And so of other
things, which in their own nature are Minutae, may become Majores, if all the
profit of the Parish consist therein: As in some Countries, a great part of the
Land within the Parish is Hemp, or Lime, or H^ps; there they are Great Tithes,
and so it may be of Wool and Lambs. Pasch. 3 Jac. B. R. in Beddingfield's Case,
Farmer to the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, who had the Parsonage Impropriate,
and had used to have Tithes of Grain and Hay, and the Vicar had the Small
Tithes: Tithe-Saffron.
And a Field of 40 Acres was planted with Saffron: and it was Adjudged, That
the Tithes thereof belong to the Vicar. There was a Case in this Court, as it
was vouched by Henden, Tithe-Hops.
3 Jac. between Potman a Knight and another: And the Question was for Hops in
Kent, and Adjudged that they were great Tithes; but as for Hops in Orchards or
Gardens, these were Resolved to belong to the Vicar ^s small Tithes.
Tithe-W^^ld.
There was a Case in this Court for Tithe of Weild, which is used for Dying,
and that was in Kent, and it was sown with the Corn, and after the Corn is
reaped, the next year without any other manurance, the said Land brings forth
and produces Weild: And that was a Special Verdict, whether the Vicar shall
have the Tithe of it, or the Parson; but one of the parties died before any
Judgment. Tithe. Tobacco.
And if Tobacco be planted here, yet the Tithes thereof are Minutae Decimae:
And all these new things, viz. Saffron, Hops, Weild, etc. if it does not appear
by material Circumstances to the contrary, shall be taken as Minutae Decimae:
And so this Case was Adjudged for the Defendant Hill. 21 Jac. rot. 705. C. B.
V^ed^ll verse. (...). Hutt. Rep.
.

(33.) In the Case of a Prohibition, in case of a Libel in the Ecclesiastical
Court for the Tithes of Cattels; the Plaintiff alleged that those Cattle, of
which Tithes were demanded, are for his Dairy, and for the Plough; and Winch
being only present said, That the Parson shall not have Tithes of such Cattle;
but if he breed up Cattle to sell it is otherwise. Secondly, the Plaintiff in
the Prohibition alleged, That time beyond memory the Parishioners had paid a
hal^^^ ^or the Tithe of a Calf, and a penny for a Cow; and that upon a day
limited they use to bring this to the Church, and to pay this to the Vicar; and
now the Vicar had Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against them, to compel
them to bring it home to his house: And Winch said, That this is no occasion of
a Prohibition, for they agree in the M^dus, but vary in the place of payment,
and this is not matter of substance, and for that reason no Prohibition will
lie Trin. 20 Jac. C. B. post Case W^^gift verse. Sr. Fran. Barrington. W^^ch.
Rep.
.

(34.) B. brought a Prohibition against C. and alleged, that the Dean and
Chapter of D. was seized of the Manor, and the Defendant being Vic^r sued in
the Ecclesiastical Court to have Tithes, and showed, that time beyond Memory,
etc. they had held that Discharged of Tithes for them and their Tenants, and
that they let that to the Plaintiff. And it was moved by Henden Sergeant, That
the Dean and Chapter are a Body Politic and Temporal, which are not capable of
this Prescription in non Decimando, Coke 2. the Bishop of Winchester's Case.
Hobart said, That the Dean and Chapter are a Body Spiritual, and are annexed to
the Bishop throughout all England; and if the Bishop is capable of that, as it
is plain he is, then the Dean and Chapter is also capable of that, which was
granted by Hutton: but Winch doubted, for he said, That he-may be a Layman, and
for that the Plaintiff ought to averr, That he is a Spiritual person: Hutton
confessed, That the Dean may be a Layman, as was the Dean of Durham by special
License and Dispensation of the King; but that is rare, and a Special Case, and
is not common, and general, and therefore not to be brought as an Example,
which was also granted by Hobart Chief Justice, and upon that day was given
over to the Defendant to show cause wherefore the Prohibition shall not be
granted Pas^. ^^ Jac. C. B. Brigg's Case. Win^l-Rep.
.

(35.) A. Libelled against W. in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Herb^ge-Tithe
of young Cattle, s^il. for a penny for every one. And Hitcham moved for a
Prohibition: and said, that he ought not to have Tithes, Tithe of C^ttel.
if they are young Beasts brought up for the Cart or Plough. And so it has
been Adjudged: As it a Parson prescribe to have Tithes for Hedgingstuff, he
cannot, because that preserves the Land out of which he had Tithes; Tithe.
Hedgstuff.
and then a Parson Libels for Tithes of an Orchard, for that it was a young
Orchard; and the Custom of the place was, Tithe-Orchard.
to pay 4 d. for an Orchard. Hitcham said, There is not any such difference
between old and new Orchards, for i^ the Custom be that he shall pay 4 d. for
every Orchard, it will reach to the new Orchard. And then he Libels for a
Hearth-peny, for the Wood burnt in his house. Hutten said, The Hearth-peny is
more doubtful; for it is a Custom in the North parts to give an Hearth-peny
for Estovers burnt; Tithe-Hearthpeny.
for which he prescribes to be free of every thing which comes to the Fire. And
in some parts by the Custom they had Pasturage for the Tenth Beast, or the
Tenth part of the Gains, which is Barren for the time. But he and Yelverton,
who only were present, That no Tithes are due for them without Custom.
Hitcham, They also will have Tithes for a thing before it comes to perfection,
which would be Tithable afterward: But I agree, if he fells them before they
come to perfection, then the Parson shall have Tithes But by Hutton and
Yelverton, there may be a Custom to have every year a penny for them. Sed
adjournatur, etc. Pas^^. 4 Car. C. B. Woolmerston's Case. H^^l. Rep.
.

(36.) A. Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of Fis^, which is due
merely by Custom; and the Defendant pleads, That time out of mind, etc. they
have paid no Tithes of that. And Henden Sergeant moved for a Prohibition.
Tithe. Fish.
And Richardson Replied and said, It is merely a Customary Tithe, as Rabbits,
etc. whereof no Tithes are due by the Law of the Land, and a Prohibition shall
not be granted. But all the other Justices affirmed, That there shall be a
Prohibition granted, because that the Custom ought to be tried at the Common
Law, and they make a difference between Modus De^imandi, which is also
Customary, and where there is a Tithe precedent due, and that Modus converts it
into another duty: There no Prohibition shall be granted; but it shall be Tried
in the Ecclesiastical Court, whether there be such a Modus Decimandi or not;
and that Case in the Custom makes the Duty it self. But if he alleged the
Modus to be for two pence, and the Parson for three pence, it shall be tried by
the Common Law. And they said, That so was the opinion in the grand Case of
Lead-Ore. And Hutton said, That so it was determined in the Case of one Berry,
for Tithes of Lime-kil^s, which are as Minerals, and are not Tithable by the
Common Law. But when the Custom is tried, then they in the Ecclesiastical
Court may proceed upon it Pasch. 3 Car. ^. B. Case of Tithes in Hetley's Rep.
.

(37.) A Parson Libells in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of Pigeons and
Acorns: And the Defendant prayed a Prohibition; because the Pigeons were spent
in his own house, and the Acorns dropped from the Tree, and his Hoggs eat them.
And it was said by the Court, Acorns are Tithable 11 Rep. 49. but then they
ought to be gathered and also sold. And a Prohibition was clearly granted
Tithes of Pigeons and Acorns. Ant^ Wilco^k's Cas. in ^et^. Rep.
.

(38.) B. Farmer of a portion of Tithes for five years, without Deed, Demises a
Farm which he had in the same Parish to F. for years; and afterward he Libells
against him in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithe of that Farm. And F.
said, he was not Farmer. And Henden prays a Prohibition for that, (1) That the
Lease for Tithes is without Deed: but he may be Discharged of his own Tithes
without Deed, Discharge of Tithes.
as was Adjudged before in this Court. (2.) The Lessee is not to pay Tithes for
the Farm; for although the Parson makes a Lease of the Gl^be for years, he paid
Tithes: But if a Layman who had the Impropriation Leases the Gl^be, the Lessee
does not pay Tithes. But the Court denied the Case of the Lease of the
Parsonage Impropriate; and said, That the Case of Perkins and Hind was
Adjudged to the contrary in that very point. And also if he purchase other
Lands in the Parish (which are discharged of Tithes in his hands) and he
Demises them, yet the Lessee pays him Tithes. And the Opinion of the Court was,
If one contract with the Parson for Discharge of the Tithes of his Lands for
years, and Demises his Lands to another; yet he shall not have Tithes, but the
Discharge runs with the Land. But if one take a Lease of his Tithes by Deed,
and makes a Demise of his Land, he has Tithes of the Lessee. And the Direction
was, That the Lessee of the Farm ought to show expressly in the Ecclesiastical
Court, that the Farmer had not a Lease by Deed: and a Prohibition was granted.
And it shall be Admitted, That the words of the Libel being Firmator,
Conductor, and Occupator was good Booth against Franklin. Hetl. Rep.
.

(39.) W. against S. in a Prohibition, in which S. Libels for Tithes of Hay.
And W. suggests for a Prohibition, That he used to pay the Tithe for Hay
inspecie, Tith^^ Hay of Headlands.
in consideration whereof he used to be Discharged of all Doles, Green-skips,
and Headlands, not exceeding the breadth that a Plough or a Team might turn
about the Lands. And Henden moved for a Consultation; for that it is said,
about, etc. that is, circa terras arabiles, when the truth is, there are Skips
at the side of Lands, as broad as the Lands themselves; and then he would be
discharged of them also, whereas it ought to be at the end of the Headlands
only. Richardson said, That in arable Lands enclosed, Pasture is at the end and
at the sides, which is mowed, and yet discharged of Tithes. But the Court in
respect there was a Prohibition granted, said, That he ought to join Issue or
Demurr upon the Declaration Mich. 3 Car. ^. B. Wood against Symons. Hetl. Rep.
.

(40.) The Earl of D. had a Manor in the Parish of C. which extended to L.
where there is a Chapel of Ease; and the Vicar of C. Libels for Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court, against one of the Tenants of the Manor. And Henden
moved for a Prohibition, for that that the Earl prescribed, That he and all his
Tenants should be acquitted of all the Tithes of Land within L. paying 10 s.
per ann. to the Chaplain of L. And he said, that such a Prescription is good,
as it was Adjudged in Bowls Case. And a Prohibition was granted The Vicar of
Chesham's Case. Hetl. Rep.
.

(41.) In Comin's Case it was agreed by the Court, That a Forest in the hands
of a Subject shall pay Tithes; and it was agreed, that in the hands of the King
it is Privileged. Tithe of Forests.
And by Henden, Davenport, and Atthowe Sergeants, It is only his personal
Privilege, which extends to the Lessee of the King, but not to the Feossee.
And it was agreed, That where the right of Tithes comes in question between a
Parson and the Vicar, who are both Ecclesiastical persons, it shall be Tried by
the Ecclesiastical Court. But Richardson said, the Books make a doubt, where it
is between the Servant of the Vicar and the Parson. But it seemed to him to be
all one Comin's O. Hetl. Rep.
.

(42.) N. and D. Plaintiffs against H. Vicar of S. in a Prohibition: the (...)
was for Wood employed in Hedging, and for Firewood: Issue was joined, That
there was in the Parish a great quantity of Land enclosed; Tithe Hedgboot and
Fireboot.
and that they used to take Wood for Hedge-boot and Fire-boot, and they were
discharged of Tithes, in consideration that he paid Tithes in kind of Hay and
Corn, etc. And it was found for the Defendant. Crawley moved, That a
Consultation cannot be granted, for that that they ought to be acquitted of
Tithes for those of Common Right, and for that although Prescription was
alleged, it is nothing to the purpose. Atthowe, For Firewood it was proved
that Tithes always was paid. Richardson, there is no doubt but the discharge
also ought to be by Custom, and to be grounded upon Modus Decimandi. Yelverton
and Crook otherwise, that it is not upon Modus Decimandi, but by the Common
Law; and the Reason is, for that that when a man is Owner of Arable Land, and
he pay Tithe-Milk and Corn, and for that they are discharged of things consumed
in the House, which are to make Masters and Servants fit to manure the Land,
etc. Richardson said, It is seen that it shall always be Discharged, in
consideration it is alleged, how a small Consideration will serve. Crook, It
is not Modus Decimandi, but the Discharge is for that, that the Parson has by
them a benefit, for he had by them better means of Tithes. Hutton, If a man had
a House of Husbandry, and Demises all the Land but the House, he shall pay
Tithes for them absumpt in the House. Crook, Not. No profit is made by them to
the party; but the Parson had a benefit by him. And a day was given to search
Presidents Pasch. 4 Car. C. B. Norton and ^u^ke^'s Cas. Hetl. Rep.
.

(43.) A Parson Libels for the Tithes of young Cattle preserved for the Cart,
and the Question was, whether in such Cases a Custom ought to be surmized.
Tithe of young Cattle.
. And Crook, F. N. B. is, That of right Tithes shall not be paid for such
things. Richardson, In all such Cases the Parson ought not to have Tithes, if
there be not a Custom alleged, by which the Parson had any thing, or
Recompense, or by which his other Tithe is better. And he said, That he had
searched the Books, and the Book of Entries; and there is not any such Case,
but some Surmize is made, as for that, that he had Tithe of Corn in specie
where the Land is enclosed; and so the Corn better. Hutton, It ought to be
Tried, whether the thing in his nature be Ti^hable, or any Usage to discharge
it or not, as the Cattle are in their nature Tithable, then you cannot prohibit
it; but the Usage ought to be surmized so: And it may be Law, as the Parson had
better Tithes. Harvey, Tithes of ^edging and Fencing. Tithes of Heifers-^erbage.
If a Libel be for Tithes of Hedging and Fencing, there a Surmize ought to be
made to discharge that. But when it is for Tithes of Heifers, which in
apparency ought to be spared by the Law of the Land, otherwise it is, etc.
Richardson, for the Herbage of those Heifers Tithe is due by the Ecclesiastical
Law; and we never can take Tithe of them without express Custom or other
Recompense. Harvey, there was a Case, 16 Jac. C. B. A Pa^son sues for the
Herbage of Horses, Tithes of Herbage for Horses.
and the Parishioner alleged, That he kept them for the carrying of Coals;
there he ought to surmize something to be Discharged: and if he allege, That
he kept them in his House for serving of Husbandry, the other may allege, That
he kept them to carry Coals, and the Allegation is Traversable. Richardson,
Tithes of Herbage for a Riding Horse.
There was a Case, where the Question was, A Husbandman keeps a Horse to ride
up and down about his business, Whether he shall pay Tithe for the Herbage of
him, and a Prohibition was in that Case granted; but a Surmize ought to be
made. Crook said, That in the Kings Bench he had twenty times seen a
Prohibition granted in such Cases, Tithe of dry Cattle.
without any Surmize. And a Libel is for dry Cattle; if it be alleged, That
they are kept for the Plough, the other may allege, That he keeps them to
sell, without that, that he keeps them for the Plough. And before there is any
profit of them, it is not reason that they should be Tithable, and the Parson
shall have the benefit for them after. And for Hedging it is Lex terrae, that
he shall pay no Tithes. Richardson, It is Lex terrae ne consuetudo loci facit
legem terrae. And if he had used to pay Tithes for the Cattle or for Hedging,
Tithes of Hedging.
he ought not to pay that still: If an ignorant man will pay Tithes for those
things, and after upon a Libel a Prohibition is granted; if the other does not
allege a Custom, the Prohibition shall stand: or if they allege a Custom,
which is ^ound against him, no Consultation shall be granted. ^arden-Tithes.
And for a Garden-peny, the reason of that is apparent: for otherwise Tithes
shall be paid in specie: And so for Hearthpeny, if he had always paid it, it
ought to be paid. Hutton, If a man had an Ancient Garden for which he paid a
penny, and that is enlarged, of that enlargement Tithes ought to be paid in
specie Pasch 4 Car. C. B. Thornill's Cas. Hetl. Rep.
.

(44.) A. Libels against B. in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of two
Pecks of Apples, and for Feeding the Cattle upon the ground. The Defendant for
the Apples answered, That there were Two pecks only growing in his Orchard,
Tithe-Apples.
and that they were stolen, and never came to his use; and for the Cattle, That
they were Ancient Milch-Beasts, Tithe-herbage of Cattle.
and that they growing old were dry: And that for a month they depastured with
other Heifers, and that after they put them in a Meadow, out of which the Hay
was carried; and afterward he fed them with Hay in his House. Atthowe, Because
that the Answer was not admitted, prayed a Prohibition. Hutton, If Apples are
upon the Trees, and taken by a Stranger, shall the Parson be hindered of his
Tithe? Yelverton, If I suffer one to pull my Apples the Parson shall have
Tithes; but if they be taken by persons not known, the Parson shall not have
Tithes of them; which was granted: For they are not Tithable before plucking;
and for that, if he suffer them to hang so long by negligence, after the time,
that they are imbelized, by Yelverton he shall pay Tithes. For the second
matter it was Agreed by the Court, and for the depasturing in the Meadow, and
for the Hay with which they were fed afterward, Tithe shall not be paid,
because that the Parson had Tithes of them before. But if the question be for
the Tithes when they went with the other Heifers, No Tithe of Pasture of
Milch-kine grown dry, unless kept for sale.
by Crook, that is no cause to excuse the Tithe. Harvey, If I have Ten
Milch-kine, which I purpose to reserve for Calves, and they are dry, the Parson
shall not have Tithe for their Pasture; but if I sell them, by which it appears
I kept them for Fatting, there Tithes shall be paid. And Hutton agreed, That
although there was so small a time, that they went with the Heifers, yet Tithes
shall be paid for their pasture during that time Case upon a Prohibition in
Hetley's Rep. post Cas. Regis verse. Archbish. of Canterbury.
.

(45.) In Walsingham and Stone's Case it was said by Hutton, That a Parishioner
compounding for his Tithes for his life was not good without Deed. And it was
said by Yelverton, that the use in the Kings Bench is, Composition for Tithes.
That if a Defendant in a Prohibition dies, his Executors may proceed in the
Ecclesiastical Court; and it may be a Rule for the Judges in that Court to
proceed also. And then the Plaintiff may, if he will, have a new Prohibition
against the Executors, etc.

(46.) In Norton's Case Fin^h Recorder said, de Communi jure for Estovers burnt
in an House Tithes ought not to be paid; by the Common Law there was not any
Tithes paid for Wood: And although the Statute of 25 E. 3. gives a Prohibition
for Timber, yet Underwoods were discharged of Tithes. Tithe-Wood.
Vid. Dr and Stud. 171. It is express that Estovers are not Tithable, because
they are not renewing every year, and it is parcel of the Inheritance, for to
destroy all the Underwoods is Waste, etc. Dawley's Case was Resolved for the
Wild of Sussex: and Mich. 13 Jac. B. R. in the Case of Porter and Dyke for the
Wild of Kent of the same Prescription, Resolved to be good; and so is the
Common Experience, that a whole County may Prescribe so. And the reason is, for
that by the Common Law it was not due; but by the Constitution of Winchelsey,
Lindwood 104. it was Ordained to be paid; for then the Prelates imputed a great
Pestilence that then was, for the negligence of paying Tithes, and appointed
Tithes of Wood. And the Commons were desirous to have the Statute of Sylva,
etc. otherwise explained than the Clergy declares it; for they say, that they
ought not to pay Tithes of any Wood that is of the growth of ten years. Hutton,
Wood is Tithable in their nature, and then there may be a Custom to discharge
them. And the Case of Hearthpeny cannot be answered; for if he Sues for the
penny, a Prohibition shall not be granted, quod concessum fuit per Crook and
Yelverton. But of things not Tithable, Tithes of them cannot be sued without
alleging a Custom. Crook, It is known that Hearthpeny is good by
Prescription: This Case is when there is not Land belonging to the House,
Hearthpeny, what*
so that the Parson is not answered for his Tithes another way. But when there
are Ten Servants kept for the maintaining it, then by the Law of the Land it
appears that Tithes ought not to be paid; although Custom had been alleged it
is nothing to the purpose, As if a Custom be alleged to pay 4 d. for every
Acre in discharge of Tithes, and the Verdict find 3 d. no Consultation shall be
granted. Hutton, the Herbage of Barren Cattle is Tithable, because there is a
Custom which discharges those that are for the Cart. Tithe herb^ge of Cattle.
And he said, That the Custom only makes that Legem terrae. And he cited Dr.
Grauut's Case: He Libels for Tithes of a House, and the party brought a
Prohibition, and alleged Modum Decimandi, etc. And it was alleged in Arrest
of Judgment, that Houses were not Tithable de Communi jure, and yet a
Consultation was granted, etc. Trin. 4 Car. C. B. Norton's Case. He^l. Rep.
.

(47.) A Case between Stone and Walsingham having been formerly in the Court
touching Tithes, the Case was again moved in Court, which was that they agreed
de anno in annum so long as the one should be Parson, and the other
Parishioner, Si ambabus partibus tam diu placuerit, he should retain his Tithes
for 6 s. 8 d. per An. And Richardson Justice said, and it was not denied, That
the Suggestion is naught for the uncertainty of it; and a Prohibition cannot be
granted upon that. For the words de ann^ in annum make an Estate for a year;*
and the next words make an Estate for Life; and the last words, but an Estate
at Will: and what shall be Traversed here? It appears, that for Years it is
good without Deed, but not for life; and if it be but at Will, when the other
demands his Tithes, the Will is determined. But at another day the Suggestion
was made, That he made several Agreements with his Parishioner, that he pay 6
s. 8 d. for his Tithes for four years. And then a Prohibition was granted.
Harvey, sufficit, If an Agreement be proved for these four years Stone against
Wallingham. Hetl. Rep*
.

(48.) S^^t moved for a Prohibition, That whereas he had twenty Acres of Wheat,
and had set out the Tenth part for Tithe, the Defendant pretending that there
was a Custom of Tithing, that the Owner should have fifty four Sheaves, and
the Parson five, and so he sued for Tithes, for that there was no such Custom:
And the Court said, That the Modus decimandi must be sued for as well in the
Ecclesiastical Court as for the Tithe it self: And if it be allowed between the
parties, they shall proceed there; but if the Custom be denied, it must be
tried at the Common Law: For if it be found for a Custom, Consultation must be
granted; if not, then the Prohibition is to stand Scot against Wall. Hetl. Rep.
.

(49.) Napper against Steward; the Parson had a Prohibition against diverse of
his Parishioners that Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court, to make Proof by
Witness of diverse manner of Tithing in perpetuam rei memoriam Napper against
Steward. Hetl. Rep.
.

(50.) A Prohibition for H. against E. Farmer of the Rectory of S. and
prescribed, That all Tenants and Occupiers of Meadow had used to cut the Grass,
and to straw it abroad called Tetting, and then gathered into Wind-rows, and
then put it into Grass-Co^ks in equal parts without any fraud, to set out the
Tenth-Cock great and small to the Parson, Custom of Tithe Gra^^-Cocks.
in full satisfaction as well of the first as of the latter Math: Upon Traverse
of the Custom it was ^ound for the Plaintiff; and exception was taken, That
the Custom was void, because it imports no more than what every Owner ought to
do, and so no recompense for the two Maths: But the Court gave Judgment ^or the
Plaintiff; for Dismes naturally are but the Tenth of the Revenue of any Ground,
and not of any labor or Industry: Where it may be divided as in Gross, it may,
though not in Corn; and in diverse places they s^t out the Tenth acre of Wood
standing, and so of Grass: And the Jury having found his Form of Tithing there,
it is sufficient: and the like Judgment upon the like Custom was in the Kings
Bench. Pasch. 2 Jac. Rot. 191, or 192. inter Hall and Symonds Hill. 4 Car. C. B.
^ide against Ellis. Hetl. Rep.
.

(51.) In Johnson's Case, if a Prohibition be granted upon matter at Common
Law, as upon a Personal Agreement between Parson and Parishioner for his
Tithes, and not upon matter within the Stat. of 2 E. 6. 13. the Suggestion
shall not be Proved within the Six months as the Statute limits; and as it is
Agreed by the whole Court Johnson's Case. Hetl. Rep.
.

(52.) The Defendant here in the Prohibition Libels for Tithes of Hay in the
Ecclesiastical Court. The Plaintiff suggests, that the Hay was growing upon
Greenskips, Deals, and Headlands, and that there is a Custom, that the
Parishioners in a Meadow there used to make the Tithe-Hay for the Parson, and
in consideration of that to be discharged of all Tithes of Hay growing ut
supra; Tithe-Hay.
and also that for the Hay of the Land, no Tithe ought to be paid of such Hay,
but does not averr, that that Hay was growing upon Greenskips, etc. And an
Exception was taken by Henden: (1.) That the Exception is double; the Custom,
and the Common Law: And by Yelverton, That is not material; for you may have
twenty Suggestions to maintain the Suggestion of the Court: but Richardson was
against that, that a Suggestion might be double here, for the Suggestion of the
Common Law is a Surplusage: As in Farmer and Norwich's Case here lately, One
Prescribes to be discharged of Tithes, where the Law discharged him, and so was
discharged by the Common Law. Second Exception is, That he does not apply the
Custom to himself in the Suggestion; for he that lays the Custom, does not
show that the Hay grew upon the Skips, upon which a Plough might turn it self:
and for this cause by the whole Court the Suggestion is naught. And here
Richardson moved, how that Two should join in a Prohibition. Yelverton, If they
are joined in the Libel, they may join in the Prohibition, and that is the
common practice of the Kings Bench. Richardson, The wrong to one in the
Ecclesiastical Court by the Suit, cannot be a wrong to the other. Hutton, They
may join in the Writ, but they ought to sever in the Declaration, to which
Harvey agreed. Yelverton, The Prohibition is the Suit of the King, and he joins
tant. as in a Writ. Richardson, But it is as the Suit of the party is, and if
any join here, I think good cause of a Consultation. It is against the profit
of the Court to suffer many to join. And it is usual in the Case of Customs of
a Parish in debate to order Proceedings in the two Prohibitions, and that to
bind all the Parish and Parson. And it was said by them all, That the
Consideration of making Hay is a good Discharge, because it is more than they
are bound to do Hill. 3 Car. and Pasc. 4 Car. Rot. 454. Wood and C^r^verner's
Case ag. Symonds. Hetl. Rep.
.

(53.) F. sued V. for Tithes of Hay, which was upon Land that was Heath-ground,
and for Tithes of Pigeons. And by Richardson, If it was mere Waste-ground, and
yield nothing, it is excused by the Statute of payment of Tithes for seven
years: But if Sheep were kept upon it, or if it yield any Profit, which yield
Tithes, then Tithe ought to be paid: Tithe-Hay on Heath. 222
As the Case in Dyer. And for the Pigeons, which were consumed in the House of
the Owner, he said, and for Fish in a Pond, Conies, Deer, it is clear that no
Tithes of them ought to be paid of Right; wherefore then of Pigeons? quod nemo
dedixit. And a day was given to show cause wherefore a Prohibition should not
be granted. And the Court agreed, That it was Felony to take Pigeons out of a
Dove-house. And afterward a Prohibition was granted, but principally, That the
Pigeons were spent by the Owner. But by Henden, They shall be Tithable, if
they be sold Fl^wer ag^. Vaug^an. Hetl. Rep.
.

(54.) P. the Vicar of Eaton in the County of Oxon, Sues C. the Parson
Impropriate in the Ecclesiastical Court in Oxford pro Minutis Decimis. C. sues
a Prohibition against the Vicar upon a Surmize of a Prescription. P. comes and
pleads the first Endowment made An. Dom. 1310. by which the Minute Tithes were
allotted to the Vicar: C. demurrs; and Adjudged for the Plaintiff, for the
Parson cannot Prescribe against the first Endowment Tr. 2 Jac. ^ B. R. rot.
520. Pring^ verse. Child. Noy. Rep.
.

(55.) In Debt upon the Stat. of 2 E. 6. for not setting out of Tithes, the
Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant was seized of the Lands in question
within that Parish, and that the Tithes did belong to the Parson and Vicar (
viz.) Two parts to the Parson, and the Third part to the Vicar, F^r not setting
^ut of Tithes.
or their Farmers, payable in specie for 40 years last past, that the Plaintiff
was Farmer proprietary of the Tithes to the Parson and Vicar spectant, and
shows the value of the Tithes due, and demands the treble value; the ^^^ndant
pleads Ni^il debet per patr. and it was found for the (...). It was now moved
in Arrest of Judgment, because the Plaintiff ought to have brought two Actions,
as the Parson and the Vicar ought for their several parts: But Resolved, that
the Action is well brought; for it is a Personal and one entire Debt for one
wrong Pasch. 3 Jac. B. R. Sir Rich. Champion verse. Rob. Hill. Noy's Rep.
.

(56.) Bott sues a Prohibition against Sir Edward B. and suggests That the
Defendant is Parson Impropriate of W. and that time out of mind there has been
a Curate of an Incumbent by the appointment of the said Rector, who administered
the Sacraments, etc. And that the Custom of that Parish time out of, etc. was,
that the Curate should have (...) Tenths renewing within that Parish,
Prescription.
except Decimas gra^^^^m, which were paid to the Parson, and that every
Parishioner who had so paid the Tenths to the Curate, was discharged against
the Parson. And that notwithstanding that, etc. Sir Edward B. had sued him etc.
And now he prays a Prohibition, and had it; but after that Surmize was adjudged
insufficient, without Argument by the Court, and a Consultation granted, for
such Curate cannot Prescribe against his Master, that may remove him at his
pleasure: And for that reason it was not a good Prescription for the
Parishioners Bott ag. Sr. Ed. Brabaton. Noy's Rep.
.

(57.) Goodwin being Vicar sues in the Ecclesiastical Court the Dean and
Chapter of Wells, b^ing Parson of a Church, for a Pension, and they pray a
Prohibition^ and it was denied: For that Pension is a Spiritual thing, for
which the Vicar may Sue in the Spiritual Court. Note, that they entitle
themselves to that Parsonage by a Grant of H. 8. who had it by 31 H. 8. of
Dissolutions Goodwin against the Dean and Chapter of Well^ Noy's Rep. Tithes
set out, No^ice.
.

(58.) It was said by Hutton in Spencer's Case, That by the Civil Law the
Parishioner ought to give notice to the Parson when the Tithes are set forth.
But it was adjudged, That the Common Law does not so oblige a man Spencer's
Case. Noy's Rep.
.

(59.) B. by his Deed Compounds for Tithes, and after Sues for them in the
Ecclesiastical Court, by Popham and Gaudy, That an Action upon the Case lies.
Composition.
Vid. E. 4. 13 Mich. 4 Jac. The Lady Waterhouse was sued for the Tithes of
Trees, whereof none were due, etc. there an Action upon the Case does not lie;
for the Parson or person may well be ignorant of what things are due, otherwise
he Sues against his own knowledge Brey a^. Patridge. Noy's Rep.
.

(60.) To have a Prohibition the Surmize was, That the Inhabitants of D. of
which he is an Inhabitant, have paid un. mod. decimand. etc. And they were at
Issue; and he proved only, that he himself had paid it, Mod^s De^^mand.
and yet well: And no Consultation; for every particular is included in the
general, and proved by it. And it appears sufficient matter for a Prohibition,
and to oust a Spiritual Court of their Cognizance. (2) Agreed, that where the
Statute appoints Proof of the Surmize to be by Two, it is sufficient if Two
affirm that they have known it to be so, or that the Common Fame is so Mich. 15
Jac. C. B. rot. 725. Fo^d ag. Weedham. Noy's Rep.
.

(61.) Upon a Surmize by a Parishioner, That he had Compounded with the Parson
for his Tithes for one year, and it may be without Deed; Composition.
by Brownlowe, That a Prohibition shall be awarded, and that there are diverse
Presidents in this Court. But otherwise, if it be for more years, it is not
good without Deed Mich. 16 Jac. C. B. rot. 541. Green ag. Dickenson. Proof of
Surmize for a Prohibition.
. And in Skinner's Case, it was Ruled by the Court upon a Surmize to have a
Prohibition, That if it be proved before one of the Judges within the Six
months, although that it be not Recorded till after the Six months, yet it is
well enough; and good also, although that the Proof be in the Vacation. [
Pasch. 43 Eliz. B. R. Pottenger against Johnson Skinner's Case. Noys Rep.
.

(62.) A Parson preferrs his Bill for Tithes of Hasle, Holly, Willow,
Whitethorn, etc. a Prohibition was moved, because they were of 21 years growth
and more: Tithe-Hasle, Holly, Willow, Whitethorn.
And by the common Custom in Hampshire, they were used for Timber to build and
repair their Ploughs, and cited Pasch. 14 Jac. C. B. Rot. 1918. Cufflye's Case
against the Parson for Holly, Willows, and Maple; and a Prohibition was
awarded. And Hubbard said, That in Cumberland Beech was used for Timber, and
the use of the Country for scarcity of other Trees will alter the Case Pinder
ag. Spencer. Noy's Rep.
.

The Parson Libels for Tithes of Hay, etc. The Parson said, that the Custom of
the Parish has been, That he that has Corn within the Parish ought to reap
the Corn, and also the Tithes of the Parson, Whether Parishioner shall preserve
the Parsons Tithe?
and to make them into Cocks, and to preserve them until the Parson shall carry
them away. And a Prohibition was granted; for although that the Parishioners
ought de jure to reap the Corn, as it was agreed Trin. 28 Eliz. B. R. yet he is
not bound to guard the Tithes of the Parson, etc. But if the Parson does not
carry them away in convenient time, an Action on the Case lies against him.
Pasch. 20 Jac. B. R. Rot. 286. there such an Action was brought by Wiseman
against the Rector of Landen in Essex, for not accepting, etc. of the Tithes of
Cheese Dr. Bridgman's Case. Noys Rep.
.

(63.) B. brought an Action upon the Case, That P. sued for Tithes, and
recovered, because there was nisi Testis singularis to prove the payment, when
in truth he had paid it before Two, but now one was dead; Testis singularis to
prove payment of Tithes.
and by the Court Resolved, That an Action does not lie, because the Cause was
merely Spiritual: And for that it differs from 8 E. 4. 13. for there the
Composition was a Temporal Contract, although it was for Tithes Bray verse.
Patridge. Noys Rep.
.

(64.) G. moves for a Prohibition, and Surmizes that the Parishioners had
Compounded with the Parson for the Tithes; but yet the due Tithes were severed
and exposed, and the Parson takes and carries them away; Composition.
the Parishioner meets him and takes them from him. And upon that the Parson
sues in the Ecclesiastical Court: And a Prohibition was awarded Brooks Case in
Noy's Rep.
.

(65.) W. Sues P. in the Ecclesiastical Court for not setting out the Tithes of
two Acres; P. prays a Prohibition, because he had set out the Tithes of one
Acre in specie, and that a party unknown had taken them; and for the other he
suggests a Modus Decimandi for 2 s. Tithes set out.
6 d. And upon that Issue is joined; and the Witnesses said, That for a long
time, as they heard say, the Occupiers of that Farm, whereof that Acre, etc.
had used to pay annually to the Parson three shillings for all Tithes; and
agreed by the Court, (1) As to the first, Quod Prohibitio stet, for after the
Tithes are severed, if a Stranger takes them away, the Parson has his Remedy
against him at Common Law, and shall not sue the Parishioner in the Spiritual
Court. (2) It was agreed, That a Proof ( by hearsay) was good enough to
maintain the Surmize within the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. But as to the other Acre,
Popham held, That the Modus Decimandi is not well proved; but Fenner and
Yelverton the contrary: For by that appears, the Parson is not to have Tithes
in specie, and for that had not any cause to Sue for them in the Spiritual
Court Webb against Petts. Noys Rep.
.

(66.) W. Sues P. in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of a Dovehouse. P.
upon suggestion had a Prohibition; but he did not prove his Suggestion within
the Sixth month. Tithes of P^geons.
W. takes issue upon the Sugg^stion, and it is found against him; and yet he
prays Costs by the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. for failure of Proof within the Six
months. But by the Court adjudged, that he shall not have it; for-^he has
surceased his time, to take advantage of that, and he can never have a
Consultation. Frgo, He shall not have double Costs. Read the words of the
Statute Warlington ^^rs. P^rry. Noy. Rep.
.

(67.) Parson preferrs his Bill for Tithes of Corn, and alleges, that time out
of mind, etc. in that Parish they have used to allot the T^nth-Shock; wher^upon
the Parishioner suggests, That the Parishioners, and all those who have
Estates, etc. have used only to set out the Tenth-sheaf for Tithes, and had a
Prohibition. The Parson prays a Consultation; but it was denied. And Resolved
by the Court, Medus Decimandi.
That the Parson might Sue for a Modus Decimandi in the Ecclesiastical Court, 2
R. 3. 3. a. But if the Parishioner deni^s that, they ought to surcease, and a
Prohibition lies, and that shall be tried at Common Law Steward's Case in Noy's
Rep.
.

(68.) A. Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of Pilchards taken
in the Sea. And now the party had a Prohibition; upon a Surmize that the
Custom there is, Tithes of Sea-F^sh.
That the Fisher-Boat, has one Moity of the Fish, and the Fishermen the other
moity: And that the Owner has used to pay the Tenth of his Moity in discharge
of all, etc. And it was held by the Court to be a good Surmize; for by the
Common Law he cannot have the Tithes of Fishes taken in the Sea, because it is
not within any Parish; and then when the Parson, by the Custom, ought to have
the Tithes of them, he ought to take them according to the Custom. And that
the Tenth of the Moity may be a good discharge of the whole. And the parties
went to issue upon the Custom in Cornwall Holland verse. Heal. Noys Rep.
.

(69.) By the Court ( Popham being absent) it is clear, That an Agreement
betwixt the Parson and one of the Parishioners, that he shall have his own
Tithes for years, it is good enough without Deed, but otherwise, if it had been
for life. And it is a better way to pl^ad that as an Agreement, and not as a
Lease Small's Case. Noys Rep.
.

(70.) A Prohibition for a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, for Tithes of Rent
in London. It was held by the Court, That by 33 H. 8. cap. 12. the Suit ought
to be before the Major of London by complaint in Writing, and not by word of
mouth only, in nature of a Monstrans de droit, declaring all the Title. And if
the Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes in London, that Court may
grant a Prohibition; and yet that Court has not power to meddle with them. (2)
It was Resolved, That a Reservation by a Lessee for life, who Leases for years
to A. is not sufficient to bind him in Reversion, to pay Tithes according to
that rate. (3) That a Rent for half a year, and afterward for another half
year, is a yearly Rent within the meaning of the Decree: And note, as the same
was last Let, is not intended last before the Decree, but before the Demand of
the Tithes Dr. Meadhouse verse. Dr. Tailor. Noy. Rep. Collector of Tithes.
.

(71.) It was found upon a Special Verdict, That the Parson of the Parish makes
A. Collector of Tithes, and that A. had Licensed a Parishioner to carry away
his Corn without setting ^orth of Tithes. By the Court clearly, that License is
void, vid. 5 E. 3. 63. Plow. 104. That a Collector of Rents cannot make an
Acquittance and discharge them. And a Consultation was awarded Brickend^^e
verse. Denwood. Noys Rep.
.

(72.) Baron and Feme Lessees of a Parsonage, etc. The Parishioner sets forth
the Tithes fraudulently, and presently takes them away again, as it appears
upon the Evidence. And the Husband only brought the Action upon 2 Ed. 6. for
the treble Damages. Fraudulent setting out of Tithes.
And it was Resolved, That Debt lies for treble Damages upon such a fraudulent
setting forth of Tithes, although that the clause of Treble Damages speaks
nothing of Fraud. But (2) it was Resolved, That the Husband and Wife ought to
have joined in the Action; because it is not a thing in possession. And if the
Husband dies, the Wife shall have the Damages, and not the Executor of the
Husband Hill. 7 Jac. B. R. Ford verse. Pomroy. Noy's Rep.
.

(73.) A Prohibition was prayed upon a Surmize, That the Tithes, for which the
Suit was, belonged to the Vicar, and not to the Parson: Tithes, whether the
Parsons or the Vicars.
By the Court, That a Consultation shall be granted; for the Right of Tithes is
confessed. And whether they belong to the Parson or the Vicar, that is merely
Spiritual. And that so it was Ruled in one Bushel's Case, the Parson of
Pancras; and in one Milbray's Case it was Adjudged accordingly Randall verse.
Knowls. Noys Rep.
.

(74.) By the Court, That a Prohibition shall not be granted upon a bare
Surmize, that he is sued for Tithes by the Parson of D. of Lands in the parish
of S. unless it appears in the Pleading in the Spiritual Court: For they there
shall not be Judges of the bounds of the Parish. Vid. 5 H. 5. 10. 22 E. 4. 24.
Philips ag. Slack, ibid.
.

(75.) A Prohibition was prayed upon a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for
Tithes in kind of a Park now converted into Tillage, upon a Surmize de Modo
Decimandi, to pay a Buck and a Do for all Tithes. Tithe-Park.
And allowed by the Court and agr^ed, (1) Although they are Ferae naturae, yet
they may be given for Tithes: So to pay Pheasants, etc. (2) Although they are
not Tithable of themselves, yet they may be given for Modus Decimandi: Mod.
Deciman.
As a great Tree may be given for Tithe of Trees tithable. (3) That that is a
discharge of the very Soil, and a Park is not but a Liberty, and the Owner may
furnish it with Game when he please. But after a Consultation was granted,
because the Surmize was not proved within the Six months: So Adjudged Hill. 6.
Jac. C. B. The Vicar of Clare in Suffolk, who sued for Hops. And there also a
Prohibition was granted upon such a Surmize. But after a Consultation was
granted in that Case: For the Modus Decimandi was alleged for Discharge of
Tithes of Hay and Herbage, and not of all Tithes, where the Libel was for
Tithes of Hops. And Coke Chief Justice vouched one Shibden's Case, That such a
Modus Decimandi generally for the Park is not good, if it be disparked. But it
shall be particularly for all Acres contained in the Park Sharp ag. Sharp. Noys
Rep.
.

(76.) Upon a Surmize to have Prohibition after Sentence at the Ecclesiastical
Court, Tithes not s^t forth.
Two Judgments were vouched upon the Statute 2 E. 6. for not setting forth of
Tithes. And 43 Eliz. B. R. a Parishioner privately sets forth his Tithes, and
takes witness of it* and immediately after he carries them away; that is not a
setting forth within the Statute. For the words are truly, justly, and without
fraud or covin. Vid. 10 H. 4. 2. 2. 44 Eliz. B. R. B^k^r's Case: A Parishioner
sells his Grain upon his Land, and after, by the command of the Vendee, he
takes his Corn, being severed, without setting forth of the Tithes. That the
Parson may well have an Action against him upon the Statute, and shall not be
compelled to Sue the Vendee, who it may be was not known to him. And it is not
Traversable, if the Tithes were set forth according to 47 Eliz. It was Resolved
in Trin. 7 Jac. B. R. in Brickendine's Case against Denwood Rochester ag.
Porter. Noy's Rep.
.

(77.) If a Vicar has used by Prescription time out of mind, etc. to have all
the Tithes within the Parish (except Corn, which the Parson appropriate used to
have) viz. of Hay, and also of Hops from the time it came into England, which
was in the time of H. 8. and of Wo^d (which is a Dying plant) and moreover
Rape-seed is sown there in the Parish, where never any such Seed was sown
before, nor in England till of late times, Tithe Rape-seed.
yet the Vicar shall have the Tithes of that Rape-seed, and not the Parson
appropriate; for that it is within the Prescription although it be a new thing,
and therefore could not be prescribed singly; and for that the Parson is
excluded of all except the Corn Pasch. 7 Car. B. R. Roll. Abr. ver* Vicar.
Decimae Garba^um.
.

(78.) If Doubt arise de Decimis Garbarum, as what shall be intended by Garba;
it is said that Garba at the Common Law signifies at this day a Sheaf of Corn,
and the Civilians say, Garba signifies such a thing as is bound together in one
bundle Roll. Abr. verb. Vicar, nu. 7. Tithe-Wood.
.

(79.) In the Case between Reynolls and Green it was Adjudged by the Court,
That Wood in its own nature is Great Tithes; notwithstanding if a Vicar be
endowed de Minutis Decimis, and by virtue of the said Endowment had of a long
time used to have Tithe of Wood not exceeding the yearly value of 6 s. 8 d. the
usage of Wood shall pass by the words de Minutis Decimis in that case, by
reason of the small value thereof Mich. 10 Jac. B. R. inter^ Reynolls ^ Green.
.

(80.) Where a Parson had Two parts of the Tithes, and the Vicar of the same
place had the Third, and they by several Leases had demised the Tithes to one:
In this Case the whole Court (except Justice Fenner) held, That although the
Parson and Vicar could not join in this Case in a Suit of Tithes, because they
claim them severally by divided rights, yet when both their Tithes are
conjoined in one person, viz. the Lessee, then the interest of their Title is
conjoined also in one (who made but one Action for the whole Tithes in that
case) yet it was agreed by all the Judges, that the Plaintiff-Lessee should
recover his Tithes in damages, and shall not demand them again in any Suit,
after a Recovery in this Action Pasch. 3 Jac. Sir R. Champion verse. Hill.
Brownl. Rep. pa. 1. Actions of Debt.
.

(81.) It was Agreed by the whole Court of Kings Bench, Mich. 5 Jac. and has
many times been Ruled, That if a man sell his Tithes for years by word, it is
good; but if the Parson agree, that one shall have his Tithes for seven years
by Word, Brownl. Rep. ibid.
it is not good, by the opinion of Flemming Chief Justice, because i^ amounts
to a Lease: and he held strongly, That Tithes cannot be Leased for years
without a Deed.

(82.) Upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. ^or Setting out of Tithes, in a
Prohibition to stay proceedings by a Parson in a Suit in the Ecclesiastical
Court against one of his Parish, Action for stopping the Parsons Way of
carrying his Tithes.
for hindering of him in his way in the Carriage of his Tithes. The whole Court
agreed in this, That if a Parson has his usual way stopped, that so he cannot
come to take away his Tithes being set out for him, he may well sue for this in
the Ecclesiastical Court, and there have his remedy. But if the Question be
whether the Parson be of right to have a way ( viz.) one way or another, this
is Triable by the Common Law, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court; but if the
Parson have a certain Way granted to him, and set out by the Common Law, if he
be at any time disturbed or hindered by any of his Parishioners, or by any
other in the use of this his Way, he may then in such case well sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court for his remedy. And the words of the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.
cap. 13. are, That if any Parson be disturbed, stopped, or hindered in the
carrying away of his Tithes, so that the Tithe comes to be lost, Mich. 8 Jac.
B. R. Bulstr. par. 1.
hurt, or impaired; in this case he may sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for his
Remedy, and upon due proof there made thereof, he shall recover double value of
the Tithe so taken or lost, besides his cost and charges of Suit. But because
in this principal Case, the Parson sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Right of his Way, whether he was to have that Way or not, which belonged
properly to the Common Law, and not Triable there in the Ecclesiastical Court;
for this cause the Court granted a Prohibition to stay their proceedings in the
Ecclesiastical Court.

A
ABby-Lands were five ways privileged or discharged of Tithes, viz. by
Composition, Bull or Canon, Order, Prescription, and Unity of possession of
Parsonage and Land time out of mind, together without payment of Tithes Hob.
308, 309.
. It is supposed, that no Land which belonged to Abbots, Priors, etc. is at
this day discharged of Tithes, but such as came to the Crown by the Statute of
31 H. 8. c. 13. All Monasteries under Two hundred pounds per A^. were to be
dissolved by the Statute of 27 H. 8. But those of 200 l. per Ann. or upwards,
not till the 31 of H. 8. The Unity aforesaid, or perpetual Unity is, where the
Abbot, Prior, etc. time out of mind have been seized of the Lands out of which
the Tithes arise, and also of the Rectory of the Parish in which the Lands lie.
Which Unity (as to a discharge of Tithes) must have these four properties, (1)
It must be Justa as to the Title: (2) Perpetua, or time out of mind: (3)
Aequalis, that is, a Fee-simple both of the Lands and Rectory: (4) Libera, or
Free from the payment of all manner of Tithes whatsoever Idem 300. Cro. 454,
and 482.
. In a Case where an Abbot held a P^rsonage Impropriate, which was discharged
of Tithes, and had purchased Lands, so that the Tithes were suspended in the
hands of the Abbot; and afterward the Possessions of the Abbot coming to the
King by the Statute of 31 H. 8. The Question was, Whether the Lands so
purchased by the Abbot before his Surrender to the King, were discharged of the
Tithes? It was the Opinion of Mr. Plowden in that case, that they were not
discharged; for that no Lands were discharged, but such as were lawfully
discharged by right Composition, or other lawful thing; and in the said Case
the Lands were not discharged in Right, but suspended only during the time that
they were in the Abbots hands Mich. 17 Eliz. B. R. Hughs Abr. verb. Dism^s.
.

Acorns or Mast of Oak shall pay Tithe, for they are of Annual increase, as in
Lifo^d's Case Co. lib. 11. and Regist. 49. and Reynold's C. Mores Rep.
. These Acorns or Mast are known in the Law by the word [Pannagium:] so
Lindwood, Pannagium est pastur. Porcorum in Nemoribus and Sylvis, ut puta de
glandibus, and aliis fruct^bus arb^rum Sylvestrium, quarum fructus aliter non
solent colligi. Lindw. de Decim. c. Sancta Ecclesia, verb. Pannagiis. And Mr.
Skene de verb Sign. defines this to be a Duty given to the King for the
pasturage of Swine in his Forests: Also Pannagium is taken for the money which
is paid for the Pannage it self, as appears by the Statute of Charta de
Foresta, cap. 90. Vnusque liber homo, etc. Hill. 7 (...). E. of Shrewsburi^'s
Case. Bulstr. p. 1, ^
.

Aftermoath or Second Moath: Of this Tithes shall be paid de jure, unless there
be a Special Prescription of Discharge by paying the Tithes out of the first
Moath, and then it shall be discharged Pasch. 41 El. B* R. per Cur. Hill. 10
Jac. B. Parson of Stanfield in Suffolk, per Cur. Prohibit. granted.
. But if a man pay Tithe-Hay, no Tithes ought to be paid d^ jure afterward for
the pasture of the same Land for the same year, for he shall not pay Tithes
twice in one year for the same thing, for that the After-pasture is but the
Relics of Hay, whereof he had paid Tithes before Pasch. 16 Jac. B. Nicholls
and Hooper, per Cu. 3 Jac. B. R. Spencer and Johnson. Pasch. 17 Jac. B.
Kenniston.
. Nor shall Tithes be paid for Agistments in such After-grass 2 H. 4. Rot.
Parl. nu. 93.
. In Johnson and Awberie's Case it was Resolved, that Tithes are not to be paid
for the After-pasture of Land, nor for Rakings of Corn Cro. pa. 1.
. And where in Awberies Case, Suit was in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Tithe of the After-mowings of Grass, an^ upon a Surmize, That the Occupiers of
the Land had used to make the first Cutting of the Grass into Cocks for Hay,
and to pay the Tenth Cock thereof in satisfaction of the First and
After-mowings, a Prohibition was awarded More. Case 1212.
. So that After-grass, or After-pasture, or Aftermoath do not pay Tithes, where
they have paid before of the Grass of the same ground the same year, save where
by Covin to defraud the Parson, more Grass is left standing than was wont to
be, or is there usual; Nor is the Herbage of Cattle, which eat up that Grass,
Tithable, unless there be some Fraud in the case P. 7 Jac. C. B. adjudg. Mich.
6 Jac. C. B. Smith's Case Bulstr. 2. 238. Cro. 2. 42. 116. Green's Case.
. Notwithstanding the Premises, although the Aftermoath be not Tithable, where
the Owner at his own costs, charges and labor, made the first Grass into Hay;
yet Q. whether it may not be otherwise, where the Owner does no more than cut
down the Grass of the first Moath? Cro. 2. 42. Hall verse. Phettiplace.
.

Agistment, that is, a taking into Grass the Cattle of Strangers within the
Parish where the Grass grows; this is Tithable, and regularly by the Owner or
Tenants of the Land, not of the Cattle, unless the Custom makes it Tithable by
the Stranger 17 Jac. B. R. and Cro. Car. 237. 559. Jones 254.
. Heretofore there was not any Tithe paid for this Agistment F. N. B. 53.
; but now the Law is taken to be otherwise Adjudg. Mich. 38 El. C. B. Grisman
verse. Jews. Cro. pa. 3. 446.
: And is (as aforesaid) to be paid by the Owner, not of the Cattle, but of the
Land Mich. 8 Jac. C. B. inter Baxter and Hopes.
. Under this Notion of Agistment is also comprehended the depasturage of Barren
Cattle, whereof comes no profit to the Parson, the Quota of which Tithes is
regulated by the Annual value of the Land, the Number of the Cattle, or the
Time of the Pasturing, according to the usage and custom of the place; yea,
though the Cattle be bred for the Plough or Pail, to be employed out of the
Parish where they are Agisted, and by one that is no Inhabitant within the
Parish, Tithes shall be paid for the Agistment of such Cattle. But for
profitable Cattle, as Oxen, Horses, or Beasts of the Plough, employed and used
in the same Parish, no Tithes shall be paid for the Agistment thereof Roll. 1.
646. a. 6, 7.
: But if Cattle or Horses be bought, not for any Husbandry in the same Parish,
but to be sold again, Tithe shall be paid for the Agistment thereof, and a
fraudulent employment of them in the Parish to defeat the Parson of his Tithes,
will not prevent the same Roll. 1. 647. (...).
. A. sued a Prohibition against B. Parson of D. because he Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes for Agistments; the Plaintiff pleaded, That he
had always paid 12 d. for every Milch-Cow going in such a Pasture; and for
this payment he had been discharged of Tithes for all Agistments in that Land.
In this case it was said, That this payment of money for Milch-Beasts, should
not discharge him from the payment of Tithes for other Beasts Hill. 43 El. C. B.
Sharinglon and Fleet-wood's Case. Goldsb. 157.
. In the Case of Lacie against Long the suggestion for a Prohibition was, That
Parson sued in the Spiritual Court the Owner of the Land for Tithes of Cattle,
which he took to Agistment, where he ought to sue the Owner of the Cattle: It
seemed reasonable to the Court, that the Suit was well brought against the
Owner; but be it quomodocunque, it belongs to the Spiritual Court to determine,
whether the one or the other ought to be Sued; therefore for that reason, as to
that point, a Consultation was granted per Curiam Hill. 7 Car. B. R. Lacie verse.
Long. Jones Rep.
. Vid. Pasture.

Agreement: No Parson can by any Agreement made with his Parishioner bind his
Successors; but being made with him for his Tithes during only the Parsons
life, this is good Co. 11. 19. 2. 43.
. And an Agreement only by Word, without any Deed, may be good, made by the
Parson with his Parishioner, that he shall keep his Tithes Yelvert. 94, 95.
. A Parson contracted with A. his Executors and Assigns, for 10 s. to be
annually paid him by the said A. his Executors and Assigns, That he, his
Executors and Assigns, should be quit from the payment of Tithes for such Lands
during the life of the Parson: A. paid the Parson 10 s. which he accepted of,
and made B. an Infant his Executor, and died: The Mother of the Infant took
Letters of Administration durante minori aetate of the Infant, and made a Lease
at will of the Lands: The Parson Libelled in the Spiritual Court for the Tithe
of the same Land against the Tenant at Will. In this Case it was said, That the
Agreement did oblige the Parson during his life: and although the Assignee
could not sue the Parson upon the Contract, yet he should have a Prohibition to
stay the Suit in the Ecclesiast. Court, and put the Parson to his Remedy for
the 10 s. upon the Contract, for that he could not have Tithe in kind, by
reason of the Composition made Pasch. 21 Jac. B. R. Snell and Bennet's Case.
Godbolt. 333.
. If a Parson agree and contract with one of his Parishioners, that he shall
keep back his own Tithes, if that be made after that he has sown his Corn, and
for the same year only, in that case the Agreement shall be good: And if the
Parson sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for the said Tithes, the Parishioner
shall have a Prohibition; but if it be for more years than one, or before the
Corn is sowed, this shall not be good, by Coke and Foster against Warburton;
and Coke said it was so Adjudged in B. R. in Parson Booth's Case, That a
Contract made with a Parishioner for keeping back of his Tithes for so many
years as he shall be Parson, was not good: and so it was Wellow's Case here
also: But it was Agreed by them all, That such a Contract or Agreement for the
Tithes of any other was void; but only of the party himself, who was party to
the Agreement, and that ought to be made by way of keeping them back. Vid. 20
H. 6. and 21 H. 7. 21. b. Mich. 8 Jac. 1610. C. B. Brown^. Rep. par. 2.
. Tithes cannot be granted without Deed: It was Agreed by the Justices in Bugg
and Woodward's Case, That an Agreement between a Parishioner and the Parson,
that in consideration of twenty shillings per An. he should hold the Land
discharged of Tithes during the life of the Parson, was not good to ground a
Prohibition upon, for that the Grant of Tithes cannot be without Deed Cro. par.
1.
. The like in Hawks and Bryafield's Case, in stay of Suit for Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court, it was Surmized, That A. was seized of a Message and
Lands in the Parish of D. and agreed with the Defendant being Parson, in
Consideration of Ten pounds to be yearly paid by A. to the Defendant during
their Joynt-lives and his continuing Parson, in satisfaction of all Tithes
growing upon the same Lands, that he should hold the Lands without payment of
Tithes. Resolved, it was not a sufficient Surmize to ground a Prohibition: For
an Agreement to be discharged from payment of Tithes, for one year by word, may
be good; but such an Agreement during the life of the Parson cannot be good
without Deed Crop. p^. 2.
.

Alms, or Things appointed for Alms, are not Tithable Co. Inst. par. 2. 652. b.
.

Animalia Vtilia, such as Cows, Sheep, and the like, shall pay Tithes in kind.

Animalia Inutilia, as Oxen, Horses, and the like, though Tithe cannot be paid
thereof in specie; yet for their depasturage, or what bargain is made for the
same, Tithes shall be paid 2 Car. B. R. Poph. Rep. 197.
.

Apples: Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithe thereof, in discharge
whereof an Award or Arbitrament was there pleaded, and the plea refused;
notwithstanding which a Prohibition was denied Parker verse. Kempe. Bulstr. par.
2. Co. Inst. pa. 2. 643, and Co. 11. par. 49. a. Dr. and Stu. 173.
.

B
BArk of Timber Trees is not Tithable, but is privileged together with the
Trees.

Barren Ground, which is suapte natura Barren, is not Tithable; but if
Tithe-Wool and Tithe-Lamb have by Thirty years been paid for it, and after by
Manurance is made Fertile, then for the first Seven years such Tithe shall be
paid for it, as was paid before. Therefore Barren Heath or Waste-grounds,
naturally Barren and not Manurable without extraordinary charge, may pay Tithe
of Wool, Lamb, or the like; but being converted into Tillage, shall pay no
Tithe of Corn or Hay for the first Seven years after such improvement; during
which time it shall pay only such Tithe as was formerly paid: Otherwise it is,
if it became barren only by ill Husbandry More, Case 1278.
: Or if it became Barren by some accident of Inundation, or overgrown with
Bushes, and after reduced again to Fertility; in that case it shall pay Tithes
presently M. 11 Jac. C. B. S^arington's Case. 2 El. Dyer 170. and 2 Ed. 6. c.
13. Co. 2. Inst. 656. Plow. 204. ^. 396. b. vid. 15 Car. B. R. in Sugden and
C^ttel's Case.
. Also Marsh-Lands newly gained from the Sea, and Fenn-Lands gained from the
Fresh waters by Drayning, etc. are not within the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. c. 13. to
be freed from the payment of Tithes during the first Seven years after the
gaining thereof. Likewise, if Land be gained from the Sea, and that by great
cost and expense, and afterward turned to Arable-Land; it was the Opinion of
the Court, that it shall pay Tithe notwithstanding the Costs, because it is not
Barren Land of it self, but only by accident, and so not within the scope and
intention of the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. Pasch. 14 Jac. B. R. Wit and Buck's Case.
Bulstr. 165, 166. par. ^.
. In the Case between Strowd and Hoskins upon a Prohibition, Two Points were
Argued by the Four Justices, viz. (1) When a Prohibition is brought upon the
Statute of 2 Ed. 6. to stay a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of
Barren-Lands the first Seven years^ it behooves the party who brings the
Prohibition, to prove his Suggestion within Six months, otherwise a
Consultation by the said Statute is grantable. (2) When a Consultation is
granted for the Reason aforesaid, yet the party may have a new Prohibition upon
the same Libel; for that the Statute of 50 Ed. 3. does not extend to a
Consultation granted upon non-probate of a Suggestion within Six months, but
where a Consultation is granted upon the matter of a Suggestion: And so the
Chief Justice declared the Opinion of the Four Justices, and thereupon a Rule
given, That the Prohibition should stand, and the Defendant notwithstanding
such Plea aforesaid in Bar of the Prohibition, may plead in chief to the
matter of the said Suggestion, and if he will dispute it, then he shall have
several Consultations on the said Libel Hill. 6 Car. B. R. Strowd verse. Hoskins.
Jones Rep.
. Thus (as aforesaid) in a Prohibition for Tithes it was said by Papham Chief
Justice, That if Lands be overflown with Water, and afterward gained by
Industry, Tithes shall be presently paid, although it had been overflown time
out of mind; for those Lands of their nature were not barren, and the Statute
of 2 Ed. 6. does not intend, that Tithes shall not be paid within seven years,
Sherington and Fleetwood's Case. Cro. par. 1.
but of such Lands as were merely Barren, and made good by Foldage or other
industrious means. And so it was Adjudged Pasch. 14 Jac. B. R. in the Case
between Wit and Buck, in a Prohibition upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13.
the Clause touching Barren and Heath-ground, of which after improvement, no
Tithes to be paid the space of Seven years next after the Improvement: For a
Prohibition it was showed, That this Land, for which the Parson Libelled for
Tithes, Bulstr. par. 3.
was Marsh and Sandy Land, and covered with Salt water, so that time out of
mind no Grass had been known there to grow, nor any profit at all made of this,
until now of late time, by and with the great costs, charges, and industry of
the Tenant, this ground had been lately gained from the Sea, and from its
overflowing, by repairing and making new Banks and Seawalls, and by continual
repairing of them, and so he had now converted the same into Arable Land, where
he had Corn, and of this Land the Parson Libels for Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court: And upon this matter thus showed, a Prohibition prayed,
being to be discharged from payment of Tithes of this Ground for Seven years;
this Statute being thus made for the encouragement of Tenants to make
improvement of their Lands. Coke Chief Justice, It was Resolved in one
Farrington's Case upon this Statute of 2 Ed. 6. that Wood-ground is not Barren
ground within this Statute: This was there Adjudged, That if one do stock and
grub up Wood-ground, and after convert this into Arable ground, he has by this
meliorated his Land, but with great cost and labor, yet he shall pay Tithes
for this ground presently; for that Heath and barren-ground, intended to be
within the Statute, ought to be such Land as is suapte natura sterilis, and
Barren. Dederidge Justice, A Salt Marsh, if this be fenced and so made good
Meadow, shall pay Tithes presently; yet before this was so fenced, no Tithes
thereof payable. Coke, This Land shall be out of the Statute, out of the clause
of Discharge for Seven years, notwithstanding this charge the Tenant has been
at in gaining this Land from the Sea; for to have this Land within the clause
of Discharge within the Statute, it ought to be Suapte natura Barren, which
here it is not, but by accident, and by the overflowing of the Sea. The whole
Court agreed in this, That by this Statute Barren ground is such ground as will
not bear Corn of it self, without very great cost in the extraordinary manuring
of it; and therefore, that this is no such Barren ground within the Statute, as
ought to be discharged from payment of Tithes, but that Tithes ought to be paid
for the fame, and that the Parson had just cause to sue for his Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court; and therefore the Prohibition was denied.

Beech-Trees, regularly are Tithable; yet in a County where there is a scarcity
of Timber, and where Beech is used as Timber for Building or the like, there
possibly they may be discharged of paying Tithes; and therefore in Trin. 38
Eliz. it was Resolved, That Tithes shall be paid of Beeches, although they are
above twenty years growth, for they are not Timber. Yet in Holliday and Lee's
Case in a Prohibition it was Resolved, That Tithes should not be paid of
Beeches of above twenty years growth More. Rep. Holliday and Lees Case.
. And in Pindar's Case it was also Resolved, That Beeches above twenty years
growth, being Timber, shall not pay Tithes More. Cas. 716, 716. Jac. C. B.
Pinder's Case.
; yet in a Country where there is plenty thereof, they are not to be accounted
Timber, or Tithe-free. So that Beeches in their own nature are not computed
Timber Trees, and therefore Tithable, except where by the Custom of the
Country, where there is scarcity of Wood, they are accounted Timber Trees, in
which case they are not Tithable Adjudg. Pasch. 6 Jac. C. B. in ^ind^r and
Spencers Case.
: The Judges of the Common Law have Resolved, That all sort of Wood that is
usually employed for the building of Houses, Mills, etc. are Gross Woods, and
within the Statute of 45 Ed. 3. cap. 3. of which sort are Oak, Ash, Elm,
Beech, Horse-Beech, and Horn-bean, against the opinion in Molyn's Case Sir S.
D^ggs Law of Tithes, c. 4.
; as also in Man and Somerton's Case, where it was said by Tanfield Justice,
That Beech by the Common Law is not Timber: and so he said it was Adjudged in
Carry and Pagett's Case; and in that case it was holden, That Tithes shall not
be paid for Beech above the growth of twenty years in a common Country for
Wood, as in Buckinghamshire, for there it is reputed Timber; but in a plentiful
Country of Wood it is otherwise, for there it is not Timber, and Tithes shall
be paid of it, as Sylva caedua, for which Tithes shall be paid under the growth
of 20 years Pasch. 5 Jac. C. B. Mau^ and Somerton's Case. Brownl. 1. par. 84.
.

Bees pay not Tithes by the Tenth Swarm, but by the 10th measure of Honey, and
the Tenth weight of Wax; and are Predial Tithes.

Birch-Trees are Tithable, though above 20 years growth More. Cas. 1271, 1272.
; and therefore in Foster and Leonard's Case, in Attachment upon a Prohib. for
Suing for Tithes of Great Wood, against the Stat. of 43. Ed. 3. it was Resolv.
1. That of Birch Tithes shall be paid, for that they are not such Wood as the
Stat. intended, as serving for Building. 2. That Oak and Elm cut down before
the age of 20 years shall pay Tithes; for till they are of that age, they are
not of that value as the Law regards for the purposes aforesaid. Also in
Foster and Peacock's Case it was Resolved, That for Birch above the age of 20
years growth Tithes should be paid More.
.

Bricks are not Tithable, as was Adjudged in the Case betwixt Liff and Watts
Mich. 19 Eliz. B. R. and Pasch. 34 El. C. B.
.

Broom for Fuel spent in the Parish is not Tithable More 1279.
; but if sold it shall pay Tithes, unless the Owner can prescribe or prove a
Custom of Tithing Milk or Calves of Cattle kept on that ground; but regularly
Tithe is not due of Broom spent for Fuel in the Parishioners house within the
Parish Pasch. 40 Eliz. Austin and Lucas, Adjudg. per Cur.
.

C
CAlves are computed among the Mixed Tithes, which with Colts, Kidds, etc. are
within the number of Tithes in kind; the Parson must have the Tenth thereof
whenever it comes, if there be no Custom to the contrary; for it is a good
Modus Decimandi for Tithes of Calves, to pay a Calf for Tithe, if he has Seven
in one year; and if under Seven, then to pay a halfpeny for every Calf for
Tithes; and if he fell any Calf, he shall pay the Tenth part of the price Mich.
14 Jac B. R. Lee and Collin's Case.
. Calves (as also Lambs) are Tithable when they are Weanable, and able to live
without the Dam; if they be sold, the Parson has for the most part the Tenth
penny in most places, unless something be in the Custom against it: Also the
Tithe of Calves, Colts, etc. is to be apportioned with respect to the places
where they were engendered, brought forth, and nourished; but Custom must
prevail.

Cattle kept only for the Plough and Pail pay no Tithe: also no Tithe shall be
paid for the Pasture which is eaten by the Oxen of the Plough, or by the Cattle
of the Pail. Mich. 9 Jac. Baxter and Hope, per Curiam. Tr. 15 Jac. B. Belle and
Tarde. Prohibition granted. M. 14 Ja. B. R. Dr. Best and Williams, Prohibition
granted. Hill. 14 Jac. B. R. Kneebon and Woodret, Consultation denied.
No Tithe shall be paid for Horses of the Plough, for the Parson has the
benefit of their labor in the Tithes of the Corn. Tithes are not due for the
young Cattle, which a man rears for the Plough, for they are for the manuring
of the Land whereof the Parson has the Tithes. M. 14 Jac. B. Watley and
Hanberry. Resolv. and Prohibition granted, Mich. 14. Jac. B. R. Joyse and
Parker. Resolv. and Prohibition granted, Trin. 12 Jac. B. R. Maschal and Price,
per Curiam. No Tithes are due for the young Cattle, which a man rears for his
Dairy; dict. Cas. Joyse, and dict. Cas. Kneebon, Prohibition granted. If a man
according to the Custom of the Country sow his Land to feed his Horses for
Tillage, and the usage be to suffer the Horses to feed upon that Land, without
any other meddling therewith, M. 3 Jac. B. R. per Towse said, That it was one
Samms Case of Essex. Adjudg'd. Tr. 38 El. B. R. inter Sherington and Fleetwood.
per Curiam. M. 7 Car. B. R. Facy and Large, per Cur. Tr. 15 Jac. B. R. L^mkin
and Wild.
the Parson shall not have any Tithes thereof, for it is nothing but Pasture
for such Horses. If a man buy or breed Cattle, seed them and sell them, he
shall pay Tithes thereof; otherwise, if he buy or breed them, feed them and
spend them in his own house. Nor shall a man that feeds Sheep on his Land, and
after kills and eats them in his own house within the Parish, pay any Tithes
thereof. If a man buy or breed Barren Cattle, as Oxen and Steers, and after
sell them, he shall pay Tithes for their Pasture, for they cannot yield any
other Tithes: otherwise it is of Barren Sheep, as of Weathers, for they can
yield Tithe of their Wool. If a man keep Horses, which are Barren Cattle, to
sell, and he sell them accordingly, he shall pay Tithes thereof. But it was
Resolved in Facy and Long's Case, That Tithes shall not be paid of any Cattle
eaten in the Parishioners Family, no more than for Cattle reared for the Plough
and Pail.

Cattle therefore or Beasts for the Plough or Pail are not Tithable, otherwise
in case they be only kept for such use, till they be ready for the Plough or
Pail, and then sold away, in such case they shall pay Tithe, being so sold for
profit. And if they stray from one to another side of a Common belonging to two
Parishes, Mich. 8 Car. B. R. Baxter and Hopes Cas. Brownl. 2. pa. acc. Trin. 20
Jac. Winch. 33. acc.
no Tithe is payable for this to the Parson of the Parish where the Cattle do
stray. And as Dry Cattle, though bred for the Plow, are Tithable, if they be
sold away before they are put to that use: so also are Fatted Cattle, if they
be sold or killed for the House, but according to the Custom of the place M.
17 Jac. B. R. Mich. 2 Jac. B. R. Webb's Case. Mich. 8 Car. by 3 Justices. B.
Istr. 2. 238. and March. 56.
. Likewise for young Cattle, as Calves, Lambs, Colts, Piggs, etc. where their
Dams are removed from one place to another, a Rate-Tithe is payable to the
Parsons, according to the times of their abode in the several places, from the
times of their engendring, by the Month-Rate Broo. Dismes 16. Lane 16. Golds b.
147. Plow. 66.
. Also Cattle Tithable feeding in any waste place, not commonly known to be in
any Parish, are Tithable to the Parson of the place where the Owner of the
Cattle does dwell. But if Cattle do feed one half of the year in one Parish,
and the other half year in another Parish, the Tithe shall be equally divided
between the two Parsons of both Parishes: so proportionably for a greater or
less time, provided it be the space of a Month or 30 days; but of any less
time than a Month, no Tithe is payable Term. 7 Jac. B. R. Broo. Dismes 17
. If Cattle be pawned or pledged, the Gagee shall pay the Tithe of them,
because he is Owner of them for the time; but if a man Bail Cattle or other
goods to Re-bail, Tithes of them shall not be paid by the Bailee, because he
has no property in them, but only a Rebailer Pasch. 15 Car. Adjudg. acc Hugh.
Abr.
.

Chalk and Chalk-pits are not Tithable.

Cheese paying Tithe, exempts the payment of Tithe-Milk whereof the Cheese is
made. Et e contra. So that Cheese is not Tithable where the Milk is Tithed. Et
vice versa. Therefore to prescribe to pay the Tenth Cheese between May and
August for all Tithe-Milk within the year, and not the Tenth part of the Milk,
may be a good Prescription More. Case 1279.
. And where Milk is Tithed in kind, there no Tithe-Cheese is due: In which
case, as in all others of Tithing, the Custom of the place is to be observed.

Cherry-Trees in Buckinghamshire have been adjudged Timber, and Tithe-free
Pasch. 17 Jac. B. R.
.

Chicken of all Tame-Fowl are Tithed in kind, according to the Custom of the
place. No Tithe shall be paid of Chicken, for that there is paid Tithe-Eggs;
and Prohibition granted. Hill. 15 Jac. B. R. Resolved.

Clay is not Tithable Hill. 16 Jac. B. R. inter Daudrige and Johnson.
.

Clothes Fulled in a Fulling-Mill pay no Tithes Ibid.
.

Coals are not Tithable; therefore a Prescription de non Decimando (as to that)
is good 20 Eliz. B. R. by Wray, and all the other Judges.
. No Tithes shall be paid de jure for Cole. Hill. 14 Jac. B. R. per Houghton.

Common of Estovers, or the Wood which a man burns in his house, does not pay
Tithes.

Composition Real, is one of the ways or means whereby Tithes may be
discharged: It is where the Incumbent, Patron, and Ordinary, by Deed or Fine,
do agree that such Lands shall for ever be freed and discharged of all manner
of Tithes paying an Annual payment, or doing some other thing for the profit or
advantage of that Parson or Vicar to whom the Tithes did belong Co. 4. 44. a. 2
Inst. 655. Dr and Stud. l. 2. c. 55. and Hob. 176.
, from which Compositions all Prescriptions de Modo Decimandi have, or should
have had their Original. But these Real Compositions, so as to oblige the
Successor of the Parson or Vicar that made the same, seem now to be restrained
by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 10. whereby they are prohibited from making any
Grant for above 21 years or three Lives, and that with the accustomed yearly
Rent reserved. And if the Parson or Vicar make any Composition with his
Parishioner without his Patron and Ordinary, it shall bind only for the Parsons
life, and during his Incumbency. This Composition is either between Parson and
Parishioner, or inter Clericos; if it be between Parson and Parishioner, and it
be touching Tithes past, the Composition is good, though it were without any
Consideration at all; but if it be touching Tithes to come, it may be good as
to a payment of Tithes only in part, but not good as to a non-payment of any
Tithes at all; nor is it good in part without the Bishops approbation and
confirmation. If the Composition be inter Clericos, and the Tithes be Personal
Tithes, it holds not: but if they be Predial Tithes, the Composition holds,
the Approbation of the Bishop of the Diocese being thereunto had. So that
Composition for the remitting or entirely taking away of Tithes it not good in
Law; but a Composition with the Parson or Vicar to have but the Thirteenth
Sheaf for his Tithe, was held to be a good Composition, and should bind the
Parson Hugh's Parsons Law, cap. 27.
. Composition may likewise prevent the payment of Tithes in kind; and if it be
made with a Parson or Vicar to pay a Modus Decimandi, which has continued time
out of mind, Custom being equivalent to Law, it is good, and shall bind the
Parson and his Successors 8 H. 6. 22, 23. 9 H. 6. 17. 6 E. 3. 27. 17 E. 3. 11.
12 H. 4. 13. 19 H. 6. 75. 34 H. 6. 36. 31 H. 6. 28. 35 H. 6. 5. 26 H 8. 7. 27
H. 8. 20. and 21 acc.
; and although a Modus Decimandi cannot begin at this day, but must be by
Prescription, yet a Composition may be made, which shall bind during the life
of him that made it Pasch. 17 Car. in Hitchcock's Case.
. The Case was, A Vicar did contract with his Parishioner to pay so much for
increase of Tithes, and died: his Successor sued in the Ecclesiastical Court
for them. A Prohibition in this case was granted by the Court. The words of the
Contract were ( inter se convenerunt:) It was holden, that this was not a Real
Composition, although that the Bishop did call it Realis Compositio, for his
calling of it so, does not alter the nature of it; but it remains a Personal
Contract, and so shall not bind his Successor, although it were confirmed by
the Bishop. It was said by Mallet Justice in this case, A Real Contract,
although it be made between Spiritual persons, and of Spiritual things, is only
questionable at the Common Law Pasch. 17 Car. B. R. Hichcock and Hichcock's
Case. Marsh. 87.
. Composition shall bind during the life of him that made it, though not his
Successors Mich. 6 Jac. C. B Case Mildmay and Hutton.
.

Coneys taken in a Warren shall pay Tithes; yet they are not Predial, but
Personal Tithes. Sed Q. whether Tithes shall be paid of them; because Berkley
Justice, They are not Tithable but by Custom, 15 Car. B. R. For no Tithes de
jure without a Custom ought to be paid for them, for they are Ferae naturae,
Trin. 8. Car. B. R. Worden and Bennet's Case; after a Prohibition granted, a
Consultation denied per Curiam for the reason aforesaid. Pasch. 15 Car. Adjudg.
acc.
Pasch. 13 Car. B. R. Sir Jo. Brewen and Dr. Bradish's Case per Cur. a
Prohibition granted, and Hill. 13 Car. B. Vincent and Tutt's Case, Prohibition
granted, and for Prohibition pleaded by the Parson to have them by
Prescription. Mich. 14 Car. B. R. Williams and Wilcock's Case. Or if a man
steals Coneys out of a Warren, Ibid.
he shall pay no Tithes of them, because the Law gives him no property in them;
nor shall the right Owner pay any Tithes of them, because he has no profit by
them.

Corn pays a Predial Tithe, as that which comes partly by the Industry of Man,
and partly of the Earth. Mich. 8 Jac. C. B. Magna Charta 649. And if a Custom
be alleged, That the Parson shall have but the Tenth Sheaf of Wheat for all
the Tithes of all manner of Corn and Grain, this is no good Custom 38 Eliz. C.
B.
. Yet Corn of all kinds fowed is Tithable according to the Custom of the
place; and is commonly Tithed by the Tenth Shock, Cock, or Sheaf, where the
Custom of the place is not otherwise; but not to put the Parsons Tenth up on
end in Shocks, unless the Custom of the place be so Smith's Case, C. B.
. And if the Owner will not cut his Corn before it be spoiled, the Parson is
without remedy 12 Ed. 4. Dr. and Stu. 169.
. And if he does change the Corn or Grain fowed in the same ground, such change
of the Corn so sowed does change the Tithe to the same kind of that Grain. And
if a man pay Tithe of Corn, he shall not pay any Tithe for the Stubble, which
grew the same year on that Land. Hill. 6 Jac. B. pl. 13. Smiths Case per Cur.
and Case ibid. Pasch. 7 Jac. per Cur. and Mich. 9 Jac. Baxter and Hope, for the
Aftergrass, and 2 H. 4. Rot. Par. nu 93. No Tithes for the Agistment in such
After-pasture. And if the Parson has Tithes of Corn one year, and the Land be
left without Seed the next year, that so it may be Plowed and made ready for
Seed the the third year, no Tithes shall be paid the second; for by lying fresh
the Land is the better, and the Parson will have the better Tithes the third
year. Pasch. 7 Jac. Smith's Case. By the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. the
Parson or Vicar is privileged to come upon the Land to see the Tithes set
forth: For by the said Statute it is Enacted, That at the Tithing time of
Predial Tithes, it shall be lawful for any to whom Tithes are payable, or for
his Deputy or Servant to see the said Tithes to be set forth and severed from
the Nine parts, and quietly to take and carry them away. And as the Parsons
Rights are hereby secured from the danger of having his Predial Tithes
subtracted: so likewise the Law has provided nor only for the prevention of
his being defrauded therein, and for his quiet removal and carrying the same
away; but also for an open, free, and unmolested way and passage through which
to carry the same away, as appears by Halsey's Case. The Case was this: H.
procured a Prohibition against H. and declared, that the Defendant had sued him
in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Way or Passage; he was Proprietor of Tithes
in the Parish of M. and that the Common way to carry the Tithes out of the
Plaintiffs Land was by a Close called S. and that the Plaintiff had stopped it
up, when in very truth the Way was by Prescription by a Close called W. and
that he had pleaded it in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the said Court would
not allow thereof, and for that the Cognizance of a Prescription for a Way
ought to be tried at the Common Law, and not in the said Court, etc. Whereupon
the Defendant demurred, and by the Opinion of the whole Court a Consultation
was granted; for that the Cognizance of Ways for the carrying of Tithes
belongs to the Court Christian, as appears by the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. and
Fitzh. N. B. in Consultation, and Lindwood de Decim. Hill. 6 Car. B. R. Halsey
verse. Halsey. Jones Rep.
When Tithes of Corn are severed from the Nine parts, an Action. of Trespass
lies against any that shall take them away, whether he be the Owner of the
Land or a Stranger Broo. Dismes 6. and Brownl. 2. pa. 30.
. Also an Action of Debt lies for Predial Tithes, as of Corn, Wood, Grass,
Fruit, Hay, etc. and treble Damages recoverable upon the said Statute of 2 Ed.
6. 13. But not so for lesser Tithes, as of Wool, Lamb, etc. nor for money given
to the Parson in lieu thereof; but for each of these Suit may be commenced
according to the Statutes of 27 H. 8. and 2 Ed. 6. 13. and 32 H. 8. 7. Co. on
Litt. 159.
. So that if the Owner of the Corn set out his Tithes, and after take it away,
the Parson may sue him in the Ecclesiastical Court, or bring an Action of
Trespass against him: But the Parson may not sue a Stranger in the
Ecclesiastical Court for taking away the Tithes which were set out. Hill. 6
Jac. Brownl. Rep. pa. 1. Cases in Law, etc.
In Hele's Case against Frettenden, the Resolution of the Court upon Two Cases
upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes was this, viz. A
man possessed of Corn sells it, and before Two Witnesses sets out his Tithes,
and afterward privily takes away the Tithes; and the Parson sues him upon the
Statute for Treble damages, for not setting forth of Tithes: And the Defendant
proves by Witnesses that he set forth his Tithes; yet the Fraud is provided
against by the Statute, for the words are [ without fraud or deceit.] In the
second Case, One secretly fells his Corn to one who was not known, and
afterward the Vendee commands the Vendor to cut the Corn, which he does, and
takes away the whole Corn without setting forth his Tithes; the Question was,
who should be sued for the Tithes: and the Court held, that the first Vendor
should be sued, for it was Fraudulent. And where a Woman, being Proprietor of a
Parsonage took A. to Husband; a Parishioner within the Parish set forth his
Tithes and divided them, and then immediately took them back again; A. the
Husband alone sued for the Treble value according to the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.
Two points were moved, (1) Whether that were a setting forth within the
Statute? And by the Court, that it was not; and so has been Adjudged in 43 and
44 Eliz. and 1 Jac. (2) Whether the Husband may sue for the Treble value
without naming his Wife? And to that the Court would be Advised; Ford verse.
Pomroy. Brownl. pa. 2.
for though the Husband may sue alone, where a thing is Personal for which he
sueth, as the Books of 4 Ed. 4. 31. 7 Ed 4. 6. 15 Ed. 4. 5, and 11. are; yet
where the Statute says, That the Proprietor shall have Suit for the not
setting forth, etc. the Husband is not intended Proprietor as the Statute
intends, but the Wife, and for that the Wife ought to join. For the due manner
of Tithing Corn, the Parishioner ought of Common right to cut the same, and to
prepare it for the Parson, and to separate it from the Nine parts; he ought
also of Common right to make up the Corn into Sheaves, Hill. 6 Jac. ^. pl. 13.
per Cur.
but is not obliged to gather and set it up into Hillocks or Heaps, for the
manner of Tithing is good, Trin. 21 Jac. B. R. Guin and Merryweather's Case.
Roll. Rep.
if the Corn be thrown out in Shocks; and being so set out they become
Lay-Chattels. In Guin and Merryweather's Case it was said by Doderidge Justice,
That if one defame and scandalize the Parson's Title to the Tithes, although he
be not punishable for this in the Temporal Courts, yet he is punishable in the
Ecclesiastical Court; he said also, that when Tithes are set out, they are then
Lay-Chattels, and if a Stranger carry them away, the Action lies not in the
Ecclesiastical, but Temporal Court; otherwise it is, if it were not severed
from the Nine parts. Ley Chief Justice Agreed it, and said, That if a Stranger
take the Corn before Severance of the Tithes, the Parson shall sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes against the Trespasser, and not against the
Terre-Tenant: And where the Right of Tithes comes in question, Prohibition
shall not be granted. Nor shall Fraud or Covin prevent the payment of Tithes;
Stebs and Goodwich's Case. Mores Rep.
for in a Case of Tithe-Corn, where the Custom of L. in the County of B. was
alleged, That the Parson ought to have the Tenth Land of Corn, beginning at
the such Land which was next to the Church; the Occupiers of the Land, to
defraud the Parson by Covin, did not sow the Tenth-Land, nor manure it; yet the
Parson sued for Tithe in kind, to have the Tenth-Cock for Tithe of the Corn
sowed, and a Prohibition awarded notwithstanding the Covin, because he had
Remedy at the Common Law for the Fraud.

Cows that yield Milk, no Tithe is to be paid for the Pasture thereof; and if a
man has but one Cow, and no Cheese made of the Milk thereof, the Custom of
the place must be observed, so that something be paid for the Tithe thereof,
otherwise no Custom will bind.

Curtelages, or places adjoining to Mansion-houses, and applied to Seeds,
Herbs, etc. are Tithable in kind, if the Parson make not an Agreement for the
same; otherwise it must be Tithed in kind, by setting forth the Tenth-part for
the Parson when the Owner receives his Nine parts.

Custom is, where a Right to many is procured in Common and Public: as
Prescription is privately to one. If the Custom be of translating of Tithes
Predial (as in Composition) then it holds: Otherwise, if it be of Tithes
Personal. But if it be of not yielding Tithes at all, it does not hold; for a
Custom of paying nothing at all, is not good; but if it be only of yielding
less than the Tenth, it holds both in Personal and Predial Tithes. It holds
also as to the Place where Tithes ought to be left, of the Time when to be
yielded, as also of the manner and form of yielding them. So that although
Custom (which chiefly refers to a Place, as Prescription) does to a Person
cannot totally take the Tithes away, yet it may limit and moderate the payment
thereof. Notwithstanding in some places and cases, a Custom applied to a
Country to pay no Tithe (as in 40 Parishes for the Wild in Sussex) is good;
but generally such a Custom is not good. Likewise, a Custom tending to the
impoverishment of the Parson or Vicar is no good Custom. Mich. 11 Jac. C. B.
inter Jux and Sir Charles Candish. Likewise a Custom to pay Tithes truly,
without view of the Parson; is not good Hob. 107.
. Also a Custom alleged to pay the Tenth Sheaf of Wheat for the Tithe of all
manner of Corn and Grain, is not a good Custom. dict. Cas. Jux and 38 Eliz. C.
B. Adjudg. But a Custom to pay Tithe-Wool at Lammas-day, though due at
Shearing, is good More. Case 1280.
. But such is the strength of a Custom, that it cannot be discharged by a
verbal Agreement for Money Hob. 106.
. Custom may make that Tithable, which of it self is not Tithable March. 65.
; and may alter Tithes in any other thing, which will be a Modus Decimandi,
sufficient to bind the Parson and his Successors Co. Select Cases 14, 46, 48.
. Custom is properly Triable at the Common Law upon a Prohibition; but a
Consultation may be granted on a Prohibition granted on a Surmize not proved
within Six months; as was Adjudged, Hill. 6 Jac. C. B. in Cas. inter Sharp and
Sharp. No^. Rep. Custom and Prescription; both ought to be without
interruption Constant, and beyond the memory of man Perpetual, that is, no man
in being remembers to the contrary; for it seems, if any man, or any Authentic
Record, or other sufficient Evidence can prove it was otherwise at any time
since the first of R. 1. viz. 1189. the Custom or Prescription at Common Law
would not hold Co. 2. Inst. 653.
. Albeit by the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. c. 13. Tithes are to be yielded and paid as
of right they had been within 40 years next before; which time somewhat agrees
with the Ecclesiastical Computation: And by the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 20. they
are to be paid according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances, after the
laudable Usages and Customs of the Parish; which was also after confirmed (as
to the lawful Usage and Custom) by the Stat. of 32 H. 8. 7.

D
DEcimae Majores. such as Corn, Hay, etc. belong to the Parson: Decimae Minores
or Minutae, as Saffron, Herbs, etc do belong to the Vicar. Pasch. 38 Eliz. B.
R. Beding and Feak's Case. and Mich. 1 Car. C. B. Sir Rich. Vdal and the Vicar
of Alton's Case.

Deer, though they are Ferae naturae, yet they may be given for Tithes; and
although they are not Tithable of themselves, yet they may be given for a Modus
Decimandi. Hill. 6 Jac. C. B. the Vicar of Clare's Case. Sharp and Sharp's
Case. Noy 148. acc.

Deprivation: A Parson may after his Deprivation sue in the Ecclesiastical
Court for subtraction of Tithes, which were due to him before his Deprivation,
and a Prohibition will not lie in the Case. Adjudged, Hill. 13 Jac. Cole's Case.

Discharge of Tithes may be either by Custom, Prescription, Composition,
Statute, Unity of Possession, or by Privilege, as to Religious Orders now not
of use Co. 1. pa. 33. and 2 Ed. 6. 13. and 32 H. 7. Co. 44 and Brownl. 2. pa.
33.
. There may be also a Discharge of Tithes as against the Vicar, by the payment
thereof unto the Parson Yelvert. 86.
. And it may be by a Real Composition Lane 17. Hob. 269, 296, 309.
, but it cannot be by a Verbal Agreement for money Hob 176.
. And if there be a Discharge not of the Tithes themselves, but from the exact
payment thereof by a Modus Decimandi, or Annual recompense in satisfaction
thereof, it must be by Custom or Prescription Co. 13. 16.
. By the Common Law a Layman, although he were capable of a Discharge of
Tithes by Grant of the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, or by Composition; yet at
that Law none had a capacity to take or receive them, save only Ecclesiastical
persons, or a Mixed person, as the King Co 2. B. of Winchester's Case.
. And by the same Law, if a Bishop were absolutely Discharged of Tithes by
Prescription, whilst the Lands were in his hands, his Demising thereof to a
Layman could not make the same chargeable therewith Co. ibid.
. For in Wright's Case, where the Bishop of W. was seized of a Manor in right
of his Bishopric, Prescribed that he and all his Predecessors had held the
said Manor, and the Demesns thereof time out of mind for him, his Farmers,
Tenants for years or at will, Discharged and acquitted from payment of Tithes
for these Lands; the Bishop made a Lease for years of parcel of the Demesns:
The Farmer of the Rectory Libelled in the Ecclesiast Court against the Lessee
for Tithes; all which matter he pleaded in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the
Judge there refused to allow of the Allegation in Discharge of the Tithes: It
was held in this case, (1) That if the Lands of the Bishop were absolutely
Discharged in his hands by Prescription, the Demising of it to a Layman could
not make it chargeable with Tithes. (2) That a Spiritual person may Prescribe
in non Decimando. (3) That the Refusal by the Ecclesiastical Judge to allow the
Allegation in Discharge of Tithes, is not Traversable Wright and Wright's Cas.
Cro. par. 1.
. In like manner the King being seized of Lands, parcel of the Forest of B. in
Fee in right of the Crown, Discharged of the payment of Tithes, granted the
Lands to the Earl of Hertford in Fee; and it was held, that the Patentee should
be Discharged of payment of Tithes; and a Prohibition was granted in that Case
Mordant and Cummin's Case Cro. par. 3.
. Yet in another Case, where it was surmized for a Prohibition, that the Prior
of B. was seized of Lands, parcel of his Priory, and held them till the
dissolution, Discharged of Tithes, for his Farmers and Tenants for life or
years; that the Priory was dissolved 27 H. 8. that the King was seized of the
Lands, and shows the Statutes of 32 H. 8. and 2 Ed. 6. and that the King died
seized of the Lands, that by mean Conveyances it was conveyed to J. S. and that
the Plaintiff being his Tenant for years, was sued by the Parson of B. for the
Tithes of these Lands. It was Resolved by the Court, That the Lands which came
to the Crown by the Statute of 27 H. 8. should not be Discharged from the
payment of Tithes, but should pay the same, although the Lands in the hands of
the said Religious Persons or Houses were Discharged from the payment thereof,
for that the Privileges were Personal Privileges, which were extinguished by
the said Statute of Dissolutions, and there are not any words in the said
Statute of 27 H. 8. to save the Privileges; and the Statute of 31 H. 8. being
a subsequent Law, had not respect to these Privileges Mich. 11 Car. B. R.
Sydown and Holme's Case. Cro. par. 3. Parkins and Hind's Case. Cro. par. 1.
Mich. 28 Eliz. in Cur. Wardor. More.
. Likewise, where a Parson by Deed Indented leased his Glebe cum omnibus
proficuis and Commoditatibus: It was notwithstanding Adjudged, that the Lessee
should be charged with the payment of Tithes. And in Branches Case it was
Resolved, That an Union of Copyhold Lands, and of the Parsonage in the hands of
the Parson, as Parson Imparsonee, was no Discharge of the Tithes of the
Copyhold Lands. And in this Case it was also Adjudged, That a Farmer of Lands
might Prescribe in Modo Decimandi, but not in non Decimando.

The Statute of 31 H. 8. gave all Colleges Dissolved to the Crown, in which
there is a Clause, That the King and his Patentees should hold Discharged of
Tithes, as the Abbots held: Afterward the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. gave all
Colleges to the Crown; but there is in it no Clause of the Discharge of
Tithes: The Parson Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court; and the Farmer of the
Lands of the College of Maidstone in Kent brought a Prohibition upon the
Statute of 31 H. 8. The Court was clear of Opinion, That the King had the Lands
of the College by the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. and not by the Statute of 31 H.
Green and Buskyn's Cas. Mores Rep.
8. But the Justices doubted, the Lands coming to the King by that Statute,
whether they should be Discharged of Tithes by the Statute of 31 H. 8. there
being no Clause in the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. for Discharge of Tithes: But it was
Resolved by the Justices, That Unity without Composition or Prescription, was a
sufficient Discharge of Tithes by the Statute of 31 H. 8.

The Templers were Dissolved, and their Possessions and Privileges by Act of
Parliament 17 Ed. Quarles and Sparting's C. Mores Rep.
2. transferred to St. John's of Jerusalem; and their Possessions by Act of
Parliament 32 H. 8. cap. 24. given to the King: It was Resolved, That the King
and his Patentees should pay Tithes of those Lands, although the Lands propriis
sumptibus excolantur, because the Privileges to be Discharged of Tithes were
proper to Spiritual persons, and ceased when the person Spiritual was removed:
And the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Dissolutions did not extend to such Lands as
came to the King by Special Act of Parliament, as those Lands of St. John's of
Jerusalem did. And Mich. 6. Jac. C. B. in a Case de Modo Decimandi it was said,
That one may be Discharged of Tithes five ways: (1) By the Law of the Realm,
viz. the Common Law, as tithes shall not be paid of Coals, Quarries, Bricks,
Tiles, etc. F. N. B. 53. and Reg. 54. nor of the After-pasture of a Meadow,
etc. nor of Rakings, nor of Wood to make Pales, or Mounds, or Hedges, etc. (2)
By the Statutes of the Realm, as 31 H. 8. 13. 45. Ed. 3. etc. (3) By
Privilege, as those of St. John's of Jerusalem in England, the Cistertains,
Templers, etc. as appears 10 H. 7. 277. Dyer. (4) By Prescription; as by Modus
Decimandi, annual recompense in satisfaction. (5) By real Composition. By all
which it appears, that a man may be Discharged of payment of Tithes; yet a
Layman ought not to prescribe in non Decimando, albeit the may in modo
Decimandi. And this in effect agrees with Tho. Aquinas in his Secunda Secundae,
Quaest. 86. art. ult. vid. Dr. and Stu. lib. 2. c. 55. fo. 164. And the Causes
why the Judges of the Common Law permit not the Ecclesiastical Judges to try
Modum Decimandi, being pleaded in their Courts, is, because that if the
Recompense which is to be given to the Parson in satisfaction of his Tithes,
does not amount to the value of this Tithes in kind, they might overthrow the
same: And that appears by Lindwood, Mich. 6 Jac. C. B. Case of Modus Decim. Co.
lib. 13.
Constit. Mepham. de Decim. c. Quoniam propter, verb. Consuetudines. For this
Reason it is said a Prohibition lies: and therewith agrees 8 Ed. 4. 14. vid. 7
Ed. 6. Dyer 79. and 18 Eliz. Dyer 349.

In a Prohibition upon a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, by the Defendant the
Vicar of D. for Tithes: A Prohibition prayed upon his Plea thereof a Modus
Decimandi, Mich. 14 Jac. B R. Wintell against Child. Bulstr. par. 3.
to pay so much yearly to the Parson of Dale, in Discharge of his Tithes and
the same Plea there disallowed. The whole Court agreed, that this Modus between
him and the Parson, will not discharge him from payment of Tithes, as to the
Vicar; and therefore by the Rule of the Court a Consultation was granted. Also
the Court was of Opinion, That where a Bishop holds Lands discharged of Tithes,
and he makes a Feoffment of the Land, the Feoffee shall be discharged of
Tithes; and the like, if the King has ancient Forest Lands discharges of
Tithes, Mich. 9 Jac. C. B. Brownl. Rep. par. 1. Cases in Law, etc.
and the King grants this Land, the Grantee is discharged of Tithes: And it is
a General Rule, That he which may have Tithes, may be Discharged of Tithes. So
long as the Land is occupied by him who has the Fee-simple, which did formerly
belong to the Order of Cistertians, it shall pay no Tithes; Brownl. ibid.
but if he let it for years or life, the Tenant shall pay Tithes. For
anciently there were many large Estates wholly exempted from paying Tithes, as
Land belonging to the said Cistertian Monks to the Knights Templers, and
Hospitallers: As in the Earl of Clanrickard's Case, who Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of Hay of a certain Meadow against Dame
Denton, who pleaded, That the Prior of A. was seized of that Meadow as parcel
of the Possessions of the Priory, and that they held it discharged time out of
mind, etc. whereupon Issue was joined upon a Prohibition, and it was found for
the Plaintiff; for that the Land was only discharged when it was in the hands
of the Priory, and not when it was in the hands of their Farmers, and they were
of the Order of Cistertians, whereupon a Consultation was granted: And now a
new Prohibition was prayed, for that in the Ecclesiastical Court they had added
to the former Libel, when the Statute of 50 Ed. 3. cap. 4. is, That whereas a
Consultation is duly granted upon a Prohibition, that the same Judge may
proceed in the same case by virtue of the former Consultation, notwithstanding
any other Prohibition. Provided always, that the matter in the Libel of the
said cause be not altered, enlarged, or otherwise changed; Dr. Pope, Doctor of
the Civil Law said, That there was not any enlarging or changing in substance
of the Libel in question; for whereas in the former Libel it was, That they had
used to pay Tithes time out of mind, now in the second Libel is added, That
although the Prior was discharged, yet they, viz. the Farmers, have paid Tithes
for 20, 30 or 40 years, and time out of mind. Montague Chapter Justice said, That
it seemed that that was not an alteration: but Doderidge and Houghton Justices
held, That that was an alteration of the Libel; for now by that last Libel,
They could fetch them in for Tithes, though they were discharged in the hands
of the Abbot: and for that the Tithes had been paid for 20, 30 or 40 years
since the Statute aforesaid (the which is a sufficient time to make a
Prescription, according to the Law of the Civilians) they would charge the Land
with Tithes in whose soever hands they are, when by the Statute it ought to be
discharged only in the hands of some, viz. the Priors; and afterward Dr. Pope
pulled off the Addition, which he had made to the former Libel, off from the
second Libel. And the whole Court said, That if he proceeded upon that
Addition, that Sentence shall be given for Tithes, upon any Prescription since
the Statute, that then they would grant a Prohibition. Mich. 18. Jac. B. R.
Dame Denton's Case and the Count of Clanrickard. Roll. Rep. par. 2.

The Order of the Praemonstracenses were Discharged of all Tithes of their
Land, the which Manibus aut sumptibus excolebant propriis. All the Chief Monks
paid Tithe as well as other men, Discharge of Tithes.
till Pope Paschal at the Council of Mentz Ordained, that they should not pay
Tithes de Laboribus suis; and that continued as a general Discharge till the
time of H. 2. when Pope Adrian restrained it to three Orders, viz. the
Cistertians, the Templers, and the Hospitallers. And the Discharge which the
Order of the Praemonstracenses had, was made by Pope Innocent the Third, by his
Bull. And after in the Council of Lateran, ne Ecclesia nimium gravaretur, it
was provided, That the Privilege of the Templers should not extend to their
Farmers. Vid. Case Dickenson and Greenhall. Mich. 22. Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep. 2.
part.

In Hurrey's Case against Boyer in a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court,
for stay of a Suit there for Tithes of Lands, which were the possessions of the
Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, upon Suggestion that the Prior of the said
Dissolved House of St. John's had this Privilege from Rome, which was by diverse
Councils and Canons; viz. That the Lands of their Predecessors, which by their
own hands and costs they did Till, they were not obliged to pay Tithes. In this
Case it was agreed, That this Hospital was not Dissolved by the Statute of 31
H. 8. c. 18. of Dissolutions, but by a Special Act made 32 H. 8. c. 24. by
which their Corporation and Order was Dissolved, and their Possessions given to
the King, with all the Privileges and Immunities thereto belonging, which the
King granted to the Plaintiff in the Prohibition; and whether he should hold
them Discharged of the payment of Tithes was the question. Harris Sergeant
urged, That this Immunity was annexed to the Corporation of the Prior, and his
Brethren of the said Hospital, and does not come to the King, it being
determined by the Dissolution of the said Hospital; and so Adjudged in B. R.
against the Book of 10 Eliz. Dyer. 277. 60. 2. Coke, the Bishop of Winchester's
Case, 14. B. and the Archbishop of Canterbury's Case, 47. B. and 18 Eliz. Dyer
349. 16. Nichols Sergeant to the contrary, and cited a Canon made by the
Council of Mag. and another made by Innocent. 3. An. 1215. and diverse others,
and also the Statute of 2 H. 4. 4. and 7 H. 4. 6. and if Land be Discharged of
payment of Tithes by Prescription of not Tithing, and this Land come to the
King, the Privilege remains; and these Lands are given to the King in the same
plight and case, as they were in the Hospitallers; and affirmed the Book of 10
Eliz. Dyer 277. 60. to be good Law; and that the aforementioned Cases of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Winchester, and the words of the
Statute of 32 H. 8. 24. gives the King not only the Manors, Houses, etc. but
also all Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, etc. In this Case it was
Confessed, that it came by reason of the Order of the Cestertians, as appears
by the Canon: And Hutton Sergeant arguing for the Defendant, said, that it
appears by the Statute of 2 H. 4. 4. that it is Personal, and that it differs
from the Lands which came to the King by the Statute of 31 H. 8. For by that
the King is Discharged of payment of Tithes, and so are his Patentees; but that
this Privilege is Personal, and if so, then it is determined by dissolution of
the other, and a personal Privilege in case of Tithe is not transferred to the
King. Barker Sergeant for the Plaintiff in this case said, That it was Ordained
by Edgar, King of this Realm, that Tithes shall be given to the Mother Church:
Also Edmund, Ethelstone, William the Conqueror, and the Council of Magans,
specially provided that Tithes should be paid, but did not appoint when they
should be paid. But the first Law which appointed the quantity, was made in the
time of Ed. 1. and this Ordained when they ought to pay the Tenth with the fear
of God. And before the Council of Lateran every one might pay his Tithes to
what Parson he would, and then were paid to Monasteries as Oblations. If a
Parson in one Parish claim Tithes in another, as portion of Tithes due by
Prescription to his Rectory, he ought to show the place especially, viz. the
place where the Tithes lie. In the Seventeenth year of Ed. 2. the Order of the
Templers was dissolved, and their Possessions annexed to St. John of Jerusalem:
and they did not claim by any Bull of the Pope, nor other Spiritual Canon, but
by Prescription, which is Privilege and private Common Law, as appears by the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 74. And Menham's Canon in the time of Ed. 1. says,
Let the Custom be observed. And another Canon, That Custom of not Tithing, or
of the manner of Tithing, if they paid less than the Tenth part, shall be
observed. Vid. Panormitan. and Cas. Hurrey verse. Boyer, Brownl. Rep. and dict.
Cas. Pasch. 9 Jac. Rot. 1511. C. B. Brownl. Rep. par. 2.

In the Bishop of Winchester's Case, 38 Eliz. it was Resolved, That at the
Common Law none had capacity to take Tithes but Spiritual persons, Coke 2. The
Bish. of Winchester's Case. 38 Eliz. fo. 43.
or Persona mixta, as the King* and regularly no mere Layman was capable of
them (except in special Cases;) for he could not Sue for them in the Court
Christian; and regularly a Layman had no remedy for them until the 32 H. 8. A
Layman may be Discharged of Tithes at the Common Law by Grant, or by
Composition, but not by Prescription; for in the Books of the Common Law it is
commonly said, That a Law-man may Prescribe In Modo Decimandi, but not In non
Decimando: And the reason is, because he is not (except in Special Cases)
capable of Tithes at the Common Law, before the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 7. And
therefore without Special matter showed, it shall not be intended that he has
any lawful Discharge, and in favor of the Holy Church (although it may have a
lawful Commencement) the Law will not suffer this Prescription, In non
Decimando, to put it to the Trial of Laymen. A Spiritual person that was
capable of Tithes at the Common Law in Pernancy, may Prescribe to be Discharged
of Tithes generally, or to have a portion of Tithes in the Land of another.
Before the Council of Lateran, every man might give his Tithes to any Spiritual
person that he would; and if the Lands of the Bishop were Discharged in his
hands absolutely by Prescription, the Demising it to a Layman cannot make it
chargeable, and the Bishop might reserve the greater Rent.

A Parson by Deed Indented leaseth his Glebe, cum omnibus proficuis and
commoditatibus: Parkins and Hind's Case. Cro. par. 1.
It was notwithstanding Adjudged, that the Lessee shall be charged with the
payment of Tithes. And in an Action of Debt upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. for
not setting forth of Tithes; the Case was, The Lands were a parcel of the
possession of the Templers, whose Lands were annexed to the Priory of St.
John's. The Templers had a Special Privilege to be Discharged of Tithes of
those Lands, Cornwallis and Spurling's C. Cro. par. 2.
which propriis manibus excolunt. By a Special Act of 32 H. 8. the Possessions
of the Priory of St John's, were given to the King by general words of all Lands
in tam amplis modo, etc. as the Abbots held them. Resolved, That the Defendant
should not be Discharged, nor have the Privilege; for by the Common Law a
Lay-person was not capable of such a Privilege, and the King should not have
the benefit of the Privilege, until the Stat. of 31 H. 8. But the Statute
extends only to such Possessions as came to the King by Surrender, and should
be vested in him by that Act, and does not extend to Possessions which are
vested in him by another Act. and these Lands were given to the King by a
Special Act of Parliament, and therefore not Discharged of Tithes.

Dotards, or the Branches of Trees of twenty years growth or upward, are not
Tithable More. Cas* 1270.
.

Doves in a Dove-house do pay Personal, not Predial Tithes 15 Car. Adjudg.
, but if stol^ out of a Dove-house, no Tithe is to be paid of such Pasch. 15
Car. Adjudg. acc.
. Tithes shall be paid de jure of young Pigeons. Mich. 14 Jac. B. between
Whatley and Hambury Resolved. Hill. 15 Jac. B. R. Resolved, and a Prohibition
denied in Gastrell's Case. By Custom Tithes may be paid of Pigeons spent in a
man's own house, but not so of Common right. Case ibid. But if sold, they shall
pay Tithe. dict. Cas. Whatly.

E
EGgs are Tithed in kind, or according to the Custom of the place, which
serves for the Tithe of the Tame and Domestic Fowl, where their young are not
paid in kind; and where Tithe of Eggs is paid, there is no Tithe of the young:
And so vice versa, where the Tithe of the Young is paid, there no Tithes of
Eggs may be demanded.

F
FAllow-Grounds pay no Tithe for these years wherein they lie Fallow, nor is
the Pasture thereof Tithable, unless it be kept Lay beyond the course of
Husbandry; for if Land lie Fallow every two or three years, the same is a
charge unto the Owner and Tenant for that time, and an advantage to the Parson
in the bettering of his Crop the year following, when the same is sowed with
Corn or Grain; and therefore, although the Grass and feeding of the
Fallow-ground for that year be some small profit to the Owner of the Soil, yet
he shall not pay Tithe for the same, as has been Adjudged Pasch. 7 Jac. C. B.
. Yet it was afterward Adjudged 15 Car. by Barkley Justice in C. B.
, That if Lands be Tithable, and the Tenant or Occupier of the Land will not
Plough it, or Manure it, especially thereby to prejudice the Parson; that in
such case the Parson may Sue the Tenant in the Ecclesiastical Court to have
Tithe of that Land.

Ferae naturae, Beasts and Birds that are such are not Tithable 12 H. 8. 4*
, till they become tame and profitable to the Owner, that is till they are
reduced to a Tameness and Property; yet it has been held, that Tithes are not
payable for tame Turkies, Pheasants, or Partridges, nor for their Eggs More.
Case 322.
. Although Beasts Ferae naturae, as Bucks, Does, Pheasants, etc. are not
Tithable of themselves; yet they may be given for Tithes, or for a Modus
Decimandi, as a great Tree may be given for Tithe of Trees tithable Case Sharp
versus Sharp. Noy. Rep.
. And as things which are Ferae naturae, whereof a man has not an absolute
property, are not Tithable: so likewise of things which are merely for Pleasure
Tithes shall not be paid 12 H. 8. 4. by all the Justices.
.

Fenny-Lands drained and made Arable do pay Tithes Bulstr. 8. 165.
, notwithstanding the Statute of Barren Land More. Case 603.
.

Fish taken in the Sea, are by the Custom of the Realm Tithable, not by the
Tenth Fish, but some small Sum of Money in consideration of a Tithe Tr. 8 Car.
B. R. Earl of Desmond's Case, adjudg. Cro. 1. pa. 192. and 15 Car. B. R.
Adjudg. Hugh. Abr. verb. Dismes.
. But if taken in a Pond, or in a several Piscary, then they are Tithable by
the Owner thereof as a Predial Tithe, and as such ought to be set forth
according to the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. Trin. 8 Jac. C. B. the Earl of Desmond's
Case. Mich. 15 Car. B. R. Adjudg. acc. vid. Trin. 9 Car. B. R. Yet it is said,
that Fishers, Fowlers, and Hunters, not for pleasure, but by way of Trade for
profit, pay some Tithe by usage in nature of a personal Tithe to the Parson or
Vicar where they inhabit, though they take their Fish, Fowl, etc. in another
Parish; but if they paid Money to another in that other Parish for this liberty
of Fishing, etc. then he that takes that Money, must pay as a Predial Tithe to
the Parson of that other Parish where he inhabits. Fish taken in the Sea, being
Ferae naturae, are not understood to be Regularly, but Customarily only,
Tithable, as in Cornwall, Wales, Yarmouth, etc. Cro. Car. 264. 1. 339. Koll. 1.
635. c. 4, 6, 7.
. And so it has been Resolved Law of Tithes, cap. 8.
; albeit in the said Case of the E. of Desmond it was held, that they were
Tithable by the Custom of the Realm: In which case it is more probable, that
the Fishers pay a Personal, than the Fish a Predial Tithe, to the Parson or
Vicar of that Parish where they inhabit. To this purpose there is a Case
extant, wherein a Prohibition was granted against the same Parson of W. in the
County of L. for suing in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithe of Trouts
taken in a River, because being Ferae naturae, they are not Tithable; and a
President was showed 5 Car. where a Prohibition was granted against the same
Parson for suing for Tithe-Eeles taken in the River* because they were Ferae
naturae: And it was said, that in Yarmouth was a Suit for Tithe-Herrings taken
in the Sea; but they could not prevail in it. Jones Justice said, That in Wales
they used to pay Tithes for Herrings; and in Ireland it is a common course to
pay Tithe for Salmons taken in Rivers: whereunto it was replied, That that
might peradventure be by Custom, for otherwise Tithes are not due for Fish
taken in Rivers Hill. 9 Car. B. R. Cro. par. 1. 247.
. For no Tithes de jure are to be paid for Fish taken in a Common River. Pasch.
5 Car. B. R. a Prohibition granted to stay a Suit for Tithes of Eeles taken in
a Common River in the Parish of Barton in Westmerland; and Hill. 9 Car.
Prohibition granted to stay a Suit for Tithes of Trouts in the same River. But
the Court seemed to be divided, whether Tithes of them were due or not: But
they granted a Prohibition, for that the Law shall decide thereupon; it was
between Dawes and Huddlestone. No Tithes shall be paid in kind without a
Custom for Fish taken in the high Sea out of any Parish. Hill. 14 Car. B. R.
between Long and Dircell per Curiam, and Prohibition granted accordingly.
Appeal out of Ireland to the Delegates in England.
And Justice Jones said, that on an Appeal to the Delegates out of Ireland in
the Lord Desmond's Case it was Agreed, That for such Fish so taken, only
Personal Tithes are due deductis expensis. Likewise, no Tithes in kind shall be
paid de jure for Fish taken in a Common River, which is not enclosed, as in a
Pond enclosed; for that they are Ferae naturae, although they are taken by one
who has a severed Piscary there, and although the place where they are taken
be within the Parish of that Parson who claims them; for it is a Personal
Tithe, in which Tithes ought to be paid deductis Expensis. Pasch. 15 Car* B. R.
between Gold and Arthur, and others, Prohibition was granted where the Suit was
for Tithes of Salmon in the River of Exe. Mich. 15 Car. between Whislake and
the said Arthur, and others: the like Prohibition granted on the same matter
between other parties. Trin. 8 Car. B. R. Cro. p. 2.
And in the Case of a Prohibition it was Resolved, That Tithe shall be paid for
Fish taken in the Sea, which is not within any Parish; and they shall be paid
to the Parson of the Parish where the Fish is landed.

Flax pays a Predial Tithe, payable when dressed up. Coke* Mag. Char. 649. The
Tithes of Flax are Minutae Decimae. Mich. 14 Car. B. R. in Noah Webb's Case.

Forest-Lands, that lie in no Parish, or between two Parishes, and anciently
such, are not Tithable by the King or his Patentees; but if the Forest be in a
Parish, and Land therein which is Tithe-Free, if the Forest happen to be
disforested, it shall pay Tithes in kind. Crompt. Jurisd 52. Bacon Chief
Justice, at Sarum-Assize; the Case was, A. Lessee for years of the Earl of H.
prayed a Prohibition against the Vicar of L. to stay a Suit in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes, because the Lands out of which the Tithes were
demanded, were parcel of the Forest of B. whereof the King was seized in right
of his Crown, and he and all his Predecessors held the said Land discharged of
Tithes; and showed that the King had granted the said Forest to the Earl of
Hertford in Fee, and so he ought to have them discharged of Tithes: In that
Case it was held by the Court, That it was only a Privilege annexed to the
Crown, during the time that the Land was in the Crown; but the Court doubted,
whether the Patentee might have such Privilege: But yet de been esse the
Prohibition was granted Mich. 3 Car. C. B. Morant and Canding's Case. Cro. p.
1. 67.
. If Tithes do lie in any Forest, as in the Forest of Windsor, Rockingham,
Sherwood, or other Forest which is not any Parish, the King shall have them by
his Prerogative, and not the Bishop of the Diocese, or Metropolitan of the
Province, as some have thought 14 H. 4. 17.
. But yet it seems by 22 Ass. 25. if there be cause of Suit for such Tithes
against the parties who ought to pay the same, such Suit might be brought in
the Ecclesiastical Court: But if a Stranger takes away such Tithes from the
Parson or Vicar, there for such Trespass the Suit may be in the Temporal Court,
as the same may be for taking away other goods in the like case. Adjudg. 15
Car. B. R.

Fowl taken by a Faulkner, who hawks for his pleasure, shall not pay Tithe; but
if a Fowler kill Fowl, and make a profit of them, it has been held, that he
shall pay a Personal Tithe for them. Pasch. 15 Car. Adjudg. acc.

Fruits of Trees, as Apples, Pears, etc. are Tithable presently upon their
gathering, and are Predial Tithes; for the subtraction whereof the Parishioner
is impleadable. Stat. 2 Ed. 6. c. 13. Fruits of Trees, Apples, Pears, etc. Mast
of Oak, Beech, etc. are Predial Tithes. Coke Magn, Chart. 649. The Fruits of
Orchards and Gardens are Tithable in their proper kinds, and to be paid when
they are gathered, unless there be some Modus or Rate-Tithe paid in lieu
thereof.

Furse is Tithable, and pays a Predial Tithe, unless the Owner thereof can
prescribe or prove a Custom of Tithing Milk or Calves of the Cattle on the
ground where the Furse grows. Mich. 29. Eliz. B. R. Vid. Heath.

G
GArdens are Tithable as other Lands, and therefore the Herbs which grow
therein pay Tithes in kind. Also Plants, Seeds, Woad, Saffron, Hemp, Rape, etc.
pay Tithes in kind, unless the Parson make an Agreement for the same; otherwise
the Tenth part must be set forth for the Parson, when the Owner receives his
Nine parts. Mich. 8. Jac. C. B. in Baxter's Case. and Trin. 9 Jac. B. R. The
whole Court.

Glebe is a portion of Land, Meadow, or Pasture, belonging to or parcel of the
Parsonage or Vicarage, over and above the Tithes. If it be Demised by the
Parson to a Layman, it pays Tithe; otherwise, if he keep it in his own hands
Owen 35.
. For Glebe kept in the Vicars own hands, pays no Tithe to the Parson
Impropriate, it is otherwise if it be in the hands of his Lessee Brownl. 69.
, by whom it is Tithable, if let by a Parson Impropriate. And although
Glebe-Lands are not properly Tithable, because Ecclesia Ecclesiae Decimas non
debet solvere; yet if Glebe-Lands be leased out the Parson, the Lessee shall
pay the Small Tithes arising out of such Glebe-Lands to the Vicar that has
Small Tithes upon his endowment, as in Blinco's Case Blinco verse. Marston. Cro.
par. 1. 469.
. And yet in that case the Vicar Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court to have
Tithes of the Glebe of the Parson, and a Prohibition was granted, for that the
Glebe shall pay no Tithe dict. Cas. Blinco. Mores Rep.
. Notwithstanding which, if a Parson lease his Glebe-Lands, and do not withal
Grant the Tithes thereof, the Tenant shall pay the Tithes to the Parson Cro.
Eliz. 161.
. Likewise, if a Parson sow his Glebe-Land, and then Lease the same, the Tenant
shall pay the Tithes of this Corn to his Landlord the Parson Roll. 655. k. 1.
. Yet if a Parson sow his Glebe, and die before Severance, some have held, that
his Executors shall not pay Tithes of this Corn. And albeit where Glebe-Lands
are leased out by the Parson, the Lessee shall, as aforesaid, pay the Small
Tithes thereof to the Vicar, that has the Small Tithes upon his Endowment; yet
he shall not have the Small Tithes arising upon such of the Parsons Glebe-Lands
as the Parson keeps in his own hands Cro. Eliz. 578.
. Likewise on the other hand it has been held, That the Vicar upon a general
Endowment, shall not pay Tithes of his Glebe to the Parson, or of the Fruits
that arise from the same, and that for the same reason aforesaid, Quia Decimas
Ecclesia Ecclessae reddere non debet Crompt. Cas. Pasch. 7 Car. 1. B. R.
. But the Lessee of the Parsons Glebe shall pay him, the Tithes thereof; to
this purpose the Case was, A Parson leased all his Glebe-Lands, with all
Profits and Commodities rendering 13 s. 4. d. pro omnibus exactionibus and
demandis, and afterward Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against his
Lessee for the Tithes thereof: It was the Opinion of the Court, That Tithes are
not things issuing out of Lands, nor any Rent or duty, but Spiritual; and if
the Parson does Release to his Parishioner all demands in his Lands, his Tithes
are not thereby extinct, and therefore a Consultation was granted Trin. 31 El.
B. R. Style and Miller. Leon. 300.
. And so it was Adjudged 32 Eliz. in Babington's Case, That such Lessee should
pay Tithes to the Parson, for that they are due jure divino, and cannot be
included in Rent Hugh. Abr. vert. Dismes. Sec. 2. and 5. Harris verse. Cotton.
Brownl. pa. 1. Actions of Debt.
. As long as the Vicar occupies his Glebe-Lands in his own hands, he shall pay
no Tithes; but if he Demise it unto another, the Lessee shall pay Tithes to the
Parson that is Impropriate. If the Vicar sow the Land, and die, and his
Executor take away the Corn. and does not set forth his Tithe, and the Parson
bring his Action of Debt upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. In this case the Court
seemed to incline, that it would lie. The Glebe-Lands and Spiritual Revenues of
Clergymen, being held in pura and perpetus Eleemosyna, h. e. in Frankalmoign,
Vid. The Present State of England. page 228.
are exempted from Arraying and Mustering of Men or Horses for the War, as
appears in a Stat. of 8. H. 4. nu. 12. in the unprinted Rolls of that
Parliament. An Abbot was Parson Imparsonee of the Church where the Abbey and
Tithes were, the Abbey was Dissolved; the King granted the Monastery to one,
and the Parsonage and Rectory to another: It was the opinion of the Justices,
That if the Land of the Abbey was the Glebe of the Parsonage before the
Impropriation, that then the Land was discharged of Tithes; for it remains
Glebe notwithstanding the Appropriation, and the Glebe cannot be gained by
Prescription, nor was ever chargeable to pay Tithes: And if the Parson does
make a Lease of his Glebe, Mich. 5 Eliz. Mores Rep.
the Lessee (as was there said, contrary to what was before said) shall not pay
Tithes; but the Demesns of the Abbey, not parcel of the Glebe, should be
chargeable to pay Tithes, if they were not discharged in right of a Composition
or perpetual Unity.

Grass pays a Predial Tithe; but if a man cut Grass, and before it be made into
Hay, being only put into Swathes, he carry it thence and give it to his Plowing
Cattle for their necessary sustenance, not having otherwise Food sufficient for
them; in this case no Tithes shall be paid for the same, and Prohibition was
granted. Mich. 9. Car. B. R. Crawley and Wells. per Curiam. The Case was, where
J. Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of the Profits, which
came of the Grass and herbage of Pasture-Land, and upon a Prohibition granted;
P. suggests, That he did feed on that Grass and Pasture with his own
Plough-Cattel, and with the Plough-Cattle of other man in the same Village.
Noy, Consultation shall be granted; for though a mrn shall not pay Tithes for
the Cattle of his Cart, yet he shall pay Tithes for the Land whereon they do
feed. Doderidge Justice, Where I do agist Cattle, and take the Cattle of other
men to eat up my Grass and Pasture, there I shall pay Tithes for the Grass;
Trin. 18 Jac. B. R. Johnson and Parker's Case. Roll. Rep.
otherwise it is, where the Grass is only such as I do depasture with my own
working Cattle. Crook cited Sherington and Fleetwood's Case, where a man Agists
other men's Cattle on his Meadowgrou^d, whereof he paid Tithe-Hay before time;
and it was Resolved in this Case, That he shall not pay Tithes for that
Meadowground now fed with other men's Cattle after Harvest, and no more than if
he had depastured the Land with his own Cattle.

Gravel is not Tithable. Mich. 19. Eliz. B. R. and Pasch. 34. Eliz. C. B. Liff
and Watt' s Case.

Grain is computed among the Predial Tithes, which is to be set out according
to the Statutes and the usage of the place, Brownl. 1. 14. which holds true of
all sorts of Grain in all grounds within the Parish: The Law is the same
touching Hay in Meadows.

Grounds let to Strangers out of the Parish, the Tenth-peny of the Rent is
commonly payable to the Parson, Mich. 8 Jac. C. B. Baxter's Case. and Trin. 9
Jac. B. R.
if no Custom against it. Or Ground within the Parish let to a Stranger
without the Parish, is Tithable by the Ower of the Cattle, unless the Custom
there be osherwise. Or if the Ground be fed with Cattle that bring no profit to
the Parson, the Owner thereof must pay Tithes for them. Or Ground fed with the
Cattle of a Stranger within the Parish, which brings no profit to the Parson or
Vicar, he is to pay Tithes for it; the Case therefore seems the same, if both
the Ground and the Cattle be his own that is the Stranger, in case he work them
in another Parish. But the Studs of Ground or the Meers thereof at the Ends of
Land, and adjoining to the Arable-ground, are not Tithable where the Land it
self pays Tithe, unless where being mowed for Hay, it has used to pay Tithes.

H
HAy pays a Predial Tithe, and is to be Tithes in Swathes, Windrows, or Cocks,
as the Custom of the place is. Or if the Custom be to measure out the Tenth
part, as the Grass grows on the Land for Hay, the Custom is good; and the
Tithe of Hay may be set forth in Grass-Cocks, where the Custom does not oblige
to make it into Hay-Cocks Roll. 1^ 644. y. 1256.
. And if Hay be put into Ricks on the ground, and after sold, the Buyer cannot
be sued for the Tithe; the Seller may, in case the Tithe thereof were not paid
before. Hill. 16. Jac. by three Justices in Ashfield's Case. And where two
Crops of Hay are had from the same ground in the same year, Tithe shall be paid
as well of the latter as of the former Roll. 1. 645. z. 11, 12, 13.
. Also Tithe shall be paid of the Hay made of Grass growing in Orchards. Co. 2.
Instit. 652. But no Tithe Hay shall be paid for the Grass growing upon
Headlands, which are only large enough for the turning of the Plough Roll. 1.
646. 2. 19.
; but not for Grass cut in Meadows to feed the Beasts of the Plough, and not
made into Hay. Trin. 1. Car. B. R. Wells verse. Crawly. Yet on some Headlands
Tithe may be payable of Hay, for suppose that in an Arable Field there be much
Grass on the Headlands thereof, and there be a Prescription to pay the Tenth
Shock of Corn there for all the Hay on the Headlands and Rakings of the Corn,
and for Tying of Horses on the Headlands, such Prescription was held good to
discharge the Tithe of the Hay upon such Headlands Leon. 2. 93.
. And although a Second Crop of Hay from the same ground the same year is
Tithable, as aforesaid, yet regularly the Hay of the Aftermath pays no Tithe,
except there be a Special Custom for it; the Rule being, That Tithes shall be
paid Ex annuatis renovantibus simul and semel Hob. 250.
. And where the Custom is not otherwise, the Parishioner ought to make the
Grass into Hay for the Parsons Tithe Pasch. 13 Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep.
. Yet when the Tithes of Grass are severed from the Nine parts, the Parson de
jure may make it into Hay upon the Land where it grew, and that de jure, as
well as the Parishioner himself; and so Adjudged in the Parson of Columbton's
Case in Devon, and the Prohibition denied accordingly; where the Parson had
alleged a Custom of doing so, but the Court held that to be needless. Hill.
14. Jac. B. R. Newbery and Reynold's Case, per Curiam. And in this case it was
held, That the Parson may go over the Parishioners ground in the Pathway to
make the said Grass into Hay, for that is incident to the Tithes. A man is not
bound to make into Hay the Tithes of the Grass which he cuts; but he may set
forth the Tithes thereof when it is in Grass-Cocks, for he may then sever the
Tithes of Grass from the Nine parts. Pasch. 17 Jac. B. Hide and Ellis, Hob.
Case 328. Contr. Hill. 14 Jac. B. R. Barham and Goose. P. 15. Jac. B. R. per
Cur. and Prohibition denied; Tr. 15 Jac. B. R. Poppinger and Johnson per Cur.
and Prohibition denied. Pasch 13 Jac. B. R. per Cur. and Prohibition denied. P.
2. Jac. B. R. Hob. 328. Hall and Simonds, Adjudged. Likewise, a man is not
bound to sever the Tithe of Grass before it be put into Grass-Cocks, and has
set forth the Tenth part; for he may put it into Grass-Cocks out of the Swath,
and then set forth the Tenth part. Ibid. Suit was for Tithe-Hay in the
Ecclesiastical Court by the Parson; it was Surmized, That they had time out of
mind paid to the Vicar 4 d. for the Tithe-Hay. The Court awarded a
Consultation, for that the Modus Decimandi does not come in question; but this
he may plead in the Ecclesiastical Court Batham and Lady Gresham's Case. Cro.
par. 1.
. And in Gomersall and Bishops Case for Tithe-Hay, the Court held, That if
there be variance between the Surmize and the Declaration, all is ill. In
another Case in a Prohibition, it was Surmized, That time out of mind the
Owners of the Land had found Straw for the Body of the Church in discharge of
all Tithes of Hay: It was the Opinion of the Court, That it was no good
Surmize, for that the Parson had no benefit of it; and a Consultation was
awarded Scory and Babe^'s Case. ibid.
.

Heath, Furse, and Broom, Tithe shall be paid thereof, unless the party set
forth a Prescription or Special Custom, That time out of mind there has been
paid Milk, Calves etc. for the Cattle that have been kept upon the same Lands;
in which case they shall not pay Tithes Mich. 29. Eliz. B. R. Adjudged. Hugh.
Abr.
.

Hemp pays a Predial Tithe. Co. Magn. Char. 649.

Herbage of ground, whereon Corn was sowed the same year, and whereof Tithe
has been paid the same year, is not Tithable More. Case 433. 697. 1280. Leon.
2. Case 30.
. If Herbage he sold, it is at the Parsons Election, whether he will Sue the
Owner of the Cattle that feed thereon, or of the Ground, for the Tithe thereof,
if Custom be not against it. And as for Herbage growing at Lands-ends,
adjoining to the Arable, pays no Tithe, where Tithe was paid for Arable Lane 16.
. Where an innkeeper has paid Tithe-Hay of certain Lands, and the rest of the
year after puts into the same the Horses of his Guests, no Tithes shall be paid
for the Herbage of such Horses; for it is but the Afterpasture of the same
Land, whereof he had paid Tithes before. Trin. 16 Jac. B. R. Richardson and
Cable, per Curiam, Prohibition granted.

Honey is Tithed by the Tenth measure thereof. A Prohibition was prayed for
Suing for diverse kinds of Tithes, and inter alia for Honey, upon a Surmize that
it was not payable, that Bees are Volatilia: It was thereupon demurred; but the
Opinion of the Court was, That Tithes are to be paid for Honey, for so is the
Book Fitz. N. B. and therewith agrees Lindwood; wherefore the Court awarded
that there should be a Consultation M. 15 Car. B. R. rot. 1227. Bar scot and
Norton's Case. Cro. pa. 3.
.

Hops pays a Predial Tithe, and regularly are accounted inter minutas Decimas;
yet in some Cases they may be Great Tithes, in places where they are much set
or planted Udall and Tindall's Case. Hutton. 77.
. Mich. 8. Jac. B. A man may set forth the Tenth part of his Hops for Tithes
before they be dried. Hill. 14 Jac. B. R. in Barham and Goos's Case, put by
Sergeant Hitcham, and agreed by Mountacute.

Hop-poles or Wood cut and employed for them, are not Tithable where Tithe-
Hops are paid. And so it has been Resolved, That if Wood be cut and employed
for Hop-poles, where the Parson or Vicar has Tithe-Hops, they shall not have
Tithes of the Hoppoles. So if a man has a great Family, and much Wood be
felled and spent in Housekeeping, Tithes shall not be paid of such Wood. Mich.
15 Jac. C. B. by Hobart Chief Justice, White and Bickerstaff's Case.

Houses of habitation, or Dwelling-houses are not properly Tithable, no Tithe
payable for the same, nor out of the Rent reserved for them being Let; yet by
a Custom Tithes may be paid for Rent reserved upon Domise of Houses of
habitation, although it be otherwise do jure, for it might commence on good
Consideration. Co. 11. Dr. Grant 16. vid. Mich. 12 Jac. B. Hobart 16.
Leyfield's Case. Prohibition granted. Otherwise of New Houses, whereof there
can be no Custom. Ibid. But regularly Houses are not at all Tithable, nor were
Tithes anciently paid for Houses in London, the Profits of the Churches
whereof, consist only in Oblations, Obventions, and Offerings, Co. ibid. But by
a Decree made An. 1535. and confirmed by Act of Parliament, Stat. 37 H. 8. cap.
12. there is 2 s. 9 d. made payable to the Parson for every Pound of House-Rent
for the Tithes of the Houses in London. Hob. 11. But if a Modus Decimandi be
alleged to pay 12 d. in every Pound of Rent for every House in such a Parish
in London, it is a good Modus Decimandi. The aforesaid 2 s. 9 d. is to be
raised and made up according to the usage and Custom of the City. Stat. 27 H.
8. 20. and 32 H. 8. 7. And no Tithes are payable for Houses in any City save
London, where a Prescription to be discharged of Tithes of a House, by paying
12 d. of every Pound Rent in lieu thereof, is (as aforesaid) a good
Prescription. Co. 11. 16. But Tithes regularly are not payable for Houses of
Habitation, nor of any Rent reserved upon any Demiss of them; for Tithes are to
be paid of things which grow and renew every year by the Act of God. And for
the Houses in London Tithes anciently were not paid, as aforesaid; yet the
Parson of St. Clements without Temple Bar Libelled against a Parishioner for
Tithes of certain Stables (...) set forth in his Libel, That of (...)
^^scription time out of mind, the (...) had used to have a Modus Decimandi,
after the Rate (...) Tenth-part of the yearly Rent or value of the same (...)
was the Opinion of the Court, That in this Case a Prohibition should be
granted; for de Communi jure no Tithes are to be paid of the yearly Rent or
value of Houses, for Tithes are paid of the revenue and increase of things; and
therefore no Tithes are paid for Houses in any Cities or Towns in England,
saving in London; and this Parish is out of London and the Liberties thereof:
Now where there is no Tithe at all, there can never be a Modus Decimandi, and
yet it seems this kind of Payment has been long used in London, which
certainty was by use. But for Houses, Oblations were paid in all places; which
are now by the Stat. brought to a certainty, viz. 4 d. for a House. Trin. 12.
Jac. C. B. Dr. Leyfield and Tindall's Case. Hob. 10. 11. In Green and Piper's
Case it was agreed by the Justices, That a House in London, which was parcel of
the Possession of a Priory, which was discharged of the payment of Tithes,
should by the Stat. of 37 H. 8. be charged with the same. One who was a Curate
and Sequestrator only of the Rectory of D. in London, the Incumbent being
suspended, Sued Four of the Parishioners in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes
of their Houses, and not before the Mayor of London, according to the Statute
of 37 H. 8. The Court doubted of it, especially because the party was neither
Parson nor Vicar, and because the Statute is a New Law, and appoints how the
Tithes in London shall be paid and Ruled, and before what Judges, and what
Remedy shall be for the party grieved; and day given to hear Counsel on both
sides Mich. 16 Car. B. R. Cro. par. 3.
. In the Case aforesaid between Green and Piper More. 1218.
, when Suit was in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of a House in
London, a Prohibition was prayed upon a Surmize, That the House was a Priory,
which was discharged of Tithes by the Pope's Bull, and the Statute of 31 H. 8.
which gave their Possessions to the Crown, did Ordain, That the King and his
Patentee of such Lands should be discharged of Tithes; yet a Consultation was
awarded, because by a latter Statute, viz. 37 H. 8. cap. 4. all Houses in
London shall pay Tithes according to their Ordinances, and the Statute extends
to all Houses, and none excepted but the Houses of Noblemen.

L
LAmbs are computed among the Mixed Tithes. To pay Pence apiece for Lambs, when
the number is less than Seven, is a good Prescription. Curia 7 Jac. B. R.
Patche's Case. Or rather thus, viz. if the Parishioner has Six Lambs, or
under, he shall yield for Tithe a halfpeny for every Lamb: if he has Seven
Lambs, then he shall yield a Lamb for his Tithe, and receive Three-halfpence
from the Parson: if Eight Lambs, then a penny: if Nine Lambs, then a halfpeny
from the Parson, who may otherwise expect the Fall of the Tenth Lamb the year
next following. Lindw. cap. Quoniam propter. Also the Tithe of Lambs is to be
apportioned with respect to the places where they were engendered, brought
forth, and nourished. Lindw. cap. Quoniam audivimus. And regularly the time of
payment is, when they are weaned from the Dam, unless the Custom of the place
be otherwise. To stay a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithe of Lambs
a Prohibition was prayed, upon a Surmize the Custom to be, That if one has
Lambs under the number of Seven, he ought to pay a halfpeny for every Lamb in
lieu of all Tithes of Lambs; if he has but Seven, then the Parson to have the
Seventh, and he to pay Threepence; if Eight, then Twopence; and if he had
Ten, the Parson should have the Tenth without paying any thing: Resolved, That
this being a Custom, which they refused to allow in the Ecclesiastical Court,
a Prohibition should be awarded Pasch. 11 Car. B. R. Cro. p. 3.
.

Lands accruing to the Crown by the Statute of 27 H. 8. touching Dissolutions,
are now Tithable, though whilst they were the Lands of Religious Houses they
were not Tithable; but their Privileges being Personal, they were extinguished
by the said Statute of Dissolutions, nor has the Statute of 31 H. 8.
retrospect to the said Privileges. 15 Jac. C. B. Garret and Wrigh's Case. and
7 Car. B. R. Clark and Ward's Case. Vid. Sr. Marmad. Strickland's Case 1639.
Adjudged at York Assize accordingly. Vid Clayton's Rep. 117. and 12 Car.
Adjudged in another Case. Also Lands gained from the Sea, and made Arable, must
pay Tithes. Bulstr. 8. 165. So must Lands in themselves Tithable, but not
Manured or Ploughed, specially if so in prejudice to the Parson; in which case
he may Sue the Occupier of such Lands in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Tithes of that Land. Vid. 15 Car. C. B. per Berkley Justice, Adjudged.

Lops of Trees above twenty years growth shall pay no Tithes More. 158.
; For it has been held, that if a man Lop a Tree under twenty years, growth,
after suffer the Tree to grow past twenty years, and then Lop it again, no
Tithe shall be paid for the second Lopping, although the first Lopping were not
Tithe-Free C. B. by the whole Court. Brownl. 1. pa. 33.
. It was Resolved in Reynold's Case, That Tithes shall not be paid of the
Lopping of Trees above twenty years growth. More's Rep.

Lime is not Tithable; Adjudg. 19 Eliz. B. R. and Pasch. 34. Eliz. C. B. Liff
and Waltt's Case: Nor Marle, Bricks, Slates, or Tiles, unless the Custom of
the place make them Tithable; otherwise not, because they do not annually
increase, and because Lime is part of the Freehold. Mich. 13 Jac. B. Thomas and
Perrye, per Curiam.

M
MAst of Oak or Beech, if sold, the Tenth-peny is payable for the Tithe thereof;
but if eaten by Swine, then the Tenth of the value or worth thereof.

Meadows by ill husbandry overrun with Thorns, Bushes, and the like, are not
computed as Barren Lands, but do still remain Tithable. Hill. 38 Eliz. B. R.
Sherington and Fleetwood's Case. Vid. 15. Car. B. R. Sugden and Cottle's Case.

Mills, the Tithe thereof, as also of Parks, Ponds, Warrens, Dovecoats, and
Bees, seem primo intuitu, as if they were all Predial Tithes. For the Tithe of
Mills, not the Tenth peny-Rent, but the Tenth Measure of Corn grinded at the
Mill, is responsible for the Tithe; understand it of Corn- Mills, whether new
or old, driven by Wind or Water; for the Tithe whereof generally the Tenth
Toll-dish is due, if there be not some other Custom in the place. And whereas
by the Law and the ancient Constitutions of the Church Tithes were not paid of
Ancient Mills, yet by the Statute of Articuli Cleri, cap. 5. Tithes are to be
paid for all Mills newly erected: so that de Molendino de novo Erecto Tithes
shall be paid. Trin. 14. Jac. B. R. So that all new Corn- Mills, be they Wind
or Water- Mills, also Fulling- Mills, Paper- Mills, Powder- Mills, Stamping-
Mills, (and probably for the same reason Saw- Mills) Iron- Mills, and all
others that are of Common and Public use, do pay Tithes; but old Corn- Mills,
for which no Tithe was ever paid, no Tithe is to be paid, except a Personal
Tithe, as is for a Trade of profit: And such Tithe shall be paid of Fulling-
Mills, Rapt- Mills, Paper- Mills, Iron- Mills, Powder- Mills, Lead- Mills,
Copper- Mills, and Tin- Mills; for such Mills pay no Tithe as Mills, because
they are but Engines of their occupation, Pasch. 17. Jac. Johnson's Case. and
Cro. 2. 532 and Bulstr. 3. 212. and Fitzh. N. B. 41. G. and Co. 2. 44. only the
Millards are to pay a Personal Tithe, as aforesaid, as for a Handicraft, or
Faculty. Therefore a Fulling-Mill as such pays no Tithe. Hill. 16 Jac. B. R.
between Dawbridge and Johnson, Parson of Buckfield. For there being a
Fulling-Mill, which Fulled 40 Clothes a week, and gained two shillings for
every Cloth: It was held, that there was no Tithe to be paid thereof. Cro. 2.
Abridg. Case 2638. But a Corn- Mill newly erected, though upon Land discharged
of Tithes by the Statute of Monasteries, must pay Tithes; and so of every new
erected Mill on a man's own ground. Ibid. Cas. 1522. Notwithstanding the
Premises it seems somewhat questionable, whether any Tithes are due for Mills
de jure, or not; for the Lord Coke. Instit. 2. par. 622. says, It was never
Judicially determined that ever he knew of. If Mills do not yield a Predial
Tithe, yet doubtless the Millards are to yield a Personal Tithe, as well as
other Handicrafts-men, but Custom in this, as in other cases prevails. It has
been Adjudged Trin. 18. Jac. B. R. That where a Parson Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of a Mill, which was erected upon Lands which
were discharged from payment of Tithes by reason of Privilege within the
Statute of 31 H. 8. That a Prohibition would not lie in that case: for that De
Molendino de novo Erecto Tithes ought to be paid. Mich. 15 Eliz. in Hapers Rep.
acc. But in the other Case of the Fulling-Mill aforesaid, where the Parson
Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes thereof, and suggesting,
that the Miller Fulled every week 40 Clothes, as aforesaid, and gained two
shillings of every Cloth, demanded Tithes for them: A Prohibition was granted
in that case; for it was said by the Justices, That by the Law of the Land he
ought not to pay Tithes of such Mills; for of such things as come only by the
Labor of men Tithes are not payable, but of things which are renewable every
year. dict. Cas. Dawbridge and Johnson. Cro. par. 2. 523. And in another Case,
where a man Libelled to have Tithes of Mills upon a Suggestion of a Modus
Decimandi for the same, a Prohibition was granted: In that Case it was said by
Coke Chief Justice, That in some cases Tithe is payable for Mills, and in some
cases not. No Personal Tithes by the Statute is to be paid of Mills, but where
by special Usage the same has been paid; and whereas a Modus Decimandi was
alleged to pay Tithes for Mills, it was Resolved, That the Modus did not
extend to Mills newly erected, upon the Statute of Articuli Cleri; for De
Molendino de novo erecto solvuntur Decimae. Trin. 14 Jac. B. R. Jake's Case.
Bul^^r. pa. 3. 212. If two Fulling-Mills be under one Roof, and a Rate-Tithe
paid for (...) Mills, and after you alter these Mills, and make one of them a
Corn-Mill, the Rate-Tithe is gone, and you must pay Tithes in kind. Brownl. pa.
1. Cases in Law. If there be two ancient Corn-Mills time out of mind, etc. for
which 6 s. 8 d. have been paid for the Tithes time out of mind, etc. and after
in continuance of time the Mill-Stream does change his course, and goes another
way at a little distance from the ancient Stream, and thereupon the Owner of
the Mills pulls down one of the ancient Mills, and new builds it in that other
place where the Stream now runs: In this case it shall be discharged of any
Tithes by force of the ancient Modus, for that happened by the act of God, and
not by the act of the party; and Prohibition was granted accordingly, Mich. 11
Car. B. R. Johnson and Dawbridge's Case, Resolved Per Curiam. But withal the
Court held, that if the Stream had been altered by the Owner, Tithes ought to
have been paid as of a new Mill. In another Case it being Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of a Grist-Mill and of a Fulling-Mill, Crook
agreed, That for a Grist-Mill Tithes shall be paid; but he said, That the
Statute De Articulis Cleri, which speaks de Molendinis non fiat Prohibitio,
ought not to be meant or intended of a Fulling-Mill, for the profit that
accrues by that, is by the Labor of men, and therefore not intended within the
general words of the Statute De Molendinis, for which reason he prayed a
Prohibition. Calthroppe said, that it was the opinion of Justice Warburton and
Nicholls, 12 Jac. That Tithes shall be paid of Fulling-Mills, viz. the
Tenth-peny of the gain or profit; but of Grist-Mills the Tenth-dish of Corn
shall be paid, for that is in the nature of a Predial Tithe: And so it was held
5 Jac. in the Case between Vbi and Lux, Vid. Lindw. Provin. Constit. But yet
Doderidge held, That if there be not a Special Custom alleged for the payment
of Tithes of a Fulling-Mill, Tithes shall not be paid thereof; for he had
spoken (as he said) with the Civilians, who held that Tithes should be paid of
such a Mill; but they could not agree what manner of Tithe it is, for some said
it is a Predial Tithe, Others, that it is a Personal Tithe; but he said it
could not be a Predial Tithe, for it wholly accrues by the Labor of man; and
if so be that he should have that Tithe as a Predial Tithe, then another Tithe
would be demanded of him who Sheers the Cloth, and also of the Dyer thereof,
and so Tithes should be paid many times for the same Cloth: But the Usage or
Custom of the Country is to be considered. And for Tin-Mills, or Lead-Mills,
or Plate-Mills, Ragg-Mills, or Edge-Paper-Mills, no Tithes shall be paid; and
to this agreed Doderidge, Houghton, and Croke: And therefore as to the Grist-
Mill, a Consultation was granted, and as to the Fulling- Mill, there was a
Prohibition. Pasch. 17 Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep. par. 2. A Parson Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of a Mill, which was erected upon Lands
discharged of Tithes by the Statute of Monasteries, 31 H. 8. A Prohibition was
prayed, but denied by the Court; for de molendino de novo Erecto non jacet
Prohibitio. Trin. 15 Jac. B. R. Cro. par. 2. Also in another Case where it was
moved for a Prohibition, upon a Suggestion of a Modus, to pay so much by a
Custom for all Mills erected, or to be erected, and this appearing to be a
New-erected Mill: Whether the Custom shall run to this or not upon the Statute
of Articuli Cleri, c. 5. was the Question. Coke Chief Justice, This Modus
cannot go to this new Mill; for an ancient Mill your Modus shall be allowed,
but not for the Mill newly erected, the Custom will not extend to it; and
therefore by the Rule of the Court, for this new Mill a Consultation was
granted.

Millstones, if one pair thereof be turned into two pair, both of them shall
pay Tithe, and their Privilege (if they had any) will be lost. Pasch. 17 Jac.
Johnson's Case, and Fitzh. N. B. I. G. Co. 244. Brownl. 1. 31. So that if there
be but one pair of Millstones in a Mill, and a Rate-Tithe be paid for them, if
afterward there be another pair of Millstones put on, now Tithes must be paid
in kind. Brownl. ibid.

Milk paying Tithe, exempts the payment of Tithe-Cheese made of the same Milk.
Et e contra.

Mines or Minerals of Iron, Brass, Tinn, Lead, Copper, Coals, and the like, are
not Tithable. Register 51. F. N. B. 53. 9. Broo. Dismes 18.

Mixed Tithes are of the profits of such things as arise partly from the labor
and care of men, and partly from the Earth whereof the things are; and
sometimes are called Predial Mediats, and come not immediately of the Ground,
but of things maintained out of the Ground, as Cattle, Calves, Lambs, Kids,
Wool, Milk, Cheese, Chicken, Geese, Ducks, Swans, Eggs, etc. Mixed Tithes are
properly such as come of Milk, Cheese, etc. Or ex foetibus animalium, quae sunt
in pascuis, and gregatim pascuntur, ut in Agnis, Vitulis, Haedis, Caprcolis,
Pullis, etc. Coke, Magn. Chart. 649.

Modus Decimandi is the payment of something in lieu of the just and full Tithe
of a thing Tithable, legitimated by Composition, Custom, or Prescription; it
is when Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments have been given to the Parson and
his Successors, or an Annual certain Sum, or other Profit always time out of
mind to the Parson and his Successors, in full satisfaction of all Tithes in
kind in such a place; and all Presidents in Prohibitions in discharge of Tithes
in case De modo Decimandi run thus, viz. That such a Sum had been always paid
in plenam Contentationem, Satisfactionem and Exonerationem omnium and
singularum Decimarum. And although the Sum be not paid, yet cannot the Parson
sue for Tithes in kind; not for the Tithes in kind in the Ecclesiastical Court,
but for the money in the Temporal. Trin 7 Jac. in the Case De modo Decimandi
Prohibitions debated before the K. Coke, Select. Cas. 40, and 46. In Biggs Case
it was Resolved, where a Prohibition is awarded upon a Suggestion of a Modus
Decimandi, and a Consultation awarded for not proving the Suggestion within Six
months, there a new Prohibition shall not be awarded upon an Appeal in the same
Suit. More 1234. This Modus Decimandi refers only to the Reality, viz. the
Tithes, and not to the Personalty, viz. the Offerings March. 8 ^.
. Nor can it begin at this day, but is and must be by Prescription, and is
intended to have a lawful commencement upon some Agreement at first made for
valuable Consideration with the Parson or Vicar Mich 6 Jac. C. B. Mildman and
Hut on's Case.
. And if the Modus Decimandi be to pay a Sum of money for the Tithe of a piece
of Ground, which is after turned to Houses and Gardens, the Modus continue Co.
11. 16.
. Yea, it does so actually discharge and extinguish Tithes, that they are
thereby turned into a Lay-Fee, as well as the Nine parts Hob. 42. and Benloes
169.
. Touching this Modus Decimandi there are some things that seem doubtful and
unresolved in the Law; as if the Modus be of Land given to the Parson in
satisfaction of Tithes, and the Land after happen to the evict, Q. if the
Tithes in kind do not in such case revive? Case Hooper verse. Andrews. Roll. Rep.
. Or if Lands be once discharged of Tithes by a Modus Decimandi, Q. whether the
Tithes shall revive again upon failure of the Modus? Vid. Hob. 39.
But if Land be granted to the Parson in satisfaction of Tithes, if the Parson
alien the same without the consent of the Patron and Ordinary, his Successor
shall have Juris Vtrum dict. Cas. Hooper verse. Andrews.
If a man Prescribe to pay a Modus Decimandi for the Tithe of certain Lands, if
the Land be afterward let to Farm, and the Farmer pay the Tithe in kind, yet
it shall not destroy the Prescription as to the Lessor Pasch. 13 Jac. B. R.
Case Mascall and Price. Roll. Rep.
. If a Lessee pay Tithes in kind, yet that shall not destroy a Modus in the
Lessor Pasc. 13 Jac. per Coke. ibid.
. But if the Modus Decimandi be of a thing for which no Tithe is due de Communi
jure, it is not good; nor can it stand to rise and fall according to the Rent
by Prescription: as of Houses in London Hob. 1^.
. That the Trial of Modus Decimandi (as the Common Lawyers affirm) belongs to
the Temporal, not the Spiritual Courts, and for the grounds of Prohibitions in
such case Vid. The grand dispu^a before the K. between the Judges of both Laws.
Trin. 7 Jac. Co. lib. 3.
. If the Ecclesiastical Court allow not of any such thing as a Modus Decimandi,
it is because the Canonists do hold Tithes to be due Jure Divino, and
consequently not extinguishable in the whole, nor diminishable in part by any
Custom or Prescription in opposition to the Law of God. The Temporal Courts
will admit them also to be Jure Divino, but do allow if so only Secundum quid,
viz. quoad sustentationem Cleri, but not quoad Decimam aut aliquam aliam certam
partem; and therefore do admit of a Modus as to the quantum, where there is a
sufficient maintenance for the Clergy besides; which is not only allowed, but
also confirmed by Act of Parliament St. 2 Ed. 6. c. 13.
. So that if the Lord of a Manor grants parcel of his Manor to a Parson in
Fee to be quit and discharged of Tithes, and makes an Indenture, and the Parson
with the assent of the Ordinary (without the Patron) grants to him, that he
shall be discharged of Tithes of his Manor for that parcel of Land; if
afterward the said Lord of a Manor or his Assigns be sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of his Manor, he or his Assigns shall have a
Prohibition upon that Deed; and therefore, if the Lord of the Manor has
always holden his Manor discharged of Tithes, and the Parson had time out of
mind Lands in the same Parish of the Gift of the Lord, of which the Parson is
seized at this day in Fee, in respect of which the Parson nor any of his
Predecessors ever had received any Tithes of this Manor: If the Parson now
sueth for Tithes of this Manor, the Owner of the Manor shall show that
Special matter, that the Parson and his Successors time out of mind have holden
those Lands of the Gift of one who was Lord: and the same is good Evidence to
prove the Surmize in the Prohibition 5 Jac. C. B. in the Case of Vodus
Decima^di. Coke (...) Cases 14, and 46.
. And in another Case of a Modus Decimandi it was holden by the Court, That if
a Modus Decimandi be for Hay in Black-Acre, and the party sows the same with
Corn seven years together, the same does not destroy the Modus Decimandi; but
the same shall continue when the same is made again into Hay: And when it is
sowed with Corn, the Parson shall have Tithen in kind, and when the same is
Hay, the Vicar shall have the Tithes-Hay, if he be endowed of Hay Trin. 10 Jac.
C. B. Brown's Case. God b 194.
. And where a Suit was in the Spiritual Court by a Defendant Vicar of A. for
Tithes: a Prohibition was prayed upon the Plaintiffs Plea there of a Modus
Decimandi, to pay so much yearly to the Parson of A. in discharge of his
Tithes. It was the Opinion of the Court, That this Modus between him and the
Parson will not discharge him from payment of Tithes to the Vicar, and
therefore the Court granted a Consultation Mich. 14 Jac. C. B. Winter and
Child's Case. Bulstr. 3. par. 220, 221.
. Also if a Prescription be laid to pay a Modus Decimandi to 100 Acres, or to
several things, if there be a failure of one Acre, or of one thing, it is a
failure of the whole Prescription Adjudg'd 15 Car. in Sir Arthur Robinson Case.
C^aytons Rep. (...) 135.
.

Monasteries under 200 l. per Ann. commonly called the Lesser Monasteries, of
the Order of Gistertians and Praemonstratenses, that were Dissolved and came to
the Crown by the Statute of 27 H. 8. were not discharged of the payment of
Tithes by the Statute of 31 H. 8. c. 8. ^^^es 373. 188.
by which Statute those of 200 l. per Ann. and upwards, commonly called the
Greater Abbeys, were Dissolved; and whereby it is Enacted, That the King and
his Patentees, having any Monasteries, etc. or any Manors, Lands, etc.
belonging to them, should enjoy the same discharged of the payment of Tithes in
as ample manner as the said Abbots, etc. St. 31 H. 8. cap. 8.
who were discharged of Tithes either by Bulls, Compositions, Prescription,
Order, or Unity of Possession. And albeit the Lands of the said Lesser
Monasteries are not within the benefit of the said Statute of 31 H. 8. to be
quit of Tithes; yet they ought to enjoy all such Privileges as are annexed to
the Lands, Vid. Sir Sim. D^gee's Law of Tithes. chap. 21.
for which reason they shall (in whose possession soever they are) be exempted
from the payment of Tithes by real Compositions and Prescriptions de Modo
Decimandi, though not by Prescriptions de non Decimando, Unity of Possession,
Order, or Popish Bulls, in all which Cases the Parsons and Vicars have the
advantage by the Dissoltion of all those Monasteries and Abbeys, which were
Dissolved by the Statute of 27 H. 8. For these Lesser Monasteries under 200 l.
per An. which were (as aforesaid) Dissolved by the Statute of 27 H. 8. lost
their Privilege of being discharged of the payment of Tithes. Nor did the
Privilege extend to any Lands, other than such as they had at the time of the
Council of Lateran, and only for such time as the same remained in their own
possessions, and only for such Lands as were in their own manurance 18 Eliz.
Dyer 349. Co. 2. par 44.
. It is said in Dickenson's Case against Greenhowe. That Monks are not of
Evangelical Priesthood, viz. capable of Tithes in pernancy, but mere Laymen,
and cannot prescribe in non Decimando. And that Bid says of them, That they
are mere Laici, and the Monks of the Order of Praemonstratenses were such, and
therefore they could not Prescribe to be Discharged of Tithes Hill. 1 C^r. B.
R. in Dichenson and Greenhowe's Case. Poph. 157.
.

Mortuaries, in some place called Coarse-Presents, though they are not Tithes,
yet they were given Pro Recompensatione subtractionis Decimarum Personalium,
nec non and Oblationum. Lindw. c. Statutum and infra, etc. for which reason
they are not here omitted out of this Catalogue of Tithes. Mortuaries (as Sir
Edw. Coke conceives) were not anciently due otherwise than by Custom only Co
2. par. Instit. 491.
, until they were settled by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 6. whereby it is
Enacted, That no man dying possessed of Goods under the value of 6 l. 13 s. 4
d. should pay any Mortuary, nor any to be paid, but in such places where they
used so to be, and that but one Mortuary; nor that, but in one place, and that
where the party deceased had his most constant abode, and usual dwelling and
habitation, after the rate following, viz. 3 s. 4 d. where the Deceased had in
Movables (his Debts first paid) to the value of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and under 30
l. at his death. 6 s. 8 d. if he died possessed of Movables to the value of 30
l. and under 40 l. 10 s. if to the value of 40 l. or upwards. And none to be
paid by any married Woman, Child Non-Housekeeper, Wayfaring-man, or
Non-Resident in the place where he died. Which Statute provides, That
accustomed Mortuaries should be paid as formerly, whether more or less than is
before limited Sr. 21 H. 8. c. 6.
. There were also it seems certain Mortuaries, which the Prelates anciently
paid to the Kings of this Realm Co. Inst. 2. par. 491.
.

A Mortuary is not properly and originally said to be due to an Ecclesiastical
Incumbent, Parson, or Vicar, from any but those only of his own Parish, to whom
he ministers Spiritual Instruction, and has right to the Tithes. Vid. Spelm.
Judicious Conjecture upon this point of Mortuaries, in his Treatise De
Sepultura page 35.
Lindwood in his Gloss on c. Statutum, ver. ut infra, de Consuetud. discovers
the ground or reason of that payment to be this, viz. That when through
ignorance, and sometimes through negligence, and unjust detention of Tithes and
Oblations the Parishioner was found tardy and faulty, etc. Ideo statuit
Archiepiscopus, quod Compensatione sic subtractorum, secundum melius Animal
defuncti Ecclesiae damno debuit applicari. But all this notwithstanding, we
know the prevalency of Custom to be such, that in some places of this Kingdom
they are paid to the Incumbents of other Parishes, that perform no Ministerial
duties at all to the deceased party, nor living nor dying. And the Statute of
21 H. 8. c. 6. does nothing at all control the course, but makes the Usage of
payment only to be the Law thereof.

In the Case of a Prohibition, because the Defendant sued in the Consistory
Court of Chester, before the Commissary, for a Mortuary, after the death of
every Priest withint the Archdeaconry of Chester, Hind and the Bishop of
Chesters Case. Cro. par. 3.
the best Horse or Mare, his Saddle, Bridle, Spurs, his best Gown, his best
Signet or Ring, his best Hat, his best upper Garments under his Gown, as to the
Bishop, de debito consuetudine fore supponitur, and recites the Statute of 21
H. 8. concerning Mortuaries. The Plaintiff averred, that there was no such
Custom there, and that she had paid a Mortuary to the Parson of B. and that
after a Prohibition the Defendant had prosecuted his Suit in the Ecclesiastical
Court. The Questions were, (1) Whether there was a Custom in that place, to
give such things for Mortuary? and this to be a just cause to have Prohibition;
Mortuaries being only Triable in the Ecclesiastical Court. (2) Whether
Consultation shall be granted without answering the Prohibition. The Court was
divided in Opinions, wherefore ordered the Defendant should Plead or Demurr,
and then the Court would give Judgment upon the Return before them.

N
NAg or Riding Nag; if a man keep a Nag or Horse within the Parish only for his
Saddle to ride on, no Tithes shall be paid of that Nag or Horse, for that it is
a Barren Beast, not renewing, but kept only for Labor; Trin. 15 Jac. B. R.
Lamkin Parson of Tbimblethorpe and Wild^'s Case.
and so Adjudged in the Parson of Thimblethorpe's Case, where the Case was,
That a man Leased out certain Lands to another, reserving to himself the
running of a Nag for his own Riding; and after the Lessor was sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of that Nag, and a Prohibition was granted
by Mountague, Crook, and Doderidge, for that it is a Barren Creature, and used
only for Riding, (and although it was urged at the Bar, that the Lessee paid
him Tithes for all the Herbage; but the Court took no advantage of that.) But
Houghton seemed e contra; for it seemed to him, That no Barren Cattle should be
discharged of Tithes, other than such as are used for Husbandry. But that was
not used for Husbandry, Cro. par. 2.
Ergo, etc. And in the Case of a Prohibition between Hampton and Wild: It was
Resolved, That Tithes shall be paid for Pasturage of a Gelding for his Saddle,
or if it be sold; but not for Horses used only for Labor.

In a Prohibition the Case was, M. the Defendant being Parson of D. did Libel
in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of Sylva Caedua, and of the Herbage
for depasturing of his Geldings: The Plaintiff there showed, that they were his
Hackney Geldings, which he kept for his pleasure, and for himself and his
Servants to ride upon, being his Saddle Horses: and this Plea being there
refused, for this cause he prayed a Prohibition: The whole Court was clear of
Opinion, That here was good cause for a Prohibition, for that these Horses are
not Tithable, nor any Tithe-Herbage is to be paid for them; otherwise it were,
if they had been Cart-Horses, which he had to Till his Ground, or for Cattle
bought, and Fatted to sell again for gain; for these he ought to be answerable
to the Parson for the Herbage of them, but not for the Herbage of his Geldings
by him kept and used only for his Pleasure; but it was for working Horses, for
the Cart or Plough, or for Fat Cattle, bought and and Fatted to sell again,
Trin. 9 Jac. B. R. (...) verse. May. Bulstr. par. 1.
of such Cattle allowance is to be made for their Herbage, because that a
Profit does come in by them; but otherwise it is of Saddle-Horses: the whole
Court agreed in this, and therefore in this Case, by the Rule of the Court, a
Prohibition was granted.

Nurseries of young Trees and Plants pay Tithes: If a man be seized of Land
within a Parish, which used to pay Tithes, and a Nursery be made thereof for
young Trees and Plants of diverse kinds of Fruit, as Apples, Pears, Plums etc.
Also of Ash, etc. and after sell diverse of them to Strangers out of the Parish
to be transplanted, he shall pay Tithes of that Nursery to the Parson; for
although the young Trees are parcel of the Freehold, so long as they continue
there, yet when they are transplanted, they are severed and taken from the
Freehold; and if that should be permitted without payment of Tithes, the Parson
might be defeated of the Tithes of all the Land in the Parish, by converting
them into Nurseries. Hill. 14 Car. B. R. Gibbs and Wiburne Adjudg. per Cur.
upon a Demurrer and a Consultation granted accordingly. Intrat. Mich. 14 Car.
Rot. 75. Cro. par. 3.

O
OAks beyond 20 years growth, that are become dry and rotten, and thereby not
fit for Timber, shall pay no Tithe, because they were once privileged. And if
Oaks beyond 20 years growth have been used to be Topt and Lopt within every 20
years, yet no Tithes shall be paid of these Tops and Branches cut within 20
years growth, because their stock is discharged of Tithes. Trin. 38 Eliz. B. R.
Ram and Patteson. Mich. 3 Jac. B. Brook and Rogers. and Co. 11. Sampson and
Worthington, 48. B. Adjudg. It was also Resolved in Wray and Clenche's Case,
That small Oaks under twenty years growth, apt for Timber in time to come,
shall not pay Tithes. Mores Rep. Likewise Oaks Top'd within the age of 20
years, and after the Lop left to grow beyond 20 years, no Tithes shall be paid,
for it is now become Timber. Mich. 10 Jac. B. per Coke. And Oaks decayed, that
are not Timber, but converted to Firewood, shall notwithstanding not pay
Tithes. More. Case 716.

Oblations, Obventions, and Offerings, seem to be but one and the same thing,
and are in a sense something of the nature of Tithes, being offered to God and
his Church of things Real or Personal. Offerings are reckoned amongst Personal
Tithes, and such as come by labor and industry, paid by Servants and others
once a year to the Parson or Vicar, according to the Custom of the Place; or
they are to be paid in the place where the party dwells at such four
Offering-days, as before the Statute of 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c. 13. within the space
of four years then last past had been used for the payment thereof, and in
default thereof. Cro. 3. Abridg. Case 3159. In London Offerings are a Groat a
House. They are by the Law now in force to be paid as formerly they have been.
Vid. Stat. 32 H. 8. 7. 27 H. 8. 20. 2 and 3. Ed. 6. 13. and Co. 11. 16. They
properly belong to the Parson or Vicar of that Church, where they are made. Of
these some were free and voluntary, others by Custom certain and obligatory.
They were anciently due to the Parson of the Parish, that officiated at the
Mother Church or Chapels that had Parochial Rights; but if they were paid to
other Chapels that had not any Parochial Rights, the Chaplains thereof were
accountable for the same to the Parson of the Mother Church. Lindw. c. de
Oblation. and cap. quia quidam. Such Offerings as at this day are due to the
Parson or Vicar at Sacraments, Marriages, Burials, or Churching of Women are
only such as were confirmed by the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. 13. and payable by the
Laws and Customs of this Realm before the making of the said Statute, and are
Recoverable only in the Ecclesiastical Court.

Orchard, the Soil whereof is sowed with any Grain, the Parson may claim the
Tithe thereof, as well as of the Fruit of the Trees, because they are of
several kinds, and of distinct natures. Coke Magn. Chart. 652.

P
PArk, if converted into Tillage, shall pay Tithe in kind, for a Park is but a
Liberty; a discharge therefore of the Tithes of a Park is not a discharge of
the Tithes of the very Soil, which may be converted into Tillage Sharp verse.
Sharp. Nor. Rep.
. Or if there be a Modus Decimandi of the Park, and the Park be disparked, and
the Land converted into Tillage or Hop-ground, or the like; in this case though
Tithes in kind are not payable, yet the Modus shall remain. The Case is the
same, if the Park be disparked by having all the Pales fallen down, which in
Law is a disparking of the Park. Sed Q. Vid. Pasc. 19 Jac. C. B. Poole and
Reynold's Case.
. For to pay a Buck or a Do, or the Shoulder of a Deer, when one is killed,
may be a good Modus Decimandi for the Tithe of a Park. A Vicar having two
shillings yearly, and the Shoulder of every third Deer killed in a Park, the
Park being disparked, the Vicar sued for Tithes in kind. The Court was divided
in Opinion: Nicholls and Hobart Justices, That notwithstanding the Disparking
the Modus did remain: Winch and Warburton Justices, That by the Disparking the
Prescription as to the Modus Decimand was determined, and that the Tithes
should be paid in kind. Quaere Cooper and Andrew's Case.
. Where a Park is disparked, if the Park paid ten shillings, or any other Sum
for all Tithes, and now disparked and sown with Corn, here only the ten
shillings shall be paid; otherwise, if the Prescription be for the Deer and
Herbage of the Park, and not for all the Park; for in such case Tithes in kind
shall be paid, if it be disparked and sown with Corn. A Modus to pay so much
money for the Tithe of a Park is good, though the Park be Disparked Pasch. 13
Jac. B. R. Mas^hal and Priceper Co. Roll. Rep.
. If one Shoulder of every Deer killed be Prescribed to be paid for all Tithes,
and it be after Disparked, here the Tithe in kind shall be paid; or if the
Prescription be to pay Ten shillings and a Shoulder of every Deer, and it be
Disparked, here it shall pay Tithe in kind, and not the Ten shillings only
More. Case 1277, and Case 1186.
. Upon a Surmize of a Modus Decimandi to pay a Buck or a Do for all Tithes of
a Park, a Prohibition, was prayed, and granted Hill. 6 Jac. C. B. The Vicar of
Clares Case.
. If a Modus Decimandi be to pay Two things, as Two shillings for a Park, and a
Shoulder of every Buck killed in the Park, and all the Deer die, or are killed
up, yet the Prescription holds good for the Two shillings Hob. 43.
. And although Tithes are to be paid for a Park, yet Deer, as being Ferae
naturae, are not Tithable, saving where the Custom is otherwise Roll. 1. 635.
c. 4. 6, 7. Noy 108. Sr. 2 Ed. 6. c. 13.
. In Thursbie's Case, where Suit was for Tithe-Corn growing in a Park lately
Disparked, the Defendant pleading a Custom to pay Venison in lieu of all
Tithes, and Proof that a Buck was paid yearly, but whether out of this Park or
not was a Non constat: The Jury found, That if it was paid out of any Park, and
accepted and allowed, this was better to uphold the Custom, than if
particularly tied to pay a Deer out of this Park; for now, if the Park be
disparked, yet this payment of the Deer may be performed: Otherwise, it is, if
the Custom had been a Deer out of this Park only, for then by the destroying
of that, the Custom is gone also. It was holden in this Case by the Judges,
That although the Deer had been often, and for the most part paid out of this
Park, yet this does not alter the Custom, if it may be paid out of any Park;
and if the Custom were to pay a Shoulder of Venison generally, it may come out
of any Park 13 Car. at York Assize Tour^btes Cas. Clayt. Rep. 91.
.

Partridges made Tame, do pay not a Predial, but a Personal Tithe.

Pasture yields a Predial Tithe, which is generally paid by the Owner thereof,
and so is the Custom; yet Pasture-grounds sed with Cattle that yield profit to
the Church, have their Tithe satisfied in the Fruit of the Beasts. And if they
belong to a Stranger who is not of the Parish, if he fell the Pasturage, he is
answerable for the Tenth penny; but if he frankly gives it, and the Parishioner
freely receives it, the Parishioner is answerable for the Estimation, if the
said Grounds be fed with Beasts yielding increase; otherwise no Profit at all
to the Church, if sed only with Horses, Oxen, and other Barren Beasts. And as
touching the Pasture of the Horses of Guests, the Tithe is to be paid by the
Innkeeper for the same Tr. 16 Car. B. R. Richardson and Caleb's Case. Poph. 143.
. But if the said Horses be put into such Pasture, as is after a Crop of Hay of
the same ground, no Tithe is payable by the Innkeeper for the same Ibid.
. Nor is the Pasture of such Horses Tithable as the Parishioner uses for his
own Riding, nor the Pasture of such Horses as are used about Husbandry in the
Parish; but where Horses are kept or bred in Pasture that they may be sold, in
that case Tithe shall be paid for the Pasture thereof Hill. 15 Jac. B. R. Hide's
Case. and Bulstr. 1. 171.
. But if Tithe be demanded for the Pasture of Riding Nags for the Saddle, for
Labor and Pleasure both, but not for Profit properly, a Prohibition will lie
Tr. 9 Jac. B. R. Pothill and May's Cas. Adjudg acc. Bulstr. ibid.
. Nor is the Pasture of Oxen used for Husbandry Tithable, that is, being used
for Husbandry in the same Parish; it may be otherwise, if they be used for
other purposes, or for Husbandry out of the Parish. Mich. 8 Jac. C. B. in
Baxter's Case. And as touching Tithe of the Pasture of Guest-Horses by an
Innkeeper, as has been formerly mentioned; the Case was, A. Parson of B.
Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against C. an Innkeeper, because that the
said C. took all the benefit of his Pasture, by putting Guest-Horses into the
same: whereupon C. prayed a Prohibition, but it was denied by the Court; for
that it is Tithable in this case. But it was said, That if C. had taken a Crop
of Hay, whereof he paid Tithe, and afterward had put in his Guest-Horses into
the After-pasture of that Ground where such Hay was made; in that case it had
not been Tithable, because the Parson had Tithe of the Land before. Trin. 16
Car. B. R. Richardson and Cobbell's Case. Poph. 142. Also if a man let out his
Pasture, reserving the Pasture of a Horse for himself to ride about his
Husbandry-affairs, Tithe shall not be paid for the Pasture of this Horse; but
if a man keep and breed Horses in his Pasture to sell them, there Tithe shall
be paid for the Pasture of such Horses. Trin. 15 Jac. B. R. Larking and Wild's
Case. Poph. 126. Vid. Trin. 9 Jac. B. R. Pothill and May's Case. Bulstr. par.
1. 171. Vid. Agistment. Vid. Grass.

Pease gathered Green, to eat in the Parishioners Family, no Tithe shall be
paid thereof, and that per legem terrae: But otherwise it is in case they be
gathered to sell, or to feed Swine therewith, in which Tithe shall be paid
thereof. Pasch. 12 Jac. B. per Cur.

Pelts or Fells of Sheep dying of the Rot are not Tithable without a special
Prescription for it: The Case was, A. Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for
the Tithes of Pelts and Fells of Sheep, which Sheep died of the Rot; a
Prohibition was prayed, and granted, to stay proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Court, because such Pelts are not Tithable, unless there be a Special Custom
for it. Trin. 3. Jac. B. R. Ashton and Willer's Case.

Pheasants that are Tame, pay a Personal, not a Predial Tithe. If a man has
Pheasants, and keep them in an enclosed Wood, and clip their wings, and they
hatch Eggs, and breed up young Pheasants, no Tithes shall be paid of these Eggs
or young Pheasants, for that they are not reclaimed, but continue to be Ferae
naturae, and would go out of the enclosure, if their Wings were not clipped; and
in this case Prohibition has been granted between Winbrook and Evans, Mich. 11
Car. B. R. It was Surmized, That no Tithes are paid of them in a great Circuit
called the Chiltern in the same County, viz. of Bucks, and so Prescribe in non
Decimando; but the Court granted the Prohibition, for that they are Ferae
naturae.

Pigeons are Tithable, Mores Abr. 1270. But if a man keep a Family, and has
Pidgeon-holes about his House, and he keep some Pigeons, and he kill and spend
in his House the young Pigeons that are bred there, he shall not pay any
Tithes for them: In this Case between Vincent and Tutt, Hill. 13 Car. B. a
Prohibition was granted, and upon the Parsons Plea, that the Parishioner sold
them, a Consultation. For Tithes of Pigeons no Prohibition lies, as was
Resolved in Jones and Gastrell's Case. Hill. 15 Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep. For the
Court there said, That Tithes ought to be paid of Pigeons, and for Conies, per
Doderidge Justice, to which the Court agreed. In the Case of a Prohibition for
suing for Tithe- Pigeons, the Defendant in the Ecclesiastical Court pleaded
payment, they refuse the validity of that Plea without Proof by two Witnesses:
the Court said, it would be a great inconvenience to bring two Witnesses to
prove payment of every sort of Tithes, wherefore a Prohibition was granted.
Malary and Mariots Case. Cro. par. 1. And in another Case a Prohibition was
prayed, where the Parson sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithe of
Pigeons, and awarded to stand, because the Court there would not allow the
proof without two Witnesses. More's Abr. Case 1208. Probably the same Case with
the former. Vid. Doves.

Pigs, if there be but Nine, as also Calves, if there be but six, and the like,
under the number of Ten in one year, the Parson can have no Tithe thereof in
kind that year, without a Special Custom for it; but must have his Tithe pro
rata either in money the same year, if there be any Custom for it, or in kind
the next year, reckoning both years together. Mich. 7 Jac. C. B. Pigs are
accounted a Predial Mixed Tithes. Mich. 8 Jac. C. B.

Pits of Stone, Lime, Gravel, Marble, Marle, Chalk, Cole, and the like, are not
Tithable; for the Land must not pay a double Tithe. Regist. 51. F. N. B. 53. 9.
Broo. Dismes 18.

Plants or young Plants transplanted, are in some cases Tithable; for the Case
was, A man had a Nursery of young Plants in his ground, and used to transplant
them, and to give or sell them to others, who planted them de novo in their
ground out of the Parish; the Parson of the Parish, where the Land lay in which
they were first planted, Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Tithes of
the value of the said Plants transplanted, and a Prohibition was granted, and
Declaration thereon given, and a Plea given in, and Replication, and thereon
Demurrer; and it was argued by Maynard for the Defendant, and Rolls for the
Plaintiff: The only point was, Whether Tithes should be paid in that case; it
was Resolved per totam Curiam, that it ought to be paid; and thereupon a
Consultation was granted Hill. 14 Car. B. R. Gibs verse. Wyborne Jones Rep.
. The Case had been otherwise Resolved, if the said Plants so transplanted from
the said Nursery had been replanted in the same Parish Ibid.
.

Prescription, which refers to a certain person, House, Land, or other thing,
as Custom does to a County, City, Town, Hundred, etc. may be considered under
two respects, either de Modo Decimandi, or de non Decimando: There is also in
some Counties a Decimando res non Decimabiles, a Tithing of things in their own
nature not Tithable, as the Tithing of Tin and Seafish in Cornwall and Devon,
Lead in Derbyshire, etc. but this is by Custom, not by Prescription, which
though in respect of Place is regularly of a more extensive latitude than
properly Custom is, yet in respect of Persons and Things is regularly under
more Restrictive limitations than the other; but as to their Origination, they
both ought to be continually-constant without interruption; and as to their
Antiquity, both of them ought to be of a more Ancient date, than any Memory of
man can contradict; and such being once duly acquired, there are not many
interruptions or disturbances that will null or frustrate the same Co. par. 1.
Inst. 14. 2. par. 653, 654.
. A Prescription goes to one man, and a Custom to many. Hill. 6. Jac. rot.
2613. Rolls verse. Mason, Brownl. Rep. par. 1. Prescription is Personal, and
always made in the name of a certain person, or his Ancestors, or those whose
Estates, etc. But a Custom is Local, and alleged in no person, but that,
within the Manor there is such a Custom. Co. 4. Foiston and Cratchwood's
Case. The payment of a Sum of money or other thing in lieu and recompense of
Tithe for sixty years or thereabouts, is held a reasonable time to make a
Prescription Co. super Littl. 14. and Crompt. Jur. 77. Dyer 7, 9.
. It was Adjudged in Grisman and Jews Case, That a Prescription to pay Tithes
of one thing in recompense of Tithes of another thing, is not good. Adjudged
also, that Tithes shall be paid of Agistment of Cattle, against the Opinion of
Fitz. 53. Cro. par. 1. This Prescription is Real, that is, it respects not the
New or never before Tithed Fruits, but the Tithable grounds that produce them;
thence it is, that an alteration of Grain or Plants in the same Ground alters
not a Prescription, but he that Prescribes in the one, shall Prescribe in the
other also. Yet a Prescription extends to no more than is in possession: And
therefore if the Parson of A. Prescribes to the Tithes of the Parish of B. and
there happen to be Decimae Novalium, that is, Tithes arising of such Grounds as
were never Manured, nor yielded before any profit to the Church, the Parson of
B. and not the Parson of A. shall have them; nor will Prescription lie against
a Composition between the Parson and the Vicar More. Case 1881.
; nor has Prescription any place, where the Interessed (in his right) can make
no demand, the matter ceasing, whereupon it should work: So of Wood never cut,
the Tithe could never be demanded. Regularly a Prescription to pay no Tithe,
nor any thing in lieu thereof, is not good, nor will it discharge, though
nothing can be proved to have been paid within the Memory of man Dr. and St.
171. 167. Broo. Prescrip. 92. Co. 244.
. Yet a Discharge of Land from Tithes may be showed another way, which will
amount to the payment of no Tithe: so that although a mere Layman cannot
Prescribe in non Decimando Co. 2. par. Bish. of Winchest. Case. and in 8 Ed. 4.
14. by Choke.
; yet he may Prescribe in modo Decimandi, to pay a Composition to the Parson in
lieu of all his Tithes; and such Composition shall bind the Parson, and such a
Prescription shall be good Adjudg. Mich.
. But as to persons Ecclesiastical, such may Prescribe not only in modo
Decimandi, but also in non Decimando, and so may their Tenants, whence it is,
that a Parson of one Parish having part of his Glebe in another, may Prescribe
in non Decimando for the same Roll. 1. 653. H. 3.
. So that a Prescription even de non Decimando as for Ecclesiastical persons,
their Farmers and Tenants may be good More. Case 498, and 693.
. In Nash and Molin's Case it was agreed by the Court, That a Spiritual man may
Prescribe in Non Decimando. Cro. par. 1. And as for any other person a
Prescription de modo Decimandi, that is, to pay Money or other things in lieu
of Tithes in kind, is good; and if he can prove it Time out of mind, this will
discharge him Co. 1. 44, 46.
. Thus a Prescription to pay 4 d. or any other Sum for all his Tithe whatever,
or for all his Tithe-Hay, or for all his Tithe-Corn in such a Farm, or in such
a Close, or for all his Fruit in such an Orchard, is good. But a Prescription
of paying no Tithe-Corn, because he pays Tithe-Hay; or of paying no Tithe of
his Cattle, because he pays Tithe-Corn, is no good Prescription H. l 8 Jac. ^.
R. Smith's Case.
. Or of not paying of Tithes in one place, because he pays in another; or of
not paying Tithe-Lamb, because he pays Tithe-Wool, vel e contra; or of not
paying Tithe for other Cattle, because he pays 12 d. for a Cow: these and the
like are no good Prescriptions 7 Jac. C. P. in Fleewood's Case.
. Yet a Prescription to pay a less part than a Tenth, may be good and binding.
Also a Prescription to pay a penny, called Hearth-peny, in satisfaction of Tithe
for all Combustible Wood, may be good More. Case 1280.
. Likewise, a Prescription by the Lord of a Manor, to pay six pound in
satisfaction of all the Tithe-Corn within the Manor, and to have the Tenth
Sheaf or Cock in recompense of his payment, is good More. Case 685.
. But if the Prescription be to be discharged of Tithe-Hay of such a ground, or
Tithe-Corn of such a ground, and the Owner change the nature of the Ground, as
Pasture into Tillage, or Tillage into Pasture, the Prescription is gone Hill. 7
Jac. B. R. Shipton's Case. Adj.
. Yet a Prescription is not destroyed by an Alteration of payment, as if
instead of the money to be paid, another sum, or Tithes in kind, have been paid
for 20 years past Co. upon Littl. 14. Dyer 7.
. But a Prescription to have Tithes of Houses according to the Rent, is not
good; for no Tithes are to be paid for Houses in any City, save in London only
Hob. 11.
. Regularly Prescription referrs to one in private, as Custom does to many in
public; and where a Prescription de modo Decimandi is denied, there a
Prohibition will lie to try it at the Common Law: otherwise, if the
Prescription or Custom be agreed Hob. 247.
. If a Prescription by a Parishioner be to pay the Tenth part of Corn as a
Modus Decimandi for the Hay also that grows on the Headlands, it is not good;
but such Prescription for the Corn and After-Rakings is good, with an averment,
That they are sparsae minus voluntary Mich. 2 Jac. B. R. Rot. 346. Case Parry
verse. Chaunsey. Noy. Rep.
. If there be a Prescription of a Modus Decimandi for an Orchard or Garden, and
it afterward ceases to be such, the Modus shall cease also, and Tithe shall be
paid in kind; but if it afterward be restored to a Garden or Orchard, by being
replenished with Herbs or Fruit Trees, it shall pay the Modus as formerly Hill.
12 Jac. B. R. C. Hooper verse. Andrews Roll. Rep.
. If the Modus be to pay two shillings and the Shoulder of three Deer for a
Park, the Modus remains, though the Park be disparked; it is otherwise, in case
the Modus be only to pay Venison Ibid.
. Or if the Prescription be to pay a certain Sum of money for all the Tithes of
a Park, the Modus shall continue, though the Park be afterward disparked P. 13
Jac. B. R. C. Maschal and Price. Roll. Rep.
. A Prescription of a Modus Decimandi generally for a Park is not good, if it
be Disparked; but it shall be particularly for all Acres contained in the Park
Co. vouched in one Shibdens case Noy. Rep. Sharp verse. Sharp.
. Prescription being a Temporal thing, is Triable only in the Temporal Courts;
and therefore in the Case of Two Parsons of Two several Parishes, where one of
them claimed Tithe within the Parish of the other, and said, That all his
Predecessors, Parsons of such a Church, viz. of D. had used to have the Tithe
of such Lands within the Parish of S. and pleaded the same in the Spiritual
Court. The Court was of Opinion, That in this Case a Prohibition did lie, for
he claims only a portion of Tithes, and that by Prescription, and not merely as
Parson, or by reason of the Parsonage, but by a Collateral cause, scil.
Prescription, which is a Temporal cause and thing Vid. 35 H. 6. Bro. Preser. 3.
Mich. 29 Eliz. B. R. God b 45.
. And in another Case it has been Adjudged, That if a Prescription be laid to
pay a Modus Decimandi to 100 Acres, or to several things, if there be a failure
of one Acre, or of one thing, it is a failure of the whole Prescription 15 Car.
Sr. A th. Robinson's Case. vid. Clayr. Rep. 135.
. But where it has been Prescribed to pay in one part of the Land, the Third
part of the Tenth; and in another part, the Moity of the Tenth for all manner
of Tithes, it has been held a good Prescription, Hill. 29 Eliz. B. R. Books
Case. Godb. 120.
. These Prescriptions de modo Decimandi are equally incident as well to
Lay-persons, as to persons Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; but as to Prescriptions
de non Decimando, none but Spiritual persons are capable of being discharged of
Tithes in that kind, as was Resolved in the Bishop of Winchester's Case Co. 2.
par. Bish. of Winchesters Case.
. Yet a whole Country or County may Prescribe de non Decimando, though this or
that particular mere Layman cannot Case ibid. and Dr. and Stu. 167.
; nor indeed can the other, unless there be sufficient Maintenance for the
Clergy besides Dr. and St. ibid.
. The Prescriptions de modo Decimandi are confirmed by Act of Parliament St. 2
Ed. 6. c. 13.
; and if any Layman will Prescribe de non Decimando, to be absolutely
discharged from the payment of Tithes, without paying any thing else in lieu
thereof, he must Found it in some Religious or Ecclesiastical person, and
derive his Title to it by Act of Parliament Seld. Hist. Decim. 409. Roll. 1.
653. H.
; and it is not sufficient to say, That they who Prescribe de non Decimando,
are Churchwardens who have Land belonging to their Church, for they are neither
Religious nor Spiritual persons Roll. ibid.
: But they who are such indeed, may so Prescribe not only for themselves, but
also for their Tenants and Farmers Roll. ibid. H. 4. and Co. 2. 45. a.
, as was formerly said. So also may the Kings Patentees of those Abbey-Lands
that came to the Crown by the Statute of 31 H. 8. Prescribe de non Decimando,
by force of the said Statute, if so be it may be proved, That they have beyond
the Memory of man so enjoyed the Lands discharged from the payment of Tithes:
But for a Parishioner to Prescribe to Non-payment of Tithes, because he has
Time out of mind repaired the Church, is no good Prescription: otherwise, in
case he had repaired the Chancel, and in consideration thereof had been quit of
Tithes; the Reason is, because the Parson not being obliged to repair the
Church, has no recompense Roll. 1. 649. d. 8, 9. vid. Law of Tithes, c. 16.
. And in Sherwood and Winchcombs Case it was Resolved, That a man cannot
Prescribe to have Tithes as parcel of a Manor, for that they are Spiritual;
but a Prescription to have Decimam partem granorum, is good. Cro. par. 1. In a
Case for a Prohibition; A. Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of
rough Hay growing in Marshes and Fenny-grounds in M. The Plaintiff Surmized,
That there was 2000 Acres of Fenny-Lands within the Parish, and 600 Acres of
Meadow, and that the Parishioners paid Tithes of Hay and Grain, growing upon
the Meadow and Arable Land, and had paid a certain Rate for every Cow, and
because they had not sufficient Grass to keep their Cattle in Winter, they used
to gather this Hay, called Fenny-Fodder, for the subsistence of their Beasts
for the better increase of their Husbandry; and for this cause had been always
freed from the payment of the Tithes thereof. It was Resolved, That the Surmize
was not sufficient for a Prohibition; for one may not Prescribe in non
Decimando, and their alleging, That they bestowed it on their Cattle, is not a
cause of Discharge: A Consultation was awarded. Webb and Sir Hen. Warners Case.
Cro. par. 1. Also in Monday and Levice's Case in a Prohibition, it was
Adjudged, That it was not a good Prescription that Inhabitants have used to pay
Calves and Lambs, and a penny for every Milch-Cow, in satisfaction of all Tithes
of Lambs, Calves, Milch-kine, and all Barren and other Beasts, and Agistments.
More's Rep. And where a Parson sued for Tithes of Fodder, and the Parishioners
Prescribed in Non Decimando, because the Fodder was for their Cattle which
manured their Land: It was held no good Prescription; but it was Agreed, Tithes
should not be paid for their Agistments, nor for Hedge-wood to enclose the
Corn, nor for Fuel. More, ibid. Case 892. In the Case between Pigott and
Hearne, the Lord of the Manor of B. in the Parish of D. did Prescribe, That he
and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estates, etc. had used from time to
time, whereof, etc. to pay to the Parson of D. the now Plantiff, and his
Predecessors 6 l. per Ann. for all manner of Tithes growing within the said
Parish; and that by reason thereof, he and all those whose Estates, etc. Lords
of the said Manor, had used time whereof, etc. to have Decimam Garbam and
decimum Cumulum Garbarum of all his Tenements within the said Manor. It was in
this Case Resolved, (1) That it was a good Prescription, and that a Modus
Decimandi for the Lord by himself, and all the Tenants of his Manor, for
barring the Parson to demand Tithes in kind, is a good Prescription, because it
might have a lawful Commencement. (2) It was Resolved, That it was a good
Prescription to have Decimam garbam and decimum Cumulum garbarum vel granorum,
or the Tenth shock; for he has it as a Profit Appender, and not as Tithes. (3)
Resolved in this Case, That if the Queen be Lady of the Manor, she may
Prescribe to have Tithes, for that she is capable of them, she being Persona
Mixta and Capax Spiritualis Jurisdictionis. More's Rep. And in Green and
Handlyes Case it was Resolved, (1) That it is a good Custom to pay the
Tithe-Wool at Lammassday, though it be due upon the clipping. (2) That for the
Pasturage of young Barren Cattle preserved for the Plough and Pail, no Tithe
shall be paid. (3) That a Prescription to pay a penny called a Hearth-peny, in
satisfaction of the Tithe of all Combustible Wood, is a good Prescription.
More. Case 1213.

Privilege is derived from the Supreme Authority upon good Consideration, and
referrs sometimes to Persons, sometimes to Places, and is an exemption from
Tithes derived from such Supreme Authority. None are to pay Tithes for Lands
privileged or lawfully discharged from the payment thereof. Stat. 2 Ed. 6. c.
13. yet such Privileges as are merely Personal, do not exempt Lands from the
payment of Tithes, longer than they are in the hands or occupation of
Privileged persons.

Q
QVarries of Stone are not Tithable. Adjudged Mich. 19 Eliz. B. R. and Pasch.
34 Eliz. C. B. Liff and Watts Case. Cro. par. 1. and More's Rep. Nor do the
Quarries of Slate, Cole, or the like pay any Tithe. More. Case 1275. Nor
Quarries of Lime, Gravel, Sand, or Clay, for these are parcel of the
Inheritance. Regist. 55. F. N. B. 53. Broo. Dismes 18. Mich. 15 Car. B. R.
Skinner 's Case. No Tithes shall be paid of Quarries, for they are parcel of
the Freehold. Hill. 11 Jac. B. R. per Curiam.

R
RAkings of the Stubble of Corn or Grain are not Tithable, for they are to be
left for the Poor and Orphans, and the Law will not give to the Parson or Vicar
Tithe of that which is appointed for Alms. Mich. 6 Jac. C. B. Smith's Case. and
Pasch. 7 Jac. C. B. Adjudg. Cro. 1. 660. So that whereas it is said, that the
Rakings of the Stubble of Corn is not Tithable, where the Corn it self was
Tithed. More. Case 433. It may not be understood as if the Tithing the Corn it
self were the Reason why the Rakings are not Tithable, but because they are by
the Law of Moses Lev. 23. 22.
. due to the Poor, and therefore not to be Tithed; understand this also of
Ordinary Rakings not voluntarily scattered, for of such only it is that no
Tithes shall be paid, as not due by the Levitical Law, and for that they are
but the scattering of the Grain whereof he had paid Tithes before. Pasch. 7
Jac. B. per Curiam. Hill. 8 Car. B. R. Saunders and Paramour, per Cur. Trin. 3
Jac. B. R. Pasch. 14 Jac. B. R. Pit and Harris, Prohibition granted; otherwise
it is, in case the Rakings were voluntarily and fraudulently scattered. Hill.
14 Jac. B. R. Peck and Harris per Cur. Adjudged. Mich. 3 Jac. B. R. per Popham.
Pasch. 7 Jac. per Cur. Mich. 14 Jac. B. R. Joyse and Parker. And where there is
a Prohibition of Tithes of Rakings, the Suggestion ought to be, That they were
Minus voluntary sparsae, otherwise it is not good; for it is not sufficient to
say, That they were Lapsae and dissipatae in Collectione. Dict. Cas. Peck and
Harris. Cro p. 1.
. And it was Resolved in Johnson and Awbrey's Case, That Tithes are not to be
paid for After-pasture of Land, nor for Rakings of Corn. Also in Green and
Hunn's Case, a Prohibition was for suing for the Tithes of Rakings of Barley, a
Prescription to make the Barley into Cocks being alleged, and to pay the Tenth
Cock in satisfaction of all Tithes of Barley, and Adjudged a good Prescription.
Notwithstanding in the Case between Bird and Adams, in a Prohibition to stay a
Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of the Rakings of Lands, after the
Crop of Corn was taken away: It was held, That the Prohibition would not lie,
but that Tithes should be paid of Rakings. More's Rep. But vid. 42 Eliz. B. R.
in Green and Hale's Case, it was Adjudged, That by the Custom of the Realm
Tithes should not be paid of Rakings. Also in Green and Handlye's Case it was
Resolved, That Tithes should not be paid of the Rakings of Corn, unless it be a
Covinous Raking to deceive the Parson. More. Case 1213.

Rate-Tithe is that which is paid according to the Custom of the place, for
the Feeding of Sheep and all other Cattle (except Laboring Oxen and young
breed of Cattle) for the Pasture and Increase thereof, whether they fed on the
Common or elsewhere.

Roots of Coppice-Woods grubbed up, shall not pay Tithe, unless it be by
Custom, as has been Adjudged in Skinner's Case. Mich. 15 Car. B. R. and
Marsh. 58. In which Case it was also Resolved, That if a man cut a
Coppice-wood, and thereof pays the Tithe, and after before any new Sprouts
grow, he grubbs up the Roots and Stubbs of the Wood, he shall not pay Tithes
thereof, for they are parcel of the Freehold dict. Cas. Bedford and Dr.
Skinner. per Cur.
.

S
SAffron pays a Predial Tithe, and is inter Minutas Decimas, as appears by
Bedingfield and Feaks Case, Pasch. 38 Eliz. B. R. Where the Farmer of a
Parsonage sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of Saffron against the
Vicar: the Vicar pleaded, That he and his Predecessors Time out of mind had had
the Tithe of all Saffron growing within the Parish. The Plaintiff pleaded, That
the Land where the Saffron was growing this year, had been for 40 years before
sowed with Corn; and because they in the Ecclesiastical Court would not allow
the Plea, a Prohibition was prayed; because the Right of the Tithe did come in
debate. It was Adjudged, That a Consultation shall be awarded. Yet Mich. 10
Jac. B. R. per Curiam, they are said to be Great Tithes. Vid. Bedingfield and
Feaks Case. Cro par. 1. Whence it may be observed, That by the Ecclesiastical
Law, the Vicar shall have Tithe of Saffron of Land newly sowed with Saffron,
albeit the Parson before had Tithe of the same Land being sowed with Corn Mich.
31 Eliz. B. R. Bedingfield and Feaks Case. Goldesbr. 149, 150. and More. Rep.
Case 1209.
.

Salt: By Custom Tithe shall be paid of White Salt. Trin. 16 Jac. B. R. Case
Jones and Gower, Admit. But Prohibition granted on a Modus.

Sheep, if they continue in the Parish all the year, the Tithe thereof in kind
may be claimed by Custom; but if they be sold before Shearing-time, and a
halfpeny be then claimed to be paid for every Sheep so sold, it is held a very
unreasonable Custom Pasch. 17 Car. C. B. Weeden and Harding's C. Vid. Mich. 2
Car. B. R. Poph. Rep. 197. acc. Marsh. 79.
. If Sheep stray out of one Parish into another, and there yean, no Tithe is
payable for this to the Parson of that place; but if they go there for thirty
days or more, for this a Rate-Tithe is payable to that place; for, for Sheep
removed from one Parish to another, each Parson must have Tithe pro rata: But
under thirty days no Rate-Tithe is to be paid. Likewise Sheep Feeding all the
year in one Parish, and Couching in another, the Tithe shall be equally divided
betwixt the Parsons. So likewise if Sheep go a while in one, and another while
in another Parish, a Rate-Tithe is payable, as aforesaid, to both. But if Sheep
are brought only by Night to dung the Land, no Tithe there is to be paid,
unless they Feed there half their time. And if Sheep be brought from one place
to be shorn in another, where they were not before, the Tithe is payable where
the shearing is, unless it be paid to the Parson of the place from whence they
came. Trin. 3 Car. B. R. in a Prohibition inter Ashton and Willer. And where
several men's Sheep feed in one Flock under one Sphepheard, they shall be
severally Tithed by their respective Owners. Lindw. c. Quoniam propter, verb.
Lanae. A Prohibition was prayed, because the Parson Libelled in the Spiritual
Court for the Tenth part of a Bargain of Sheep, which had depastured in the
Parish from Michaelmass to Lady Day: the party Surmized, That he would pay the
Tenth part of the Wool of them, according to the Custom of the Parish: The
Court would not grant a Prohibition, for that, by this way, the Parson might be
defrauded of all, and the Sheep being now gone to another Parish, he cannot
have any Wool at this time, because it was not the time of Shearing Mich. 2
Car. B. R. Hob. 197.
.

Spoliation or the Action thereof, may be commenced in the Ecclesiastical
Court, where one Parson takes away the Tithes or Profits belonging to the
Church of another Parson, if the Tithes and Profits belonging to the Church of
that other Parish, do not amount to the Fourth part of the value of the Church,
in which case the one Parson shall have a Spoliation against the other in the
Ecclesiastical Court, although they claim by several Patrons; and if they claim
both by one Patron, there the one shall have a Spoliation against the other,
although the Profits do amount to above a Fourth part, as to a Third part, or
to the Moity of the Church, because the Patronage does not come in debate. But
if the Profits do amount to above the Fourth part of the Church, and they claim
by several Patrons, that if one Parson sueth a Spoliation in the Ecclesiastical
Court against the other, the party grieved shall have an Indicavit, which is in
the nature of a Prohibition, unto the Ecclesiastical Court, because the Right
of the Patron does come into debate: But where the Right of Tithes does only
come into Debate, and not the Patronage, there the Jurisdiction does belong
unto the Ecclesiastical Court. Co. Select Cases, in the Case de Modo Decimandi
38, 39, 40, 46. 38 H. 6. 20. by Fortescue, 26 H. 8. 3. acc. And if there be a
Contention De jure Decimarum, Originem habens de jure Patronatus, tunc spectat
ad Legem Civilem, by the Opinion of all the Justices. Mich. 29 El. B. R. in
Bushie the Vicar of Paucas Case. Godbolt. 63.

Sylva Caedua does pay a Real and Predial Tithe; by Sylva Caedua is to be
understood, all such Trees of what kind soever, as may be cut, and being cut do
grow again from the Stock or Root. Lindw. c. Quanquam ex Solventibus, lib. 5.
Or all such Wood as may be cut, and (after Lopping, Topping, or cutting from
the Boughs, Branches, 50 Ed. 3. 10. b6 Belknap.
. Stock, or Root) do grow again; by which are excepted Great Trees and
Timber Trees. So that of Sylva Caedua and Underwoods Tithes are payable; but
not of Great Trees, or of twenty years growth, and that by the Statute of 45
Ed. 3. cap. 3. Whereby a Prohibition will lie, Vid. Co. 2. par. Inst. 643, 644.
Seldens Hist. Decim. 236. Roll. 1. 1. 637, 638, 639.
in case, etc. which Statute exempteth Wood of twenty years growth and upwards
from the payment of Tithes, as Prescription does such Wood as has not been
Felled in the Memory of man; yet Wood of the age aforesaid, not in use nor apt
for Timber, is (under permission of the said Statute) Tithable Body and Bough,
Felled or Lopped: And such Woods as are not Sylva Caedua nor Tithable, go under
the notion of Gross Woods, or Great Wood, viz. such as are usually employed for
the building of Houses, Mills, etc. as has been Resolved Co. 2. par. Inst. 643.
, of which sort are Oak, Ash, Elm, Beech, Horn bean, and Asp Plow. 470. a. b.
: Yet if these be cut under 21 years growth, they are accuonted Sylva Caedua,
and ought to pay Tithes. But the Loppings of great Oaks, Ashes, etc. though the
Lops be under twenty years growth, shall not pay Tithes, being priviledg'd by
the Bodies Co. ubi supra.
; nor are the Shoots and Underwood growing from the Roots and Stocks of such
Timber Trees Tithable, or from the Roots and Stocks of Trees above the growth
of 20 years, which have been felled More. 762. Plow. 470. b. Roll. 1. 640. q. 1.
3, 4. Co. 11. 49. a.
. Vid. Trees, Wood, Underwoods, and Timber.

T
TAres, or Green Tares, cut before they are Ripe, or mowed when they are green,
for the Feeding of Cattle, when Suit has been commenced in the Ecclesiastical
Court for Tithes thereof, a Prohibition has been granted upon a Suggestion
grounded upon special Customs, that no Tithes ought to be paid for the same.
Fetches, Tares, and other course Grain, eaten only by the Cattle which do the
Husbandry-work in the place, pay no Tithe, except there be a Special Custom
for it. Lane 16. Notwithstanding, whether they are Tithable or not, if cut for
Horses is a Question; for where upon a Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court for
Tithes of Green Tares cut for seeding of Laboring Horses, it was moved for a
Prohibition, it was not granted upon such a general Suggestion, it being no
ground for it: Otherwise, upon the Custom of the Parish, That no Tithe has
been paid in such case Mich. 7 Car. B. R. Mead verse. Thu^m^n. Jones Rep.
. It was Mead and Thurman's Case, which is elsewhere Reported, That a
Prohibition was prayed upon a Suggestion of this Custom, That for Tares cut or
mowen before they are ripe, and given to Plough-Cattel, Tithes ought not to be
paid: And another Custom for Headlands sown with Corn, used to be fed with
Plough-Cattel, or mowed or cut for that purpose, that the Owners should be
discharged of Tithes. It was holden by the Court, That this Suggestion grounded
upon a Special Custom was good: and the parties being sued for the Tithes of
the Premises in the Sp. Court, the Court granted a Prohibition Hill. 10 Ca^. B.
R. Mead and Thurman's C. Cro. 1. pa. 285.


Timber Trees, that have been usually Top'd and Lop'd, such Toppings and
Loppings are not Tithable; for the Law that does privilege the Body of the
Tree, does privilege also the Branches thereof. The Law is the same, if the
Tree become Rotten Dry, and Barren Co 11 par. in Bowle's C. Co 11. pa. 48.
Liford's Case.
. Timber Trees in all Counties, as Oak, Ash, and Elm, after twenty years
growth, are not (as aforesaid) Tithable. Also Beech, Horn-Bean, Maple, Asp, and
Hasel, may in some Counties, where there is scarcity of other Timber and an
Usage accordingly, be computed as Timber Trees, and not Tithaable. But any
Timber-Wood, if it be cut within twenty years after the first planting thereof,
is Tithable More. Case 1271.
. But on the other hand, Timber Trees once discharged of Tithes are for ever
discharged and quit of Tithes, though rotten dead. Whether a Parson may
Prescribe to have Tithes of great Trees, contrary to the Common Law and the
Statute of Sylva Caedua, Quaere, 9 H. 6. 56. It is said by Belknap 50 E. 3. 10.
, That of great Trees, or of Timber Trees, Tithe was never demanded, and that
by the Statute of 43 Ed. 3. But vid. Coke 11. par. in Liford's Case, the words
in that Statute, and in the Book of 50 E. 3. viz. Great Trees must be intended
Oaks, Ash, and Elms, of all which as well before the said Statute as since, if
they were of twenty years growth, it seems by the Common Law Tithes were not to
be paid, because of their own nature they were only accounted Timber Trees, and
fit for Building. But of Sallows, Willows, Maples, and the like, although they
be above twenty years growth, yet Tithes thereof shall be paid Plow. Com. 450.
and Dr. and Stud. 169.
. Of other Trees of the age of twenty years growth or upwards, which are
Timber Trees, Tithes shall not be paid; but of Sylva Caedua and Underwoods,
Tithes shall be paid, but not of great Trees by Statute ^t. 45 Ed. 3. cap. 3.
11 H. 4. 89. 50 E. 3. 10.
. In a Prohibition the Question was, Whether Trees, which were above the age of
20 years growth become Rotten, and be cut down for Fuel, shall pay Tithe or
not. It was the Opinion of the Court, that they shall not pay Tithes, for that
Tithes are payable for all increase, and not for a decrease; and being
privileged in regard of their high nature, this Privilege shall not be lost
in regard of its decrease Hill. 43 El. C. B. Rame and Pateson's C. Goldes b. 145.
. So if Timber Trees become Arida, Sicca, etc. yet because sometimes it was an
Inheritance, which was discharged of Tithes, although it now become Dotard,
Tithe shall not be paid of the same; for the quality remains, though the
estate of the Tree be altered Co. 11. par. 81. Bowle's C. vid. Pas. 8 Jac. C.
B. Dr. Nowman's Case, Godb. 175. ac. Hill. 2 Jac. B. R. Bro^k and Roger's Case.
Cro. 1. par. 100.
. If a Tree under the growth of 20 years be Top'd, and the Body thereof
suffered to grow till it be past that age, and afterward the Boughs being
grown out again are Top'd and Lop'd again, Tithes thereof shall not be paid,
although that the Tree was not Priviledg'd at the first cutting; which was the
Opinion of the whole Court of Common Pleas v. Brownl. 1. par. 33.
. Such Timber Trees are in Law known by the name of Great Trees 45 Ed. 3. and
the Bo^k 50 Ed. 3.
, and Gross woods Plowd. 470.
.

Trades and Labors pay some Tithe by usage in the nature of Personal Tithes;
and so Carpenters, Masons, etc. and all Handicraftsmen have paid Tithe. There
was a Parson in Bristoll that sued an Innkeeper there for the Tithes of the
Profits of his Kitchen, Stable, and Wine-cellar; in a Prohibition moved for by
Yelverton, the Case appeared to be this: The Defendant being Parson of a Parish
in Bristoll, Mich. 11 Jac. B. R. Dolley ver. Davies. Bulstr. par. 2.
did Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court against the Plaintiff, being an
Innkeeper of the Bear in Bristoll, to have Tithes of the Profits by him made,
of his Kitchen, Stable, and Wine-cellar, and lays in his Libel there, That he
made great gain in selling of his Beer (having bought it for 500 l. and sold
the same for a 1000 l.) and so Libels for the Third part of the Profits of the
same, and sets forth in his Libel, That this is due unto him per Communem Legem
Angliae; and sets forth in his Libel, That Negotiando and Traficando, he does
bargain and sell Beer in his Inn for 1000 l. which he bought for 500 l. and
gained in his Sale 300 l. and better, of which gain he ought to have Tithe.
Yelverton moved for a Prohibition, setting all this matter forth in his
Suggestion; and further showed, That the Defendant had yearly of the Plaintiff
40 l. at the least. Doderidge Justice, The Defendant would have Tithe, as I
think, also of the Kitchin-stuff. Clench Clerk of the Papers informed the
Court, That there was a Parson, who Libelled for Tithes of the gains of 10 l.
for an 100 l. put out at Interest, and a Prohibition was granted: In this
principal Case, by the Rule of the Court a Prohibition was awarded.

Transaction differs from Composition only in this, that Transaction is an
Agreement, touching Tithes, upon things litigious and doubtful; the other is
Frank, gratuitous and voluntary, of things not contended for. See Composition.

Treble Damages may be had in an Action grounded upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.
for not setting forth of Tithes, which Action is to be sued in the Temporal
Courts.

Trees of all sorts regularly and generally (except Timber Trees, as aforesaid)
Root and Branch, Body, Bark, and Fruit, used or sold by the Owner, are
Tithable. Tithes shall be paid of Hasel, Willows, Holley, Alder, and Maple,
although above twenty years growth. Mich. 5. Jac. B. Resolved, and Consultation
granted accordingly. So that Trees of all kinds, not apt for Timber, though
exceeding 20 years growth, nor ever cut before, may be Tithable. And all Trees
under the notion of Sylva Caedua aforesaid, Underwoods and Coppices felled and
preserved to grow again are Tithable to the Parson, when the Owner takes his
Nine parts. But Trees cut only for Mounds, Plow-gear, Hedging, Fencing, Fuel,
for maintenance of the Plough or Pail, be it Underwoods of Coppices, Parings of
Fruit Trees, or the like, are not Tithable; but Trees bearing Fruit of all
sorts, are Tithable in their Annual increase: And therefore as to Fruit Trees,
as Apples, Pears, etc. the Tenth of the Fruit shall be set out and delivered,
when they are newly gathered; for the omission whereof, if loss come to the
Parson, the Owner is chargeable to him in the Treble Damages. If a man pay
Tithes for the Fruit of Trees, and after cut down the same Trees, and make them
into Billets and Faggots, and sell them, he shall not pay Tithes for the
Billets or Faggots; for that it is not any new Increase. Coke, Magna Charta,
652. 621. If Trees be Felled, no Tithes shall be paid of the Roots. Coke,
Pasch. 29 Eliz. B. R. nor of the young Sprouts, that grow of such ancient
Stock. M. 12 Jac. B. R. Stamp and Clinton. Roll. Rep. And as Fruit Trees pay
Tithes in their Fruit, so also may young Trees, which as yet bear no Fruit, pay
Tithes in another kind; for where a Parson Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court
for the Tithes of young Trees planted in a Nursery, upon purpose to be rooted
up, and sold to be planted in other Parishes: The Question was, Whether Tithes
should be paid for them? It was said, they were of the nature of the Land, and
Tithes should not be paid of them, no more than of the Mines of Coals, or
Stones dug; or for Trees spent in Fuel in the House. But it was the Opinion
of the whole Court, That forasmuch as he made a profit of such young Trees,
Tithes thereof should be paid, when they are dug up and sold into another
Parish, as well as of Corn and Carret, or other things of like nature Hill. 14
Car. B. R. Gibbs and Wibornes Case. Cro. 1. par. 378.
.

Note by the Justices, If one cut Trees which are or may be Timber, although
they be under the age of 20 years, no Tithes are due; and so it is of new
Germins growing under that age. Pasch. 29 El. B. R. Crook Rep. par. 1.
And where in a Prohibition, for that it was Libelled in the Ecclesiastical
Court for Tithes of Timber- Trees, the Defendant said, the Trees were long
since aridae, mortuae, and putridae: It was the Opinion of the Justices, That
no Tithes should be paid of those Trees, Ram and Batersons Case. Cro. par. 1.
for being above the growth of 20 years, they were discharged of Tithes. Also
in Brook and Rogers Case, where a Parson sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for
the Tithes of the Boughs of Trees, above the age of 20 years growth, and the
Defendant prayed a Prohibition, and showed that the Trees were aridae, Cro.
par. 2.
siccae, and in culminibus putridae: It was held by the better Opinion, that
Tithes should not be paid of them.

In an Action upon the Case: Declared, whereas by the Statute of 45 Ed. 3. cap.
3. Tithes ought not to be paid for Gross Trees: That she had cut down such
Timber- Trees, being above the growth of twenty years, The Lady Waterhouse and
Bawde's C. Cro. par. 1.
and that the Defendant as Parson sued her for Tithes of them against the
Statute; upon which it was Demurred. Resolved by the whole Court, That the
Action did not lie; for none shall be punished for Suing in the Ecclesiastical
Court for any matter which is properly demandable there, although perhaps, he
has no cause of Action: But if he Sues in the Ecclesiastical Court for matter,
which appears by his Libel is not Suable there, nor the Court has Jurisdiction
thereof, there an Action upon the Case lies.

Turkeys: Tithes shall not be paid of them, nor their Eggs, quia Ferae naturae
Houghton and Princes Case. More. Rep.
.

Turves used for Fuel or Firing, do pay Tithe, and are Tithable as Predial
Tithes; yet held that Tithes shall not be paid thereof. Hill. 14 Jac. B. R. per
Houghton. Hill. 11 Jac. B. R. per Cur.

Tile-Stones, or Brick- Tile are not Tithable Adjudg. Mich. 19 Eliz. B. R. and
Pasch. 34 Elliz. C. B. Liff and Watts C.
.

Tithes or Tithes are a Tenth, or otherwise a certain part or portion of the
Fruit or lawful Increase of the Earth, Beasts, or Men's Labor and Industry; and
are payable by every person having things Tithable, that cannot show a Special
Exemption, either by Composition, Custom, Prescription, Privilege, or some
Act of Parliament: And they are to be paid without any Diminution; for which
reason the Owners of things Tithable ought not to have the Nine parts, till the
Tenth be first severed therefrom. And on the other side, the Tithe is in no
case to be taken by the Parson or Vicar, before the same be severed from the
Nine parts. The Parson de mero Jure is to have all the Tithes, if there be no
Endowment of the Vicarage 29 Eliz. B. R. in Bus^ie the Vicar of Paucas Cas.
Godb. 63.
; and a Vicar cannot have Tithes, but by Gift, Composition, or Prescription,
for that all Tithes de jure do belong to the Parson Pasch. 15 Car. B. R. Marsh.
11.
. In Suit for Tithes it is not necessary to demand the very value, for the Duty
is uncertain. Mich. 16 Jac. B. R. Case Pemberton and Shelton. Roll. Rep. If
Tithes be payable by one who dies before he pays it, it must be paid by his
Executor, if he has Assets. But if the Parishioner sets forth his Tithes,
and they stand upon the Land two or three days, and afterward he takes or
carries them away; this is not a setting forth of his Tithes within the
Statute of 2 Ed. 6. Adjudg. 10 Car. in Anderson's Case.
. But if the Parson or Vicar shall suffer his Tithes (being severed) to lie
long upon the Land to the prejudice of the Owner of the Ground, he may have his
Action of the Case Ley. 70.
. And whoever takes away the Tithes, not having Right thereto, is a
Trespasser. Also an Action lies against a Disseisor for the Tithes: or if one
cut them, and another carries them away, an Action lies against either of
them Pasch. 15 Car. B. R. upon Stat. 2 Ed. 6.
. And although in the Ecclesiastical Courts no Plea is allowed in Discharge of
Tithes Dr. and Stu. 177. and in 8 Ed. 4. 14.
; yet Lands in the hands of Ecclesiastical persons may be Discharged of Tithes,
and now since the Statute of 31 H. 8. in the hands of the Kings Patentees also,
by Suspension, Privilege, or Unity Vi. Hugh. Pars Law. cap. 27. p. 235.
. And since in the Ecclesiastical Courts no Plea (as aforesaid) is allowed in
Discharge, it is nothing strange that the Common Law holds, that the Court
Spiritual has not Jurisdiction in matters of Tithes, where the Prescription is
de non Decimando; otherwise, where it is de modo Decimandi Yelv. 79. 2.
. The manner of right Tithing is regularly thus, viz. That Tithes and all other
Church-Duties, shall be yielded and paid according to the Usage and Custom of
the place, where they are paid: And of Predial Tithes, the Tenth is to be set
apart from the Nine parts in the place where they grow, before the said Nine
parts are carried away; which Separation from the Nine parts is to be done in
presence of the Parsons Servant, upon seasonable Notice given to the Parson by
the Parishioner; and the Parson is to have reasonable time to take away his
Tithe Broo. Tresp. 125. Co. 2. par. Inst. 610.
. And as for the Small Tithes, such as Plants, Herbs, Seeds of Woad, Flax,
Hemp, etc. they are Tithable in kind, if not Compounded for. And Personal
Tithes, such as are for Profit made by Trade and Manual Occupations (except
Common Laborers) are to be paid, as they were used to be paid forty years
before the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. and as of right they ought to be paid, as at or
before Easter some small Sum of Money, according to the Custom of the place;
but without a Custom nothing to be paid By 3 Judge. 17 Jac. B. R.
. The Tithes of one thing only cannot be in satisfaction of Tithes of the same,
and other things of another kind More. Case 623.
. Nor is Tithe twice payable of one thing in one and the same year: Therefore
if a Parson has Tithe-Fruit of a Tree felled the same year, and made into
Billets or Faggots, he shall not have Tithe thereof. Nor are Tithes payable by
any, but such as have a Property in the thing Tithed, therefore they are not
payable of things Stolen; nor shall things merely for Pleasure pay Tithes, nor
the things that are in no man's property; only the King shall have the Tithes
arising out of Ground not in any Parish. And if Tithe be paid to one that comes
into the place by Simony, it is at his own peril, if afterward he be forced to
pay it again Hob. 168.
. Where Sale is or may be made of a thing Tithable, the equallest way is to
let the Parson or Vicar have the Tenth penny made of the thing sold. And
although Tithe is not payable to the Simonaick Parson, yet an Incumbent
wrongfully Collated by the Bishop, may be such a person as is capable of
Tithes, and may Sue for the same Hob. 30^.
. In Love and Piggots Case it was said, That if a Lessee for years be Sued in
the Spiritual Court for Tithes, he in the Reversion may have a Prohibition.
Pasch. 29. El. B. R. Cro. Rep. par. 1. And a Layman lawfully Interessed in
Tithes, being disseized thereof, or wronged therein, may have his Remedy for
them in the Kings Temporal Courts. This takes not away the ordinary Remedy for
them in the Ecclesiastical Court; the Law (as to that) being as it was before
the Statutes Dyer 133. Co. 11. 13.
. Likewise, for refusal to pay Tithes, or not setting forth Predial Tithes, the
Parson may Libel in the Ecclesiastical Court, or he or other Proprietor thereof
may Sue at the Common Law, or for the Subtraction thereof, at their Election,
and recover the Treble value of the Tithes Adjudg. 29 El. Wood's Case. St. 2
Ed. 6. Vid. Co. 2. par. Inst. 650. b. Hill. 40 El. C. B. Rot. 699. Bedell's Case
acc.
. Yet where only the Right of Tithes does come in debate, and not the right of
Patronage, in such case it has been held, That the Ecclesiastical, not the
Temporal Jurisdiction, shall take cognizance thereof; yea, though both parties
claim by Prescription, which in it self is a matter Triable at the Common Law
12 Ed. 4. 24. Mich. 29 El. B. R. Adjudg. acc. 35 H. 6. 39. acc.
. But where the parties Litigant are both Ecclesiastical persons, and the Claim
of the one be for an Annual Pension out of the Parsonage of the other, although
he claim the same by Temporal grounds, viz. by Prescription and Real
Composition, he has his Election to sue for the same either in the
Ecclesiastical, or in the Temporal Court: And by the Statute of 34 H. 8. c. 16.
Ecclesiastical persons may sue for Pensions in the Ecclesiastical Court; but if
he brings a Writ of Annuity for the same, and declares upon the Prescription,
he has then determined his Election, that if afterward he Sue for this
Annuity in the Ecclesiastical Court, a Prohibition will lie Hugh. Parsons Law.
c. 27. p. 292.
. If Suit be in the Ecclesiastical Court between Parson and Vicar for Tithes,
Prohibition has always been denied, if there be not other matter determinable
by the Common Law. Mich. 16 Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep. But where the Question is
only between the Parson and the Vicar, it is to be decided in the
Ecclesiastical Court More. 1267.
. Yet it is said, That a Real Contract, though made between Ecclesiastical
persons and of Ecclesiastical things, is only cognizable at the Common Law
Marsh. 87.
. But if a Custom of Tithing be agreed by and between both parties, it may be
sued for in the Spiritual Court; but if the Custom be denied, a Prohibition
may be awarded, till it be Tried at Common Law Hob. 247.
. But where there is a Modus Decimandi, be it of Lands, or a certain Annual Sum
of money, or other profit time out of mind given to the Parson and his
Successors, in full discharge of all Tithes in kind in such a place certain; if
this Sum be not paid, yet may not the Parson sue for Tithe in kind, but for the
Money in the Ecclesiastical Court: But yet the Modus it self is Triable at the
Common Law, and not in the Spiritual Court Co. Select Cases. 40. 46.
. Likewise, after that the Tithes are carried away out of the Ground, it has
been held, Suit cannot then be commenced for them in the Ecclesiastical Court,
because they are then become Lay-Chattels, and the Property thereof is altered
Tr. 12 Jac. B. R. Case Reynolds and Hayes. Roll. Rep. vid. 38 Ed. 3. 13. by
Finehden. Co. 11. par. Dr. Grant's Case.
. And for the not setting forth of Tithes, not only the Parson or Rector, but
also the Farmer of the Rectory may sue upon the Statute More. Case 192.
. The bare severing or setting forth of Tithes does not make them to become
Lay-Chattels, but the carrying them away out of the Ground does: And therefore
if Tithes be severed, and set forth, and afterward the Parson Lease out the
Parsonage, not mentioning the Tithes, the Tithes set forth shall pass; for
although they be divided and severed, yet they are as yet Spiritual Duties of
the Parsonage: But if the Tithes be carried into the Barn, and afterward the
Parson Leaseth out his Parsonage, with all Profits, etc. those Tithes shall not
pass to the Lessee, for that now they are become Lay-Chattels Mic. 6 J^c. C. B.
Smith's Case. Adjudg.
. It was Agreed clearly in Cannen's Case, That if a Parishioner sever his Hay,
and it be made into Reeks or Cocks, and after fell it, the Parson cannot sue
the Vendee for the Tithes thereof, but him that severed it, and on this matter
Prohibition was granted. H. 16. Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep. If a Parishioner does not
set forth his Tithes, or subtracteth them after they be once set forth, the
Parson may Libel against him in the Spiritual Court; or else by the Statute of
2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. the Parson or other Proprietor of the Tithes may have their
Action in the Kings Temporal Courts, for the not setting forth or subtracting
of them at their Election, and shall recover the Treble value of the Tithes in
an Action of Debt: for although the Treble value be not given to the Parson, or
other Proprietor of the Tithes, by any express words of the Statute; yet
forasmuch as he is the party grieved, and has the Right of the Tithes in him,
the Treble value is given to him. For wheresoever a Statute gives a Forfeiture
or penalty against any one, who wrongfully detaineth or dispossesseth another
of his Right or Interest; in that case he that has the wrong, shall have the
forfeiture or penalty, and shall have his Action at the Common Law for the
same, or he may Sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for the same Mic. 29 El. Wood's
Case. adjudg. Co. 2 par. Inst. 650.
. But in his Action at Common Law it seems, he shall recover no Costs, as has
been Adjudged 43 El. C. B. Sr. Moyle Finche's Case. and vid Hill. 40 El. B. R.
Rot. 699. Bedell's Case. acc.
. But if the Parson or other Proprietor will sue in the Ecclesiastical Court
for the subtraction of the Tithes, he shall recover there but the double value
of them; because in that Court he shall recover the Tithes themselves, which is
equivalent to the Treble value at the Common Law Co. 2. par. Inst. 651. a.
. In another Case, where Debt upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. was brought, for not
setting forth of Tithes; the Plaintiff showed, That Two parts of the Tithes did
appertain to the Rectory, and a Third part to the Vicarage, and that he had a
Lease for years of the Rectory, and another Lease of the Vicarage: And for not
setting forth of the Tithes he demanded the Treble value: upon Non Debet, it
being found for the Plaintiff, it was urged in stay of Judgment, that he ought
to have brought several Actions, being grounded upon several Leases, as his
Title is several. But it was Resolved, That the Action was well brought, in
regard he had both Titles in him; and the Action is brought upon the wrong,
because he did not set out the Tithes Hill. 2 Jac. B. R. Sr. Rich. Chaepernon
and Hill's Case. Cro. 2. pa. 68.
. Again, in Debt for not setting forth of Tithes upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6.
The Case was, Corn was growing upon the Glebe-Lands of the Vicar, which was
discharged of Tithes being in his own use: It happened that the Vicar died
before the Tithe was severed, and his Executors did cut and carry away the
Corn; and he that had the Parsonage appropriate brought the Action: The Counsel
of the Defendant prayed the Opinion of the Court, whether he might plead Nihil
debet: But the Court refused to deliver their Opinion in it, because it hanged
in Suit before them Tr. 15 Jac. B. R. Horn and Cotton's Case. Hob. 387.
. In the Case of Mountford against Sidley it was said, That where Tithes are
set out, the Parson has a liberty for a convenient time to come and carry
them away: And this convenience of Time is triable by a Jury; if he exceed
this, he shall be subject to an Action, and then by Judgment of Law he shall be
taken to be a Trespasser ab initio: Otherwise, it shall be of a License in Fact
given by the Parson himself. And it was holden by the Court, if the Corn had
continued over long, his Remedy had been by Action upon the Case Hill. 22 Jac.
B. R. Rob 212. Mountford and Stdley's Case. Bo^str. 3. par. 336, 337. vid.
Trin. 21 Jac. B. R. Wiseman and Denham's Case. Gods. 329.
And as a Parson ought to have convenient time to carry away his Tithes, so
likewise he ought to have for that end free ingress, egress, and regress, to,
through, and from the Land where the Tithes are, wherein if he meet with any
obstruction, he ought to see how he Sues and lays his Action; for in a Case,
where a Parson Libelled for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, and set forth;
That the Tithes were set forth, and that the Defendant did hinder him and stop
him from carrying them away: But because he did not Sue there upon the Statute
of 2 Ed. 6. for he did not mention the Double value as he ought, and it was
Agreed by all the Justices, he ought to have done; nor mention the Statute, as
he ought also to have done; a Prohibition in that Case was awarded P. 17 Car.
C. B. Adj. acc. Hugh. Abr. Dismes, Sect. 4.. 7.
. The Grant of a Tithe for Life to begin at a day to come, is not good.
Yelvert. 131. If a man will let a Lease of his Tithes, the Lease must be by
Deed, and not by word only; therefore, if a Parson does Demise his Rectory for
years, the Tithes will pass inclusive, although the Lease be by word only; but
if the Parson Lease his Tithes alone, they will not pass, unless the same be by
Deed or Writing Tr. 26 El. B. R. Wit^^ and Paunder's C. Adjudg. acc.
. Yet the Parson may Demise his Tithes to the Owner of the Land, for a year by
word only, as has been agreed by all the Justices M. 2 Car. B. R. Bellamy and
(...) Case. ^ot 175. Goab. 373.
; but to a Stranger he cannot Demise them, otherwise than by Deed: And although
Tithes will (as aforesaid) pass by Contract to the Owner of the Soil; yet may
the Parson sue the Owner for Tithes in kind in the Spiritual Court, and (as it
has been holden) the Owner by reason of the Contract, shall not have a
Prohibition Mich. 8 Ja. C. B. in C^fes Case.
. In which case the Ower of the Soil may sue the Parson upon the Contract in
the Temporal Court, and recover as much in Damages; but then in his Pleading
he must not declare of a Verbal Contract, but must set forth the same to have
been made in Writing, and so it has been Adjudged M. 7 Jac. C. B. in ^awling's
Case.
. And in the Lord Shandois Case it was holden by the Court, That a Suggestion
of an Agreement between him and the Parson, in consideration of a certain Sum
to be yearly paid to the Parson during their Joynt-Lives, and his continuing
Parson, that his Message and Lands in the Parish of D. and the Tenants
thereof, should be discharged from the payment of Tithes thereof, showing, that
the said yearly Sum was paid accordingly, and that notwithstanding the
Defendant sued the Plaintiff, being his Farmer, for Tithes: In this Case it was
held, That this was not a sufficient Surmize to maintain a Prohibition: For an
Agreement to be discharged from Tithes, may be a year by word; but to have such
an Agreement for life or years, cannot be without Deed M. 4 Car. B. R. in Hawes
and Brayfield's Case. Cro. 2. par. 137. vid. Nelson and Prettiman's C. and
Rolls and Roll's Case. B. R. Adjudg. acc. ibid.
. Likewise in an Ejectione Firm brought of a Lease of Tithes, the Plaintiff
did not show, that the Lease was by Deed: and because Tithes cannot pass
without Deed, after a Verdict found for the Plaintiff: It was Ruled to be ill,
and Adjudged for the Defendant P. 19 Jac. B. R. Both and Crompton's C. Cro. 2.
pa 613.
. To conclude, In the 19 El. B. R. it was debated whether Tithes were Jure
divino, or by the Constitution of men only? The Judge. were all it seems of
Opinion, That they were due as well by the Constitution of Kings as by the Law
of God 19 Eliz. B. R.
. And therewith does Dr. and Stu. 166. if the Qu. be de Quota part: For there
it is held, that the 60 part is due only by man's Law. And the Opinion of Gerson
the Divine, is cited in his Treatise, Entitled Regulae Morales, where it is
said, Solutio Decimarum Sacerdotibus est jure Divino, quatenus inde sustentur;
sed quoad hanc quam illam partem assignare, aut in alios reditus commutare,
Positivi juris est. And elsewhere, Non vocatur portio Curatis Decima pars, imo
est interdum vicesima, aut tricesima Dr. and St^: 166. and 19 E^. Dyer in B. R.
Adjudg. vid. Hugh Abr. Dismes Sect 1.. 11, 12.
. And in He^sloe's Case, Co. 9. par. it is said, That Tithes, Quatenus Tithes,
were Spiritual things, and due ex jure Divino, and were not accounted as
Temporal Inheritances Hensloe's Case. Co. 2. par.
. Hence it is, That where a Parson leased all his Glebe Lands, with all Profits
and Commodities, rendering 13 s. 4 d. pro omnibus exactionibus and demandis; and
afterward Libelled in the Spiritual Court against his Lessees for the Tithes
thereof. It was the Opinion of the Court, That Tithes are not things issuing
out of Lands, nor any Rent or duty, but Spiritual; and if the Parson does
Release to his Parishioners, all Demands in his Lands, his Tithes thereby are
not extinct; and therefore a Consultation was granted Tr. 31 El. B. R. St^le
and Miller's Case. Leon. 300.
. And in the like case it has been Adjudged, That the Lessee should pay Tithes
to the Parson, for that they are jure Divino due, and cannot be included in
Rent 32 Eliz. in Dabbi^gtons Case.
.

If a Parishioner sets forth his Tithes, and sever the Tenth part from the Nine
parts justly and truly, although he does not give Personal notice to the
Parson, nor general notice in the Church of the time of setting forth his
Tithes, whereby the Parson might be present at the setting of them forth, and
to see that it be justly done; yet it is a good setting forth of the Tithes,
Mich. 13 Car. B R. Chase and Ware, per Cur. Intratur Tr. 13 Car. rot. 564.
as in the Case between Chase and Ware, in a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in
an Action upon the Case against the Parson, for leaving his Tithe of Hay upon
the Parishioners ground after notice of setting them forth, whereby the
Parishioner lost his Grass there. But it was not alleged, that the Parson had
notice of the time of setting them forth; and yet the Court affirmed the
Judgment against the Parson.

A. Parson in Consideration of 20 s. yearly, promised to B. that B. should pay
no Tithe for a certain Wood, per parol; and in Consideration thereof B.
promised to pay the 20 s. yearly, and this Agreement was during their Lives. B.
made a Lease at Will of the Wood; Trin. 21 Jac. B. R. Bennet verse. Snell. Roll.
Rep. par. 2.
the Lessee had a Prohibition against him, for the Agreement was good; and
Jermyn demanded, what Remedy against the Less for the 20 s. Doderidge, None;
but he shall have Action on the Case against B. or his Executors; but the
Lessee for years may have Action against the Parson, if he Sue him in the
Ecclesiastical Court. For the Case was, There was an Agreement per parol made
between S. Parson, and B. the Parishioner: B. promised to S. for himself, his
Executors and Assigns, to pay him Ten load of Wood, and 10 s. for the Tithe of
a Wood during the life of S. And S. promised not to Sue him, etc. for any other
Tithe. B. dies, his Executor made a Lease at Will of the Wood; the Question is,
whether the Tenant at Will, may take his Action against the Parson who sued him
for other Tithes, etc.

In a Prohibition against a Parson who sued for Tithes, it was Surmized, That
the Clerk of the Parish and his Predecessors, S^vil and Woods Case. Cro. par 1.
Assistants to the Minister, had used to have five shillings for the Tithe of
the Lands, where, etc. It was the Opinion of the Court, That if this Special
matter be showed in the Surmize, it might perhaps be good by reason of long
continuance: But they held that by Common intendment, Tithes are not payable to
a Parish-Clerk, and he is no party in whom a Prescription can be alleged,
wherefore a Consultation was awarded.

The Parson of T. sued for Tithe-Wood of the Park of T. for a Prohibition it
was surmized, That he and all those, etc. time out of mind, Sherburne's Case.
Cro. par. 1.
etc. had used to pay to the Vicar of T. ten shillings yearly for all Tithes of
Wood growing in the place, and the proof was, That he paid ten shillings for
discharge of Tithe-Wood in the Park and two other places: The Prohibition was
denied, and a Consultation awarded, because the right of Tithes between the
Parson and the Vicar came in question, and because the party failed in the
proof of his Prescription.

In a Prohibition to stay Suit for Tithes, surmizing that he set forth his
Tithes, and for some reasonable cause he detained part of them: Leigh and Woods
Case. Cro. par. 1.
And the Parson sued him in the Ecclesiastical Court; upon which it was
Demurred; because by the fetting forth they were Lay-Chattels. But the Court
held, That the Prohibition did not lie; for against the party himself, who
sets forth his Tithes, a Suit is maintainable in the Ecclesiastical Court,
if he detains them, although he might have his Remedy for them at the Common
Law: Otherwise, if they were taken away by a Stranger after they were set forth.

For a Prohibition it was Surmized, That he had used to pay the Tenth sheaf of
Corn, Ingolib^y and Johnson's C. Cro. par. 1.
the Tenth Cock of Hay, the Tenth Fleece of Wool (and so the like) in
satisfaction of all Hay, Corn, Cattle, etc. And it was held, That it was no
sufficient Surmize for a Prohibition, because that which he used to pay is but
the Tenth in kind.

In Sands and Pruries Case the question was, whether Tithes were grantable by
Copy: Cro. ibid.
It was Objected they could not, because it is against the nature of Tithes,
whereof none could have property before the Council of Lateran, and it was
impossible there should be any Custom to demise them by Copy, when none had
interest in them, and they cannot be parcel of a Manor, for they are of
several natures, though united in one man's hands: But by the Court Resolved,
they might be granted by Copy, so it had been time so out of mind.

A Parishioner severed his Tithes, but being in a Close, the Gate was locked,
Blackwell's Case. Cro. par. 1.
so as the Parson could not come at them: The question was, whether the Gate
were locked or open, and thereupon a Prohibition brought. The Court was of
Opinion, that although the Tithes were severed, yet they remain Suable in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and then the other is but a consequent thereof, and
Triable there, and the Prohibition denied.

In Sharington and Fleetwood's Case it was Resolved, That if a Parson Libels
for Tithes, More's Rep.
and a Prohibition is granted, and after he Libelleth for the Tithes of another
year, the first Suit not being determined, an Attachment upon the Prohibition
lies against him. More's Rep.
And in the Case between Talentire and Denton, where the Bishop of Carlisle
being seized in Fee of Tithes in right of his Bishopric, made a Lease of them
for Three Lives, rendering the ancient Rent, the Tithes having been usually
demised for the same Rent; It was Resolved, That the Lease was not good against
his Successor, because he had not remedy for the Rent by Distress or Action of
Debt: Otherwise it had been, if only a Lease for years, for there Debt lies
for the Rent.

In Leigh and Wood's Case it was Resolved, That if the Owner sets forth his
Tithe, Ibid. Case 1219.
and a Stranger takes them, no Suit shall be for the same in the Ecclesiastical
Court; but if the Owner himself, after he has once set forth his Tithes, takes
them away again, the Parson may Sue him in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Tithes.

S. Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against H, for Subtraction of Tithes;
the Defendant there pleaded, That he had divided the Tithes from the Nine
parts. And then the Plaintiff made Addition to the Libel (in nature of a
Replication) viz. That the Defendant divided the Tithes from the Nine parts,
Quod praedict. the Plaintiff non fatetur, sed prorsus diffitetur; yet presently
after the pretended Division, in fraudem Legis, he took and carried away the
same Tithes, Trin. 44 El. B. R. Spratt against Heal. Co. lib. 13.
and converted them to his own use: and thereupon the Plaintiff obtained
Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court, and to recover the Treble value according
to the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. And thereupon H. made a Surmize, that he
had divided his Tithes, and that the Plaintiff ought to Sue in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the Double value, and at the Common Law for the Treble
value. But it was Resolved by the whole Court, That the said Division mentioned
in the Libel, was not any division within the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. c. 13. For
that Act provides, That all the Kings Subjects henceforth, shall truly and
justly without Fraud, divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of other
Predial Tithes in their proper Land: So as when he divides them to carry them
away, he divides them not justly without fraud; and therefore the same is out
of the Statute: and where the words of the Statute are [ divide, set out, etc.]
their Predial Tithes, etc. and if any person carry away his Corn and Hay, and
other Predial Tithes, etc. And to make an evasion out of these words [ this
Invention was devised]; the Owner of the Corn by Covin sold his Corn, before
Severance, to another, who as Servant to the Vendee reaped it, and carried it
away without any Severance, pretending that neither the Vendor, because he did
not carry them away; nor the Vendee, because he had no property in them, should
be within the Statute: But it was Resolved, That the Vendor should be charged
in that case with the penalty of the Statute, for he carried them away, and his
fraud or covin shall not help him. Vid. 8 Ed. 3. 290. 9 H. 6. 41. 33 H. 6. 5.
But it was Resolved, That the Plaintiff could not Sue in the Ecclesiastical
Court for the Treble value, but for the Double value he might.

A Parson Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court upon the Statute of 2 Ed.
Whereupon a Libel for Tith. a Prohibition; and where a Consultation shall be
granted.
6. cap. 13. for Tithes. The Case was this, The Parishioner sets them out
according to the Statute; but they being so set out, he would not suffer the
Parson to come and take them away, thinking by this means, and this way to
avoid the Statute: And upon this the Parson Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court
for these Tithes; the Defendant there Surmizes, That he did not hinder him from
the having of his Tithes, but says, That he did hinder him in coming for his
Tithes one way (which was the usual way) but that he might have come for them
another way: And upon this a Prohibition was prayed, and granted, supposing
that there was no question at all as touching the payment of Tithes, but as
touching the Way to come for them; and upon this whole matter the Parson prayed
a Consultation. The whole Court were clear of Opinion, That such a setting out
of Tithes, as the same appeared here to be in this Case, without suffering the
Parson to come and take away his Tithes, that this is a fraudulent and no good
and sufficient setting forth of Tithes, according to the Statute, and as the
Statute does require, which ought to be a fruitful and effectual setting forth
of his Tithes; for in so doing, he ought to set forth his Tithes, and also to
suffer the Parson to come, have, and to take away his Tithes: otherwise, unless
he do also perform this, the setting out of his Tithes here is to no purpose
for to excuse him, and to the Surmize here made for the Way. A Consultation
granted.
The whole Court clear of Opinion, That this is no ways at all material, and
so without any further motion or Arguments, by the Rule of the Court, a
Consultation was granted. Vid. Bulstr. par. 1. fo. 108. Hill. 8 Jac.

V
VEnison, though not Tithable of it self, yet may be given as Modus Decimandi;
Per Assisas Forestae, and other Records, it does appear, that Tithes have been
paid, even of Venison, in diverse parts of England.

Vetches, Tares, and the like, eaten by the Cattle that do the Husbandry in the
same Parish, be it eaten on the Ground or elsewhere, are not Tithable, unless
the Parson has a Special Custom for it.

Vine is Predial Tithe. Co. Magna Charta, 649.

Unity of Possession, or Unity of the Parsonage and Lands, which should pay
Tithes, in the hands of Religious and Ecclesiastical persons: By this Unity of
Possession Tithes are not now discharged in Right, though in Payment; so that
it is not to be pleaded as a Discharge of Tithes, but as a discharge of the
Payment of Tithes Hob. 44. 297.
, This Unity has been often Resolved to be a good Discharge of the payment of
Tithes within the meaning of the Statute of 31 H. 8. Co. 2. par. Inst. 655.
More 46, 47. Cro. Jac. 608.
. Originally this Unity was, where an Abbot, Prior, etc. time out of mind had
been seized of Lands in themselves Tithable, and also of the Rectory of that
Parish wherein such Lands did lie: So that Unity of the Parsonage and Lands,
which should pay Tithes by Appropriation or otherwise, in the hands of
Religious and Ecclesiastical persons, had discharged from the payment of
Tithes: and now since the said Statute of 31 H. 8. such an Unity of Possession
in the said Religious Houses, and Lands, and Persons, shall be a Discharge for
the Kings Patentee for the Lands that came to the Crown by the said Statute.
But then it was Resolved, That such an Unity must have been Justa, Libera,
Aequalis, and Perpetua. It must have been Justa, claimed by Right, by good and
lawful Title, and not by Disseisin, or other extortious and unlawful Acts; for
such an Unity had not been a good discharge within the Statute. 2. It must have
been Aequalis, that is, there must have been a Feesimple both in the Lands and
in the Tithes, as well of the Lands upon which the Tithes are, as of the
Parsonage or Rectory; for if those Religious persons had held but by Lease,
that had not been such an Unity as the Statute intended. 3. It must have been
Libera, free from the payment of any Tithes in any manner; for if their
Farmers, Tenants at Will, or Years, had paid any manner of Tithes before the
Dissolution, it may be a sufficient Bar to avoid the Unity pleaded in discharge
of Tithes. 4. It must have been Perpetua, time out of mind, that such Religious
Houses were Endowed, and such Religious Persons had in their hands both the
Land and the Rectory before the memory of man, or as it seems (according to the
Rules of Common Law) before the first of R. 1. Discharged of Tithes; or if the
Appropriation were Ancient, as in the time of Ed. 4. such is said to be a good
discharge of Tithes, either on the account of Perpetual Unity or of
Prescription Sr. Sim. Degrees. Law of Tithes, chapter 21. and Hugh. Abr. Dism. Sect. 3.
17.
. And at this day such an Unity is said to be a good discharge of Tithes in the
hands of the Kings Patentee, within the Statute of 31 H. 8. Co. 11. par. 13.
Bridle and Nappe^s Case.
. There may be also (as appears at the Common Law) an Unity of Possession,
different from the former, which shall likewise discharge from the payment of
Tithes; but such Discharge is only pro tempore, and therefore though it be an
Unity of Possession, yet it is not a Perpetual Unity in the sense aforesaid: As
if a Parson of a Church purchases a Manor within his Parish, by this
Purchase, and Unity of Possession, the Manor which before was Tithable, is now
become Non Decimabilis, because he cannot pay Tithes to himself; but if he
makes a Lease of his Parsonage and Rectory to a Stranger, the Parson himself
shall pay Tithes of his Manor to his Lessee; and so if the Parson makes a
Feoffment of his Manor, the Feoffee shall pay Tithe to the Parson, because
Tithes are due by the Law of God ex Debito, and cannot be extinct, into whose
hands the Lands come, unless they come to the hands of the Parson himself Mich.
30 H. 8. Dyer 43.
.

Underwood is Tithable, and of Underwoods dug up by the Roots Tithe shall be
paid, and so of Hedge-rows Mich. 11 Jac. C. B. Sharington's Cas.
; likewise of Underwood sold standing the Tithe shall be paid, and that not by
the Seller, but by the Buyer. But Underwood used for sencing of Corn or Pasture
pays no Tithe Hill. 15 Jac. C B. Adjudg. Hide and Ellis Case.
. An Action of Trespass was brought by a Parson against a Vicar for Underwoods,
and each of them did claim the Underwoods by Prescription as his Tithes, that
(although their claim was by Prescription,) yet because the right of the Tithes
was in debate only, the Temporal Court was ousted of the Jurisdiction of them
22 Ed. 4. 24.
. But if a Parson or Vicar claim a portion of Tithes by Prescription only,
which is a Temporal thing, and sueth in the Spiritual Court; it was holden that
a Prohibition lies 29 Eliz. B. R. by S^uit and Cl^rk Justices.
.

In a Prohibition to stay Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court, upon a Libel
there by the Parson for Tithe of Underwood, by reason of a Prescription in Non
Decimando, for the Wild of Kent, this Wood growing in the Wild of Kent. Mich.
12 ^ac. B. R. (...) verse. (...). Bulstr. par. 2.
Henden moved the Court for this Prohibition, for these Reasons, (1) A whole
Country generally may Prescribe in Non Decimando, in a particular place, and
as a whole Country may so do, by the same reason a particular person may. A
second Reason; The Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. gives life unto this
Prescription, for this particular place and precinct. Coke Chief Justice. By
Lindwood, a whole Country may Prescribe in non Decimand^; and so is Dr. and
Stu. cap. ult. fo. 166. b. But it is with this Proviso, so that there is
besides this Maintenance for the Parson; otherwise the same is not good. The
Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. aids you not at all in this Case, for a private
man cannot in this manner Prescribe: And to say, that the Conqueror never
conquered this place; this is but Historical and Apocryphal, for he was
Conqueror by Composition had. It is true, that in former time, long since this
place was not Tithable, because there was no Wood there but great Timber Trees,
which were not Tithable; but these being now cut down, wasted, and destroyed by
the Iron-Mills, and as in many other places; now this place which was not
Tithable before, being now Underwood, and converted into Tillage or Pasture, is
now become Tithable, and Tithe shall be there paid; and if Waste and Barren
Ground, for the which no Tithe has ever been paid, if the same be now
meliorated and converted into Tillage; now by the Common Law Tithes shall be
presently paid for this, unless the same be within the Proviso of the Statute
of 2 Ed. 6. of Exemption from payment of Tithes for a certain time after the
melioration of the same, as appears in the Statute; otherwise Tithes shall be
paid presently: No Tithes could formerly be paid here in this place, because
there were only great Timber Trees here growing; but now clearly they ought to
pay Tithes for the Underwoods, and this is the only Demand here. The whole
Court was clear of Opinion, That no Prohibition should be here granted in this
Case, but that Tithe should be paid. Coke, Will you allow the Parson here in
this place Tithe-Hay and Corn, and not Tithe-Wood? Doderidge, by Lindwood and
Dr. and Stud. a whole Country may be discharged from payment of Tithes; but
this at the first of necessity ought to have a lawful Commencement by way of
Composition, or, etc. Coke agreed with him herein, and said unto Henden, Show
unto us an Ancient Writing, by way of a Composition for your Discharge of
payment of Tithes; the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. makes against you there, though no
Tithe was ever paid, yet upon the melioration of the Land Tithes shall be paid
presently, if the Statute had not been made. The Court were all clear of
Opinion against the granting of a Prohibition, and so no Prohibition awarded.

W
WAges of Servants of the Plough shall not pay any Tithe, as has been
Resolved, Pasch. 14 Jac. B. inter Parson Ellis and Drake; and Prohibition
granted accordingly, although the Libel was but for the Tithe of a Third part
of their Wages, leaving the rest free; for it was said, That by the same reason
that the Cattle of the Plough are free of Tithe, the Wages of the Servants that
follow the Plough are Tithe-free also.

Waste Pasture Lands, 2 H. 4. Rot. Par. nu. 99.
if Tithes in kind be paid for Lambs, Calves, etc. feeding and couching
thereon, Tithes shall not afterward in the same year be paid for Agistments on
the same Waste Pastures. Waste Grounds, not certainly known in what Parish, and
Cattle feeding thereon, the Tithe thereof belongs to the Parson of the Parish
wherein the Owner of the Cattle does dwell.

Wax of Bees is Tithable by the Tenth weight thereof. Tithes ought to be paid
in kind de jure of Wax and Honey of Bees in the Hive. Mich. 15 Car. B. R. inter
Barefoot and Norton, Adjudged in a Prohibition upon a Demurrer, and a
Consultation granted.

Willowes, growing in the soil of a Manor, felled, are not (as is said)
Tithable, though it be waste to fell them Hob. 219.
. No Tithes shall be paid of Willowes in a Country where they are used for
Timber Hob. Rep. Case 288.
. Sed Q. as to the former; for a Record of a Prohibition was showed to the
Court, where a Prohibition was awarded to the Spiritual Court for Tithes of
Willowes upon a Surmize, That they are of use as Timber in the County of
Southampton. And in that Case it was said, If Willowes grow within the Site of
a House, it is Waste to fell them; yet if they be felled, that Tithes shall be
paid of them P. 14 Jac. C. B. rot. 1918. G^ffly and Vindar's Case. Hob. 219.
.

Woad yields a Predial Tithe, and regularly to be computed inter Minutas
Decimas; yet in some Cases may be Great Tithes in places where it is much
sowed; as in Vdall and Tindall's Case Hutt. Rep. 77.
. The Case was, That in Trespass for taking of two Loads of Woad; the Jury
found, That if they were Minutae Decimae, then the Jury found the Defendant
guilty, if they were not Minutae Decimae, then for the Plaintiff: It was said
for the Plaintiff, That without more Circumstances it shall not be intended
Minutae Decimae; for it may be, That a great quantity of Woad may be sown, and
the greatest part of the Commodity in the Parish may consist in it, for Minutae
Decimae are but of small consideration in a Parish, as Herbs in a Garden, and
such like: and therefore Woad sown in a Field is not Minutae Decimae. It was
Resolved by the Court, That Woad growing in the nature of an Herb, the Tithe
thereof ought to be accounted Minutae Decimae, and belong to the Vicar. And the
Dean and Chapter of Norwich Case Pasch. 42 Eliz.
was vouched to prove it, That the Tithe of 40 acres of Land sowed with
Saffron, did belong unto the Vicar, and not to the Parson, because they were
Minutae Decimae. Hill. 1 Car. C. B. Sir Rich. Vdal and the Vicar of Altons
Case. Cro. 3. par. 20. vid. Hutton 77. the same Case.

Wood is computed among the Predial Tithes, as also among the Great Tithes; yet
it has been Resolved, That if a Vicar be only endowed with the Small Tithes,
and has by reason thereof always had the Tithe- Wood, that in such case it
shall be accounted a Small Tithe; otherwise it is to be accounted among the
Great Tithes Roll. 1. 643. v. 2. Bulstr. 27.
. Wood, or a great Wood consisting for the most part of Underwoods, only some
Great Trees here and there sparsim therein, the whole Wood is Tithable, unless
they be specially exempted Adjudg. Trin. 19 Jac. B. R.
. But if the Wood for the most part consist of Timber Trees, only some small
parcel of Underwoods or Bushes in the same, no Tithe shall be paid for such
Wood; the Timber Trees do in that case privilege the rest of the Wood Adjudg.
Hill. 16 Jac. C. B Leonards Case. and 4 El. B. R. Foster and Leonards C.
Adjudg'd accordingly. Cro. 2. par. 199. acc.
. Wood converted into Arable, shall not be discharged of Tithes, as Barren Land
within the Statute of 7 E. 6. Trin. 12 Jac. B. R. Case Maschal and Price. Roll.
Rep. The Tenth acre of Wood in a Coppice is a good payment of the Tithe,
specially if such be the Custom of Tithing Wood in that Country; otherwise
Wood in a Coppice or the like, cut and sold, the Tithe thereof is to be
answered not by the Buyer, but the Seller, as some conceive; which by others is
opposed, who hold, That the Buyer, not the Seller of Woods selled to be sold,
shall answer the Tithe: the Reason is, because Tithes do follow the Fruits; yet
the Parson for his Right, has his Remedy against either: But Wood of Coppices
or Trees that one cuts and spends in his own Housekeeping, though he spend
much, is not Tithable By Hobart Chapter Justice.
, unless the Parson can allege and prove a special Custom to the contrary M 4
Jac. B. R.
; for generally Wood used for Fuel in Housekeeping is not Tithable M. 15 Jac.
C. B. White and Bickerstaffs Case.
, sed Qu. the Custom, it being not so per Legem terrae Tr. 4 Car. C. B. Norton
and Farmer. Case
. Nor is there any Tithe to be paid for such Wood as is cut for Hoppoles, where
Tithe is paid of the Hops dict. Bickerst^ffs Case.
. But where Wood is grubbed up, the Land that thereby is made fit for the
Plough, shall pay Tithe presently. And if the Tithes of Wood, after the
Inheritance thereof sold be subtracted, the Parson may by the Canon Law implead
either the Buyer or the Seller at his choice, though he can recover but of one;
but now by the Statute 2 Ed. 6. 13. vid Roll. 1. 656. l. 1.
the Seller only unto Treble damages. If there be Parson and Vicar in one
Church, and the Vicar has the Tithe of Woods, and the Parson the Tithe of the
Pasture, and Wood be felled for Fencing and enclosing the Pasture, the Vicar
shall not have Tithe of the Wood Hill. 15 Jac. C. B. Hide and Ellis Case.
Adjudged.
. Woodlands converted into Arable or Tillage is not discharged of Tithes as
Heath, Waste, or other Barren Grounds, within the Statute of 7 Ed. 6. Trin. 12
Jac. B. R. Case Maschall verse. Price, in fin. Roll. Rep. A Prohibition in
another Case was granted to stay a Suit for Tithe- Wood, upon a Surmize, That
the Wood was spent in his House for Firing, and shows, that the Custom in the
same Parish is, That the Owners of any House and Land in the said Parish, who
pay Tithes to the Parson, ought not to pay Tithe of Wood spent for Fuel in
their Houses: And Issue being upon this Custom, it was found for the
Defendant. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That although it be found there
is no such Custom, that yet he ought not to pay Tithe for Wood spent in his
house, nor for Fencing-stuff for Hedges, but per Legem terrae ought to be
discharged of them: But it was Resolved by the Court, That it is not de jure
per Legem terrae, that any be discharged of them; for it is usual in
Prohibitions, to allege Customs, or by reason of other Lands whereof he pays
Tithes, that he is discharged of that Tithe, but not to allege, that per Legem
terrae he is discharged: And in this Case, the Plaintiff in the Prohibition
having alleged a Custom, and it being found against him, it was Adjndged for
the Defendant, that a Consultation should be awarded Tr. 4 Car. C. B. Cro. 1.
par. 80. Norton and Fermor's Case.
. By Custom Tithes may be paid for Wood spent in a man's own House. Mich. 14
Jac. B. Watley and Hanberry, Agreed. And albeit there are some Trees, of what
age or bigness soever they be, are regularly to pay Tithes, as Willows, Hasels,
Hollies, Maples, Birch, Alders, Thorns, etc. Hob. 288. and 219. Roll. 640. q. 6,
7, 8. Noy 30. Cro. Jac. 199.
; yet if they are cut for Fencing of Grounds, or for Fuel to be spent in the
Houses of the Owner within the same Parish, no Tithes shall be paid thereof,
unless it has been otherwise by Custom Co. 2. Inst. 652. Cro. El. 499, 609.
and Cro. Car. 113. More 683. Roll. 1. 644. z. 1, 2, 3.
. Also Wood cut for Burning of Bricks, to be used for repair of the Owners
Buildings in the same Parish, pay no Tithes: otherwise, if used for Bricks to
sell, or for making Houses not of necessary habitation, so as the Wood in its
own nature be Tithable Roll. 1. 645. z. 8, 9, 10.
. Likewise Tithe shall not be paid of the Roots of such Coppice-Wood, as paid
Tithe at the cutting thereof, if such Roots were soon after the cutting such
Wood, grubbed up to cleanse the Ground Roll. 1. 637. e. 7.
. If Woodlands be mixed with Woods partly Tithable, partly not Tithable; it has
been held, That if the Major part be not Tithable, it shall privilege the
rest; but if the greater part be Tithable, then all that is Tithable shall pay
Tithes Tr. 19 Jac. B. R. Buckhu^st. verse. Newman. Trin. 36 El. B. R. per
Henden. Pars. Law
. Touching the manner of Tithing of Wood and Trees, and how the Tithes thereof
are to be paid and delivered, the Reader for his better satisfaction may
consult the Authors in the Margent Co. 11 par. 48, 49, 81. Plowd. 470. Brownl.
1. pa. 94. and 2. par. 150. Doct. and Stud. 69.
.

The Parson of Henley brought an Action of Debt for 600 l. upon the Statute of
E. 6. for not setting forth Tithes of Wood, and shows, that the Defendant had
cut down 200 Loads of Wood, to the value of 200 l. and says, that the Tenth
part of that did amount to 200 l, and so he brought his Action for 600 l. upon
the Statute: And the Plaintiff was Nonsuit for one fault in his Declaration;
Pasch. 5 Jac. Man verse. Somerton. Brownl. Rep. pa. 1. Actien^ of Deb.
for whereas he declares the price of the Wood to be 200 l. it was mistaken,
for it should have been 2000 l. for he demanded more for the Tenth part than
the Principal is, by his own showing. If a man buy Wood Tithable, and burn it
in his own House, he shall not pay Tithes thereof, as has been Resolved. And
no Tithes shall be paid for Wood cut and employed for the enclosures in the
Husbandry. Tr. 14 Jac. B. Parson Ellis and Drak^. T^. 38. El. B. R. Pars. Ran
and P^tteson. and Tr. 10 Car. B. R. Brown and Nixon. per Cur.
Also if a man cut Wood and burn it to make Brick for repairing of his
Dwelling House for himself and his Family within the Parish, no Tithes shall be
paid for that Wood, in regard the Parson has benefit by the labor of the
Family: otherwise it is, in case the Bricks were only to enlarge his house
within the Parish, and more than needful for his Family, as for his pleasure or
delight. If a man sell Wood to me, and I burn it in my house, the Vendor shall
stand charged for the Tithes thereof, and not the Vendee, for no Tithes are due
for Wood burnt in the Parishioners house, as has been Resolved. Pasch. 14 Jac.
in B. Parson Ellis and Drakes Case, and Prohibition granted accordingly:
Although it was said, That by the Civil (or rather Canon) Law, the Parson has
his Election to Sue either of them; which is contrary to the Common Law.

In the Lord Clanrickard's Case against Dame Denton, the Plaintiff surmized to
the Court, Mich. 17 Jac. B. R. Roll. Rep. par. 2.
That all the Vill. of Kent, which is a Precinct containig above forty Parishes
time out of mind, etc. have been discharged of the payment of Tithes of Wood
under the age of 20 years, and the Defendant had sued him in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and hereupon had a Prohibition. And the Defendant Traversed the Custom,
which a Jury was taken at the Bar to try; and for inducement of the Custom,
Lindwood was produced in Cap. de Decimis, where it is said, That before that
time Tithes were not paid for Wood, which is contrary to the Old and New
Testament, and that Assertion is made by Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury,
for that this was a Provincial Constitution, that at that time, viz. 17. E. 3.
Tithes of Sylva caedua shall be paid; By which Constitution the Comminalty
finding themselves grieved, exhibited a Bill in Parliament the same year 17 E.
3. reciting the Ancient Usage of not paying such Tithes, and the last
Constitution to the contrary, and prayed a Prohibition to the contrary: To
which Bill answer was made in this manner, viz. Be it done in this case, as it
has been done before this time: And the next year another Petition was made in
Parl. for the same cause; to which it was answered also, That where Tithes of
Wood have not been used to be paid by Custom, that a Prohibition shall be
granted: And these Acts of Parliament the Plaintiffs Counsel produced out of
the Parliament-Rolls. Crook Justice gave the Rule, viz. Quod de grossis
a^boribus Decimae non dabuntur, sed de Sylva Caedua Decimae dabuntur. Vid. Dr.
and Stu. 164. a. 169. b. Anscombe said, The Doctor and Student mistook the
maker of that Constitution of Stratford Archbishop.

In a Prohibition for Tithes of Wood it was suggested, That in the Parish there
is a Custom, Somerton and Cotton's Case. Cro. par. 1.
that all the Parsons of the said Church, time out of mind Habuerunt and gavisi
fuerunt such Lands, parcel of the Manner of F. in recompense of all Tithe- Wood
within the Parish: It was the Opinion of the Justices, that it was a good
Prescription; for it may be that at the beginning all the Land was parcel of
the Manor, and then the allowance of the Profits of this Land was allotted in
discharge of the Tithes of all the Woods within the Parish.

In Prohibition to stay a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes- Wood it
was showed, that the Custom of the Parish is, That the Owners of any House and
Land in the Parish, who pay Tithe to the Parson, Norton and Fermor's Case Cro.
par. 3.
ought not to pay Tithe for Wood spent for Fuel in their Houses: It being found
for the Defendant, the Issue being upon the Custom; It was said, That
notwithstanding there were any such Custom, yet Tithe ought not to be paid for
Wood spent for Fuel, nor for Fencing-stuff, but per Legem terrae he ought to be
discharged thereof. Resolved, It is not de jure per Legem terrae, that any one
is discharged of them; for it is usual in Parishioners to allege a Custom,
but not to allege that per Legem terrae he is discharged: And in this case the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition having alleged a Custom, and it being found
against him, a Cousultation was awarded.

A Composition was betwixt an Abbot and a Parson, that in recompense of the
Tithes of all the Woods within the Manor, whereof the Abbot Owner, That he
should have to him and his Successor 20 Loads of Wood every year in 20 Acres of
the said Manor to burn and spend in his House: The Parsonage was Appropriate
to the Abbey, and after the Abbey was dissolved; the King granted the Parsonage
to one, and the 20 Acres to another. It was Resolved, That by the Unity the
Estovers were not extinct; for it they be Tithes they are not extinct by this
Unity of possession, for that Tithes run with the Lands: and Tithes de jure
Divino and Canonica Institutione do appertain to the Clergy.

Wool of Sheep is Tithable proportionably to the time they are in the Parish;
as thus, viz. The Parson shall have Eight pound of Wool in Eighty, of Forty
Sheep in the Parish a whole year: Four pound of Wool in Forty, if they were
there but half the year: Two pound of Wool in Twenty, if they were there but
Three months: and but the Tithe or Tenth of the Twelfth part of the Wool, if
the lay and fed but One month in the Parish. The Wool of Sheep shorn and dying
before Easter next following such shearing, is not Tithable, unless the Parson
or Vicar can allege a special Prescription for it. Therefore Q. where by
Prescription such Tithe is claimed Fitz. N. B. Consultation 51. g.
. It is said also, That a Custom to pay a Halfpeny for the Wool de ovibus
venditis, after shearing and before Michaelmass, is good; and that the Sheep
discharged shall be Weathers as well as Ewes More. Case. 1283.
. Also Wool-locks and Flocks of Wool, after the Wool made, are likewise
Tithable, if there be more than ordinary left, otherwise not: And if a
Prescription be alleged to be discharged of Locks of Wool, it must be set
forth of Wool casually lost More. ibid.
. For Wool and Lamb, no Action lies upon the Statute for not setting out of
Tithes, for they are no Predial Tithes: and no Action lies upon this Statute
for Small Tithes. vid. Brownl. Rep. par. 1. Cases in Law, etc. yet Wool and
Lamb are said to be Predial mixed Tithes. Mich. 8 Jac. B. By the Decree or Canon
of the Provincial Constitutions the payment of the Tithe of Wool is regulated
as the Tithe of Lambs, viz. That if the Parishioner has under Seven Fleeces,
he shall pay a Halspeny for every Fleece; and if there be Seven Fleeces and
under Ten, then the Parson or Vicar is to allow a Halfpeny for every one that
is wanting of Ten. Lindw. cap. Quoniam propter. And albeit by the said Decree,
Election is given to the Parson to receive his Tithe in manner aforesaid, or to
let them run on till a Fleece in kind be due in the ensuing year; yet it seems
by the Common Law Tithes must be paid annually P. 14 Eliz. Harpur's Rep.
. Although Tithe cannot be denied of Locks and Pelts of Wool, where there is
much in quantity; yet it has been Resolved, That where Tithe-Fleeces of Wool
are paid, there shall be no Tithe paid of the Locks and Pelts of Wool Cro. El.
363. T.
. Also where the Custom is to shear the Necks of Sheep about Michaelmass, to
prevent the tearing off of the same by Thorns by Briars in the Winter, if this
be done without fraud, and not to deceive the Parson, then no Tithe shall be
paid for the same Roll. 1. c. 45. z. ^4, 15, 16. Bulstr. l. 3. 242. Fess and
Parker's Case.
. But for the Wool of Sheep dying of the Rot, or any other disease, or killed
or sold by the Owner, Tithe shall be paid ratably for the same Roll. 1. 646. z.
18.
. And yet it has been otherwise Resolved, and that Tithe shall not be paid of
the Pelts and Fells of Wool of Sheep which die of the Rot, without a Special
Custom for it: For where the Vicar of Kilmonsden in the County of Somerset,
Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithe of the Wool of Sheep, which died
of the Rot, a Prohibition was granted Tr. 3. Car. B. R. Ashton and Wilters Case.
. Nor shall Tithe be paid of the Wool of those Sheep, which after they be
shorn, do die before the Feast of Easter next following: The Reasons are, (1)
Because they are but of small or no value. (2) Because the Owner of the Sheep
has paid Tithes for them the same year, and there shall not be a double Tithe
paid for one and the same thing in one and the same year. (3) Because Tithe
shall be paid of the clear profit only; but if the Sheep do die before the
Feast of Easter, all the profit of them is lost, for which reason to demand
Tithes for the same, were Afflictionem addere Afflicto 15 Car. B. R. adjudged.
vid. M. 2. Car. B R. Poph. 197. Hugh. Abr. Dismes, Sect. 5.. 21.
. Where a Prohibition was prayed, because the Parson Libelled in the
Ecclesiastical Court for the Tenth part of a Bargain of Sheep, which had
depastured in the Parish from Michaelmass to our Lady Day: the party Surmizing,
That he would pay the Tenth part of the Wool of them, according to the Custom
of the Parish. The Court would not grant a Prohibition, for that by this way
the Parson might be defrauded of all, and the Sheep being now gone to another
Parish, he cannot have any Wool at this time, because it was not the time or
season of shearing. Note in that Case it was said, That de Animalibus
Inutilibus, the Parson shall have the Third part of the Bargain for Depasture,
as Horses, Oxen, etc. But de Animalibus Vtilibus, he shall have Tithe in specie
Mich. 2 Car. B R. Hob. 197.
. Finally, to obtain a Prohibition a man alleged inter alia a Custom, That
they used to clip the Wool from the Necks of their Sheep for the preservation
of them, as aforesaid, and at Shearing they used to pay the Tenth Fleece, in
consideration whereof they used to be discharged of the payment of Tithes of
Neck- Wool: Issue being joined upon this and other Prescriptions then pleaded,
and found against the Plaintiff. It was moved, That no Consultation might be
awarded, but it was Adjudged for the Defendant; for the Prohibition is grounded
upon the Prescription, and being found against it, that, etc. Wherefore being
found for the Plaintiff, a Consultation was granted. Trin. 18 Jac. B. R. Jouce
and Parker's Case. Cro. 2. Par. 575. vid. Bulstr. 3. par. 242, 243. the same
Case. Hughe's Abridg. Dismes, Sect. 5.. 23.

An Action of Debt brought upon the Statute of E. 6. for not setting forth of
Tithes, Trin. 8 Jac. Rot. 134. Pain verse. Nichol. Brownl. Rep. par. 1. ^ctions
of Debt.
and the Plaintiff declared as well for the Predial Tithes, for which he might
well bring his Action, as for other Tithes, as of Wool and Lamb, for which no
Action on that Statute would lie; and upon Trial the Jury found for all, as
well for those that would, as would not bear an Action; and after a Verdict
this Exception was taken, and Judgment arrested. If a man pay Tithe of Lamb at
St. Marks-tide, and after at Midsomer he shear the rest of the Lambs, Pasch. 16
Jac. (...) inter Ni^^cls and Hooper, per Cur.
viz. the Nine parts, he ought to pay the Tithe of Wool for them, although
there be but Two months between the time of payment of the Tithes of the Lamb
that were not shorn, paid with their Fleeces, and the shearing of the rest, for
it is a new increase; in this case Prohibition was therefore denied. Tr. 12
Jac. B. R. between Marskall and Price. Dubit. Mich. 14 Jac. B. R. between Joyse
and Parker. per Cur.
But a man shall not pay any Tithe of Herbage of Sheep, for that he pays Tithe
of the Wool, for otherwise he should pay Tithes twice of the same Increase. If
a man shear his Sheep only about the Neck to preserve them from the Vermin, and
not for the profit of the Wool, the Parson shall have no Tithes thereof; but
otherwise it is, if they are much shorn by Covin for the benefit of the Wool:
the Law is the same, if they are shorn about the Necks without fraud but two
Months before and two Months after Michaelmass to preserve them and their
Fleeces from the Brambles, Case ibid.
no Tithes shall be paid thereof, for it appears that they were not shorn for
the benefit of the Wool, it being done at that time before the Flecces are
increased after their being shorn throughout. P. 14 Car. B. R. inter Dent and
Salvin, per Cur.
Likewise, if a Parishioner cut off the dirty Locks of his Sheep, for their
better preservation from the Vermin, before the Shearing-time, and that without
fraud, no Tithes shall be paid thereof; and Prohibition granted in this case.
But if a man kill sheep, he shall yet pay Tithes of the Wool that comes of
them, Ibid.
but not for their Skins.

For a Prohibition for suing for Tithes of Locks of Wool, it was suggested, he
had paid the Tenth Fleece of Wool in satisfaction of all Locks and Tithes due
for Wool: J^s^p and Pains Case. Cro. par. 1.
The Court held, that in this case the substance of the Prescription was good
enough, because Locks be not of the same value with the Fleece: But in regard
of a fault in the Suggestion, that it was not ( that they had usually paid)
which is issuable, a Consultation was awarded.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Banns.
1. Whence the probable derivation of that word, and what it signifies. 2. The
manner and form of Publication of Banns according to the Provincial
Constitutions. 3. By whom Licenses for Dispensation of Banns may be granted
according to the Canons; Also to whom, and under what Conditions or Cautions.
4. Requisites or Preparatories in Law unto such Licenses. 5. A Case at Common
Law, with the Resolutions of the Court relating to Banns, with the power of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction therein.
(1.) BANNS (bannus vel bannum) if Ban in the British Language signifies
clamor, as Mr. Blount gives it in his Nomo-Lexicon, then we need seek no
further for its Derivation: Bannos, Q. an non declinata voce a Graece. (...)
omne, (...) innotescat. Mutatur enim facile (...) in (...). For though the Word
be frequently mentioned by the Feudists, and thence applied to other uses, as
to that which we here in this Kingdom call a Proclamation, whereby any thing is
by Authority publicly Commanded, Permitted, or Forbidden, Vincen. de Franch.
Decis. 521, and 360. yet in the Sense here meant and intended, it is not so
properly a Proclamation as a Publication or a public Notice-giving. And
therefore by the word Banns, as we use it, is intended that publishing of
Matrimonial Contracts in the Church tempore Divnorum, before Solemnization of
Marriage, to the end, That if any have ought material to object against the
intended Marriage signified by such Publication, either in respect of
Pre-contract or otherwise, they may seasonably make their Exception against it,
consonant to the very Letter of the Canon Law, where Banna sunt proclamationes
Sponsi and Spansae in Ecclesiis fieri solitae. c. 27. extr. de Spons. etc. ult.
Qui Matrim. pos. etc. ult. de clandest. Despon. vid. Gothof. ad Nov. Leon. 89.
in med. ibi. Hottoman is very confident that there is both bannns and bannum,
and that they signify Two distinct things, and neither of them to our purpose;
for according to his exposition, the one should signify an Edict what day
their Vassals or Slaves furnished with Horse and shall encounter one another;
the other a Sanction or Decree, that is, a Mulct or Fine imposed on him that
does not obey the Edict. Hottom. in verb. Bannus. De verbis Feudalibus.

(2.) In the Provincial Constitutions Banna are public Proclamations or
Denuntiations; Lind. Provin. Constit. de cland. Despon. c. 1. glos. verb.
Bannorum. Others describe them to be Edicta public proposita; Petr. de Anchor.
in cap. cum in tua Ext. de Sponsal. By the said Provincial Constitutions the
Banns ought to be Solemn Publications, that is, they ought to be thrice
published in the Parochial Churches where the contracting Parties and their
Parents dwell, on 3 Sabbath days or 3 Festival days (allowing some interval of
time between each) at the time of Divine Service, when most of the Parishioners
are assembled together, by the Parsons of the said Parishes respectively, or
others in holy Orders, at such times and seasons wherein Solemnization of
Marriage is not Canonically prohibited, glos. verb. Bannorum, ubi supra. Yet
where three Festivals immediately succeed each other, such Publication in them
made holds good in Law; Prove. Constable. de Spons. glos. in verb. a se distantibus:
As also shall the Marriage it self, when once solemnized, albeit such
Publication of Banns, as aforesaid, did not precede the same. gl. in v. Solen.
Edit. de cland Despon. ubi supra.

(3.) But by the Ecclesiastical Canons now in force, it is Ordained Can. 101,
102, 103, 104.
That no License for the Solemnization of Marriage shall be granted, without
thrice open Publication of the Banns, according to the Book of Common Prayer,
by any Person exercising any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or claiming any
Privileges in the right of their Churches; but shall be granted only by such
as have Episcopal Authority, or the Commissary for Faculties, Vicars General of
the Archbishops and Bishops sede plena, or sede vacant, the Guardian of the
Spiritualties, or Ordinaries exercising of right Episcopal Jurisdiction in
their several Jurisdictions respectively, and unto such Persons only as be of
good State and Quality, and that upon good caution and security; which shall
contain these four Conditions. (1) That therein is not any Impediment or
Precontract, Consanguinity, Affinity, or other lawful Cause to hinder the said
Marriage. (2) That there is not any Suit depending in any Court before any
Ecclesiastical Judge, touching any Contract or Marriage of either of the said
Parties with any other. (3) That they have the consent of their Parents or
Guardians. (4) That they shall celebrate the said Marriage publicly in the
Parish Church or Chapel where one of them dwells, and that between the hours
of 8 and 12 in the Forenoon. Pasch. 8. Car. B. R. case Matingley verse. Martyn.
It was resolved, that if any Marry without the Proclamation of Banns, or
License to dispense therewith, they are citable for the same in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and no Prohibition lies in the case. Jones Rep.

(4.) Before any such License (as aforesaid) can be granted, it must appear to
the Judge by the Oaths of two sufficient witnesses, that the Consent of the
Parents or Guardians is thereunto obtained; and one of the Parties must
personally swear, that he beleives there is no Let or Impediment of
Precontract, Kindred, or Alliance, or of any other lawful Cause whatsoever, nor
any Suit commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court, to hinder the said Marriage
according to the Tenor of the said License; But in case the Parties be in
Widowhood, then the Clause relating to the Parents Consent may be omitted; the
penalty for offending in the Premises is six months suspension ab executione
Officii in any Commissary for Faculties Vicars General or other the said
Ordinaries, together with a vacating of every such License or Dispensation, and
subjecting the Parties marrying to the punishments appointed for clandestine
Marriages. The Syntagmatist tells us, that there is a Canon extant, made by John
Metropolitan of Muscovy, who is held as a Prophet in Russia to this day, that
Matrimonium non nisi public in Ecclesiis contrahatur. Petrus Gregor. Tholos.
Synt. jur. l. 9. c. 5. n. 10.


(5) In the case of Matingly against Martyn it was resolved (1) That the
Cognuzance of all fornications, Adulteries, and suspected living in Adultery
does appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court, Pasc. 8. Car. B. R. Matinley verse.
Martyn. Jones Rep.
(2) That if any marry without proclamation of the Banns, and without a License
to dispense therewith, they are citable in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
same, and no Prohibition lies in that case (as aforesaid.) (3) That if any
Licenses to marry without Banns be granted by the Ordinary of the Diocese, or
by Commissaries or Officials in their Jurisdictions, or by the Archbishop in
his Province before the Stat. of 25. H. 8. The Cognuzance of the sufficiency of
such License, of the form of the Dispensation, and of the Conditions and
Provisoes of such License, and whether sufficient Notice thereof were given or
not, are examinable only in the Ecclesiastical Court; and when the License is
sufficient, and the Provisoes well and duly observed, and Notice thereof, and
This be refused or rejected in the Ecclesiastical Court, yet no Prohibition
lies, but the Party grieved must have his Remedy by way of Appeal, and not
otherwise. (4) That where power is given by Act of Parliament to the Archbishop
to grant License either de novo or in Confirmation of his Authority, yet the
form of the Dispensation, and the observation of the Provisoes and Conditions
thereof, and whether sufficient Notice were given or not, are examinable in the
Ecclesiastical Court; and if they there adjudg in that case irregularly, no
Prohibition lies, but the Remedy is only by way of Appeal: But if it come into
question in the Ecclesiastical Court, whether the words of the Act of 25. H. 8.
do give sufficient power to the Archbishop to grant a License, there if the
Ecclesiastical Court does judge against the power, a Prohibition lies, and not
otherwise; but if they allow the License in point of power, and only insist
upon the Form, and Notice, and other Circumstances, in such case a Prohibition
does not lie: For though a power to grant Licenses be by Act of Parliament,
which is a Temporal thing, yet the License it self remains an Ecclesiastical
thing, and the examination of all these things (saving the Power) remains to
the Ecclesiastical Court as it was before.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of Adultery.
1. What Adultery is, why so called, and in what Court Cognizable. 2. The
Punishment of Adultery under the Levitical Law; and what it was anciently by
the Civil Law. 3. The several Punishments thereof anciently according to the
Quality of the Offenders respectively. 4. Adulterers compared to Idolaters;
strange Punishments of Adultery among the ancient Pagans. 5. The Severity of
certain Ecclesiastical Laws in ancient times against Adultery. 6. The Customs
among the Arabians, Mahumetans, Tartars, Indians, Pagans, in punishing
Adulterers. 7. The Civil Law touching Jealousy, and second Marriage the former
Husband then living. 8. Adultery, what in sensu largo; how the punishment
thereof is now mitigated at the Civil Law to what it was anciently; and how
punished at the Canon Law. 9. The diversity of punishments inflicted on
Adulterers according to the diverse Customs of Nations respectively. 10. In what
respect the Temporal Laws may take some Cognizance of Adultery. 11. What the
Saxons of old in this Kingdom called the Punishment of Adultery; the remarkable
Case of Sr. Jo. de Camois. 11. Adultery falls under a Threefold Consideration of
Law; the History of the Adulterous Stork.
(1.) ADULTERY, or Adulterium, quasi [ ad alterius thorum] where the Rights of
lawful Matrimony are violated, Lindwood's Constable. de Offic. Archipresb. verb.
tertium mandat. is the Incontinencie of Married persons, or of persons whereof
the one at least is under the Conjugal Vow. Adulterium est illicitus Concubitus
conjugati and conjugatae.
This is properly cognizable within the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; the
Conviction whereof is by Examination and other Legal proof requisite by the Law
of the Church; which if committed by any of the Clergy, duly convicted
thereof, he was punishable by Imprisonment at the discretion of the Bishop or
Ordinary of that Diocese wherein he resides. St. 1. H. 7.


(2.) By the Levitical Law Adultery was punished with Death in both Sexes, Lev.
20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
yea Stoned to death. Joh. 8. 5.
By the Civil Law also, which calls it the Violating of another man's Bed, the
Punishment anciently was Death, both in the Man and in the woman: But
afterward the Punishment was mitigated by that Law as to the Woman, she being
first whipped, and then shut up in a Monastery; but by the Canons other Laws are
inflicted.

(3.) At the Synod in Ireland, held by St. Patrick and other Bishops an. 456.
by the 19 th. Canon thereof the Adulterers were to be excommunicated. At the
Council held at Berghamstead by Bertwald Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop
of Hereford and others, in the fifth year of Withred King of Kent an. 697.
several Laws were made against Adultery, according to the several qualities and
conditions of the Persons offending respectively; beside Excommunication
against all such; if the Adulterer were an Alien, he was to depart the Land,
and to take his Sins and his Estate away with him: If a Soldier, then to be
fined five pounds: If a Rustic or Country Husbandman (known in the Law by [
Paganus]) then to pay fifty shillings: If a Priest, then to be inhibited from
administering the Sacrament of Baptism.

(4.) Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, when he was the Popes Legate in Germany,
an. 745. in his Epistle to AEthelbald King of Mercia, compares Adulterers to
Idolaters; and moreover says, that the Greeks and Romans Compared Adultery to
Blasphemy, when committed by or with one of religious Orders; and adds, that
among the Pagans, in the time of the old Saxons the very pactice was, that if a
Virgin Adulterously defiled her Fathers Family, or a Married woman played the
whore, they were enforced to be their own Executioners, and by their own hands
to reduce themselves by Strangling to dead Corpse, which being after burnt, the
Adulterer was hanged over the Ashes thereof; and at other times the Adulteresses
were by those of their own Sex, out of their Zeal to Chastity, whipped from
Village to Village, till they were whipped to death. In Antiqua Saxonia, In
epist. Bonifac. ad Ethelbald. Ang. Reg. Antiq. Brit. f. 60. n. 20.
ubi nulla est Christi cognitio, si Virgo in paterna domo maritata, sub Conjuge
fuerit adulterata, manu propria strangulatam cremant, and supra fossam sepultae
corruptorem suspendunt; aut cingulo tenus vestibus abscisis flagellant eam
castae matronae, and cultellis pungunt, and de Villa in Villam inter se
occurrunt novae flagellatrices, donec interimant. Seldeni ad Eadmerum Notae and
Specilegium. p 185. l. 37.
By the Laws of William the Conqueror the Adulterer was to be put to death. Si
Pater deprehenderit Filiam in Adulterio in domo sua, seu in domo Generi sui,
been licebit ei our ( lege forsan occire, occidere) Adulterium.

(5.) In the Ecclesiastical Laws of Keneth King of Scots, an. 840. By the 14
th. and 15. Canon thereof it is ordained, That he who deflowrs a Virgin, shall
dye for it, unless she desires him for her Husband; and that he who Adulterates
another man's Wife not dissenting, Both shall suffer the severest punishment,
unless she were under a force, in which case she shall be acquitted. By the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Hoel Dak King of Wales, an. 940. it was a sufficient
cause of Divorce, if a Woman did but kiss any other man than her Husband. l.
18. Yea she must lose her Dower and all her Rights by that Law, and only for a
kiss; and by the same Law Adultery in the Man was held as a kind of Hostility.
In the time of the latter Saxons by the Ecclesiastical Laws of King Edmund, an.
944. Adulterers and Murderers had one and the same punishment, and both alike
denied Christian Burial. After him, by the Ecclesiastical Laws of King Knute,
an. 1032. Adulterers and such as violated the Chastity of a Widow or a Virgin,
were to be banished and their Estates confiscate: And in case a Wife played the
Strumpet, her Husband living, he was to possess himself of all her Estate Real
as well as Personal, and she to have her Nose and Ears cut off, and an
indelible Blot with perpetual Infamy to remain upon her Family.

(6.) The Arabians (as Strabo relates) though they used Incestuous Copulation
with Sister and Mother, yet punished Adultery with death; but that only was
Adultery in their account, which was out of the same Lineage or Kindred, for
otherwise All of the same Blood to use the same Woman, was but their (
Incestuous) Honesty. And by the very Alchoran not only is an unchaste Look on
another man's Wife forbiden, but also if a Wife be convicted of Adultery by the
testimony of four Women, she is confined to perpetual Imprisonment in her own
house till she dies, and none suffered to come at her: And in some parts of the
Grand Signiors Territories the Turks have a custom to thrust the Adulterers
head into a Dung-Wallet of the Panch of a Beast new killed, and so to carry him
through the Streets; but for a Christian to have Carnal knowledge of any of
their women, is death, unless he turn Turk. And with the Tartars their Women
are so chaste, as that Adultery is seldom heard of among them, but when it
happens to be committed, they punish it also with death. Vin. l. 3. c. 86.
Among the very Pagan Indians as at Dominica, Cuiana, Bantam, Japan, and other
parts of the Indies Adultery is punished with death: Scot. Hist.
Likewise the Javans and Chinois or Chinesses inflict the same punishment of
death on Adulterers; and at Pequin, the City where the King of China makes his
Residence, the Dowries or Joyntures of convicted Adulteresses are bestowed on
the Hospitals of Female Orphans; Purch. Pilg. p. 3. l. 2. c. 2. 5.
and at Petane, a Province joining to Chinas their Noble Personages are for
Adultery even by their own Parent either strangled or stabbed to death, at their
own choice which. At Brasile, the Husband might kill his Adulterous Wife,
Lerius c. 17.
and at Mexico or New Spain Adultery was death; Mex. Hist.
also by the Laws of the Inguas, the ancient Lords of Peru, Adultery and Incest
with Ascendents or Descendents in the Direct Line was punished with death; yet
they held it no Adultery to have many Wives, whereof one only was principal,
with whom Marriage was contracted, whom they wedded and received with a
particular Matrimonial Ceremony, She only was held as the Adulteress, and with
the Adulterer died for it; the others being rather Concubines than Wives, were
not understood by them as capable of this offense or punishment. Purc. Pil. p.
3. l. 5. c. 6.
Indeed in the Kingdom of Angola in AEthipia and at Bengala in the Indies
Adultery is but the loss of the Adulterers Nose, Lins. c. 16.
and in Guinea it is in the Woman but a Divorce and Banishment from her house,
and in the Adulterer but a forfeiture of 24 Peso's of gold to the King; and
among the Jews, now since the Sword and Scepter departed from Judah, it is but
a Penalty in stead of a punishment, and but a standing up to the Chin in cold
water to quench the Flames of Lust. These Presidents are not here quoted for
Laws, but only to let us see what Constructions even Pagans and Mahumetans have
made of Adultery.

(7) By the Civil Law, a man jealous of his wife, may accuse her before a
Competent Judge of Adultery, if after three admonitions, in the presence of
three credible Persons, given to the Person suspected of too much Familiarity
with her, he refrain not from her company and communication with her. Auth.
Coll. 9. By which Law also both Sexes are punished as guilty of Adultery; if a
Woman, whose Husband is abroad in the Wars, or otherwise absent, marry again,
before she has certain intelligence of his death either from the Commander
under whom he served, or from the Governor of the place where he died; for
without such certain intelligence, if she presume to marry again (how long
soever her Husband is otherwise absent from her) both she and he who married
her shall be punished as Adulterers; and if her former Husband after such her
second Marriage return back again, she also shall return back again to her
former Husband, if he will receive her, otherwise she shall live apart from
them both, Auth. Coll. ibid. Blackden married one within age, and after
disagreed, so that they might Marry elsewhere; and the first wife had Issue by
other Husbands, and died; and Blackden was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court by
an Informer, supposing he had married a woman, living his other wife, and
Blackden there proves the disagreement, by which he had Sentence for him
against the Informer, and yet he was taxed to give the Informer 20 Marks for
costs, which he refused to pay, and moved for a Prohibition, which was granted:
For it was Injustice to allow costs to one who had vexed him without cause, and
when Sentence had been given against the Informer.

(8.) This Adultery or Adulterium, quasi [ad alterum] being (as aforesaid) an
unlawful access ad alterius thorum, although it properly refers to one or both
such as is or are in a Matrimonial State, yet by abuse of words it is also
commonly understood of corrupting or violating the Chastity of a Virgin or a
Widow; as when we usually say, such or such natural things are adulterated,
when by reason of some Artifice they are corrupted and become not truly
natural; and such Wares and Merchandises are adulterated, when there is some
Fraud in the case, and so Adultery is repugnant to the very Nature of
Matrimony, which of Two makes One, when as the other of One makes Two: The
punishment whereof was anciently by the Civil Law, Capital as to the Man: But
by the latter Laws of the Authenticks, the Women are first whipped, then thrust
into Monasteries; and by the Canon Law it is Excommunication.

(9.) Plato made a Law, that whoever killed an Adulterer, should go unpunished.
The Inhabitants of Arabia Foelix punished it with death. Seleucus, otherwise
Nicanor, King of Syria, that succeeded Alexander in the Government of that part
of the Empire, decreed that whoever was apprehended in Adultery should be
exoculated, or have his eyes plucked out, which afterward happened to be
impartially first executed on his own Son AElianus.
. And albeit according to the proper Construction of words there is a
difference put between Adulterium and Stuprum, the former referring to persons
married, the other to Widows or Virgins. Modestin. in l. inter Stuprum ff. de
verb. Sig. Yet by the Julian Law the word [Adultery] is used indifferently in
reference to both: Id. Modest. in L. Stuprum. Ad L. Jul. de Adult. But to speak
properly, they are not Termini convertibiles, for though all Adultery be
Whoredom, yet every Whoredom is not Adultery; each of which have their
respective punishments according to the Laws and Customs of the place where
they are committed. Grotius out of Lessius affirms, that the Adulterer and
Adulteress are not only obliged to indemnifie the innocent party as to all
charges of Alimentation of the unlawfully begotten, but also to make good what
damage the Legitimate Children may thereby suffer in their Inheritance, and
whoever does lessen the Reputation of a Virgin either by force or insinuations,
shall refund to her as much as she is thereby fallen in value, upon the hopes
or expectation of her Preferment in Marriage: But if by his Solicitations he
has obtained the use of her body under a promise of Marriage, he is obliged to
marry her accordingly. Grot. de jur. bell. lib. 2. cap. 17.. 5. and Less. lib.
11. cap. 10. Dub. 6.

(10.) Although this Sin of Adultery, is properly and of right belonging to the
Cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, yet it will not be denied, but
that as it is an offense against the peace of the Realm (for which reason some
are of opinion that Avoutry or Bandry is an offense Temporal as well as
Spiritual) the Justices of the Peace may out of their Sessions require Surety
for the good Behavior of such as offend therein, as also of such as by Common
Fame are reputed Resorters to houses suspected of maintaining Adultery or
Incontinency, of such as keep such houses, of lewd Women found in such houses,
of common Whoremongers and common Whores; 28. Eliz. by Wray, Anderson, and
manwood. Crom. 140.
And upon Information given to a Constable, that a Man and a Woman be in
Adultery or Fornication together (or that a Man and woman of evil Fame or
Report are gone to a suspected house in the night) the Officer may take company
with him, and if he find them so, he may carry them to Prison, or before a
Justice of Peace to find Sureties for the good Behavior. 13. H. 7. 10. Br.
Travers. 432.


(11. The Punishment of Adultery is diversified according to the Laws and
Customs of several Nations respectively as forementioned, and the Penalty
thereof with the Saxons of old in this Kingdom was called Lairwite or
Lecherwite, and Legergeldum, from two Saxon words signifying it seems
concumbere and mulcta, Bl. Nomo. Lex. Verb. Lairwite.
a Fine or Custom of punishing offenders of that kind; which Privilege is said
to have belonged anciently to the Lords of some Manors, in reference to their
Villains and Tenants. Vid. Fleta. l. 1. c. 47. to this purpose and Co. Inst.
par. 4. fo. 206.
And by Statute Law, as also by the law of the Land, a Wife that clopes, and
departs from her Husband with an Adulterer, and refuses to be reconciled to
him, loses or forfeits her Dower or Jointure, St. West. 3 c. 34. Co. 2. p.
Inst. fo. 433.
yea though she departed from him with his own consent, to which purpose
remarkable is that Case of Sr. John de Camois, Son of the Lord Ralph Camois, in
the time of Ed. the first, who of his own voluntary Will gave and demised his
own Wife Margaret, a Daughter and Heir of John de Gaidesden unto Sr. William
Pannell Knight. and together with her gave, granted released, and Quit-claimed all
her Goods and Chattels etc. so that neither himself nor any other in his name,
should ever after make any claim, or challenge any interest in the said
Margaret, or to or in her Goods or Chattels, etc. Whereupon, she demanding her
Dower in part of the Lands of Sr. John Camois there happened a Suit at Law,
wherein she was overthrown by Judgment given, That she ought to have no Dower
out of his Estate, upon the Stat. of Westminster. 2. Quia recessit a Marito suo in
vita sua, and vixit ut Adultera cum praedicto Gulielmo, etc. Camd. Brit. tit.
Sussex. and Co. Inst. 2. p. fo. 475.


(12.) There are of the Church of Rome, who hold that Adultery in conjugato cum
soluta is minus peccatum quam in conjugata cum soluto; the reason they give for
it is, for that it is far more repugnant to the Law of Nature that one Woman
should be joined to two Men, than e contra, and suppose that Bigamy in the
Patriarchs of old is an impregnable Fortification of that Reason; the Feminine
Sex will give them but little thanks for this Opinion: But leaving them to
enjoy the one and the other, we hold that This, as to the Inquiry and
Punishment thereof, is properly within the Ecclesiastical Cognizance, it being
most consonant to Reason, that in what Jurisdiction Matrimonial Causes are
controvertible, in the same should the Violation of Conjugal Rights be
discussed; to which end, as well the Civil as Canon Law (though that
especially) are furnished with great variety of Constitutions, to obviate all
manner of circumstances relating to this Subject. Pasch. 8. car. B. R. Case
Matingly verse. Martyn. It was resolved, that the cognizance of all
Fornications, Adulteries, and of persons suspected to live in Adultery, does
belong to the Ecclesiastical Court. Jones Rep. So then Adulterium being quasi
Accessio ad alterius thorum, is the violation of another Bed; whence it is
required, that either both, or one of the Parties, be under the Matrimonial
Vow; for that conjugal circumstance, either in the Male or Female, is as the
causa sine qua non, that the luxurious Act falls under the notion of Adultery,
in distinction from acts of the same kind under other circumstances: For the
Law holds, that it may be committed in a threefold manner, either ex part
viri, vel feminae, vel utriusque always supposing that one or both are
Matrimonializ'd, and both living. The Penalty of Adultery has varied according
to the Laws and Customs of several Nations, and of several Ages in the same
Nation; as appears by what has been said on this Subject; Lessius de Just. and
jur. lib. 4. cap 3. Dob. 10. nu. 71.
The punishment of this epidemical evil, the very Brutes and mere Animals have
given us a president of, if credit may be given to such as have made report of
the Stork, of which Lessius writes out of another Author, as being a Creature
of strange abhorrency and revenge of Adultery, that by the very instinct of
Nature the jealous Animal, impatient of vindicating his defiled Nest, summoned
others of the same Feather to advise in the Case, Testifying that in his own
time a certain Stork being as it were convicted of Adultery per olfactum
masculi sui or the smelling of her Male, he convened a Flock of other Storks,
before whom he so prosecuted ( Nescio qualiter, says the Author) the
Indictment against the Female Stork, that she was first deplum'd, then torn in
pieces, by the rude Multude of the other Storks, as if in a solemn Council they
had all unanimosly sentenced her to death as an Adulteress. If the report seems
improbable, yet the Moral is very applicable.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Bastards and Bastardy.
1. What Bastard signifies; the derivation of that word. 2. The difference
between Bastard and Mulier; what Mulier signifies; and why so called. 3.
Bastardy distinguished at the Common Law into Special and General Bastardy. 4.
The Presumptions of Law touching Bastardy, in case of the Husbands obsence from
his Wife. 5. Five Appellations of Bastards for distinctions sake at the Civil
Law, with respect to the several qualities of the Persons of whom they were
begotten. 6. The different modes of prosecution of Bastardy in the Temporal and
Ecclesiastical Courts. 7. Limitation of Time in reference to Birth and Bastardy
by the Civil Law; The chaste Widow of Paris, whose Child born the 14 th Month
after her Husbands death, was adjudged Legitimate. 8. Of a Child born before
Marriage, or immediately after Marriage; or long after Marriage of a Woman
whose Husband dyed without Bedding her, whether Bastard or not? 9. The legal
computations of Time touching the Birth of a Child, whether Legitimate or not,
And of such as are begotten after a Divorce. 10. The punishment of a Woman
having a Bastard, that may be chargeable to the Parish. 11. How the same Person
may in diverse respects be both a Bastard or Nullius Filius, and yet a Son. 12.
The Physicians report in Court, in a Case at Common Law, how long a Woman may
go with Child. 13. The Bishops Certificate requisite in a Plea of Bastardy,
indisability of a Plaintiff. 14. The power of the Justices of the Peace, and of
the Sessions, in reference to the reputed Fathers of Bastards. 15. In an Action
for saying such an one had a Bastard, a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical
Court, because they admitted the Defendants, Confession, but would not allow of
his Justification. 16. Who are held as Bastardiz'd at the Common Law. 17. What
a Mulier is at Common Law. 18. Other Descriptions of Muliers and Bastards. 19.
The difference between the Civil and Common Law in point of Muliers and
Bastards. 20. What kind of Divorce shall Bastardize the Issue. 21. Different
Resolutions touching Bastardy. 22. A Man is Divorced Causa Frigiditatis,
Marries again, has Issue by the second Wife, the first Living, Q. Whether that
Issue be a Bastard. 23. A Case of Remark touching this Subject adjudg'd in
Ireland.
(1.) BASTARD, Bastardus, Nothus, Spurius, Filius Naturalis, Filius Populi,
Filius nullius, Incestuosus -- Adulterinus, illegitimo coitu Progenitus.
Bastard is a French word, Bastardd British; yet some are of opinion that the
word [ Bastard] has its derivation from two German words [ Boes art] that is,
Degeneris ingenii. Q. an non e Graec. Bassaris. i. e. Meretrix vel Concubina.
Bastard and Filius Naturalis are both one Cossanae de Consuet. Burgund. p. 1116.
. Bastard is that Male or Female that is begotten and born of any Woman not
Married, so that the Child's Father is not known by order and judgment of Law,
for which reason he is called Filius Populi Terms of Law. verb. Bastard. St.
20. H. 3. 9. Mulier according to Vlpianus is a defiled Woman.
.

(2.) Bastard and Mulier are opposed each to other at the Common Law, Otherwise
at the Canon Law. For at the Common Law by Mulier is meant and understood one
that is lawfully begotten and born, and therefore where they are compared
together we shall find at that Law this addition to them Bastard eigne or
Elder, and Mulier puisne or Younger) and by the Common Law he or she that is
born before Marriage, celebrated between the Father and Mother is called a
Bastard; and by that Law, a Child begotten and born of a Woman out of Marriage,
by one who after Marries her, is said to be not a Mulier but a Bastard Ibid.
verb. Mulier and Lit. Tenures. lib. 3. cap. 6. Of Descents.
. This word [ Mulier] seems to be a word corrupt from Melior, or the French
[Melieur] signifying at Common Law the lawful issue, preferred before an Elder
Brother born out of Marriage St. 9. H. 6. c. 11. and Smith. de Rep. Angl. lib.
3. cap. 6.
. But by Glanvile such Lawful Issue seems rather Mulier than Melior, because
begotten a Muliere, and not ex Concubina; for he calls such issue, Filios
Mulieratos, opposing them to Bastards Glanv. l. 7. c. 1. and Britt. c. 7. and
skene de verb. fig. verb. Mulierarus filius. Vid. Co. on Litt. fol. 170. b. and
243. b.
, Quia Mulieris appellatione uxor continetur, l. Mulieris 13. and ibid. gloss.
De verb. sign.

(3.) Bastardy [Bastardia] at the Common Law signifies a defect of Lawful
Birth objected to one begotten out of Marriage Bract lib. 5. cap. 19.
. which Law does distinguish Bastardy into Special and General Kitchen fol. 64.
. The later whereof being only a Certificate d. Stat. 9 H. 6. 11.
. from the Bishop of the Diocese to the Kings Justices, after just enquiry
made, whether the Party inquired of, be Bastard or not; upon some question of
Inheritance; and the former being only a Suit commenced at Common Law against
him that calls another Bastard; This being called Bastardy special, because
Bastardy is the principal and special matter in Trial: As the other is called
Bastardy General, because Inheritance is there the chief thing under debate and
in contest; By both these significations Bastardy at the Common Law seems to be
taken only for an Examination or Trial, whether a Man's Birth be illegitimate,
and so does but rather imply what it is not, than express what it is Vid. Bro.
tit. Bastardy. nu. 29.
Which (according to a better Definition) is an unlawful state of Birth,
disabling the Party to succeed in Inheritance.

(4.) It appears by what has been said, that a Bastard is one that is born of
any Woman, so as the Father be not known according to the order of Law C^. 8.
102. ^. 65 sup. Litt. 244.
. So that if any Woman has a Child before her Marriage, it is a Bastard: And
though the Father thereof after Marry the Mother, yet in the judgment of the
Common Law it is still a Bastard, but at the Canon Law it is otherwise as
aforesaid St. 20. H. 3. c. 9. 1 H. 6. 31. Co. on Litt. 244.
. If one Marry infra gradui Maritagii and has thereby Issue, Q. whether it he
a Bastard or Mulier in case Divorce does after thereupon ensue 48 Ed. 4. 28.
and Broo. Sect. 48. and 93. E. 3. 32.
. If there be Issue by a second Husband or Wife, the former then living, such
Issue is a Bastard 39 Ed. 3. 14. 7 H. 4. 9. 18. Ed. 4. 26.
A Woman Eloping from her Husband, and Living in Avoutry (her Husband being
beyond Sea that he cannot come at her) having Issue in this time, this Issue
seems to be a Bastard: But by the Common Law, if the Husband be infra quatuor
maria (he) within the Jurisdiction of the King of England, and his Wife have
Issue in his absence, No proof is Admissable to prove the Child a Bastard,
unless there be an apparent impossibility of Procriation in the Husband, in
which case such Issue, albeit born within Marriage, is a Bastard 43 E. 3. 19. 7
H. 4. 9. 7 H. 5. 9. 44 E. 3. 10. 1 H. 6. 17. Co. on Lit. 244.
. And by the Civil Law, if the Husband be so long absent from his Wife, or by
no possibility of Nature the Child can be his, or the Adulterer and Adulteress
be so known to keep company together, as that by just account of time, it
cannot fall out to be any other Man's Child but the Adulterers himself, it is
accounted to be a Bastard: And yet in these very cases within this Realm,
unless the Husband be all the time of the impossibility of Procreation (as
aforesaid) beyond the Seas, the Rule of Law will hold true, Pater is est quem
Nuptiae demonstrant Rid l. view of etc. par. 3 cap. Sect. 2.
.

Note in debt upon an obligation by Cook Chief Justice; And so was the Opinion
of the Civilians, That a Disagreement to the Marriage had under the Age of of
Consent, at the Age it ought to be published in Court; otherwise the Issue may
be Bastarded. For a Disagreement in Writing is not a sufficient Disagreement,
nor a good Proof Sir Walter Sand. verse. Adams and Cu^win. post dict. cale in
Noy's Rep.


(5.) The Law has given several Appellations for the distinction of Bastards
according to the different conditions of the persons of whom they were
begotten; As when they were begotten by persons of a single and unmarried
Estate, and of such as were kept as Concubines, the Civil Law called them Filii
Naturales: if begotten of single Women, not designed for Concubines, for
satisfaction of present Lust, then they were called Spurii: if begotten of such
as the Law styles Scorta, or common Harlots by public profession, than they
were called Manzeres: if begotten of Married Women, then they were called
Nothi: if begotten between Ascendents and Descendents, or between Collaterals
contrary to the Divine prohibition, then they are called Incestuosi.

(6.) Bastardy so stains the Blood, that the Bastard can challenge neither
Honor nor Arms; and so disables him, that he cannot pretend to any succession
to inheritance. The Temporal and the Ecclesiastical Laws with us do not differ
as to matter of Bastardy, but something as to the prosecution thereof: The
Ecclesiastical Law brings it two ways to Judgment, Incidently and Principally;
the Common Law makes two sorts thereof, General and Special. Incidently at the
Ecclesiastical Law, when it is pleaded in Bar to a claim of something in right
of Nativity: Principally, when by reason of some slanderous and reproachful
speeches, it is brought before the Court as the principal matter in Judgment to
be alleged and proved, that thereupon Sentence may be pronounced accordingly
by the Ecclesiastical Judge, Ad Curiam enim Regiam non pertinet agnoscere de
Bastardia Glanvil. lib. 3. cap. 13.
. General Bastardy at Common Law, is so called because it is in gross objected
in Bar against a Man to disappoint him in the Principal matter of his Suit.
Which, because it is of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, is sent by the Kings Writ to
the Ordinary, to enquire whether the Party charged with Bastardy were born in,
or out of Lawful Matrimony; And as the Ordinary finds the truth of the matter
upon due examination, so he pronounces accordingly in his Consistory, whereof
he returns Certificate to the Temporal Courts Ridley. ubi supra.
. Special Bastardy at the Common Law, seems to be only that, where the
Matrimony is confessed, but the Priority or Posteriority of the Nativity of him,
whose Birth is in question, is controverted ibid.
.

General Bastardy ought to be Tried by the Bishop, and not by the Country 18 E.
3. 40.
. But Bastardy in this sense cannot be tried by the Ordinary otherwise than by
virtue of the Kings Writ, on some Suit depending in the Temporal Court D. 1.
Bastardy 55. 39. E. 3. 31. b. per Thorp.
. When Issue is joined on Bastardy, before it be awarded to the Ordinary to Try
it, Proclamation thereof is made in the same Court, and after Issue it is
certified into Chancery, where Proclamation is made once a Month for three
Months, and then the Lord Chancellor certifies it to the Court where the Plea
is depending; and after it is Proclaimed again in the same Court, that all such
whom the said Plea concerns, may appear and make their Allegations before the
Ordinary 10 H. 6. cap. 11.
; whose Certificate of Bastardy is nothing to the purpose, unless it come in by
Process at the Suit of the Parties 7 H. 6. 32. b.
. And this Bastardy ought to be certified under the Seal of the Ordinary, for
it is not sufficient to certify it under the Seal of the Commissary 20 H. 6. 1.
. And although the Defendant be certified a Bastard by the Ordinary, yet the
Certificate shall lose its force, if the Plaintiff be afterward Nonsuit, for
then the Certificate is not of Record 18 E. 3. 34.
.

In the Case of Elborough against Allen, it was said by Crook, that for calling
one Bastard generally, there is not any sufficient Ground of Action at the
Common Law, but if there be any special Loss thereby, it shall be a good ground
of Action at the Common Law, as if a Man be upon Marriage, or in treaty for the
sale of Land, whereby his Title is disparaged. Doderidge Justice said, That the
word Bastard is generally of another Jurisdiction and belongs to the
Ecclesiastical Court to determine what shall be Bastardy, and their Judgment
is given for the damage, which the party had in his birth, and for that their
Entry is quia laesis est natalitiis. And in this Case the Chief Justice said,
that generally to say J. S. is a Bastard, J. S. has not cause of Action given
him thereby; but if there be a Temporal cause averred, the Common Law may
proceed therein; for though Originally Bastardy be of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, not Triable at the Common Law; and therefore as in its general
nature it is of the Spiritual Jurisdiction, so being by its generality no
ground of Action at the Common Law, yet if one be to sue for a Child's part, or
sue for the Administration of his Fathers Goods, and this be set forth in the
Declaration, it will maintain an Action at Common Law. Doderidge Justice said,
That to say generally that one called him Bastard, is not ground of Action, if
he does not show some special Loss thereby, as when a Woman brings her Action,
and says that she was in Treaty of Marriage, and that the Defendant called her
Whore, this will not maintain an Action unless she say withal, that by reason
of these words she lost her preferment; but Chamberlain Justice said, to call a
Woman Whore is at this day a sufficient cause of Action for her, for that it is
punishable by the Statute; he also further said, that if a Man Libel in the
Ecclesiastical Court, that he has Lands by descent, and that J. S. called him
Bastard, they may not proceed there; or if they do, a Prohibition lies, He
further said, that for calling a Man Bastard generally, without special Loss
alleged, Action shall be maintained, and Cited a Case in 6 Eliz. Dyer. Where a
Man recovered red great Damages, Mich. 20. Jac. B. R. Elborough versus Allen.
Roll. Rep.
for that the Defendant had said that his Father was a Bastard; And cited also
one Nelson and Stokes Case in 5 Jac. where the Plaintiff did not allege any
special cause of Action, and yet recovered:

(7.) By the Civil Law such as were born in the beginning of the eleventh Month
next after the decease of their Mothers Husband were to be accounted
legitimate, but such as were born in the end thereof, were to be accounted
Bastards Auth. Col. 4. yet the Gloss there relates a matter of Fact contrary to
this Law, and gives us an instance of a Widow in Paris, who was delivered of a
Child the fourteenth Month after her Husbands death, yet the good repute of
this Woman's continency prevailed so much against the Letter of the Law, that
the Court Judged the causes of Childbirth to be sometimes extraordinary, the
Woman to be chaste, and the Child Legitimate. Hoc tamen in exemplum trahi facile
non oportet, as the Gloss there concludes.

(8.) By the Common Law, if a Child be born but an hour after the solemnization
of Marriage, it shall be the Husbands, though it were begotten by another Man,
who was not the Mothers Husband, and may be the Heir of him who Married the
Mother but a Day before the Birth of such Child Term of Law. Verb. Bastardy.
for in that Case he is not reputed a Bastard, who cannot inherit Land as Heir
to his Father, nor can any person inherit Land as Heir to him, but one who is
Heir of his Body Littl. Sect. 401. Fitz. B. 20.
. Otherwise it is in case the Child were begotten by him who after the Birth of
the Child does Marry his Mother; For in that Case notwithstanding such Marriage
subsequent to the Birth, the Child is reputed a Bastard in the judgment of the
Common Law, as being born out of Wedlock, though according to the
Ecclesiastical Law the Child in that case is reputed as Legitimate St. 20. H.
3. 9. and 1 H. 6. 3. Co. on Lit. 244.
. But if one Marry a Woman, and dye before Night, without ever bedding her, and
she after happen to have a Child, within possibility of conception in respect
of time computable from such Marriage, Quia subsequens matrimonium toltir
culpam praecedentem.
it seems it shall be accounted his Child, and Legitimate Vid. Engl. Lawyer.
117.
.

(9.) If a Child be born within the tenth Month (computing thirty days to the
Month) next after a Man's death, it shall be reputed his Child as a Mulier; but
the most natural time is nine Months and ten days (computing twenty eight days
to the Month) which is forty Weeks; or any day in the tenth Month may be
natural enough Co. sup. Litt. 123. Arsop's Case. M. 17. Jac. B. R.
. Also the Children begotten under a second Marriage after a Lawful divorce
from a former, are Legitimate, and not Bastards Co. 4. 29.
. And the Child wherewith the Mother is visibly big when she takes a second
Husband, shall be reputed the Child of the former Husband, though born after
Marriage with the second. Otherwise, if at her second Marriage she were so
privlly with Child as that it could not be discerned; understand it with this
limitation, if by possibility of nature it may be so 21 Ed. 3 39.
. And if a Widow take another Husband within ten days next after the death of
her former, and be delivered of a Child eleven days before or after forty Weeks
from the death of the said former Husband, it shall be reputed the Child not of
the former, but of the later Husband 18 Ed. 1. Com. Bedf. Case. R. 13. B. R.
. And in one Thecker and Duncombes Case it was adjudged, that a Woman may have
a Child in thirty eight Weeks, and that by cold and hard usage, she may go with
Child above forty Weeks; which was mentioned by the Court in the Case of one
Owen against Jevon in an Action of the Case for saying, This is the Whore that
my Man C. begat a Bastard on; and upon a Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved
in arrest of Judgment, that the words are not Actionable, because there is no
special loss or damage alleged by the Plaintiff, and that in one Lightfoots
Case against Pigot it had been ruled that an Action lies not for saying a Woman
had a Bastard: but it being argued on the other side, that the words are
Actionable, because if they were true, the Party of whom they are spoken is
punishable by the Statute of 7 Jac. with corporal punishment, Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, Nisi. Trin. and Pasch. 1651. rot. 211. B. R. Owen
verse. Jevon Still. Rep.
.

(10.) The punishment of a Woman that has a Bastard, that may be chargeable to
the Parish, is the House of Correction for one year by the Statute 77 Jac. cap.
4.
.

(11.) Although in the judgment of the Common Law a Bastard be reputed quasi
nullius Filius Littl. 41. b.
, insomuch that, if being seized of Lands in his own right, he dye without
Issue of his Body, they may Escheat; yet even by that Law the Bastard in
respect of his Mother is said to be a Son Vid. 11. H. 4. 75.
. But in respect of the the Father he is said to be nullius Filius, and
therefore in the Case of Ralph Haward and the Lady Anne Powes his Wife in a
Writ of Partition, it was held, that if the Mother dispose of all her Lands
holden in Knights Servive, to her Bastard-daughter by conveyance in her
lifetime, that the same is out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. because she is but a
mere Stranger to the Father, because nullius Filia; and the said Statute speaks
of Lawful generation. And in the 39 Ed. 3. 42. in a Praecipe, where a Bastard
was named Filius J. S. the Writ for that reason did abate Vid. 13. Eliz. Dyer.
296. and 14 Eliz. Dyer. 313. Hugh. Abridg. verb. Bastard.
. For the same reason also it is, that in a conveyance by a Father to his
Bastard-son, natural affection is not a sufficient consideration; for that he
is a Stranger in Law, although he be a Son in Nature Mich. 23. Eliz. Dyer. 374.
Wersel^ Case
. And yet it seems if a Grant be made to a Bastard by the Surname of him who is
supposed to beget him, it is good, if he be known by such Name, and yet in
truth he is nullius filius. And if Husband and Wife divorced causa
Praecontractus, the Issue has lost his Surname, for Cognomen Majorum est ex
sanguine tractum; and the Issue now is Bastard and nullius filius: yet because
he had once a Lawful Surname, it is a good ground of reputation, to make him a
reputed Son, which is a good Name of purchase Co. 6. par. 65. in Sr. Moile
Finch's Case.
. And it has been resolved that a Child begotten by a second Husband (living
the former) of a Woman divorced from the former causa Praecontractus, is
legitimate and no Bastard Mich. 28. El. Coke par. 4. 29. Banti^g and
Lepingwells Case.
; But in another case, that a Child begotten after Marriage solemnized infra
annos nubiles, and for that cause after divorced, is illegitimate and a Bastard
Co. 7. par. 42, 43. ^enns Case.
.

(12.) A. takes B. to Wife and dies. B. after forty Weeks and ten Days is
delivered of a Daughter. The question is, whether the Daughter shall be Heir to
her Father, or a Bastard? The Affirmative prevails, and such a Child may be
lawful Daughter and Heir to her Father; for a Post-natus, that is born after
the forty Weeks, may as well be an Heir as an Ante-natus that is born at the
end of seven Months; And a Child may be legitimate, although it be born the
last day of the tenth Month after the conception thereof, computing the Months
per menses solares and non lunares; according to the report given upon Oath by
the learned Physicians in Alsop's Case Mich. 17. Jac. B. R. Alsop and Bowtrels
Case Cr. 2. par. 321. Godb. 281. the same case.
, If a Man has Issue born by his Wife forty Weeks and eight Days after his
death, as if he dye the three and twentieth of March, and the Issue is born the
ninth of January next following, that Issue shall be held Legitimate, for it
may be Legitimate by nature, and it seems the Common Law does not limit any
certain time for Legitimate Infants to be born: p upon evidence at the Bar
which concerned the Heir of one Andrews, Mich. Jac. B. R.
it was resolved by the Court, that Dr. Paddey and Dr. Momford, Physicians,
should (being first sworn) in that case inform the Court upon their Oaths,
whether according to Nature such Issue may be Legitimate, and they said that
the exact time of the birth of an Infant is 280. days from the conception,
viz. nine Months and ten Days after conception, accounting it by the Solar
months, viz. 30. days to each month; but it is Natural also if he be born any
time of 10 Months, viz. in 40 Weeks, for by such account 10 Months and 40
Weeks, or all one, but by accident an Infant may be born after the 40 Weeks, or
before: Si partus nascatur post mortem Patru (qui dicitur Posthumus) per tantum
tempus, quod non sit verisimile quod possit esse defuncti filius and hoc
probato talis dici poterit Bastardus. Bract. lib. 5. f. 417. b.


(13.) It is agreed on all hands that Bawardy is an Ecclesiastica Cause, and of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and therefore if Bastardy be pleaded in disability
of a plaintiff, the sa^^ (...) be tried by the Certificate of the Bishop,
whether it be in Real Action relating to Inheritance, or Personal relating to
(...) otherwise where Action on the Case will lie: But if it be pleaded, that
the Plaintiff was born at such a place before the Marriage solemnized, and so
he is a Bastard: This the Common Law calls a Special Bastardy, and shall be
tried by Jury at the Common Law, where the Birth is alleged; Vid. Co. 8. par.
Case of the abbot of Strata Marcella.
So in the Duke of Suffolk's Case of Partition, where Special Bastardy was
pleaded, and Issue thereupon taken, the Trial was awarded to be by a Jury of
London. Vid. 7. E. 6. Dyer. 79.
And where in an Action, upon the Case brought for calling one Bastard, the
Defendant justified that he was a Bastard; it was awarded, that it should be
tried by the Country, and not by the Ordinary. Trin. 14. Jac Hob. Rep.
Which seems something Paradoxical, that if Bastardy be pleaded in Disability of
a Plaintiff, then it shall be tried by the Bishops Certificate; but if it be
pleaded, that the Plaintiff was born in such a place before the Marriage, then
by a Jury: The former whereof is said to be a general Bastardy; the other a
special Bastardy; whereas in truth they both seem to differ only in this, that
the former seems to be a general relating to the Plaintiffs condition in
respect of his Disability, the other seems to be a special relating to the
circumstances of Place and Time of his Nativity, but both referring to his
Bastardy.

(14.) If a man, that is ordered by two Justices of the Peace to keep a
Bastard-Child (he being according to the said Order the reputed Father) shall
appeal from the said Order to the next Quarter Sessions according to the Stat.
of 18. Eliz. and being there discharged, and the said Order repealed, shall yet
afterward at another Quarter Sessions of the Peace upon re-examination of the
matter be ordered according to the first Order; in that case it has been held
by the Court, that the second Sessions had no power to alter the Discharge made
by the former Sessions.v And in another Case it has been resolved, Trin. 9.
Car. B. R. 248.
that before the Statute of 3. Car. c. 4. the Justices at the Sessions had no
Authority to intermeddle in the Case of Bastardy, Cro. 1. par Pigeons Case.
ibid. 255. acc.
till the two next Justices according to the Stat. of 18. Eliz. had made an
order therein; As also that by the Stat. 3. Car. the Justices of their several
Limits are to make an Order in Case of Bastardy.

(15. Pasch. 19. Car. B. R. Slaters Case. Cro. 1. par. 337.
) C. commenced an Action in the Spiritual Court against W. for saying that he
had a Bastard. W. the Defendant alleged in the said Court, that the Plaintiff
was adjudged the reputed Father of a Bastard by two Justices of the Peace
according to the Statute, whereupon he spoke the words. The Spiritual Court
accepted of his Confession, but would not allow of his Justification; whereupon
he prayed a prohibition, and it was granted Pasch. 17. Jac. B. R. Webb and
C^oke Case. Cro. 2. par. 5, 5. and 625.
. It is not denied, but that if the Spiritual Court try a thing that is of
Temporal Cognizance, a Prohibition may lie, although all the Cause were
originally Spiritual, as was resolved in Kenns Case Cook. 7. par. 44. acc.
Kenns Case.
, in which Case it was likewise resolved, that where the Cause is Spiritual,
there the Spiritual Court has Jurisdiction; and in the Case between Banting
and Lepingwell it was resolved, that the Judges of the Common Law ought (that
is the word in the Report) to give Faith and Credit to the Proceedings of the
Spiritual Court, albeit it be against the Reason of their Law Mich. 28. Eliz.
Cook. 4. par. 29. Banting and Lepingwith Case. Hugh. Abr. ver^. Bastard. Cas. 6.


(16.) If a man having a wife, take another wife, and has Issue by her, living
the former wife, such Issue is a Bastard 18. H. 6. 31. 18. E. 4. 30. b. Co. 7.
Kenn. 44.
, for the second Marriage is void 38. Ass. 24. Adjudg.
. If a man marry one within the Degrees prohibited, the Issue between them is
not (by the Common Law) a Bastard, until there be a Divorce, for by that Law
the Marriage is not till then void 18. H. 6. 34. b.
. (So it is although the Brother Marry the Sister) 18. H. 6. 32. 39. E. 3. 31.
b.
If a Man has Issue by A. and after Marries her, yet the Issue is a Bastard at
the Common Law 47. E. 3. i 14 b. 11. H. 4. 84. 18. E. 4. 30. 39. E. 3. 31. b.
38. Ass. 24.
, An Idiot may consent to Marriage (by the Common Law) though he were an Idiot
from his birth, and his Issue by that Law is Legitimate Trin. 3. Jac. B. R.
inter Style and West.
If the Husband be castrated, so that it is apparent that he cannot by any
possibility beget any Issue, and his Wife have Issue diverse years after, it
shall be a Bastard, although it be begotten under Marriage, for that it is
apparent that it could not be Legitimate Hill. 14. Jac. in Camera Stellata
inter Done and Egerton Plaintiffs, and two Hintons and Starkey Defendants so
held by the Chancellor, and Montacule but Hobart e contra.
.

(17.) By the Law of the Land a Man cannot be a Bastard who is born after the
Espousals, unless there be some special matter in the case 40. E. 3. 16. b. 21.
E. 3. 89. 39. E. 3. 31. 31. Ass. pl. 10. 2. E. 3. 29. per Herle and Yond.
. If a Woman be big with Child by A. and after A. Marry her, and the Issue is
born within the Espousals; in this Case by the Common Law the Issue is a
Mulier, and not a Bastard 14. E. 3. 12. b. 45 E. 3. 28.
, So if a Woman be big with Child by one Man, and after-wards another Marries
her, and after the Issue is born, such Issue is a Mulier, for that he is born
under Espousals, and cannot be held the Issue of him by whom she was with
Child, because that cannot be certainly known 1 H. 6. 3 contra. 44. Ed. 3. 12.
b. 45. E. 3. 28. cont. 18. H. 6. 31. b.
; and so it is although the Issue were born within three days after Marriage
18. E. 4. 3
.

(18.) If a Woman Covert has Issue in Avoutrie, yet if the Husband be able to
get a Child, and be infra quatuor maria, the Issue is no Bastard Hill. 14. Jac.
Came. Stellat. ubi supra
If a Woman Elope and live in Avoutrie with another Man, during which Issue is
born in Avoutrie, yet it is a Mulier by the Common Law 1 H. 6. 3. 43 E 3. 18.
b. 20. 81. E. 4. 30. Hill. 18. Jam ibid. Came. Stellat.
But then the Husband must be infra quatuor maria, so as that by intendment he
might come to his Wife, otherwise the Issue is a Bastard 40. E. 3. 20. Ass. 8.
. But if a Woman has Issue, her Husband being beyond sea for 7 years together
before the Issue was born, such Issue is a Bastard at the Common Law 18. H. 6.
17.
. If a Feme Covert has Issue, her Husband being beyond Sea for 6 years before
the Issue is born, it is a Bastard at the Common Law 18. H. 6. 34.
. If a Woman has Issue, her Husband being within 14 years of age the Issue is
a Bastard at the common Law. 1. H. 6. 3. b.
quaere.

(19.) If A. has Issue by B. and after they intermarry, yet the Issue is a
Bastard by the Common Law; 47. E. 3. 14. b. 11. H. 4. 84.
but it is a Mulier by the Civil Law 11. H. 4. 84. Bracton. l. 5 f. 4 6, 617.
. If the Parents be Divorced causa Consanguinitatis, they being ignorant
thereof at their Marriage, the Issues they had before, are Bastards at the
Common Law, and Muliers by the Civil Law 18. E. 4. 24. b.
. If a Man has Issue by a Woman, and after marry the same Woman, the Issue by
the Common Law is Bastard, and Mulier by the Ecclesiastical Law 18. E. 4. 30.
: Likewise if a man espouse a Woman bigg with Child by another Man, and within
three days after she is delivered of Child, by the Common Law this is a
Mulier, and by the Ecclesiastical Law a Bastard ibid. 1. H. 6. 3.
. If a Woman Elope and has Issue in Adultery, such Issue is a Mulier at the
Common Law, and a Bastard by the Ecclesiastical Law 18. E. 4. 30. 43. E. 3. 19.
b. 20.
; yet if the Woman continue in Adultery, and has Issue, such Issue are
Bastards even by the Common Law 40. E. 3. 16.
. But by the Law of the Land a man may not be reputed a Bastard who is born
after Espousals, unless there be some special matter in the Case as aforesaid
ibid.
. But if a man who has a wife, does during her life take another wife, and
has Issue by her, such Issue are Bastards by both the Laws, for the second
Marriage is void 18. E. 4. 30. b. Co. 7. Kenn 44. 18. H. 6. 31.
.

(20.) A Divorce causa Praecontractus does Bastardize the Issue, 47. E. 3. pl.
78. 18. H. 6. 34.
so also does a Divorce causa Consaguinitatis 47. E. 3. 78. cont. 29. E. 1.
Bastardy. 21. cur.
likewise if the Divorce be Causa Affinitatis, it does Bastardize the Issue;
ib. 47. E. 3.
and the Law is the same, in case the Divorce be causa Frigiditatis. ib. 47. E
3. 78.
A Man has Issue a Bastard, and after marries the same Woman, and has Issue
by her diverse Sons; and then devises all his Goods to his Children. Q. whether
the Bastard shall take by the devise? But if the Mother of the Bastard make
such a devise, it is clear the Bastard shall take because he is known to be
Child of the Mother More's Rep.
.

(21.) B. contracted himself to A. afterward A. was Married to F. and
cohabited with him, whereupon B. sued A. in the Court of Audience, and proved
the contract, and Sentence was there pronounced, that she should Marry the said
B. and cohabit with him, which she did, and they had Issue C. B. and the Father
died: It was argued by the Civilians, that the Marriage betwixt B. and A. was
void, and that C. B. was a Bastard. But it was resolved by the Justices. that
C. the Issue of B. was legitimate and no Bastard Mich. 26. and 27. Eliz.
Bantings Case. More's Rep.
.

(22.) The Case was wherein a Man was divorced causa Fridigitatis, and
afterward took another Wife and had Issue; it was argued by the Civilians, and
also by the Justices, whether the Issue were Bastard or not, it was adjudged
that the Issue by the second Wife was not a Bastard; For that by the Divorce
the Marriage was dissolved a vinculo Matrimonii, and each of them might Marry
again: But admit that the second Marriage was voidable, yet it good till it be
dissolved, and so by consequence the Issue born during the Coverture is a
lawful Issue. Mich. 28. Eliz. in Cor. Warder. Morris and Webber^ Case. Moore's
Rep. Mich. 9. Jac. En le Court de Castle-Chamber en ^^^land Danis Rep.
.

(23.) Upon an information in the Castle-chamber in Ireland against the Bishop
of K. and C. B. and others, that by Practice and Combination, and by undue
course of proceedings they endeavored to prove the said C. B. (who was ever
before reputed a Bastard) to be the legitimate or lawful Son and Heir of G. B.
Esquire to the disherison and defamation of E. B. who was the sole Daughter and
Heir of the said G. B. And upon Oier of this cause the Case appeared to be
this, viz. About twenty six years before the exhibiting of this Bill, the said
G. B. had Issue the said C. B. on the Body of one J. D. who during the life of
G. B. was not reputed his Wife, but his Concubine: and the said C. B. for all
the time aforesaid, was only accounted the natural Son of G. B. but not for
legitimate. Afterward, viz. sixteen years after the birth of C. B. (his Mother
being then living) G. B. took to Wife a Lady of good Estate and Reputation,
with the assent of her Friends, by whom he had Issue the said E. B. and died.
After the death of the said G. B. the said C. B. his reputed Son (nor his
Mother who was yet living) said nothing by the space of nine years, but at last
they practiced and combined with the said Bishop of K. being of their Kin, and
with many others, to prove the legitimation of the said C. B. by an irregular
and undue course, to the intent to bastardize and disinherit the said E. B.
according to which practice and combination, the Bishop without any Suit
commenced or moved in any of the Kings Temporal Courts, or any Writ directed to
him, to certify Bastardy or Legitimation in that Case, and (which is more)
without any Libel exhibited in his Ecclesiastical Court touching that matter,
of his own will and pleasure, privately, and not convocatis convocandis, nine
years after the death of the said G. B. took the depositions of many Witnesses
to prove that the said G. B. twenty nine years before had lawfully Married and
took to Wife the said J. D. Mother of the said C. B. and that the said C. B.
was the legitimate and lawful Son and Heir of the said G. B. And these
depositions so taken, the said Bishop caused to be engrossed and reduced into
the form of a solemn Act; and having put his Signature and Seal to that
Instrument, delivered the same to C. B. who published it, and under color of
that Instrument or Act declared himself to be the Son and lawful Heir of the
said G. B. etc. And for this practice and misdemeanour the said Bishop of K.
and others were censured; and thereupon these points were resolved (1.) That
although all Matrimonial causes have of a long time been determinable in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and are now properly within the jurisdiction and
cognizance of the Clergy, yet ab initio non fuit sic: For causes of Matrimony
as well as cause Testamentary were heretofore civil Causes and appertaining to
the civil Magistrate, as is well known to all Civilians, until the Christian
Emperors and Kings, as an honor to the Prelates of the Clergy, did grant and
allow unto them the cognizance and jurisdiction of these Cases. And therefore
the King of England, who is, and of right ever was the Fountain of all Justice
and Jurisdiction in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his own
Dominions, although that he allow the Prelates of the Church to exercise their
several Jurisdictions in those Causes which properly appertain to their
cognizance, yet by the Rules of the Common Law, he has a superintendency over
their proceedings, with power of direction how they shall proceed, and of
restraint and correction, if they do not proceed duly in some cases: as is
evident by the Writs of several natures directed to Bishops, by which the King
commands them to certify Bastardy, Le course del Trial de Legitimation and
Bastardy.
Excommunication, Profession, Accouplement en Loyal Matrimony, De admit.
Clericis, de Cautione admittenda, etc. as also by the Writs of Prohibition,
Consultation, and Attachment upon a Prohibition. (2.) It was resolved, that the
question of Bastardy or Legitimacy ought to be first moved in the Kings
Temporal Court, and thereon Issue ought to be joined there; and then it ought
to be transmitted by the Kings Writ to the Ecclesiastical Court, to be examined
and tried there: and thereupon the Bishop shall make his Certificate to the
King's Court; to which Certificate being made in due form of Law such credit is
given, that the whole World shall be bound and stopped thereby. But on the other
side, if any Suit to prove Bastardy or Legitimacy be first commenced in the
Ecclesiastical Court, before any Question of that matter has been moved in he
Kings Temporal Court, in that Case Prohibition lies to restrain such Suit. To
this purpose was Corbet's Case cited, 22 Ed. 4. Fitz. Consultation 6. Sir
Robert Corbet had Issue two Sons, Robert and Roger, Robert the eldest Son,
being within the age of fourteen years, took to Wife Matild, with whom he
cohabited till he came of full Age, and they publicly known and reputed for
Husband and Wife; yet afterward Robert the eldest Son does dismiss the said
Matild, and she living, does Marry one Lettice, and having Issue a Son by the
said Lettice, dies: after his death Lettice does publish and declare openly,
that she is the lawful Wife of Robert, and that his Son was a Mulier and
legitimate. Whereupon Roger the younger Son of Sir Robert Corbet does commence
a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court to reverse the Marriage between Lettice and
Robert, and to put Lettice to silence, etc. wherefore Lettice does purchase a
prohibition; Whereupon Roger sets forth the whole matter, and prays a
consultation, which was denied him, and for this reason chiefly, viz. for that
the Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court was to Bastardize the Issue between
Lettice and Robert, and to prove Roger to be Heir to Robert; and the Original
Action of Bastardy shall not be first moved in the Ecclesiastical Court, but in
the Temporal Court, etc. And to make this point yet the more clear, two Cases
put by Bracton. lib. 5. tit. de exceptionib. c. 6. were remembered (1). B.
having Issue of the Body of a Feme-Inheretrix born before Marriage, under
color whereof he claimed to be Tenant by the Courtesy, but being for that
cause barred in an Assize brought by him against A. he obtained the Popes Bull,
and by authority thereof commenced his Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, to
prove his Issue legitimate, quod facere non debuit, as Bracton there says; and
therefore prohibition was granted to stay the Suit, showing the whole matter,
Et quod praedictus B. ad deceptionem Curiae nostrae, and ad infirmandum
judicium in curia nostra factum, trahit-ipsum A. in placitum coram vobis in
Curia Christianitatis, authoritate Literarum domini Papae, ad praedictum puerum
legitimandum, etc. Et cum non possint Judices aliqui de legitimatione
cognoscere, De Legiti^^tate.
nisi fuerit loquela prius in curia nostra incepta per breve, and ibi Bastardia
objecta, and postea ad Curiam Christianitatis transmissa, vobis prohibemus,
quod in placito illo ulterius non procedatis, etc. And in the same Chapter
Bracton has the form of another Prohibition, which makes the difference before
put more evident, Rex talibus judicibus, etc. Ostensum est nobis ex part A.
etc. quod in causa successionis, and haereditatis petitione, debet prius moveri
placitum in curia nostra, and cum ibi objecta fuit Bastardia, tunc deinde
transmitti debet recordum loquelae and cognitio Bastardia ad curiam
Christianitatis, ut ibi ad mandatum nostrum de legitimitate inquiratur: quod
quidem in hac part non est observatum. Et cum hoc sit manifest contra
Consuetudinem Regni nostri, etc. vobis prohibemus, etc. whereby it is very
evident, that if the Ecclesiastical Court proceed to the examination of
Bastardy or Legitimation without direction of the Temporal Court, it is to be
restrained by a Prohibition. (3.) As the Ecclesiastical Judge may not enquire
of Bastardy or Legitimation without special direction or command of the King:
so when he has received the Kings Writ to make such Inquisition, he ought not
to surcease for any Appeal or Inhibition, but ought to proceed until he has
certified it into the Kings Court; and this also appears by Bracton in the
forecited place, c. 14. Cum autem Judex Ecclesiasticus Inquisitionem fecerit,
non erit ab eo appellandum, nec a petente nec a tenente: a petente non, quia
talem Jurisdictionem and talem judicem elegit; a tenente non, qui sic posset
causam in infinitum protrahere de judice in judicem usque ad Papam, and sic
posset Papa de Laico feodo indirecte cognoscere. See also to this purpose 39 E.
3. 20. a. in a Writ of Dower, where Ne unques occouple en loyal Matrimony was
pleaded, and Issue thereupon joined, the Writ issued to the Bishop to certify,
who certified that he could do nothing by reason of an Inhibition which came to
him out of the Arches. This return was held insufficient, for it was there
said, that he ought not to surcease from doing the Kings command by reason of
any Inhibition (4.) Lastly, it was said, that the very cause and reason why the
Ecclesiastical Judge may not enquire of Legitimation or Bastardy, before that
he has received direction, or a mandate out of the Kings Temporal Court, does
consist in this, that the Ecclesiastical Court never has Jurisdiction or power
to intermeddle with Temporal Inheritance, directly or indirectly; It being
observed that Christ himself refused to meddle with a Cause of that nature,
when upon request made to him, Luke 12. Magister, dic fratri meo, ut dividat
mecum haereditatem, he answered, Quis me constituit judicem aut divisorem super
vos? And therefore in the time of King H. 3. when the usurped Jurisdiction of
the Pope was elevated much higher than ever before or since in the Dominions of
the King of England, Pope Alex. the third, having granted a Commission to the
Bishops of Winchester and Exon to enquire de Legitima nativitate of one Agatha,
the Mother of one Robert de Ardenna, and if she were found legitimate, then to
restore to the said Robert the possession of certain Lands whereof he was
dispossessed, being informed that the King of England was greatly offended at
the said commission, he revoked and countermanded it in the point of the
restitution of possession, knowing and confessing that the establishment of
Possessions belonged to the King, and not to the Church. Which Case is reported
in the Canon Law, Decretal. Antiq. Collect. 1. lib. 4. tit. Qui filii sunt
legitimi. cap. 4. and cap. 7. where in the 4 th Chapt. the Commission, and in
the seventh Chapt. the revocation or countermand appears in express terms.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Divorce; as also of Alimony.
1. What Divorce is, the causes thereof; the difference between the Civil and
Canon Law touching the proof of impotency, frigidity, or disability; and what
manner of proof the Law requires thereof. 2. What time of absence in the
Husband may cause a Divorce. 3. Whether Divorce by reason of Adultery dissolves
the Marriage a vinculo? or whether the innocent party may remarry altera
existente? 4. What the Canon in Concilio Arelatense provides in that Case. 5.
The opinion of some eminent Common Lawyers in this point. 6. The different
Opinions of Divines and Lawyers, and of each among themselves touching this
matter. 7. The Opinion in summa Hostiens. as also of Suarez, touching the
legality of second Marriage after Divorce. 8. The Canon of the Council of Trent
concerning Matrimony; also the Opinion of some of the Ancient Fathers, and a
Decree of one of the Popes touching second Marriage after a Divorce 9. Decrees
and Histories of great Antiquity relating to this Subject. 10. What the
Pontifical Law, what Justinian, what Baldus, and what Grotius says in this
matter. 11. Opinions in this point take their diversification much from the
cause of the Divorce, as whether ex causa praecedenti vel subsequenti. 12.
Judgments at the Common Law, that a Divorce for Incontinency, is only a Thoro
and mensa, non a vinculo. 13. What the Law intends by Alimony, and what
Elopement signifies; no Alimony due to her that Elopes. 14. In what Cases the
Law will allow Alimony, or not. 15. How the Civil Law provides in that Case of
Alimony. 16. The Ecclesiastical Court is the proper Court for Alimony. 17.
Whether the High Commission-Court had power of Alimony, or not? 18. Prohibition
denied to the Husband sued in the Ecclesiastical Court by the Wife for Alimony
in causa saevitiae. 19. Whether the Ecclesiastical Court may take Bond for
Alimony, or Imprison for non-payment thereof.
(1.) A Divorce is a Sententence pronounced by an Ecclesiastical Judge, whereby
a Man and Woman formerly Married to each other, are separated and parted Co.
par. 7. Kerah's Case.
. The word Divortium or Repudium is often taken promiscuously, both for a Total
and Perpetual Divorce, and a vinculo Matrimonii; as also for a Partial and
Temporal Divorce, or Separation a Cohabitatione, vel a thoro and mensa. The
causes of this Divorce, whereof some are precedent, others subsequent to the
Marriage, are many in the Law; Thomas Aquinas reckons up no less than a dozen
of them, and thinks he has Poetically comprised them all in four Verses, viz.

Error. Conditio. Votum. Cognitio. Crimen.
Cultus Disparitas. Vis. Ordo. Ligamen. Honestas.
Si sis Affinis. Si forte Coire nequibis;
Haec Socianda vetant Connubia, Facta retractant.
Aquin. supplem. 3. par. q. 51, 52, 53. praesertim in 4. Did. 34. q. 1. a. un.
. But the Causes of Divorce in the Law as now commonly practicable, may be
reduced to these few. (1.) The Levitical Degrees within which it is prohibited
to Marry. (2.) Precontract; And so if a Man Marry one precontracted, and have
Issue by her, it is the Fathers Child until there be a Divorce upon the
precontract, and then it is Nullius Filius, a Bastard Co. par. 6. 66. and Dyer.
105.
. (3.) Impuberty or Minority; And so if two be Married infra annos nubiles, and
after full age are Divorced for the same, the Woman may bring an Assize against
the Man for Land given her in Frank-marriage Lib. Ass. 19. An. pla. 2.
which proves that the Divorce is by that Law from the very Bond of Matrimony
(4.) Frigidity in the Man, or Impotency in the Woman, termed Arctitudo in the
Law; but the word [ Impotency] is promiscuously used in both Sexes, for it is
said, that if after a Man be Divorced for Impotency, he take another Wife and
have Children by her, these shall not be Bastards, because a Man may be habilis
and inhabilis diversis temporibus Co. par. 5. 93. and Dyer. fo. 178.
. But in this Case the Civil Law has made other provision, for that Law in
causa Frigiditatis requires three years Cohibitation for Trial of the
Disability before it does upon other legal evidence and proof conclude any
Married persons either Frigid or Impotent; Indeed the Canon Law expects present
proof, and in case of such Impotency or Frigidity, not Accidental but Natural
and Incurable, concludes that the Matrimony was never a Matrimony. The evidence
of which Disability depends on the Oaths of able Physicians, as also of aged
and grave Matrons experienced in such affairs; nor is it to be alleged till
after a Triennial experience of each other post Matrimonium Consummatum; and is
a just cause of Divorce, for that it frustrates one of the chief ends of
Marriage, viz. Procreation of Issue, if it be sufficiently proved by Inspection
of the Body, Triennial Cohabitation and the Oaths aforesaid. Consil. Matrim.
To. 2. Consil. 8. nu. 1. And in Cases doubtful whether it did precede the
Marriage or not, the Law will presume it to antecede the Marriage, and
consequently nulls it, in case it be Natural; otherwise, both as to the
presumption and operation, in case it be only Accidental. Sanch. lib. 7. disp.
103. nu. 4. And where the Impotency does sufficiently Constare to be Perpetual
by the Oaths aforesaid upon Inspection, there the Triennial probation ceases.
Vt cum Glossae. cap. Fraternitatis. De Frigidis and Maleficiis. and Panor. nu.
11. Pope Sixtus 5 th in his Bull An. 1587. declared that Matrimonia cum
spadonibus, vel eunychis prorsus eviratis, seu utroque testiculo carentibus,
cum quibuslibet Mulierihus, seu defectum praedictum ignorantibus, seu
scientibus, esse semperque fuisse irrita. Antonini ^^ana resolutiones morales.
Tract. 4. Miscelan. resol. 75. p. 190.

(2.) There are also other seeming causes of Divorce than what are
forementtoned; for the Civil and Canon Law do allow of Divorce after a long
absence, but are not agreed touching the Time of that Absence; for in one place
it is after Two years Absence, in another after Three years; in another after
Four. Cod. lib. 5. tit. 1. l. 2. post biennium. tit. 27. post tres an. l. 27.
post Quatuor an. others hold that the Civil Law requires Five years Absence
before there may be a Divorce on that account. In the Council of Lateran a
Sentence was allowed by the whole Council, which was given by a Bishop,
pronouncing a Divorce for a Woman, complaining that her Husband had been absent
Ten years, giving also leave to the Woman to Marry again. In Council. later.
par. 50. cap. 23. But the truth is, no absence, be it for any time whatever,
does properly cause a Divorce in Law; Indeed Seven years Absence without any
tidings or intelligence of or from the Absent Party, will so far operate in Law
toward what is equivalent to a Divorce, as to indempnifie the Woman from the
penalty of Polygamy, if in that case she Marry again. Also the Canon Law has
decreed, that if the Wife refuse to dwell with her Christian Husband, he may
lawfully leave her. Causa 28. q. 1. c. 4. And some of the Imperial Laws allow
Homicide, Sacrilege, Theft, Man-stealing, etc. for causes of Divorce, Cod.
lib. 5. tit. 17. l. 8. But the Canon Law decrees otherwise. In the time of Ed.
1. William de Chadworth was Divorced, because he carnally knew the Daughter of
his Wife before he Married her Mother Term. Pasch. 30. Ed. 1. coram rege.
. The Stat. of 1 Jac. cap. 11. is the first Act of Parliament that was made
against Polygamy. Polygamia est plurium simul virorum, uxorumve connubium, The
difference between Bigamy, or Trigamy, etc. and Polygamy is, Quia Begamus seu
Trigamus, Co. Inst. par. 3. cap 27.
etc. est, qui diversis temporibus, and successive duas, seu tres, etc. uxores
habuit. Polygamus, qui duas vel plures simul duxit uxores. And if the Man be
above the Age of fourteen (which is his Age of Consent) and the Woman above the
Age of twelve (which is her Age of Consent) though they be within the Age of
twenty one, yet they are within the danger of the Stat. of 1 Jac. cap. 11. --
Co. Inst Par. 3. Cap. 27. vid. Instit. par. 1. Sect. 104.

(3.) This matter of Divorce has often ministered occasion for high debates and
altercations touching second Marriages, As whether a Divorce by reason of
Adultery in either of the Married Parties, does so dissolve the Marriage a
vinculo, as that it may be lawful for the Innocent Party to Marry again during
the others life? By the 107 th Canon, It is provided, that in all Sentences for
Divorce security be given and Bonds taken for not Marrying during each others
life Canons Ecclesiastical. Edit. 1603.
. By enjoining such security to be given, and such Bonds to be taken, This
seems to be a Penal Canon, viz. pecuniarily Penal; whoever therefore breaks the
Law incurrs the penalty, and whoever suffers the penalty does answer and
satisfy the Law which before he had infringed; a penalty expressed or implied,
provided for in, and annexed unto a Law that is in it self prohibitory, seems
to create some qualification of that legal prohibition, Prohibitio vim suam
exercere potest per poenam vel expressam vel arbitrariam: Et hoc genus Leges
Imperfectas vocat Vlpianus, quae fieri quid vetant, sed factum non rescindunt,
So Grotius. Grot. de jure Bell. and Pacis. lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 16. But to
speak a little nigher to the point in hand, it is Grotius again in the same
place, Si Lex humana conjugia inter certas personas contrahi prohibeat, non
ideo sequitur irritum fore Matrimonium, si re ipsa contrabatur: sunt enim
diversa prohibere, and irritum quid facere. The Laws whether Ecclesiastical or
Temporal are not of any private interpretation; yet to speak herein only
hypothetically, if this be interpretative as a penal Canon by virtue of the
said Security and Bond, then apposit and observable is that which Grotius has
in another place, in Casu Legis Paenalis, his words are these, viz. Rex qui est
Auctor Legis, and ubi Regni ipsius personam and auctoritatem sustinet, qua
talis est, potest legem etiam totam tollere; quia Legis humanae natura est, ut
a voluntate humana pendeat, non in Origin tantum sed and in duratione. Sicut
autem totam Legem tollere potest, ita and vinculum ejus circa personam aut
factum singular, manente de caetero lege. Dei ipsius exemplo. Qui (Lactantio
test) legem cum poneret, non utique ademit sibi omnem potestatem, sed habet
ignoscendi licentiam. Imperatori, inquit Augustinus, Licet revocare sententiam,
and Reum mortis absolvere and ipsi ignoscere: Causam explicat, Quia non est
Subjectus Legibus, qui habet in potestate Leges far. Grot. ibid. de Paenis.
cap. 20. Sect. 24. How far the power of Princes may extend it self in this
matter, is not before us; But clear it is, that all such as acknowledge the
Regal Supremacy, will withal confess, that his Majesty has more right to
dispense with Canons within his own Dominions ex plenitudine potestatis
Regalis, than was here formerly exercised ex usurpatione potestatis Papalis. In
all Laws that are both Prohibitory and Penal, as they are of the more force by
reason of their Prohibitory quality, so they seem to abate of that force by
reason of the annexed penalty; for he that suffers the penalty, satisfies the
Law, though he transgress the Command. The Statute of primo Jacobi has a
Proviso or exception to second Marriages by persons legally Divorced; St. 1
Jac. cap. 11.
. no Caitons or Constitutions prevail or are executable, in repugnancy to the
Kings Prerogative, or to the Laws or Statutes of this Realm St. 25. H. 8. c. 19.
. That Statute of primo Jacobi prohibiting second Marriages during the Life of
each other, does not only not extend to persons legally Divorced, but as to
such it is with an exception, limitation or proviso as aforesaid. Sir Ed. Coke
taking notice hereof in Porters Case, reports that that Statute extends only to
persons which are Divorced by Sentence in the Spiritual Court Porters Case. Co.
rep.
; And that distinction of Total and Partial Divorce, Or that vel a vinculo vel
a Mensa and Thoro, will not it seems satisfy all Judgments, some alleging
that ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus, applying that Rule ad
Evangelium also; and thence will not be persuaded but that the innocent party
in Causa Divortii ob Adulterium may Marry again, altera part existente,
because though they know it to be otherwise by Text Canonical, yet know not
where to find it so by Text Scriptural; and specially because they find a
Proviso in the said Statute of primo Jacobi, that the parties Divorced by
sentence, if he take another Wife, or she take another Husband, shall not be
within the danger of the Statute; And that this extends to every manner of
Sentence of Divorce, and not to any particular cause of Divorce. Cajetan,
though of the Roman Church, yet on the 19 th of Matthew says, Intelligo ex hac
Domini Jesu Christi lege, licitum esse Christiano dimittere uxorem ob
fornicationem carnalem ipsius uxoris, and posse aliam ducere: and soon after
adds, Non solum miror, sed stupeo, quod Christo clare excipiente causam
fornicationis, torrens Doctorum non admittat illam Mariti libertatem. This
Question, Whether after Divorce for Fornication it be lawful to Mary again
during the Lives of the parties Divorced, is at large handled by the learned
Doctor Hammond in his Treatise of Divorces; where he says that Mat. 19. 9. and
Mark 10. 6. are two places of such perspicuity (one Cause of Divorce allowed
the Christians, that great Breach of the Conjugal Vow, and whosoever Divorces
and Marries again, save in that one Case punctually named, commits Adultery)
that as no Paraphrase can make them more Intelligible: So there is but one
Question that can reasonably be started in them, viz. Whether he that puts away
his Wife on this one authentic cause, be so perfectly freed from the Conjugal
Vow and Bands, that he may Lawfully Marry some other Woman, and some other Man
Marry that Divorced Adulterers Wife? In Mat. 19. 9. The words are, That
whosoever shall put away his Wife, save for fornication, and shall Marry
another, commits Adultery; and he that shall Marry her that is put away,
commits Adultery: Which words (says that learned Author in Sect. 22.) are
favorable to the affirmative, that it is Lawful for him in that one excepted
Case to Marry again. The nature of a Divorce among the Jews was the rescinding
of the Conjugal Bands, and by one supposition common to Jews and Romans, viz.
That they who were duly Divorced might Marry again: So of the Jewish Divorced
Wife, Deuteronomy. 24. 2. it is expressly said, she may Marry another; and of the Man,
this was his only End of putting away his Wife in that place, that he might
Marry another: Accordingly the Form of Divorce in Misna, tit. Gittin, Behold,
thou art free, or at liberty for any Man, and this is the Bill of Divorce
between me and thee, so that it is free for thee to Marry to any Man thou will.
Idem. Sect. 27. yet on the other side (says that learned Author) it may be
argued, that although in the Mosaical Law, Divorce was the rescinding the
Conjugal Bands, to which it was consequent, as long as the Jewish polity
lasted, that they who were duly Divorced (as in the one Case of Fornication)
might freely Marry again: yet in the acceptance of our Christian Courts,
Divorce appears not to be any more than the solemn Judicial separation from
Conjugal Society, as that it seems to be rather the freeing the Husband and
Wife from the Obligation to mutual conjugal duties, than the utter rescinding
and dissolving the Bands. For if it were so, then that Husband and Wife could
never come together again without a new Wedlock, which was never heard of in
the Church; that Adultery, the efficient cause of Divorce (though a breach of
the Conjugal Vow) is yet no actual diss^lution of the Conjugal Bands, among us
Christians, seems probable (says Doctor Hammond) by these two evidences (1.)
Because Adultery committed by the Husband, dissolves not Marriage, which yet it
equally should, if that fault committed, and not the Sentence of Divorce
rescinded the Conjugal Band, etc. In this a difference is observable between us
and the Jews; for in case of Fornication, the Jew expected no Sentence of the
Consistory, but the Man might put her away, give her from himself a Bill of
Divorce, which was never allowed or practiced among Christians. 2. Because if
this were so, if Adultery in the Wife dissolved the bands, then the Husband,
that after the Wifes Adultery continued to live with her Conjugally, must be
concluded to commit Fornication with her, the validity of the bands being it
(and nothing else) which makes Conjugal Society Lawful. Accordingly has the
Opinion of the Church been anciently, as in Can. Apost. 48. If any Laick put
away his Wife and Marry another, or Marry a Woman which has been put away by
another, let him be Excommunicate. So likewise at the Council of Arles, An.
314. Can. 10. De his qui Conjuges suas in adulterio deprehendunt, and iidem
sunt Adolescentes Fideles, and prohibentur nubere, placuit ut in quantum
possit, concilium iis detur, ne viventibus uxoribus suis, licet Adulteris,
alias accipiant. Likewise in the Milevitan Council, An. 402. at which St.
Augustine was present, it is decreed, that secundum Evangelicam and Apostolicam
Doctrinam, neque Dimissus ab uxore, neq. Dimissa a Marito, alteri conjungantur,
sed ita maneant, aut sibimet reconcilientur. So also in the Codex Can. Eccl.
African. Can. 102. (...). That they that are Divorced from Husbands or Wives,
should remain unmarried. And what has thus been defined by these Canons, is
evidently received into the Ecclesiastical constitutions of this Church, which
therefore has decreed, that when Divorces are pronounced, Monitio and
prohibitio fiat, ut a partibus ab invicem segregatis cast vivatur, nec ad
alias Nuptias alterutra vivente convoletur. Constit. Eccl. An. 1597. upon these
Arguments pro and con, Doctor Hammond in the forecited place does conceive,
that the Resolution may be made by these three propositions: (1.) That by the
force of Christ's words in all the Evangelists, he that Marries again after any
kind of Divorce, but that one for Fornication, does commit an Unchristian sin.
(2.) That by force of the Arguments first produced, for the interpreting Mark
and Luke by Mat. 19. 5. vid. Doctor Hammond of Divorces, fol. 452, 453. it may
be probably concluded that in that one case of Divorce for Fornication, the
Marriage of the Innocent party shall not be Adulterous. (3.) That although this
be granted, yet the words of St. Mark and Luke, especially the words of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 39. do give such prejudices against Marriages after Divorce
indefinitely, that the ancient Canons of the Church, and the Constitutions of
our English reformation, have thought fit not to permit such liberty in any
kind, and therefore that this may be the better observed, the decree of
separation shall not be pronounced, till they that demand it, shall give
sufficient security that they will do nothing against the Admonition and
Prohibition, for our Constitution adds, Denique quo illud firmius observetur,
sententia separationis non antea pronunciabitur, quam qui eam postulaverint,
Cautionem Fidejussoriam sufficientem interposuerint se contra monitionem and
prohibitionem nihil commissuros, which if not observed by the Judge, he is
punishable, and the Sentence of Divorce for such defect declared void. Constit.
Eccl. an. 1597. Innocent the first, Bishop of Rome says, Qui interveniente
repudio, alii se Matrimonio copularunt, in utraque part Adulteros esse
manifestum est, etc. But the said Judicious Author conceives, that of this and
the like Testimonies it may be observed, that most of them belong not to these
Divorces, which are in case of Fornication, but (proportionably to Christ's
words in St. Mark) to those which according to the Jewish or Imperial Laws,
were allowed in other Cases, than what either Christ, or the Primogenial
institution of Marriage had allowed of: And further says, that it is evident
and confessed by all Christians, that of These, that is, the Marriages (after
such Divorces by the Jewish and Imperial Laws) are Adulterous, but not so of
those other Marriages of the innocent parties after those other Divorces in
that one Case of Adultery. Yea and some Canons have been made with this
Temperament expressly ( except in the case of Fornication) so in the second
Canon of the Council of Vannes, eos qui relictis uxorihus suis, sicut in
Evangelio dicitur, excepta causa Fornicationis, sine Adulterii probatione alias
duxerint, statuimus, etc. They that have left their own Wives, as it is said in
the Gospel, except for cause of Fornication, and without proof of Adultery
shall have Married others, we judge them, etc. Notwithstanding which, the Law
tells us of other Cases than that of Adultery or Fornication, wherein the Man
after a Divorce may remarry during the Life of the Woman Divorced, as in the
Case of Arctitude, which you may find in Summa Astensi, Lib. 8. De Divortio
propter impotentiam. Tit. 37. fo. 233. Si Arctatio alligetur (subaudi
quamcunque impotentiam Foeminae) statim potest Divortium Fieri hoc modo, viz.
vocabuntur Matronae fide dignae, and in Nuptiali opere expertae, -- Ar. F. de
Ventr. inspect. l. 1. verb. igitur, etc. Et si Mulieres asserant eam non posse
fieri Naturaliter Matrem, tunc statim potest Divortium fieri, et dabitur viro
Licentia cum alia contrahendi. It will not be denied, but that in all Cases
where the Marriage was ab initio Null, there it shall, after a legal Divorce,
be free for either party convolare ad secundas Nuptias altera part existente,
which strictly and properly cannot be said to be a second Marriage, because
precedent to it, there was duly and legally none; nor therefore can they be
properly said to be Divorced, Separated, or put asunder, that never were de
jure put together. Among the several kinds of these Null Marriages may be
computed that which Panormitan speaks of in his Fourth Tract de Sacramentis.
Resol. 201. Foemina (says he there) si commode non potest aptam se reddere
viro, impedimentum censendum esse perpetuum, and Matrimonium declarandum
Nullum; which holds true vice versa, and therefore it is likewise said, that
Foemina per contractum Matrimonii jus suum tradit viro apto, non inepto, atque
in non aptum nullum transfertur jus. The Canon Law is express in prohibiting
these second Marriages after a Divorce, although Ex causa Fornicationis. So
Tostatus, verb. Matrimonium, ubi voluit nullam esse Causam Repudii, nisi
Fornicationem; Et istam non quidem simpliciter ad Dirimendum Matrimonium, sed
ad tollendam Cohabitationem. ut patet, Extra. de Divort. c. Gaudemus. The
Lawyers and Divines (says Adam Tannerus) are of different opinions in this
point, Juristae Divortii voce utuntur pro Dissolutione Matrimonii etiam quoad
vinculum, ut constat. ex toto tit. F. De Divortiis. Theologi tamen ea voce
Divortii solam significant separationem inter conjuge^, aut quoad
Cohabitationem, aut quoad Thorum. Adam. Tannerus, Tom. 4. Disput. 8. de
Matrimonio. q. 5. Dub. 5. nu. 74. de Divortio.

(4.) In concilio Arelatensi, which was held in An. 314. at the command of
Constantine the Great, under Pope Silvester in the first Year of his Papacy, it
was Canoned, Vt is cujus uxor adulteravit, aliam illa vivente non accipiat. Sir
Hen. Spelman gives the words of this Canon thus, viz. De his qui Conjuges suas
in Adulterio deprehendunt, and iidem sunt Adolescontes Fid^^es and prohibentur
Nubere, placuit ut in quantum possit, Consilium iis detur, ne viventibus
uxoribus suis, licet Adulteris, alias accipiant Sir H. Spelm. Council de Council.
Arelat. Can. 10.
If this Canon be not directly prohibitory, and against second Marriage after
Divorce in Case of Adultery during the Life of the other Party, yet it provides
that Counsel or Advice in the Case be given against it, and the Parties
monished to the contrary.

(5.) Mr. Attorney Noy in Dame Powels Case reports, that a Divorce causa
Adulterii is but a mensa and thoro, and non a vinculo Matrimonii; and the
reason he gives is this, viz. Because (says he) the offense is after the just
and lawful Marriage Dame Powells Case against Weeks. Noy Rep.
; if for this Opinion of his any Anticanonist should dream, that he died in the
Catholic Faith of Matrimonial Sacraments, let him consult Sir Edward Coke in
the Third part of his Institutes, where he does not only allow of that Member
of the foresaid distinction, but withal says, that in the Case of Divorce a
Mensa and Thoro the second Marriage is void, living the former Wife or Husband
Co. Instit. 3. par. cap. 17. Polygamy.
. Yet in Bury's Case he reports it to have been adjudged, that by a Divorce the
Marriage is dissolved a vinculo Matrimonii; and also resolved, that admitting a
second Marriage to be voidable, yet it is adjudged that the same does remain in
force until it be dissolved; and that the Issue born during such second
Coverture is a lawful Issue to inherit the Land Bury's Case. Co. 5. part 98.
.

6. Touching the kinds and effects of Divorce, whether Divorce a vinculo
Matrimonii, or separation only a Mensa and Thori, with the causes thereof; the
Divines and Lawyers are of different Opinions, and each of these divided among
themselves; some conceive, that as there be Divorces Ex Causa praecedente, so
there are some Ex Causa subsequente, as Causa Adulterii, and that Adultery
dissolves the very Bond of Matrimony, which consists in their being one
Flesh. And whereas it is written, That whosoever shall Marry her that is
Divorced, commits Adultery Mat. 5. 32.
, they will have it to be meant only of such as shall Marry her who is Divorced
for any other cause or reason, than for Fornication; which they infer from the
former part of Mat. 5. 32. that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for
the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery; so that for the cause
of Fornication it is lawful to put her away, and whosoever shall Marry her that
is (say they) Divorced for any other cause, commits Adultery; whence they
would infer, that a Remarriage after Divorce for the cause of Fornication is
not forbidden; And as for that Divorce or Separation a Thoro and Mensa, they
look on it as no current Coin, not having (as they pretend) Caesar's Image or
Superscription thereon, but seem very positive in affirming that Pha^isaei
interrogabant Christum de dimissione quoad vinculum, and non quoad Thorum and
mensam. It is true indeed, by the Judicial Law a Woman Divorced from her
Husband in causa Adulterii might be another Man's Wife Deuteronomy. 24. 1, 2.
; which is no contradiction to Mat. 5. 22. if the Divorce there mentioned be a
vinculo. But that which such as are for Post-repudiary Marriages much insist
on, Beza in Luke 16. 19.
is that which the Reverend Mr. Beza has on the like place, Qui hinc colligunt
(says he) post Repudium Nullum esse secundo Matrimonio locum, altera part
existente, inepte colligunt; loquitur enim Christus de Repudiis apud Judaeos
usitatis, inter quae numerari non potest Repudium ob Adulterium, Levit. 20. 10.
and Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
cum Adulteros ex lege oportet Capitali poena plecti.

(7). If ingressus in Religionem be (as some understand it) a kind of Mors
Civilis, then it should seem it might be for that reason that in such case it
was lawful for the other Party convolare ad secundas Nuptias, for by the 118
Canon of Egbert Archbishop of York An. 750. called Canon Affrica^ensis, in
exceptionibus suis e Canonibus Patrum Concinnatis, it was Lawful so to do, the
words of the Canon are, Si vir sive Mulier ex consensis Religionem ceperit,
licet alterum accipere novum conjugium; But from hence no Argument can be drawn
to prove the Lawfulness thereof in Causa Divortii. The Cardinal of Segutium in
his summa Hostiensis seems to be of Opinion that it is Lawful in case of
Divorce to Marry again, the words of that famous Canonist are, debet Iudex
sententiam Divortii partibus tradere in Scripturam publicam redactam, ne Filiis
susceptis ex secundo Matrimonio, probatione deficiente, valeat praejudicium
generari Sum. Host. lib. 3. de Divortiis. nu. 14.
. But Cardinal Navarr seems to be more positive in the point, where he Affirms,
that Matrimonium Contractum cum secunda post sententiam Divortii, valet,
provided it be post Triennalem Cohabitationem, as the Canon Law requires, in
causa Impotentiae. Navar. Council. l. 4. council. 1. de Frigidis. nu. 3. p. 414.
But it seems strange that Sanchez a Jesuit, and one of the highest form,
arguing this Question against the Heretics, as they are pleased to call us,
should so ingenuously confess, that ex ipsis Catholicis aliqui existimarunt,
omnino dissolvi Matrimonium quoad vinculum eo propter Adulterium alterius
Conjugis separato: atque ita licere aliud Matrimonium inire, priori Conjuge
superstite. Sanch. de Matrim. Tom. 3. l. 10. de Divor. Disp. 2. nu. 1. and
Navar. lib. 4. Council. 1. nu. 3.

(8.) This, utrum ob Adulterium alterius Conjugis dissolvatur Matrimonium quoad
vinculum, ita ut integrum sit innocenti ad alias Nuptias transire, altera part
vivente? was a Question long since controverted by Bellarmin, and by Valentia.
Bellarm. l. 1. de matrim. c. 15. Valent. lib. unic. de indissolubilitate
matrim. cap. 3. And by them admitted as disputable with a Non obstante to the
Council of Trent, whereby Matrimony is highly Sacramentiz'd, as appears by that
which the said Tridental Council declares concerning it, viz. Matrimonium est
Sacramentum, quod ex opere operato confert gratiam. secundum Communem and veram
opinionem, quam pro infallibili Articulo Fidei tenendam esse, ait Concilium
Trident. and declaravit Navar. lib. 4. Council. 1. nu. 3. Yet the forementioned
Sanchez does cite Sixtus Senensis bringing in Origin Asserentem sui temporis
Episcopos permisisse alias Nuptias uxoribus ob virorum Adulteria ab ipsis
divertentibus. Sanch. ubi supra Sixth. Senens. lib. 6. Bibliothec. Of which
Judgment also was St. Ambrose ( as he affirms:) also Tertullian, Erasmus,
Cajetan and Catherinus. Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marcion. Erasm. annot. ad 1.
Cor. 7. Cather. l. 5. Annot. contra Cajetan. infin. Cajetan. in Mat. 19. in
illud, quicunque dimiserit. This also, says Sanchez, was the Judgment of the
Greek Church, as Guido the Carmelite reports; and of this Judgment are both the
Lutherans and Calvinists; yea, it was the Judgment also of a Pope, Pope
Zacharias the First, who expressly Decreed in these words, viz. Concubuisti cum
sorore uxoris tuae, Neutram habeas; Et si illa quae uxor tua fuerit, Conscia
sceleris non fuit, si se continere non vult, Nubat in Domino cui velit. Cap.
Concubuisti. 32. quest. 7. And as to the Husband St. Ambrose is express in the
Case, uxor a viro non descedat, nisi causa Fornicationis; quod si discesserit,
aut maneat innupta aut reconcilietur. Ideo, non subdit de viro, quod de uxore
praemisit, quia vero liceat ducere aliam. D. Ambros. ad 1 Cor. 7. and refertur.
cap. uxor. 32. q. 7. So likewise Ex concilio apud Vermerias, it is express,
that Maritus (uxore conciliante mortem ejus) possit ipsam uxorem dimittere, and
si voluerit aliam ducere. refertur c. si qua Mulier. 31. q. 1.

(9.) In the first Year of Lotharius King of Kent, An. 683. In Concilio
Herudfordiae It was Decreed, that Nullus Conjugem propriam, nisi (ut sanctum
Evangelium docet) Fornicationis causa relinquat. Quod si quis quam propriam
expulerit Conjugem Legitimo sibi Matrimonio Conjunctam, Si Christianus esse
recte voluerit, nulli alteri copuletur: sed ita remaneat, aut propriae
reconcilietur Conjugi Spelm. Council. de Council. Herudford. art. 10.
. In those days it seems he was reputed scarce a Christian, that being
separated from his Wife presumed to Marry another. And above two hundred years
before, in St. Patricks Synod, viz. In Synodo Sancti Patricii, aliorumque
Episcoporum in Hibernia Celebrata, circa An. Christi 450, vel 456. It was
decreed, That the punishment of a Woman departing from her Husband, and joining
her self to another Man, should be Excommunication Idem. de Synod. Sancti
Patricii Sect. 19.
. In the time of H. 3. and in the Case of Simon de Montford, between him and
his Wife, the Pope ratified his Marriage, after he had dispensed therewith
contrary to the Laws and Canons Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 455.
. King John being Divorced from the D. of Glocesters Daughter, viz. the third
of June 1199. soon after, viz. before the 8 th of October then next following,
was Remarried to Isabel, sole Daughter and Heir to the E. of Engolesme.
Likewise Alice Daughter of the E. of Savoy, and King John's first Wife, was
Married to him after she had been the Divorced Wife of Henry de Lion, D. of
Saxony. Speed Chron. in vita Johan. R. Angl. Also King Henry 8 th. after he had
been Divorced from Q. Katherine, his Brothers Relict, and after above twenty
years cohabitation with her, Married again (during her Life) the Lady Anne
Bullen, by whom he had Q. Elizabeth. These are Presidents of Fact, not of Law;
For,

(10.) Alceat asserts, that hodie Jure Pontificio permittitur solum separatio
ex certis causis, nec interim licet aliam ducere, etiamsi separationi uxor
causam dederit: yet withal he says in the same place, Aliter tamen aliqui ex
Antiquis Patribus olim observare, inter quos Ambrosius, qui ex justa causa
Marito jus divertendi atque aliam ducendi, etc. Non enim hos homo separat, sed
Deus, quando ita Optimis Antistitibus propter malos Foeminae mores videtur.
Alceat. de verb. sig. l. 101. inter stuprum. Sect. Divortium. In which place
the same Author further adds, It is no wonder that the Emperor Justinian
himself was somewhat sparing in this point, when the Pontifical Canon passim
tempestate sua observatus fuisset: ut forte credendum sit, Licere Pontifici eos
Canones tollere, and jus Romanum observari, si velit. Grotius says, Cum ea
alteri Nupta est, Matrimonium haud dubie irritum lege quidem Naturali, nisi vir
prior eam dimiserit. Grot. de jur. bell. lib. 2. cap. 5.. 11. And in the
Matrimonial Councils it is express, That Mulier a primo Matrimonio per
sententiam separata, cum eo, cum quo secundo nupsit cum Authoritate Ecclesiae,
manner debet. Council. Matrim. Council Baldi 3. nu. 3. Where the Judgment of the
famous Baldus is, That Contrahentes Matrimonium cum Authoritate Ecclesiae, and
vigore sententiae Divortii, praesumuntur esse in bona fide, nec Adulterium
^^mittunt. ibid. nu. 17.

(11.) Although the D. D. are (...) divided in this point of second Marriage,
whilst the Divorced Parties are alive; yet the Law generally seems much more to
incline to favor such second Marriages, where the Divorce is ex causa
praecedenti, than where it is, ex causa subsequenti; For when it happens ex
causa praecedenti, as when the Degrees prohibited are violated, Precontract,
Frigidity in the Man, Impotency in the Woman, or other perpetual Impediment,
the Marriage was void and null ab initio, it being a Rule and a Truth in Law,
that non minus peccatum jungere non Conjungendos, quam separare non separand^s:
But where the Divorce happens ex causa subsequenti, there the Marriage was once
good and valid in Law, and therefore (as some hold) indissoluble; and that such
subsequent cause can have no influence quoad vinculum M^trimonii, but only
quoad separationem a Mensa and Thoro, which is but a Partial or Temporal, not a
Total or Perpetual Divorce. A. was Divorced from his Wife for Incontinency, he
after took another Wife* living the first Wife, Adjudged, the second Marriage
was void* because the Divorce was but a Mensa and Thoro, and not a Vinculo
Matrimonii. Rye and Juliambs Cas. More 's Rep. Sanchez says that Quoties
Matrimonium dissolvitur, si id fit ob utriusque Conjugis perpetuum
impedimentum, utrique aliae Nuptiae interdicendae sunt: S^ vero ob alterius
tantum impedimentum, illi interdicuntur, concessa non impedito Licentia ad
alias tra^s^undi. Sanch. de Matrim. lib. 7. Disp. 93. nu 37 And again in the
same place, Viro ratione Frigiditatis separato, conceditur Foeminae Licentia
Nubendi alii, ea viro denegata: Et Foeminae ob impedimentum separatae
interdicto alio Conjugio, id non denegatur sed conceditur viro. ibid. etc.
Laudabilem de Frigid. etc. 2. in fin. 33. q. 1. etc. ex literis. eod. tit.
Likewise the Summa Astensis has the same in substance, si Arctatio alligetur
(subaudi quamcunque impotentiam Foeminae) statim potest Divortium fieri hac
m^do: vocabantur Matronae fide dignae, and in Nuptiali opere expertae, ar. ff.
de ventr. inspect. l. 1. verb. igitur, etc. Et si Mulieres asserant eam non
posse fieri Naturaliter Matrem, tunc statim potest Divortium fieri, and dabitur
viro Licentia cum alia contrahendi. Sum. Astens. in l. 8. de Divor. propter
impotent. tit. 37. fo. 233. as aforesaid: yet Tostatus on the 19 th of Mat.
says, that Fornicatio non valet simpliciter ad dirimendum Matrimonium, sed ad
tollendam Cohabitationem. Tostati Index. verb. Matrimon. as appears also by the
Canon Law. Extra de Divor. etc. Gaudemus, etc. Quare facto Divortio ( says
Tostatus again) non transeatur ad aliud Matrimonium, Tostat. ibid. for which he
there quotes St. Hierome D. Hieron. in Mat. tom. 5. 190. F. and 188. C. and
185. D.
, who in this point is opposed by St. Ambrose D. Ambros. ubi supra.
. Possibly the different constructions that Divines and Lawyers do make of this
word [Divorce] may not be the least reason of the different Opinions in this
point; for Adam Tannerus ( as aforesaid) tells us, That Juristae Divortii voce
utuntur pro Dissolutione Matrimonii etiam quoad vinculum, ut constat ex toto
tit. ff. de Divortiis. Adam Tannerus. Tom. 4. Disp. 8. de Matrim. q. 5. Dub. 5.
de Divortio Col. 2232. nu. 74. and variis de causis solvi posse, ut videtur in
iisd. Legib. and apud Greg. Syntag. jur. par. 2. lib. 9. cap. 5. Theologi tamen
ea voce Divortii solum fignificant separationem inter Conjuges, aut quoad
Cohabitationem, aut quoad Thorum. Tannerus ubi supra.

(12.) F. being Divorced for Incontinency of the Wife, he afterward Marries P.
the Daughter of R. living the first Wife. By the whole Court that is a void
Marriage; for the Divorce is not, but a Mensa and Thoro, and does not dissolve
vinculum Matrimonii. And by Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury. So also is the
Opinion of Divines and Civilians Hill. 44. Eliz. Rye verse Fulcombe. in Noy's
Rep. and More Rep. Case 893.
. As also in Dame Powels Case against Weeks formerly hinted, In Dower it was
resolved, That a Divorce Causa Adulterii is no Bar of Dower; because it is but
a mensa and thoro, and not a vinculo Matrimonii. And it was said by Daniel,
that an Elopement is not a Bar of Dower ad ostium Ecclesiae. And Judgment for
the Plaintiff Dame Powell verse Weeks. Noy's Rep.
.

Agar of Kingston upon the Thames was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for
beating of his Wife, and for calling her Whore, and was sentenced there to pay
his Wife three shillings a Week for her Alimony, and diverse Fines were imposed
upon him for not performing thereof, and a Prohibition was granted, and also a
Habeas Corpus, to deliver Agar out of Prison Agar's Case in Brownl. Rep. pa. 2.
.

There was a Case of late years, where a Man Married the relict of his Great
Uncle, he Married his Grandfathers Brothers Wife by the Mothers side, and it
was held lawful, it was the Case of one Harison against Dr. Burwell Trin. 20.
Car. 2. C. B. Rot. 2043. Harrison verse. Doctor Burwell Vaugh. Rep. and Arg.
. But where a Man Married his Wives Sisters Daughter, it was held unlawful, and
after a Prohibition a Consultation in that Case was granted Cro. 33. El. 228.
Mann'^ Case. vid. dict. Case Harrison. and vid. Case Hill verse. Go^d. in Vaugh.
Rep.
. But Marriages with Cozen Germans are in the said Case of Harrison against
Doctor Burwell reported by Sir John Vaughan to be lawful; in which Case, as
also in the Case of Hill against Good, reported likewise by the said Sir John
Vaughan Chief Justice, the Reader may find what Marriages are Lawful, and what
not, what Marriages are prohibited within the Levitical degrees, and what
Marriages are by Gods Law otherwise prohibited.

In the Case between Webster and Bury in an Ejectione Firmae, a special Verdict
was given upon Divorce between Bury and his Wife, causa Frigiditatis, Co. 5.
Buries Case. 40 Eliz. C. B.
, and that his Wife for three years after his Marriage remansit virgo intacta,
propter perpetuam impotentiam generationis in viro, and quod vir fuit ineptus
ad generandum; and in this special Verdict all the examinations of the
Witnesses, upon which the Judge in the Ecclesiastical Court was moved to give
his Sentence, by which the perpetual disability of Bury ad generandum was
manifest, were read; and by which it was pretended, that the Issue which he had
by a second Wife was illegitimate, and this was the doubt of the Jury; and it
was adjudged, that the Issue of the second Wife was Lawful, for it is clear
that by the Divorce (causa Frigiditatis) the Marriage is dissolved a vinculo
matrimonii, and by consequence either of them might Marry after; then admitting
that the second Marriage was avoidable, yet it remained a Marriage until it was
Dissolved, and by consequence the Issue that is born during such Coverture (if
no Divorce be in the Life of the Parties) is Lawful, Et homo potest esse
habilis and inhabilis diversis temporibus, and Judgment affirmed in Error.

A. Was indicted upon the Statute of Primo Jacobi for having two Husbands. It
was found that A. was Lawfully Married to N. and before the Judge of the
Audience she sued a Divorce against P. Pasch 12. Car. B. R. Porter's Case. --
Cro. par. 3.
propter saevitiam: whereupon it was decreed that propter saevitiam of her
Husband, she should be separated a Mensa and Thoro, and it was expressed in the
Sentence, that she should not Marry any other during the Life of P. she
afterward ( P. Living, and she knowing thereof) took to Husband J. S. The
Question was, whether that were Felony within the Statute. It was said in this
Case, that this being a Divorce Causa Saevitiae, was but a separation a Mensa
and Thoro, and not a Dissolution a vinculo Matrimonii, and therefore that the
Marriage continued between them. The Court doubted, whether the Proviso in the
said Statute did extend to every manner of Divorce; but inclined to be of
Opinion, that she was not within the Proviso; for if this should be suffered,
many would be Divorced upon such pretenses, wherefore the Court advised the
Woman, to procure a Pardon to avoid the danger of the Statute.

Debt against Husband and Wife, Underhill and Brooks Case. Cro. par. 1.
as Executrix of her former Husband; the Defendants plead by Attorney, that
they were Divorced before the Writ brought: It was adjudged, that the Writ
should abate; for it shall be presumed, the Divorce continues, if the contrary
be not showed. In another Case, being for Debt upon an Obligation, where the
Defendant said, that at the time of the making of the Obligation she was Wife
to J. S. who is yet in vita, and so Non est factum: Mic. 43. and 44. Eliz. B.
R. Riddlesde^ and Wogan's Case. Cro. par. 1.
The Plaintiff said, that after the making of the Bond, there was a Suit in the
Ecclesiastical Court between the said J. S. and the Defendant, for that the
said J. S. had another Wife alive at the time of the Marriage betwixt them, so
as the Defendants Marriage was adjudged void. It was the opinion of the Court,
that this Divorce was but Declarative, for it was void ab initio, and so the
Defendant sole always and adjudged for the Plaintiff.

The Wife Libelled against the Husband in the Ecclesiastical Court for Alimony,
Sir Tho. Simmond's Case. More's Rep.
because he beat her so as she could not live with him; a Prohibition was
prayed, but denied by the Court; and it was held in this Case, that the Wife
might have the Peace against her Husband for unreasonable correction.

By the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 11. it is Felony to Marry a second Husband or
Wife, the former Husband or Wife living; out of the generality of which Law the
Lord Coke makes five exceptions. (1. Co. Inst. par. 3 cap. 27. vid. 22. E. 4.
Consultation 5. Pains Case. lib. 9. fo. 72.
) It extends not (says he) to any person, whose Husband or Wife is continually
remaining beyond the Seas by the space of seven years together; and notice is
not material, in respect of the commorancy beyond Sea. (2.) It extends not,
when the Husband or Wife shall absent him or her self, the one from the other,
by the space of seven years in any parts within his Majesty's Dominions, the
one of them not knowing the other to be Living within that time; here notice is
material, in respect the Commorance is within the Realm. (3.) It extends not to
any person that at the time of such Marriage is Divorced by any Sentence had in
the Ecclesiastical Court. (4.) Nor to any person, where the former marriage is
by Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court declared to be void and of no effect.
(5.) Nor to any person, for or by reason of any former marriage made within the
age of Consent.

If the Man be above fourteen, and the Wife under twelve, or if the Wife be
above twelve, and the man under fourteen, yet may the Husband or Wife so above
the Age of Consent, Co. ubi supra.
disagree to the Espousals, as well as the party that is under the age of
Consent: for the advantage of disagreement must be Reciprocal. And so it was
resolved by the Judges and Civilians, Trin. 42 Eliz. B. R. in a Writ of Error
between Babington and Warner. So as if either Party be within Age of Consent,
it is no former Marriage within the Act aforesaid.

It is commonly as well as formerly said, that there are two kinds of Divorces,
Co. ibid.
the one that dissolveth the Marriage a vinculo Matrimonii; as for Precontract,
Consanguinity, etc. The other a Mensa and Thoro, as for Adultery, because that
Divorce by reason of Adultery cannot dissolve the Marriage a vinculo
Matrimonii, for that the offense is after the just and lawful Marriage. And the
said Stat. of 1 Jac. cap. 11. does in respect of the generality of the words,
privilege the Offender (in case of second Marriage, where the former Husband
or Wife is living) from being a Felon, as well in the case of Divorce a mensa
and thoro, as where it is a vinculo matrimonii, and yet in the Case of the
Divorce a mensa and thoro the second Marriage is void, living the former Wife
or Husband. And if there be a Divorce a vinculo matrimonii, and the adverse
party appeal, which is a continuance of the former Marriage, and suspends the
Sentence, yet after such a Divorce the party Marrying is no Felon within the
said Statute, etc. although the Marriage be not Lawful.

(13.) Alimony, although it properly signifies nourishment or maintenance, when
strictly taken; yet now in the common, legal, and practicable sense, it
signifies that proportion of the Husbands Estate, which the Wife sues in the
Ecclesiastical Court, to have allowed her for her present subsistence and
livelihood, according to Law, upon any such separation from her Husband, as is
not caused by her own Elopement or Adultery. By this Elopement is here
understood, meant, and intended that voluntary departure of a Wife from her
Husband to live with an Adulterer, and with whom she does live in breach of the
Matrimonial vow, whereby she incurrs the forfeiture of her Dower, unless her
Husband upon her free and voluntary submission shall think fit by way of
reconciliation to receive her again, and readmit her into the former conjugal
relation St. Westminster. 2. cap. 34.
In which sense a Woman thus deserting and forsaking her Husband, is said to
Elope, whereby the Law will not compel him in this case to allow her Alimony;
on which word Mr. Blount in his Nomo-^exicon makes mention of an ancient record
Rot. Claus. An. 7. H. p. 1. m. 3.
, wherein the same thing is called rationabile estoverium; This Alimony the
Wi^e that Elopes or departs from her Husband with an Adulterer (though she
departed with her Husbands consent) yet loses, together with her Dower or
Jointure, as appears by that remarkable Case of Sir John de Camois before
recited supra verb. Adultery. verse. sin.
And the Husband, from whom his Wife departs, and lives with an Adulterer,
shall not be compelled to allow her any Alimony.

14. Notwithstanding the premises, regularly the Husband is obliged to allow
the Wife Alimony pendente lite, arg. l. si neget, ff. de lib. agnos. and Sanch.
de Matr. lib. 2. Disp. 41. nu. 51. and afterward in most Cases of separation
not occasioned by Elopement or Adultery as aforesaid, nor in case of a total
Divorce by reason of some legal impediment, whereby the Marriage was Null and
void ab initio. dict. Sanch. Tom. 2. lib. 7. Disp. 93. nu. 22. This Alimony in
strictness of Law is a duty properly due from the Husband to the Wife whilst
she cohabits with him; for by the Canon Law if without any default of his, she
does of her own accord depart from him, he is not obliged to allow her Alimony
during such her wilful deserting of him, though she be not charged of Adultery.
c. haec imago 33. q. ^. It being a Rule in Law, Qui non facit quod debet, non
recipit quod oportet. l. si ea C. de Condit. insert. and l. Julian. affinis ff.
de acti. empt. But if she depart by reason of some default in him, as because
of cruelty or the like, in that case he shall be compelled to allow her
Alimony; for the Law understands her as a dutiful Wife, so long as it is
attributable only to him, and no way imputable to her, that she is constrained
to seem otherwise. arg. l. jure civili. ff. de Cond. and demonst. and Lyn. in
l. qui in uxorem. c. de Neq. gest. nu. 1. and D. D. Communiter. But if she
depart of her own default, the Husband is not obliged to allow her Alimony,
albeit he had a considerable Dowry with her: and on the other side, if the
Husband be in the fault, and she depart from him, he is obliged to allow her
Alimony, though he had nothing with her. Jo. Lupus c. pro vestras. de Donat.
int. vir. and ux. Barbos. 2. p. rubr. ff. solut. matr. nu. 43. And in case it
be doubtful, through whose default it is, that they live asunder, the Law in
that case concludes, that the party that was last in fault, is not least in
fault, l. illud 17: ff. de peric. and commod. rei vendit. And therefore if the
Wife, who by her own default did voluntarlly depart from her Husband, shall
after repent, and submitting her self to him, shall desire reconciliation, and
to be admitted to cohabitation with him, he then refusing her shall be obliged
to allow her Alimony, save in the Cases aforesaid. Glos. c. significasti. verb.
materiam in side Divort. ubi Host. nu. 2. verb. restitui. Jo. Andr. nu. 7. fi.
and D. D. Communiter. On the other side, if by reason of the cruelty of the
Husband the Wife shall blamelesly fly from him, and the Husband shall offer
sufficient security or caution for his future good behavior to her, and her
safety and peace with him, and the cruelty or ill usage not such, but that by
such caution the Wifes peace and safety may be undoubtedly secured, and she
notwithstanding refuse to return, in such case the Law will not compel him to
allow her Alimony. Quia ultima ea culpa uxori nocet. Ferret. council. 34. nu.
18. Barbos. 2. p. rub. ff. solut. matrim. nu. 44.

(15.) By the Civil Law, if a Dowry or Marriage-Portion with a Wife be promised
and not paid to the Husband, he is not obliged to allow her Alimony; Gloss.
Auth. de non eligend. secundo Nubentes. The reason whereof is, because such
Portion quasi in pretium datur; l. pro oneribus, c. de jur. Dotium. But if by
reason of some misfortune, her Parents or such as undertook for the Payment
thereof, do after become insolvant, she shall notwithstanding have Alimony,
even by that Law, which in other respects seems somewhat severe in this Point,
unless you can affect them with Fraud in promising what they knew they could
not perform. Barbos. ff. solut. Matri. nu. 71. Or in case two persons lay claim
to the same Woman, each pretending she is his Wife by Marriage, and the one of
them move to have her kept under Sequestration till the Case be decised; in
this case she shall have Alimony pendente lite of that Person at whose motion
or instance she is so Sequestered. l. si pro lusorio. ff. de appellat. But if
the controversy be only between a Man and a Woman, touching the validity of a
Marriage, as whether a Marriage or not; in such Case no Alimony is due, till
some Matrimonial Proof appear, or that it does some way constare de Matrimonio,
but wherever a Marriage does appear, there Alimony shall be due pendente lite;
arg. l. si neget. ff. de lib. Agnosc.

(16.) John Owen lived apart from his Wife: And upon Petition of the Wife to
the Justices of Assize for Maintenance, they referred it to the Bishop of
Bangor, who ordered that he should pay to his Wife 10 l. per an. which was
afterward confirmed by Decree in the Council of Marches of Wales. And because
that John Owen disobeyed that Decree, and did not pay the 10 l. per an. the
Council sent a Messenger to apprehend his Body, and caused his Goods and the
profits of his Lands to be Sequestered. And Henden prayed a prohibition: For
that Alimony was not within their Instructions. Richardson demanded of him, if
they could grant Prohibitions, if they meddle with a thing which belongs to
Ecclesiastical Power, where they themselves have Power. Harvey was of the same
Opinion, for this Court should preserve other Courts in order. Yelverton said,
for the Sequestration of the Lands, they could not do that. Richardson, they
have not any Power to sell the Goods. The Ecclesiastical Court is the proper
Court for Alimony; and if the Person will not obey, they cannot but
excommunicate him. And by Yelverton, when that comes to them from the Bishop to
be confirmed, they cannot but walk in the Steps of the Bishop; and a day was
given to show why a Prohibition should not be granted: And so it was ruled
Mich. 8. Car. C. B. John Owens Case. Hetley's Rep.
.

(17.) Dame Sherley Wife of Sr. Henry Sherley sued in the High Commission Court
for Alimony; and Hit^ham moved for a Prohibition; and said that Alimony is not
within the Jurisdiction of the High Commission; for the Court of High
Commission is to try Ardua Regni, which are not triable by the Common Law.
Richardson, the Power of the High Commission is not de Arduis Regni, but of
Heresies, and such other things Ecclesiastical; and he said, that the Court of
High Commission had special words in their Commission, but not in the Statute
of primo; and that the Statute de primo had no Prerogative in that: And so the
Question is, if the King may by the Common Law grant such a Commission. Hutton
said, that by the same reason as he may grant such a Commission, they may grant
Commissions for all other things. Yelverton, I marvel how that came within
their Commission: he said that in tempore Jacobi, upon a debate before him, Sir
Edward Cook so fully satisfied the King. And this matter of Alimony was
commanded to be put out of their Commission. And upon that Richardson said to
Hitcham, move this again when the Court is full, for we may advise of this --
Et adjournat. etc. Dame Sherley's Case. Hetleys Rep.
. One Broke was committed by the High Commissioners to the Fleet, because he
refused Alimony to his Wife, and that being returned upon an Habeas Corpus, he
was delivered. -- Broke's Case. More's Rep.

(18.) The Wife complains against her Husband in the Ecclesisiastical Court
Causa saevitiae, for that he gave her a Box on the Ear, and spit on her Face,
and whirled her about, and called her damned Whore. Which was not by Libel, but
by Verbal accusation, after reduced to writing. The Husband denies it, and the
Court ordered the Husband to give to his Wife 4 l. every Week, pro expensis
litis and Alimony. Barkley and Henden moved for a prohibition. The Suit is
originally Causa saevitiae, and as a Case wherein they Assess Alimony. And now
for a ground of a prohibition, it was said that the Husband chastised his Wife
for a reasonable cause, as by the Law of the Land he might; which they denied,
and said, that they had Jurisdiction in these matters de saevitia, etc. And
afterward that the Wife departed, and that they were reconciled again. And
then that reconciliation took away that Saeviti^ before, as reconciliation
after Elopement. Richardson, it was said here, that the Suit was without Libel,
but that is no ground of a prohibition, for she proceeded upon that matter
reduced in Articles, and we cannot grant a Prohibition if they proceed in their
Form; For we are not Judges of their Form. But if they will deny a Copy of the
Libel, a Prohibition lies by the Statute. You say, that an Husband may give
reasonable chastisement to his Wife, and we have nothing to do with it: But
only that the Husband may be bound to his good behavior by the Common Law. And
the Sentence in Causa saevitiae is a mensa and thoro, and we cannot examine
what is Cruelty, and what not. And certainly the matter alleged is Cruelty;
for spitting in the Face is punishable in the Star Chamber. But if the Husband
had pleaded a Justification, and set forth a Provocation to him by his Wife, to
give her reasonable castigation, then there would be some color of a
Prohibition. Henden, we have made such an Allegation, and it is absolutely
refused. Hutton, perhaps he is in Contempt, and then they will not admit any
Plea; as if one be Outlawed at Common Law he cannot bring an Action. But they
advised the Plaintiff to tender a Justification, and if they refused it, then
to move for a Prohibition The Wife of Mr. Clobery against her Husband. Hetley's
Rep.
.

(19.) B. was ordered by the High Commission-Court to give Alimony to his Wife,
and was bound in an obligation of 300 l. to one of the Doctors there, to give
her Alimony, and to use her as his Wife; And now he is sued there again, and it
is alleged against him that he had committed Adultery with diverse Women, and
that he had not given Alimony to his Wife, and thereupon B. was put to his
Oath, who answered, that as to the point of Alimony he was not bound to answer,
for that he was bound in an obligation to perform it, and also that he was sued
to discover upon his Oath the forfeiture of the Obligation; and for that the
Defendant would make no other answer, he was committed to Prison, and being
brought hither by Habeas Corpus, the Court was prayed that he might be released
for the reason aforesaid. Coke, Gawens Case which was ruled here in Wrays time,
was the same Case in effect, and it was ruled that the Ecclesiastical Court may
not examine him upon his Oath in such Case, and per Curiam B. was Bailed till
the next Term, for that that was the last day of the Term. Coke, for that there
is an obligation taken in this Case, I will grant a Prohibition for taking an
Obligation for that, if it be moved, and it was not well done to take the
obligation to one of the Doctors, but we use to take the obligation in the
Kings Name, Mich. 5. E. 4. B. R. Rot. 143. The Statute of 2 H. 4 gives
authority to Bishops to Fine and Imprison for Heresy; And where one Reser had
given a Legacy to Bishop Stephens, for which he sued the Executor, who being
for not payment thereof Excommunicated, said that he was not Excommunicated
before God, although he were before Men, for his Corn grew very well; for which
words he was after Imprisoned, but he was bailed here per Curiam upon an Habeas
corpus, for that it was not Heresy, because that Court has Authority to
examine such things which are given by the Statute of 10. H. 7. One said, that
the Tenth part of Tithes was not due Jure Divino, for which words he was
Imprisoned, whereupon the Habeas Corpus was brought, and that depended till 14.
H. 7. at which time it was adjudged that it was not Heresy, and that the Court
had Jurisdiction to examine that, it being given by Statute. And it seems to me
that the High Commission Court had not power to Fine or Imprison for Alimony.
Hill. 12. Jac. upon an Habeas Corpus by one Codd, the return was that he was
Imprisoned by the High Commission by that Warrant, Mich 12. Jac. B. R.
Bradstons Case.
viz. We command you to take him and Imprison him for manifest Contempt to the
Court, for that he being ordered to receive his Wife, and to enter into an
obligation to use her as his Wife, Roll's Reports.
he refuses so to do. Coke, he shall be Bailed, for that he could not be
imprisoned by them for Alimony, nor take obligation to perform their order.

Sentence was given in the Ecclesiastical Court, Hill. 12. Jac. B. R. Hyats
Case. Cro. p. 2.
that the Wife should be separated from her Husband, propter saevitiam of the
Husband, and Alimony allowed her there: the Husband prayed a Prohibition,
setting forth he desired a Cohabitation, and proffered Caution thereby to use
her fitly. The Court denied it, because the Court of the Ordinary is the proper
Court for allowance of Alimony.

A Libel was before the High Commissioners, which supposed diverse cruelties
used by the Husband against the Wife, for which she was enforced to depart from
him, who would not allow her maintenance, and therefore she sued before them
for Alimony: But because it is a Suit properly suable before the Ordinary,
wherein if there be wrong, the party may have an appeal; and although it be one
of the Articles within their Commission to determine of; yet because it is not
any of the clauses within the Stat. of 1 E. 6. for which causes the Commission
is ordained, the Court awarded a Prohibition.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Defamation.
1. What Defamation is; how many ways it may be; and where Cognizable. 2. Two
ways of prosecution at the Civil Law in Causes of Defamation. 3. Prohibition
for suing in the Ecclesiastical Court upon the words [ Drunkard and Drunken
Fellow.] 4. Several differences in reference to the Cognizance of the Temporal
and Spiritual Courts in point of Slander. 5. Whether Action lies for calling
one Queen? 6. Prohibition for suing in the Ecclesiastical Court for words
tending to the obstruction of a Marriage. 7. Matters determinable at Common
Law, not Cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Courts. 8. Whether these words [ Thou
have taken a false Oath] be Actionable, and in what Court? 9. Whether Action
lies at Common Law, for saying Thou art a Whore, etc. 10. Words of Slander to
the ^inderance of Marriage, are Actionable at the Common Law. 11. Defamatory
words [ Thou art a Bawd and keep a Bawdy house] whether and where
Actionable? 12. To say A. is a Cuckold, and that B. had layen with the Wife of
A. is a Defamation suable in the Spiritual Court. 13. The Difference as to
Cognizance between the words [ Thou art a Bawd, and I will prove thee a Bawd]
and the words [ Thou keep a House of Bawdry.] 14. To say [ Thou art a
Drunkard or a Drunken Fellow] whether such words are suable in the
Ecclesiastical Court? 15. The words [ he is a Cuckoldly knave] are suable not
in the Temporal, but in the Ecclesiastical Court. 16. Whether the calling of
Pimp, Common Pimp, be Actionable, and in what Court. 17. Welsh J^de, expounded
to be Welsh whore, and cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Court. 18. Whether the
words Queen or Base Queen be Actionable in the Ecclesiastical Court? 19. Action
in that Court for Scandalizing a Parson. 20. Whether Action lies in the
Ecclesiastical Court, for saying of one that kept a Victualling house, that she
kept a House of Bawdry. 21. Whether the words [ Thou art a Pander] be
Actionable at the Common Law? 22. Churchwardens presentment of a Feme Covert
upon a Common Report for Adultery, and Action of Defamation brought in the
Ecclesiastical Court thereon. 23. Whether Action upon the Case for words lies
against an Infant of Seventeen years of age? 24. Several other Cases at the
Common Law pertinent to this Subject of Defamation; what of them cognizable in
the Ecclesiastical Court; and wherein the Prohibition lies or not.
(1.) DEFAMATION, properly so called, is the utterance of Reproachful Speeches,
with intent of raising an ill Fame of the Party so reproached; Defamare, est in
mala Fama ponere: Bart. l. turpia. ff. de Legate. 3. This extends it self to
Writing, as by defamatory Libels; as also to Deeds, as by Reproachful Postures,
Signs and Gestures; Lindw. c. authoritate. verb. quacunque. in gloss. de Sent.
Excommunicat. And as for the most part it proceeds of malice, implying matters
either of Crime or Defect; so it generally aims at some prejudice or damage to
the Party defamed. All Actions of Defamation suppose in additu quam plupalavit,
etc. Case Barrew against Lew^lling. Hob. rep.
Whatever Cognizance the Temporal Laws of this Realm do take of Defamations by
virtue of Prohibitions and Actions upon the Case; yet it will not be denied,
but that the Cognizance of Defamations, where they are duly prosecuted, does
properly belong to the Spiritual Law, specially where the matter of the
Defamation is only Ecclesiastical.

(2.) In all causes of Defamation the Party defamed had his Election by the
Civil Law, whether he would prosecute the Defamer ad Vindictam publicam, or ad
privatum interesse; the former whereof was made choice of, where the Defamed
aimed more at the Defamers shame, than his own Interest; and chose rather to
reduce him to a Recantation, than augment his Cash by his own Credit's
diminution; l. in constitutionib.. ult. ff. L. Cornel. The other, viz. ad
privatum interesse, was chosen by such Defamed ones as valued their Credit at a
certain Rate, and chose rather a Pecuniary Compensation, than an unprofitable
Recantation; aiming more at their own private satisfaction, than at the
Defamers public Disgrace. l. stipulationum.. plane. ff. de verbor. obligat.
and l. si quis ab alio. ff. de re judic. But both of these the Defamed could
not have; for having determined his Election, he was therewith to rest
satisfied; only having obtained a Sentence against the Defamer, for his
Recantation or public Disgrace by prosecuting him ad publicam vindictam, he
might possibly have in Lieu thereof a pecuniary Recompense by way of
Commutation. The Prosecution ad publicam vindictam was left to the
determination of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the other to the Cognizance
of the Secular: Much in conformity to what the Laws of this Realm in Cases of
Defamation seem to say, viz. where the Prosecution is merely for the Punishment
of Sin, and Money not demanded, there the Spiritual Court shall have the
Cognizance: But where Money is demanded in satisfaction of the Wrong, there the
Temporal, specially if the Defamer undertake to justify the matter, or the
words express or imply a Crime belonging to the Cognizance of the Common Law.
Vid. Stat. 2. E. 3. c. 11.
These Actions of Defamation are of a higher Nature, than they seem primo
intuitu to be (a man's good Name being Equilibrious with his Life;) and
therefore the Law calls them Actiones praejudiciales, that is, such as draw
lesser Causes to them, but themselves are drawn of none.

(3.) One Libelled against another in the Ecclesiastical Court, for saying That
he was a Drunkad, or a Drunken Fellow, and an addle Drunken Fellow, and by the
opinion of the whole Court a Prohibition was granted, and for such words a
Prohibition was granted in C. B. in the Case of Martin Calthorp Mich. 8. Car.
B. R. Cuckowes Case Jones Rep.
.

(4.) One moved at the Bar for a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court on a
Suit there depending for calling one Bawd; Jones Justice conceived, that these
Differences ought to be observed, where a Man calls a Woman Whore, or such like
Slander, for which Suit lies in the Ecclesiastical Court against the Party (if
the matter appear) in that Case Suit lies for Slander there, and no Prohibition
lies; e contra, if a man be called Thief, Traitor* or the like, whereon no Suit
lies for the Principal in the Ecclesiastical Court, but at the Common Law, if
one be sued for such Slander in the Ecclesiastical Court, a Prohibition lies.
If a man call one Bawd, for which Suit lies at the Spiritual Court and also at
the Common Law; there if the Suit be for Slander in the Ecclesiastical Court,
in that case no Prohibition lies, for the Party has Election to sue in which
Court she please: So if a Woman be Slandered in her Reputation, whereby she is
hindered in her Marriage, she may sue either at the Common Law or in the
Spiritual Court for Slander. And lastly, if a man speak any words, for which no
Suit lies at Common Law, nor are such as concern any thing whereof the
Ecclesiastical Court takes Cognizance, it seems that in such Case if Suit be in
the Spiritual Court for Slander, as for Convitia, a Prohibition lies, as for
calling one Knave, Drunkard, or the like. Quaere of that, the Chief Justice
agreed to that, the others said nothing therein Trin. 7. Car. B. R. Anonymus.
Jones. Rep.
.

(5.) A Suit was commenced in the Ecclesiastical Court, where the Lilbel was,
that he called the Plaintiff Queen, or words to that effect, or importing the
same Sense; in this Case a Prohibition was granted: (1) Because no Action lies
for that Word Queen. (2) For the uncertainty thereof Anonymus. Latch. Rep.
.

(6.) The Defendant said to one Anthony Elcock (who was a Suitor to the
Plaintiff, and with whom there was near an Agreement of Marriage) I know Davies
Daughter, well, she did dwell in Cheapside, and a Grocer did get her with child,
and the Plaintff declared, that by reason of these Words, Elcock refused to
take her to Wife. Adjudged, that the Action would lie at the Common Law, and
the Suit was not to be in the Spiritual Court for Defamation; but at the Common
Law, for that she is prejudiced in that which should be her Temporal
advancement; and the ground of the Action is Temporal. The truth of the Case
was this; an Action upon the Case for a Slander was brought by Anne Davies
against John Gardener: That whereas there was a Communication of a Marriage to
be had between the Plaintiff and one Anthony Elcock; the Defendant to the
intent to hinder the said Marriage, said and published, that there was a Grocer
in London that did get her with Child, and that she had the Child by the said
Grocer, whereby she lost her Marriage. To which the Defendant pleaded Not
guilty, and was found guilty at the Assizes at Aylesbury to the damages of Two
hundred Marks, and now it was alleged in Arrest of Judgment, that this matter
appears to be merely Spiritual, and therefore not determinable at Common Law,
but to be prosecuted in the Spiritual Court. But per Curiam, the Action lies
here, for a Woman not Married cannot by intendment have so great advancement as
by her Marriage, whereby she is sure of maintenance for her life, or during her
Marriage, and Dower and other benefits which the Temporal Laws give by reason
of her Marriage; and therefore by this Slander she is greatly prejudiced in
that which is to be her Temporal advancement, for which it is reason to give
her remedy by way of Action at Common Law: As if a Woman keep a Victualling
house, to which diverse of great credit repair, whereby she has her livelihood,
and one will say to her Guests, that as they respect their Credits, they take
care how they use such a House, for there the Woman is known to be a Bawd,
whereby the Guests avoid the House, to the loss of her Husband: shall not she
in this Case have an Action at Common Law for such a Slander? It is clear that
she shall. So if one says, that a Woman is a Common Strumpet, and that it is a
Slander to them to come to her House, whereby she loses the advantage that she
was wont to have by her Guests, she shall have her Action for this at Common
Law. So here upon these collateral circumstances, whereby it may appear that
she has more prejudice than can be by calling of one Harlot, and the like. And
judgment was given for the Plaintiff Davies verse. Gardner. Poph. Rep. Vid. did.
Cas. Coo. lib. 4. 16. 3^. Eliz.


(7.) Touching Defamation, for which Suit is in the Ecclesiastical Court.
Resolved, the matter must be mere Spiritual and determinable only there; for if
it concern any matter which is determinable at the Common Law, the
Ecclesiastical Judge has not the cognizance thereof 25. Eliz. Palmer and
Thorp's Case. Co. 4. par. 20.
.

(8.) Action was for these words, Pierce has taken a false Oath in the Court
of Consistory of Exeter. It was objected, that for matters in the Spiritual
Court, an Action will not lie: And the Stat. of 5 Eliz. of Perjury, does not
extend to those Courts, but it was resolved, that the Action did lie for these
words, and that the Statute does extend to such and the like Courts; as the
Court of Star Chamber, etc. And the words, that he has taken a false Oath,
shall be intended actively, and shall amount to these words, He is forsworn. In
this Case it was said by Prideoux, that these words are Actionable, although
the Perjury be supposed to be committed in the Spiritual Court; for he shall be
Excommunicated if he will not appear, and he shall do penance in a white sheet,
which is as great a disgrace as to be set upon the Pillory. And it was ruled in
an Action upon the Case betwixt Dorrington and Dorrington, upon these words,
Thou art a Bastard, that an Action lies, and yet Bastardy is a Spiritual
matter, and there determinable; so for these words, Thou art a Pirate, an
Action lies, and yet Piracy is not punishable by the Common Law, but in the
Court of Admiralty. And these words, He has taken a false Oath, do amount to
these words, He is forsworn. Wray conceived, that the words are not Actionable,
for there is a Proviso in the Statute of Eliz. cap. 9. that the said Act shall
not extend to any Ecclesiastical Court, but that every such Offender shall be
and may be punished by such usual and ordinary Laws as heretofore have been,
and are yet used, and frequent in the said Ecclesiastical Court. Gaudy, upon
these words, an Action does not lie, for they are not pregnant of any Perjury
in the Plaintiff, for he may be mere passive in it: for if one of the Masters
of the Chancery Minister an Oath to any person, or any Commissioners, etc. and
the Plaintiff swears falsely, a Man may say that the Master of the Chancery,
or the Commissioners have taken a false Oath: and yet he is not guilty of
falsity. And afterward Mutata Opinione Wray, that the Proviso in the said
Statute is to this intent, such an offense may be enquirable and examined in
the Ecclesiastical Court in such manner as was before, but the same does not
take away or restrain the Authority of the Common Law, but that such an Offense
may be here examined, etc. And as to the latter exception upon these words ( he
has taken a false Oath) it shall be intended Actively, and not Passively; And
if so, the Defendant ought to have so pleaded it: And afterward Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff Hill. 32. Eliz. Rot. 434. B. R. Pierce verse. How Leon.
Rep.
.

(9.) Pollard and his Wife brought an Action against Armshaw, for these words,
viz. Thou art a Whore, for I. S. Goldsmith has the use of thy Body, and the
Cart is too good for thee. Per Curiam, the Action will not lie; for the Common
Law cannot define, who is a Whore; but where if one keep a Victualling House,
it be said she keeps a house of Bawdry, an Action will lie 40. Eliz. B. R.
^ollard and his wife against Armshaw. Gold. 172.
.

(10.) Action upon the Case for words of Defamation. Whereas the Plaintiff was
a Person of good Fame, and always free from Adultery and Fornication, etc. And
after the death of Brian her late Husband, was in Communication with one Cowley
for a Marriage betwixt them; That the Defendant to deprive her of her Fame, and
to hinder her from the said Marrige, spoke of the Plaintiff these words, viz.
she is a Whore, and her Children (innuendo her Children which she had by the
said Brian late her Husband) are Frambishes Bastards (innuendo one Nicholas
Frambish.) After Verdict upon Not Guilty, and found for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment by Grimston, that these words are not Actionable:
For, for calling Whore, there lies not any Action; and to say that her Children
by her former Husband, are Frambishes Bastards, is repugnant in it self; for
they cannot be Bastards, which were born in the time of her former Husband: But
all the Court held that the Action well lies. For to say of a Widow who is in
Comnunication of Marriage with another, that she played the Whore in her former
Husbands time, is a great Discredit: And to say that her Children are Bastards
(although in truth they cannot be Bastards in Law, yet in Reputation they may
be so) is cause of loss of her Marriage, and that none will marry with her;
wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff Mich. 9. Car. B. R. Dorothy Brian
verse. Cockman. Cro. Rep.
.

(11.) Action upon the Case. Whereas he keeps an Alehouse Licenced by
Justices of the Peace, that the Defendant to scandalize the Plaintiffs Wife,
spoke these words of her, Hang thee Bawd, Thou art worse than a Bawd: Thou
keep a House worse than a Bawdy house, And thou keep a Whore in thy House
to pull out my Throat. Upon not guilty pleaded, found for the Plaintiff. Stone
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words are not Actionable; but agreed,
that for saying One is a Bawd, and keeps a Bawdy house, Action lies, because it
is a temporal Offense, for which the Common Law inflicts punishment. But to
call one Bawd without further speaking, an Action lies not, no more than to
call one Whore. But it is a Defamation punishable in the Spiritual Court. And
to say That be keeps a House worse tha^ a Bawdy house has not any intendment
what he means thereby; wherefore the Action lies not: And if it be intended,
that such words should hinder Guests from coming thither, being an Alehouse,
the Husband only ought to have brought the Action. And as to that, the Court (
absente Richardson) agreed. But for the other words, they held, the Action lies
by the Husband and Wife, for the slander to his Wife; and it is as much as if
he had said, that she keeps a Bawdy house; wherefore it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff Trin. 9. Car. Person and his Wife against G^oday. Cro. Rep.
.

(12.) A prohibition was prayed, because A. and his Wife sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court for Defamation, and speaking these words of the Plaintiff,
He was a Cuckold and a Wittal, which is worse than a Cuckold, and that
Aylsworth had layen with Ayloffs Wife; And for these Defamatory words he sued
there; and because it was alleged, that for these words, being but words of
Spleen, Prohibitions had been usually granted, day was thereupon given until
this Term, to show cause why a Prohibition should not be granted, and diverse
presidents were showed, that for calling one Cuckold or Whore, Prohibitions have
been granted: But now upon advertisement all the Court agreed, that no
Prohibition should be granted, but that the Ecclesiastical Court should have
Jurisdiction thereof: For although they agreed, that there ought not to have
been any Suit for the first words, they being too general; yet being coupled
with a particular, showing that the Wife committed such an Offense with such a
particular person, they be not now general words of spleen in common and usual
discourse and parlance; But they held it was a Defamation suable in the
Spiritual Court; whereupon the Prohibition was denied Pasch. 4. Car. C. B.
Eaton verse. Ayloff and his Wife. Cro. Rep.
. -- Brownlow chief Protonotary produced on that occasion several presidents,
where Prohibitions had been granted to stay Suits for such words, viz. Trin.
15. Jac. rot. 2260. Purchase verse. Birrel, for that he was presented at several
enquests within his Parish for being a Drunkard, and a Barretor. And Pasch. 6.
Jac. rot. 397. Prohibition to stay a Suit for calling a Parson Hedge-Priest.
And Mich. 21. Jac. Barker verse. Pasmore: She is a Queen, and a tainted Queen.
Prohibition granted.

13. H. Prays a Prohibition to stay a Suit in the Spiritual Court of Defamation
for speaking these words, Thou art a Bawd, and I will prove thee a Bawd. And
because these are words properly dererminable in the Spiritual Court, and for
which no Action lies at the Common Law, a prohibition was denied. But for
saying, Thou keep a house of Bawdry, this being matter determinable at
Common Law by Indictment, Suit shall not be in the Spiritual Court Mich. 7.
Car. B. R. Hollingsheads Case. Cro. Rep.
. vid. 27 H. 8. and Co. lib. 4. fo. 20.

(14.) Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court to stay a Suit there
for Defamation, for these words, Thou art a Drunkard or drunken fellow. And by
the opinion of Croke, Jones and Berkley, a Prohibition was granted: For these
words do not concern any Spiritual matter, but merely Temporal, and they be but
Convitium Temporale, and a common phrase of brawling, for which there ought not
to be a Suit in the Spiritual Court; and so it was held in Martin Calthorp's
Case, in C. B. but Richardson doubted thereof, because the Spiritual Court as
well as the Temporal may meddle with the punishment of drunkenness; so it is
not merely Temporal: But he assented to the grant of a Prohibition, and the
Party may (if he will) demurr thereto; whereupon a Prohibition was granted
Mich. 8. Car. B. R. Cucko verse. Star. Cro. Rep.
.

(15.) Prohibition was prayed by Bulstrod for Gobbet, to stay a Suit in the
Spiritual Court for Defamation, in speaking these words, He is a Cuckoldly
Knave, and cited presidents, that for saying, He is a Knave and a cheating
Knave, Suit being in the Spiritual Court, a Prohibition was granted upon good
advisement; and the Court said, that president is not like to this Case, for
there was not any offense wherewith the Spiritual Court ought to meddle, but in
this Case for these words, it is properly to be examined and punished there pro
reformatione morum; for it is a disgrace to the Husband as well as to the Wife,
because he suffers and connives at it, whereupon ( absente Richardson) the
Prohibition was denied. Again, it was moved, that this should be granted upon
the Statute of 23 H. 8. because he was sued in the Court of the Arches, which
is in the Archbishops Jurisdiction, and the words were spoken at Thistleworth
in London Diocese, as appeared by the Libel. But Jones said, that he was
informed by Dr. Duck. Chancellor of London, that there has been for long time
a composition betwixt the Bishop of London and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
that if any Suit be begun before the Archbishop, it shall be always permitted
by the Bishop of London; so as it is quasi a general License, and so not sued
there but with the Bishops assent; and for that reason the Archbishop never
makes any Visitation in London Diocese. And hereupon also the Prohibition was
denied Hill. 9. Car. B. R. Gobbets Case. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
.

(16.) Action, for that the Defendant had said of and to the Plaintiff, being
of good same, and one who had served as Captain in the Wars, haec verba in
London, Thou art a Pimp, averring that in London that word was known to be
intended a Bawd; and further said, that he was a common Pimp, and notorious,
which he would justify. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, Littleton (the King's
Solicitor) moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words are not Actionable;
for it is a mere Spiritual Slander, as Whore or Heretic, and punishable in the
Spiritual Court, and not at the Common Law; and he said, that diverse times
Suits have been in the Spiritual Court for such words, and Prohibitions prayed
and never granted. vid. 27. H. 8. 14. But to say that he keeps a Bawdy house,
is presentable in the Leet, and punishable at the Common Law. Ward, e Contra,
because it is spoken of one of an honorable profession, viz. a Soldier, and
trenches on his reputation to be taxed with such a base Offense; and he said,
that such offenses have been diverse times punished in London by corporal
punishment, but it was answered, that was by Custom; and there the calling one
Where is Actionable. Jones Justice held that the Action lay not; and all the
Justices agreed, that the exposition and averment (that Pimp is known to be a
Name for a common Bawd) is good. Croke and Berkley agreed, that the words are
very slanderous, and more than if he had called him Adulterer or Whoremonger,
etc. and may be indicted and punished for it corporally, as tending to the
breach of the Peace; and rule was given that Judgment should be entered, etc.
But was afterward stayed Mich. 10. Car. rot. 148. Dymmock verse. Faweett. Cro.
Rep.
.

(17.) Suit being in the Ecclesiastical Court for calling a man's Wife Welsh
Jade and Welsh Rogue, Sentence being there in the Arches, the Defendant
appealed to the Court of Audience; and in the Appeal mentioned the former
words, and in the libel was interlined [ and a Welsh Thief:] and hereupon a
Prohibition was prayed and granted, unless cause were shown by such a day to
the contrary: For it was held clearly, that for the word [ Welsh Thief] Action
lies at the Common Law, and they ought not to sue in the Spiritual Court: And
for the other words, it was conceived upon the first Motion, they ought not to
sue in the Spiritual Court, for they be words only of Heat and no Slander. But
it was afterward moved and shown, that the said words [ A Welsh Thief] were
not in the first Libel, nor in the Appeal at the time of the Appeal; but were
interlined by a false Hand without the privity of the Plaintiff in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and that upon Examination in that Court, it was found to
be falsely inserted, and ordered to be expunged. And that the words Welsh Jade
were shown in the Libel to be expounded and so known to be a Welsh Whore; which
being a Spiritual Cause and examinable there, it was therefore prayed that no
Prohibition should be granted; and if it were granted, that a Consultation
should be awarded. And of this Opinion was all the Court, that the words [ and
a Welsh Thief] being unduly interlined, and by Authority of the Ecclesiastical
Court expunged, and in that Court Jade is known and so expounded for a Whore,
our Law gives Credence to them therein, and especially being after two
Sentences in the Spiritual Court. This Court will not meddle therewith.
Wherefore Consultation was granted, if any Prohibition was issued forth quia
improvide; And Rule given, that if a Prohibition was not passed, that none
should be granted Pasch. 12. Car. C. R. Pew and his Wife ver. Jefferyes. Cro.
Rep.
.

(18.) It was moved for a Prohibition by Harris Sergeant to the Court of
Audience, because that the Plaintiff was sued there for saying to one, Thou art
a common Whore and a base Queen, and Harris said, that a Prohibition had been
granted in this Court, for saying to one that she was a pimperly Queen: And it
was the Case of Man against Hucksler: And Finch said, though the words are not
Actionable in our Law, yet they are punishable in the Spiritual Court, For the
word Queen in their Law implies as much as Whore: But Hobart said, that this
word Queen is not a word of any certain Sense, and is to all intents and
purposes an Individuum Vagum, and so uncertain Trin. 19. Jac. C. B. Winch. Rep.
.

(19.) In an Action upon the Case; that whereas he is Parson of D. and a
Preacher, the Defendant Slandered him in haec verba, Parrett is a lewd
Adulterer, and has had two Children by the Wife of I. S. I will cause him to
be deprived for it. By the Court the Action does not lie: For the Slander is to
be punished in the Ecclesiastical Court. And so awarded Quod Quer. nil. cap.
per. bill. Case Parrett verse. Carpenter. Noy. Rep.
.

(20.) D. had sued T. in the Ecclesiastical Court for this, viz. That whereas
she was of good fame, and kept a Victualling House in good Order; that the said
T. had published that D. kept an house of Bawdry. T. now brought a Prohibition,
and by the Court well; for D. might have an Action for that at the Common Law,
especially where she kept a Victualling house as her Trade. Note, 27. H. 8. 14.
And by the Justices, that the keeping of a Brothel-house is enquirable at the
Leet; and so a temporal Offense. And so was the opinion of the Court; Tr. 7.
Car. B. R. Mrs. Holland's Case Thorn against Alice Du^ham. Noy. Rep.
.

(21.) W. sued L in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Defamation, and had
Sentence; L. appeals, and depending the Appeal comes a Pardon, which relates to
the Offense, and pardons it; then L. deferrs his Appeal, and for that W. had
costs taxed him: And now L. prayed a Prohibition, because he deferred his
Appeal because of the Pardon, which had taken away the Offense. And by the
Court in that Case, after the pardon the inferior Court cannot tax Costs; but
it was urged that the superior Courts might tax Costs upon the desertion of
the Appeal, which is an Offense after the Pardon. But it was answered on the
other side, that it was in vain to prosecute the Appeal, when the Offense it
self is pardoned. The words were, Thou art a Pander, to Sr. Hen. Vaughan: And
there was much debate if they were actionable at Common Law; yet it was agreed,
that a Suit may be brought for them in the Spiritual Court, as for calling one
Whore, Bawd, or Drunkard: But otherwise by Jones, if he had said, That he was
Drunk; for then a Prohibition lies. And it was ruled in 6. Jac. B. R. in the
Case of Cradock against Thomas; a Prohibition was granted in a Suit for calling
one Whoreson. And in Weeks Case, a Prohibition in a Suit for calling one Knave
Case Jews against Whitton. Noy Rep.
.

(22.) E. and M. being reputed Churchwardens (but they never took any Oath, as
the Office requires) present a Feme Covert upon a common report for Adultery,
etc. And the Husband and Wife libel against them in the Ecclesiastical Court
for that Defamation. And when Sentence was ready to be given for them, the
Churchwardens appeal to the Arches, where the presentment was proved but by
one Witness; they sentenced the Baron and Feme. But now Ward Sergeant, moved
for a Prohibition, but it was denied by the Court; for they were Plaintiffs
first. And also it is a Cause, which this Court had not any Cognizance of Eaten
and Morris's Case. Hetley's Rep.
.

(23.) Note, upon evidence to the Jury, Resolved by the Court that an Action
upon the Case for words, lies against an Infant of Seventeen years of age. For
malitia supplet aetatem Sir Christoph Hod^man verse. John Grisell. Noy' s Rep.
. And it is said at the Common Law, that if a Man Libel in the Ecclesiastical
Court against one for saying certain words of him, which he will maintain in an
Action upon the Case at Common Law, a Prohibition lies Hill. 4. Jac. B. R.
inter Turnain and Thorn per Cur. and Mich. 38, 39. Eliz. B. R. Butler and
Bartlett. Adjudgd.
.

(24.) If a Man Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court against one for saying that
he is a Witch or the Son of a Witch; although no Action lies for that at the
Common Law, yet no Prohibition shall be granted, for peradventure he may have
some Spiritual prejudice thereby, if he should be the Son of a Witch, as that
he cannot be a Priest or the like: (for it seems all the force of the words
consists in the last words, they being spoken in the disjunctive) Rep. 14. Jac.
B. Adjudg. vid. Roll. Abr. page 295. nu. 2.
.

If a Parson of a Church call A. B. Drunkard, upon which A. B. answers thou
lie; if the Parson sue A. B. in the Ecclesiastical Court for giving him the
lie, a Prohibition lies, for that the Cause for which he gave him the lie, is
not Spiritual, but depending on a Temporal thing precedent Mich. 7. Jac. B.
inter Simpson and Water^ per. Cur.
. But if a Man call a Minister Knave, he may be sued for that in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and no Prohibition lies Hill 7. Jac. B. per Coke.
. If one Man says of another, that he will not hear Sermons made by those who
have been made Ministers by Bishops; he may be sued for that in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and no Prohibition shall be granted Hill. 7. Jac. per
Cu^iam Adjudg.
.

If a Man says of another, that he keeps a Bawdy house, and is sued for it in
the Ecclesiastical Court, although he might have an Action at Common Law, yet
the Ecclesiastical Law has a concurrent Jurisdiction in this, and the words
are mixed, for which reason no Prohibition lies 27 H. 8. 14. b. per Fitzherbert
And if one says of another, that he is a Pander, he may be sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court, for that the signification of that word is well known,
and sounds to a Spiritual Defamation Mich. 2. Car. inter Jews and Whitley. per
Dederidge and Jones contra Whi^l^ok.
, Or if a Man says to another, Thou art a Cuckoldly Knave, and for that he and
his Wife sue him in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Defamation, no Prohibition
lies, for that these words amount to a Spiritual Defamation, viz. that his Wife
was incontinent; in this Case a Prohibition was denied Hill. 9. Car. B. R.
inter Isles and Cobbet per Curiam.
.

Husband and Wife were Divorced for Adultery a mensa and thoro, and mutua
cohabitatione (and as one of the Counsel said, de omnibus Matrimonialibus
obsequiis, but the Counsel of the other party denied that) and after the Wife
sued in the Ecclesiastical Court a Stranger for Defamation, and Sentence there
given for her, and penance enjoined to the party Defendant, and costs of Suit
assessed for the Plaintiff; and afterward the Defendant appeals, and after the
Husband of the Wife releases all Actions, and that Suit and all appertaining
thereunto, and the Defendant pleaded that Release, and they remitted back the
Suit to the inferior Court again; and now Coventry Recorder of London prayed a
Prohibition, for that notwithstanding the Divorce they continued Husband and
Wife, and therefore the Release of the Husband should bar the Wife from having
Execution of the Sentence, and of the Costs 44 El. In this Court between
Steevens Administrator of one Steevens, and Totte, the Case was, That after a
Divorce for Adultery of the Husband a Mensa and Thoro, the Woman sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court for a Legacy, devised to her by the Testator, and the
Defendant pleaded a Release thereof from the Husband, and thereupon a
Prohibition was granted, and he showed that president in Court, but the
President did not comprehend the Divorce; But Doderidge said, he well remembered
when that Case was argued, and the parlance then was about the Divorce.
Wentworth, it seems that no Prohibition shall be granted, Hill. 7. Jac. in this
Court. A Suit was commenced in the Ecclesiastical Court by two Churchwardens,
and the Defendant there pleaded the Release of one of them, and thereupon a
Prohibition was here granted, and after a consultation was granted, for that
they shall try that, having cognizance of the Principal, and in this Case the
Release is after the appeal, and therefore it may not be pleaded upon the
appeal, for the Judges in the appeal have no power but to examine the former
Sentence, and not any collateral matter. Coventrie, I agree the Case of the
Churchwardens, for that the Release of one is not any Bar in Law, for 38.
El^z. it was here resolved between Methon and Winns, that a gift by the
Churchwardens without the Assent of the Sidemen or Vestry is void; but it is
otherwise here, for here the Release of the Husband is sufficient to discharge
the Execution of that Sentence, the which is all that we demand, 10. l^. 3.
such Divorce is not any Bar of Dower. The Court seemed to incline that no
Prohibition should be granted, for that the Wife in such Case may be sued alone
without the Husband by the Ecclesiastical Law, and this is matter merely
Spiritual viz. Defamation, and therefore we have nothing to do therewith, and
the Release of the Husband shall not discharge the Suit of the Wife, which is
only to restore her to her Credit and Reputation which was impeached by the
other, and the Costs of Suit is not for any Damage, but merely for the Charge
of the Suit, and therefore the Suit being not discharged, the Costs shall
remain also; and this Case is not like the forecited Case of Stephens, for the
thing for which that Suit was, was originally a Legacy due to Husband and Wife,
and therefore there the Release of the Husband was a good discharge, but here
was no duty in the Husband originally, Ergo, etc. Curia advisare vult Mich. 14.
Jac. B R. Motam verse. Motam. Roll. (...). Coke. 4. Palmer and Thorps Case. 25.
El. f. 20.
.

In Palmer and Thorps Case it was resolved, that Defamation in the
Ecclesiastical Court ought to have three Incidents. (1) That the matter be
merely Spiritual and determinable in the Ecclesiastical Court, as for calling
one Heretic, Schismatic, Advowterer, Fornicator. (2) It ought to concern
matter merely Spiritual only; for if it concern any thing determinable at
common Law, the Ecclesiastical Judge shall not have Cognizance of it. See for
this 22. E. 4. 20 the Abbot of St. Albons Case. (3) Though the thing be merely
Spiritual, yet he which is defamed, cannot sue there for amends or damages,
but the Suit there ought to be for punishment of the offender, Pro salute
animae: For this see Articulis cleri, and Circumspecte agatis, and Fitz. 51,
52, 53. but yet the Plainshall recover Costs there, and there if the Defendant
to redeem his Penance agree to pay a certain sum, the Party may sue for this
there, and no Prohibition lies in that Case.

In a Case of Prohibition between M. and M. in the Ecclesiastical Court; the
Case was, a Suit was there for Defamation, by the Wife of the party, a Sentence
there given, and Costs pro expensis litis, the Husband did release these Costs,
which they would not there allow of; upon a suggestion here that the Husband
was divorced causa Adulterii, a Prohibition was prayed; and for which it was
urged, that the Release by the Husband was good, the Suit being there for
Defamation, Sentence there given, the Wife divorced a Mensa and Thoro, which
does not dissolve Vinculum Matrimonii, but that this notwithstanding they may
come together again when they will; and such a Divorce is no Bar of Dower.
Doderidge, They are only to restore the Party to her good Name, in Case of
Defamation: The point here only is, the Husband and Wife are divorced, Causa
Adulterii, the Wife sues in the Ecclesiastical Court for Defamation, and there
recovers, and Costs are given, the which the Husband did release; whether this
Release thus made by the Husband, shall bar the Wife of her Costs. And if they
will not allow of this Release there, whether a Prohibition shall be granted or
not. The Whole Court clear of opinion, that no Prohibition in this Case is to
be granted. And so by the whole Court, the Prohibition was denied.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Sacrilege.
1. Whence the word Sacrilege is derived, what it imports, and the several
kinds thereof. 2. It is taken properly and strictly, or improperly and in sensu
largo; and is of a mixed Cognizance. 3. The several ways whereby Sacrilege may
be committed. 4. Who are intended by Persons Sacred, against whom Sacrilege
may be committed; the division thereof. 5. Bartol's Definition of Sacrilege;
several severe punishments thereof Recorded by Historians. 6. The several
punishments inflicted on Sacrilegious persons according to the Civil and Canon
Law; The Civil Law more severe therein than the Canon; how punished anciently
in this Realm according to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions thereof. 7. The
dreadful Curse anciently and solemnly pronounced in Parliament against
Sacrilegious persons. 8. A remarkable Judgment that happened to a Bishop of
Bangor for Sacrilege.
(1.) SACRILEGE, from Sacro and Lego, or a Sacris Legendis, that is,
suffurandis for that word Lego sometimes signifies furari or rapere: Isidor.
lib. 1. Origin. lit. s. Sacrilegus, qui sacra legit, h. e. furatur. In the
Greek (...) importing as much as to say (...), that is praedari vel violari
Sacra, for Sacrilege is the violation or usurpation of some thing that is
Sacred, Gloss. in cap. omnes Ecclesiae. 17 q. 4. and may be committed three
several ways, As (1.) either in respect of the Person, as when a man does wound
or strike an Ecclesiastical Person in Holy Orders: or (2.) in respect of the
Place, as when one violates the Privileges or immunities of the Church or
Churchyard: or (3.) in respect of the Thing, as when a thing Sacred or
Consecrated or deputed or dedicated to some Sacred use is usurped upon and
taken away, and this holds true, whether auferatur Sacrum de Loco sacro, vel
non sacro, vel non sacrum de sacro. Lindw. de Offic. Archipres. c. 1. glos. in
verb. Sacrilegium.

(2.) Sacrilege is taken either strictly and properly, as when a thing sacred
is stolen out of a sacred place; so it is held according to the Law generally,
but either will amount to Sacrilege according to the Canons: or in a large
sense and improperly, and so it extends to other Crimes. l. si quis c. de Epis.
and cle. etc. de sacrileg. per totum. As infringing the Church's Liberties,
invading Ecclesiastical goods and the like, whereof more hereafter. Lindw. de
immun. Eccl. c. 2. glos. in ver. Sacrilegi. The Emperors held their
Constitutions so sacred, that they called the violation thereof Sacrilege. l.
un. c. de Crimi. Sacril. This Crime is of a mixed cognizance, partly
Ecclesiastical, partly Secular, whereof each Jurisdiction may jure proprio take
cognizance. c. cum sit generale. De foro compet. So that this Crime of
Sacrilege is not merely Ecclesiastical, because the cognizance ^^^reof in some
Cases may appertain to the Secular Judge, at least quoad poenam, si quis in hoc
c. de Epis. and Cler. And Hostiensis himself does confess as much quoad poenam
Corporalem; otherwise it is as to the censures of the Church contra talem
fulminadas.

(3.) There are many ways whereby Sacrilege may be committed, as by invading
the rights and goods of the Church, by unjust and illegal vexing and molesting
the Church, by wasting and destroying the Church, by violating Ecclesiastics,
by a Clerks consulting with Soothsayers and Diviners, by violating
Church Priviledges and Immunities, by striking a Clerk. Lindw. de immun. Eccl.
c. seculi glo. in verb. ausu Sacrilego. Church-burners, Church-breakers,
Church-robbers, by stealing the Church-bible, the Calice, or other thing out of
the Church, by violating the Church Porch or breaking the Doors thereof, by
striking in the Church, or apprehending and taking any one there, by
obstructing the Jurisdiction of the Church, or hindering any of that free
access which he ought to have to the Church, by usurping the Guardianship or
custody of a Church that is void, and under that pretense posess themselves of
the Goods and Revenues thereof, by usurping and occupying the Oblations and
Offerings of the Church; but to explicate this Crime of Sacrilege to its full
latitude, it is requisite in order thereto, to distinguish aright of things
Sacred which are violated thereby; for as Habits are distinguished ex objectis,
so Vices by the matters about which they are conversant; now the matter of
Sacrilege is ever something Sacred, and therefore Sacriledges are
distinguished according to the diversity of Sacred things; whence Aquinas
inferr's, that as there are Three kinds of things Sacred, viz. Persons, Places,
and some other Things: So there is a Threefold kind of Sacrilege, viz. against
Persons, against Places, and against other Things consecrated and dedicated to
Divine Worship. Which distinction the Canonists do generally hold in each
Member thereof: As Sacrilege, (1.) Against Ecclesiastical Persons. cap. sicut.
etc. quisquis. 17. q. 4. and in c. si quis deinceps usque ad cap. si quis
suadente. ead. Cause. and q. (2.) Sacrilege against sacred places. cap. Miror,
etc. Frater. (3.) Against the Goods and Revenues of the Church. cap.
Sacrilegium. cap. Omnes Ecclesiae. and cap. Attendendum. It being expressly
said, that Qui pecunias vel res Ecclesiae abstulerit, Sacrilegium facit. in
cap. qui rapit. There is no Sacrilege but may be reduced to one of these three
heads, although under them there may be diverse other kinds of Sacriledges more
particularly subdistinguish'd.

(4.) By Persons Sacred is here understood such, as in a peculiar manner are
set apart and dedicated to Divine public Worship according to Sacred
Ordination; and the principal kind of Sacrilege commissable against such, is
the laying of violent hands on them, which is a violation of their Immunities
or Privileges. cap. si quis suadente. 17. q. 4. And as to Sacrilege committed
against Places sacred, the Canon is, That Sacrilegium Committitur auferendo
Sacrum de sacro, vel non sacrum de sacro, aut sacrum de non sacro cap. quisquis
17. q. 4. Of which Three Members the Third does not belong to this circumstance
of Place. And as to the second Member thereof the Civil Law determines
otherwise than the Canon, for in that Case the Civil Law says, that Res
Privatorum, si in aedem sacram depositae, surreptae fuerint furti actionem non
sacrilegii esse. l. Div. ff. ad leg. jul. pec. yet among the Canonists it is
communis opinio, that furtum in loco sacro sacrilegium est. And where the Canon
Law speaks of Churches, it says, si qui deposita, vel alia quaelihet exinde
abstrahunt, velut Sacrilegi Canonicae Sententiae subjaceant. But every Offense
done in the Church is not Sacrilege; yet it is held, that it is in the power
of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, so to prohibit the doing of some certain
things and actions in the Church, that such as offend against the Prohibition,
shall be reputed Sacrilegions, though the things in themselves are not
Sacrilege. The Canonists also do hold, that the perverting of the Holy
Scriptures, to uphold, maintain, or confirm errors, is gravissimum Sacrilegium.
Suar^z. lib. 3. de Sacrilegio c. 7. nu. 1;

(5.) Notwithstanding what has been said, Bartol defines Sacrilege to be the
taking away or stealing some sacred thing out of some Public sacred place;
this is most properly Sacrilege, according to Bartol, Bart. in l. Sacrilegii
poenam. ff. ad Leg. Jul. Pcculat. to which it may not be impertinent or
superfluous to add [ cum animo furandi.] The Civil Law punished it with death,
Bart. ibid. and alii D D. in dict. L. and Menoch. de Arbit. Jud. l. 2. Cent. 4.
Cas. 389. nu. 2. So the Athenians put a Boy to death for stealing a Plate of
Gold out of Diana's Temple which fell from her Gown. Aelian. lib. 5. de var.
Hist. cap. 16. Among the Grecians the Sacrilegious Persons were not to have the
common humanity of a Grave, but were cast out unburied. Diod. Sicul. lib. 16.
Biblio. in 6. An. Philippi. Philip King of Macedon in his holy War against the
P^ocenses, having taken their General Onomarchus and routed their Army,
commanded the General to be hanged, the rest to be drowned like Sarcrilegious
persons. Idem dict. lib. anno 8. Philip. Alexander the Great in the Olympic
Games caused it to be proclaimed by an Herald, that all Exiles and Banished
persons, except for Sacrilege and Murder, should be permitted to return to
their own Country. Idem lib. 17. An. 9. Alexandri. and Gemist. Pl^tho. lib. 2.
de Gestis. Graec. post pugnam Mantineam. Pleminius Ambassador from Scipio to
the Senate of Rome, having robbed the Treasure of Proserpina, and being now
nigh dead by a most searful and horrid kind of disease before he was brought to
his Trial, the Roman Senate notwithstanding condemned him in double the sum to
Pr serpina. Livius lib. 9. Bell. 2. Punic. and Valor. l. 1. cap. 2. Domitian,
when it was reported to him by the Flamens or Jupiters High Priests, that one
had erected a Monument for his Son with stones designed for the Temple or
Capitol, commanded the Monument to be pulled down, and demolished, the Bones
and Ashes of the Party to be cast into the Sea, and the stones to be restored
to the Temple: Sueton. in Domitian. cap. 8. Xenophon relates out of the Laws of
the Athenians against Sacrilegious persons in these words, viz. Judge, O
Athenians, in this matter according to the law made against Sacrilegious
persons and Traitors, That if any has committed Treason or Theft of things
Sacred, let him be adjudged to death, and let Sentence be that be be not buried
in Athens, and all his goods confiscate. Xenoph. de lege Atheniens. Another Law
against Sacrilegious persons apud Constantinum Harmenopulum, in haec verba,
Whoever steals any thing Sacred out of a Sacred place, let him have his Eyes
plucked out. Constable. Harmen. lib. 6. Prompt. jur. car. 5. Gunctranus King of the
Parisians and Galls, with his Nobles and Bishops assembled on the Festival of
Sumphorianus, made a Law that their Armies or Soldiers should not on pain of
death, either on their March or on a Victory, rush violently into any Churches
or rob the same. Greg. Turon. lib. 8. Hist. Franc. c. 30. Clearchus and
Sitacles, Soldiers under Alexander the Great, being accused by his Army of
robbing and spoiling Churches and removing ancient Monuments, were commanded to
be put to death. Orxines, who succeeded Phrasaortes in the Kingdom of Persia,
being accused and convicted of robbing and wasting the Temples, Churches, and
the Monuments of the Kings, was by Alexanders command Crucified to death.
Arria. lib. 6. in fin. de expedit. Alexan. The Law in some Cases does leave the
Penalty of Sacrilege Arbitrary, especially where any Churches are notoriously
and violently broken open, and the Offerings or sacred Vessels thence stolen
away by night, in which case the Punishment is Capital; and so practiced in the
kingdom of Naples; Boerii Decis. 254. nu. 13. It is not the value of the thing
stolen, that causes this crime of Sacrilege to be so severely punished, but
because there is more of audacity and iniquity in this kind of Theft than of
others of inferior Circumstances; and therefore Calistratus accused Menalopus
that he had robd'd Templi Custodes, Anglice, Churchwardens, and had thence
stolen away three very small Vessels minimi ponderis, yet even this was
punished as Sacrilege of a very criminal nature. Innumerable are the
Presidents of this kind found among Historians; to which might be added that of
Famous or rather Infamous Remark, touching Charles Martell, King of France,
cujus animam (says Tritemius) visam deportari od Inferos, quod multas Ecclesias
spoliasset, dum bellis inimicos persequeretur. Tritem in Breviar. Hist. Franc.
in fin.

(6.) Touching Sacrilege as diversified in respect of Persons, Places, and
other things Sacred, the Canonists enumerate such kinds thereof, as would seem
very uncouth and strange for us to hear of in this Kingdom, as the Constitution
of the Ecclesiastical State thereof is now most Protestantly established; they
are therefore here purposely omitted. The Penalties likewise inflicted on
Sacrilegious persons vary according to Circumstances, and as the kinds or
degrets of the Sacrilege are; and herein the Canon and the Civil Law have
provided very different penalties; which at the Canon Law are of one kind, and
at the Civil Law of another: But according to the ancient Ecclesiastical
Constitutions of this Realm, Sacrilege of what kind soever, regularly incurr's
the penalty of Excommunication, which admitts also of distinctions: For as
there is the greater and the lesser Excommunication; so there is
Excommunication ipso facto, in Contradistinction to that which is only ipso
jure; also the Law even in this point of Sacrilege does distinguish between
Excommunication latam, and ferendam; for if it be Sacrilege committed against
an Ecclesiastical Person, then according to the Canon Law, and as heretofore
practiced in this Realm, the penalty was Excommunicatio lata; but when it is in
respect of some things pertaining to the Church, in that case the Punishment
was Excommunicatio ferenda. Lindw. de immun. Eccl. c. 1. glo. in ver. omnibus
poenis. And sometimes a pecuniary punishment was inflicted for Sacrilege. 17.
q. 4. c. quisquis. etc. si quis contumax. The Ecclesiastical Law does not
punish Sacrilege with that austerity and severity as the Civil Law does, l.
Sacrilegio. ff. ad Leg. Jul. peculat. whereby the punishment sometimes is
Damnatio ad bestias, sometimes the Sacrilegious person is burnt alive,
sometimes hung on Fonk, sometimes condemned to the Mines, sometimes banished,
and sometimes sentenced to death in the ordinary way of Execution. He that is
guilty of Sacrilege against an Ecclesiastical person, is by the Canon Law
excommunicatus ipso facto, 17. q. 4. c. si quis suadente. But if it be in rebus
Ecclesiae, he is by that Law Excommunicandus. de Foro compet. c. conquestus. If
it be committed in the Church, and that by firing or breaking it open, in that
Case the Sacrilegious person is ipso jure excommunicated. de sent. Excom. c.
conquesti. If it be without burning or breaking it open, as when a thing being
left in the Church, is taken away, in that Case he ought to be excommunicated.
De furtib. c. fin. And this (says Lindwood) may stand as a rule in Law, that
wherever you find that regularly the Sacrilegious person is not ipso jure
excommunicated majori Excommunicatione, it has these several Fallentias, that
is, it does not hold in case of Burning, violating, spoiling and wasting of the
Church, nor in burning or breaking open the Church door, nor in Sacrilege
against an Ecclesiastical person, nor in case of striking or violently
apprehending any man in the Church, nor in any forcible or violent taking away
any thing out of the Church, nor in any that were excommunicated before for the
like Offense, nor in such as pull down or demolish the Body of the Church or
any part thereof, and the like, Lindw. de immu. Eccl. c. ut invadentib. glo. in
ver. Excomunicati. All which is likewiseexpresly set down in John de Athon's
Gloss on Cardinal Othobon's Constitutions, de abstrahentib. Confug, ad Eccles.
c. ad tutelam glo. in ver. Obsevari. and seems to have an adequate affinity
with what Solomon (who, as in other things, so specially in matters of the
Temple, had the best experience) says, It is a suare to the man, who devoureth
that which is Holy. Pro. 20. 25.

(7.) The dreadful Curse denounced against Sacrilegious persons, appears in
that remarkable passage in Parliament above Four hundred years since, where the
Privileges of the Clergy, and Franchises of the Church, were (with the
Liberties of the People) granted, confirmed, and settled by the King in full
Parliament, Anno 1253. in such a solemn manner, as no History can parallel; The
King stood up with his Hand upon his Breast, all the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, stood with burning Tapers in their Hands, the Archbishop pronounces
as follows, viz. By the Authority of God Omnipotent, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, etc. We Excommunicate, Anathematize, and sequester from our Holy
Mother the Church, all those, who henceforth knowingly and maliciously deprive
and spoil Churches of their right, and all those that shall by any art or wit
rashly violate, diminish, or alter secretly or openly, in Deed, Word, or
Counsel, those Ecclesiastical Liberties, etc. Granted by our Lord the King, to
the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, etc. For everlasting memory whereof, we
have hereunto put our Seal. After which, all throwing down their Tapers,
extinguished and smoking, they all said, Vid. The Present State of Eng. p. 29.
So let all that shall go against this Curse, be extinct and stink in Hell, And
Ethelwolphus, the second sole Monarch among the Saxon on Kings, having by
advice of his Nobles, granted for ever to God and the Church, both the Tithe of
all Goods, and the tenth part of all the Lands of England, free from all
secular Service, Taxes, or Impositions whatsover, vid. the Charter of Donation
in Ingulphus and other Authors.
concludes the said Grant or Charter of Donation in these words, viz. Qui
augere voluerit nostram Donationem, augeat Omnipotens Deus dies ejus prosperos;
si quis vero mutare vel minuere praesumpserit, noscat se ad Tribunal Christi
rationem redditurum.

(8.) Dr. Heylyn in his Ecclesia Restaurata relates a remarkable passage
touching a sad Judgment, page 224, 225.
that in the time of Queen Mary befell Buckly Bishop of Bangor, An. 1541. for
the Sacrilegious havoc he made of the Lands and Patrimony of that Church, who
not content to alienate the Lands, and weaken the Estate thereof, resolved to
rob it also of its Bells (for fear perhaps of having any knell rung out at the
Churches Funeral;) and not content to sell the Bells which were five in number,
he would needs satisfy himself with seeing them conveyed on Shipboard, and had
scarce given himself that satisfaction, but was immediately struck blind, and
so continued from that time to the day of his death:

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Simony.
1. The Definition and description of Simony; the penalties thereof. 2. The
difference between Simoniacus and Simoniace Promotus; the latitude of that word
Simony. 3. How the anuual value of the Benefice is computable upon the
Forfeiture by reason of Simony. 4. Whether a Clerk Simoniacally presented, but
not privy to the Simony, be disabled for that turn to be presented by the King
to the same Church? 5. The diversifications of Simoniacal Contracts, or the
various ways of committing Simony. 6. An Obligation to present one upon
condition of resignation, may not be Simony. 7. To promise one a Sum of Money
to bestow his endeavor to procure one to be presented to a Benefice, is a
Simoniacal Contract. 8. Several ways of contracting, obliging, and agreeing,
which will amount to Simony. 9. A Clerk may oblige to his Patron to pay a Sum
yearly, and yet no Simony. 10. The Plea of Simony is a good Bar to the Parsons
demand of Tithes. 11. Whether the Fathers free Covenant with his Son in Law,
upon the Marriage of his Daughter to present him to such a Living when it
falls, be Simony? 12. Whether a Simoniacal Usurper shall prejudice the rightful
Patron, by giving the King the presentation. 13. Whether an Incumbent that is
in by Simony, may after a General Pardon be removed. 14. The grand Case of
Calvert and Kitching at the Common Law touching Simony. 15. To convey a corrupt
gift by an innocent hand, will not excuse it from being Simony. 16. The Kings
Case against the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir John Hall, and Richard Clark
touching Simony. 17. The Proof of Simony in a Parson is good to harr him of
Tithes. 18. A Patrons Presentation upon the Presentees Obligation to make a
Resignation within Three months after the Patron so please, may amount to
Simony within the Statute of 21 Eliz. cap. 16. 19. A corrupt Contract for an
Advowson may make the subsequent incumbent Simoniacal. 20. To plead a
Simoniacal Contract against a Bond, it not so appearing, is no admissable Plea.
21. Masters of Chancery, why so called, and what they were anciently. 22.
Prihibition to the High Commissioners, that would have put a Parson to his Oath
touching Simony. 23. In what Cases (by reason of Simony) the Patron may present
after Six months; and the Church said to be full as to one, not to another. 24.
The injunction of King Ed. 6. against Simony. 25. The form of the Oath of
Simony. 26. A Simoniacal Contract a good plea in Bar of Tithes. 27. A further
description in Law of the difference between Simoniacus, and Simoniace
Promotus. 28. The Simoniace Promotus, though ignorant of the Simony, yet is
deprivable in the Ecclesiastical Court. 29. A Simoniacal Contract, to which
neither the Incumbent nor the Patron are privy, may yet be Simony within the
Statute of 31 Eliz. 30. Simony in it is utmost latitude is properly cognizable
in the Ecclesiastical Court. 31. Simony worse than Felony; A Bond or Obligation
good, though entered into upon a Simoniacal Contract. 32. Whether a Parson
outsed for Simony, may be after admitted to the same Benefice by the Kings
presentation. 33. A Person Simoniace promotus, and ousted, is by the express
words of the Statute disabled to accept the same Benefice. 34. Where Simony is
pleaded in Bar of Tithes, the Ecclesiastical Court shall take cognizance, and
no Prohibition lies. 35. Whether the Father may buy the next avoidance, and
present his Son; no Simony to buy an Advowson. 36. To procure a Man (in
consideration of Marriage) to be presented to a Benefice, is Simony. 37. Four
observations on the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 6. by the Lord Coke. 38. The
extent of the words ( Present or Collate) in the said Statute, also the
diversity in Law between a Presentation made by a Rightful Patron and an
Usurper. 39. What punishment by the Canon Law in case of Simony; and the
strange conceit of Rebuffus touching the same. 40. The reasons why it has its
denomination from Simon Magus; how many ways it may be committed according to
the Canon Law.
(1.) SIMONY (from Simon Magus, as Thomas Aquinas and others conceive, Tho.
Aquin. 20. 2. ae. q. 100. art. 1. and 40.) is according to Panormitan's
definition thereof,) studiosa voluntas emendi vel vendendi aliquid Spirituale,
vel Spirituali annexum, opere subsecuto, Panor c. Nemo extra, etc. Or it may be
described thus, Simonia est vox Ecclesiastica, a Simone illo Mago deducta, qui
donum Spiritus Sancti pecuniis emi pura vit.
viz. Injustum est illa vendere, quae gratis distribui debent.
Simony is when any person is presented or collated to any Benefice with Cure
of Souls, Dignity, Prebend, or Living Ecclesiastical, etc. or has any such
given or bestowed on him, for or in respect of any Sum of Money, reward,
payment, gift, profit, or benefit directly or indirectly, or for or by reason
of any promise, agreement, grant, bond, covenant or other assurance for any Sum
of Money, reward, payment, gift, profit or benefit whatsoever, directly or
indirectly, or for or in respect of any such corrupt cause or consideration;
and every Presentation, Collation, and gift, as also every Admission,
Investure, and Induction thereupon is by the Statute utterly void Stat. 31.
Eliz. c. 6.
, and whereby the King his Heirs and Successors for that one turn only shall
present, collate, etc. And every person so giving or taking any such Sum of
Money, etc. or taking or making any such promise, etc. does forfeit and lose
the double value of one years profit of every such Benefice. Moreover, the
person so corruptly taking any such Benefice is thereupon and from thenceforth
adjudged a person disabled in Law to hold and enjoy the same Benefice Stat.
ibid.
. The like penalty of the said double value does he incurr, who for any Sum of
Money, reward, etc. directly or indirectly (other than the Lawful Fees) or for
or by reason of any promise, etc. does admit, institute, install, induct any
person to, or in any Benefice with Cure, etc. Likewise, if any Incumbent of any
such Benefice shall corruptly resign or exchange the same, or for or in respect
thereof shall corruptly take, directly or indirectly, any pension, sum of
money, or benefit whatever, in such case both the giver and taker corruptly as
aforesaid, shall forfeit double the value of the sum so given, taken, or had,
whereof the one Moiety to the King, etc. the other to him that shall sue for
the same in any Court of Record ibid.
. In which Statute of 31 Eliz. there is a Proviso, that the censures
Ecclesiastical shall not be restrained by any of the premises therein contained.

(2.) They that Simoniacally buy Ecclesiastical Livings are compared to Simon
Magus, and they that sell them to Gehazi the Servant of Elisha 2 Kin. 5. 20.
etc.
if a person be possessed of an Ecclesiastical Living by such Simony as whereunto
he was not privy, be is said to be in only Simoniace: but if he be in any
corrupt and Simoniacal Contract, to which himself is a party, and was privy and
consenting thereunto, in that case he is Simonaicus; both which are inhibited
by the Canons Ecclesiastical or Provincial Constitutions, as also are the said
corrupt and Simonaical selling as well as buying Ecclesiastical Livings, Lindw.
e. Nulli liceat Ecclesiam etc. Quia plerunq, and that under penalties greater
than the Temporal Laws did then, or now will allow of. And although by Simony
in the vulgar acceptance of the word, is commonly understood such corrupt
Contract for Ecclesiastical Livings as aforesaid, yet it has a more extensive
signification and that is a more proper sense, which is by corrupt Ordinations
of Ministers, or for undue Licenses to Preach; for prevention whereof it is
provided in the Statute aforesaid Dict. St. 31 Eliz.
, that if any person shall receive or take any Money, Fee, Reward, or any other
profit directly or indirectly; Universas promissiones and pactiones Simoniacas
penitus revocamus, and eas in posterum fieri districtius in hibemus. --
Constit. Otho^on. cap. quia p^erumque
or any Promise, Agreement, Covenant, Bond, or other assurance thereof (Lawful
Fees excepted) for or to procure the Ordaining or Making of any Minister, etc.
Or giving any Order and License to Preach, shall forfeit Forty shillings, and
the Minister so made Ten pound, beside the loss of any Benefice, Living, or
other Ecclesiastical promotion after Induction, that any such Minister shall
within Seven years next after such corrupt entering into the Ministry accept and
take; the one half of which Forfeitures do go to the King, etc. the other to
the Informer, etc. And the Patron in that case may present, etc. as if the
party so inducted were naturally dead.

(3.) The forfeiture of the double value of one years profit of the Church by
way of penalty, as is beforementioned, is not to be computed only according to
the valuation in the Kings Books in the Firstfruit Office, but according to the
just and full annual value of the Church Co. 3. Inst. 154.
. This double value shall be accounted according to the very or true value, as
the same may be let, and shall be tried by a Jury, and not according to the
extent, or taxation of the Church. Co. par. 3. Inst. cap. 71. And albeit the
Clerk be not privy to the Simoniack Contract, yet it seems the Patron shall pro
hac vice lose his Presentation C^. 12. 74.
. But the Title of the rightful, and incorrupt Patron shall not be sorscited or
prejudiced by the Simoniacal Contract of an Usurper, albeit the Clerk be by his
presentation admitted, instituted and inducted, nor entitle the King to present.

(4.) The Church, notwithstanding the Admission, Institution, and Induction,
becomes void, whether the Clerk presented were a party or privy to the corrupt
and Simoniacal Contract or not; But Sir Simon Degee in his Parson's Counselor
puts the material Question, viz. Whether the Clerk that is presented upon a
Simoniacal Contract, to which he is neither party nor privy, be disabled for
that turn to be presented by the King to that viz. the same Church? In order to
the resolution whereof he acquaints us with a Case reported, wherein it was
adjudged, that if a Clerk were presented upon a Simoniacal Contract, to which
he was neither party nor privy, that yet notwithstanding it was a perpetual
disability upon that Clerk as to that Church or Living Pasck. 17. Jac. B. R.
Case Fowls verse. Lapthorne. vid. the Pars. Counselor. par. 1. cap. 5.
The like in another Case, where B. (the Church being void) agreed with the
Patron to give him a certain Sum of Money for the Presentation; B. presented C.
who knew nothing of the Simoniacal Contract till after his Induction; In this
Case it seemed by Warburton Justice, that C. was disabled quoad hanc Ecclesiam
Mich. 42. and 43. Eliz. B. R. Case Baker and Roger, Cro. El. 788.
. In which Case it was clear, that the grant of the Presentation during the
vacancy was merely void; that B. presented as an Usurper; that C. was in by the
corrupt Contract; and that were it not for the same, the Patron would not have
suffered the Usurpation. In further confirmation hereof it is also reported to
us that Sir Edward Coke affirmed it has been adjudged, that if a Church be
void, and a Stranger contracts for a Sum of Money to present one who is not
privy to the Agreement, that notwithstanding the Incumbent coming in by the
Simoniacal Contract, is a person disabled to enjoy that Benefice, although he
obtain a new presentation from the King; for that the Statute as to that
Living, has disabled him during Life Case of the King and the Bishop of
Norwich, Cole and S^cker. Cro. Jac. 385. Bulstr. 3. 92.
. Notwithstanding all which Premises, Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon the
said Statute of 31 Eliz. asserts it to have been adjudged in the forecited Case
of Baker and Rogers, that where the Presentee is not privy nor consenting to
any such corrupt Contract, there (because it is no Simony in him) he shall not
be adjudged a disabled person within the said Act, for the words of the Statute
are ( And the person so corruptly giving, etc.) And so (says he) it was
resolved. Mich. 13. Jac. Where the Presentee is not privy nor consenting to any
corrupt Contract, he shall not be adjudged a disabled person within the Act
because it is no Simony in him -- Coke Inst. par. 3. cap. 71. Co. 3. Inst. 154.
cap. 71.
. Also it was so resolved in Doctor Hutchinsons Case by the whole Court, viz.
That if a Clerk be presented upon a corrupt Contract within the said Statute,
although he be not privy thereunto, yet his presentation, admission, and
induction are all void within the Letter of that Statute, but not within the
clause of disability within the same Statute Co. 12. 101. So was the Opinion of
all the Judges of Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet. Mich. 8 Jac. Parsons Cons. ubi
supra.
.

(5.) The Contracts which are commonly held corrupt and Simoniacal, may be
diversified almost into as many kinds as transferences and proprietary
negotiations are capable of: but those which have been most in practice (as
appears by the Cases reported in the Law) have been by way of unlawful
purchasing the next Advowson, by Exchanges, by Resignation, Bonds, by
Matrimonial compacts, by contracts remote and concealed from the Presentee, by
Obligations of an indirect nature, and the like. To the purposes aforesaid it
has been held Simony for a Parson to promise his Patron a Lease of his Tithes
at such a Rent, in case he would present another Parson into his Benefice, with
whom he was to exchange, albeit that other was not privy to the Contract, he
making the Lease after Hill. 16. Jac. rot. 667. c. B. per Grant and Bowdens
Case.
. It was likewise held Simony for a Father to present his Son by virtue of a
purchase of the next Advowson, which he made in the presence of his Son, a
Clerk, when the Incumbent was not like to live by reason of a Sickness, whereof
he soon after died Case Smith verse. Shelburne. More 916. Cro. Eliz. 685.
. Otherwise, in case the purchase had been made in the absence of the Son, as
is hereafter mentioned ibid. and infra eod. Noy Rep.
. But per Hutt. it was held Simony to purchase the next Advowson, the Incumbent
being sick Case Sheldon verse. Brett. Winch. 63.
. The like in Winchcombes Case against the Bishop of Winchester and Puleston, a
Case hereafter often Margined on several accounts, where it was held Simony in
one Say, who was presented upon a Contract which he made with the Patron (the
Incumbent being then sick) for Ninety pound to present him when the Church
should be void Hob. 165. vid. Parson's Counselor. par. 1. c. 5.
. And as to Resignationbonds, Sir Simon Degge affirms, That in the case of
Jones and Lawrence the sense of the Court was, that if a Man be preparing his
Son for the Clergy, and have a Living in his disposal, which falls void before
his Son is capable thereof, he may Lawfully take a Bond of such person as he
shall present, to resign when his Son becomes capable of the the Living;
otherwise, in case the Patron take a Bond absolutely to resign upon request
without any such or the like cause; as for avoidance of Pluralities,
Non-residence, or other such reasonable design 8 Jac. Case. Jones and Lawrence.
Cro. 248. 274. Pars. Couns. ibid.
. The like you have in Babbington and Wood's Case hereafter mentioned. So that
it seems Bonds and Obligations given and taken upon just and honest grounds to
resign are not in themselves Simoniacal; Otherwise, where there is is corruption
in the case, accompanied with some subsequent Act in pursuance thereof. And
although presentations made upon Simoniacal Bonds and Obligations are void in
Law, yet such Bonds themselves, though corrupt and Simoniacal are not made void
by the Statute of 31 Eliz. Co. 3 Inst. 153. Noy. 72.
.

(6.) B. brought Action against C. upon an Obligation, The condition whereof
was, that whereas the Plaintiff did intend, and was about to present the
Defendant to the Benefice of Stow, if the Defendant at the request of the
Plaintiff should resign the same to the hands of the Bishop of London, then the
Obligation to he void. The Defendant demanded Oyer, and demurred, and adjudg'd
for the Plaintiff, for the resignation might be upon a good intention to
prevent pluralities, or some other cause, and it shall not be intended Simony,
if it be not specially pleaded and averred; and Mich. 37. and 38. Eliz. Between
Jones and Lawrence it was adjudg'd accordingly, and affirmed an Error, which
the Court viewd, and thereupon Judgment was given for the Plaintiff Hill. 5.
Car. B. R. Case Babinglon verse. Caleb Wood. Jones Rep.
.

(7.) The Plaintiff declared, that the Rectory of St. Peter's infra Turrim
London was void, and that the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff
would bestow his labor and endeavor to cause or procure him to be Rector of
the said Rectory, promised to give him Twenty pounds; and that after the said
Plaintiff procured him to be Rector by the Kings Commission, and
notwithstanding that he had required him to pay the said Twenty pounds, etc.
and thereupon he brought his Action upon the Case in the Court of the Tower of
London, and upon Non Assumpsit, it was found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment
was there given, upon which the Defendant brought Error, and una voce all
agreed that the Judgment was erroneous, for the consideration was Simoniacal
and against Law, and not a good consideration, therefore the Assumpsit was not
good, the Judgment was reversed; the Attorney said, that that Court was a
Court Baron, as appears by a Record in the time of King Henry the Sixth Pasch.
10. Car. B. R. Todderidge verse. Mackalley. Jone's Rep.
.

(8.) If A. be obliged to present B. etc. and he presents by Simony, yet the
obligation is forfeited per Hob Case Winchcomb verse. Pulleston. Noy Rep.
. Or if one contract with the Patrons Wife to be presented for Money, and is
accordingly presented by her Husband, it is Simony within the Stat. of 31 Eliz.
and makes the presentation void Mich. 13. Jac. B. R. Case of the K. verse.
Bishop of Norwich. Rolls Rep.
. For the contract of the Wife is the contract of the Husband 27 H. 8. 26.
. Likewise if the Patron present one to the Advowson, having taken an
Obligation of the Presentee, that he shall resign when the Obligee will after
Three months warning, this is Simony within the Stat. of 21 Eliz. cap. 16. per
Curiam Trin. 15: Jac. C. B. Rot. 1052. Sir J^. Paschal verse. Clark. Noy. Rep^.
. Also if one promises to a Man that has a Manor with an Advowson appendant,
that if he will present him etc. after the then Incumbents death, he will give
him such a certain Sum of Money, and the other agree thereto, and that by
agreement between them the next avoidance shall be granted to B, etc. who after
the then Incumbents death presents accordingly; this is Simony because there
was a corrupt Contract for the Advowson Case Winchcombe verse. Vullesto^ Noy Rep.
. For although the next avoidance may be bought and sold bona fide without
Simony, yet if it be granted to one to perform a corrupt Contract for the same,
it is otherwise ibid.
. But if the Father purchase the next avoidance, and after the Incumbents death
presents his Son, this is not Simony Adjudg. 42. and 43. Eliz. (...) and (...)
Case. Noy Rep.
. Yet by Hob. Chief Justice it was held, that if in the grant of the next
avoidance it appears that it was to the intent to present his Son or his
Kinsman, and it was done accordingly, it is Simony Noy ibid.
. Likewise if a Man's Friend promises the Grantee of the next avoidance a
certain Sum of Money, and so much certain per Annum, if he will present B. to
the Church, Quando, etc. and B. not knowing any thing of the Contract be
presented accordingly, this is Simony 7 Jac. Calvert verse. Parkinson in Came.
Scaccar. Noy Rep.
, For if a Stranger contract with the Patron Simonaically, it makes the
presentation void Mic. 13 Jac. B. R. Case of the K. verse. Bishop of Norwich
Roll.
.

(9.) A Patron took an Obligation of the Clerk whom he presented, that he
should pay Ten pounds yearly to the Son of the last Incumbent, so long as he
should be a Student in Cambridge unpreferr'd; this is not Simony; otherwise, if
it had been to have paid it to the Patrons Son. per Cur. Adjudg. in Bakers
Case. verse. M^undford Noy's Rep.
. An Obligation was made by a Presentee to a Patron to pay Five pounds per An.
to the late Incumbents Wife and Children; the Parson kept and enjoyed the
Parsonage, notwithstanding great opposition to the contrary E. of Suffex Case
v^^ch'd by Forster Justice in dict. Bakers Case. Noy. Rep.
.

(10.) A Parson preferred his Bill for Tithes, the Parishioner pleaded that he
was presented by corruption, etc. and by Simony, and a Prohibition was granted,
notwithstanding the Parson pleaded pardon of the Simony by the King; and it
seemed, that it was now triable by the Common Law 10 Eliz. Doctor Hutchinsons
Case cited by Warburton and Hutton. Noy Rep.
. The Church may be full or void in effect, when there is a Simoniacal
Incumbent; yet to say the Church was full for Six Months is no plea, when he
was in by Simony; For a Quare Impedit may be had by the rightful Patron after
the Six Months against the Incumbent of an usurper, that is in by Simony Dict.
Cas. Winchcombe verse. Pulleston.
. And the death of a Simoniacal Incumbent does not hinder but that the King may
present, for the Church was never full as to the King, and that turn is
presented to the King by force of the Statute ibid.
.

(11.) In the Stat. of 31 Eliiz. there is no word of Simony, for by that means
then the Common Law would have been Judge, what should have been Simony and
what not Noy. Winchcombs Case.
; by which Law the Simoniack is perpetually disabled dict. Case of the King
verse. the Bishop of N^rwich. Roll. Rep.
. And a Covenant to present such a one, made under any consideration whatever,
be it of Marriage or the like, may be Simoniacal; But if a Father in Law upon
the Marriage of his Daughter, do only voluntarily and without any
consideration, Covenant with his Son in Law, that when such a Church, which is
in his Gift falls void, he will present him to it; It has been held, that this
is no Simony within the said Statute Cro. Car. 425.
.

(12.) A Simoniacal Usurper presenting shall not prejudice the rightful Patron,
by giving the King the presentation Hob. 167.
. The proof of Simony will avoid an Action of Tithes commenced by a Simoniack
Parson Pasch 17. Jac. Case of Sir Jo. Bowse verse. Wright. 167, 168, 177.
; who dying in possession of the Church, the King loses not his presentation
Hob. ibid
, because the Church was not full of an Incumbent; but remains void though the
Simony or Penalty thereof were pardoned ( y]. Lastly, all corrupt resignations
and exchanges of Ecclesiastical Livings, are punishable with the forfeiture of
double the Sum given and received, both in Giver and Taker, by the said
Statute, but it seems this works no avoidance or disability in the public
person.

(13.) The Patron of an Advowson before the Statute of 31. Eliz. for Simony,
does sell proximam Advocationem for a sum of money to one Smith, and he sells
this to Smith the Incumbent: After which comes the general Pardon of the Queen,
whereby the punishment of Smith the Incumbent is pardoned, and of Smith the
Patron also. If the Incumbent may be removed was the Question: Williams said
that the Doctors of the Civil Law informed him, That the Law Spiritual was,
that for Simony the Patron lost his Presentation, and the Ordinary shall
present, and if he present not within six montehs, then the Metropolitan, and
then the King. Spurling Sergeant, This punishment cannot discharge the
Forfeiture, although it discharges the punishment. Glanvil contra; and said
that this point was in question when the Lord Keeper was Attorney, and then
both of them consulted thereupon, and they made this diversity, viz. Between a
thing void and voidable, and for Simony the Church is not void until Sentence
Declaratory, and therefore they held that by the Pardon before the Sentence all
is pardoned, as where a man committs Felony, and before Conviction the King
pardons him, by this Pardon the Lord shall lose his Escheat, for the Lord can
have no Escheat before there be an Attainder, but that is prevented before by
the Pardon: And so here this Pardon prevents the Sentence Declaratory, and so
no title can accrue to the Ordinary. Walmsley contra: if Patron be charged by
the Sentence, he may plead the Pardon. But if a Quare Impedit be brought by a
third Person, the Pardon of the King shall be no Bar to him, for the title
appears not to him, but only the punishment. Anderson, they may proceed to
Sentence Declaratory, notwithstanding the Pardon; for the Pardon is of the
punishment, but the Sentence extends not to that, but only to declare that the
Church is void. Glanvile, in 16. Eliz. a man was deprived of his Benefice for
Incontinency, and after he was pardoned and restored. Walmsley, I doubt much
whether the King can pardon Simony. And Williams said, that the Proctors of the
Civil Law said, that neither the Pope nor the King could pardon Simony quoad
culpam, but only quoad poenam they may: And the Court at last said, that if
the parties would not demurr, they would hear the Doctors on this matter Hill.
41. Eliz. C. B. Smiths Case. Owens Rep.
.

(14.) In Calverts Case against Kitchen and Parkinson in the Exchequer, where
K. not knowing of any Simoniacal agreement was Presented, Instituted, and
Inducted to the Church of D. and this after the Statute of 31. Eliz. cap. 6.
And this Presentation belonging to the Queen by reason of this Presentation for
Simony by force of the said Statute, the Queen presented one B. and before that
B. was Admitted and Inducted the Queen died; whereupon the King presented C.
without any recital or mention of the Presentation made by the Queen, and
without any revocation actually made of the said first Presentation, and
thereupon C. is Admitted and Instituted; and for Tithes as Parson he brought
Trespass. In this Case one of the points in Question was, if within the said
Statute here be Simony in the Patron, and not in the Parson, if this ought to
prejudice the Parson or not? In this point Hitchcock conceived, that although
the Presentee in this Case, was not party to this corrupt agreement, yet he
shall be prejudiced by it, although not so prejudiced thereby, but that he may
be capable to be presented again to the same Benefice, but hac vice the
presentation of him is void; for as Littleton says, the Presentee ought to
accept the Parsonage subject to such charges as the Patron pleases, who in the
time of vacation has power to charge it, and so by his Act had made it subject
to the Forfeiture, and therefore the person who comes under him shall be
prejudiced, etc. Damport to the contrary; The Patron and a stranger corruptly
agree to present K. whereupon he is presented; If this shall be void against K.
is the question. To this he said that at the Common Law, if one be Simoniacally
presented, yet this is not void until the Presentee be deprived; and if before
the said Statute such a corrupt Presentation had been made, the Incumbent and
Ordinary being free, then no Presentation should ensue; and he vouched the
saying of Lindwood to be accordingly; but if money be given by the friends of
the Presentee, and after the King had notice thereof, and Assent, then it is
not punishable, but pardonable at the discretion of the King; and now by him
the Statute provides no punishment for the Parson, when the Patron only
consents to the Simony; for he observed that after the said stat. of 31. Eliz.
had appointed a punishment for the Patron, then in the last part of this
Branch, the words are, The persons so corruptly taking, etc. shall be incapable
of the Benefice aforesaid; and so it seems, that the intent of the Statute is
not to punish any party, but he that is to the Simony, and this is also
explained to be so, by other clauses in the Statute, for another clause
inflicts punishment upon the Ordinary, if there be any corruption in him, and
another clause inflicts punishment upon him who is party to a corrupt
Resignation, and so in all the clauses, those only who are partakers of the
crime shall be punished, etc. And in this Case was no agreement assented unto
by the Parson; and this diversity also seems to be good, that if A. has the
Presentation, and B. the Nomination to a Benefice, and the Presentor upon a
corrupt agreement, makes a presentation unknown to the Nominator, here the
Nominator shall not be prejudiced within this Statute, etc. In this Case
Bromley Baron declared his opinion, that the intent of the Statute was to
eradicate all manner of Simonies; and therefore the words are not if any man
give money to be presented, but they are If any present for money, and the
jurors here found 20 l. to be given, and nothing for what it was given, or to
whom it was given, for if money be the meed, a Presentation is void, and
therefore if I. S. be patron of the Church of D. which is void, and a stranger
says to me, procure the Presentation for A. and you shall have 100 l. and he
procured A. to be Presented; here if the Patron had notice of the money given
to me, this Presentation is void, but otherwise not: And in this Case without
notice of the Parson, the Admission and all that ensued thereupon is void, by
reason of the Simony in the Patron; and it is void as to the Parson also; and
if in this Case we are not within the words of the Statute, yet we are within
the intent clearly, etc. And Panormitan says, That Simonia est studiosa
voluntas emendi vel vendendi aliquid spirituale, vel spirituali annexum cum
opere subsequente. Altham Baron was of the same opinion, and said that the
words of the Statute are, That if a Presentation be made for money, it shall be
void, and that the King may present that turn; and therefore the want of
privity in the Incumbent is nothing to the purpose, as to the avoiding of the
Benefice; but his want of privity avails to excuse him of being Simoniacus,
yet he is Simoniace Promotus, and therefore the Presentation is void, and the
King shall have it by the express words of the Statute; and therefore as it
seems, if in this Statute there had been an express saving of the Interest of
the Incumbent, by reason of his innocence, yet such a saving of Interest had
been void and repugnant, in respect that it was expressly given to the King
before, as it is in Nichols Case in Plowden upon the Stat. of 1. H. 7. etc. And
to prove that by the Simony in the Patron that the Parson shall be prejudiced,
he vouched 42. E. 3. fo. 2. -- Snig Baron concurred in opinion with the former,
and said that as to the point of Simony by the Civil Law, it was punishable by
Deprivation, and the guilt of the Patron should prejudice the Parson, as to
matter of commodity in the Parsonage; and at the Common Law if the Parson will
plead such Presentation, he should be prejudiced, and here by the Incumbency
the words of the Statute will not be satisfied, etc. Also it seems that if I.
S. has an Adowson, and A. purchase the next avoidance to the intent to present
B. and the Church becomes void, and A. presents B. this is Simony by averment,
as by good pleading the Presentation of B. shall be adjudged void, etc.
Tanfield accordingly, as this Case is, here is Simony by the Civil Law, and the
party had his Benefice by Simony, although he be not cognusant thereof.
Secondly, admit here was not Simony by the intendment of the Civil Law, yet the
Statute has made an avoidance of the Benefice in this Case, although it be not
Simony, for the Statute speaks not one word of Simony throughout the Act, and
yet by express words it does avoid such Presentations as this is; and as to the
Civil Law such Benefice is to be made void by Sentence Declaratory, but it is
not void ipso facto, as it seems in the Case where a common person was
consenting to the Simony, but the text of the Civil Law says expressly, that the
Church ought not to be filled Corruptive, or by corruption, and the Civil Law
expresses such a person as in this Case by Simoniace promotus, and calls him
who is Particeps Criminis, Simoniacus, and he who is Simoniacus, is by the
Civil Law deprived not only of the Benefice ipso facto, but also is deprived to
be a Minister, and adjudged guilty, in culpa and poena. Petrus Benefieldus
says, that if a Friend give money to a Patron, to make a promise to him etc.
and the Incumbent pays it, such an Incumbent is Simoniacus by the Civil Law;
and so if the Incumbent pay the money not knowing it till after the induction,
yet he is Simoniacus; and by him if a Friend give money, and the Parson is
thereupon presented, though the Parson knew not of the money given, yet he
shall be deprived of the Benefice; and this difference was certified by
Anderson and Gaudy to the Council Table upon a Reference made to them by the
King, touching the filling of Benefices by corrupt means; And the Statute of
purpose forbears to use the word Simony, for avoiding of nice construction in
the Civil Law as to that word, and therefore the makers of the Act set down
plainly the words of the Statute, that if any shall be promoted for money, etc.
So that by these words it is not material from whom the money comes; and then
in such Cases for the avoiding of all such grand Offenses a liberal
Construction ought to be made, as has been used in such cases, etc. for which
and many other reasons mentioned in this Report, he commanded Judgment to be
entered for the Plaintiff Trin. 7. Jac. in the Exchequer. C^lvert against
Kitchen and Parkinson. and Kitchen against Calvert. Lanes Rep.
.

(15.) Sr. George Carry being seized of an Advowson, granted the next Avoidance
to his second Son, and died; and after the Son corruptly agreed with I. S. to
procure the said I. S. to be presented to this Benefice, and the second Brother
knowing thereof; it was agreed that for the perfecting of the agreement, the
second Brother should surrender his Grant and Interest to the elder Brother,
which elder Brother not knowing of the said corrupt agreement, presented the
said I. S. who was Instituted, etc. all shall be void, for he is here presented
by reason of this corrupt agreement between the Patron who then was, and the
Parson, and the elder Brother was only used to convey a bad gift by a good
hand, and all had reference to the corrupt agreement, with the Assent of the
Patron who then was Gloss and Pompoyes Case vouched by Damport in Calverts
Case against Kitchen. Lanes Rep.
.

(16.) The King brought a Quare Impedit against the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Sr. John Hall, and Richard Clark, for the Church of M. and declares that
Richard White was seized of the Manor, to which the Advowson belonged. And the
6. Jac. by Indenture, he covenanted to stand seized to the use of himself and
his Wife for their lives, and to the heirs of Richard White. And after White
presents one Boynton, and dies, and his Wife marries with Sr. John Hall, who
the first of June. 6. Jac. by deed grants proximam Adocationem to two, to this
intent, that he might receive of such a Parson, that he presented, all money as
should be agreed between Grantor and Grantee: And that this was done Bointon
lying in extremis. And then the 26. Jan. 16. Jac. there was a corrupt agreement
between Sr. John Hall and one of the Grantees, that for 200 l. to be paid by
the Clerk Blundell, that the other Grantee should present him. And the first of
February Blundel pays Sr. John Hall the money, and the second day he was
Presented, Instituted and Inducted accordingly. And that upon this it
appertained to the King to present: The Bishop pleads but as Ordinary: Sr. John
Hall makes a title, and traverses the corrupt agreement. The Incumbent pleads
by Protestation that there was not any corrupt agreement, as it was alleged,
and not answers whether the money were paid or not; but that he is Parson
Imparsonee of the Presentment of -- But 16. Jac. after such an agreement (
scil.) 17. Febr. he was presented by the Letters Patents of the King to his
Church, Trin. 4. Car. C. B.
and never answers to the Simony. and it was held by the Court to be naught;
and only pleaded to hinder the Execution before the Justices of Assize, if the
trial went against the Patron The King against the Archbishop of Canterbury
Hetley's Rep.
. And further in that Case between Hall and Blundell it was said by Davenport,
that this Parson being presented by simony is disabled to this Church for ever,
and cannot be presented to this Church again; as it was adjudged in the Lord
Windsors Case. But it was said by Richardson if he had said, absque hoc, That
he was in ex Presentatione of etc. it had been good enough which was granted.
Henden, two exceptions had been taken. (1.) That the Incumbent does not show
what Estate or Interest the King had to present him; which does not need, if
the King brought a Quare Impedit, then it is a good answer to say, that he is
in of his Presenting. But if it be brought by a stranger, then he ought to show
the title in his Presentment. And he alleged the Statute of 25. E. 3. which
enables the Incumbent to plead by Writ of the Law. 41. Eliz. There was a Quare
Impedit brought for the Church of Danell; a presentation by the King was
pleaded, without making a title, and it was admitted good. And in many Cases it
is more safe not to make a title. (2.) Because that he pleaded a Presentation
by the King he is disabled. As to that he said, that before he be convicted of
Simony, he may be presented. But by Crook in Sathers Case, that if he be
presented before conviction, yet it is a void Presentation. And it was so
agreed by the Court, and they resolved the plea was naught, because he answers
nothing to the Simony; for the Protestation is not any answer: wherefore
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff Hall and Blundells case Hatley's Rep.
.

(17) F. Libels in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes, and a Prohibition was
prayed upon a Suggestion that he came to the Church by Simony. By the Court, a
Prohibition ought to be granted upon a surmise only, that he came to the Church
by Simony. Then Honden showed, that it was found by verdict in the Kings Bench,
that he came in by Simony; And upon that verdict there was a Decree in the
Court of Wards accordingly. And then the Court inclined to grant a Prohibition.
And the Case here was, that F. being convicted of Simony, the King presents
Clapthorn, who was Admitted Instituted, and Inducted: And afterward he takes
another Benefice above the value of 8 l. by which the other was void. Yet by
the Assent of the Lord Windsor Patron, F. continued possession. And by
Richardson, he cannot be any way removed until Lapse incurr Fowlers Case. ibid.
.

(18.) It was said by the Court in Sr. John Paschall's Case against Clark upon
evidence, that if the Patron present one to the Advowson, having taken an
Obligation of the Presentee, that he shall resign when the Obligee will after
three Months warning, that that is Simony within the Statute of 21. Eliz. cap.
16. Trin. 15. Jac. C. B. rot. 2051. Sr. John Paschall verse. Clark. Noy's Rep.
.

(19.) A. Scised of a Manor with an Advowson Appendant: S. comes to A. and
promises that if he would present him, etc. after the death of the now
Incumbent, he would give him Seventy pounds, to which he agreed. And upon that
it was agreed between them, that the next avoidance shall be granted to B, etc.
the Incumbent dies, B. presents S. who continues lacumbent from 27 Eliz. until
the 7 th of King James, Than A. grants the Manor came pertinent. to Winchcombe
in Fee, S. the Incumbent dies, 7 Jac. And the King presents Pulleston by the
Title of Simony: and Winchcombe brought a Quare Impedit, and adjudged that it
does not lie. In which Case two points were resolved. (1.) That that is Simony;
First, because there was a corrupt Contract for the Advowson: Note, that in the
Stat. of 31 Eliz. there is not word of Simony; for by that means then the
Common Law would have been Judge, what should have been Simony and what not.
Secondly, although that the prochein Avoidance might be bought and sold bona
fide, without Simony, yet it was so granted to B. to perform the corrupt
Contract, 2 Jac. was vouched, that it the Father purchased the prochein
Avoidance, and presents his Son after the death of the Incumbent, that is not
Simony, and that it was accordingly judged in 42 and 43 Eliz. It was Smith and
Shelborns Case. But by Hubbard, that if in the grant of the Prochein Avoidance
it appears that it was to the intent to present his Son or his Kinsman, and it
was done accordingly, that is Simony. In the 7th Jac. In the Exchequer Calvert
against Parkinson. The Cousin of C. being Clerk comes to the Grantee of the
prochein Avodance, and promises him Twenty pounds, and Twenty pounds per an. if
he will present C. to the Church quando, etc. C. not knowing any thing of the
Contract, is presented accordingly. This is Simony. Fortiori in this Case where
S. himself who was to be presented, was party to the first motion of the
Contract for presentation. (2.) It was resolved, that the death of the
Simoniacal Incumbent does not hinder but that the King may well present, for
the Church was never full as to the King, and that Turn is preserved to the
King by force of the Statute, yet it seems the Church is so full that a
Stranger may not present for usurpation; for it is not like 7 Rep. 28. where
the King is to present by lapse. And there are many Cases wherein the Church
may be full or void in effect, when there is a Simoniacal Incumbent. Hubbard
said that if A. be obliged to present B, etc. and he presents by Simony, yet
the Obligation is forfeited, etc. The rightful Patron may have a Quare Impedit
after the Six months against the Incumbent of an usurper, that is in by Simony.
And by the Court, to say the Church was full for Six months, is no plea, when
he is in by Simony. Warburton and Hutton cited Doctor Hutchinsons Case 10 Eliz.
A Parson preferrs his Bill for Tithes, the Parishioner pleads that he was
presented by corruption, etc. and by Simony, and a prohibition was granted,
notwithstanding that the Parson pleaded pardon of the Simony by the King, and
it seemed that it was now triable by the Common Law. Note 7 H. 7. 37. and Mich.
40. and 41 Eliz. Gregory against Ouldham. In debt upon an Obligation to perform
certain Covenants, which in truth were Simoniacal Contracts, and the Plaintiff
recovered, for it was said that that obligation is collateral, and the Law does
not at all look upon or take notice of the Simony, eo nomine, for it is not
once named in the Statute, but only corrupt giving, etc. Winch-combe against
Pulleston. Noy's Rep. vid. dict Cas.
.

(20.) In debt upon an obligation, it was said that it was made upon a
Simoniacal contract for presentation to the Church, with the cure of Souls; and
so it was for Simony. All that was averred the Court held to be matter debors,
and not appeared within the Deed; and for that the Plaintiff had Judgment. For
no such averment is given by the Statute Gregory? verse. Olden. Noy 's Rep.
. Note, the Statute does not make the Bond, Promise, or Covenant void, but the
Presentation. And so adjudged, Pasch. 40. Eliz. Rot. 1745. C. B. Case of
Gregory against Oldbury. Co. Inst. par. 3. cap. 71.

(21.) If an innocent Incumbent be in by a Simoniacal Contract, to which he was
no way privy, he is not Simoniacus though Simoniace promotus; and as he is not
Simoniacus, so neither Perjurus, for Simony seldom goes without some kind of
Perjury. An Action was brought upon 5 Eliz. for Perjury before one of the
Masters of Chancery, who had power to take an Oath. Adjudged Quod nihil cap.
per breve. And the reason was, because he does not show that the Oath was in
Court. By Whitlock they were called Masters of Chancery, Masters of Chancery,
why so called.
because they were Priests and Clergymen in ancient time: and that was the
reason that the Lord Chancellor had the disposal of the petty Offices of the
King, for the preferment of these Clerks: that was also the reason that they
could not Marry until they were enabled by the Stat. etc. Luther verse. Holland.
Noy 's Rep.
.

(22.) Parson L. was convented before the High Commissioners, and they would
put him to his Oath touching Simony (supposing it to be committed by him.) And
a Prohibition was granted, that none shall be compelled to accuse himself upon
his Oath; where he is to incurr a temporal punishment at the Common Law, or a
temporal loss as in that case of his Church: So for Usury. Note Dyer 175. in
the Margin. And Cook Chief Justice, vouched 10 Eliz. Smiths Case, an Attorney
of that Court. The High Commissioners would put him to his Oath, for hearing
Mass. And a Prohibition was granted: for by that he is to lose One hundred
pounds by the Staute, and a Prohibition was now granted by the Court Parson
Letters Case against Sussex. Nay's Rep.
.

(23.) If a Stranger, having no Title, present per tort, to a Church (being
void) Simoniacally, and Six months pass, yet the true Patron may after present,
for the Statute has made such Presentation, Institution and Induction void,
and so he is no Incumbent, nor is the Church full Co. Lit. 120.
. Likewise, if a Man be Presented, Instituted, and Inducted by Simony to a
Church, although it be void as to the King, and as to the Parishioners, yet it
is not void as to an usurper, for he that has no right shall not present
thereunto Winch-combs Case. Hob. rep. 227.
.

(24.) To avoid the detestable Sin of Simony, because buying and selling of
Benefices is execrable before God; it is therefore ordained by the Injunctions
of King Ed. 6. An. 1547. That all such persons as buy any Benefices or come to
them by fraud or deceit, shall be deprived of such Benefices, and be made
unable at any time after to receive any other Spiritual promotion. And such as
do fell them, or by any color do bestow them for their own gain or profit,
shall lose the right and title of Patronage, and Presentment for that time, and
the gift thereof for that vacation shall appertain to the Kings Majesty vid.
Bishops Sparrow. Collection of Artic. etc. page 9.
.

(25.) The Oath of Simony is as follows, viz. I. A. B. do swear that I have
made no Simoniacal Payment, The Oath of Simony.
Contract, or Promise, directly or indirectly by my self, or by any other to my
knowledge, or with my consent, to any person or persons whatsoever for or
concerning the procuring or obtaining of the Rectory or Vicarage of A. in the
Diocese of London. Nor will at any time hereafter perform or satisfy any such
kind of payment, contract, or promise made by any other without my knowledge or
consent. So help me God, etc.

(26.) P Parson of R. in the County of W. sued for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical
Court before the Ordinary, and the Defendant here pleads that the same Parson
was presented upon a Simoniacal Contract, Penns Case. Brownl. Rep. par. 2.
and for that his Presentation, Admission, and Institution was void, by the
Stat. of 31 Eliz. the Simony was for that it was agreed between the said Parson
and another that was Brother to the Bishop of L. and C. who was Patron of the
same Church; that if he should procure three several Grants of three several
next Avoidances, to them severally granted, to surrender their said several
Grants, and procure the said Bishop to present him when the Church became void
(it being then full of an old Parson being mortally sick) that he would make to
him a Lease of parcel of the Tithes of his Rectory: and the Brother of the said
Bishop procured the said Grantees to surrender their several Grants accordingly
(the Church being then full.) And also after when the Church became void, he
procured the said Bishop to present him according to the first Contract, and
then the said P. made a Lease to him of the Tenths, and after sued others of
his Neighbors in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes, who pleaded the said
Simoniacal Contract; and here Nicholas Sergeant suggested, that the Judges
Ecclesiastical would not allow of this Plea there; but the Court would not give
credit to this suggestion; but said, that if the Ecclesiastical Court make
exposition of the Statute of 31 H. 8. against the intent of it, that then they
would grant a Prohibition, or if they should deny to allow of this Plea; and
for that advised him, that his Client might offer this Plea another time to
them, and if they denied to grant that, they would grant a Prohibition.

(27.) The Patron of a Benefice may be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for
presenting his Clerk (who is also inducted) by Simony, for the Statute of
Simony takes not off the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from punishing the party
pro salute animae Hill. 11. Jac. B. R. Sr. VVil. Bovers Case resolved.
. And where the Parson is party or privy to the Simony, he shall be
perpertually disabled. Also if money or other reward be given for the
Presentation, be it with or without the agreement or knowledge of the
Incumbent, yet it shall always disable him from enjoying that Church Pasch. 17.
Jac. B. R. Lapthornes Case. Bath verse. Potter Roll. Rep. par. 2.
. In Wilsons Case against Bradshaw it was said by Doderidge Justice, that
Simony is a contract either with the Patron to present, or with the Ordinary to
institute, and if it be not one of these it is not Simony by the Common Law;
Simoniacus is he which makes such a contract or promise, and he is disabled to
take any other Benefice, and shall be deprived of the Church in which he is:
But Simoniace promotus, is he whose friend (without his privity or knowledge)
gives money to the Patron or Ordinary for his Presentation or Institution, and
he shall be deprived of the Benefice to which he is corruptly promoted, but not
incapable of any other, nor of that, if he shall have it duly again; and every
corrupt contract for aright to present, is Simony Hill. 21. Jac. Rot. 1058.
Wilson verse. Bradshaw. Roll. Rep.
.

(28.) In a Prohibition, the Case, A. seized of the Advowson of the Church of
B. the Church being void: C. before the general pardon 39. Eliz. contracted
with him for the Avoidance, who for 100 l. granted it to him; and he by color
of this Grant presented his Brother to the avoidance: This was held to be
Simony in the Grantee the Incumbent, although he was not privy to the Simony at
the first; and Simony was there defined to be Voluntas sive desiderium emendi
vel ven dendi spiritualia vel spiritualibus adhaerentia vel anxa Mich 42. and
43. Eliz. B. R. Baker and Rogers Case Cro. par. 1.
. Or thus viz The Church being void, B. contracted with the Patron for 180 l.
to have the Presentation, and thereupon presented W. his Brother, who knew
nothing of the Simoniacal contract, till after his Induction, notwithstanding
he was deprived in the Ecclesiastical Court, because he was Simoniace promotus;
and it was held in this Case, that if an usurper present by Simony, the Clerk
is punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Simony, More. Case 1223.
although the Patron does recover the Advowson and the Presentation.

(29.) Mich. 13. Jac B. R. Cro. par. 2.
In the Case between the King and the Bishop of Norwich, and Saker, and Cole,
It was said by Coke Chief Justice, that if a Church be void, and a stranger
without the privity of the after-Incumbent, procures the Patron to present him
upon a Simoniacal contract, although that the Alter-Incumbent be not privy to
the contract, yet he comes in by Simony; and so it is, where the Incumbent
makes Simoniacal contract with the Friend or Wife of the Patron, and the Patron
knows not thereof, and the Incumbent be presented by the means of him with whom
the Contract was made, it is Simony within the Statute of 31 Eliz. and the King
shall present.

(30.) A man who was presented by Simony, Libelled in the Ecclesiastical Court
for Tithes. The Question was, whether the Simony should be tried in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or by the Common Law; Close's Case. More's Rep.
the point was not resolved. Note there Simony is defined to be studiosa
voluntas emendi vel vendendi Spiritualia vel Spiritualibus annexa -- and it is
either Mentalis vel Conventualis, of both which the Ecclesiastical Law may
Judge, but the Temporal Court only of Conventual Simony.

(31.) In Sir William Boyers Case for a Prohibition to the High Commission
Court, for their examining there upon Oath in Case of Simony, Hill. 11. Jac. B.
R. Bulsr. par. 2.
it was said by Coke Chief Justice, that Simony is worse than Felony, it is an
enormous offense, if money be paid, for to present one to a Benefice, although
it be not paid to the Patron, neither had he any knowledge of it, yet the
Incumbent for this shall be avoided, and the Patron also shall lose his
presentation pro hac vice. The Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 6. is so strongly
penned against the Incumbent, that if the Patron be privy unto it, he shall
also be punished: an Action of Debt was brought in the C. B. the Defendant in
Bar pleaded, that the same was entered for payment of money for Simony; yet
the Bond was held good; and we are not to take any notice of Simony, this being
punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court, and if they there meddle only pro
salute Animae, they are not then to be prohibited; Otherwise it is, when they
will there examine the person upon an Article tending to the Title of the
Patronage, there, in such case a Prohibition lies.

(32.) In case of the King against Zakar and others, It is said that if one be
presented by Simony, Pasch. 13. Jac. B. R. Bulstr. par. 3.
and the same person afterward obtain a presentation from the King, this is
not good, for he is now a disabled person to take this Benefice, he has a
leprosy upon him by the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 6. Like unto that of Gehazi.
And Coke Chief Justice there declared, that notwithstanding the King says,
that the said Incumbent shall still continue, yet the King shall have the next
presentation.

(33.) The Lord Winsor seized of an Advowson, granted the next avoidance
thereof to Doctor G. the Church void, R. F. the Father of H. F. Pasch. 17. Jac.
B. R. Booth and Porters Case. Cro. par. 1.
dealt with Doctor G. to permit the Lord Winsor to present H. F. who know not
of the agreement, who was Presented, Instituted, and Inducted accordingly.
Resolved, that this was Simony, and that the King was to present by the Statute
of 31 Eliz. The King presented J. S. who was Instituted and Inducted. R. F. the
Father sued J. S. before the High Commissioners for Misdemeanors, and procured
him to be deprived, and Ten days after procured a Grant of the next avoidance
to J. N. and after the deprivation within Ten days procured the said J. N. to
present the said H. F. etc. Resolved, that the said presentation of the said H.
F. was merely void, and that he was a Person disabled by the express words of
the Statute to accept of that Benefice.

(34.) For a Prohibition upon a Suit for Tithes, supposing the Parson had come
in by Simony, Risby and Wentworth's Case. -- Cro. par. 1.
and thereby the Church void, and the Tithes not belonging to him: it was
resolved by the Court, a Prohibition did not lie, for that Simony might more
aptly be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court.

(35.) The Incumbent of a Church being sick, the Father contracts with the
Patron in the presence of his Son, Trin 41. Eliz. B. R. Smith and Shelbourne.
Cro. par. 1. vid. More. Case. 1229.
for the next avoidance for the Son, and agreed to give him One hundred pounds.
The Grant is made, the Incumbent died; the Son is Presented; Instituted, and
Inducted; being sued for Simony in the Ecclesiastical Court, he prays a
Prohibition, and alleges the General Pardon 39 Eliz. which is after the
Institution and Induction, wherein Simony is not excepted: In this Case it was
resolved. (1.) That although the Pardon discharges the punishment of Simony,
yet he may be examined of it by the Ordinary, and deprived for it: But it was
(2) Resolved in this Case, there was no Simony, for the Father might buy the
next avoidance and present his Son, and it is not Simony in any to buy an
Advowson; therefore the Prohibition was granted.

(36.) In Debt upon an Obligation to perform Covenants. That T. Mich. 11. Car.
B. R. Bryte and Mannings Case. Cro. par. 3.
B. Son of W. B. should marry A. the Defendants Daughter: In consideration of
which marriage, the Defendant amongst other Covenants, Covenanted, that he
would procure the said T. B. to be Presented, Instituted, and Inducted into
such a Benefice, upon the next avoidance of the Church, and the breach was
assigned, for non performance of the said Covenant, in procuring him to be
Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted: It was demurred to by the Defendant,
because the Covenant is against Law, being a Simoniacal Agreement, and a Bond
for performance thereof is not good. Resolved, it it had appeared to have been,
that in consideration of the Marriage, of his Son, he would procure him to be
Admitted and Instituted into such a Benefice, that had been a Simoniacal
Contract, and had avoided the Obligation; but here this Covenant is not in
consideration of the former Covenant, nor depending thereon, but it is a mere
distinct Covenant of it self, and independent upon the former; and without a
special averring or showing that it was a Simoniacal Contract, it shall not be
intend, but it may be a Covenant upon a good consideration. And it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff.

(37.) In the forsaid Case of the King against Zakar alias Secker and others,
it was said by Coke Chief Justice, that it is put for a Rule in Green's Case,
Bulstr. ubi supra.
that if one presents Simaniace to a Church of the Kings, and the King
afterward presents, jure Simaniace, this is a void Presentment, because he
has mistaken his Title, but he ought to present jure Patronatus, not ratione
Simoniace Presentatus. And as to the disability of a Simoniacal person by the
State of 31 Eliz. cap. 6. Four things are to be observed upon this Statute.
(1.) The Presentation to be void. (2.) The King to have this Presentment. (3.)
A Fine to be imposed by way of Forfeiture. (4) The party presented to be
utterly disabled. For where there is matter of Simony, if there be Fraud in the
Incumbent, or if Money be given for the Presentation, though it be unknown to
the Incumbent, to this let the Patron look; the Incumbent shall be removed. In
this Case the whole Court agreed clearly in this, that the person party
presented by Simony, the presentation is merely void, and that the so presented
is utterly disabled for ever by the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 6. to take the same
Benefice, to which he is presented by Simony, and that he is incapable to have
another presentation to the same Benefice.

(38.) The words [ Present or Collate] in the Stat. of 31 Eliz. c. 6. are not
intended (says the Lord Coke) only where the person presenting or collating,
Co. Inst. pa. 3. cap. 71.
has right to present or collate, but also where any person or persons, Bodies
politic or corporate, do usurp and have no Title to present or collate; and
that so it was adjudged in case where the usurpation was to a Church of the
King. Sed quando Praesentatio and Jus Poetronatus sunt Temporalia Quaeritur
quomodo sit Simonia per donum pecuniae pro illis: Respondendum est, Quod Jus
Patronatus and Praesentatio dicuntur Spiritualia, vespectu rei, ad quam
praesentatur, quae Spiritualis est. Vide Lindwood. cap. de Jurejurando. fo. 80.
He says further, that there is a diversity between a presentation or collation
made by a rightful Patron and an usurpur. For in Case of a rightful Patron,
which does corruptly present or collate, by the express Letter of the Statute
the King shall present: But where one does usurp, and corruptly present or
collate, there the King shall not present, but the rightful Patron: For the
Branch that gives the King power to present, is only intended, where the
rightful Patron is in fault; But where the rightful Patron is in no fault,
there the corrupt act and wrong of the usurper makes the Benefice, etc. void,
but takes not away the Lawful Title to present from the rightful Patron And so
it was adjudged Mich. 13. Jac. in Quare Impedit, between the King and the
Bishop of Norwich, Tho. Cole, and Rob. Secker, for the Vicarage of Haverel in
Suffolk.

(39.) The Canon Law looks upon Simony as a kind of Heresy, imo Simoniacos
veluti primos and praecipuos Haereticos: Rebuff de Simon. in Resign. nu 12. and
excommunicates all Simoniacks to that degree as not to be absolved but by the
Pope himself, nor by him till at the point of death. -- extra. cum sit
detestabile de Simonia. And are ipso jure deprived of that Benefice wherein the
Simony was Committed: -- extr. ibid. And this holds true as well where the
Simony is only Coventional or by Compact, as where it is real and per pecuniam
numeratam; albeit there are some D D. who will not agree that a mere
Conventional Simony should incurr a Deprivation, although they contest it not
as to the real Simony, viz. cum aliquid datur. Cassad. in Decis. 5. de Constable.
But in the Council of Constans (touching this Matter) there is nothing said de
datione as to Deprivation, but only to as Excommunication; whether therefore it
be a Conventional or a Real Simony, a Presentation or Collation in consequence
of either, is ipso jure void and null according to that Law. Rebuff. ubi sup.
nu. 10. It is worth an Asterisk to observe, what an excellent exposition
Rebuffus the Canonist to this purpose makes on Matthew. 21. 12. (possibly more
like a Lawyer than a Divine) he says, that by the sellers of Doves, is there
meant, such as endeavor to make sale of the Sacred Imposition of hands: And by
the Money-Changer are intended such as sell Ecclesiastical Benefices: And
pleasing himself in this conceit, breaks out into a Piece of Eloquence, viz.
Nusquam reperitur (quod sciam) Dominum tanta severitate, tam districta censura
Justitiae peccatores corripuisse, non solum eloquio increpans, verum etiam
facto flagello de funiculis verberans omnes eliminavit de Templo; and thence
most infallibly inferrs, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the Redeemer of
Mankind, did cast out of the Temple all Simoniacal persons, and such as sell
and make Merchandise of Ecclesiastical Benefices. -- Rebuff. de Elect. derog.
lit. d. in verb. Nonnullae.

(40) This most detestable Evil of Simony, may possibly (though rarely) be
found in Ordinations; yet is most frequently negotiated in Presentations (Roman
Elections and Postulations) Collations, Resignations, and Permutations of
Ecclesiastical Benefices. It is supposed that it has it is denomination from
Simon Magus for these three Reasons, (1.) Because he was the first, that in the
New Testament we meet with, that was ever infected with that Crime. (2.)
Because he was the superlative Offender in this kind above all others that were
anciently guilty thereof, for (as Augustine says) he would buy the Holy Ghost
on purpose to sell the Holy Ghost. Aug. tract 40. in Johan. Number. 22.
But those that went before him sold only some created Spiritual thing, as
Balaam would have sold his Prophecy; and Gehazi Servant to Elisha, that health
which he obtained from a Divine Power for Naaman the Syrian. 2 King 5.
(3.) Because Simon seemed obstinately to persist in supposing this thing to be
Lawful, and so therein he thence became an Heretic, and as such is generally
condemned by the Fathers. The Definition which Panormitan makes of Simony seems
defective according to Lessius and other modern Authors; Panormita defines it
as aforesaid) to be studiosam voluntatatem emendi vel vendendi aliquid
Spirituale, vel Spirituali annexum, opere subsecuto. But to make the definition
adequate to the thing, there should be added to it ( pretio temporali;) for it
is supposed, that if one Spiritual thing be given for another, in that Case it
is not properly Simony, because the Turpitude of this Evil consists in this,
that Spiritual things, which in their own Nature are inestimable, are here
estimated at a Carnal, Humane, or Temporal price, which value or price the Law
makes threefold, viz. Pretium muneris, as Money or ought else that may be sold
for Money: Pretium linguae, as undue and undeserved Praise, or immoderate
Flattery: Pretium obsequii, as some service done, or to be done for the Patron
in matters Temporal; or as when a Chaplain serves a Bishop domestically without
any Stipend or Salary, or remitts it on purpose that a Benefice may be bestowed
on him; which by the express Letter of the Canon Law is no other than Simony.
c. sunt nonnulli. 1. q. 1. So likewise as to the Pretium linguae, that Law is
express against it, That Rogans pro indigno ut Beneficium obtineat, Simoniam
committit; dict. c. sunt nonnulli. etc. tuam, de aetat. and qualit. As to that
Mental Simony which Navarr. cap. 23. nu. 102. And Cajetan also, verb. Simonia,
and others would have to be one Member of the Distinction thereof, it seems to
be wholly rescinded by the two last words of the Definition, opere subsecuto.
It is also the more received Opinion among the DD. that to resign a Benefice
into the hands of the Ordinary in favor of a Third Person, with this Clause (
non aliter nec alias) is Simony; the Reason they give is, quia omnis pactio in
spiritualibus Simoniam continet. cap. fin. de Pactis. and cap. ex part. 1. de
Offic. Deleg. To conclude, the Canon Law in this point of Simony is of a far
wider extent than the practice with us is capable of comprehension; remembering
therefore we are in an Abridgement, we may abuse the Reader in perplexing him
with Exotic Questions in reference to this Subject, As whether every Sale or
Exchange of Spirituals for Temporals be Simony? Whether an Exchange of
Spirituals for Spirituals be Simony? Whether there be any Simony Jure Humano,
and by what Contracts it may be discerned? Whether the Pope may be Simoniacal.
Q. Whether it be Simony to give money for the Sacrament upon a Deathbed?
Whether it be Simony in the Ordinaries or their Officials to take money for
Letters of Ordination under Seal? Whether it be Simony in Ecclesiastics to
take money for Sermons or Theological Doctrines? Whether it be Simony to resign
a Benefice reserving a Pension out of it? Whether it be Simony to resign or
bestow a benefices upon Trust or Confidence? With diverse other such Questions
in the Canon Law, relating to this Subject, the Solutions whereof are not of
any moment to us who are out of the Pope's Diocese.

CHAP. XL.
Of Blasphemy and Heresy.
1. What Blasphemy is, and whence so called. 2. The several punishments
inflicted on Blasphemers. 3. How may ways Blasphemy may be. 4. What Heresy is;
a Conjectural derivation of that word Heresy, it is Threefold. 5. What shall
he accounted Heresy; what the Lollards of old were, and why so called. 6. In
whom the Jurisdiction of Heresy properly resides. 7. A Heretic convicted, and
so persisting, whether according to Law combustable; The reason of that severe
Law; Heresy is Lepra animae. 8. An Alphabetical black Catalogue of Heretics;
their Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies; and the times wherein they pestered
the World. 9. A Catalogue of Jewish Heretics, but not in any Alphabetical
manner as the former.
(1.) BLASPHEMIA, (...), quod laedat famam. (...) is as it were (...), to hurt
another same or reputation: Suidas interprets (...), one who injureth God
with contumelious words, which is when men detract from God the honor due unto
him, or attribute any evil to him. Blasphemare, est tacit vel express, verbo
vel scripto, contra deum aliquid contumeliosum dicere. Navar. cap. 12. nu. 81.
Blasphemia est injuriosa in deum locutio, vel contumelia in deum verbo
irrogata. Less. lib. 2. de Blasph. This is cognizable in the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and by the 109. Canon of the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of the
Church of England, is among other notorious Crimes to be certified into
Ecclesiastical Courts by way of presentment, in order to punishment according
to Law.

(2.) This Crime of Blasphemy was so odious to the Emperor Justinian, that he
ordained, that the Blasphemer should undergo ultimum supplicium, be punished by
death, for he made it capital. Auth. ut non. Luxur. Coll. 7. By the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Keneth King of Scots. An. 840. It is provided, that he
that Blasphemeth shall have his Tongue cut out L. L. Eccl. Kenethi. l. 7.
Spelm. Council. An. 840.
. Blasphemy is speaking Treason against the Heavenly Majesty, the belching out
of exercrable words against God, whereby the Deity is reproached. Baldus says
that Blasphemy is a kind of Heresy. Bald. in L. Qui accusationem C. Qui Accus.
non posse. for which a Layman is Anathematized by the Church of God, and a
Clerk deposed from all Ecclesiastical Orders. Can. si quis per capillum. 22. q.
1. The Canon Law seems not severe enough in the punishment of this Crime,
probably for that they of the Roman Church do hold, that there is a Blasphemy
against Saints, and Blasphemia Dei vel sanctorum has but one and the same
punishment with them, and that is a solemn and public penance if the Blasphemy
were publicly committed. Extra. de Maledict. c. statuimus. And that the World
may know how they abominate this sin of Blasphemy, they put the Question and
demand, whether any Priest inferior to a Bishop, can absolve a man from this
sin? for answer they distinguish and say, that if the Blasphemy be public and
notorious, it cannot be absolved but by a Bishop: but if it were only private
and occult ( non in platea, nec in camera multis audientibus) then every Priest
may absolve it. Ant. de pae. and re. si Episcopus. lib. 6. Steph. de Gaeta
Repet. in c. ad Limina. 30. q. 1. nu. 139. Aquinas reckons it among the Mortal
sins.

(3.) Lindwood in his Provincials says, that that is Blasphemy quae dicitur
irreligiosa reprehensio, detractio, vel vituperatio, but (says he) to speak
properly and strictly, Blasphemare, est Deo injuriam irrogare, which may be
done three several ways, (1). Aliquid attribuendo quod deo non convenit. (2.)
Ab ea removendo quod deo convenit. (3.) Creaturae attribuendo illud quod est
proprium deo. Lindw. de Offic. Archipr. c. 1. verb. Blasphemia. In the
Primitive times this sin was punished by a delivering the Offender over unto
Satan, which was an Ecclesiastical censure by the Greater Excommunication,
whereby the Offender became unto others as an Heathen and a Publican. 1 Cor. 5.
5. 1 Timothy 1. 2.
Mat. 18. 17. and whereby he is dissiranchised of all the Privileges of the
Church.

(4.) Touching Heresy, there are various conceptions as to the derivation of
that word; some are of opinion that the word comes from ( Error and rectus) and
that from thence comes [ Haereticus] that is, Errans a Recto sive Rectitudine
Fidei Catholicae. l. 2. in sin. C. de Haeretic. Others will have the word
Heresis to be from [ heriscor] that is [ divido,] and thence Heresy to be
Divisio ab unitate Fidei. Azo. Sum. C. eod. tit. Others will have it to be from
[ haereo and Error,] thence Haeresis, quasi adhaesio Erroris, and Haereticus,
quasi adhaerens Errori, for Error of it self does not make an Heretic, but
adhering to an Error does. Lindw. de Haeret. c. 1. And others there are, who do
conceive that the word [ Haeresis] dicitur ab Electione, because an Heretic
does choose to himself that Opinion which he thinks is best for himself Hieron.
Epist. 24. q. 3. haeresis.
. And he that inclines to this Opinion, seems to be least in an Error, for
Haeresis is from the Greek (...) Optio, vel electio, secta, ab (...) Eligo.
Heresy is an Opinion repugnant to the orthodox Doctrine of the Christian
Faith, obstinately maintained and persisted in by such as profess the Name of
Christ. that Heresy which is commonly called Haeresis univorsa, or Heresy in
sensu largo is threefold, and does consist either in a man's heart, or in his
mouth, or in his works. Under the first of these are comprised all such as are
Christians only by Name, but not so in truth and in deed: under the second are
comprehended all vain Swearers, Covenant-breakers, and indevout approachers to
God in his Worship: under the third are contained all Hypocrites, whose
counterfeit devotion without any sincerity in the heart, consists only in the
simulation of an external work; all these are by Lindwood. understood in a
large sense as Heretics Lindw. de Offic. Archipr. c. 1 glos. in ver. Haeresis.
But these are not the Heretics here meant or intended, nor indeed are they
Heretics in any proper sense, whereby we commonly understand such as
Heretics, who maintain and persist in any Opinion contrary to the True,
Orthodox, Catholic Faith, or any of the Articles thereof grounded on the word
of God.

(5.) By a Proviso in the Act of 1 Eliz. c. 1. no matter or cause shall be
adjudged Heresy, but such only as has been so adjudged by the Authority of
the Canonical Scriptures, and by the first four General Councils, or by any
other General Council, wherein the same was declared Heresy by the express and
plain words of the Canonical Scripture, or such as shall hereafter be
determined to be Heresy by Parliament, with the assent of the Clergy in their
Convocation, as appears by the said Statute; the occasion of the making whereof
was (as supposed by reason of an Indictment against certain persons called
Lollards, upon the Statute of 2 H. 4. c. 15. Whose Opinions were (1.) That it
was not meritorious to go in Pilgrimage to St. Lollards from Lolium, Darnel or
Tares.
Thomas, nor to St. Mary of Walsingham. Nor (2) To adore the Image of a
Crucifix or of Saints. Nor (3) To confess sins to a Priest, but to God onley,
etc.

(6.) Sir Ed. Coke in the third part of his Institutes cap. 5. does assert,
that both by the Books at Common Law, and by History it does appear, that an
Heretic may be convicted before the Archbishop and other Bishops, and other
the Clergy at a General Synod or Convocation. Bract. Lib. 3. fo. 123, 124. in
Council. Oxon. Newburgh. l. 2. c. 13. 6 H. 3. Stow. Hol. 203. 2 H. 4. Rot. Parl.
nu. 29. Sautries Case. F. N. B. 269. 2. 1 El. c. 1. And the Bishop of every
Diocese may convict any for Heresy, and so might have done before the Statute
of 2 H. 4. c. 15. Co. p. 3. Inst. c. 5.
For the Diocesan has Jurisdiction of Heresy, and so it was practiced in all
Q. Elizabeth's Reign: and accordingly it was resolved by all the Justices in the
the Case of Legate the Heretic By Fleming Chief Justice, Tanfield Chief Baron,
Williams, and Coke Justices. Hill. 9. Jac.
; And that upon a conviction before the Ordinary of Heresy, the Writ de
Haeretico comburendo did lie Mat. Hammond. 21 Eliz. Holl 1579. Stow. 1161. Co.
ubi supra.
. Without the aid of the Act of 2 H. 4. c. 15. it seems the Diocesan could
Imprison no person accused of Heresy, but was to proceed against him by the
censures of the Church. And now (says the Lord Coke in the forecited place) In
as much as not only the said Act of 2 H. 4. but also that of the 25 H. 8. c.
14. are repealed, the Diocesan cannot Imprison any person accused of Heresy,
but must proceed against him as he might have done before these Statutes, by
the censures of the Church, as it appears by the said Act of 2 H. 4. c. 15.
according to Sir Ed. Coke in that place aforesaid: where he also says, that no
person at this day can be indicted or impeached of Heresy before any Temporal
Judge, or other that has Temporal Jurisdiction. But every Archbishop of this
Realm may cite any person dwelling in any Bishops Diocese within his Province
for causes of Hersie, if the Bishop or other immediate Ordinary thereunto
consent, or if that the same Bishop or other immediate Ordinary or Judge do not
his duty in punishing the same 23 H. 8. 9. and Co. ubi sup.
.

(7.) Again, Sir Ed. Coke in the forementioned place affirms, that it appears
by Bracton, Britton, Fleta, Stanford and all the Books of the Common Law, that
he who is duly convicted of Heresy, shall be burnt to death. Mir. c. 4. de
Majesty. Bract. ubi sup. Britt. c. 9. Fleta. l. 1. c. 35. Reg. F. N. B. 269.
But the Ecclesiastical Judge cannot (as he says) at this day commit the person
that is convict of Heresy, to the Sheriff (albeit he be present) to be burnt;
but must have the Kings Writ De Haeretieo Comburendo according to the Common
Law. F. N. B. 269. Rot. Par. 2 H. 4. nu. 29. Sautries Case. Bre. de haeret.
Combur. per Reg. and Council. in Parliam. The reason Sir Ed. Coke gives,
wherefore Heresy is so extremely and fearfully punished is, for that Gravius
est aeternam quam Temporalem Laedere Majestatem: And Haeresis est lepra animae.
2 Mar. tit. Haeresie. Br. 7. Co. ubi supr.
. The party duly convicted of Heresy, may recall and abjure his Opinion, and
thereby save his life, but a relapse is fatal. And if the Heretic will not
(says he) after conviction abjure, he may by force of the said Writ be burnt
without abjuration Co. ubi supr. and 2 Mar. ubi supr.
. 2 H. 4 Rot. Parl. N. 24. A Writ was issued by the advice of the Lords
Temporal in Parliament to the Sheriffs of London, and subscribed per ipsum
regem and concilium in Parliamento, by which the Sheriffs were commanded to
burn William Sautre, who had been before condemned for a relapsed Heretic by
the Archbishop of Canterbury Apostolicae sedis Legatum, and other Suffragans,
and all the Clergy of that Province, in Concilio suo Provinciali Congregat.
juris ordine. Note 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Proviso, that such as have Jurisdiction by
Letters Patents, shall not have power to Judge Heresy but in such Cases as
have been before adjudged, etc. or such as shall hereafter be ordered, judged,
and determined to be Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm,
with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation, as aforesaid. Before a man
shall be adjudged an Heretic, he ought to be convicted by the Provincial
Synod, for the Common Law does not take notice what is heresy. F. N. B. 269.
If an Heretic convict shall after abjuration relapse into the same or any
other Heresy, and thereof be convict again, the Writ De Hoeretico Comburendo
may be directed to the Sheriff after the party is delivered by the Clergy unto
the secular power. And by the Statute of 2 H. 4. c. 15. Every Bishop in his own
Diocese might (as aforesaid) convict a man of Heresy, and upon another
conviction after abjuration, might by the Sheriff proceed unto comburation. But
that Statute is repealed by the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 14. vid. co. lib. 12. in
a Case of Heresy. Note 2 Ma. tit. Heresy. Brook per omnes Justiciarios and
Baker and Hare. The Archbishop in his Province, in the Convocation, may and
does use to convict Heresy, by the Common Law, and then to put them convicted
into Lay-hands, and then by the Writ De Haeretico Comburendo they were burnt;
but because it was troublesome to call a Convocation, It was ordained by the
Statute 2 H. 4. cap. 15. That every Bishop in his Diocese might convict
Heretics. And if the Sheriff was present, he might deliver such to be burnt
without the Writ aforesaid; but if the Sheriff were absent, or he were to be
burnt in another County, then the said Writ ought to be had, who are Heretics,
vid. 11. H. 7. Book of Entries, fo. 319. vid. Doctor and Stu. lib. 2. cap. 29.
Cousin. 48. 2. 1 and 2. P. and M cap. 6. Also 3 F. N. B. fo. 269. And the Writ
in the Register proves this directly. 4 Bracton. l. 3. cap. 9. fo. 123, 124.
And it is also true, that every Ordinary may convent any Heretic or
Schismatic before him pro salute animae, and may degrade him, and enjoin him
penance according to Ecclesiastical Law; but upon such conviction the party
shall not he burnt. Note (says the Lord Coke in the same place) that the makers
of the Act of 1 Eliz. were in doubt what shall be deemed Heresy or Schism,
etc. and therefore the Statute of 10 Eliz. provides, that nothing shall be
deemed Heresy, but what had been so determined by one of the four General
Councils, the word of God, or Parliament. vid. Fox in Ed. 6. and Britton. 5 Ed.
1. lib. 1. cap. 17. and with this agrees the Statute, 2 H. 5. cap. 7. 23 H. 7.
9. 25 H. 8. c. 14. The proceedings in the commencement and end was altered by
the Statute of 25 H. 8. Then came the Statute 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. and that
repealed 5 R. 2. 2 H. 5. and 26 H. 8. and the 2 H. 4. and by general words all
Statutes concerning matter of Religion; then the 1 and 2. P. and M. cap. 6.
Revived the 2. H. 4. by which the 25. H. 8. lost it is force, the Act 1 and 2 P
and M. cap. 8. expressly repealed. 21 H. 8. 23. H. 8. 24. H. 8. 27. H. 8. but
the 25. H. 8. cap. 14. was not repealed, being repealed before by the 1. Ed. 6.
yet in the end of that long Act there is a general clause sufficient of it self
to repeal the Act 25. H. cap. 14. without more: Then the 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
repeals the 1 and 2 P. and M. except some Branches; and in the same Act it is
enacted, that all other Statutes repealed by the said Act of Repeal 1 and 2 P.
and M. and not in this Act specially revived, shall remain repealed. But the
25. H. 8. cap. 14. was not particularly revived, and therefore remains
repealed. And after the said Statute 1. Eliz. repeals the Act 1 and 2 P. and M.
of reviving of three Acts for punishment of Heresies; so that now at Common Law
(according to the Lord Coke) none can be burnt for Heresy, but by Conviction
at a Convocation. After this, viz. Hill. 9. Jac. the Attorney and Solicitor
consulted with him whether at this day, upon Conviction of an Heretic before
the Ordinary, the Writ de Haeretico Comburendo lies, and it seemed to him to
be clear that it did not, for the Reason and Authorities that he had reported
Trin. Hill. 9. Jac. Co. lib. 12.
9. Jac. before. But after, they consulting also with Fleming Chief Justice,
Tanfield Chief Baron, and Williams and Crook Justices: And they, upon the
report of Dr. Cosins, and some Presidents in Queen Elizabeth's time, certified
the King that the said Writ lies Coke lib. 12. Case of Heresy.
.

(8.) Since the Devil in his Serpentine Policy first negotiated the Fall of
Man, there have ever been such as have gone forth, like the lying Spirit in
Ahabs false Prophets, whereby many, as he was, are deceived to their own Ruin;
these are the Devils Emissaries, Active in sowing Tares among the Wheat, whom
we commonly call Heretics, a Black Catalogue whereof in an Alphabetical Method
here follows.

Acatiani and Semi-Arriani, An. 491.
they held that the Son was a Creature made by the Father, and that Christ was
like to the Father in Will but not in Substance. This Heresy began by Acatius
(not the Eutychian) Bishop, and Successor to Eusebius in Cesaria; and was
condemned in the Council of Seleucia. A. D. 353.


Acephali, so called because they had neither Bishop nor Priest for their Head,
and were Branches of the Eutychian Heresy. They rejected the Council of
chalcedon, and denied the two Natures of Christ. An. 174.
They despised all Congregations and the Sacraments.

Adamiani, so called from their going naked in their Assemblies (in imitation
of Adam in his Innocence) to which Estate they said Christ had restored
Mankind. They condemned Marriage and had Women in common, with whom they lay
promiscuously after the Light put out. They held that we ought not to pray to
God, because he knows our wants without Prayer: And called their Assemblies
that Paradise which God had promised to the Blessed. They had their
Conventicles in subterrancan places, called Hypacausta, because that under the
place of their Meetings, a Furance of Fire was kindled to warm the same, where
they unclothed themselves when they entered into it, and stood naked, both Men
and Women, in imitation of Adam and Eve before the Fall. This Heresy was first
broached by one Prodicus a Gnostick. There was also the Heresy of Adamites,
promiscuous in their Lusts, begun or rather revived by a Picard of Gallo-Belgia
in the year 1341.

AEtius, An. 357.
a Syrian of Antioch, and Priest of that Church, successor to Arius, to whose
Errors he added, and was degraded, and went into Cicilia, where he published
them, and was banished by the Emperor, and recalled by Julian in hatred to the
Christians. He held (besides Arrianism) that God was comprehensible, and that
Christ was unlike the Father in all things, and spoke uncouth things of the
Trinity, and was justly called an Atheist. He was condemned in the Seleucian
Council in the year 359. and confuted by Epiphanius.

Agnoetae, An. 601.
they held that the Divine Nature of Christ was ignorant of some things, as of
the day of Judgment, and denied perfection of knowledge to the Son of God in
his Divine Nature.

Almaricani, An. 1202.
from Almaricus of Carnotum in France, who uttered Blasphemous opinions
concerning God, that he was the Essence of all Creatures, and the Soul of
Heaven, and that all Creatures should be converted into the Substance of God
again: These Heretics approved of all Uncleaness under the Veil of Chastity.

Alogi, An. 198.
they rejected the Gospel, and the Revelation of St. John; saying that they
were written by Cerinthus, and denied Christ to be the Word, An. 214.
as also his Divinity.

Angelici, These Heretics were Angel-Worshippers; Epiphanius who speaks of
them, better knew their Name than the original of their Sect.

Anomaei, a Branch of the Stock of the Arians; the principal Authors were
Acatius, Eunomius, and AEtius. This was in the fourth Century; Sozom. l. 4. c.
22.

Anthropomorphitae, An. 932.
these Heretics were the Disciples of the Andeani an. 370. and revived their
Heresy, so called of Audaeus a Syrian, who lived in the end of Arius his time.
They Blasphemously held that God had a body like unto Man. That Darkness, Fire,
and Water were Eternal. They refused the congregation of the Orthodox Church
and admitted grievous Sinners to the Communion without Repentance.

Antidicomarianitae, these supposed that after the Nativity of our Lord, the
Virgin Mary accompanied with her Husband Joseph, and did bear Children to him.
August. de haeres. of which opinion was Helvidius. It is said, that the opinion
of the Fathers of the Church was, that as no man did lie in the Sepulcher
wherein Christ was buried, before him: So in the Womb wherein he was conceived,
no man was conceived after him; and that the Fathers by the words in the
Apostolic Symbol understood, that he was born of Mary a perpetual Virgin; And
that by the Brethren of our Lord in the Holy Scriptures, is meant (as is
generally held) the Kinsmen of the Lord according to the Flesh. An. 1556.


Antrinitarians were those Heretics who denied the Blessed Trinity.

(...), these were a Branch from the Root of Eutyches; They supposed that the
Flesh of Christ was void of all kind of Humane Infirmity. The Emperor Justinian
was said to be tainted with this Heresy in his old age, by bearing so much
with the Emperess Theodora, to the great Advance of Eutyches his Error.

Apelles, a Disciple of Marcion, yet could not agree with his Master in all
things, for he agreed that Christ had a true Body, but not made of the
Substance of the Virgin Mary, but of the four Elements, and that after his
Resurrection he dissolved into the four Elements, and then returned to Heaven
from whence he came Epiphan.

Apollinaris, An. 373.
Bishop of Laodicea in Syria, so Ruffin. l. 2. c. 20. yet it is said of him,
that missing of a Bishopric he fell into these Heresies, viz. That Christ had
not Humane Flesh from the Virgin, but from Heaven: That he had a Humane body
but not a Soul: Confounding the Persons in the Trinity: That Christ had no
Humane Will: That Souls begat Souls: That after the Resurrection, all the
Ceremonies of the Law should take place among the Godly.

Apostolici, An. 183.
these Heretics condemned Marriage, and held the Apostles to be all unmarried:
They made all things to be common: They used Apochryphal Books for Gospel:
They refused to receive those into the Church who had lapsed after Baptism:
They would not have Possessions, but rejoiced in voluntary Poverty: and gave
Sentence against themselves that they were unclean, because they were
procreated by Marriage.

Aquarii, these were certain Heretics, who instead of Wine received Water in
the Holy Sacrament. This was in the days of Cyprian.

Arius, An 324.
a Lybian, and a Priest or Presbyter of Alexandria, he said that Christ was
neither God, nor Eternal, but an excellent Creature created before all
Creatures: That he assumed only a Body, but not the Soul of a man: That the
Holy Ghost was a Creature of a Creature, viz. of the Son: He Rebaptized, and
perverted the order of Baptism: He used the Trisagion thus, Gloria Patri, per
Filium, in Spiritu Sancto: He denied the Son of God to be begotten of the
Substance of the Father, but that he was a Creature, and made of things not
existent, and that there was a time wherein the Son was not: He was condemned
in the Nicene Council, and banished by the Emperor Constatine.

Armenii, An. 609.
so called of the Province, where their Heresies raged, by the means of
Euchanius called Mantacunes: They denied, that Christ assumed his Humanity from
the Virgin Mary: They celebrated the Passover after the Custom of the Jews:
They held a Quaternity, and that the Divinty suffered.

Artemon, Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, denied the Divinity of Christ, and
affirmed that he was not existent before he took Flesh from the Virgin. This
was in the third Century.

Artotyritae, An. 186.
they were of the Sect of the Pepusians, and added Cheese to the Bread in the
Sacrament.

Assitae, these were Heretics who carried about with them new vessels, to
represent that they were vessels filled with the new Wine of the Gospel.

Badesianistae, these were but a Branch of the Heresy of the Valentinians and
Gnostics, who denied the Resurrection; these Heretics were in the third
Century.

Basilides, An. 135.
an Egyptian of Alexandria; he held fond Opinions concerning the Creation and
number of Heavens: that not Christ but Simon of Cyrene was Crucified: That it
was lawful to deny Christ in time of persecution, and to have Idols: that no
Sins but such as are unwittingly committed should be pardoned: That Faith was
natural: That Prophesies came not from God but Angels: And that there was no
Resurrection.

Beryllus Bishop of Bostra, he was orthodox at the first, but afterward held
that the Soul died with the Body, and both rose again together: That Christ was
not before his Nativity. Origin reclaimed him, These Heresies were condemned in
the Arabian Council. An. 249.

Caini, An. 170.
so called of the special worship they attributed to Cain: The reverenced Esau,
Core, the Sodomites, yea and Judas himself, as Authors of man's Salvation: They
denied the Resurrection of the Body: rejected the Law, and worshipped evil
Angels. Tertullian and Epiphanius say, that these Heretics arose from the
Nicholaitans, but Ireneus says they sprung out of the Valentinians.

Carpocrates of Alexandria in Egypt, An. 141.
he held that Christ was mere man, and born of Joseph and Mary: he held also
the transmigration of Souls; also that the Devil created the World, and denied
the Resurrection. These damnable Heresies did spread in Egypt, Asia, and Rome
under the name of Gnostics: he lived incontinently with Marcellina, one of his
own Sect, his Son Epiphanes succeeded him in this diabolical Heresy, and
(after him) Prodicus the Author of the Adamites. The followers of Carpecrates
had in secret places Images of Gold and Silver, which they called the Images of
Jesus, and therewithal the Images of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, all
which they worshipped. So that the worshipping of Images, and the adoration of
the Image of Jesus, seems to be a Custom borrowed rather from the old
Heretics, than from the ancient Fathers of the first Three hundred years.
Epiph. contra Haeres.

Cathari, An. 252.
they professed themselves purer than others, and held Rebaptizing those who
sinned after Baptism, condemned second Marriage, and refused to receive those
who had lapsed in time of persecution. The founder of these Cathari was
Novatus, ordained Priest of Rome by Cornelius, upon his repulse in a Bishopric.

Cerdon of Syria, An. 144.
from whence he went to Rome, and in the time of Higinus broached these
blasphemous heresies, viz. That there were two Gods, one good, who was the
Father of Christ, and another severe and bad, and this Created the World. This
Cerdon, as also Marcion, were the Authors of the Opinion of two Gods, or two
Beginnings: he denied the Resurrection of the Body, and invented a new Baptism
after a man has been Baptized a second and third time: he held that Christ was
neither born of the Virgin Mary, or suffered really, with many other
Blasphemies against him: he rejected the Law, and often seigned to recant, but
in the end was Excommunicated, having lived in Rome Eight and thirty years.

Cerinthus, An. 93.
a circumcised Jew, contemporary with Ebion, he affirmed that the World was not
Created by God, but by an inferior power: That Christ was born after the
manner of men, of Joseph and Mary, denying her Virginity: he divided Jesus from
Christ, saying that Christ descended upon Jesus at his Baptism in the form of a
Dove: That Jesus, not Christ, suffered and rose again: That there was a
necessity of Circumcision, and that Life Eternal should be at Jerusalem, where
all Earthly pleasures should endure One thousand years. The report is, that St.
John finding him in a Bath, departed thence saying, that it was a Miracle that
the Bath fell not down while Cerinthus was in it. This Heresy began at
Antioch, and spread over Asia and Syria; but this Name lasted not, though
Carpocras and Samosatenus continued the heresy.

Chiliastae or Millenarii, An. 116.
their Author was Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, whose Heresy was a Branch of
that of Cerinthus, in that point that Christ would raise the Godly first, and
live a thousand years with them on the Earth. This Heresy was afterward
maintained by Nepos, an Egyptian Bishop, Two hundred thirty one years after
Christ's Passion.

Circumcelliones, They were the most reprobate Branch of the Donatists: they
would throw themselves headlong from high places, or cast themselves into fire
or water, and counted it Martyrdom. Aug. de Haeres.

Colarbasus, he was Marcus the Magicians Fellow Disciple, and held that men's
Lives and Actions were ruled by Seven Planets, and divided Jesus and Christ
into two distinct persons.

Collyridiani, An. 364.
they offered Divine honor to the Virgin Mary, and Sacrificed to her as to the
Queen of Heaven, they worshipped her with Divine adoration, and offered to her
little Pasties baked. Epiphan.

Coluthiani, they denied that any evil, either of sin or punishment was of God.

Donatists, An. 307.
from Donatus a Priest of Carthage, who missing the Bishopric he would have
had, did discontentedly fall into these heresies, viz. That the true Church was
no where but with him and his Disciples: that obedience to Gods precepts ought
to be voluntary and not compulsive: That no Heretics ought to be punished by
the Magistrate: he measured the effects of the Sacrament by the Minister, not
by the Author: He Rebaptized, used Incantations, and boasted of Revelations: he
held the Son to be less than the Father, and the Holy Ghost less than the Son:
His followers slew as many opposites to their Sect as they could: he was at
last Bishop of Numidia.

Ebioni, An. 87.
from Ebion a Samaritan, their Founder, or from Ebion [Hebraice] Poor, they
having made themselves so by distributing their Goods in Alms. They denied the
Divinity of Christ, rejected St. Paul's Epistles and all the Gospel except St.
Matthew; and held themselves bound to observe the Law of Moses as necessary to
Eternal Life. Eusebius.

Elcesai, An. 110.
of Elcesai their Founder, they were also called Sampsei: They opposed the
Virginity of the Virgin Mary, and held that there were two Christ's, one
inferior born of her, the other superior; also that the Spirit was Sister to
Christ: They adored water as a God: held it Lawful to become Apostates in time
of persecution, and approved of one only. Apochryphal Book made by themselves.
They sprang from Ebion the Heretic.

Enchratitae, so called because they abstained from Wine, eating of Flesh, and
living Creatures: they condemned Marriage, and blasphemed the Epistles of St.
Paul; The Author of this Sect was Tatianus a Syrian. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 28.

Euchitae, An. 385.
they held Baptism unprofitable.

Eunomius, An 361.
Bishop of Syricum, an Arian, he added to the heresies of AEetius, that the
Holy Ghost was Created by the Son, and that Christ assumed only a humane Body,
and not a Soul, he was confuted by St. Basil.

Eutyches, An. 447.
Abbot of Constantinople, confuting Nestorius, fell himself into other errors,
and confounded the two natures of Christ, making him (after his union) to have
but the Divine nature only, and held that he assumed nothing but Humane from
the Divine: He affirmed also that the Divine nature was passible, and that
Christ was rather Deified than God; he was condemned in the Council of
Chalcedon.

Foelix Bishop of Vrgel on the Pyrenean hills, An. 792.
he held that Christ in his Humane nature was the Adopted Son of God; he was
condemned for Heresy at Ratisbon; hence came the Foeliciani.

Floriani from Florinus or Florianus a Priest of Rome, An. 185.
he held that God Created all Creatures and things in an evil state, and
celebrated the Passover after the manner of the Jews.

Fratricelli, they were of Opinion, that a man might in this world attain to a
state of such perfection that he might be altogether without sin, and that he
who had attained thereto, was neither under subjection to Civil nor Spiritual
Governors, but was freed from all subjection to mortal men, and that they had
no need of Prayer or Fasting. These were in the thirteenth Century, and now
also in this seventeenth Century are every where to be found among us, though
under another appellation.

Gazareni, An. 1295.
called also Patereni, and Gazari, these were certain Heretics about Toulouse
in France in the thirteenth Century, who held that married men were not in a
State of Grace, and could not be saved; This Opinion was condemned by the
Council of Lateran.

Gnostics, An. 161.
they assumed that Name from the knowledge and learning which they proudly
conceived they had above all others: They held (besides those heresies of the
Carpocratians) many other fond Opinions concerning the Creation by Angels; and
affirmed that every faithful man had two Souls, that there were two Gods, one
good and the other bad: They distinguished Jesus from Christ: and held that
Christ was eighteen months upon Earth after his Resurrection. There were diverse
sorts of this Sect.

Godescalchus, An. 849.
one of the Netherlands, about the year eight hundred forty nine, perniciously
held, that those who were predestined unto life by a decree of Gods
predestination, were necessitated to do well: and those who were predestined
to condemnation, were necessitated by a Decree of God to do evil.

Helsesaitae, the same with those formerly called Elcesai, otherwise called
Sampsaei, they mixed the Religion of the Jews, Gentiles, and Christians
together: they rejected the Writings of the Apostle Paul: and affirmed that a
man who denies the Lord with his mouth in the time of persecution, if so be he
adhered to the Faith in his heart, he had committed no sin: they carried about
with them a singular Book, which they said was sent down from Heaven, and
promised remission of sins to every man that would hearken to the words of that
Book; these were of the third Century. Epiphan. contr. haeres. 2. and Comment.
Func. in Chron.

Hermiani, An. 201.
they sprung from Hermogenes an Affrican, and held that the Mass whereof the
World was created, was coeternal with God: That Angels created men's Souls: That
Christ ascending, left his humane flesh in the Son: They denied the
Resurrection, and received not Baptism by water.

Hieracitae, An. 261.
of Hierax an Egyptian of Leontopolis, he spoke of the Father as of two lights,
differing in substance: damned Marriage: denied the Resurrection: excluded
Children from Heaven: held that Melchisedeck was the Holy Ghost: and that
Paradise was no Earthly place.

Jacobitae of Jacob a Syrian, An. 607.
called Zanzalus, for his poverty: They received the heresy of Eutyches.

Jovinianus, An. 362.
a Roman, he held all sins to be equal: denied the Virginity of the Virgin
Mary: Contemned Fasting, and all Spiritual exercises: and held that men did not
sin after Baptism:

Lucianistae and Apelliani, so called from Lucianus and Apelles, Disciples of
Marcion.

Lucifer Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia, An. 367.
he diabolically held, that man's Body was formed by the Devil: That a Christian
might kill himself, to be quit of the burden of the flesh, and allowed but part
of the Old Testament.

Luciferniani, it is supposed that these were not from the former, but from
another Lucifer, for some say, that these were rather but Schismatics than
Heretics, and only held, that Faith was a Weapon of Contentions, and not of
Heresies. Theod. Compen. Haeres. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 13.

Lombardians for want of another Name, for in the time of the Emperor Albert in
Lombardy near to Navarre, there were a Sect of Heretics, who under color of
Religion and Charity made all things common, and women in like manner moved men
to carnal conjunction, alleging it to be a deed of charity. This was in the
fourteenth century. Imp. Hist. page 522.

Macedoniani, An. 343.
of Macedonius the Arian Bishop of Costantinople; They were sometimes
Semi-Arians, at other times Arians, and sometimes orthodox, but never constant.
They held that Christ was not of the same essence with the Father, but only
like to him: And that the Holy Ghost was not God, but Gods Minister, and a
Creature not eternal.

Manes a Persian, An. 171.
otherwise called Manichaeus in Dioclesians time, Author of the Manichees, he
was a devilish crack-braind fellow, and chose to himself twelve Disciples, and
composed his heresies out of diverse others: He blasphemously affirmed himself
to be the Holy Ghost: he held two beginnings, the one good the other evil:
rejected the Old Testament, and mangled the New: denied Christ's Divinity, and
his real Passion, and the Resurrection of the Body: Condemned Marriage, Alms,
and Baptism: he most blasphemously said that Christ was the Serpent that
deceived Eve: that Christ's Body was fixed in the Stars: That he redeemed Souls:
he forged many things about the Creation: he worshipped the Sun and Moon as
Gods: attributed two Souls to every man: he ascribed sin not to the free will
of man, and his natural defection voluntary, from the Estate of the first
Creation, but to necessity, because man's Body was made of the substance of the
prince of darkness: with other fond and blasphemous heresies. One Scythianus a
Sarazen Merchant infused these Heresies into him. Warranes King of Persia
hearing of his fame, sent for him to cure his sick son, who died under his
hands; whereupon he cast him into Prison, from whence he made his escape into
Mesopotamia; but there the said King retook him, slead him, filled his skin
full of chaff, and caused it to be set up before the Gates of the City in
Mesopotamia. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. and Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 22. Eccle. hist.

Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, An. 341.
the Metropolis of Galatia, he held blasphemous Opinions against the Trinity,
and denied the Divinity of Christ.

Marcion, An. 166.
the Disciple of the Heretic Cerdon: he held (besides Cerdons heresies) that
Christ was not the Son of God: he held likewise the transmigration of Souls:
That War was not lawful though on just occasion: he condemned Marriage:
rejected the Old Testament: Forbad eating of flesh, and allowed of Rebaptizing
( toties quoties) as often as men fell and repented, Polycarpus called this
Marcion Primogenitus diaboli,

Marcus a Magician, An. 149.
of whom came the M^^citae: he invented a new form of Baptism, viz. In the Name
of the unknown Father of all things, and in the Name of the verity the Mother
of all things, and in the Name of him who descended upon Jesus: he held that
Christ suffered not, nor assumed a Body: he desiled the Sacrament, and was a
man of a very filthy life: he denied the Resurrection of the Body, and supposed
that Salvation belonged only to the Soul.

Melchisedechiani, An. 208.
the Author of these Heretics was Theodatus Disciple to Theodatus the Currier:
he held that Melchisedech was made by God greater than Christ; whose Divinity
they also denied, and magnified Melchisedech above Christ.

Menander, An. 61.
Disciple and Contempory with Simon Magus, a Samaritan and a Sorcerer, and
Author of the Gnostics; he held with Simon about the Creation by Angels, and
affirmed that he was sent from Heaven to save the World; and that by virtue of
his Baptism men should not dye nor grow old; but the success not answering his
promise, his heresy fell of it self. Epiph. Eusebius. Aug. and Theod. lib. 4 cap.
11.

Meletiani from Meletius a Bishop of Thebaida, he was deposed for sacrificing
to Idols. This was in the fourth Century.

Messaliani, An. 374.
they worshipped God, but not in three persons, and held that God might be seen
with corporeal eyes: that the Devil ruled our actions. They attributed
Salvation to Prayer totally: they contemned Christ's Passion, and the
Sacraments, Alms, and a laborious life, and tolerated Perjury to promote
Religion.

Metangismonitae, An. 403.
they held that the Son was in the Father, as a lesser Vessel comprehended in a
greater: That God had a Body, and in the Divine essence was something greater
and something lesser. Aug. out of Philaster.

Monophysitae, An. 451.
whose Author was Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, they were also called
Theopaschitae and Monothelites, who denied not directly the two Natures of
Christ, but only affirmed that after the union of the Natures, there was only
one will and one operation in Christ; they attributed the Divine Nature only
to Christ; These were a branch of the Eutychian Heretics.

Montanus of Phrygia, An. ^^3.
Author of the Cataphryges, he affirmed himself to be the holy Spirit, he
called himself the Holy Spirit, whom Christ sent to instruct his Disciples in
all truth: He said that the Spirit fell but little upon the Apostles, and fully
upon himself: He instituted Laws concerning fasting, condemned second Marriage,
allowed Incest, confounded the persons in the Trinity, and baked man's Blood
with the Bread of the Eucharist: He seduced two women Priscilla and Maximilla
to leave their Husbands, and to be his Prophetesses.

Nazareni, An. 67.
they styled themselves so, because that before the Name of Christians began,
that Name was the most honorable among Christ's Disciples: They confessed
Christ, but withal held a necessity of observing the Law, and framed strange
things of Ouria or Nauria (Noah's Wife, as they would have it) or Vesta: They
had many Gospels (as they called them) and boasted much of Revelations and
Visions: They held that the Soul of a Man, of a Beast, and of a Plant were all
of one Substance. These Heretics continued till after the time of Epiphanius,
who reports that the Jews so hated them, that they prayed twice a day against
them. Epiph. Aug. Theodor. Isodor.

Nepotiani, from Nepos, a Bishop in Egypt, about the year 264. They affirmed
that at the latter Day the Godly should rise before the Wicked, and should live
with Christ a thousand years in abundance of all earthly Pleasures. Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 24.

Nestorius, An. 428.
Bishop of Constantinople, he spoke against the personal Union of Christ's
Divine and Humane Nature, for he held that Christ had two several Persons, but
not two Wills: That the Son of God in Christ, was but an Assistant to the Son
of the Virgin Mary, whom he would not have to be called the Mother of God, but
only the Mother of Christ. Euag. l. 1. c. 7. He held that the Humanity in
Christ was made equal with the Deity or Divine Nature. He was condemned in the
general Council of Ephesus, and dyed in Banishment, his Blasphemous Tongue
being first eaten with Worms, which rotted in his mouth.

Nicholatiae, An. 81.
from Nicholas a Deacon of Antioch, chosen by the Apostles to look to the Poor,
who being suspected to be jealous of his fair Wife, did (to clear himself)
proffer her to any of the Brethren that would Marry her: Whereupon they took
occasion to live promiscuously, making their Wives Common; and held that it was
lawful to eat things offered to Idols: That Darkness and Light begat the World,
of which were born Angels and Devils, and of them Men. This Heresy continued
not long in this Name, but was polished and revived by the Gnostics and
Vaentinians. Clem. Alex. and Strom. 3. Act. 6. and Eusebius.

Noetius, An. 179.
of Smyrna Disciple to Montanus, he called himself Moses, and held but one
person in the Trinity: He being convented, abjured his Heresy; but afterward
being ambitious of a Name, relapsed and dispersed it, and when he dyed, was
cast out unburied, as not worthy thereof.

Novatus, An. 252.
ordained a Priest of Rome by Cornelius, he was the Founder of the foresaid
Heretics the Cathari: He held that such as had fallen in time of persecution,
were not to be restored to the Fellowship of the Church, albeit they repented
thereof.

Ophitae, An. 169.
of (...) a Serpent, whom they worshipped, affirming most Blasphemously that
Christ was the Serpent which deceived Eve: they denied Christ's Humanity, and
the Resurrection; They held also a Blasphemous opinion concerning the
Sacrament: This Sect was a Branch of the Valentinians, and continued till after
the time of Justinian the first.

Origeniani and Turpes, An. 18^.
of one Origin a Gnostick, who drew his Heresy from Epiphanes Son to the
Heretic Carpocras: They prohibited Marriage, but committed fornication and all
Filthiness, and rejected some Books of the Old and New Testament, which made
against them. Some say they were soul and filthy Beasts, not abhorring Whoredom
but Procreation of Children, to the end they might seem chaste, not unlike unto
Onan whom the Lord slew. They were also called Origenistae, because they
defended the Books of Origin, who were Theodorus Ascidas Bishop of
Caesaria-Cappadocia, and the Monks of Nova Lawra. There were of these Heretics
also in the sixth Century.

Palmerius, An. 1449.
the Chronologer, he was burnt for his Heretical Opinions concerning Angels.

Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, An. 116.
he was St. John's Disciple, yet afterward became the Author of the Sect of
the Chiliasts or Millenaries, whose Heresy was a Branch of that of Cerinthus,
in that point, that Christ should raise the Godly first, and live a thousand
years with them on earth.

Patalorynchitae, a Foolish People who counted it Religion to stop their breath
with their fingers, and not to utter any intelligible speech.

Patareni and Gazareni, An. 1295.
these Heretics did hold that married men could not be saved.

Paterniani or Patriciniani and Venustiani, An 421.
they were called by the first Name, of Paternus their Founder, and by the
last, of their lascivious behavior: They held that the lower Parts of Man were
not made by God but by the Devil; others say that they affirmed that the whole
Body of Man was formed by the Devil, and ^^t by God.

Paulus Samosatenus, An. 267.
so called of Sam^sata the Metropolis of Comagena, where he was Born: He held
that the word was not in Christ, otherwise than in the Prophets: That Christ
was not the word, and denied his Divinity: He Baptized not in Christ's Name.

Pelagius Brito, An. 412.
whose Followers were Julianus and Coelestius, in the days of Arcadius or
Honorius; this Pelagius was a Roman Monk, born in Armorica or Little Britain,
who with his Disciple Coelestius spread his Heresies over almost all Countries,
viz. That Adam had died though he had not sinned: That his Sin did only hurt
himself, and not others but in his Example: That Lust and Concupiscence, which
is naturally in us, is Good, and nothing in it whereof we need be ashamed: That
Infants neither have nor draw original Sin from their Parents: That the Infants
of the Faithful, though not Baptized, shall be saved, but shall remain without
the Kingdom of God: That men have free Will sufficient to do Good, without the
Grace of God: That Men by nature were able to fulfill the whole Law of God.
Howbeit more easily and better if they were supported by the Grace of God: They
denied original Sin, and said that the posterity of Adam were Sinners by
imitation of Adam's Sin, but had not received Sin by carnal Propagation: That
Children had no need to be baptized for Remission of Sins, and that the godly
Fathers in Scripture, when they confessed their Sins, they did it rather for
example of Humility, than for necessity, or guilt of Sin. These Heresies have
in all ages been confuted by many Learned and Eminent Divines and were
condemned by many Councils, specially in the Council of Carthage.

Pepusiani, An. 182.
they were of Pepuza, a Town of Phrygia, between Galatia and Cappadocia; they
held (beside other Heresies of Montanus) that Pepuza was the Heavenly
Jerusalem mentioned by St. Paul, Heb. 12. and in the Revelation c. 2. 1.

Petrus Abelardus, a French man, he held vile things concerning the Blessed
Trinity, that the Holy Spirit was the Soul of the World, and that he was not of
the Substance of the Father. This was in the twelfth Century.

Photinus Bishop of Syrmium in Illyria, An. 346.
a Disciple to Marcellus: he held that Christ's Kingdom was not everlasting,
began at his birth, and should end at the day of Judgment. He was condemned in
the Council of Sardis. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 9.

Praxeas, An. 204.
he was Author of the Monarchici and Patrispassiani; he held that God the
Father only suffered.

Priscilianistae, An. 382.
from Priscilianus, a man of Noble birth in Spain: he confounded the Persons in
the Trinity: Held fond opinions concerning the Creation: That Man's Soul was of
the same Essence with God: That Man's life was ruled by the Planets: That
Perjury and Lying were lawful, to hide a Man's Religion: He forbad eating of
Flesh, and condemned Marriage, but allowed Fornication, and renewed the Heresy
of the Gnostics; this was in the days of the Emperor Gratianus and
Valentinian; he was executed at Trevers as a Sorcerer. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. c.
11.

Proclinianitae, An. 281.
of one Proclus, who (besides other Heresies of the Seleuciani) held that
Christ was not come in the Flesh.

Quartodecimani, An. 195.
they held that Easter was to be observed on the fourteenth Moon; and upon what
day soever that Moon happened (though Sunday) they fasted: They refused to
admit and receive those who had lapsed after Baptism.

Sabellius an African, An. 256.
he and his followers confessed, that there was but one God only, but they
denied that there were three distinct Persons in that one Godhead: They not
only confounded, but took away the Persons in the Trinity: He was the Founder
of the Photinean's Heresy: They were called Patrispassiani, because their
Opinion imported that the Father suffered; this Sabellius was for his Heresy
excommunicated.

Samosatenus, Bishop of Antioch, he denied the Divinity of the Son of God,
affirming that Christ obtained the Name of the Son of God through his virtuous
Behavior and patient Suffering, but that he was not naturally and truly the
Son of God, begotten of the Substance of the Father: He abrogated the Psalms
sung in the Church, and hired Women there to sing his own Praises: He was
deposed by a Council at Antioch, and excommunicated by all the Christian
Churches in the World. This was (as some affirm) not in the second but third
Century.

Suturniani, An. 130.
from one Saturnine of Antioch, who with Basilides the Egyptian, shared the
Heresy of Simon in two parts; this Saturnine held that his Disciples, though
living dissolutely, might be saved by faith in him: That the World and Man were
Created by seven Angels praeter voluntatem Dei: That Christ's Body was
fantastical: That there was one God of the Jews, another of the Christians:
That at the Beginning a Good and a Bad man were created, and that from the Good
came good men, and from the Bad came evil men: That Marriage was a doctrine of
Devils: That men must abstain from things that had life: That some of the Old
Prophets were of the Devil: and lastly they denied the Resurrection of the Body.

Secundiani, An. 154.
of Secundus, who was the Chief Disciple of Valentinian the Heretic, and held
all his Heresies, and allowed his Followers all filthiness of Life.

Seleuciani or Hermiani from Seleucius and Hermias, they most abominably held,
that the Mass whereof God created the Elements was Coeternal with himself: That
the Angels, not God, created the Souls of Men. That Christ in his Ascension
unclothed himself of the Flesh of Man, and left it in the Globe of the Sun:
They received not Baptism by Water: They denied the Resurrection of the Body,
supposing that by new Generations, one succeeding another, that is performed
which in Scripture is written concerning the Resurrection.

Sethitae, An. 172.
another Branch of Valentinian in Egypt: They held that Angels begat men in the
beginning: They attributed to Seth the Honor due to our Savior, and denied
the Resurrection of the Body.

Severus, An. 190.
Successor to Apelles in the School of Marcion, his Heresies were spread in
East Syria: They forbad the use of Wine: rejected the Old Testament and the
Prophets, using Apocryphal Books of their own: Denied the Resurrection:
Ascribed the Creation to Angels. Detested Women as works of the Devil: and used
Magic.

Simon Magus, An. 41.
said to be the Father of Heretics, he was Magician and an Hypocrite, though
Baptized by Philip the Apostle: he spread his heresies at Rome, where he grew
so famous, that the people erected an Image to him with this Inscription,
Simoni deo Sancto: he most blasphemously affirmed himself to be true God: That
the World was Created by Angels: he denied that Christ was either come or
suffered: he denied also the Resurrection of the Body: he brought in the
promiscuous use of women, and used the company of one Helena, whom he
blasphemously gave out to be the Holy Ghost, and that he begat Angels of her:
he taught his Disciples to worship Images, his own Image, and the Image of
Helena, who accompanied him from Asia to Rome: he attempted to show his power
in flying, and with a fall broke his Thigh, and died miserably. -- Iren. l. 1.
c. 30. Aug. Epiph. Theod.

Swenkfeldius, born in Silesia, he held that the outward Ministry of the Word
and Sacraments was not necessary to eternal life, because that by the
illumination of Gods holy Spirit, without the Ministry of the word, men might
be saved.

Tatian, An. 165.
he held that Adam was damned, called Marriage Fornication, prohibited eating
of flesh and drinking of wine, he held many Gods, denied Christ to be born of
David's Seed, and condemned the Law of Moses; he was Author of the Euchratitae.

Theodatus, a Cataphrygian, a poor Currier of Constantinople, he held that
Christ was but man, and begotten by man; besides which blasphemy he altered the
Gospel according to his own fancy. The Theodatiani denied the Divinity of
Christ, for when Theodatus having in time of persecution denied Jesus Christ,
was reproved for the same, An. 194.
he answered, that he denied not God, but Man, signifying thereby, that Christ
was only Man, and not God manifested in our Nature.

Theopaschitae, they held that the Divinity of Christ suffered. This Heresy
lasted long, An. 338.
and was maintained afterward by Eutyches and Dioscorus.

Triformiani, they held the Divine Nature one and the same in the three persons
together, An. 407.
but imperfect in the several persons.

Tritheitae, they held that the Nature and Essence of God was threefold, An 606.
and not one and the same. Johannes Grammaticus (called Philoponus) was the
Founder of this heresy.

Valentinian, An. 153.
an Egyptian, he held plurality of Gods, of both Sexes: a multitude of Heavens
and Eternities: that Christ assumed nothing from the Virgin, but passed through
her as by a Pipe: That he saved Souls only: That the World was made by evil
Angels: he denied the Resurrection: despised good works, as unprofitable, and
lived of things sacrificed to Idols. Against him Irenaeus wrote Five Books.

Valesii, An. 250.
of one Valens an Arabian; They held that none could be saved, but such as made
themselves Eunuchs, detested Marriage, but allowed all filthy Acts, yet gelded
themselves.

Venustiani, so called of their lascivious behavior; They were the same
Heretics that were called Paterniani from Paternus their Founder, and held the
same blasphemous and damnable Heresy.

Vigilantius, An. 406.
an Apostate Monk, he declined Churches, and condemned Virginity, and Spiritual
exercises. St. Hierome wrote against him.

(9.) All these Heretics do commonly pass under the notion of Christian
Heretics, whereas in truth they may more properly be termed Antichristian; yet
they are styled Christian Heretics in distinction to the Jewish Heretics, of
which sort were the Pharisees, the Sadduces, the Hessees, the Galilaeans, the
Hemerobaptists, the Nazaraeans, the Ossens, the Sampsaeans, the Massalians, the
Herodians, the Genites, the Merissaeans, the Coelicolae, the Ophitae or
Serpentines, the Caiani, the Sethiani, the Heliognosti, the Frogworshippers,
the Accaronites, the Thamuzites, the Samaritans, with many others, out of
which, or some of them, came that cursed Brood of Heretics which poisoned a
great part of the World in the succeeding Generations,

The Pharisees (from Phares, division, or separation, because they would be
accounted Separatists from all others Epiphan. Origin. Ambros. in Luc. l. 3.
Damasc. de Here Is. Suidas.
, attributed all things to Fate; they believed that God disposed all things,
but the Stars helped, yet so as Free Will was left in the hand of Man. They
held Transmigration of good Souls, or going into other Bodies; they conceived
that he which kept most of the Commandments, although he transgressed in some,
was just before God, with innumerable Pharisaical, Proud and Hypocritical
conceits and actions.

The Sadduces (either from Sedec, Justice, because they were fevere and
rigorous in Judgment Epiph. haer. 14. Lyra. in Act. 5.
; or of one Sadoch, the first Inventer of their Heresy Burgens. Addit. 1. in
Epist. Jac. 2. 10.
; or from both Serarius.
;) These Sadduces were called Minim or Minei, that is Heretics. They
interpreted the Scriptures after their own Sense, and rejected Traditions; they
denied a future Reward, and consequently the Resurrection; they denied also the
subsistence Spiritual; they cooped up God in Heaven, without all beholding of
evil; They denied Spirit altogether; for they held God to be corporeal Lyra. in
Acts. 23.
; the Soul to dye with the Body; the denied Angels and Devils; they ascribed
good and evil to a man's Free Will.

The Hessees, Essees, or Essens (either from a word which signifies Rest, or
Quietness, and Silence Scalig. Elench. c. 26.
or Essaei quasi (...) Holy Philo.
. They are placed by Pliny on the West of the Dead Sea Plin. l. 5. c. 17.
a people solitary, without women, without Money, they make no weapon of War,
nor meddle with Merchandise; they have no servants, but are all both free and
mutually servants to each other; they live perpetually chaste, counting
continence and contentment great Virtues; they swear not at all, and have all
things Common; they avoid pleasures and riches as sins; they marry nor, yet do
not deny the lawfulness of Marriage, but the honesty of Women; they shun Oil
and Neatness, yet always wear a white Garment; they neither buy nor sell, but
mutually communicate; they were worshippers of the Sun, for before the Sun
rises, they speak of no worldly matter, but celebrate certain Prayers, as
praying him to rise; they hate an Oath no less than Perjury; they keep the
Books of their own Opinions, and the names of the Angels; they give no Sentence
of Judgment, being fewer than one hundred Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.
; they will not so much as purge Nature on the Sabbath, for fear of profaning
it thereby Scaliger.
.

The Galilaeans, their Doctrine was, that only God was to be accounted their
Lord and Prince, and would rather endure any the most exquisite Tortures, than
call any mortal man their Lord; in other things they agreed with the Pharisees
Joseph. de Antiq. l. 18. c. 2. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.
.

The Hemerobaptists, so called from their being baptized or washed every day at
all times of the year; they were in their Doctrine of the Resurrection, and in
Infidelity like unto the Sadduces; in other things they differed not from the
Scribes and Pharisees Epiph. haer. 17.
.

The Nazaraeans, they would not eat any thing which had life, and held it
unlawful to eat Flesh: They disallowed the five Books of Moses: They placed all
Righteousness in Carnal Observations: And professing to imitate Sampson, they
nourished the hair of their head, placing all their Virtue therein Philastrius.
de haer.
.

The Ossens were an Issue of the Ancient Essens, holding some things of theirs,
as concerning the worshipping of Angels, and of the Sun, adding thereto other
Heresies of their own Epiph. haer. 19.
.

The Sampsaeans would not admit either the Apostles or the Prophets: They
worshipped Water, esteeming it as a God, believing that life is from thence
Epiph. haer. 53.
.

The Massalians were a Slip of the Essees, but after by Marriage with some
Pseudochristians, of Jewish became Christian Heretics Scal. ele. c. 28.
.

The Herodians thought Herod to be the Messiah, and entered into society for
costs and charges in Common, to be bestowed on Sacrifices and other
Solemnities, wherewith they honored Herod alive and dead Scal. ad Eusebius. p.
150.
.

The Genites or Genists stood upon their Stock and Kindred, because in the
Babylonish captivity, or after, they married not strange Wives, and therefore
boast themselves of the purity of Abraham's seed Bridenb.
.

The Merissaeans or Merists were (as the name imports) sprinklers of their Holy
Water; they made a division of the Scriptures, and received only some part
thereof Idem B^^^denb.
.

The Coelicoli were also an Offspring of the Essees, and from these proceeded
the Massalians, they were Jews, though they corruptly embraced Christianity;
and being baptized, revolted to their former Judaism, and retained the Rites of
these Coelicolae, or Heaven-worshippers; they had their places of prayer abroad
in the open air Scal. Elench. trib. Serar. c. 31.
.

The Ophitae or Serpentines worshipped a Serpent, saying, that he first
procured us the knowledge of Good and Evil, for which God envied him, and cast
him from the first Heaven into the second, whence they expect his coming,
esteeming him some virtue of God, and to be worshipped, Philastr. l. de Haeres.


The Caiani, which commend Cain for Fratricide, saying that Cain was made of
the power of the Devil, Abel of another power, but the greatest power was in
Cain to slay Abel Philastr.
.

The Sethiani were worshippers of Seth the Son of Adam, who affirmed, that two
men being created in the beginning, and the Angels dissenting, the Feminine
power prevailed in Heaven (for with them they held are Males and Females, Gods
and Goddesses) Eve perceiving that, brought forth Seth, and placed in him a
Spirit of great power, that the adversaries power might be destroyed. Of Seth
they held, that Christ should come of his Stock; yea some of them conceived him
to be the very Christ Id. Philast.
.

The Heliognosti were such as worshipped the Sun, and held that the Sun knew
all the things of God, and yielded all necessaries to men.

The Frogg-worshippers were such as held, that worship was due to those croking
Creatures, thereby thinking to appease Divine Wrath, which in Phara^h's time
brought Frogs upon the Land of Egypt.

The Accaronites were such as held that worship was to be performed unto a
Fly, and did worship it accordingly; probably for the same blind reason that
others of them worshipped Frogs; for Divine Wrath was executed by the one as
well as by the other.

The Thamuzites, of Thamuz, the Son of a heathen King; they held that his image
was to be worshipped and abroed; accordingly the Jewish Women that were
bewitched with this Heresy, worshipped this image of Thamuz with Tears and
continual Sacrifices; and held further that Pharaoh which ruled in Egypt in
Moses his time, was of that Name.

The Samaritans were those Jewish Heretics, who held (especially the Cuthaeans
among them) an abstinence from pollution by the Dead, or Bones, the Slain, and
the Sepulchers; they held washing their bodies and changing their vestments,
when they enter into the Synagogue; they held such Heretical opinions, that the
other Jews would have no dealings with them; they held that only the five Books
of Moses were Canonical Scripture, the rest they recived not; they held that
neither the Trinity, nor the Resurrection was to be acknowledged; they washed
themselves with Urine, when they came from any stranger, being thereby (as they
held) polluted; they held themselves profaned by the touch of one of another
Faith; and therefore if they touched one of another Nation, they dived
themselves, garments and all in Water; they held a dead Corpse in abomination
presently Epiph. Haer. 9.
. If they met a Jew, or Christian, they said Touch me not Drus. de 3. Sect. l.
2.
. They call themselves Men which belong to the Blessed Hill. They abstained
from things that have life, and some of them from Marriage. One Dosithens a
Samaritan is supposed to be the first Founder of the Samaritam Heresies, and
the first among them that rejected the Prophets, as not having spoken by the
Holy Ghost Tert. praescrip. advers. Haer. l. 1.
. There were four sects of Samaritan Heretics, according to Epiphanius, each
of them holding their different Heresies in some respects, and having in other
respects certain Heretical Tenants common to them all. By all which premises
it is most evident, that the Prince of Darkness, and the Father of Lies has
had in all Ages, Nations, and Churches, his Emissaries to infect them with
Heretical and Blasphemous Erros, but the Gates or Power of Hell to this day
never could, nor to Eternity ever shall prevail against the Truth.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Councils, Synods, and Convocations.
1. The several kinds of Councils and Synods. 2. What Canons in force in the
Realm of Primo. Ed. 6. Also how the Canons entitled Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum became abortive. 3. That part of the Canon Law, is part of the
Law of England. 4. Convocation in England, what how, and by what Authority, and
for what ends convened; also of what Members it does consist; with the
Authority thereof. 5. Convocations and Provincial Synods of very great
Antiquity in England; have been ever called by the Kings Writ; their
Privileges. 6. The Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions may not be
repugnant either to the Kings Prerogative, or to the Laws, Statutes, or
Customs of this Realm. 7. Lindwood's Method of Provincial Synods in this
Realm, and under what Archbishops. 8. The four several kinds of Councils and
Synods in general. 9. A compendious Catalogue thereof, when and where held, by
and under whom convened, with the principal matters therein treated and
determined.
(1.) OF Councils or Synods there are four kinds, viz. (1) Ecumenical, as
being called out diverse Nations. (2) National, as out of diverse Provinces, both
these kinds of Councils or Synods were ever assembled by Imperial, Regal, or
Papal Authority. (3). Provincial, as out of diverse Dioceses, convened by
Metropolitans or Patriarchs. (4) Diocesan, as out of one Diocese only,
assembled by the Bishop thereof. The frequent celebration of Synods the Council
of Basil calls praecipuam agri Domini culturam Touching Synods vid. Duar. de
Sacr. Eccl. minist. et benefic.

(2.) In the Reign of King Hen. 8. the Bishops and Clergy in the Convocation
an. 1532. obliged themselves neither to make nor execute any Canons or
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, but as they were thereto enabled by the Kings
Authority; it was by them desired, by him assented unto, and confirmed in
Parliament, that all such Canons and Constitutions Synodal and Provincial, as
were before in use, and neither repugnant to the word of God, the Kings
prerogative Royal, or the known Laws of the Land, should remain in force until
a Review thereof were made by 30 persons of the Kings appointment; which Review
not having been made from that time to the first year of King Edward 6. All the
said old Canons and Constitutions so restrained and qualified, did then still
remain in force, as before they were. For this consult the Act of Parliament of
25 H. 8. c. 1. And in the Third year of the said King Edward 6. there passed an
Act in Parliament, For enabling the King to nominate Eight Bishops, and as many
Temporal Lords, and Sixteen Members of the Lower House of Parliament, for
Reviewing of such Canons and Constitutions, as remained in force by virtue of
the Statute made in the 25th year of King H. 8. and fitting them for the use of
the Church in all times succeeding. According to which Act the King directed a
Commission to Archbishop Cranmer, and the rest of the Persons whom he thought
fit to nominate to that employment; and afterward appointed a Sub-Committee of
Eight persons to prepare the Work and make it ready for the rest, that it might
be dispatched with the more expedition: which said Eight persons were the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Goodrick Bishop of Ely, Dr. Cox the Kings
Almoner, Peter Martyr Dr. in Divinity, William May and Rowland Tailor Drs. of
Laws, John Lucas and Richard Goodrick Esquires; by whom the Work was undertaken
and digested, fashioned according to the method of the Roman Decretals, and
called by the name of Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, etc But not being
Commissionated hereunto till the Eleventh of November in the year 1551. they
either wanted time to Communicate to the chief Commissioners, by whom it was to
be presented to the King, or found the King encumbered with more weighty
Affairs, than to attend the perusal thereof. And so the King dying before he
had given life unto it by his Royal Assent and Signiture, the design
miscarried: Dr. Heyl. Hist. Eccl. de Temp. Ed. 6. p. 19. and 83.
and never since thought fit to be resumed in the following Times by any of
those who have had the Government of the Church, or were concerned in the
honor and safety thereof.

(3.) It is asserted by good Authority, Case Edes verse. the B. of Oxford, in
Sr. Jo. Vaughan's Rep. and Arg.
That if the Canon Law be made part of the Law of this Realm, then it is as
much the Law of the Land, and as well, and by the same Authority, as any other
part of the Law of the Land. Likewise in the Case of Shute against Higden,
touching Voidance of a Former Benefice by being Admitted and Instituted into a
Second, and that by the Ancient Canon Law received in this Kingdom, This (says
the same Authority) is the Law of the Kingdom in such cases And in the Case of
Hill against Good the same Author does further assert, That a Lawful: it must
also be supposed to be received into use and practice.
Lawful Canon is the Law of the Kingdom, as well as an Act of Parliament: And
whatever is the Law of the Kingdom, is as much the Law, as any thing else is
so; for what is Law, does not suscipere magis and minus Sr. J^. Vaughan's Rep.
and Arg.
Which Premises, though they may seem, yet are not inconsistent with what Sr.
Ed. Coke says, viz. That the Laws of England are not derived from any Foreign
Law, either Canon, Civil, or other, but a special Law appropriated to this
Kingdom Co. Inst. p. 3. ^. p. 36.
; That it may be said of its Law as of its situation, Et penitus toto divisos
Orbo Britannos.

(4) Convocation is the highest Ecclesiastical Court or Assembly, called and
convened in time of Parliament by the Kings Writ, directed to the Archbishops,
consisting of all the Clergy of both Provinces, either Personally or
Representatively present, in the Upper House of the Archbishops and Bishops,
and the Lower House of the other Clergy or their Proctors, chosen and appointed
to appear for Cathedral or other Collegiate Churches, and for the Common Clergy
of every Diocese, with a Prolocutor of each House, and President of the
Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, to consult of matters
Ecclesiastical, and thereon to Treat, Agree, Consent, and Conclude (as occasion
requires) on certain Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, to be ratified
and confirmed by the Royal Assent F. N. B. 269. b. Co. Inst. ^. Sect. 133. 21
H. 8. 1. 32 H. 8. 23. 33 H. 8. 31. Co. Inst. p. 4. ^. 74.
. They were Anciently called Church-gemote. Int. Leges H. 1. c. 8. The
Convocation is under the power and Authority of the King, 21 Ed. 4. 45. b.
Assembled only by the Kings Writ. 13 Ed. 3. Rot. Parl. M. 1. vid. Stat. 25 H.
8. c. 19. The King having directed his Writ (therein assigning the time and
place) to each of the Archbishops to the effect aforesaid, the Archbishop of
Canterbury does thereupon direct his Letters to the Bishop of London, as his
Dean, Lindw. Provin. Sec. 1. de Poenis. ver. Tanquam in Gloss. First Citing
himself peremptorily, then willing him to Cite in like manner all the Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and generally all the
Clergy of his Province to the Place at the day in the said Writ prefixed,
withal directing that one Proctor for every Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and
two for the other Clergy of each Diocese may suffice. In pursuance whereof the
Bishop of London directs his Letters accordingly, willing them to certify the
Archbishop the Names of all such as shall be so Monished by them, in a Schedule
annexed to their Letters Certificatory; whereupon the Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, and the other Churches having Elected their Proctors, it is certified
to the Bishop, who makes due Returns thereof; which method is likewise observed
in the other Province of York. It is said, That these Proctors anciently had
Place and Vote in the Lower House of Parliament 21 R. 2. c. 2. and 12. Cow.
Inter. ver. Proctors.
; a good expedient for the maintenance and preservation of the Liberties of the
Church. The Prolocutor of the Lower House of Convocation, is immediately at the
first Assembly by the motion of the Bishops, chosen by that Lower House, and
presented to the Bishops as their Prolocutor, by whom they intend to deliver
their Resolutions to the higher House, and to have their own House specially
ordered and governed: His Office is to cause the Clerk to call the Names of the
Members of that House, as often as he shall see cause; likewise to see all things
propounded to be read by him, to gather the Suffrages or Votes, and the like.
Trin. 8 Jac. It was Resolved by the two Chief Justices, and diverse other
Justices at a Committee before the Lords of Parliament, concerning the
Authority of a Convocation, (1) That a Convocation cannot Assemble without the
Assent of the King. (2) That after their Assembling, they cannot conferr to
constitute any Canons without License del Roy. (3) When upon Conference they
conclude any Canons, yet they cannot execute any of them without the Royal
Assent. (4) They cannot execute any after Royal Assent, but with these
Limitations, viz. (1) That they be not against the Kings Prerogative: (2) Nor
against Statute Law: (3) Nor against the Common Law: (4) Nor against the
Customs of the Realm. All which appears by 25 H. 8. c. 19. 19. Ed. 3. Title
Quare non Admisit, 7. 10. H. 7. 17. Merton, cap. 9. -- By 2 H. 6. 13. a
Convocation may make Constitutions to bind the Spiritualty, because they all in
person or by Representation are present, but not the Temporalty. Q. Q. Trin. 8
Jac. Convocation Case. Coke lib. 12.
And 21 Ed. 4. 47. the Convocation is Spiritual, and so are all their
Constitutions. Vid. The Records in Turri, 18 H. 8. 8 Ed. 1. 25 Ed. 1. 11 Ed. 2.
15 Ed. 2. Prohibitio Regis ne Clerus in Congregatione sua, etc. attemptet
contra jus seu Coronam, etc. By which it appears, that they can do nothing
against the Law of the Land, or the Kings Prerogative.

(5.) The word [ Convocation] and the word [ Synod] are rather words of two
Languages, than things of two significations; for although, they have different
derivations, the former from the Latin, the other from the Greek, yet in effect
they both center in the same thing. Convocation a Convocando, because they are
called together by the Kings Writ. It is of very great Antiquity according to
Sir Edward Coke, Co. Inst. p. 4. cap. 74.
who mentions out of Mr. Bid and other Authors and ancient Records, such as
were nigh a thousand years since, and more expressly of one great Synod held by
Austins Assembling the Britain Bishops in Council, An. 686. N^wburgh, l. 2. c.
13. Bract. l. 3. fo. 173, 124. 6 H. 3. Hol. 203. Rot. Par. 18 Ed. 3. nu. 1. and
Rot. Par. 2 H. 4. nu. 29 F. N. B. 269. 8 H. 6. c. 1. Co. Inst. page 4. cap. 74.
. And affirms, That the Clergy was never Assembled or called together at a
Convocation, but by the Kings Writ 18 Ed. 3. nu. 1. 13 Ed. 3. Rot. Par. 16. 24
Do. l. Cla^. 17. Ed. 3. nu. 30, 31. 25 H. 8. 1.
. And in the year 727. there was a Convocation of the Clergy, called Magna
Servorum Dei frequentia Int. L^ges (...) An. 727. Co. ubi supr.
. It was by the assistance and authority of Ethelbert, the first Christian King
of Kent, that Austin called the aforesaid Assembly of the British Bishops, and
Doctors, that had retained the Doctrine of the Gospel, to be held in the
borders of the Victians and West Saxons, about Southampton, as supposed, to
which resorted (as Mr. Bid says) Seven Bishops, and many other Learned
Divines; but this Synod or Convocation suddenly brake up without any thing done
or resolved Bid Hist. l. 2. c. 2. Galfrid. l. 8. c. 4.
. This Assembly was convened for determining the time for the Celebration of
Easter; touching which the Controversy continuing no less than 90 years after,
was at last concluded at another Convocation purposely called at Whitby by the
Authority of Oswy King of Northumberland, and whereof the Reverend Cedda, newly
Consecrated Bishop, was Prolocutor, and King Oswy himself present at the
Assembly Bid Hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
. Likewise about the year 1172. at Cassils in Ireland a Convocation was held by
Authority of King H. 2. soon after he had Conquered that Island, which
Convocation was for the Reformation of the Irish Church, where amongst many
other Constitutions it was Decreed, That all the Church Lands, and all their
Possessions, should be altogether free from the Exaction of Secular men, and
that from thenceforth all Divine things should be handled in every part of
Ireland in such sort, as the Church of England handles them Giral. Came. l. 1.
Hib. c. 31. and 34.
. Likewise about the year 1175. at London a Synod or Convocation was held, at
which King H. 2. was present, where among other Canons and Constitutions, it
was both by Authority of the King and Synod decreed, That every Patron taking a
Reward for any Presentation should for ever lose the Patronage thereof Hoved.
in H. 2. fo. 310.
. Which together with other Canons then made for the better government of the
Church of England, were Published by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, with the
Kings Assent Gervasins. Rog. Hoved.
. Likewise a Provincial Synod was held at Oxford by Stephen Langton Archbishop
of Canterbury under King H. 3. about the year 1222. for Reformation of the
Clergy Walsingh. in Ypod. Ranulph. Cestr. l. 7. c. 34.
, with many others, in subordination to the Laws of the Land. One special
Privilege of the Convocation appears by 8 H. 6. cap. 1. All the Clergy from
henceforth to be called to the Convocation by the Kings Writ, and their
Servants and Familiars shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such
liberty and Immunity in coming, tarrying, and returning, as the Great men and
Commonalty of the Realm of England, called or to be called to the Kings
Parliament, have used or ought to have or enjoy. 8 H. 6. In Parliamento
Statutum est, ut Praelati atque Clerici, c^rumque Famulatus, cum ad Synodos
accesserint, iisdem Privilegiis ac Immunitatibus gaudeant, quibus Milites and
Burgenses Parliamenti. Ant. Brit. fo. 284. nu. 30.

(6.) The Jurisdiction of the Convocation in this Realm, though relating to
matters merely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, yet is subordinate to the
established Laws of the Land; it being Provided by the Statute of 25 H. 8. c.
19. That no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances shall be made or put in
execution within this Realm by Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy,
repugnant to the Prerogative Royal, or to the Customs, Laws, or Statutes of
this Realm. To the same effect was that of 9 Ed. 1. Rot. Parl. Memb. 6.
Inhibitio Archiepiscopo, and omnibus Episcopis, and aliis Praelatis apud
Lambeth Conventuris, ne aliquid statuant in praejudicium Regis, Coronam, vel
dignitatem. For although the Archbishop and the Bishops, and the rest of the
Clergy of his Province, 20 H. 6. 13. Newton.
Assembled in a Synod, have power to make Constitutions in Spiritual things,
yet they ought to be Assembled by Authority of the King, St. 25 H. 8. c. 19.
and to have (as aforesaid) his Royal Assent to their Constitutions; which
being had and obtained, the Canons of the Church, made by the Convocation and
the King, without Parliament, shall bind in all matters Ecclesiastical, as well
as an Act of Parliament, as was Resolved in Bird and Smiths Case Bird verse.
Smith. Mores Rep.
. Although the Saxons, who founded and endowed most of our Churches, and made
many good Laws in reference to the Jurisdiction power, and privileges thereof;
yet the Royal Prerogative, with the Laws and Customs of the Realm, were ever
so preserved, as not to be invaded thereby: King AEthelbert the first Saxon
King, King Ina, AEthelstane, Edmund, Edgar, and King Kanute, all these made
Laws in favor of the Church, but none of them ever entrenched on the
Prerogative of the Crown, or on the Laws, or Customs of the Realm; nor any of
those ancient Church-Laws ever made without the Supreme Authority to ratify
and confirm the same.

(7.) The Laws and Constitutions whereby the Ecclesiastical Government is
supported, and the Church of England governed, are the General Canons made by
General Councils, also the Arbitria Sanctorum Patrum, the Decrees of several
Archbishops and Bishops, the Ancient Constitutions made in our several
Provincial Synods, either by the Legates Otho and Othobon, or by several
Archbishops of Canterbury. All which by the 25 H. 8. are in force in England,
so far as they are not repugnant to the Kings Prerogative, the Laws and
Customs of England. Also the Canons made in Convocations of Later times, as
Primo Jacobi Regis, and confirmed by his Regal Authority: Also in some Statutes
Enacted by Parliament touching Ecclesiastical affairs; together with diverse
Customs not written, but in use beyond the memory of Man; and where these
fail, the Civil Law takes place. Among the Britain Councils (according to
Bishop Prideaux his Synopsis of Councils, Edit. 5.) those amongst the rest are
of most remark, viz. At Winchester, in King Edgars time under Dunstane: at
Oxford, by Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury: at Claringdon under King
Henry the Second. The Council under King Edward the 6 th. in which the 39
Articles of the English Confession was concluded and confirmed. The Synod under
the same King, from which we receive the English Liturgy which now we have,
composed by Seven Bishops and Four Doctors, and confirmed by the public
consent of the Church, which (as also the said 39 Articles) the succeeding
Princes, Queen Eliz. King James, and King Charles, ratified and commended to
Posterity. At London a Synod, in which 141 Canons or Constitutions, relating to
the pious and peaceable Government of the Church, presented to King James by
the Synod, and confirmed by his Regal Authority: and at Perth in Scotland,
where were Articles concerning Administering the Sacrament to the Sick, Private
Baptism where Necessity requires, Confirmation, admitting Festivals, Kneeling
at the Receiving the Sacrament, and an allowance of Venerable Customs. But de
Council. Britan. vid. D. Spelman. The Ancient Canons of the Church and
Provincial Constitutions of this Realm of England, were according to Lindwood
the Canonist (who, being Dean of the Arches, compiled and explained the same in
the time of King H. 6.) made in this order or method, and under these
Archbishops of Canterbury, viz. The Canons or Constitutions

1. Of Stephen Langton, Cardinal, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Council at
Oxford, in the year of our Lord 1222, who distinguished the Bible into Chapters.

2. Of Otho, Cardinal, the Popes Legate in Anno 1236. on whose Constitutions
John de Athon Dr. of Laws, and one of the Canons of Lincoln, did comment or
gloss.

3. Of Boniface Archbishop of Cant. 1260.

4. Of Othobon, Cardinal of St. Adrian, and Legate of the Apostolical Chair; on
whose Constitutions the said John de Athon did likewise Glossematize. His
Canons were made at London in Anno 1268.

5. Of John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury; at a Synod held at Reding, An.
1279.

6. Of the same Peckham, at a Synod held at Lambeth, An. 1281.

7. Of Robert Winchelse, Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 1305.

8. Of Walter Reynold, Archbishop of Canterbury, at a Synod held at Oxford, An.
1322. These Constitutions in some Books are ascribed to Simon Mepham, but
erroneously; for the date of these Constitutions being An. 1322. the said
Walter Reynold (according to the Chronicle) died in An. 1327. and was succeeded
by Simon Mepham.

9. Of Simon Mepham Archbishop of Cant. An. 1328.

10. Of John Stradford, Archbishop, An. 13...

11. Of Simon Islepe, Sudbury, L. Chancellor, he was Beheaded by the Rebels of
Wat. Tyler. Arundel, Lord Chanc. Chichley, Cardinal.
Archbishop, An. 1362.

12. Of Simon Sudbury, Archbishop, An. 1378.

13. Of Tho. Arundel, Archbishop, at a Synod or Council held at Oxford, An.
1408.

14. Of Henry Chichley, Archbishop, An. 1415.

15. Of Edmond, Archbishop of Canterbury.

16. Of Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Dates of the Canons or Constitutions of these Two last Lindwood makes no
mention, by reason of the uncertainty thereof; but withal says, it is clear,
That Richard did immediately succeed the foresaid Stephen Langton, and the said
Edmond succeeded Richard. Lindw. de Poen. c. ad haec. and infra, in verb.
Mimime admittatur. If so, then it was most probably Richard Wethershed, who was
Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 1229. And St. Edmond Chancellor of Oxford, who
was Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 1234. H^yl. Hist. verb. Canterbury.
.

(8.) Councils were either General, or Ecumenical from (...), whereunto
Commissioners by the Emperors Authority were sent from all quarters of the
World, where Christ has been preached: Or National: National, are such as
comprehend the Provincials of every Metro sitan or Diocesan Bishop within their
own Limits.
or Provincial: or Particular, by Bullenger called (...); such were the
Councils of Gangra, Neo-caesarea, and many others, commonly Assembled by
Patriarchs and Bishops in some particular place of a Country. The ends of
these Councils chiefly were, either for the suppression of Heresies, the
decision of Controversies, the appeasing of Schisms, or the Ordaining of Canons
and Constitutions for decency of Order in the Church. Vid. AElfrici Canones ad
Wulfinum Episcopum. Can. 33. where it is said, That there were Four Synods for
the defense of the True Faith against those Heretics, who belched out their
Blasphemies against the Holy Trinity, and the Humane Nature of our Savior; the
First whereof was at Nice: another after that at Constantinople, consisting of
a hundred and fifty Bishops: the Third at Ephesus, of two hundred Bishops: the
Fourth at Chalcedon, where many hundreds of Bishops were present; and they all
with an unanimous Consent confirmed all those Decrees which were made in the
Nicene Council. These Four Synods (says the said Canon) are so to be observed
by the Church of Christ, ut Quatuor Christi Codices. There were many other
Synods about the same time, but these Four were of the best Authority.

At Jerusalem in the First Century the Apostles, At Jerusalem, Cent. 1.
Elders, and Brethren held a Council against some Pharisees touching
Circumcision, in the Fourth year of the Reign of the Emperor Claudius. The
Apostles celebrated also certain Councils for the substituting of Matthias in
the place of Judas, Act. 1. For the Election of Seven Deacons -- Act. 6. For
not pressing the Ceremonial Law, Act. 15. 11 For the toleration of some Legal
Observations only for a time, Act. 21. 18. To these some will have to be added
a Meeting by the Apostles, wherein was composed the Apostles Creed. Also
another Assembly of the Apostles, which did obtrude to the Church 85 Canons
under the notion of the Apostles Authority, concerning which there are various
Controversies. In this Century there were also Two Synods summoned in Asia, for
the Reformation of the Churches, and Consecration of Bishops, at which John the
Evangelist was present. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 20.

At Ancyra in Galatia in the Second Century was Assembled a Synod of diverse
Bishops, At Ancyra, Cent. 2.
wherein the Figments of Montanus were confuted. In this Synod Montanus was
Excommunicated, and his Heresy condemned. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14. In this
Century, viz. An. 195. Six several Synods were held about the Observation of
Easter, viz. At Rome in Victors time: at Caesarea in Palestina: at Pontus: in
France, where Irenaeus was chief: in Ostroena and at Ephesus. In all which
Synods it is observed, That the Bishop of Rome had no more Authority than the
other Bishops. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.

In the Third Century there were Eight or Nine Synods of Remark, viz. Eusebius. l.
6. c. 32. At Bostra, Cent. 3.
At Bastra, where Beryllus was confuted by Origin: at Rome in the time of
Fabianus, where the Schism of Novatus was removed: another at Rome in the time
of Cornelius, wherein Novatus the Heretic was condemned: Ibid. cap 42. Ibid.
c. 45. Id. lib. 7. c. 3. Ibid. c. 6.
at Antioch, where Novatus was condemned again: at Carthage, which erred about
the Re-baptizing of Heretics: at Iconium, for receiving of Heretics after
Repentance: at Antioch again, where Samosatenus was condemned; this was about
the Twelfth year of Galienus: Another at the same place under Aurelianus, Ibid.
cap. 26, 28, 29.
where he was condemned again, and deprived of his Church. And at Sinuessa,
consisting of 300 Bishops, where Marcellinus Bishop of Rome was condemned for
denying Christ, and sacrificing to Idols. Tom. 1. Council.

At Ancyra in the Fourth Century, At Ancyra, Cent. 4. An. 308.
about the year 308 were assembled Bishops of diverse Provinces, to constitute a
form of Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to which they who had Sacrificed
to Idols in time of Persecution, were to be received again upon their
Repentance. In this Council also it was Ordained, That Chorepiscopi, that is,
Countrey-Bishops, or Vicarii Episcoporum, should abstain from Ordination of
Elders and Deacons, and from usurping of dominion over the Preaching Elders,
who were in Cities. This Council was subscribed by Eighteen Bishops.

At Nicea in Bithynia, The first, at Nice, An. 330, or 333.
Assembled by the Authority of Constantine the Great, a General Council,
consisting of 318 Bishops: The exact time when it began Historians do not
agree, some conceive it was A. D. 325. So Hillar. Socort. l. 2. c. 29. Others,
359. So Baron. N. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3.
27. Others, 330. and others referr the year to 333. But Eusebius computeth it
to be in the Twentieth year of Constantines Reign. It was also in the time of
Julius the First, and Silvester, Popes. Three things especially are reported to
be condemned by this Famous Council. 1. The Arrian Heresy, Blasphemously
denying to Son to be Coeternal and Co-essential with the Father. 2. The
dissent of the Eastern from the Western Christians about the celebration of the
Passover, in a manner different from the Jewish Custom; and it was concluded
in this Council, That the Feast of Easter should be kept on the Lords Day, and
not on the Fourteenth day of the First Month of the Jews called Nisan. Ruffin.
l. 1. c. 6.
3. The Schismatical dissentions of the Melitians and Novatians. In this
Council the Emperor burnt all the Accusations which the Bishops brought
against each other, as unworthy to be seen. Of this Council it is anciently
Recorded, That Constantinus Imperator congregavit in Nicaea Civitate 318.
Episcopos ex omnibus Nationibus ad Confirmandum fidem Catholicam. Ita in Tertio
Can. AElfrici ad Wulfin. Episcop.

At Tyrus in the Fourth Century was convened a National Council by Constantine
the Emperor, At Tyrus Cent. 4.
in the Thirtieth year of his Reign, wherein were 60 Bishops from Egypt, Lybia,
Asia, and Europe; the major part whereof were Arrians, who charging Athanasius
with false Accusations, deposed him in his absence; whose Deposition Arsenias
subscribed with the same hand, Socrat.
which the Arrians alleged was cut off by Athanasius.

At Gangra in Paphlagonia about the year 324. At Gangra. An. 324.
were assembled about Sixteen Fathers; in which Council were damned the
heretical Opinions of Eustathius, who admiring the Monastic life, or favoring
the heresy of Eucratitae and the Manichaeans, spoke against Marriage, and
eating of Flesh, and damned the public Congregations for the Service of God in
Temples, saying, a man could not be saved unless he forsook all his Possessions.

About this time there was a Council at Antiochia, At Antioch.
wherein the Arrians deposed Eustatius. As also a Council at Arles, wherein
Cecilianus was absolved from the Accusation of the Donatists. At Arles.


At Eliberis in Spain in the time of Constantines Reign, At Eliberis.
were assembled 19 Bishops and 36 Presbyters. Among the 81 Canons made in this
Synod, it was Ordained in the 36 Canon, That nothing that is worshipped should
be Pictured on a Wall; and that in Private Houses no Idols should be found.

At Carthage, At Carthage.
the First Council there (wherein St. Cyprian, with the Advice of many other
Bishops of Numidia, Lybia, and other parts of Africa, Ordained those who were
Baptized by Heretics, to be Rebaptized) was not held under the Reign of
Constantine, for that St. Council. To. 1.
Cyprian was Martyred in Valexians days, the Eighth Persecuting Emperor; but
the first Council of Carthage held in Constantines days, was that wherein the
Donatists condemned Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, whose innocence was made
afterward to appear.

At Antioch, At Antioch, An. 340, or 344.
the First Council there was held by Arrians under the Reign of Constantinus,
Son of Constantine, in the year 340 or 344. This being one of the Councils,
which either determine Heretical Opinions, or raise up Schisms and Troubles to
the dispersing of the Christian Flock, does not undeservedly pass under the
name or notion of one of the Rejected Councils. To this Assembly resorted 90
Bishops, under pretense of Dedicating the Church of Antioch, built by
Constantine, when in truth their principal design was to eject Athanasius out
of his Chair, and to subvert that Systeme of Faith, which was set down in the
Nicene Council. This Council of Antioch is to be distinguished from Five others
which Bellarmine reckons; Longus also does name this, and mentions other
Councils of Antioch. But this Council is referred to the time of Constantinus,
and Julius the First. Athanasius being restored from Banishment by Constantine,
the Son of Constantine the Great, the Arrians declare it to be unlawful,
because the same Authority which did eject, must restore: This matter therefore
being referred to Pope Julius, he Summons the Synod to appear at Rome. But the
Eusebians, chief of the Heretics, that they might avoid this, did without much
difficulty seduce Constantius to be at the Consecration of the Magnificent
Temple built by Constantine the Great at Antioch: where were met about 90
Bishops, as aforesaid, 30 whereof being Arrians, the favor and Authority of
the Emperor, against the double Suffrages of the Orthodox procured the
condemning of Restored Athanasius. It is said of this Council, That they did
set forth a Form of Belief so intermixed with Truth and Error, that he which is
heedful lest he be deceived, Socrat. l. 2. c. 5.
in his greatest warlness can scarcely be safe; for by the omission of what
might establish the Truth, Sozom l. 3. c. 5.
they weaken that which they undertake to maintain. To this Council probably
may be referred Two other Councils, At Antioch. An. 348.
which some report to have been held also at Antioch about the year 348. the
former whereof was occasioned by the favor, which Julius Bishop of Rome showed
to Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, and other Bishops. In the other the Arrians
did set forth a new Sum of their Faith, which being sent to the Bishops of
Italy, was refused by them, adhering to that of the Nicene Council.

At Sardis in Illyricum in the year 351. At Sardin, An. 351.
by the Command of Constantius and his Brother Constans a great National
Council was Assembled, consisting of 376 Bishops, whereof Three hundred were
from the West, and Seventy six from the East, from Thirty five Provinces in
all. The Three hundred Western Bishops confirmed the Nicene Creed, to this end,
That Athanasius, who was Banished Rome for the space of Three years, should be
restored to his Place at Alexandria; but the other Seventy six Arrians meeting
at Philippolis confirmed Arrianism under the Title of the Council of Sardis. In
this Council by reason of the Arrian Faction, and from thence forward, were
added different Affections to different Opinions. Vid. Bish. Prideaux Synops.
of Councils.
In this Council, which is commonly called an Appendix to the First Nicene
Council, were ratified 21 Canons under Pope Julius.

At Sirmium in Illyria in the year 356. At Sirmium, An. 356.
by Command of the Emperor Constantius a Council was held, where were present
besides Eastern, Three hundred Western Bishops and upwards for the hearing and
deciding the Cause of Photius, who complained to the Emperor that he was
unjustly condemned at the Synod of Sardis, although he had preached that Christ
was mere man, and inferior to his Mother. dict. Synops.
This Council at Sirmium so groaned under the Arrian Tyranny of Constantius,
that the Supremacy and Presidentship of Pope Liberius dared not to appear;
Photius Bishop of Sirmium having renewed the Heresies of Sabellius and
Samosatenus: Vid. Socrat. l. 1. c. 24.
Of this Council (says Longus) there is nothing extant besides Three Forms of
Belief, S^zom. l. 4. c. 5, and 6.
which are found in Binius. In this Synod there was a hot Dispute between
Basilius Bishop of Ancyra, Epiph. Haer. 7.
an Arrian Heretic, and the said Photius a Sabellian Heretic.

At Millain in the year 355. At Millain, An. 355.
at the instance of the Arrians a Council consisting of Three hundred of the
Occidental Bishops at the command of Constantius was Assembled, Socrat. l. 2.
c. 36.
who (after that the Emperor Constans was slain by Magnentius) had the whole
Sovereignty both of the East and West in his hands. This Council was convened
partly for ratification of the Sentence pronounced against Athanasius at Tyrus,
T^eed. l. 2. c. 15.
and partly for subversion of the Nicene Faith, but prevailed in neither. In
this Council the Emperor himself was President, Liberius being Pope; I (says
the Emperor in this Council) am an Accuser of Athanasius. The Western
Catholic Bishops there present (for there were few Eastern) promised to
consent to the Arrians, if they would first subscribe to the Nicene Creed. But
Valence and Vrsacius, the chief Leaders of that Faction withstood them. Then
followed the degrading of the Bishops, and the corrupt Ecclesiastical
determination. This was effected especially that they might allure Liberius
Bishop of Rome, either by Gifts or Threats to their way, who is reported thus
Heroically to have Answered the Emperor (who had judged him to be Banished to
Thrace, and offered him the charge of his Journey) viz. Thou have robbed the
Churches of the Earth, and now offerest to me Condemned an Indigent an Alms; Go
first and become a Christian thy self.

At Ariminum in Italy about the year 363. At Ariminum. An. 363.
was held a National Council, consisting of more than Four hundred Western
Bishops, under the Emperor Constantius in the 22 d year of his Reign, at the
motion of the Arrians, to whose Opinions the said Emperor was flexible enough;
but the major part of the said Bishops rejecting the motions made in favor of
the Arrian Error, touching the Son of God, adhered closely to the Nicene Faith.
This Ariminum is (it seems) Famous for Two Councils; the one Orthodox, and
lawfully called, which is that aforementioned. The other Heretical and
Tyrannical, craftily called by the Arrians under the notion of the Council held
at Ariminum, that this False one might extinguish the True one; whereof the
greater part determined the Nicene Creed punctually to be observed, and the
Sons equality with the Father in Essence to be asserted: The Decrees of the
Synod at Sirmium to be rejected: and Vrsacius and Valence with the Arrians,
their Followers, to be Excommunicated.

At Seleucia in Isauria, At Selencia, An. 363.
which lies between Lycania and Cilcia, whence Paul and Barnabas sailed to
Cyprus, Act. 13. 4. was a Council of 160 Oriental Bishops, held the same year
wherein the said National Council of Ariminum was held, viz. An. 363. The
business of this Council, procured (as the former) by the Arrians, was much
prevented by a Contest arising touching precedence of Debates, as whether the
matter of Faith, or the Lives of such as were to be accused, should first fall
under Examination. At this time there being Convened at Ariminum 600 Bishops
(according to Bellarmine out of the Chron. of Jerome) of which the Eastern
Heterodox being overpowr'd both in Number and Arguments by the Orthodox, the
Emperor Constantius removes them unto Seleucia in Isauria aforesaid. Here the
Acatians altogether reject Consubstantiality, the Semi-Arrians admit it in
their sense: In this diffention the Semi-Arrians prevail, and determine, That
the Form of Faith composed at the Dedication at Antioch, should be retained and
subscribed unto; but they ejected the dissenting Acatians or Arrians from their
places.

At Constantinople, At Constantinople.
where the Acatians remained after the Council at Seleucia, were Assembled by
them about 50 Bishops out of Bythinia and other adjacent parts. In this Synod
they confirmed the Sum of Faith read in the Council of Ariminum.

At Antioch in the 25 th year of Constantius his Reign another Council was
Convened, At Antioch.
with design or ordering matters so, that for the time to come no man should
call the Son of God Consubstantial with the Father, nor yet of a different
substance from the Father; but neither in this Council could the Arrians
perfect their intended purpose of inventing a new Sum of Faith.

At Laodicea, At Laodicea, An. 368.
not that Laodicea nigh Antioch in Syria, but at Laodicea the Metropolis of
Phyrgia, and one of the Seven Churches of Asia, to which John in his Banishment
wrote from Patmos, At this Laedicea a Synod was assembled about the year 368.
wherein nothing was determined concerning matters of Faith, only the
Worshipping of Angels was damned as an horrible Idolatry, and a forsaking of
Christ; also the Books of the Canonical Scriptures were particularly set forth,
wherein no mention was made of the Books of the Machabees, of Ecclesiasticus,
or other Apocryphal Books.

In Illyricum about the year 370 under the Emperors Valentinian and Valens, In
Illyricum, An. 370.
not yet infected with the Arrian Heresy, was held a Council, wherein the
Nicene Faith had confirmation and allowance.

At Lampsacum nigh the Hellespont under the Emperor Valens was a Synod of
Macedonian Heretics, At Lampsacum.
who ratified the Council of Seleucia, Socrat. l. 4. c. 6.
and damned that of Constantinople by the Acatians. Sozom. l. 6. c. 7.


At Rome under the Emperor Valentinian in the West, At Rome. Theod. l. 2. c.
22.
Damasus Bishop of Rome Convened a Council, wherein was confirmed the Nicene
Faith.

At Constantinople in the year 383 under Theodosius the Emperor, was a General
Council held, At Constantinop. An. 383.
consisting of 150 Bishops, whereof 36 were infected with the Macedonian
Heresy, which blasphemously held the Holy Ghost to be a Creature, Theod. l. 5.
c. 6.
a Minister and Servant, not Consubstantial with the Father and the Son. From
this Council the said Heretics having withdrawn themselves; they which
remained in Council damned the Heresy of Macedonius, and confirmed the Nicene
Faith, with ampliation of that part of the Symbol which concerned the Holy
Ghost, in this manner, viz. I believe in the Holy Spirit our Lord, Giver of
life, who proceeds from the Father, and with the Father and the Son is to be
worshipped and glorified. This Council was held under Gratian and Theodosius
the Great, and Damasus. They condemned and discharged Macedonius Bishop of
Constantinople, Longus ex Lombard 1. ^em. D. 11. Bonavent. and aliis. Theod.
Hist. l. 5. c. 6. and c. 10.
for his perfidious opposing the Deity of the Holy Ghost, together with Maximus
Cynicus by reason of his Doctrine against Discipline. The Emperor nulled all
Confessions, except that of those who acknowledged Christ Coessential with the
Father, which our present Liturgy retains under the name of the Nicene Creed.
It is thought that Gregory Nazianzen compiled it, according to the sense of the
Synod.

At Constantinople under Theodosius another Council was held, At Constantinople.
whence a Synodick Letter was sent to the Bishops then Convened at Rome, Theod.
l. 5. c. 9.
declaring the troubles they sustained by Heretics; and as to matters of
Discipline recommended unto them the Canons of the Council of Nice.

At Constantinople in the Fifth year of Theodosius his Reign, At Constantinople.
a great National Council was again Convened, wherein the Heretics were
divided among themselves touching what Credit they should give in matters of
Faith to the Fathers that preceded their time; whereupon that good Emperor
rent in pieces the Sums of the Arrian, Eunomian, and Macedonian Faith, and
Ordained the Homousian Faith only to take place.

At Carthage the Second Council was assembled under Theodosius, At Carthage.
nigh the time of the foresaid General Council held at Constantinople, wherein
the Nicene Faith was confirmed, abstinence from Matrimonial Society with
Infidels and Heretics recommended to Ecclesiastical persons.

At Nice there was another Council An. At Nice, An. 181.
181. under Constantine, which wholly restored the Images and Statues of Irene,
together with the Relics formerly broken in pieces by Leo Isaurus his
Grandfather, and Constantine Copronymus his Great Grandfather, the business
being chiefly promoted by Gregory the Second and the Third, together with
Adrian the First, and Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople. There met at this
Council (which is one of the Greek or Eastern Ecumenical Councils) 350
Bishops, who with the said Tarasius President of the said Council, by 22 Canons
condemned Image-breakers for Heretics. Bellarmine and Baronius imagine, that
this Synod was condemned by the Fathers at the Council of Franckfort under
Charles the Great, which yet is denied by Binnius, Surius, and others,
according to Longus, page 632.

At Carthage a Third Council was Assembled in the year 399, At Carthage, An.
399.
at which Augustine Bishop of Hippo was present, wherein it was ( inter alia)
Ordained, Can. 40.
That the Bishop of Rome should be called the Bishop of the First Seat, but not
the High Priest, or the Prince of Priests. Can. 47.
Likewise, That nothing except the holy Canonical Scriptures should be read in
Churches under the notion of Holy Books.

At Carthage a Fourth National Council was held under the Reign of Honorius
about the year 401. At Carthage, An. 401.
consisting of 214 Bishops, at which Augustine Bishop of Hippo was also
present, and wherein were nigh as many Canons made as were Bishops assembled;
wherein among other things it was Ordained, That a Bishop should admit no man
to a Spiritual Office without Advice of the Clergy; Can. 22, 23. 95.
nor pronounce any Sentence without such Advice: That Refusers to pay unto the
Church the Oblations of persons Deceased, should be Excommunicated. Whereby it
appears, That Oblationes Defunctorum were not Soul-Masses said for the Dead,
but Charity by way of Testamental Legacies.

At Cyprus under the Reigns of Arcadius and Honorius was Assembled a Council by
Epiphanius. At Cypru:
And at Alexandria by Theophilus, under pretense of damning the Books of
Origin. Alexandria.
Also at Constantinople by the malice of Eudoxia, Constantinople.
the Wife of Arcadius the Emperor, to depose John Chrysostom Bishop of
Constantinople.

At Carthage about the year 419. a Fifth Council was held, At Carthage, An. 419.
wherein the Opinions of Pelagius and Coelestius were damned as Heretical; and
whereby it was Declared, That the Adoration of Relics was at this time the
Custom of Ethnicks, and Appointed, That Supplication should be made to the
Emperors; That such Relics as were found in Images, Groves, and Trees, or
elsewhere, should be abolished.

At Toledo in Spain under the Reigns of Arcadius and Honorius, At Toledo.
was a Council assembled for Confirmation of the Nicene Council, and refutation
of some Errors.

At Melevitum in Numidia was Assembled under the Reign of Arcadius a Council,
At Melevitum.
whereof St. Augustine was President; which was Assembled chiefly to finish the
work begun at the Fifth Council of Carthage, in condemning the Heresies of
Pelagius and Coelestius, concerning the power of Man's Nature, Can. 22.
not supported by the Grace of God, and Free Will of Man to do good of it self;
as also to inhibit Appeals to Bishops beyond Sea, on pain of being secluded
from the Communion of all African Bishops.

At Carthage in the year 402 under Honorius and Theodosius the Second; At
Carthage An. 402.
a National Council of 217 Bishops was assembled, which continued for the space
of Six years: The business of this Council was prevented by a Controversy
happening between them and the Bishops of Rome, who successively endeavored
(but not successfully) to persuade the African Bishops, Hist. Magd. Cent. 5.
cap. 9.
that they were under the Sovereignty and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome;
to whom this Council would not allow of any Appeal from the Bishops of Africa.

At Bagaia in Africa about the year 433. At Daga^a, An. 433.
certain Donatists to the Number of 310 assembled themselves in Council,
chiefly for the deposition of Maximinianus, Bishop of Bagaia, whom they Deposed
and Accursed, because he had renounced their Heresy, and had recovered many
others from the Error of that way.

At Ephesus in the year 434. At Ephesus, An. 434.
and in the Eighth year of the Reign of Theodosius the Second, by some called
Theodosius the Younger, was a General Council assembled against the Heretic
Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople; which Council consisted of above Two
hundred Bishops, by Command from the Emperor: By which Council Nostorius, for
his Heresy in denying the Son of the Virgin Mary to be God, and consequently
the Personal Union of the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ, was Banished to
Oasis. This was the first General Council of Ephesus, promoted by Celestine the
First, wherein Two hundred Bishops (as aforesaid) condemned Nestorius together
with Carisius his flattering Presbyter, who instead of Two Natures acknowledged
diverse Persons in Christ, and therefore pleaded that the Blessed Virgin Mary
should be styled (...) only, The Mother of Christ, not The Mother of God.
and not (...). In this Council Cyrillus of Alexandria is recorded President,
whom Nestorius, being piously and brotherly invited to a better Opinion proudly
contemned, and having craftily allured John of Antioch to his party,
Anathematized him and the Council, who had formerly Anathematized him. The
matter being related to the Emperor, and thoroughly understood, Cyrillus and
his are cleared, but Nestorius with his party is Banished (as aforesaid) to
Oasis, a Sandy Habitation, where like another Cain (says a Modern Historian)
roving here and there, Blaspheming, at length his Tongue being consumed and
eaten up by Worms, he breathed out his last. There are (it seems) two Copies of
this Council, Vid. Liberat. in Breviar. cap. 11.
the First observing Eight, the Second Thirteen Canons, which are comprehended
in the Anathema's of Cyrillus. The Massilianites, termed also Euchites and
Enthusiasts, were condemned by this Council, and thereby the integrity of the
Nicene Creed confirmed.

At Ephesus under Theodosius the Second was likewise a Particular Council
assembled by Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, At Ephesus. an. 440.
who condemned Eutyches an Abbot of Constantinople, for Affirming, That in
Christ, after the Union of the Divine and Humane Natures, there were no longer
Two Natures; which absurd Opinion Flavianus damned as Heretical. So that the
occasion of this Second Council of Ephisus, An. 449. was this Eutyches, an
Archimandrite of Constantinople, who after Manes and Apollinaris denied the
Flesh of Christ to be like ours, but affirmed, that falling from heaven like
the Rays of the Sun, it penetrated the Virgins womb. And so he denied that Two
Natures were in Christ Incarnate; but asserted, that his Flesh was changed into
his Divinity: for which he was (as aforesaid) condemned by Flavianus Patriarch
of Constantinople, and Eusebius Bishop of Doril, and others their Associates;
yet by the help of Chrysaphius the Eunuch, and Eudoxia the Empress, whom he had
seduced, he prevailed with Theodosius, that the matter might be determined by a
Famous Synod; for which reason this at Ephesus by the Emperors Authority was
called, where 128 Bishops met, Dioscorus of Alexandria being President, one so
full of Eutychianism, Vid. Liberat. in Breviar. cap. 12. Evang. l. c. 9. 10.
Niceph. l. 14. c. 57.
that Eutyches is absolved, and the reclaimers forced (says the Historian) to
subscribe by Club-Arguments. Flavianus opposing it, was so suriously trodden
upon, that three days after he died; besides, many very Learned Bishops
discharged of their Places; yet not long after all this was dashed in pieces by
the most Famous Council of Chalcedon.

At Berytus in Phoenicia was held a Council about this time, At Berytus.
where in the Cause of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, whom Dioscorus had deposed, was
revived, and himself justified and absolved.

At Agatha in France was a Council held, At Agatha,
wherein nothing was more remarkable, than that they had liberty to meet
together by the Command of Alaricus King of Goths, who at that time had the
Sovereignty in that parr of France called Gallia Norbonensis; whence it
appears, That Councils both General and National, were in all Countries
Convened by the Authority of Sovereign Princes.

At Chalcedon in Bythinia in the year 455. At Chalcedon, An. 455.
and in the Fourth year of Marcianus the Emperor was a General Council, at
which was present in person the Emperor, and 630 Bishops and Reverend Fathers
from most parts of the World. In this Council Dioscorns Bishop of Alexandria,
together with Eutyches and Juvenalis Bishops at Jerusalem, was condemned as an
Heretic, for absolving the Heretic Eutyches in the Council at Ephesus, and
acting other Crimes, whereof he was then accused. In this Council it was
Ordained, That men should believe, that the Natures of Christ, albeit that they
were united, yet were they not confounded, as Eutyches had Heretically
affirmed. Also in this Council it was Ordained, That Anatelius Bishop of
Constantinople and his Successors, should have the chief Dignity next unto the
Chair of Rome. This Council was called by the said Emperor Martianus against
the said Eutyches, Abbot of Constantinople, and his Champion Dioscorus of
Alexandria; the suppositious Acts of the Council held at Ephesus were condemned
by this Council, those of Ephesus being in favor of Eutyches, who affirmed one
only Nature to be in Christ, viz. his Divine Nature, after his Incarnation. It
is not clear or certain, who was President of this Council of Chalcedon,
excepting the Emperor, and Judges Moderators: The matters thereof were for the
most part by favoring parties between Leo the First of Rome, and Anatholius
Patriarch of Constantinople.

At Ravenna in the Sixth Century, At Ravenna, Cent. 6.
was a Council Assembled by occasion of the Schism happening on the Election of
Symmachus to the Sea of Rome, whose Competitor was Laurentius, afterward made
Bishop of Nuceria. In Symmachus his time were no less than Six Councils held at
Rome, all Convened by Authority of Theodoricus King of Goths, who then Reigned
in Italy, and all of little importance, otherwise than the Endeavors that then
were for the Supremacy, whereat they aimed.

At Valentia in Spain were assembled Two Councils, At Valentia.
called Herdense and Valentinum, both very obscure Councils, there being in the
one but Eight Bishops present, and only Six in the other. In the First of
these, Marriage was prohibited the time of Lent, and three weeks before the
Feast of St. John the Baptist, and during the time between Advent and Epiphany.

At Sidon in the Twentieth year of the Emperor Anastasius a National Council
of 80 Bishops was Assembled, At Sidon.
by the procurement of Xenaeas Bishop of Hierapolis, for undoing the Council of
Chalcedon, which as far as in them lay, they did accordingly.

At Aurelia, that is, At Orleance
Orleance in France in the 22 d year of Anastasius, and under the Reign of
Clodoveus King of France, were convened 32 Bishops, on purpose to settle some
Order in Ecclesiastical Discipline, which by reason of the irruption of
Barbarous people into the Country of France, had been brought into great
disorder.

At Gerunda and Caesaraugusta in Spain were Two Councils under Theodoricus King
of Goths then Reigning in Spain. At Gerunda, At Caesarangusta.
In the former of these were only Seven Bishops convened, who made some
Constitutions, chiefly about Baptism: In the latter were Eleven Bishops, and
they in opposition to Supersitition and the Manichaean Heretics, prohibited
Fasting on the Lords day.

At Rome in the Sixth Century, At Rome, Cent. 6.
by the Mandate of Theodoricus King of Goths, Reigning in Italy, a Council was
Assembled by Hormisda Bishop of Rome, wherein the Error of Eutyches is damned
de novo, and Ambassadors sent to the Emperor Anastasius, and to the Bishop of
Constantinople, to divert them from that Error.

At Constantinople in the same Century under the Emperor Justinus was another
Council convened, At C^stent. Cent. 6.
wherein many great Accusations were exhibited against Severus Bishop of
Antioch, who was then condemned of Heresy, and afterward Banished by the
Emperor.

At Toledo in the same Century was a Second Council assembled, At Toldo, Cent.
6.
partly for renewing Ancient Constitutions, and partly for making New in order
to Ecclesiastical Discipline. By the first Canon of this Second Council of
Toledo, Marriage was tolerated to such of the Clergy, as on their initiation to
that Function protested that they had not the gift of Continency.

At Constantinople in the year 532. At Constantinople, An. 5^2
under Justinian was another Council consisting of One hundred Sixty five
Bishops, Menes being President, or rather his Successor, Eutychius Patriarch of
Constantinople; but Pope Vigilius, who came to Constantinople to Summon the
Emperor, yet would not himself be present at the Council, lest a seeming
yielding to Eutychius might be prejudicial to his Supremacy. The Emperor
endeavored to reconcile the Eutychians and the Orthodox for the Public
Tranquillity, and therefore would have revoked the Articles concerning the
condemning of Theodorus of Mopsuesta, and of Theodoret against Cyrillus that
was Anathematized. But the Western Churches with Pope Vigilius constantly
opposed it, and confirming not only the Decrees Anathematizing those Heretics
with their Heresies of former Councils, Vid. Niceph. l. 17. c. 27. Gregor. l.
1. Ep. 24. Evag. l. 4. d. 34 Liberat. in Brev. c. 23, ^4.
but also of Chalcedon. The Errors of Origin also expunged, which either denied
the Divinity of Christ, or the Resurrection of the Body, or affirmed the
Restitution of Reprohates and Devils. Consult concering this Council, Zonar. in
vit. Justinian. If this be that Council which some report to have been at
Constantinople under the Emperor Justinian in the year 551. there appears
above Twenty years difference in computation of Time. This Council is said to
have been occasioned chiefly for pacifying the Controversy between Eustochius
Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theodorus Ascidas Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia,
touching Origens Books and Tenets, as also for the determination of other
Contentious Disputations. In this Council a Question was moved, Whether men
that were dead, might lawfully be Cursed and Excommunicated? To which it was
Answered, That as J^sias not only punished Idolatrous Priests while they were
alive, 2 Kin. 23 16.
but also opened the Graves of them that were dead, to dishonor them after
their death, who had dishonored God in their life time: Even so, the Memorials
of men might be accursed after their death, who had disturbed the Church of
Christ in their life.

At Orleans under Childebertus King of France were frequent Meetings and
Assemblies of Bishops, At Orlean.
the 2, 3, 4, 5 Councils, whereby many Constitutions were made prohibiting
Marriage to Priests; and in the Fourth Canon of the Second Council Simony was
damned.

At Overnie in France under Theodobertus King of France, At Overnie.
the Bishops who were present at the Councils of Orleans, did assemble and
Ordained, That no man should presume to the Office of a Bishop by Favor, but
by Merit.

At Tours under Aribertus King of France a Council was held, At Tours.
wherein Provision was made against such Poor as wandered out of their
Parishes. In this Council several Constitutions also were made relating to
Bishops and the other Clergy in reference to Marriage.

At Paris a Council was held, At Paris.
wherein order was taken concerning the Admission of Bishops to their Offices,
and that not to be by favor, but with the consent of the Clergy and People.

At Toledo Assembled a Council of 62 Bishops, At Toledo.
where Recaredus King of Spain, and the whole Nation of the West-Gothes in
Spain renounced the Arrian heresy.

At Constantinople under the Reign of Maruitius a Council was held, At
Constantinople. Hist. Magd. Cent. 6. cap. 9.
for trying the Cause of Gregorius Bishop of Antioch accused of Incest, but
declared to be Innocent, and his Accuser scourged with Rods, and Banished.

At Matiscon about the time of Pelagius the Second, At Matiscon.
a Council was held, wherein Command was given, That none of the Clergy should
Cite another, Can 8.
having a Spiritual Office, before a Secular Judge. And that she who is the
Wife of a man that becomes a Bishop or a Presbyter, should after such Dignity
become his Sister, and he be changed into a Brother.

At Matiscon another Council was Convened under Gunthranns King of France in
the 24 th year of his Reign, At Matiscon.
wherein it was Ordained, That Children should be Baptized at Easter and
Whitsontide; Can. 3. 12.
and that Secular men should reverence the Clergy.

At Rome in the year 595, At Rome. An. 595.
and in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of the Emperor Mauritius, was a
Council assembled of 24 Bishops and 34 Presbyters, wherein the first Four
General Councils were confirmed; and that for Ordination of men in Spiritual,
no Reward should be given or taken.

Before the Conclusion of this Sixth Century, and precedent to the Councils
last mentioned, there were some other Councils of less moment, such as
Concilium Gradense, Braccarense, Lataranense, Lugdunense, Pictaviense, and
Metense, which being for the most part employed chiefly in damning Old
Heresies, and in contentious Disputations, are here omitted.

At Rome in the year 607. At Rome, An. 607.
under Phocas the Emperor, a Council of 72 Bishops, 30 Presbyters, and 3
Deacons, was Assembled. In this Council the privilege of Supremacy given by
Phocas to the Roman Church was published. And in the Eighth, that is, the last
year of Phocas, Boniface the Fourth assembled another Council at Rome, wherein
he gave power to the Monks to Preach, Administer Sacraments, hear Confessions,
to Bind and Loose, and associate them in equal Authority with the Clergy.

At Braga or Bracara in Portugal, At B^acara, An. 610.
An. 610. under the Reign of Gundemarus King of Gethes assembled some Bishops
of Gallicia, Lusitania, and of the Province of Lucensis, whereby it was
Ordained, That every Bishop should visit the Churches of his Diocese; That they
should receive no Rewards for Ordination of the Clergy; And that a Church
builded for Gain, and Contribution of the People, redounding to the advantage
of the Builder, should not be Consecrated.

At Auxerre in France, At Auxerre, An. 613.
An. 613. assembled a number of Abbots and Presbyters, with one Bishop and
three Deacons. In this Synod they damned Sorcery, made many Superstitious
Constitutions, as touching Masses, Burials, Marriages, Prohibition of Meats,
etc.

At Hispalis, At Hispalis, An. 634.
commonly called Civil La grand, in Spain, in the year 634. and in the 24 th
year of the Emperor Heraclius, a Council was assembled by Isidorus Bishop of
Hispalis, at the Command of King Sisebutus, for suppression of the Heresy of
(...), a Branch of the Eutychian heresy, and for the decision of some
Questions touching the Bounds of their Dioceses.

At Toledo in Spain, At Toledo, An. 639.
An. 639. under the Reign of Sisenandus King of Spain, by the Kings Command
were more than 70 Bishops and Presbyters Convened upon occasion of diversity of
Ceremonies and Discipline in that Kingdom. This was the Fourth Council at
Toledo.

At Toledo in the First year of Chintilla King of the Goths, At Toledo.
about the time of the Emperor Heraclions Reign, a Fifth Council was held,
convened by Eugenius Bishop of Toledo. In this Council nothing considerable was
done, but in reference to Annual Letanies, and the appointment of Supplications
for the King.

At Rome in the year 652. At Rome, An. 652.
was a Council convened by Martinus Pope, consisting of more than 100 Bishops,
occasioned by the Error of the Monothelites, obstinately maintained by Paulus
of Constantinople, and countenanced by the impious Edict of the Emperor
Constans. The Constitutions and Decrees made in this Council tended to condemn
those that denied the Trinity, the Divine Unity in the Divine Nature, the
Manifestation of the Second Person of the Trinity, and his Sufferings in the
Flesh.

At Toledo in the year 653. At Toledo, An. 65^.
a Sixth Council was held, consisting of Fifty two Bishops, whereof Eugenius
Bishop of Toledo was President. The occasion whereof was the Renovation of Old
Heresies, and Contradiction to precedent Councils. The Fourth Canon of this
Council is against Simony, and the Eighteenth is against Rebellion.

At Toledo in the year 662. At Toledo, An. 66^.
a Seventh Council is held, of 4 Archbishops, 50 Bishops and many Presbyters.
The First Canon of this Council is against Sedition and Treason. By the Fourth
Canon it is forbidden, That Bishops in their Visitations should extort, or
oppress their Churches.

At Quinisext (so termed by Balsemon) the same year, At Quinisext, A^. 662.
viz. 662. was held a Council, which by Bid and many others is accounted an
Erroneous Synod; it was convened under Justinian the Second and Pope Sergius,
wherein the Fathers thought fit to supply the defect of the Fifth and Sixth
precedent Synods in reference to manners and Ecclesiastical Discipline, for
which reason they ratified 102 Canons, in the Trullo, that is, a vaulted
Cloister in the Emperors Palace.
Trullo of the Imperial Palace, whence they are called Trullans. These are
rejected by such Latins, whose consent went not to the stablishment thereof,
specially not empowr'd and authorized thereto by the Pope. In the 36 th Canon
thereof the Patriarch of Constantinople is equalled to the Roman, and in the 13
th Canon Matrimony is granted to the Clergy.

At Chalon in Burgandy by the Command of Clodoveus K. of France a Council of 44
Bishops assembled, At Chabillanum, or Chalon.
wherein the Canons of the Nicene Council had great approbation; And it was
Forbidden, That Two Bishops should be Ordained in one City; and Decreed, That
no Secular work should be done on the Lords Day.

At Rome in the time of Constantinus Pogonatus Emperor under the Popedom of
Agatho was held a Council, At Rome.
wherein it was Declared by the Suffrages of 125 Bishops, That Two wills and
Two operations were to be acknowledged in Christ; and the Defenders of the
Heresy of the Monothelites were condemned.

At Toledo in the year 671. At Toledo, An. 671.
an Eighth Council of 52 Bishops was assembled, wherein were high Debates
concerning Perjury; At last it was Resolved, That no Necessity obliges a man
to perform an unlawful Oath. In this Council Marriage was utterly forbidden to
Bishops, and eating of Flesh in Lent.

At Toledo in the year 673. At Toledo. An. 673.
and in the Seventh year of Recesuvindus King of Goths, and by his Command,
were convened 16 Bishops, which was the Ninth Council at that place; and in
which several Canons were made touching the Discipline of the Church.

At Toledo in the Eighth year of the said Kings Reign was the Tenth Council, At
Toledo, An. 674.
consisting of 21 Bishops, who made some Decrees touching certain Festivals,
and others relating to the Clergy, and removed Protamius Bishop of Bracara from
his Office, being convict of Adultery.

At Toledo in the Seventh year of Bamba King of Goths 19 Bishops and Seven
Abbots were assembled by the Kings Command, wherein several Canons were made
concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline.

At Bracara a Second Council was held (the first according to Caranza,) At
Bracara.
wherein many old Opinions of the Priscilianists and Manichaeans concerning
Prohibition of Marriage and Meats are condemned, together with the Heresies of
Samosatenus, Photinus, Cerdon, and Marcion: And in the 30 th Canon of this
Council it was Ordained, That no Poesy should be Sung in the Church, except
the Psalter of the Old Testament.

At Bracara in Spain in the time of Bombas King of Goths another Synod of
Eight Bishops was assembled, At Bracara.
wherein the Nicene Faith is again rehearsed. In the Fifth Canon of this Synod
it is Ordained, That upon Festival days Relics enclosed in an Ark, shall be
born on the Shoulders of the Levites, as the Ark of God in the Old Testament
was accustomed to be born.

At Constantinople in the year 680. At Constantinople. An. 680.
in the Twelfth year of the Reign of Constantine Pogonatus a General Council
was held, Pope Agatho procuring it by his Legates. In this Council were
convened 150 Bishops (they who reckon 270 or 286 do compute the Absent Romans,
and others consenting thereto,) the Emperor himself was President. In this
Council was discussed the Question touching the Wills and Actions of Christ:
Here were condemned the Monothelites, Sergius, Cyrus, Pyrrhus, Peter, Paul,
Theodorus, together with Pope Honorius; who in the defense of Eutychianism
pleaded, that there was one only Will in Christ. This Council confirmed the
Canons, not only of General, but also of Particular foregoing Synods, as of
Antioch, Laodicea, and others. It also added, what was to be approved in the
Orthodox Writings of the Fathers, as appears by the Second Canon of this
Council. Vid. Paul. Diacon. in vit. Constant.

At Toledo the Twelfth Council, At Toledo.
consisting of 33 Bishops with some Abbots, and 13 of the Nobility, assembled
the first year of the Reign of Euringius, to whom Bombas King of the Goths
resigned his Royal Authority, choosing rather to be Shaven than to wear a Crown,
and to enter into a Monastery than to fit on the Throne of Majesty. This
Council (as to the Confession of Faith) adhered to the Council of Nice, and
confirmed the Acts made in precedent Councils against the Jews. Other Councils
there were at Toledo under the Reigns of Euringius and Egista, but not of such
Remark, as needs any apology for their omission.

At London in the year 712. At London, An. 712.
under the Saxons Reign a Council was assembled, at which the Popes Legate
Bonifacius, and the chief Prelate of England Brithwaldus was present. The two
grand Points treated in this Council, were concerning the Worshipping of
Images, and Prohibiting Marriage to persons in Spiritual Orders.

At Constantinople about the same year of 712. At Constantinop. An. 712.
a Council was called by the Emperor Philippicus, for the undoing or the Sixth
General Council, wherein the Error of the Monothelites was condemned.

At Rome in the year 714. At Rome, An. 714.
a Council was Assembled by Pope Gregory the Second, whereat two Bishops of
Britain were present, Sedulius and Fergustus. Most of the Canons made at this
Council did concern Marriage, Masses, S^rceries, and the Mandates of the
Apostolic Chair.

At Rome a great Council of 903 Bishops was assembled by Pope Gregory the
Third, At Rome.
having received a Mandate from the Emperor Leo for the Abolishing of Images.
In this Council was the Emperor Leo Excommunicated, and deprived of his
Imperial Dignity, because he had disallowed the Worshipping of Images. Now is
the Popes Banner displaied against the Emperor, which is the Forerunner of
that Enmity which ensued between the Pope and the Emperors.

In France in the year 742. In France, An. 742.
under the Reign of Charles the Great, Zacharias the First being then Pope, a
National Council of the Bishops, Presbyters, and Clergy of France was assembled
by Bonifacius Archbishop of Mentz, according to the Mandate of King Charles.
This Council was called for Reformation of Abuses in that Country, or rather
to reduce it to a conformity unto the Rites of the Roman Church.

At Constantinople in the year 755. At Constantinople, An. 755.
and the Thirteenth year of the Emperor Constantinus Copronymus a General
Council of 338 Bishops was Assembled by the Emperors Command. In this Council
the Worshipping of Images was damned, and the placing of them in Oratories and
Temples, as a Custom borrowed from the Pagans was forbidden; yet in the 15 th
and 17 th Canons of this Council the Invocation of Saints is allowed. An. 730.
Bell. de Council. l. 1. c. 6.
The Council of Constantinople is by some accounted two, which others contract
into one, but the distinction (it seems) is manifest, because the first is said
to be celebrated under Father Leo Isaurus, An. 730. The Second by Constantius
Copronymus in the year 755, as aforesaid. The one opposes the Worshipping of
Images and Relics, on which account both may be esteemed as one, or at least
united. The first under Leo discovers Intercession of Saints to be imaginary,
and the Worshipping of Images mere Idolatry. Germanus Patriarch of
Constantinople, and John Damascene, and others, too much inclined to Images,
are deprived of their Dignities. Gregory the Third intercedes for Images in a
Roman Anti-Synod, in which he Excommunicated the Eastern with the mark of
Heretical Imagebreakers; but this did not terrify the said Constantine
Copronymus from declaring himself to be an Image-breaker; but assembled 338
Bishops at Constantinople, as aforesaid, over whom himself was President, and
persecuted the Maintainers of Images. Some will have This and the Seventh
Council as Occumenical; but the Romans so abhorred it, Vid. Paul. Diac. l. 21,
22. Re^um Romans and Zonar. in Annal.
that for this Controversy about Images they denied their Subjection to the
Greek Emperors: whenc afterward ensued the Western and Eastern Division,
never to be reconciled. How well the Nicene Council corrected the Errors of
this, appears by the Decrees thereof.

At Francfurt in the year 794. At Francfurt, An. 794.
a Council was convened, but it is not agreed, whether it was an Occumenical or
Provincial Council; the more Ancient Writers will have it to be Ecumenical,
because it was called by Charles the Great, and Adrian the First, and it
consisted of at least 300 Bishops; yet the latter Writers will have it
Provincial, because it seems not to favor Images. The Reason of the convening
of this Council was, because Elipardus Archbishop of Toledo, and Felix
Vrgelitanus Bishop of Aurelia or Orleance in France, preached, That Christ was
only the Adopted Son of God, which Aquinas refutes 3. part. q. 23. art. 4. But
Binius with Longus and others will have it, that this Council or Synod
confirmed the Opinion of the 2 d Nicene Council concerning the Adoration of
Images, which Bellarmine will not believe, though he wishes it to be true.

At Nice in Bythinia in the year 788. At Nice, 783.
a Council of 350 Bishops was assembled; in which it was Ordained, That the
Image of Christ, the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of the Saints, should not only be
received into places of Adoration, but also should be adored and worshipped.

At Frankford in the year 794. At Frankford, An. 794.
a great Council was assembled by Charles the Great, King of France, partly by
reason of the Heretic Felix, who called Christ the Adopted Son of God in his
Humane Nature, and was condemned in a Council at Ratisbone, An. 742. partly
also by reason of great Disputes that were in most places concerning the
Worshipping of Images, disallowed in the Council of Constantinople, but allowed
in the Second Council of Nice.

At Mentz in the year 813. At Mentz, An. 813.
by the Command of Carolus Magnus, was Assembled a Council of 30 Bishops, 25
Abbots, with a great number of Priests, Monks, Counts, and Judges, about
Reformation of the dissolute manners of Ecclesiastical and Laypersons.

At Rhemes in the same year 813. At Rhemes. An. 813.
a Council was Assembled by the Command of Charles the Great, who not only
called that Famous Council of Frankford, An. 794. in which the Adoration of
Images was condemned, but also about one and the same time, viz. An. 813.
appointed Five National Councils to be convened in diverse places for
Reformation of the Clergy and Laity, viz. at Mentz aforesaid; this at Rhemes;
another at Tours; a Fourth at Chalons; and a Fifth at Aries. In all which no
opposition was made to the foresaid Council of Frankford, nor was the Adoration
of Images avowed in any of these Councils.

At Tours, At Tours, An. 813.
An. 813. at the Command (as aforesaid) of the Emperor Carolus Magnus a
Council of many Bishops and Abbots was assembled, for the Establishing of
Ecclesiastical Discipline in Tours.

At Chalons, At Chalons, An. 813.
An. 813. was the Fourth Council convened the same year under Charles the
Great, and by his Command, for the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical state; the
Canons whereof for the most part are consonant to those made in the said former
Councils under Charles the Great.

At Arles the same year of 813. At Arles, 813.
wherein the Four preceding Councils were held, another was convened by Command
of Charles the Great, wherein as to matters of Faith, Church Discipline,
Regulation of the Clergy, Reformation of Manners, etc. the Canons generally
agree with those of the said Four preceding Councils.

At Constantinople in the year 871. At Constantinople, An. 871.
in the Third year of Basilius Emperor of the East, and under the Reign of
Lewis 2. Emperor of the West, a Council was Assembled by Basilius the Emperor
against Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople; in which Council he was
deposed and Excommunicated, and the Books he wrote against the Bishop of Romes
Supremacy above other Bishops, commanded to be burnt. At this Council the
Ambassadors of Pope Adrian the Second were present, and great endeavors used
to have all things therein framed to his content. In this Council the
Worshipping of Images was again allowed; and it was Commanded, That the Image
of Christ should be held in no less reverence than the Books of the Gospel.

At Acciniacum in France a Council consisting of Ten Bishops was convened by
Carolus Calvus. At Accinicum.
In this Council Hincmarus Bishop of Laudunum was deprived of his Office, and
his eyes thrust out; but Pope John the 9 th. under the Reign of Carolus
Crassus, restored him to his Office, because he appealed from his own Bishop
and a Synod in his own Country, to the Chair of Rome.

At Strasburgh in the year 899. At Strasburgh, An. 899.
and in the Eighth year of the Emperor Arnulphus, 22 Bishops of Germany were
assembled. Many of the Constitutions of this Synod (according to Caranza) are
in effect the same with the Canons of former Councils. In the 46 th Canon of
this Synod it is Ordained, That a man, whose Wife is Divorced from him by
reason of her Adultery, shall not marry again during her life.

At Ravenna in the year 903. At Ravenna, An. 903.
a Council of 74 Bishops was convened, whereat was present Carolus Simplex,
King of France. In this Council the Acts of Pope Formosus had allowance, and
the Decrees of Stephanus the Sixth were condemned and burnt.

At Rhemes under the said Carolus Simplex a Council was assembled for
correcting the abuses of Church-Rents, At Rhemes.
a great part whereof under pretense of the Kings necessary occasions, was
converted by some Courtiers to their own use, against which Fulco Archbishop of
Rhemes declaring his mind freely in Council, was slain by Vinemarus one of the
Oppressors at Court; the like not having been known since the Second Council of
Ephesus, called a Council of Briggandry, wherein Flavianus Bishop of
Constantinople was slain.

At Rome in the time of Otto the First a great Council was assembled against
Pope John the 13 th. At Rome.
or as others affirm, Pope John the 12 th. In this Council the Pope was accused
of Ordaining a Deacon in a Stable, of Simony, of Adultery, of making the Sacred
Palace like a Baudy-House, of Murdering Benedict his Spiritual Father, of
Gelding John an Archdeacon, of raising Fire, of drinking to the Devil, of
distributing the golden Crosses and Chalices to his Harlots, of imploring help
from Jupiter and Venus in his playing at Dice, and of his not Signing himself
with the Sign of the Cross.

At Canterbury in the year 975. At Canterbury. An. 975.
a Council was Assembled, when Dunstanus was Bishop thereof. The Question that
was most in debate at this Council, was concerning Marriage in relation to such
persons as were in Spiritual Orders, the which Dunstanus (whether his Crucifix
spoke True or False, if it spoke at all) declared his Judgment against.

At Constantinople under the Reign of Nicephorus Phocas Emperor of the East
was a Council convened, A Constantinople.
by reason of Nicephorus his taking to wise Theophania the Reflict of his
Predecesso^ Romanus, having been Witness in Baptism to Theophania's Children;
the which so displeased Polyeuchus Patriarch of Constantinople, that for the
same he debarred the said Emperor from Holy things, and so in effect
Excommunicated the Emperor of the East.

At Rhemes, At Rhemes, An. 992.
An. 992. in the Ninth year of the Emperor Otto, and in the Fourth of Hugo
Capeto King of France a Council was convened against Arnulphus Bishop of Rhemes
for countenancing Duke Charles, who claimed the Crown as next Heir, being
Brother to Lotharius. Whereupon Arnulphus was deposed, and denuded of his
Episcopal Dignity, who yet afterward was restored to it again by another
Council at Rhemes, called by Pope John the Thirteenth.

At Arles in the year 1026. At Arles, An. 1026.
and under the Reign of the Emperor Henry the Second, a Council was assembled
in order to the appeasing of the wrath of God and his indignation at that time
manifested against the greatest part of the whole World.

At Halingnustat in the year 1023. At Halingnustat, An. 1023.
under the Emperor Henry the Second a Council was Assembled, wherein great
endeavors were used to make a Conformity and Unity in observation of
Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies in Germany; wherein Laws were made
concerning the degrees of Consanguinity.

At Triburia, At Triburia, An. 1030.
An. 1030. under the Reign of the Emperor Conrade the Second a Council was
Assembled, at which the Emperor was present, wherein were made some
Constitutions concerning Fasting.

At Sutrium in Italy, At Sutrium, An. 1046.
An. 1046. under the Reign of the Emperor Henry the Third was an Assembly by
the Emperor for the pacifying that grand Schism in the Roman Church, when
Three Popes at once contended for the Popedom, viz. Benedict the Ninth,
Silvester the Third, and Gregory the Sixth, all which the Emperor and the
Council dispoped, and chose one Sindigerus Bishop of Bamberg to be Pope, whom
they called Clemens the Second.

At Rome about the year 1050. At Rome, An. 105.
Leo the Ninth assembled a Council at Rome against Berengarius Deacon at
Angiers, who disapproved the Opinion of Transubstantiation, viz. [That after
the words of Consecration the substance of Bread evanished, and the substance
of the Body and Blood of Christ was in the Sacrament, under the Accidents of
Bread and Wine;] whose Letters touching this matter, not finding Lanfrankus
Bishop of Canterbury (to whom they were directed) in Normandy, were delivered
to some of the Clergy, who opening the same, sent them to Pope Leo the Ninth,
whereupon this Council at Rome was assembled, wherein the said Letters of
Berengarius being read, they condemned him (though absent) as an Heretic.

At Vercellis the same year Leo the Ninth assembled another Council against
Berengarius. At Vercellis, An. 1050.


At Tours in the year 1055. At Tours, An. 1055.
Pope Victor the Second Assembled a Council against Berengarius, who there
answered, That he adhered to no particular Opinion of his own, but followed the
Common Doctrine of the Universal Church.

At Rome in the year 1059. At Rome, An. 1059.
Pope Nicholaus the Second assembled a Council of 113 Bishops against
Berengarius, who submitting himself to the Pope and Councils Correction, they
prescribed him a Form of Renunciation of his Error, so there called, which he
accepted and recanted, yet afterward published a Refutation of the same
Doctrine. In this Council it was Ordained, That the Election of the Pope should
belong to the College of Cardinals.

At Millan, At Millan, An. 1060.
An. 1060. Pope Nicholaus the Second by Petrus Damianus held a Council, wherein
the Two chief points debated were touching Simony, and the Error of the
Nicholaitans, whereof they counted such Priests guilty as had married Wives,
though they did not (as the Nicholaitans) make them Common.

At Mantua, At Mantua, An. 1066.
An. 1066. the Emperor Henry the Fourth assembled a Council for pacifying the
Differences in the Roman Church, between Alexander the Second, and Candalus,
called Honorius the Second, wherein Alexander was declared Pope, and Candalus
pardoned.

At Winchester Pope Alexander the Second by two Cardinals sent into England, At
Winchester.
Assembled a Council to appease the Troubles of the Church in this Kingdom;
wherein they deposed certain Bishops and Abbots, among whom Stigandus Bishop of
Canterbury, because he had possessed that Chair, Robert Archbishop thereof
being then alive, and because he possessed another Bishopric with it, viz. the
Bishopric of Winchester.

At Friburgh (anciently called Tributia) the Bishops of Germany assembled
themselves in a Council, At Friburgh, or Tribu^ia.
in which they declared the Archbishop of Bremen to be an Enemy to their
Country, except he delivered up the young Emperor Henry the Fourth, to be
educated according to the Covenant made between the Princes and Bishops of
Germany during his Minority.

At Mentz, At Mentz. An. 1069.
An. 1069. a Council was assembled in order to a Divorce of the Emperor Henry
4. from his Wife, from which he was dissuaded by the Arguments of Petrus
Damianus the Popes Nuncio for that purpose.

At Erfurd, At Erfurd, An. 1074.
An. 1074. the Bishop of Mentz assembled a Council, in order to an observance
of a Command from Pope Gregory 7 th. touching a separation of the Priests
within the Bishopric of Mentz from their Wives, or else to depose them from
their Offices. By reason whereof, as also by reason of the Bishops exaction of
Tithes from Turingia, this Council rose in a tumult and great confusion re
infecta.

At Mentz, At Mentz, An. 1075.
An. 1075. the Bishop thereof (being commanded by Pope Gregory 7 th. to
separate the Priests from their Wives) convened a Synod, but the married
Priests so terrified the Bishop of Mentz, and the Bishop of Chur the Popes
Nuncio, that this Council also, as the former, was dissolved, and nothing done.

At Worms the Emperor assembled all the Bishops of his Kingdom in order to a
deposing of Pope Gregory 7 th. At Worms.
otherwise called Hildebrand, accused of Perjury, Ambition, Avarice, and Pride.
The determination of this Council was, That he should be removed from the
Popedom, which was Subscribed by all the Bishops present at the Council.

At Friburgh, At Friburgh, An. 1076.
An. 1076. another Council was assembled, wherein the Princes of Saxony and
Sweve appeared in favor of the Sea of Rome against the Emperor Henry the
Fourth.

At Rome by order of the Pope a Council was assembled in Lent, wherein the
Emperor Henry 4 th was not only Anathematized, At Rome.
but also denuded (as far as in them lay) of his Imperial Dignity.

At Brixia in the year 1080. At Brixia, An. 1080.
the Emperor Henry 4 th assembled 30 Bishops of Germany and Italy, together
with many Princes of the Empire: All which consented, That Hildebrand should be
deposed from the Popedom, and Gilbertus Bishop of Ravenna placed in his room.

At Rome, At Rome, An. 1081.
An. 1081. the Emperor Henry 4 th. with the Advice of the Roman Senate
appointed a Council to be Assembled, wherein Hildebrand was deposed, and
Gilbertus, otherwise Wigbertus, to succeed in the Papacy. This Council was
called by the said Emperor soon after he had besieged and taken the City of
Rome.

At Beneventum a Council was Assembled by Pope Victor the Third, At Beneventum.
who before his Election to the Papacy was named Desiderius, Abbot in
Cassinates, chosen by the Romans, not regarding Gilbertus whom the Emperor had
made Pope. In this Council Victor the Third Anathematized Gilbertus Bishop of
Ravenna.

At Clermont in Overnie of France in the year 1095. At Clermont. An. 1095.
Vrbanus the Second convened a great Assembly, wherein it was Ordained, That an
Army should be raised for support of the distressed Christians in Jerusalem,
and recovery of the Holy Land out of the hands of the Infidels: The which was
likewise Ordained in the Council of Placentia, and other Councils of the lesser
concern here omitted for Brevities sake. In the next, viz. the 12 th Century,
there were above 115 Councils: To instance in the most material of them may
suffice for this Abridgment.

At Paris Vrbanus the Second, At Paris, the 12 th Century.
at the complaint of Alexius Emperor of Constantinople against the rage of the
Turks, assembled a Council of most Nations, and was present himself thereat. In
this Council were appointed 100000 Men out of the Western Kingdoms for the Holy
Land.

At Florence Pope Paschalis the Second convened a Council, ^^. Florence, An.
1110.
wherein the Bishop of Florence was called to an account for Preaching openly,
That Antichrist was already come; for which he was sharply rebuked, and
commanded, That for time to come he should utter no such Doctrine.

At London in the year 1102. At London, An. 1102.
in the Third year of the Reign of Hen. 1. King of England. Anselmus Archbishop
of Canterbury assembled a Council, for prohibiting the Marriages of Priests;
and the year following was constrained to convene another Council at St. Paul's
in London, to make Constitutions for the punishment of such as defiled
themselves with Sodomitical Lusts.

At Mentz, At Mentz, 1106.
An. 1106. a great Council was assembled against the Emperor Henry 4. whom
they condemned of Heresy, which was Simony, because he would not resign the
Right of Investure of Bishops into the Popes hands, and having Excommunicated
him, took off his Imperial Crown.

At Troyes in France in the year 1107. At Troyes, An. 1107.
Pope Paschalis the Second convened a Council, which treated concerning the
Investure of Bishops, not to be in the power of Lay-persons.

At Triburia in Friburgh in the year 1119. At Triburia, An. 1119.
the Bishops of Germany assembled concerning the Investure of Bishops, and in
opposition to the Emperor Henry the Fifth.

At Senon a Council was called against Abelardus by reason of his Heresy: At
Senon.
He was also accounted an Heretic in the Council of So^sson.

The First Four Lateran Councils are comprehend under one and the same Title,
1. Laleran, An. 1123.
as more favoring the Roman Dissentions than the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church: The first under Henry the Fifth, and Calixtus the Second, which had
300 (or according to Bellarmine, 900) Bishops, and 22 Canons. In this Council
Burdinus the Antipope was laid aside, the vestures with the Ring and Staff
were taken from the Emperor and given to the Pope; who absolved the Emperor
and gave him power of electing German Bishops. In this Council there were
appointed Crosses for the (...) War, by means whereof Pardon of Sins might be
grant (...) them that undertook that War, and to their Families.

The Second Lateran Council was under Lotharius the Emperor, 2. Lateran, An.
1131.
and Innocentius the Second, which increased to the number of about 2000
Bishops. This Council omitted Thirty Canons lately published by Gratian from
the Vatican Library, which Bellarmine is said to reject: It discharged Peter
usurping the Roman See after Leo, under the name of Anacletus the Second;
branded for Heretics Peter of Bruis, and Arnaldus of Brixia the Disciple of
Peter Abullard, who rejected Pedobaptism, Church-buildings, and the Adoration
of the Cross: It proclaimed these Lay-persons to be Sacrilegious, and incurr
the danger of eternal damnation, who receive Tithes; and deprived Usurers of
Christian Burial, and Cursed them to Hell.

The Third Lateran Council was under Frederick the First and Alexander the
Third, 3. Lateran.
by an assembly of 30 Bishops, who made up the difference between this
Alexander, and one Octavianus and his Successors Gindon and John, a German
taking up the quarrel with him; which Dissentions divided Europe into parties.
Also the Albigenses under the name of Cathari, Publicans and Paterini, taking
their Rise from the Waldenses, were here condemned; Lombard, who affirmed that
Christ according to his Manhood was nothing, was Censured; Ordinations made by
Schismatics wholly abrogated, Private Oratories and Priests for Leprous
persons appointed, and the manner of Visitations by Archbishops, Bishops, and
Deacons prescribed.

The Fourth Lateran Council was under Frederick the Second, 4. Lateran.
and Innocentius the Third, with 400 Bishops and 80 other Fathers. This Council
rejected the Book of Joachimus the Abbot against P. Lombard; established
Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession, and the Papal Absolution of Subjects
from their Allegiance: It exacted an Oath from Secular Magistrates to expel
Heretics nominated by the Pope. This Council by Indulgencies encouraged those
that went with Crosses for recovery of the Holy Land under Godfrey of
Bulloigne; prohibited Plurality of Benefices, and Sale of Relics.

At Papia in the year 1160. At Papia, An. 1160.
the Emperor Frederick the First convened a Council, occasioned by the
difference between Alexander 3. and Victor the 4 th. for the Popedom after the
death of Adrian the Fourth. In this Council Victor the Fourth was declared
Pope. Whereupon Alexander the Third convened a Council at Cleremont, in which
he Cursed the Emperor, Pope Victor, and their Adherents.

At Rome in the year 1180. At Rome, An. 1180.
a Council of One hundred and eighty Bishops was convened by the Popes
Authority. Their Consultations and Canons were touching the Form of Electing
Popes for the future, also touching Ecclesiastical Dignities and Discipline,
touching Excommunication, Residence, Continency, Plurality, Patronage,
Presentations, Festivals, Usurers, Jews and Sarazens, and the like.

At Rome in the year 1215. At Rome, An. 1215.
Pope Innocentius the Third Convened a General Council, wherein the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was ratified. This was another of the Lateran Councils.

At Lions Two Councils, 1. At Lions, An. 1244.
the First called by Frederick the Second, and Innocentius the Fourth, about
the year 1244. In this Council the Emperor that deserved so well of the
Christian Church against the Infidels, was after Four Excommunications deposed
by the Pope, prohibiting that any should name him Emperor: Being thus Deposed,
he defends his Right by his Gibilines against the Guelphes of the Papal party.
In this Council appears no other President than the Pope himself, who with 140
Bishops and Abbots, endeavored under color of recovering the Holy Land, by
the Fifths of the Church to redeem the East. By this Council new Festivals were
instituted for the Canonizing of Roman Saints. The Seventeen Institutions
ascribed to this Council, are said to be rather Political and Polemical than
Ecclesiastical, and (according to Bellarmine) are to be found in the Sixth of
the Decretals.

At Lions the other of these Two Councils was under Rodolphus the First at
Haspurge, 2. At Lions.
procured by Gregory the Tenth, consisting of at least Seven hundred Bishops:
In this Council was present Michael Paleologus the Greek Emperor. Aquinas sent
for to this Council dies in his way thither, where Bonaventure, after his being
created Cardinal, died also. In this Council the Pope in behalf of the Holy
Land requires a Subsidy, the Tenth of all Ecclesiastical Rights for the space
of Six years. In this Council also it was ordered, That there should be Bowing
at the Name of JESUS. There were 31 Constitutions or Canons made by this
Council, which though omitted by the Summulists, may yet be found in the Sixth
of the Decretals.

At Vienna in the year 1311. At Vienna. An. 1311.
under Henry the Seventh, Clement the Fifth being Pope, a General Council of
above Three hundred Bishops was convened. In this Council was set forth a Book
of Papal Decrees, called Liber Clementiarum, which was Ratified by this
Council. In this Council also it was, that Corpus Christi Day was Ordained to
be a Festival, and the Order of Templers to be quite abolished; Antonin. Hist.
Par. 3. Titat. 3.
for the Jerusalem-Expedition being strongly urged in this Council, the
Templers are removed out of the way for murdering of the Abissins Ambassador,
and other Impieties and Heresies. Whether Trithemius did hit the mark or not,
it matters not; Notorious it is, That the Templers were very Rich, but if that
were a sufficient pretense for Heresy and Expulsion (as some conceive) then
there would be no such thing as the Church of Rome, at least not Orthodox. In
this Council the Clergy are permitted to take an Oath of Allegiance, not of
Subjection to Lay-Magistrates; also Peter John, the Dulcimists, the
Fratricelli, the Begwards and Begwins, together with the Lollards were
condemned. Peter John was condemned for denying the Soul to be the Form of Man;
a new piece of Heresy against Natural Philosophy. The Constitutions of this
Council under the name of Clementine, are extant in 5 Books for a Supplement of
the Canon Law; in which is that Famous Decree of Constituting Professors to be
maintained by a competent Stipend at the Court of Rome, at the Universities of
Paris, Oxford, Bononia, and Salamanca, ^lem. l. 5. Tit. 1. Gal. l. 7.
for the instructing in Hebrew, Arabic, and Chaldee Languages, whereby the
Jews and Mahumetans might the more easily be converted to the Faith.

The Fifth Lateran Council in the year 1311. 5. Lateran, An. 1311. Vid.
Prideaux his Synopf. of Councils. Edit. 5. Oxon.
under Maximilian the Emperor, Pope Julius 2. President thereof. It is
supposed this Council was called for disannulling another at Pisa, where some
Cardinals were met against the Pope. There were convened at this Council 114
Bishops, and it had Twelve Sessions, Five whereof were under Julius, the other
Seven were finished by Leo the Tenth. Suarez, Cajetan, and Navarr profess this
to be a rejected Council. The pragmatical Decree made at the Council of Basil,
in defense of Ecclesiastical Liberty against Popish Usurpations, is here
discussed and exploded. The Immortality of the Soul is here also defended,
concerning which many at that time doubted it, others wantonly disputed it, and
others heretically denied it. By this Council a restraint is laid on such as in
Preaching wrest the Scriptures at their pleasure to uphold and disperse some
strange Opinions; which restraint extended also to the impression of Books not
Orthodox, nor Licensed as such.

At Pisa in the year 1409. 1. At Pisa, An. 1409.
was (as some call it) a General Council, consisting of Twenty three Cardinals,
Three Patriarchs, Three hundred Archbishops and Bishops, Twenty eight
Governors of Monasterics, and a very great number of Divines, and Ambassadors
of Princes. The great Dissension between Benedict the Twelfth, and Gregory the
Thirteenth was the occasion of this great and First Council at Pisa. Both which
having been Summoned, are Deposed by this Council, and Alexander the Eighth
placed in St. Peter's Chair, which yet removed not the said Dissension;
notwithstanding Alexander thus Elected, is reckoned in the Catalogue of the
Popes. There were Twenty three Sessions of this Council, the Acts thereof
Printed at Paris, An. 1612. are extant. They that conceive this to be a
Headless Council (as Antonius and others) because called in a tumult by the
Cardinals, 3 Part. Tit. 22. c. 5 sect. 2, 3.
without the Popes Authority, do not consider, that at this time the Head was
troubled with a double Impostume, and could not be consulted in the case.

At Pisa the Second Council was called by Maximilian the Emperor, 2. At Fisa.
and Lewis the French King against Pope Julius the Second, who (it seems) had
obliged himself by an Oath to have a General Council within Two years next
after his Election to the Popedom; but this not being performed, some of the
more eminent Cardinals, under the protection of the said Emperor and French
King, meet at Pisa, and Summon the Pope to make his appearance there; instead
whereof he Excommunicates them, the French King and all, the Emperor himself
scarce escaping that Thunderbolt, and calls a Lateran Anti-Synod at Rome,
before whom he excuses his Oath, clears himself, and dies. Leo the Tenth
succeeds, continues the Council, and ratifies many Decrees; whereupon the Pisan
Cardinals upon their Submission are restored to their former Dignity.

At Constance in the year 1414. At Constance, An, 1414.
a Council with great difficulty was convened by the Emperor Sigismond and
Pope John the Twenty third, consisting of about a Thousand Bishops and Doctors,
for the removing of the Popish Schisms out of the Western parts, and pacifying
the Difference which happened between Three Popes, all striving for the
Popedom, viz. Pope John, whom the Italians set up: Pope Gregory, whom the
French set up: and Benedict, whom the Spaniards set up. This Council continued
Four years; in which all the said Three Popes were Deposed, and Martinus
elected Pope. Others relate it somewhat otherwise, As if after Gregory the
Eleventh, some Cardinals exalted Urban the Sixth, Others, Clement the Sixth.
The Nations are divided into parties, our English (as reported) with the French
and Spaniard adhering to Clement; but Urban dying at Rome, Boniface the Ninth
supplies his place, but Angelus a certain Venetian succeeds him under the Title
of Gregory the Twelfth. Clement also being removed, had for his Successor Peter
de Luna a Spaniard, under the name of Benedict the Thirteenth. To quench this
Flame the Cardinals and Bishops meet at Pisa, where they exalt one of Creet
unto the Papal dignity, under the Title of Alexander the Fifth, who sickening
suddenly by an Intoxicating clyster, was succeeded by John the 23 d by Election
of the Pisan Cardinals, who by the persuasion of the said Emperor Sigismond
called this Council at Constance, and being present at the same, was first
accused of many Crimes, then deposed, and Martin the Fifth exalted by the
Council to the Papal dignity. There were 45 Sessions of this Council, in the 8
th whereof the Doctrine of John Wickliffe was condemned, and his Bones ordered
to be taken out of his Sepulcher and burnt. In the 13 th Session thereof it was
Ordained, That no Priest under pain of Excommunication, should Communicate unto
the People under both kinds of Bread and Wine. In the 15 Session the Sentence
of Condemnation of John Husse was read and published, and himself delivered to
the Secular power to be Burned. In the 21 Session, the Sentence of Condemnation
was pronounced against Jerome of Pragus, who was also delivered to the Secular
power to be Burned. In this Council it was concluded, That the Council is above
the Pope; and that an Engagement with an Heretic is not to be kept.

At Basil in the year 1431. At Basil, An. 1431.
was a General Council assembled, procured by Sigismond the Emperor of Pope
Martin the Fifth, and afterward of Eugenius the Fourth, in which Cardinal
Julian of Arelatum was President, and which continued high 18 years. This
Council had 45 Sessions, and therein it was also concluded (as in that of
Constance,) That the General Council is above the Pope, and that all persons
ought to be subject to the General Council, as Children are subject to the
Authority of their Mother. Pope Eugenius confirmed this Council by his
Apostolical Letters, whom notwithstanding this Council Deposed, and in his room
chose Amedeus Duke of Savoy to be Pope, whom they called Foelix the Fifth. For
this Pope Eugenius the Fourth, being Cited and not appearing, was deposed for
his Contempt, and the said Amedeus Duke of Subaudis, who lived an Hermites life
in the Mountains of Ripalia, by the Cardinals is exalted to the Popedom, and
styled Foelix the Fifth. Besides the Delaring here, That the Council is above
the Pope, it was also Confirmed, That the Pope cannot dissolve, prolong or
remove the Council, being lawfully called. Yet after this the said Eugenius
constituted an Anti-Synod at Ferraria, which afterward removed to Florence,
where he acted with the Greeks, the Emperor being present. They of Basil mean
while confirmed the pragmatical Decree, condemned Popish Bastardy, suppressed
Concubines, and ordered how the Jews might be brought to Christianity. They
declared also the Blessed Virgin to be free from the contagion of every sin,
indulged to the Lay- Bohemians the use of the Cup in the Eucharist, and by
reason of a raging Pestilence betake themselves from Basil to Lausanna, where
the Emperor Frederick persuaded Duke Amedeus to renounce the felicity of Pope
Foelix,

At Florence in the year 1431. At Florence, An. 1431.
a Council contrary to that at Basil, yet fitting and undissolved, was held by
Pope Eugenius, in which Council the Emperor and Patriarch of Constantinople
with many others of the Greek Church were present, and were prevailed with to
yield to many points of the Roman Church, but could never be prevailed with to
believe their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. This Florentine Council began at
Ferraria, under Albertus Emperor, and Eugenius the Fourth, whence by reason of
a Pestilence did remove to Florence, and was there finished. In this Council
were 141 Bishops, the Pope himself President, who deposed the Council of Basil
at the same time by the Germans. There were present at this Council John
Paleologus, with the Patriarch Joseph, and the Greek Doctors. In this Council
were debated certain Articles concerning the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost, with
the Addition to the Nicene Greed [ and from the Son,] Purgatory, the Power of
Suffrages, and Sacrifice to the Dead, Transubstantiation, the Administering
unleavened Bread in the Eucharist, but especially the Popes Supremacy.

At Trent in the year 1546. At Trent, An. 1546.
was a Council held under Charles the Fifth and Ferdinand the Tenth, Paul the
Third, Julius the Third, Pius the Fourth, Marcellus, and Paulus the Fourth; for
this Council continued no less than Eighteen years: At the First Meeting
whereof were Seven Sessions in the Two first years thereof. The Second Meeting
was in the time of Pope Julius the Third, An. 1551. which had only Three
Sessions, by reason of Wars happening in Germany: At this Second Meeting the
French King protested against this Council. The Third Meeting whereof was Nine
years after the Second, it being appointed by Pope Pius the Fourth; there
having been in this interval, since the Second Meeting, when Julius the Third
was Pope, two other Popes, viz. Marcellus and Paulus the Fourth. At this Third
and last Meeting there were Nine Sessions, the Last whereof began the Third of
December, An. 1563. The chief Points treated of at this Council were concerning
the Scriptures, Original Sin, Justification, the Sacraments in General,
Baptism, the removing of the Council, the Eucharist, Repentance, Extreme
Unction, Communion of Lay-persons under one kind, the Sacrifice of Mass, the
Sacrament of Order, Matrimony, Purgatory, Worshipping of Relics, Invocation
of Saints, Worshipping of Images, Indulgencies, the choice of Meats, Fastings,
and Festivals. The History of this Council of Trent is extant.

Of National Councils there have been many more than what are before mentioned,
as here in Britain, and in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, the Eastern, and
African. In Italy it is said, that there are to be found 115 such Synods, as it
were National, which go under the Name of Roman Councils. But such as are of
the most Remark in each of these Countries, and the principal things they
determined, you may find a touch of (and no more) in the Learned Bishop
Prideaux his Synopsis of Councils, in the Eighth Chapter, Edit. 5. Oxon. 1672.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Excommunication.
1. What Excommunication is: It is Twofold. 2. By what Appellations the Greater
and Lesser Excommunication are known and distinguished; their respective
derivations and significations, and the nature of each. 3. Ecclesiastical
Censures in the general may be Threefold. 4. What the Law intends by
Excommunication ipso facto. 5. What the Excommunicate is not debarred of by
Law. 6. Legal Requisites to the due pronunciation of the Sentence of
Excommunication. 7. What course the Law takes with an Excommunicate, after
Forty days so perisisting obstinate. 8. The several Causes of Excommunication
ipso facto, enumerated by Lindwood. 9. The Causes of Excommunication ipso
facto, by the Canons now in force in the Church of England. 10. The several
Writs at Law touching persons Excommunicate; and the Causes to be contained in
a Significavit, whereon the Excommunication proceeded. 11. What the Writs de
Excommunicato Deliberando, also de Excommunicato Recipiendo do signify in Law.
12. A sufficient and lawful Addition to be in the Significavit, and in the
Excom. Capiend. Vid. Sect. 10. 13. Several Statutes touching Persons
Excommunicated. 14. Excommunication for striking in the Church. 15. Whether a
Bishop has Jurisdiction, or may Cite a man out of his Diocese. 16. What are
the Requisites of a Certificate of Excommunication for stay of Actions, and how
it ought to be qualified. 17. A Significavit of Excommunication, for not
Answering Articles, not showing what they were, not good. 18. By whom an
Excommunication may be Certified, and how. 19. In what case the Significavit of
an Excommunication ought to express one of the Causes mentioned in the Statute.
20. Whether a General Pardon does discharge an Excommunication for Contempt
precedent to the Pardon, or shall discharge the Costs of Court thereon? 21. A
man taken upon an Excom. Cap. and discharged, because the Significavit did not
express the party to be Commorant within the Bishops Diocese at the time of the
Excommunicat. 22. Where a man is twice Excommunicated, whether an Absolution
for the latter shall purge the first Excommunication. 23. Whether a Prohibition
lies to the Ecclesiastical Court, upon Costs there given, not in an Action at
the Suit of the party, but upon an Information there exhibited. 24. What Remedy
in Law for a party wrong fully Excommunicated, and so remaining Forty days,
without suing a Prohibition. 25. Whether a Person taken by a Capias de Excom.
Capiend. be Bailable or not; And whether the Bishop may take Bond of the
Excommunicate to perform Submission for their Absolution.
(1.) EXcommunication, An. 23. H. 8. c. 3.
commonly termed in the Common Law, in the Law-French thereof, Excommengement,
is a Censure of the Church, pronounced and inflicted by the Canon or some
Ecclesiastical Judge lawfully Constituted, whereby the party against whom it is
so pronounced, is pro tempore deprived of the lawful participation and
Communion of the Sacraments. And is also sometimes (as to Offenders) a
deprivation of their Communion, and sequestration of their persons from the
Converse and Society of the Faithful. And therefore it is distinguished into
the Greater and Lesser Excommunication; the Greater comprizing as well the
latter as the former part of the abovesaid definition or description; the
Lesser comprizing only the former part thereof. de Except. c. a nobis. Lindw.
de Cohab. Cler. gl. in verb. Sacramenta. Excommunicatio, quasi, extra
Communionem. For Excommunication is, Extra Communionem Ecclesiae separatio; vel
Censura Ecclesiastica excludens aliquem a Communione Fidelium 11. quest. 3.
cap. nihil. in Jur. Can.
This Ecclesiastical Censure, when it is Just, is not by any means to be
despised or opposed; for Christ himself is the Author thereof Matt. 18. 17. 1
Cor. 5. 9, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
Anciently among the Hebrews, such persons as were Excommunicated, were termed
Aposynagogi, as being quasi Synagoga exacti, and to be shunned or avoided of all
men until they repented. That of our Savior in Matthew. 18. 17. [ Let him be
unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican] seems to referr to some such
Excommunication, the power whereof by way of Judicature being then in the
Jewish Sanhedrim, or College of Elders.

(2.) This Ecclesiastical Censure, when limited or restrained only to the
Lesser Excommunication, the Theologists will have to be understood by the Greek
word Anathema, Romans 9. 3. Gal. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 16. 22.
Accursed or Separated; and when it extends to the Greater Excommunication,
then to be understood by the Syriack word Maran-atha, or [ Our Lord cometh]
Anathema Maran atha. [Anathema] Let him be Accursed, quasi, Devoted to the
Devil, and separated from Christ and his Churches Communion: [Maran-atha] Some
take this for a Syriack word Bez. Annot. in 1 Cor. 16. 22.
. Others, not so well satisfied with that Judgment, will have it to be a
Chaldee word, yet used in the Hebrew, and familiarly known among the Greeks
Calv. Com. ibid. and Buxtorf. Lexic.
. [ Maran-atha] viz. [Our Lord comes,] for Maran is, our Lord, and atha,
comes; or rather three words more properly, viz. Mara-na-atha, Our Lord
comes. Being a word used in the greatest Excommunication among the Christians,
intimating or implying, That they summoned the person Excommunicated before the
dreadful Tribunal at the last coming of the Son of God, or that such as were
under this Censure of the Church, were given up and reserved to the Lords
coming, to be judged by him; and mean while (without Repentance and Absolution)
are to expect nothing, but the Terrible coming of Christ to take Vengeance of
them. To which that Prophecy of Enoch seems to allude, Behold, the Lord comes
with Ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, etc. The
Venerable Mr. Bid does suppose, that this answers to the heaviest Curse
amongst the Jews; for they had (1) their [ Niddui,] (2) their [ Cherem] that
is, Anathema. This their Cherem, was either the simple and single Anathema, or
their Shematha or Maranatha: For this dreadful kind of Excommunication, here
called Maran-atha, the Jews called Sammatha; Sem signifying the name of God
Tetragrammaton, or Jehovah, and atha, he comes; though others will have that
Sammatha to be derived from [ Sam] that is [ their] and [ Mitha] that is [
death] their death. But not to insist further on the words whereby this
Ecclesiastical Censure of Excommunication is signified; for that is but as a
Flash of Lightning, in respect of the Thunder of the Curse it self.

(3.) Although every Excommunication is an Ecclesiastical Censure, yet every
Ecclesiastical Censure is not an Excommunication; for an Ecclesiastical Censure
may be as well per Suspensionem, and per Interdictum, as per Excommunicationem.
Extr. de verb. sig. c. quaerenti. Hanc autem Censuram fulminare possunt Eccles.
Praelati, quibus ab homine, Lege, vel Canone, aut Consuetudine tribuitur
Jurisdictio Ordinaria. De Offic. Ord. c. cum ab Ecclesiar.

4. It has been sometimes questioned, what the Law intends by Excommunication
ipso facto; that Clause imports, ac si diceret, ipso jure, that is, nullo
hominis ministerio interveniente. Not. per Arch. de Rescrip. c. 1. verb. ipso
jure. li. 6. Lindw. de Offic. Archid. gloss. in c. Vt Archidiacont, verb. ipso
facto. And regularly when a person is Excommunicated, it is not intended only
of the Lesser Excommunication, Nam Excommunicatio simpliciter prolata,
intelligitur de Majori. Extr. de Sen. Excom. c. Si quem 11. q. 3. debent. and
Lindw. glos. verb. Excommuni. c. Exhorrenda. De Procuratorib.

(5.) Notwithstanding, the Law does not exclude the Excommunicate from such
lawful Acts, as sine quibus vix potest consistere vita hominis. Glos. ibid. in
verb. Actu Legitimo. And although depending the Excommunication, he is
disqualified to commence Actions at Law as a Plaintiff, yet he may ad sui
defensionem appellare, and caetera in Judicio facere and exercere, quae ad ejus
defensionem pertinent. Gloss. Lindw. ibid. And according to Lindwood, he may
Matrimonium Contrahere; etiam and Testari. Lindw. ibid.

(6.) This Sentence of Excommunication ought not to be pronounced against
Offenders otherwise than rite and cum debita solennitate, that is, juris ordine
servato; and therefore the Canon requires, That there issue a Summons or
previous Citation to the Delinquent, before Sentence of Excommunication be
pronounced against him. Primo vocetur Delinquens propositurus Causam
rationabilem, quare pronunciari non debeat incidisse in dictam Sententiam. Ad
effectum namque quod aliquis denuncietur Excommunicatus, a Canone vel
Constitutione requiritur Citatio praevia. C. Si per vim vel alio modo. l. fin.
de Man. and Obed. c. inter quatuor. de Cens. c. fi. in Oec. cum glos. So
likewise the Canon is, That Nemo Excommunicationem promulget, ubi Excessus non
est manifestus, nisi Monitione Canonica praecedente. Lindw. de Sentenia Excom.
c. Vt Archidiaconi. unless the same party for the same cause be Excommunicated
again, in which case there needs not any previous Citation or Monition as
before; Nam Excommunicatio quae sit saepius ex eadem Causa, potest fieri nulla
Citatione, nullaque Monitione praevia. Ibid. c. praeteria. ver.
Excommunicentnr: For in truth this Excommunication in such case is not any new
Sentence of Excommunication, but only a Ren^vation of the former with an
Aggravation; for which reason it is, that such Excommunication as is again
pronounced against the same person for the same cause repeated by him, may be
nulla Citatione, nullave Monitione praecedente. Ibid. and Extr. de Judaeis. c.
ita quorundam. Whence it does appear, That a person Excommunicated may be
Excommunicated again, either for the same or some other new Cause. Ibid. and 3.
q. 4. engeltrudam. And although the First Excommunication is in effect
sufficient for the ejecting such an one out of the Church, so that he who is
once cast out of the Church, amplius excludi non potest; yet by this Second
Denunciation there follows another effect, and that is, That thereby he may be
reputed and held by all the Faithful in all places, as a person utterly shut
out of the Church, donec per suum Judicem secundum formam Ecclesiae fuerit
absolutus. Gloss. ibid. verb. and denuncientur.

(7.) Also, Old N. P. 34. 35. b.
when a person Excommunicated has Forty days persisted in his obstinacy
contrary to Law under that Sentence, the Bishop may then make his humble
address to the King for the apprehending and imprisoning such obstinate
Excommunicates; but this may not be done by any inferior to a Bishop, Nam ad
rogatum praelatorum inferiorum Rex non consuevit scribere pro Captione
Excommunicatorum. Lindw. de Sententia Excom. c. praeteria. glos. in verb.
Praelatorum. And therefore if a man be Excommunicated by any inferior to a
Bishop, as by a Dean, Archdeacon, or the like, yet the Supplication for his
Majesty's Writ ought to be by the Bishop of that Diocese, and in his Name; Nam
Inferiores Episcopis non possunt invocare Brachium Seculare. Ibid. and Lindw.
de Cohab. Cler. and Mul. c. 1.. and si nec. ver. Brachium Seculare. And in case
the Bishop shall herein refuse to do what the Law requires, he may be
constrained thereto by the Archbishop. Ibid. and de jur. patron. c. nullus. Nor
can the Excommunicated person, who (after Forty days persisting in his
obstinacy) is upon the Kings Writ (on the Significavit) pro Corp. Excom.
Capiendo apprehended or like to be apprehended, evade Imprisonment, or defend
himself by an Appeal, or by virtue thereof, or by showing the same to the
Temporal Judge, that so under pretense of a dependency of an Appeal he may
escape Imprisonment; because such Appeal as to the validity or invalidity
thereof, or teneat vel non teneat, legitima vel non legitima, falls under the
scrutiny and examination, not of the Temporal, but Ecclesiastical Judge; and
therefore si talis indag^ sive discussio pertains not to the Secular Judge, it
were frivolous to allege that before one not qualified to examine the merits
of the Appeal. Dict. c. praeteria. glos. in verb. Dari debet. And as persons
Excommunicated cannot legally have any shelter or subterfuge under pretense of
such Appeals: so neither do the Canons suffer the Contemners of this Sentence
of Excommunication to go unpunished; under which number regularly and generally
are computed all such as animo indurato do persevere under Excommunication by
the space of Forty days, according to the Custom of the Realm of England.
Lindw. de Sententia Excom. c. ut Archidiaconi. glos. in verb. Contemnentes. But
more particularly the Canons hold them Contemners of this Excommunication, who
add Culpam culpae; or go into the Church, albeit Divine Service be not then
celebrating, unless it be to hear the word preached, which being ended, he is
immediately to depart; or stand at the Church-door in the time of Divine
Service, and hearing the same, albeit he go not within the Church it self; or
thrust himself into the company of others, when it is in his power to avoid it;
or lastly, when he continues too long secure under such Sentence of
Excommunication without repentance, whereby the Law concludes him so manacled
by his obstinacy, as no Spiritual Physic can have any operation upon him: And
although regularly the Return of such a one is to be expected usque ad annum;
yet in this Kingdom ( quoad incovationem Brachii Secularis) it is sufficient if
Forty days be expired after his Excommunication. Ibid. c. 1. authoritate glos.
in verb. Contemnentes. And whereas we often in the Law meet with certain Cases
of Offenses, incurring the Sentence of Excommunication ipso facto, that is as
aforesaid, nullo hominis ministerio interveniente; Requiritur tamen, even in
that case, Sententia Declaratoria. C. cum secund. Leges. de Haeret. li. 6. and
Lindw. de Foro Comp. c. 1. glos. in verb. ipso facto.

(8.) It is therefore not impertinent here to insert, what principally those
Offenses are, on the Guilty whereof the Law does inflict this Excommunication
ipso facto. Lindwood tells us, that there are found among the Canons and
Constitutions Provincial these Cases following, wherein Excommunication ipso
facto is incurred; viz. (1) A wilful and malicious impeding the execution of
the Canon against Incontinency, specially in Ecclesiastics as to Concubines.
(2) A clandestine and surreptitious Proceeding at Law, even to the Writ of
Banishment, against an innocent person, and ignorant of the Proceedings. (3)
Bigamy. (4) False Accusing of any Innocent Clergyman before a Temporal Judge,
whereby he happens to suffer under the Secular Power. (5) A laying Snares to
entrap any in holy Orders; whereby afterward to charge them falsely before the
Secular Powers with Crimes, whereof they were not guilty. (6) A violation of
lawful Sequestrations made by the Bishops, their Vicars general, or principal
Officials. (7) The exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by any Clerk
married, or by any Lay-person, in matters only and properly pertaining to the
Cognizance of the Church. (8) Disobedience to the Gregorian Constitution,
forbidding the holding of Two Benefices Incompatible cum Cura animarum without
a Dispensation. (9) A procuring to be Presented to a Benefice that is already
full of an Incumbent, by virtue of the Writs of Quare non admisit, or Quare
impedit, or the like. (10) Abettors and Advisors of any to fraudulent
Conveyances or Deeds of Gift in fraudem Ecclesiae, Regis Creditorum, aut
haeredum. (11) All such as hinder any of what quality soever, that are legally
Testable, from making their last Wills and Testaments, or afterward do
unjustly obstruct the due execution of the same. (12) All such as hinder the
devotion of the people, in making their Offerings and paying their Tithes,
converting them to their own use. (13) All such as deny the gathering of the
Tithes of any Fruit, or molest and hinder the Collectors thereof. (14) All
Laypersons who usurp upon such Oblations and Offerings as are due and appertain
only to Ecclesiastical persons, without their assent and the assent of the
Bishop. (15) Sacrilegious persons, and all such as invade the just Rights,
Liberties, or Revenues of the Church, or otherwise unjustly possess themselves
de bonis Ecclesiasticis. (16) All Bailiffs and other Officers, that unjustly
enter upon the Goods of the Church, or unduly exact from the same, or commit
Waste upon any the Revenues of a Church vacant. (17) All Oppugners of Episcopal
Authority, or that resist and oppose the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and all such as dissuade others from their due Obedience
thereunto. (18) All such as being imprisoned for their Contempt to some
Ecclesiastical Sentence, are thence set at liberty contrary to the Liberties
and Customs of the Church of England, being Excommunicate persons when they
were first apprehended. (19) All such as violently usurp upon the propriety of
such Trees and Fruits as grow in the Churchyards, rooting them up or felling
them down, or mowing down the Grass thereof, contrary to the will and without
the consent of the Rector, or Vicar of any Church or Chapel, or their Tenants.
(20) All such as should non rite solemnize Prohibited Marriages, that is, such
as have any Canonical Impediment. (21) All such as contrary to the true
Catholic sense shall assert any thing, or lay down positions, or make
propositions, sauouring of Heresy, publicly in the Schools. (22) All such as
in their Preaching or otherwise shall violate the Canon, that enjoins a due
examination and approbation of persons before they are admitted to Preach the
Word of God. (23) All such as touching the Sacraments assert any thing beside
or contrary to the determination of the Church, or call such things into doubt
publicly, as are defined and stated by the Church. (24) All such as in the
Universities do (after a premonition to the contrary) hold any Opinions, or
assert any Doctrines, Propositions or Conclusions, touching the Catholic
Faith, or good manners, of an ill tendency, contrary to the determination of
the Church. (25) All such Clerks as without Ecclesiastical Authority, shall of
themselves or by any Lay-power intrude themselves into the possession of any
Parochial Church, or other Ecclesiastical Living, having Curam animarum. These
Cases, and some others, now not of use in this Realm, are enumerated by
Lindwood. Lindw. de Sententia Excom. c. ult. gloss. in verb. Candelis accensis.
But there are very many other Cases in the Canon Law that fall under this
Excommunication ipso facto, by which in the Law is ever understood the Major
Excommunicatio, and was wont to be published and denounced in the Church Four
solemn days in every year, when the Congregation was likeliest to be most
full, and that in Majorem terrorem.

(9.) The Causes of Excommunication ipso facto, according to the Constitutions
and Canons Ecclesiastical of the Church of England, now in force, are such as
these, viz. (1) Impugners of the Kings Supremacy. (2) Affirmers of the Church
of England, as now established, to be not a true and Apostolical Church. (3)
Impugners of the Public Worship of God, established in the Church. (4)
Impugners of the Articles of Religion, established in the Church of England.
(5) Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies, established in the Church of
England. (6) Impugners of the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. (7) Impugners of the Form of making and Consecrating Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. in the Church of England. (8) Authors of Schisms in the Church. (9)
Maintainers of Schismatics, Conventicles, and Constitutions made in
Conventicles. Likewise by the said Canons, the Ecclesiastical Censure of
Excommunication is incurred by all such Ministers, as Revolt from the Articles
unto which they subscribed at their being made Ministers, and do not reform
after a months suspension: Also by all such persons as refuse the Sacraments at
the hands of Unpreaching Ministers, after a months obstinacy, being first
suspended: Also by all such Ministers as without their Ordinaries License under
his Hand and Seal, appoint or keep any Solemn Fasts either publicly or in
private Houses, having been formerly suspended for the same fault; and finally
by all Ministers who hold any private Conventicles, to Consult on any thing
tending to the impeaching or depraving of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, or of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any part of the Government, and
Discipline now established in the Church of England, which by the Seventy third
Canon, is Excommunication ipso facto.

(10.) Touching persons thus Excommunicated, persisting Forty days in their
obstinacy, there are Three several Writs at the Law, issuing from the Secular
power, viz. Excommunicato Capiendo: Excommunicato Deliberando: Excommunicato
Recipiendo. The Excommunicato Capiendo is a Writ issuing out of Chancery,
directed to the Sheriff, for the apprehending and imprisoning of him who has
obstinately stood Excommunicated Forty days; for the Contempt to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, of such not in the interim obtaining their Absolution,
being by the Ordinary certified or signified into Chancery, the said Writ
thence issues for the apprehending and imprisoning them without Bail or
Mainprize, until they Conform F. N. B. fo. 62. Stat. 5. Eliz. c. 23. Orig. Reg.
Writs, fo. 65, 67.
. Which Writ as by the Statute of 5 Eliz. c. 23. is to be awarded out of the
high Court of Chancery, so it is to issue thence only in Term time, and
Returnable in the Kings Bench the Term next after the Test thereof, and to
contain at least Twenty days between the Test and the Return thereof. And in
case the Offender against whom such Writ shall be awarded, shall not therein
have a sufficient and lawful Addition, according to the form of the Statute of
1 H. 5. Or if in the Significavit it be not contained, That the Excommunication
does proceed upon some cause of Contempt, or some Original matter of Heresy,
or refusing to have their Children Baptized, or to receive the Holy Communion,
as it is now used in the Church of England, or to come to divine Service, now
commonly used in the said Church, or Error in matters of Religion or Doctrine
now received and allowed in the said Church, Incontinency, Usury, Simony,
Perjury in the Ecclesiastical Court, or Idolatry: That then all pains and
Forfeitures limited against such persons Excommunicate by the said Statute of 5
Eliz. 23. by reason of such Writ of Excom. Capiend. wanting sufficient
Addition, or of such Significavit wanting all the Causes aforesaid, are void in
Law dict. St. 5. El. 21.
.

(11.) The Excommunicato Deliberando, is a Writ to the Undersheriff for the
releasing and delivery of the Excommunicate person out of Prison, Old N. B. 35.
a.
upon Certificate from the Ordinary into the Chancery of his Submission,
Satisfaction, or conformity to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction F. N. B. fo. 63.
Reg of Writs, fo. 67.
. And the Excommunicato Recipiendo, is a Writ whereby Excommunicated persons,
who by reason of their Obstinacy having been committed to Prison, and thence
unduly delivered, before they had given sufficient Caution or Security to obey
the Authority of the Church, are to be sought for, and committed again to
Prison Rep. of Writs (...)
. This Sentence of Excommunication by the 65 th Canon pronounced against any,
and not absolved within Three months next after, is every Sixth month ensuing,
as well in the Parish Church, as in the Cathedral of the Diocese wherein they
remain, by the Minister openly in time of Divine Service upon some Sunday, to
be denounced and declared Excommunicate; and where by the 68 th Canon Ministers
are enjoined not to Refuse to Bury, it is with an exception to such persons
Deceased, as were denounced Excommunicated Majori Excommunicatione; for some
grievous and notorious Crime, and of whose repentance no man is able to
testify C^n. 65. 68.
.

(12.) A Sentence was given in the Chancellors Court at Oxford at the Suit of
B. against H. and thereupon H. was Excommunicated, and taken in London, upon
the Writ of Excom. Capiendo. And it came into the Kings Bench, where he
pleaded, That there was no Addition in the Significavit according to the
Statute of 5 Eliz. and thereupon prayed to be discharged. And the Opinion of
the Court was, That by the Statute of 5 Eliz. the Penalties mentioned in the
said Statute are discharged, but not the Imprisonment nor the Excommunication
Hill. 6 Car. B. R. Hughes verse. Bendy. Jones Rep.
.

(13.) By the Statute of 9 Ed. 2. 12. the Writ de Excom. Capiendo may be
awarded to take a Clerk Excommunicate for Contumacy, after Forty days. And by
the Statute of 9 Ed. 2. 7. the Kings Letters may not be sent to an Ordinary to
Absolve an Excommunicate, but where the Kings Liberty is prejudiced. By the
Statute of 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 4. striking, or laying of violent hands upon any
person in a Church or Churchyard, is Excommunication. And by the Statute of 2
Ed. 6. 13. it is Excommunication to disobey the Sentence of an Ecclesiastical
Judge in Causes of Tithes. By the Statute of 3 Jac. 4. the Sheriff may
apprehend a Popish Recusant standing Excommunicate; and by the Statute of 3
Jac. 5. a Popish Recusant convicted, shall stand as a person Excommunicate. And
by the Statute of 3 Ed. 1. 15. he that is Excommunicated shall be debarred of
Mainprize.

(14.) V. against E. in the Ecclesiastical Court, where the Suit was for
Striking in the Church, which by the Second Branch of the Statute of 5 Ed. 6.
cap. 4. is Excommunication ipso facto. By which he surmized him incidisse in
poenam Excommunicationis. And being granted, if, etc. And Ashley showed cause
why it should not issue, viz. There ought to be a Declaration in the
Ecclesiastical Court of the Excommunication, before any may prohibit him the
Church. Richardson said, That the Proceedings are not contrary to the Statute,
but stood with the Statute. And it was said by Yelverton, It seems there ought
to be a Declaration in the Ecclesiastical Court: But the difference is, where
it is Officium Judicis, or Ad instantiam paris, they will give Costs, which
ought not to be. Hutton and Richardson, If the party will not prosecute it,
none will take notice of it, and they proceed to give Costs, then a Prohibition
may be granted. And if he be a Minister, he ought to be suspended for an
offense against the Statute. And it ought to be first declared, and so to
Excommunication; and that cannot be pleaded, if it be not under Seal. Dyer 275.
And after all these were agreed by the Court, and no Prohibition was granted
Viner against Eaton. Hetley: Rep.
.

(15.) B. was sued in the Ecclesiastical Court in a cause of Defamation in
another Diocese than that wherein he lived, and being Cited, was for
Nonappearance Excommunicated, and upon Significavit the Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo was awarded. Sergeant Finch, Recorder, prayed a Supersedeas for two
Reasons. (1.) Upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. because he was Sued out of the
Diocese; to which the Court ( viz. Jones and Whitlock) answered, That at the
Common Law a Bishop cannot Cite a man out of his Diocese. And that the Statute
of 23 H. 8. inflicts a punishment, etc. and Whitlock said, That a Bishop has
not power of Jurisdiction out of his Diocese, but to Absolve him being
Excommunicate. (2) Upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 23. because the Case of
Defamation is not within the Statute, and then the Statute Enacts, That it
shall be void. To which the Court answered, That he ought to averr that by way
of Plea, and so also said the Clerks of the Court, That he ought to have Sued a
Habeas Corpus, and upon Return thereof to Plead. But the Plea was admitted de
been esse, and the party bailed Bro^ no Case. Latch. Rep.
.

(16.) No Letters of Excommunication are to be received in stay of Actions, if
they are not under the Seal of the Ordinary 20 H. 6. 1.
, for an Excommunication under the Seal of the Commissary is not to be allowed
in such case Ibid. Adjudg'd.
. If the principal cause of the Action, for which the Excommunication was, be
not comprised within the Letter of the Certificate, it is not to be allowed;
that so it may appear to the Court, that the Ecclesiastical Court had
Jurisdiction of the Cause for which he was Excommunicated 14 H. 4. 14. b.
. The Certificate ought to be Vniversis Ecclesiae Filiis, or to the Justices of
the Court where the Suit is to be stayed 20 H. 6. 25.
. Also the Excommunication certified ought to be duly dated, that is, the
Certificate ought to contain the day of the Excommunication 20 H. 6. 25.
. A Certificate by the Archdeacon is sufficient by the Custom Contra 8 H. 6.
13.
; And upon an Excommunicato Capiendo, if it appears that the Excommunication
was by an Archdeacon of some certain place, it ought also to appear either
expressly or by implication in the Certificate, that the matter for which the
Excommunication was, was within his Jurisdiction, otherwise it is not good 14
Ja. Starling, Cas. Roll. Abr. ver. Excommunication.
.

(17.) F. being apprehended upon an Excommunicato Capiendo, and the
Significavit being, That he was Excommunicated for not answering Articles, and
not showing what they were, his discharge was prayed for the Incertainty
thereof, Excom. Cap. Incertainty.
and per Curiam it is not good, and therefore was Bailed: Coke 22 E. 4. is,
That a man was Excommunicated for certain Causes, Hill. 12 Jac. B. R. Fox his
Case. Roll. Rep.
not good; and so Co. 5. Arscots Case Schismaticus inveteratus is not good
Excommunication, nor shall be allowed in the cause of him who Excommunicates
him, 5 E. 3. quod fuit concessum per Doderidge.

(18.) In Trollops Case it was Resolved, That the Official cannot certify
Excommunication, for none shall do that, but he to whom the Court may write to
assoil the party, Co. 8. Trelleps Case. 6 Jac.
as the Bishop and Chancellor of C. or O. and for that if a Bishop certify and
die before the Return of the Writ, it shall not be received, but the Successor
shall do it; and one Bishop shall not certify an Excommunication made by a
Bishop in another Court, but a Bishop after Election before Consecration may,
and so may the Vicar General, if it appears that the Bishop is in Remotis
agendis; also that the Suit and the Cause are to be expressed in the
Certificate, that the Temporal Court may judge of the sufficiency, and if it be
insufficient (as if a Bishop certify an Excommunication made by himself in his
own Cause) the Court may write to absolve him.

(19.) H. was condemned in the Chancellors Court of Oxford, in Costs, and had
not paid; an Excommunicato Capiendo being awarded upon a Significavit, Trin. 6
Car. B. R. Hughe, Case. Cro. par. 3.
returned and delivered here in Court, according to the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap.
23. He was Arrested thereupon. Resolved, The Excommunication was good, though
the Significavit does not mention any of these Causes in the Statute, but it is
for other Causes; but if any Capias with Proclamations, and Penalties be
therein awarded, the Penalties be void un^ess the Significavit express it to be
for one of the Causes mentioned ^n the Statute.

(20.) In another Case, where a man was Excommunicated upon a Sentence in the
Delegates for Costs in Castigatione Morum, Trin. 6 Car. B. R. The King and
Rodmans Cas. Cro. par. 3.
21 Jac. a Capias with Proclamations issued; and he being taken, Quoad the
Excommunicato Capiendo pleads, That the Offense and Contempt was pardoned by
the General Pardon of 21 Jac. It was Agreed, That the Pardon did not discharge
the Costs of the party, which were taxed before the Pardon: It was moved there,
That as the Costs were not taken away, so no more was the Excommunication,
which is the means to enforce them to be paid. But Resolved, That this
Excommunication before the Pardon, is but for a Contempt to the Court, and all
Contempts in all Courts are discharged by the Pardon; wherefore the same was
discharged; and for the payment of the Costs, the party is to have new Process.

(21.) A man was taken upon an Excommunicato Capiendo; (...) C. Mores Rep.
and the Significavit did not mention, That he was Commorant within the Diocese
of the Bishop at the time of the Excommunication, and for that cause the party
was discharged. And in an Action where an Excommunication was pleaded in Bar,
L. (...) and Edwards Case. More. ibid.
and the Certificate of the Bishop of Landaph showed of it, but did not mention
by what Bishop the party was Excommunicated, it was for that reason adjudged
void.

(22.) Upon a Contract Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court was, That the
Defendant should marry the Plaintiff, (...) Case. Mores Rep.
he did not do it, for which cause he was Excommunicated. The Defendant
appealed to the Delegates, by whom the Cause was remitted to the Judge a Quo,
who Sentenced him again, where he was also Excommunicated again for
nonperformance of the Sentence: He appealed to the Court of Audience, and then
had (...). He was taken by a Capias Excom. upon the first Excommunication, upon
a Habeas Corpus it was Resolved, That the Absolution for the latter had not
purged the First Excommunication, quia Ecclesia decepta fuit. (2) That the
Appeal did not suspend the Excommunication, although it might suspend the
Sentence.

(23.) In Weston and Ridges Case it was Resolved, That upon an Information
exhibited in the Ecclesiastical Court, More's ibid.
for laying of violent hands upon a Clerk, and Costs there given against the
Defendant, for which he was Excommunicated for not paying them; a Prohibition
should issue forth, because it was not at the Suit of the party, and Costs are
not grantable there upon an Information.

(24). In the Case of Prohibitions it was Resolved, Mich. 8 Jac. That if a man
be Excommunicated by the Ordinary, Mich. 8 Jac. Co. lib. 12.
where he ought not, as after a General Pardon, etc. And the Defendant being
negligent, does not sue a Prohibition, but remains Excommunicate by Forty
days, and upon Certificate in Chancery is taken by the Kings Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, no Prohibition lies in this Case, because he is taken
by the Kings Writ. Then it was moved, what Remedy the party has who is
wrongfully Excommunicated: to which it was Answered, he has Three Remedies;
viz. (1) He may have a Writ out of Chancery to Absolve him, 14 H. 4. fol. 14.
And with this agrees 7 Ed. 4. 14. (2) When he is Excommunicated against the Law
of this Realm, so that he cannot have a Writ de Cautione admittenda, then he
ought Parere mandatis Ecclesiae in forma Juris, i. e. Ecclesiastici, where in
truth it is Excommunicatio contra Jus and formam Juris, i. e. Communis Juris:
But if he show his Cause to the Bishop, and request him to assoil him, either
because he was Excommunicate after the Offense pardoned, or that the Cause did
not appear in Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and he refuse, he may have (as the
Lord Coke says) an Action sur le Case against the Ordinary; and with this
agrees Dr. and Stu. lib. 2. cap. 32. fo. 119. (3) If the party be
Excommunicated for none of the Causes mentioned in the Act of 5 Eliz. cap. 23.
then he may plead this in the Kings Bench, and so avoid the Penalties in the
Act. Note, It was Resolved by the Court, etc. That where one is Cited before
the Dean of the Arches (in cause of Defamation, for calling the Plaintiff
Whore) out of the Diocese of London, against the Statute of 23 H. 8. and the
Plaintiff has Sentence, and the Defendant is Excommunicated, and so continues
Forty days; and upon Certificate into Chancery, a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo is granted, and the Defendant taken and Imprisoned thereby, That he
shall not have a Prohibition upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. for no Writ in the
Register extends to it; but there is a Writ there called De Cautione admittenda
de parendo Mandatis Ecclesiae, Co. ibid.
when the Defendant is taken by the Kings Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, and
to assoil and deliver the Defendant.

(25.) Where the Court of B. R. was moved for the Bailing of one, who was taken
by force of a Capias de Excommunicato Capiendo, upon the Statute of 5 Eliz.
cap. 23. and came to the Bar by a Habeas Corpus. Williams Justice, He that is
taken by force of a Capis de Excommunicato Capiendo, is not Bailable upon the
Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 23. which Statute does only dispense with the
Forfeiture of the Ten pounds, and such a person is not Bailable; and as to the
other matter, the same remains as it was before at the Common Law, and the
Statute of 5 Eliz. dispenses only with the penalty of Ten pounds. Yelverton
Justice of a contrary Opinion, and that in this case he is Bailable. Flemming
Chief Justice, This is a Case which does deserve very good consideration, and
that therefore he would consider well of it, and also of the Statute of 5 Eliz.
before he would deliver his Opinion. Williams Justice, clearly he is not
Bailable in this Case. Afterward at another time, it was moved again unto the
Court to have him Bailed. Yelverton Justice, That he is Bailable, and so was it
Resolved in one Keyser's Case, where he was taken by a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, brought hither by a Habeas Corpus, and upon Cause showed he was
Bailed by the Court, de die in diem, but neither the Sheriff nor any Justice of
Peace in the Country can Bail such a one, but this Court here may well Bail,
as in the Case before, de die in diem. It was further alleged here in this,
That in the Ecclesiastical Court they would not there discharge such a one,
being taken and Imprisoned by force of such a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo,
without a great Sum of Money there given, and a Bond entered into for the same;
otherwise no discharge there. Yelverton Justice and the whole Court, The Bishop
ought not to (...) such a Bond for the performance of their submission. The
Rule of the Court here in this was, That upon their submission they shall be
Absolved, without any such Bond entered into. Flemming Chief Justice, They shall
Absolve them, and if they perform not according to their promise and
undertaking, they (...) again by the Writ De Corpore Excommunicato Capiendo;
but the Bishop is to take no Bond of them for their Absolution, to perform
their Submission; the taking of such Bond by them being against the Law: And as
to the Bailment, all the Judges (except Williams Justice) did agree that he was
Bailable, and so by the Order and Rule of the Court he was Bailed. vid. Bulstr.
Rep. par. 1. fo. 122. Pasch. 9 Jac. in Case of Hall verse. King.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Statutes of Articuli Cleri, and Circumspecte agatis.
1. Several Statute-Laws relating to Ecclesiastical persons and things, enacted
under the Title of Articuli Cleri, in the Ninth year of King Ed. 2. 2. Some
other Statute-Laws touching Ecclesiastical matters, made the Fourteenth year of
King Ed. 3. 3. The Ratification and Confirmation of the 39 Articles of
Religion: The Subscription required of the Clergy. 4. Certain Cases wherein a
Prohibition does not lie to the Ecclesiastical Courts, according to the Statute
of Circumspecte agatis, made the Thirteenth of King Ed. 1. And in what case a
Consultation shall be granted.
(1.) THese are certain Statutes made in the time of King Ed. 1. and Ed. 2.
touching Persons and Causes Spiritual and Ecclesiastical An. 9 Ed. 2. An. 14
Ed. 3. c. 3.
. By the latter of these it is Enacted, (1) That upon demand of Tithes,
Oblations, etc. under that Name, a Prohibition shall not lie, unless the demand
be of money upon the Sale thereof 2 H. 5. fo. 10. 8 Edw. 4. 13 Fitz. Prohib.
18, 20, 27.
(2) That upon debate of Tithes amounting to a Fourth part of the whole, and
arising from the Right of Patronage, as also upon demand of a Pecuniary
penance, a Prohibition may lie: Not so, in case of demand of money voluntarily
accorded unto by way of Redemption of Corporal penance enjoined 31 H. 6. fo.
13. 28 H. 6. fo. 2^. 12 E. 4. 13. Regist. fo. 45, 50. V. N. B. fo. 32. F. N. B.
fo. 30. 42. Regist. fo. 35. Coke pl. fo. 465
. (3) That upon demand of money Compounded for in lieu of Corporal penance
enjoined for the Excommunication, for laying violent hands on a Clerk, a
Prohibition shall not lie Regist. fo. 31 5^, 57. F. N. B. fo. 52, 53. A. Rest.
pl. f. 483.
. (4) That notwithstanding any Prohibition, the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may
take cognizance and correct in Cases of Defamation, and the money paid for
redeeming the Corporal penance thereon enjoined may receive, notwithstanding a
Prohibition be showed Regist. fo. 45, 49. F. N. B. fo. 52. ^, 53. ^, Ra^^. pl.
fo. 487, etc. Co. lib. 4. fo. 20. Bro. asur Case, 15.
(5) That no Prohibition shall lie, where Tithe is demanded of a Mill newly
erected. (6) That in cases of a Mixed cognizance (as in the Case aforesaid, of
laying violent hands on a Clerk, whereby the Kings Peace is broken, and such
like) the Temporal Court may discuss the same matter, notwithstanding Judgment
given by the Spiritual Court in the case Rast. pl. 488. Coke lib. 4. fo. 16 20.
. (7) That the Kings Letters may not issue to Ordinaries for the discharge of
persons Excommunicate, save only in such Cases as wherein the Kings Liberty is
prejudiced by such Excommunication 5 Eliz. 23. Regist. 65. V ^. B fo. 33, 35.
F. N. B. fo. (...), etc. 5 Ed. 3. fo. 8. Co. lib. 8. fo. 68.
. (8) That Clerks in the Kings Service, if they offend, shall be correct by
their Ordinaries, but Clerks, during such time as they are in his Service,
shall not be obliged to Residence at their Benefices Regist. fo. 58.
. (9) That Distresses shall not be taken in the Ancient Fees wherewith Churches
have been endowed; otherwise, in possessions of the Church newly purchased by
Ecclesiastical persons Regist. fo. 98. 183. F. N. B. fo. 173, 174. a. St. 52 H.
3. 15.
. (10) That such as Abjure the Realm, shall be in peace so long as they be in
the Church, or in the Kings Highway Note, This was Repealed by 1 Jac. 25. and
21 Jac. 28.
. (11) That Religious Houses shall not by compulsion be charged with Pensions,
resort, or Purveyors Rast. pl. 373. St. 3 Ed. 1. 1.
. (12) That a Clerk Excommunicate, may be taken by the Kings Writ out of the
Parish where he dwells. (13) That the examination of the Ability of a Parson
presented unto a Benefice of the the Church, shall belong unto a Spiritual
Judge Regist. fo. 53. F. N. B. fo. 35. i. Rast. pl. 497. Coke lib. 5. fo. 57.
Dyer fo. 273.
. (14) That the Elections to the Dignities of the Church shall be free without
fear of any Temporal power St. 3 Ed. 1. 5.
. (15) That a Clerk flying into the Church for Felony, shall not be compelled
to abjure the Realm Note, This is also Repealed by the Statute of 1 Jac. 25.
and 21 Jac. 28.
. (16) And lastly, That the Privilege of the Church being demanded in due form
by the Ordinary, shall not be denied unto the Appealor, as to a Clerk
confessing Felony before a Temporal Judge.

(2.) In conformity to the premises there were other Statutes after made in
the time of King Ed. 14 Ed. 3.
3. whereby it was Enacted (1) That the goods of Spiritual persons should not,
without their own consents, be taken by Purveyors for the King. (2) That the
King shall not collate or present to any vacant Church, Prebend, Chapel, or
other Benefice, in another Right, but within Three years next after the
Avoidance Note, This is Repealed by the Stat. 25 Ed. 3. 2.
. (3) That the Temporalties of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. shall not be seized
into the Kings hands without a just cause and according to Law St. 25 Ed. 8. 6.
Regist. fo. 32. S. 1. Ed. 3. 2. 2. Sess.
. (4) That no waste shall be committed on the Temporalties of Bishops during
Vacancies, and that the Dean and Chapter may (if they please) take them to Farm
F. N. B. fo. 59. b.
. (5) And lastly, That the Lord Chancellor or Lord Treasurer may during such
vacancies, demise the Temporalties of Bishoprics to the Dean and Chapter for
the Kings use.

(3.) And as there are Articuli Cleri, so there are also Articuli Religionis,
being in all thirty nine; Agreed upon at a Convocation of the Church of England
Ann. An. 1562. St. 13. Eliz. c. 12. Where the Penalty for maintaining of
Doctrine against the Articles, is Deprivation.
1562. Ratified by Q. Elizabeth under the Great Seal of England, Confirmed and
Established by an Act of Parliament, with his Majesty's Royal Declaration
prefixed thereunto. Which Act of Parliament requires a Subscription by the
Clergy to the said thirty nine Articles; the same also being required by the
Canons made by the Clergy of England at a Convocation held in London Ann. 1603.
and ratified by King James. The said Subscription referrs to three Articles.
(1.) That the Kings Majesty under God is the only Supreme Governor of the
Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, etc. (2.) That
the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordaining of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains nothing in it contrary to the Word of God, etc. (3.) That he
allows of the said thirty nine Articles of Religion, and acknowledges them
to be agreeable to the Word of God. By the Statute of 13. Eliz. 12. the
Delinquent is disabled and deprived ipso facto, but the Delinquent against the
Canon of King James, is to be prosecuted and proceeded against by the Censures
of the Church Vid. Dyer. 23. Eliz. 377. and l. 6. f. 69. in Green's case
; And it is not sufficient, that one subscribe to the Thirty Nine Articles of
Religion, with this Addition (so far forth as the same are agreeable to the
Word of God.) For it has been resolved by Wray, Chief Justice, and by all the
Judges of England, That such subscription is not according to the Statute of
13. Eliz. because the Subscription which the Statute requires must be absolute:
But this is no other then Conditional Per Wray. B. R. Pasch. 23. Eliz. Smith's
Case. Vid. Co. Inst. p. 4. c. 74. verb. Subscriptions.
.

(4.) The Circumspecte agatis is the Title of a Statute made in the 13 th. year
of Ed. 1. Ann. D. 1285. prescribing certain Cases to the Judges, wherein the
Kings Prohibition does not lie Co. l. 7. f. 44. and l. 5. f. 67. and Inst. par.
2. f. 487.
. As in Case the Churchyard be left unclosed, or the Church it self uncovered,
the Ordinary may take Cognizance thereof, and by that Statute no Prohibition
lies in the Case. Nor in case a Parson demands his Oblations, or the due and
accustomed Tithes of his Parishioners; nor if one Parson sue another for Tithes
great or small, so as the fourth part of the Benefice be not demanded; nor in
case a Parson demand Mortuaries in places where they have been used and
accustomed to be paid; nor if the Prelate of a Church, or a Patron demand of a
Parson a Pension due to him; nor in the Case of laying violent hands on a
Clerk; nor in Cases of Defamation where Money is not demanded; nor in Case of
Perjury. In all which Cases the Ecclesiastical Judge has Cognizance by the
said Statute, notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition. So that the end of that
Statute is, to acquaint us with certain Cases wherein a Prohibition does not
lie. And the Statute of 24 Ed. 1. shows in what Case a Consultation is to be
granted Reg. f. 44. F. N. B. f. 50. c. 53. h. V. N. B. f. 32. Rast. pla. 483.
12 H. 7. f. 22. 2 H. 4. f. 9. Fitz. Consultat. 1, 2, 4. 5.
. And by the Statute of 50. Ed. 3. cap. 4. no Prohibition shall be allowed
after a Consultation duly granted; provided that the matter of the Libel be
not enlarged, or otherwise changed Reg. f. 45. V. N. B. f. 33. F. N. B. f. 45.
A.
.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of several Writs at the Common Law pertinent to this Subject.
1. What the Writ of Darrein Presentment imports, in what case it lies, and how
it differs from a Quare Impedit. 2. Assise de utrum, what, and why so called.
3. Quare Impedit, what for; and against whom it lies 4. What a Ne admittas
imports, the use and end thereof. 5. In what case the Writ [ Vi Laica
removenda] lies. 6. What the Writ Indicavit imports, and the use thereof. 7.
What the Writ Advocatione Decimarum signifies. 8. Admittendo Clerico, what; and
in what Case issuable. 9. The Writ [Beneficio primo Ecclesiastico habendo]
what. 10. That Writ [ Cautione Admittenda,] and the effect thereof. 11. The
writ of [Clerico infra Sacros ordines constituto, non eligendo in Officium,]
What the use or end thereof, 12. The Writ [Clerico capto per Statutum
Mercatorum] what. 13. What the Writ of [Clerico convicto commisso Goalae in
defectu Ordinarii deliberando] was. 14. What the Writ of [ Annua Pensione] was
anciently. 15. The Writ of [Vicario deliberando occasion cujusdam
Recognitionis] what. 16. Three Writs relating to Persons excommunicated. 17.
Assise of Darrein Presentment brought after a Quare Impedit in the same cause,
abates. 18. Difference of Pleas by an Incumbent, in respect of his being in by
the Presentment of a stranger, and in respect of his being in by the
Presentment of the Plaintiff himself. 19. Notwithstanding a recovery upon a
Quare Impedit, the Incumbent continues Incumbent de facto, until Presentation
by the Recoverer. 20. Of what thing a Q. Imp. lies, and who shall have it. 21.
Who may have a Quare Impedit, and of what things. 22. How, and for whom the
Writ of Right of Advowson lies. 23. What the Writ de jure patronatus, and how
the Law proceeds thereon. 24. The Writ of Spoliation, what, and where it lies.
25. The Writ Vi Laica removenda further explained. 26. The Writ Quod clerici
non eligantur in Officium.
(1.) AGainst the unlawful Possessor, who is the Usurper, lives Three Writs,
viz. One of the Right, as the Writ of Right of Advowson; and the other two, of
the Possession, viz. A Quare Impedit, and Darrein Presentment. This Assize of
Darrein Presentment or Assisa ultimae Praesentationis, is a Writ, which lies
where a man or his Ancestor has presented a Clerk to a Church, and after (the
Church becoming void by his death or otherwise) a stranger presents his Clerk
to the same Church, in disturbance of him who had last presented. This Writ is
otherwise also used Vid. Bract. l. 4. tract. 2. Reg. Orig. f. 30. and F. N. B.
f. 193.
; and differs from that of a Quare Impedit; for the Quare Impedit lies upon the
disturbance of one who has the Advowson in his Presentation, when the Church
is void: The other lies, where a man or his Ancestors had presented before, and
now (the Church becoming void again) a stranger presents in disturbance of him
who had last presented. Where ever a man may have Assize of Darrein
Presentment, he may have a Quare Impedit, but not e contra Terms of Law verb.
Quare Imp.
. He that has right to present after the death of the Parson, and brings no
Quare Impedit nor Darrein Presentment, but suffers a stranger to usurp upon
him, yet he shall have a Writ of Right of Advowson; but this Writ lies not,
unless he claim to have the Advowson to him and his heirs in Fee Simple ibid.
. Where the Ordinary, Metropolitan, or King presents for Lapse, any of these
Collatives will serve the Patron for a possession in his Assize of Darrein
Presentment 5 H. 7. 43. F. N. B. 31. F. Mich. 12. Jac. rot. 2642. Colt and
Glover verse. Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. Hob. Rep.
, which Assize of Darrein Presentment may not be purchased, pending a Quare
Impedit, for the same avoidance; and therefore in the Case, where William St.
Andrews brought a Writ of Assize of Darrein Presentment against the Archbishop
of York, Mary Countess of Shrewsbury, and one Hacker; and the Bishop making
default, the Countess and Hacker pleaded in Abatement, that the Plaintiff
before the Writ purchased, brought a Quare Impedit against the same Defendants,
and shows all certain, which remains undetermined, and averrs that they are
both of the same avoidance: And upon Demurrer the Writ was abated by Judgment
Mich. 15. Jac. rot. 32. C. B. William St. Andrews verse. Archbishop of York and
alios. Hob. Rep.
.

(2.) Assize de utrum or Assisa utrum, is a writ which lies for a Parson
against a Layman, or for a Layman against a Parson, for Land and Tenements
doubtful, whether it be Lay-Fee or Free Alms Vid. Bract. l 4. Tract. 5. r. 1.
and seq. Britton. c. 95.
. These Writs are called Assizes, probably either because they settle the
possession; and so an outward Right in him that obtains by them; or because
they were originally executed at a certain time and place formerly appointed;
or because they are tried most commonly by especial Courts set and appointed
for that purpose. The Incumbent, as touching his Right for his Rectory; has
the only Writ of Juris utrum, and for his possession any other possessory
Action.

(3.) Quare Impedit is a Writ which lies for him, who has purchased an
Advowson in Gross, or a Manor with an Advowson thereunto appendant, and
against him, who (when a Parson Incumbent dies, or a Church otherwise becomes
void) disturbeth the other in the Right of his Advowson, by presenting a Clerk
thereunto being void. Vhis Writ is distinguished from the former of Darrein
Presentment or Assisa ultimae Praesentationis, because this latter lies (as
aforesaid) only where a man or his Ancestors formerly presented, but the Quare
Impedit lies properly for him, who himself was the Purchaser of the Advowson;
though he that may have Assize of Darrein Presentment, may have the other if he
please, but not so Vice versa, as was also before observed. Yet it is said in
Reg. Orig. f. 30. That a Quare Impedit is of a higher Nature, than an Assize of
Darrein Presentment, because it supposes both a Possession and a Right Old N.
B. f. 27. Bract. l. 4. Tract. 2. c. 6. Brit. c. 92. F. N. B. f. 32. Reg. Orig.
f. 30. and Westminster. 8. c. 5.
. Which Quare Impedit the Executors of a Testator may (as well as himself
might) have upon a disturbance made to the Presentment; and so was the Opinion
of the whole Court in Smallwoods Case awainst the Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, that the Executors may have a Quare Impedit upon a disturbance made
to the Presentation Trin. 31. El. C. B. Smalwood, Case. Leon. Rep.
, which Writ lies also of a Chapel, Prebend, etc. St. W. 2. and in dict. C.
. And in case after the death of the Ancestor of him that presented his Clerk
unto a Church, the same Advowson be be assigned in Dower to any Woman, or to
Tenant by the Courtesy, which do present, and after the death of such Tenants,
the very Heir is disturbed to present when the Church is void, it is in his
election whether he will sue the Writ of Quare Impedit or of Darrein
Presentmet; the which, it seems, is also to be observed in Advowsons Demised
for term of life, or years, or in Fee Tail St. 13. Ed. 1. c. 5. and Fitz. Dar.
Pres.
. And Damages shall be awared in both these Writs, that is, if the time of Six
Months pass by the disturbance of any so that the Bishop does thereby Collate
to the Church, and the very Patron lose his Presentation for that turn,
Damages shall be awarded for two years value of the Church: And if the Six
Months be not elapsed, but the Presentment bederaigned within that time, then
Damages shall be awarded to the half years value of the Church: And if the
disturber has not wherewith to satisfy the Damages, where the Bishop
Collateth by lapse of time, he shall suffer two years Impisonment; and half
years imprisonment, where the Advowson is deraigned within the half year Stat.
ib. Fitz. Damage. 49. 17. 29 38. 93. 106. Fitz. Q. Imp. 34. 45. Die. f. 135.
236. 241. kel. f. 57. Fitz. En. 43. Co. l. 6. f. 48. l. 9. f. 26. In Broke-byes
Case 31 El. it was resolved, that an Executor shall have a Q. Imp for a
disturbance made in vita Testatris, if the Avoidance be a chattel rested.
. Likewise, he that recovers a Manor, whereunto an Advowson is appentlant,
being disturbed to present when the Church is void, shall have a Quare Impedit
St. 7 H. 8. 4.
. In which, as also in Assise of Darrein Presentment, plenarty of the
Defendants or Disturbers party is no plea Sr. 13. Ed. l. c. 5.
; but two Quare Impedits of one Church, and for one avoidance a man cannot have
Pasch. 15. Jac. E. of Bedford verse. the Bishop of Exiter.
. In the Case between the King and the Bishop of Norwich and Saker and Cole it
was resolved, that when one is admitted, instituted and inducted, by the
presentation of a common person, though it was upon an usurpation upon the
King, yet the King cannot remove the Incumbent without a Q. Impedit brought,
for the Church is full of him till he be removed -- Cro. par. 2.

(4.) Ne admittas, is a Writ that lies for the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit,
or him that has an Action of Darrein Presentment, depending in the Common
Pleas, and fears that the Bishop will admit the Clerk of the Defendant during
the dependency of the Suit betwixt them. This Writ must be sued within six
months next after the Avoidance, because after the six months the Bishop may
present by the lapse. Therefore if the Patron of a Church vacant, having or not
having any Controversy depending with another touching the right of
Presentation, doubts that before he makes his Presentation, the Bishop may
collate a Clerk of his own, or admit a Clerk presented by another to the same
Benefice unto which he has such right of presentation, he may at his own Suit
have this Writ of Ne admittas directed to the Bishop forbidding him to collate
or admit any to that Church during the time aforesaid Reg. Orig. fo. 31. F. N.
B. fo. 37.
.

(5.) Vi Laica Removenda, is a Writ which (upon the Bishops Certificate into
Chancery of a force and resistance touching a Church) lies where a Debate or
Controversy is between two Parsons for a Church, the one whereof does enter
into the Church with a strong hand and great power of the Laity, holding the
other out, and keeping possession thereof vi and armis; whereupon he that is so
held out of possession may have the said Writ directed to the Sheriff of the
County, to remove the force within that Church, and (if need be) to raise the
Posse Comitatus to his assistance, and to Arrest and Imprison the persons that
make resistance, so as to have their Bodies before the King at a certain day to
answer the contempt: which Writ is ever made returnable, and is sometimes
grantable without the Bishops Certificate, as aforesaid, for it may, it seems,
be had upon a surmise made thereof by the Incumbent himself without such
Certificate; there being a distinct and several form thereof in each of the
said Cases F. N. B. fo. 54. Reg. Orig. fo. 59, 60.
. So that this Writ properly lies for the removal of any forcible possession
of a Church kept by Laymen.

6. Indicavit is a Writ in the nature of a Prohibition, issuing out of the
Kings Temporal to his Ecclesiastical Courts, and lies for the Patron of a
Church, whose Clerk is Defendant in some Spiritual Court in an Action of Tithes
commenced against him by another Clerk, and extending to the value of the
fourth part of the Church, or of the Tithes belonging thereunto; for in this
Case the cognizance thereof belongs to the Kings Temporal Courts by the Stat.
of Westminster. 2. c. 5. wherefore, the Defendants Patron being like to be prejudiced
thereby in his Church and Advowson, in case the Plaintiff should prevail and
obtain in the Spiritual Court Reg. Orig. fo 35. b vid. Old. N. B. fo. 31. and
the Reg. fo. 35. and Brit. c. 109. tit. a.
. So that this Writ lies properly where there is a contest or Controversy
between two Clerks in an Ecclesiastical Court, of a Church or part thereof for
Dismes or Tithes amounting at the least to the value of the fourth part of the
Church; In which regard the Patron of the Clerk Defendant, losing his Advowson
in case the Plaintiff should recover in the Spiritual Court, shall have this
Writ directed to the Clerk Plaintiff, or to the Officers of the Ecclesiastical
Court, commanding them to cease their proceedings, until it be discust and
decided in the Temporal Court, to whom the cognizance of the Advowson belongs;
This Writ shall be between four persons, whereof two are Patrons, and two are
Clerks; and is not returnable as other Writs; but if they cease not their Suit
and proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court, an Attachment issues. Terms Law.
verb. Indicavit.
.

(7.) Advocatione Decimarum is a Writ, that lies for the claim of the fourth
part or upwards of the Tithes that do belong to any Church Reg. Orig. fo. 29. b.
.

(8. Upon a Ne admittas tried and found for, etc.
) Admittendo Clerico is a Writ granted to him, who has recovered his right of
presentation against the Bishop in the Common Pleas Reg. O. rig. fo. 33. a. F.
N. B. fo. 38.
.

(9.) Beneficio Primo Ecclesiastico habendo is a Writ directed from the King to
the Lord Chancellor, to bestow the Benefice that shall first fall in the Kings
gift, above or under such a value, upon this or that person Reg. of Writs fo.
307 b.
.

(10.) Cautione admittenda is a Writ that does lie against a Bishop, who
holds and detaineth an Excommunicate Person in Prison, notwithwanding he
offers sufficient Caution or Assurance to observe and obey the Orders and
Commandments of Holy Church from thenceforth. The form and further effect of
which Writ vid. Reg. Reg. of Writ. p. 66. F. N. B. f. 65. and F. N B 63. Vid.
Roll. Abr. f. 234.
.

(11.) Clerico infra sacros ordines constituto, non eligendo in officium, is a
Writ directed to the Bailiffs, etc. that have imposed a Bailywick or Beadleship
upon one in Holy Orders, charging him to release him thereof ib. f. 143. a.
.

(12.) Clerico capto per Statutum Mercatorum, etc. is the delivery of a Clerk
out of Prison, who is imprisoned upon the Breach of the Statute Merchant ib. f.
147.
.

(13.) Clerico convicto commisso Goalae in defectu Ordinarii deliberando, is a
Writ for the delivery of a Clerk to his Ordinary that was formerly convict of
Felony, by reason his Ordinary did not challenge him according to the
Privileges of Clerks ib. f. 69. a.
.

(14.) Annua Pensione is a Writ now grown obsolete and out of use: For whereas
anciently there were certain Abbeys and Priories, that in respect of their
Foundation or Creation, were obliged unto an Annual Pension due unto the King
for such his Chaplains unprovided of a sufficient Living, as he should nominate
and appoint: This Writ in pursuance thereof was wont to issue to such Abbot or
Prior, in favor of such whose name was comprised in the said Writ, until etc.
requiring the said Abbot or Prior, that for his said Chaplains better
assurance, he give his Letters Patents for the same Reg. Or. f. 1 65, and ^7.
and F. N. B. f. 231.
.

(15) Vicario deliberando occasion cujusdam Recognitionis etc. is a Writ that
lies for a Spiritual person imprisoned upon forfeiture of a Recognizance,
without the Kings Writ Reg. O^ig. f. 147.
. For as there is one Form of the Writ Statuto Mercatorio, for the imprisoning
of him who has forfeited his Bond called the Statute Merchant, until the Debt
satisfied, as to Lay persons: So there is another Form of the said Writ, as
against Ecclesiastical Persons ib. f. 148.
.

(16.) Touching the three Writs, viz. De Excommunicato capiendo. Excommunicato
deliberando. Excommunicato recipiendo vid. sup. in cap. de Excommunicatione.

(16.) The Village of St. Andrews brought a Quare Impedit against the
Archbishop of York and Countess of Strewsbury, Quare Imp. D^rrein Presentment.
and after brought an Assize of Darrein Presentment for the same Church. The
Quare Impedit is returned. It was said by the Court that the Assize of Darrein
etc. shall abate, vid. by Hobard. But if he had brought another Quare Impedit,
it had been well. And so it was resolved in the Earl of Bedfords Case; and by
Hutton, that the Statute of W. 2. cap. 5. proves it, viz. Quod habeant Ass.
etc. vel Quare Imp. but not both vid. 8 E. 3. 17. Mich. 15. Jac. C B. rot. 32.
N y. Rep.


(18.) In a Qua. Impedit the Plaintiff must allege a Presentation in himself,
or in those under whom he claims; and so must the Defendant. -- Sr. Jo. Tufton
verse. Sir Ric. Temple. Vaugh. Rep.
In a Quare Impedit the Incumbent pleads, that before the Action brought he had
been in by the space of six months, etc. of the presentment of S. S. in the
Church. This difference was taken by Sergeant Henden, and agreed by the Court:
when the Incumbent pleads the presentment of a Stranger, there he ought to
show, That the Stranger had a Title, and that he was seized of the Advowson,
etc. or that he was seized of a Manor to which, etc. But where he pleads that
he was in for Six months of the Presentment of the Plaintiff himself, or by
collation by lapse by the Ordinary, there he need not make any Title. 10. E.
11. Lister against Crameel. Noy 's Rep.
.

(19.) If a man recovers in a Quare Impedit against an Incumbent, the Incumbent
is so removed by the Judgment, that the recoverer may present to the Church
without other removal of the Incumbent, who yet continues Incumbent de facto
until there be a Presentation made by the recoverer M. 12. Jac. B. R. inter
Whistler and Singleton. Resolved per Cur. -- Roll. Abr. verb. Presentment. lit.
Q. nu. 6.
. And after such recovery in a Quare Impedit, a Stranger to the recovery cannot
present to the Church, for notwithstanding the recovery, the Incumbent
continues Incumbent de facto as to all Strangers to the recovery M 13. Jac. B.
R. inter Fairbank and Durrham.
.

(20.) A Quare Impedit lies of a Donative, and the Writ shall be Quod permittat
ipsum presentare ad Ecclesiam, etc. and set forth the special matter in his
Declaration Co. Lit. 344.
. And the Grantee of a next avoidance may have a Quare Impedit against the
Patron who granted the same 39 H. 6. qua. imp. 95. per Cur.
.

(21.) If the Husband, who has an Advowson in right of his Wife, be disturbed
in his presentation thereto, and dies, the Wife shall have a Quare Impedit on
that disturbance 3 E. 3. qua. ^mp. 57. 3 H. 5. qua. imp. 71. admit.
Also a Chapter may have it against the Dean for their several possessions 40.
E. 3. 28. b.
. It lies also of a free Chapel which a man has by Patent from the King, 14
H. 4. 11. b.
if the Sheriff refuse to put him into possession thereof 18 E. 3. 1.
. A presentation by a Bishop as Patron, is sufficient for the King to maintain
a Quare Impedit to the Church, when the Temporalties come into the Kings hand
by reason of vacancy of the Bishopric 50 E. 3. 26.
.

(22.) The Writ of Right of Advowson lies properly for him, who claims to have
the Advowson to him and his Heirs in Fee-simple Term. Law. verb. Quare Impedit.
. This Writ lies of an appropriation 44 E. 3. 34. 14 H. 4. 14. b.
. He that procures this Writ, ought to show a possession in himself or
Ancestors 21 E. 4. 1. 1 H. 4. 2. 21 E. 3. 27. b.
. Admission and Institution of a Clerk without Induction, is not sufficient to
maintain this Writ 38. E. 3. 9. Com. Hares and Bickley, 528.
.

(23.) When a man presents his Clerk to the Bishop within the Six months, and
also another presents his Clerk, in that case the Church is Litigious, and the
Bishop may issue the Writ De jure Patronatus, to enquire to whom the right of
Patronage belongs. This Writ may also issue out of Chancery to the Ordinary 34
H. 6. 39. b. per Moyle.
. And the Ordinary is to make Inquisition thereon 34 H. 6. 11. b. per Pr^sot.
. Some question is, at whose costs this Writ shall be sued, whether at the
Bishops, or at the parties? It has been said, that it shall be sued at the
costs of the Ordinary; because it is for his own discharge and for his ease 5
H. 7. 22. per B^tan. But Reble contra. and contra 34 H. 6. 11. b. per Danby.
and 2 Drs. and 35 H. 6. 19. per Prisot.
. But it seems otherwise, for that the Ordinary is not obliged to award a
Commission to enquire De Jure Patronatus ex Officio, but at the desire of the
parties 8 E. 4. 24. b. per Curtam. 5 H. 7. 20. b. per Reble. and 22 H. 6. 30.
per Mark.
. For when the Church is litigious, he may suffer the lapse to incurr without
enquiry. 34 H. 6. 41. Curia. 35 H. 6. 18. b. and if he should be obliged to
grant it ex Officio, then he should never have a lapse. 35 H. 6. 19. And by 34
H. 6. 38. It shall be at the costs of the parties, for that the Ordinary is
Judge in that case Roll. Abr. Ver. presentment. lit. P. page 384.
. If there be but one only that does present to the Ordinary; yet he may award
a Jure Patronatus 21 H. 6. 44. 34. H 6. 40.
. But if two present, then there may be two Jure Patronatus 21 H. 6. 44.
: And if the Ordinary admit his Clerk, for whom the right is found upon the
Writ, it will excuse the Ordinary, and he shall be no disturber, although the
right in a Quare Impedit be afterward found for the other party 34 H. 6. 11.
b. per Prisot. 34 H. 6. 38.
. But if on the said Writ the right be found for one Petron, and afterward the
Ordinary admit the Clerk of the other Patron, that is at his peril, for he may
(if he please) admit him, notwithstanding the Commission, and the finding for
the other 34 H. 6. 11. b.
. For it seems it is but for the Ordinaries better information. But when the
right on the said Writ is found for one Patron, and the Ordinary admits the
Clerk of the other Patron: if it be afterward found in a Quare Impedit, that
the right belongs to that Patron for whom it was found in the Jure Patronatus,
he will be a disturber ibid. per Prisot.
. It is some question, whether the Ordinary may suffer the lapse to incurr,
after it is found on the said Writ for one of the Patrons? It is supposed that
he may not: For 35 H. 6. 19. per Prisot. he shall not have any lapse after it
is found for one of them, for he is to admit his Clerk 21 H. 6. 44. 45.
Roll^ubi supra.
. Yet after it is found for one of them, the Ordinary is not obliged to admit
his Clerk without a new request made to him by the Clerk, but no need of the
Patrons making any new request or presentation 34 H. 6. 12. per curiam.
.

(24.) The Writ of Spoliation lies properly by one Incumbent against another
Incumbent, where the right of the Patron comes not into debate F. N. B.
Spoliation. fo. 36. b. vid. Cas^ Edes verse. the Bishop of Oxford. in Vaugh. Rep.
. And therefore if a person be Created Bishop, and has a dispensation to hold
his Rectory, and after the Patron presents another Incumbent, who is instituted
and inducted, the Bishop shall have against that Incumbent a Spoliation; which
proves the Bishop to continue Incumbent after his Consecration, and to hold his
Rectory by his former Presentation; and in ancient times it was held, that
where the Pope does License one, who is created a Bishop, to retain his former
Benefice, and the Patron presents another, if in that Case the Elder Incumbent
sues a Spoliation in the Spiritual Court, it well lies, for both claim by the
same Patron 38 H. 6. f. 19. Br. Spoliation pl. 4.
. So that if one happen (during the Incumbents presentation) to be presented by
the same Patron, or do come into the same Church, by course of Law, so that the
Patronage comes not into Debate, a Spoliation lies.

(25.) If any man shall hold or keep the possession of a Church by force, so
that the Bishop or the Parson cannot do their office there, it shall be removed
by the Kings Writ, called Vi Laica removenda, as aforesaid: O. N. B. 33. b.
which Writ lies especially where the debate is between two Parsons touching
the same Church, or Prebendaries, on the Title, and where the one keeps the
other out by Force and Arms; but by this the Force only shall be removed, and
not the Incumbent, who is in possession of the Church, whether he be in
possession by right or wrong. F. N. B. 54.
And this Writ shall be granted on the bare Surmise of the Incumbent, or party
greived, without any Certificate made by the Bishop into Chancery, as upon such
Certificate, and also by reason thereof; and there are two several forms of the
Writ in these two Cases; which Writ is returnable or not, at the pleasure of
the party who sues out the same; Finch. Nomotexnia. p. 138.
and may be returned into the Court of Common Pleas as well as into the Kings
Bench.

S. was deprived by the high Commissioners for not conforming to the Canons of
the Church; it was general, quia Refractarius; but no particular Canon
mentioned: The King by reason of the said Deprivation, presented B. who was
inducted, but S. would not yield up the possession of the Parsonage-house:
whereupon the Writ of Vi Laica issued out of Chancery; the Sheriff came to the
house, but could not apprehend the parties; B. finding the house empty, entered
peaceably; S. made an Affidavit in B. R. that he was ousted by the Sheriff by
force, and B. put in possession; the Court of B. R. thereupon granted a Writ of
Restitution, he having an Appeal depending of the Deprivation: In this Case
these points were resolved; (1) That the Writ De vi Laica removenda is not
returnable unless the Sheriff find the Force. (2) That the Kings Bench cannot
award Restitution upon an Affidavit, but there ought to be a Return of the Writ
of Vi Laica etc. in the Chancery, and upon Affidavit made there, that the
Sheriff by virtue of the Writ has removed one and put another in possession,
Restitution is awardable. (3) Resolved, that upon a Deprivation by the High
Commissioners no Appeal lies, because the Commission is grounded upon the
Prerogative of the King, in the Ecclesiastical Government; and therefore the
Commissioners being immediate from the King and possessing his person no Appeal
lies. (4) Resolved, That the Canons of the Church, Bird and Smiths Case More
's Rep.
made by the Convocation and the King, without Parliament, shall bind in all
matters Ecclesiastical, as well as an Act of Parliament: In the principal Case
it was adjudged, that until the Deprivation was repealed, it stood good; and so
B. had good Title to the Church.

A Lease was made of a Rectory, a Parson was presented to it, and upon a
supposition, that he was held out by Force, had a Vi Laica removenda, Roberts
and Amond shams Case. More 's Rep.
upon which the Sheriff returned Non inveni vim Laicam, nec potentiam armatam,
notwithstanding which Return upon Affidavit, that he was kept out with Force, a
Writ of Restitution was awarded out of the Kings Bench. Yet in Zakars Case,
Coke Chief Justice said, we are to judge upon a Record, and not upon
Affidavits, in which Case he being deprived for Simony, Richardson Sergeant
moved the Court to have him restored again, Mich. 13. Jac. B. R. the Kings case
against Zakar Bulst. par. 3.
because (as he urged it) he was unlawfully removed: The reason being, that in
a Vi Laica removenda, whereby he was removed (which Writ by F. N. B. and the
Register, comes to remove omnem vim Laicam) he shows that the Sheriff did
dispossess him, and put another in, the which he ought not to do, and as Coke
Chief Justice then said, that in so doing he had done against the Law, if he
removes one and puts another in; and Richardson Sergeant there cited Robinsons
Case, Hill. 38. Eliz. where upon an Affidavit made that the Sheriff in a Vi
Laica removenda, had removed one, and put another in, there this was debated,
whether upon this showed to the Court the first man removed should be restored
again or not; and there resolved by the whole Court, the second man to be
displaced again, and the first to be restored; and Coke said, if a Justice of
Peace remove a Force, he cannot put another into possession:

(26.) There is a Writ in the Register, Quod Clerici non Eligantur in officium
Ballivi etc. For all Ecclesiastical persons in office are allowed certain
privileges by the Common Law in respect of their Function; they are exempt
from all personal charges, which might any way hinder them in their calling; F.
N. B. 175. b.
as to be Chosen to the Office of Bailiff, Beadle, Reeve or the like in respect
of their Lands; to which end the said Writ is provided, which does recite that
by the Common Law they ought not to be chosen to such offices aforesaid, and
commands that in case any Distress be taken or Amercement levied on any of them
on that account, that it shall be restored. So the Stat. of Marleb. cap. 10.
That persons of Holy Church, and persons Religious, Finch. ubi sup. p. 135.
Stamf. 133.
shall not be commpell'd to come to the Sheriffs Turn or Leet; and so also it
is by the Common Law. In Favor also of Holy Church the Law did anciently allow
them Two other privileges, viz. Clergy and Abjuration.

In the Ninth year of the Reign of King James, a question was moved, whether
after the Conviction of an Heretic before the Ordinary, the Writ de Haeretico
comburendo did at that day lie or not; as to the Resolution of which question
the Judges were then divided in opinion, as appears in the Fortieth Chapter
precedent,. 7. Cap. 40. sect. 7. in fin. sect. page 564.
what was then controverted, is now decided by an Act of Parliament made in the
29 th. year of his Majesty's Reign, wherehy it is enacted, that the Writ
commonly called Breve de Haeretico comburendo, with all process and proceedings
thereupon, in order to the executing such Writ, or following or depending
thereupon, and all punishment by death, shall be from thenceforth utterly taken
away and abolished.

(...)

FINIS.
THE INDEX Referring to PAGE and PARAGRAPH.
ABBY-Lands, how many ways privileged or discharg^^ (...) Tithes. p. 383. How
the Abbey of Battle came to be dispens^^ with from Visitation. p. 108. Sect. 8.
When and by whom (...) Abbey of Westminster was founded. p. 328. Sect. 5. Abbot,
whence that word is derived, and what it signifies. p. 326 327. Sect. 1. How
many Abbots anciently in England. p. 327. Sect. 1. and 328. Sect. 5. They were
reputed as Peers. p. 327. Sect. 2. Some were Elective, others Presentative. p.
328. Sect. 5. When and by whom made Elective. p. 331. Sect. 7. Three Abbots
condemned at once for denying the Kings Supremacy. p. 10. Sect. 14. Abeyance,
what. p. 183. Sect. 9. and 189. Sect. 8. and 284. Sect. 3. Abjuration, The form
thereof anciently. p. 141, 142. Sect. 8. Absence of the Husband from the Wife,
what requisite to cause a Divorce. p. 494. Sect. 2. Abstinence or Fasting Days,
the Original thereof in England. p. 130. Sect. 44. Acceptance of Rent, by a
Bishop, whether it shall bind him. p. 38. Sect. ult. By a Parson, whether it
confirms the Lease made by his Predecessor. p. 189. Sect. 8. Accessories
determinable in that Court which has cognizance of (...) Principal. p. 114.
Sect. 11. and p. 123. Sect. 25. Account, in what case an Executor shall not be
compelled thereun^^ p. 116. Sect. 12. Acorns, Whether Tithable. p. 383. Action
upon the Case, in what Case it may lie at Common Law for suing in the
Ecclesiastical Court. p. 444. Administrator, how he may make his own Goods
(...) Debts. p. 86. Sect. 11. Admission, what; and under what qualification
(...) p. 272. Sect. 6. the form thereof. p. 272. Sect. 7. Admittendo Clerico,
in what Cases that (...) Adultery, where Cogni^able, and (...) Advocatio
Medietatis Ecclesiae, and Medietatis Advocationis Ecclesiae, the difference in
Law between them. p. 206. Sect. 2. Advocatione decimarum, what that Writ
imports. p. 647. Sect. 7. Advowe or Avowe, who properly such. p. 206. Sect. 2.
and p. 213. Sect. 14. Advowson, what; and whence derived. p. 205. Sect. 1.
Twofold. p. 206. The Original thereof. p. 207. Sect. 3: A Temporal non
Spiritual Inheritance. p. 209. Sect. 6, 7. How Advowson in Gross differs from
Appendant. p. 210. Sect. 8. Whether it may be extended. p. 182. Sect. 7. By
what words in a Grant it may pass, or not. p. 211. Sect. 10. p. 214: Sect. 15,
16. Whether it may be Assets. p. 214. Sect. 15. Whether the Advowson of a
Vicarage endowed, belongs to the Parson or the Parsons Patron. p. 216. Sect.
21. Whether the Advowson of a Vicarage does pass by the Grant of the Vicarage.
p. 219. Sect. 24. Three Original Writs of Advowsons. p. 216. Sect. 20.
Aftermath, and Aftergrass, whether Tithable. p. 384. Age, at what age a Minor
Executor may administer. p. 219. Sect. 16. Agistment what, and whether
Titheable. p. 384, 385. Agreement between Parson and Parishioner touching
Tithes. p. 373. Sect. 47. and p. 385, 386. Good for years without Deed, not so
for Life p. 379. Sect. 69. and p. 386. Alcheron, how severely it does punish
Adultery. p. 471. Sect. 6. Aldermanus, anciently what? p. 96. Sect. 1. Aliens,
whether presentable to a Church in England, p. 264. Sect. 26. and p. 272. Sect.
6. Alimony, what. p. 508. Sect. 13. where cognizable. p. 510. Sect. 16. 18, 19.
In what Cases the Law allows Alimony or not. p. 509, 510. Sect. 14, 15. whether
due to her that Elopes. p. 508. Sect. 13. Alms, or things appointed for that
end, whether Tithable. p. 386. Altarage, what. p. 339. Sect. 1. whether Tithe-
Wool, or Tithe- Wood shall pass by the word Altaragium. p. 341. Sect. 3. p.
342. Sect. 4, 5. St. Andrews in Scotland, when and by whom the Bishop thereof
was made Metropolitan of all Scotland. p. 18. Sect. 9. Animalia Utilia and
Inutilia; the difference between them in reference to Tithes. p. 360. Sect. 17.
and p. 386. Annates, what; by and to whom payable. p. 335. Sect. 1. The
Original thereof. p. 337. Sect. 2, 3. vid. First Fruits. Annua Pensione, what
that Writ imports. p. 648. Sect. 14. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, the
first that made Appeals to Rome. p. 97. Sect. 1. and p. 118. Sect. 13. The
first Archbishop of Canterbury that was Legatus Natus. p. 98. Sect. 1.
Apparitor, Action against such for false informing. p. 88. Sect. 14. vid.
Summoner. Appeals to Rome, prohibited. p. 9. Sect. 14. p. 118. Sect. 13. They
are made to the King in Chancery. p. ibid. Appeal out of Ireland to the
Delegates in England, in what case. p. 407. vid. Delegates. Appellatione
remota, the effect of that clause in Law. p. 117. Sect. 13. Apples, what Tithes
they pay, whether small to the Vicar, or great to the Parson. p. 361. Sect. 21.
p. 386. In what case they may not be Tithable. p. 371. Sect. 44. Appropriation,
what. p. 223. Sect. 3. The original thereof. p. 221, 222. Sect. 1. Whether it
may be made without the Kings License. ibid. and p. 198. Sect. 3. Whose Assents
are requisite thereunto. p. 222. Sect. 1. How they are now changed in their use
and end, from what they were originally. p. 223. Sect. 2. Whether they might
formerly be granted to Nunneries. p. 223. Sect. 2. and p. 225. Sect. 5. They
may not now (as to their Original) be called into question. p. 226. Sect. 6.
How a Church Impropriate may become disappropriate. p. 229. Sect. 12. Arabians,
their strange conceit of Adultery. p. 471. Sect. 6. The punishment thereof with
them Capital. ibid. Arable Land, left Fallow and untilled every other year,
whether Tithable that year. p. 394. Archbishop, whence so called; A description
of that Dignity. p. 12. Sect. 1. What difference between Archbishop and
Metropolitan. p. 15. Sect. 3. Three Archbishops in England and Wales anciently.
p. ibid. Sect. 4. How that in Wales came to be lost, and when. p. 17. Sect. 6.
None in Ireland until the year 1152. p. 20. Sect. 13. In what Cases an
Archbishop may call Causes to his own Cognizance Nolente Ordinario. p. 19.
Sect. 10. Whether he may Cite a man out of his own proper Diocese. p. 100, etc.
Sect. 3. The great Antiquity, Precedence, Privileges, Style, and Precincts of
the Archbishop of Canterbury. p. 13. Sect. 1. He is the first Peer in England,
next to the Blood Royal. ibid. Anciently he had Primacy as well over all
Ireland as England. p. 20. Sect. 13. He was anciently styled Patriarcha, and
orbis Britannici Pontifex. ibid. He had some special marks of Royalty. p. 21.
Sect. 13. Several Privileges peculiar to him. ibid. Whether he had concurrent
Jurisdiction in Inferior Diocesses within his Province. p. 18. Sect. 9. That
See kept Four years by King William Rufus without an Archbishop. p. 24. Sect.
3. In what respects the Archbishop of Canterbury has some power over the
Archbishop of York. p. 18. Sect. 9. The Original of the Metropolitan See of
York. p. 14. Sect. 2. The Antiquity, Precedence, Style, and Precincts of the
Archbishop of York. ibid. Anciently an Archbishop of London. p. 17. Sect. 7.
Arch^s-Court, the hig^^ Consistory. p. 83. Sect. 6. Why so called. p. 100.
Sect. 3. The great Antiquity, Jurisdiction, and decent order (...) 5. (...) and
what he is. p. 60. Sect. 1. How he (...) Office and Jurisdiction. p. 61. Sect.
1. The (...) kinds of Archdeacons, and how many in England. p. 61. Sect. 2. How
they are distinguished by the Canon Law. p. 65. Sect. 10. Whence their P^rer is
derived. p. 62. Sect. 3. The Canon touching (...) to their Visitations. p. 64.
Sect. 9. Whether they have Power of Visitation Jure communi. p. 63, 67. Sect.
7. What Remedy in case an Archdeacon does refuse to swear the Churchwardens
elect. p. 164. Sect. 9. Whether an Archdeaconry be understood as a Benefice
with Cure p. 62. Sect. 5. and p. 200. Sect. 13 Arch-Flamins, what, and how many
anciently in England, and where. p. 16. Sect. 4. They were succeeded by as many
Archbishopricks. ibid. Arch-Presbyter, what, p. 56. Sect. 7 Arms, or
Coat Armor on Monuments or Church-windows not to be defaced or demolished. p.
138, 139. Sect. 5 Arrests, whether they may de executed on Christmas Day. p.
115. Sect. 12. Whether executable on Clergymen in time of Divine service. p.
141. Sect. 8. Articles 39 of Religion, what kind of subscription thereunto
required. p. 163. Sect. 8. Articles of Religion under King Ed. 6. p. 8. Sect.
14. The like under Q. Eliz. ibid. Articles of Enquiry on a Jure Patronatus. p.
180. Sect. 2. Articles before the high Commissioners at York against the Vicar
of Hallifax. p. 189. Sect. 9. Articuli Cleri, and Circumspecte agatis, what. p.
639. Assault on a Clerk, whether cognizable before the Ordinary. p. 115. Sect.
12. Assaults in the Church or Churchyard are not to be retaliated. p. 139.
Sect. 5 Assent to the Articles of Religion, what good or not, within the intent
of the Statute. p. 163. Sect. 8. Assent of the Ordinary requisite to the
Foundation of a Church, p. 207. Sect. 5. Assent of the Patron requisite to the
Union and Appropriation of Churches, p. 109. Sect. 8. Assise de utrum, what,
and why so called, p. 644. Sect. 2. Attorney at Law, he may not be elected
Churchwarden, p. 164. Sect. 9. Audience, or Court of Audience, what it was,
where kept, and what matters it took Cognizance of, p. 106. Sect. 7. Aumone or
Frank Almoigne, a description thereof, it is use and end, p. 338. Sect. 4.
AVoidance, what, 283. Sect. 1. Twofold, ibid. What difference between Avoidance
and Next Avoidance, p. 284. Sect. 2. How many ways it may be, p. ibid. Sect. 3.
In what Court cognizable, p. 122. Sect. 21. The difference between the Common
and Canon Law in reference to Avoidances, p. 286. Sect. 8. The grant of the
Next Avoidance, during an Avoidance, is void, p. 219. Sect. 24. Whether the
grant of a Next Avoidance good without Deed, p. 255. Sect. 4. Avowe or Advowe,
what, p. 181. Sect. 5. Austin, whether the first that preached the Gospel in
England, p. 13. Sect. 1. Whether the first Archbishop of Canterbury, p. ibid.
Where buried, p. 16. Sect. 4. Award or Arbitrament pleaded in Bar of Tithes in
the Ecclesiastical Court, and refused, no ground for a Prohibition, p. 122,
123. Sect. 25.
B.
BAIL, whether it may be taken for one apprehended by a Capias, De Excom.
capiend. p. 651. Sect. 25. Banns, what, whence derived; how published; by whom
dispensed with, and the legal Requisites in order to such Dispensations, p.
465. Bark of Trees, what not Tithable, p. 387. Barren Land, the Law touching
the Tithes thereof, p. 387. etc. Bastard, whence that word, and who properly
such, p. 478. Sect. 1. and p. 486. Sect. 16, 18. How differenced from Mulier at
Common Law, p. 478. Sect. 2. How distinguished at the Civil Law, p. 480. Sect.
5. How that Law computes the time of a Woman's going with Child, p. 482. Sect.
7. How computed at the Common Law, p. 482: Sect. 9. and p. 484. Sect. 12.
Bastardy, how distinguished at Common Law, p. 478, 479. Sect. 3. It is Triable
by the Certificate of the Bishop, p. 122. Sect. 21. How prosecuted in Courts of
Justice, p. 480. Sect. 6. and p. 484. 485. Sect. 13. How punished, p. 438.
Sect. 10. and p. 485. Sect. 14. Difference between the Common, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical Law in reference to Bastardy, p. 487. Sect. 19. Baud, whether
and where Actionable for calling one so, p. 519, 520. Sect. 11. and p. 520.
Sect. 13. and p. 523. 20. Beauford Henry, Great Uncle to King H. 6. and Bishop
of Winchester, made Cardinal, how he thereby fell into a Praemunire, p. 110.
Sect. 8. Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, his contention with King Henry 2. p.
100. Sect. 2. Beech-Trees, how and in what Case Tithable or not. p. 389. Bees,
in what kind they pay Tithes. p. ibid. Benefice Ecclesiastical, the true
definition thereof. p. 200. 12. The reasons of that definition. p. ibid.
Whether Ecclesiastical Dignities fall under the notion of Benefices. p. 200.
Sect. 13. Of what a Benefice consists. p. 200, 201. Sect. 14. No Contract to be
made for it, nor is it vendible. p. 201. Sect. 15. Six Signs or Requisites of
an Ecclesiastical Benefice. p. ibid. The common distinction thereof. p. 201.
Sect. 16. Beneficio primo Ecclesiastico habendo, what that Writ imports. p.
647. Sect. 9. Birch-Trees, whether Tithable after Twenty years growth. p. 390.
Bishop, the derivation of that word, and why so called. p. 22. Sect. 1.
Anciently he was the universal Incumbent of his Diocese. p. 13. Sect. 1. Why
called Ordinary. p. ibid. Sect. 2. What things requisite to his Creation. p.
25. Sect. 4. The form and manner of making Bishops. ibid. and p. 26. and p. 50.
Sect. 8. His interest and Authority in his several capacities. p. 29, 30. Sect.
9. Whether he may grant Letters of Institution out of his own proper Diocese,
and under any Seal other than his own Seal of Office. p. 31. Sect. 12. Several
things incident to a Bishop qua talis. p. ibid. and Sect. 13. In what respects
his Jurisdiction is not merely local. p. 32, 33. Sect. 15. The Dignity and
Precedence of Bishops here in England. p. 35. Sect. 19. Their precedence among
themselves. p. 13. Sect. 1. Their Capacity of Temporal Jurisdiction restored.
p. 36. Sect. 20. They were anciently invested per Annulum and Baculum. p. 24.
Sect. 3. and p. 29. Sect. 8. Bishops of London Deans of the Episcopal College.
p. 38. Sect. 22. Bishoprics in England, all Founded by the Kings of England.
p. 24. Sect. 3. How many iu England. p. 12, 13. Sect. 1. They were anciently
Donative. p. 24. Sect. 3. and p. 29. Sect. 8. Their Patronage is in the King.
ibid. How the Bishoprics of Wales became annexed to the Crown of England. p.
28. Sect. 6. They were erected into Baronies by King William the Conqueror. p.
35. Sect. 19. Blasphemy, what; whence so called; Threefold, the severe
Punishments inflicted thereon. p. 559, 560. Sect. 1, 2, 3. Bona Notabilia,
what. p. 104. Sect. 6. Bricks, whether Tithable. p. 390. Broom, in what Case
Tithable or not. p. 390. Buck and Do, not Tithable, yet payable for Tithe. p.
361. Sect. 20. and p. 380. Sect. 75. Bull, or the Popes Bull, whence so called.
p. 341. Sect. 3. Burial in the Body of the Church, who has right to License
it. p. 139. Sect. 5. Whether any thing payable to the Parson for Burial of him
out of his Parish, that died in his Parish. p. 188. Sect. 5. Burglary to enter
a Church by Night with an intent to steal. p. 141. Sect. 8.
C.
CAerlegion in Wales, anciently the Metropolis of Britannia Secunda. p. 16.
Sect. 4. Calves, how Tithed, and when, and what kind of Tithes they yield. p.
390. Camois, or Sir John de Camois, the remarkable Case of his demising his
Wife. p. 474. Sect. 11. Canon Law, when and how first introduced into England.
p. 129, etc. Sect. 44. Where and by whom it was first read in this Kingdom. p.
132. Sect. ibid. Whether it be any part of the Law of England. p. 585, 586.
Sect. 3. p. 131. Sect. 44. Canons anciently made by the Kings of this Realm
without the Pope. p. 6. Sect. 8. They were ever called the Kings Canons, not
the Bishops. p. ibid. They cannot be made, nor oblige the Subject without the
Royal assent. p. 7. Sect. 11. and p. 99. Sect. 2. They may not be repugnant to
the Kings Prerogative, nor to the Laws or Customs of the Realm. p. ibid. p. 9.
Sect. 14. p. 163. Sect. 5. p. 192. Sect. 15. p. 589. Sect. 6. What Canons in
force. 1 Ed. 6. p 585. Sect. 2. They are the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land.
p. 112. Sect 9. Canterbury, anciently the Royal City of the Kings of Kent. p.
13. Sect. 1. when first declared to be the Metropolitan Church of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. p. 20 Sect. 13. Cathedrals, whence so called. p. 347.
Sect. 1. Cathedraticum, what; and how it differs from Procurations; p. 72.. 9.
the original thereof. ib. Cattle, in what cases tythable or not, and the
Herbage thereof. p. 390, 391. p. 366. Sect. 33. p. 367.. 35. whether young
Cattle are tythable. ib. p. 370, 371.. 43. whether the Herbage of Barren Cattle
be tythable. p. 373.. 46. Caveat entered against an Institution to a Benefice,
whether it makes void such Institution made after the entering of the Caveat. p.
276.. 34. p. 280.. 18 whether a Caveat entered in the life time of an Incumbent
be void. ib. Cautione admittenda, what that Writ imports, and the effect
thereof in Law. p. 648.. 10. Certificate of the Bishop, requisite in a Plea of
Bastardy. p. 484.. 13. in what Case traversable. p. 88.. 12. Cession, what. p.
286.. 9. where Cognizable. p. 122.. 11. Chalk, whether tythable. p. 391.
Chancel, by whom to be repaired, p. 143.. 10. p. 175.. 4. In whom the Freehold
thereof (...). p. 150.. 22. Chancellor of a Diocese a description of his
Office. p. 81.. 1. What matters cognizable by him. p. 85.. 10. The original and
use of that Office p. 81, 82.. 2. What the Canons enjoin concerning such p.
ibid.. 3. Why called the Bishops Vicar General. p. 81.. 1. Whether a Divine not
experienced in the Civil and Canons Laws may be a Chancellor p. 82, 83.. 4.
Chaplains, whether the King, Queen, Prince, and Children of the Blood Royal,
may retain as many as they please. p. 294.. 3. How many the Archbishop of
Canterbury may retain. ibid, and p. 21.. 13. and p. 32.. 13. How many
retainable by a Bishop, ib. How many by a Duke, Marquess, Earl, and other
persons of honor, p. 294. Sect. 3. Chapel, whence that word p. 145, 146.
Sect. 15. How many kinds thereof. ibid. What a Chapel of ease, and what a Free
Chapel is, and by whom visitable. Sect. ibid. The Imperial Law touching the
building of Chapels. p. 146. Sect. 17. Chapter, what, p. 56. Sect. 8, etc. The
difference between Capitulum and Conventus. p. 58. Sect. 9. Charles Martell,
the first that violated the Church in point of Tithes. p. 354. Sect. 7. Charter
of William the Conqueror touching Consistories. p. 84. Of King John touching
the Election of Bishops. p. 183. Sect. 10. Of King H. 8 touching Pentecostals.
p. 74. Chaunter and Chauntry, what. p. 392, etc. Sect. 6. Certain differences
in Law touching Chauntries. p. 331. Sect. 8. Che^se, in what Case to be Tithed
or not. p. 391. Cherry-Trees, where adjudged Timber and Tithe-free. p. 392.
Chicken, how Tithable or not. p. 392. Child, how reputed legitimate or not, as
to the time of it is Birth in computation from the time of its conception. p.
484. Sect. 12. Chorepiscopi, what. p. 30. Sect. 11. Christmas Day, whether
Arrests may be made thereon. p. 115. Sect. 12. Church, none such in Law until
Consecration, p. 142. Sect. 9. Anciently a Sanctuary, p. 141. s. 8. Threefold,
p. 136. s. 1. Church Lands prohibited by the Imperial Law from being alienated,
p. 136. s. 2. In whom the Freehold of the Church and Churchyard is, p. 137. s.
3. Churchwardens, by whom Eligible, and wherein their Office consists, p. 160,
etc. Sect. 1. p. 162. s. 4, 5. p. 168. s. 21. and p. 166. s. 14. Whether they
are a Corporation in Law, p. 162, 163. s. 5. and p. 164. s. 11. and whether as
such they may take Lands to the use of the Church, p. 167. s. 17. and p. 168.
s. 22. What power they have touching Seats in the Church, p. 140, 141. s. 7.
What Actions may lie for or against them, p. 161. s. 2. p. 163. s. 7, 8. p.
167. s. 18. p. 168. s. 20. p. 186, 187. s. 3. Before whom they are to make
their Account, p. 161. s. 1. p. 166. s. 16. and p. 167. s. 19. Whether the New
Churchwardens may have Action for Trespass done in their Predecessors time, p.
162. s. 3. Cistercians, discharged of Tithes, p. 401. Their Privilege in
respect of Synodals, p. 72. s. 9. Citation, whether it may issue originally out
of the Archbishops Consistory, to any not inhabiting within his Diocese or
Peculiar, without License first obtained from the Diocesan, p. 20. sect. 12. p.
soi. s. 3. p. 105. s. 6. City, what properly, p. 15. s. 3. Clay, whether
Tithable, p. 392. Clergy, whence so called, p. 61. s 1. Margent. What their
Privileges, p. 193, etc. s. 18. Clerico capto per Statututum Mercatorum, what
that Writ imports, p. 648. s. 12. Clerico convicto commisso Goalae in delectu
Ordinarii deliberando, what that Writ signifies, p. ibid. s. 13. Clerico infra
Sacros Ordines constituto, non eligendo in Officium, what the use and end of
that Writ, p. ibid. sect. 11. and p. 652. s. 26. Clothes Fulled in a
Fulling-Mill, whether Tithable, p. 392. Coals, whether Tithable, p. ibid.
Coat Armor in a Church, whether Action lies against such as pull it down, and
for whom, p. 139. sect. 5. p. 150. s. 22. p. 154. s. 35. p 156. s. 38. p. 157.
s. 42. Collation, what, p. 252. s. 1. How it differs from Presentation and
Institution, ibid. It is only in Right of the Patron, p. 254. s. 3. Commendam,
what, p. 230, 231. sect. 1. Threefold, p. ibid. and p. 232. s. 3. The Law
touching Commendams, p. 232. sect. 4, etc. Commissary or Commissarus Foraneus,
what p. 81. Sect. 1. and p. 83. S. 5. and p. 89. Sect. 15. Whether the Grant of
a Commissarie's place or the reve^^an thereof by a Bishop, shall bind his
Successors, p. 90, 91. Sect. 17, 8. Whether the Office of a Commissary may be
granted to a Lay-person, p. 90 91. Sect. 18. p. 89. Sect. 15. Common of
Estovers, whether Tithable, p. 392. Commposition in reference to Tithes, what
the Law therein, 392, 393. For a man's life, whether good without Deed, p. 372.
Sect. 45. For one year, or more, whether good without Deed, p. 377. Sect. 61.
Commutation for Penance justifiable by Law, p. 89. Sect. 14. Confirmation of
Bishops, what, p. 44. Sect. 3, 4. The form thereof, ib. and p. 25, 26. Conge
d'Eslire, what, p. 29. Sect. 7. p. 42. Sect. 1. The original thereof, ibid.
Restrictions thereof, p. 29. Sect. 8. Consecration of Bishops, what, p. 46.
Sect. 1. The manner how, and the ancient solemnity thereof, p. 25, 26. Sect. 4.
It is Character indelebilis, p. 49. Sect. 6. The Scandal forged by the
Romanists, touching Consecration of Bishops in England, p. 27. Sect. 4. How
Churches were anciently consecrated, p. 47, 48. Sect. 3, 4, 5. Consent to the
39 Articles, what not good, p. 163. Sect. 8. Consistory, what, p. 83. Sect. 5,
6. Whence the word derived, and the diverse significations thereof, p. 83, 84.
Sect. 6. Constituted by Willam the Conqueror, p. 84. Sect. 7. The Original and
Antiquity of Consistories, p. ibid. Sect. 7. The difference between
Consistorium and Tribunal, p. 85, Sect. 9. Consolidation of Churches, what, and
whence so called, p. 169. Sect. 1. How distinguished in Law. p. 172. Sect. 6.
How many ways it may be. p. 170. Sect. 2. The reasons or grounds thereof in
Law. p. 170, Sect. 3. The legal requisites in order thereto. p. 171. Sect. 4.
Constitutions of Claringdon, in order to Church Government. p. 100. Sect. 2.
Consultation, in what Cases it has been awarded. p. 116. Sect. 12. p. 165.
Sect. 11. p. 125. Sect. 31. p. 141. Sect. 7. p. 143. Sect. 10. p. 144 Sect. 12.
p. 193. Sect. 17. p. 393. Sect. 27. p. 376. Sect. 56. p. 379. Sect. 71. p. 380.
Sect. 73. p. 174. Sect. 1. p. 385. 394. 401. 410. 413. 414. 415. 420. 422. p.
426. 431. 435. 450. 453. 459. 463. 464. 506. Where a Consultation is awarded
after a Prohibition, there no new Prohibition to be on the same Libel. p. 116.
Sect. 112. Convocation Court, what. p. 98. Sect. 2. p. 586. Sect. 4. How and by
whom convened. p. 99. Sect. 2. p. 586. Sect. 4. The Antiquity, Power,
Privileges, and Jurisdiction thereof. ibid. Conies, Taken in a Warren, whether
Tithable. p. 393. They are not Tithable of Common right. p. 375. Sect. 53.
Corn, The Law in reference to the Tithes thereof, p. 393, 394, etc. A Case in
Law touching Corn set out for Tithes, and left by the Parson on the Ground. p.
362. Sect. 23. Costs of Suit, in what Case not given upon failure of proof of a
suggestion within the six months. p. 378. Sect. 66. Costs obtained by
Churchwardens in a Suit for Reparations, are to the use of the Church. p. 144.
Sect. 12. Costs of Suit discharged by a Pardon relating before the Taxation
thereof. p. 116. Sect. 12. Covent, anciently a Corporation. p. 328. Sect. 4.
Councils, to whom the power of calling and dissolving them belongs. p. 5. Sect.
7. The several kinds thereof. p. 584. Sect. 1. Sect. 8. A Catalogue of Councils
and Synods. p. 592, etc. Courts Ecclesiastical, the several kinds thereof. p.
96. Sect. 1, etc. Court of Augmentations, what. p 333. Sect. 10. Cowes yielding
Milk, whether Tithes due for their Pasture. p. 396. Cranmer, when and how he
became Archbishop of Canterbury. p. 18. Sect. 8. Cuckold, whether Action lies
for calling one Cuckoldly Knave, and where. p. 521. Sect 15. p. 520. Sect. 12.
Curate, whether he may prescribe against the Parson. p. 376. Sect. 56.
Curtelages, whether Tithes are due out of such. p. 396. Custom in reference to
Tithes, how it differs from Prescription. p. 396. What Customs not Triable in
the Ecclesiastical Courts. p. 120 Sect. 17.
D.
Damages, who shall have them Treble, and in what Case, p. 381. Sect. 76. p.
380. Sect. 72. Darrein Presentment, what that Writ imports, in what Case it
lies, wherein it differs from a Quare Impedit, and when it abates. p. 644.
Sect. 1. p. 648. Sect. 17. David, Uncle to King Arthur, succeeded Dubritius in
the Archbishopric of Caerlegion in Wales. p. 17. Sect 6. Dean, what; why so
called. p. 51. Sect. 1. The several kinds thereof. ibid. Sect. 2. and p. 54.
Sect. 4. What Dean and Chapter signifies. p. 51. Sect. 1. Whether they are a
Body Politic, Spiritual or Temporal, p. 366, 367. Sect. 34. Dean of the
Arches, whence so called. p. 103. Sect. 4. Deans Rural, what, p. 33. Sect. 1. A
Layman, once Dean of Durham. p. 367. Sect. 34. Deanary, whereof it consists.
p. 55. Sect. 7. Whether Deanaries are understood as Benefices with Cure. p.
200. Sect. 13. p. 286. Sect. 6. Whether a Deanary may be a Dispensation be held
in Commendam with a Bishopric, p. 112. Sect. 10. Decimae Majores, and Minores,
what and to whom payable, p. 398. Decrees and Decretals of the Canon Law, when
first published here in England. p. 129. Sect. 44. Deer, whether Tithable, p.
375. Sect. 53. and p. 398. Defamation, what, and where Cognizable, p. 515, etc.
Degradation, what, p. 309. Sect. 8. May be done two ways, ibid. Deprivation,
what, p. 306. Sect. 1. The causes thereof, p. 206, 207. Sect. 2. Where
cognizable, p. 122. Sect. 21. Whether a Bar to Tithes due before, p. 398.
Whether the Church be void, pending the Appeal from a Sentence of Deprivation,
p. 314. Sect. 17. Delegates-Court, how Constituted, p. 117. Sect. 13. Whether
they may Excommunicate, or grant Letters of Administration, p. ibid.
Dilapidation. what, p. 173. Sect. 1, 2, 3. The remedies in Law against it; and
how many ways it may happen, ibid. Whether it be a sufficient cause of
Deprivation, p. 175. Sect. 5, 9. and p. 315. Sect. 19. Diocese, whence that
word derived, p. 101. Sect. 3. What it properly signifies, p. 275. Sect. 8.
Discharge of Tithes, how many ways it may be, p. 398. In what Cases it may be,
or not, p. 358. Sect. 12. p. 368. Sect. 38. Dispensation, the true definition
thereof, p. 112. Sect. 9. By whom Dispensations may be granted, and in what
Cases, p. 107, etc. Sect. 8. Anciently had from the Court of Rome. ibid. It may
be without the word [ Dispensamus] p. 302. Sect. 18. They are grantable by the
King, qua talis, p. 5. Sect. 7. p. 109. Sect. 8. The granting thereof is
eminently in the Crown, p. 6. Sect. 9. The Archbishop of Canterbury may be
Statute grant them, ibid. p. 19. Sect. 11. The difference between such granted
by the Pope formerly, and those granted by the King now, p. 293. Sect. 2. In
what Case grantable by the Guardian of the Spiritualties, p. 40. Sect. 3. What
remedy in Law in Case he refuse so to do, ibid. Divorce, what, 493. Sect. 1.
The Causes thereof, ibid. Whether (if for Adultery) it dissolves the Marriage a
vinculo, p. 495. Sect. 3, etc. Donative Churches, what, p. 202. Sect. 16. The
Original thereof, p. ibid. By whom visitable, p. 34. Sect. 18. The Law
concerning Donatives, p. 262. Sect. 18. How they cease to be such, and become
Presentative, p. 201. Sect. 16. and p. 263. Sect. 21. Whether a Donative in the
Kings gift may be with Cure of Souls p. 218. Sect. 23. Dotards, whether
Tithable, p. 405. Doves in a Dove-house, what Tithes they pay, p. ibid. Druids,
their Idol-Temples, when first abolished in England, p. 16. Sect. 4. Drunkard,
whether actionable to call one so, p. 516. Sect. 3. p. 521. Sect. 14.
Dubritius, Archbishop of Carlegion in Wales, p. 17. Sect. 6. Duplex Querela,
what, p. 275. Sect. 8.
E.
ECclesia, whence that word derived, p. 136. Sect. 1. Ecclesiastical Laws of
England, the Antiquity thereof, p. 129, etc. Sect. 44. Edgar King, his Zeal for
the Church in his Oration to the Clergy of England, p. 97. Sect. 1. Eggs, how,
when, and in what Case Tithable, p. 405. Election of Bishops, how and by whom
to be made, p. 43. Sect. 2. Eleutherius Pope, what style be gave K. Lucius, p.
4. Sect. 4. p. 111. s. 8. Elopement, what it signifies, p. 508. Sect. 13.
Episcopal Authority derived from the Crown, p. 30. Sect. 10. Episcopal
Jurisdiction endeavored to be taken away, p. 36, 37. Sect. 2. Episcopocide in
a Clerk, Petty Treason, p. 35. Sect. 19. Estovers burnt in a house, whether
Tithable, p. 372. Sect. 46. p. 392. Ethelbert, King of Kent, by whom Canterbury
was given to St. Austin for his See, p. 13. Sect. 1. p. 17. Sect. 5. Whether he
built St. Paul's Church in London, p. 17. Sect. 7. Ethelwolph, Son and Successor
to Egbert, the first sole King of England; he was Bishop of Winchester, p. 36.
Sect. 19. And the first that enriched the Church of England with Tithes, p.
348. Sect. 1. Euginus, whether he were the first that styled himself Pope, the
first that consecrated Churches, and the first that decreed Godfathers and
Godmothers in Baptism, p. 49. Sect. 7. Examination, when and by whom to be
performed, p. 270 Sect. 1, 3. Excommunication, what, p. 624. Sect. 1, 2.
Twofold, ibid. What intended by Excommunication ipso facto, p. 626. Sect. 4.
What the causes in Law of That Excommunication, p. 628. Sect. 8. In what manner
Excommunication is to be pronounced, p. 626. Sect. 6. By whom it is to be
certified, and how, p. 635. Sect. 18. Whether the Ordinary may take Bond of an
Excommunicate, for his submission in order to absolution, p. 637. s. 25.
whether Excommunication in a Patron, be sufficient cause for a Bishop to refuse
the Clerk presented by such Patron, p. 266. Sect. 32.
F.
FAculty, or Court of Faculties, or Faculty Office, what, p. 107. Sect. 8. The
Archbishop of Canterbury empowered by the Statute to grant Faculties, ibid. and
p. 19. Sect. 11. The force and efficacy thereof to Commendams or two Benefices,
p. 107, 109, 110. Sect. 8. The difference between a Faculty to Take and a
Faculty to Retain a Benefice, p. 110. Sect. 8. Fallow-grounds, whether
Tithable, p. 405. Fees for Probate of Testaments, what due by Statute, p. 105,
106. Sect. 6. F^nny-Lands drained, whether they pay Tithes presently, p. 406.
Ferae naturae, Creatures of that kind, whether Tithable, p. 405. First Fruits,
by and to whom payable, p. 337. Sect. 2. vid. Annates. Fith taken in the Sea,
or in a River, Pond or Piscary, whether Tithable, and how, p. 406. and p. 367.
Sect. 36. p. 379. Sect. 68. p. 375. Sect. 53. Flamins, how many anciently in
England, p. 16. Sect. 4. Flax, what Tithes it pays, and when, p. 407.
Forest-Lands, whether Tithable or not, and by whom, p. 407, 408. Not situate
in any Parish, to whom the Tithes shall be paid p. 408. Whether Priviledg'd
from Tithes, whilst in the Kings hands, otherwise in the Subjects, p. 369.
Sect. 41. Whether they are Privileged from Tithes, if in the hands of the
Kings Patentee or Grantee, p. 399. 401. Fowl taken, in what Case Tithable or
not, p. 408. Fraud in setting forth Tithes, whether treble damages in that
Case p. 380. Sect. 72. p. 381. Sect. 76. Freehold f the Church or Chancel, in
whom it is, p. 137. Sect. 3. p. 83. Sect. 4. p. 139. Sect. 5. p. 142. Sect. 9.
p. 150. Sect. 22. p. 151. Sect. 25. p. 155. Sect. 38. Frigidity in the Man
pleaded by the Woman, how the Civil Law proceeds thereon, p. 493. Sect. 1.
Fruit Trees, what Tithes they pay, and when, p. 408. Fuise, whether Tithable,
p. ibid.
G.
GArba, or Decima Garbarum, what it signifies, p. 381. Sect. 78. Gardens, how
Tithable, p. 409. p. 371. Sect. 43. Geoffry Plantaginet, Son to King H. 2. was
Bishop of Lincoln, p. 36. Sect. 19. Glass-windows Painted in the Isle of a
Chapel, if pulled down, whether Actionable, p. 138. Sect. 5. Gleab, what, p.
409. The Law concerning the Tithes thereof, ibid. and p. 410. Gleab of a
Parsonage Impropriate and Leased, whether Tithable, ibid. and p. 368. sect. 38.
Whether Gleab in Lease pays Tithe, p. 362, 363. s. 26. Whether the Freehold of
the Gleab, during a Vacancy, be in the Patron or not, p. 183. s. 9. Gleab
manured and sowed by an Incumbent that dies before Harvest, who shall have the
Corn, p. 318. s. 3. Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, the Original thereof,
p. 49. s. 7. Grain, pays a Predial Tithe, p. 411. Grant of Tithes, whether good
without Deed, p. 386. Grass, what Tithes that pays, and how, p. 410, 411.
Grass-cocks Tithed, p. 374. s. 50. Gravestone taken away, whether Actionable,
and where, p. 157. s. 42. Gravel, whether Tithable, p. 411. Grounds let to
Strangers out of the Parish, who answers the Tithe, ibid. Guardian of the
Spiritualties, his Office, and by whom Constituted, p. 39. sect. 1. p. 41. s.
4, 5. His power in the vacancy of an Archbishopric, p. 40. s. 2. What Remedy
in case he shall refuse to grant Faculties or Dispensations, where they may or
ought to be granted, p. 40. s. 3.
H.
HAlimots, anciently what, p. 97. Sect. 1. Hay, the Law touching Tithe- Hay, p.
412, 413. Whether the Tithes thereof may belong to the Vicar, p. 381. s. 77.
Two Crops of Hay from the same ground the same year, whether both Tithable, p.
412. Hazel, Holly, Willows, and Whitethorn, in what cases they may be Tithable
or not, p. 377. s. 62. Head-Lands, whether Tithable, p. 359. s. 16. p. 369. s.
39. p. 374. s. 52. Hearth-peny, the ancient Custom thereof, p. 367. sect. 35.
p. 372. s. 46. Heath, Furse, and Broom, in what cases Tithable or not, p. 413.
Barren Heath-ground, in what sense excused of Tithes for the first Seven years,
p. 375. s. 53. Hedging and Fencing-Wood, whether Tithable, p. 370, 371. s. 43.
Hemp, what Tithes that pays, p. 413. and p. 366. s. 32. Heyfers, whether Tithes
due for the Herbage thereof, p. 370. Sect. 43. Henry de Blois, Brother to King
Stephen, was Bishop of Winchester, p. 37. Sect. 16. Henry de Beaford, Brother
to King H. 4. was also Bishop of Winchester, p ibid. Herbage, what, and how
Tithable or not, p. 370, 371. Sect. 43. and p. 413. Herbage of Sheep, whether
Tithable, p. 464. Heresy, what, and whence the word derived, p. 560, 561.
Sect. 4. Threefold, ibid. Where Cognizable, p. 561, 562. Sect. 6. How punished,
p. 562, 563. Sect. 7. It is Lepra animae, ibid. Heretics, an Alphabetical
Catalogue of such; their Errors and Heresies; the Times and places when and
where broached; and the Councils wherein they were condemned, p. 164, 165, etc.
High Commission-Court, the Constitution thereof, p. 11, 12. Sect. 14. What the
power thereof was, p. 118. Sect. 14. Hoel-Dha, his Law against fighting in the
Churchyard, p. 140. Sect. 6. Honey, whether and how Tithable, p. 413, 414.
Hoods to be worn by Proctors in the Arches, when and by whom first enjoined, p.
103. Sect. 4. Hops, what Tithes they pay, and how Tithed, p. 414. Whether Great
Tithes to the Parson, or Small Tithes to the Vicar, p. 366. Sect. 32. Whether
they may not belong to the Vicar by Prescription, p. 381. Sect. 77. The
difference in Kent (as to Tithes) between Hops in Orchards, and Hops in
Gardens, p. 366. Sect. 32. Hop-poles, whether the Wood thereof Tithable or not,
p. 414. Horses for Husbandry, whether their Pasture be Tithable, p. 371. Sect.
43. Hospitallers, either Lay or Spiritual, by whom Visitable, p. 34. Sect. 18.
They were discharged of Tithes, p. 402. Houses being Dwelling Houses, where
Tithable, p. 414, 415. Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 7. Sect. 11.
Hundred-Court, the Antiquity thereof, and Extent anciently of its Jurisdiction,
p. 96. Sect. 1. p. 84. Sect. 7.
I
JAde, to call one Welsh Jade, whether Actionable, and where p. 522. Sect. 17.
Jealousy, how the Civil Law proceeds therein, p. 472. Sect. 7. Ideocy, in what
case Triable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 120. Sect. 17. Jewish Heretics,
who such anciently, and what their Heresies, p. 580, etc. Sect. 9. Impotency in
a Man, how to be proved, p. 493. Sect. 1. Impropriations, how many within York
Diocese, p. 14. Sect. 2. vid. Appropriations. Ina, the Saxon King, whether he
the first that gave Peter Pence to the Pope, p. 112. Sect. 8. His Law against
Striking in the Church, p. 140. Sect. 6. Incumbent, what, p. 317. Sect. 1.
Legal Requisites to make a Complete Incumbent, p. ibid. His Rights, p. 318.
Sect. 2. Indians, their severe punishment of Adultery, p. 471, 472. Sect. 6.
Indicavit, what that Writ imports; the end and use thereof; in what cases, and
for whom it may be awarded, p. 647. Sect. 6. p. 439. Induction, what, and how
executed, p. 278. Sect. 16. Whether it be a Temporal Act, and cognizable in the
Temporal Court, p. 279. Sect. 17. Infant, if under age Admitted and Instituted
to a Benefice, it is void, p. 280. Sect. 20. Whether Action lies against a
Minor under Seventeen years of age for Slandering, p. 524. Sect. 23. Ingulphus,
Abbot of Crowland, his Report touching Appropriations, p. 280. Sect. 1.
Institution, what; the Form thereof; Requisites thereto; and what Remedy, if
denied, p. 274. Sect. 8. Institutions are cognizable in the Ecclesiastical
Court, p. 123. Sect. 28. The difference between the Civil and Common Law
touching Institutions, p. 276. Sect. 9. Whether it works a Plenarty without
Induction, p. ibid. Sect. 11. p. 280. Sect. 18. p. 281. Sect. 21. Ireland,
until what time under the Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 20. Sect. 13. Isle of a
Church, who may prescribe to it, p. 138. Sect. 4. or whether it may be peculiar
to a Family, p. ibid. Sect. 5. p. 158. Sect. ult. Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
and Temporal, the Original of that distinction, p. 133. Sect. 44. Juris utrum,
for and against whom that Writ lies, p. 205. Sect. 1. Jure Patronatus, what
that Writ imports, p. 206. etc. How the Law proceeds therein, p. 179. s. 2. In
what case the Bishop may make use thereof, and his power therein, p. 33. s. 16.
At whose charge it is to be, p. 180. s. 3. What Jus Patronatus is, p. 205. s.
1. Jus Canonicum, the Original thereof, p. 132. s. 44.
K
KAnute King, his strict Law concerning Abbots, p. 328. Sect. 3. Knave, whether
Actionable to call one so, p. 517. s. 4. and p. 524. s. 21, 24.
L
LAmbs, how Tithable, p. 416. They yield a small Tithe, and may belong to the
Vicar, p. 198. Sect. 3. p. 359. s. 16. In what case they may be Great Tithes,
and payable to the Parson, p. 366. s. 32. Lands accruing to the Crown by the
Statute of Dissolutions, whether they shall pay Tithes, p. 416. Lapse, what, p.
242. s. 1. The Original and gradations thereof, ibid. The difference between
the Common and Canon Law as to the time of Lapse, p. 245. sect. 2. When the Six
Months shall commence, ibid. How the Six Months before a Lapse are to be
computed by Days, and how Notice shall be given to the Patron or not before
the Lapse incurrs, p. 247. s. 4. Whether a Grant may be made of a Lapse, p.
248. s. 5. A Lapse is more a Trust than an Interest, ibid. From what time the
Lapse shall incurr, ibid. s. 6. In what case the Lapse may incurr to the
Ordinary, notwithstanding a Quare Impedit brought by the Patron, p. 183. s. 10.
Lapse made by one Bishop de facto during the life of another de jure, of the
same Diocese, whether good, p. 38. s. 23. Leases of Tithes, whether Triable in
the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 127. s. 140. They must be by Deed, not Parol, p.
382. s. 81. Leases made by Parsons, p. 199. s. 10. Cases at Common Law touching
the same, p. 190. s. 10, 11. p. 193. s. 17. Legacies, properly suable for in
the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 113. sect. 11. p. 125. s. 34. and p. 126. sect.
ibid. Legates of the Pope, of Three sorts, p. 20. s. 12. p. 102. s. 3. Legatus
Natus, what it imports, and who were such in England, p. 20. s. 12. p. 21. s.
13. and p. 105. s. 6. Lessee to Parson and Vicar, whether he may Sue for the
Tithes in one Action, or must divide his Actions, p. 381, 382. s. 80. Letter
expressing the Grant of the Next Avoidance, vain and ineffectual, p. 285. s. 4.
Libel, whereof a true Copy denied, is ground for a Prohibition, p. 122. Sect.
24. License to carry away Tithes without setting them forth, given by a
Collector of Tithes, whether good, p. 379. s. 71. Lime, Marle, Slates, or
Tiles, whether Tithable, p. 417. Lind wood, what he was, and when his
Provincial Constitutions were compiled, p. 208. s. 5. Litigious, how many ways
a Church may so become, p. 181, 182. s. 6. Lollards, what they were, and why so
called, p. 561. s. 5. London, anciently an Archbishopric, p. 17. s. 7. The
Metropolis of Britannia Prima, p. 16. s. 4. The Archiepiscopal See thereof
removed and placed at Canterbury by the Saxons, p. ibid. Lops of Trees, whether
Tithable after Twenty years growth, p. 417. Lucius, First Christian King of
Britain, p. 15. s. 4. By whom Converted to the Christian Faith, ibid. When
Baptized, p. 16. s. 4.
M
MAhumetans, their severe punishment of Adultery, p. 471. Sect. 6. Malum in se
and Malum prohibitum, the Legal difference between them, p. 10. s. 14. p. 187.
s. 4. Marriage after Divorce, altera part existente, whether lawful, p. 495.
s. 3, etc. Marsh-Lands, or Fenn-Lands, newly gained from the Sea, whether under
the notion of Barren Lands, as to any discharge of Tithes, p. 387. St. Martins
Le grand, London, whether it be an Ecclesiastical Benefice, p. 202. s. 16. Mast
of Oak, or Beech, whether Tithable, and how, p. 417. Masters of Chancery, what
they were anciently, and why so called, p. 550. s. 21. Meadows overrun with
Thorns and Bushes, whether Tithable, p. 417. Metropolitan, why so called, the
derivation of that word, p. 15. sect. 3. Midwives questioned in the
Ecclesiastical Court for exercising that Calling without a License from the
Ordinary, whether Prohibition lies, p. 126. s. 36. Milk paying Tithes, exempts
the Cheese from payment thereof, p. 391, 420. Milch-kine, whether their Pasture
be Tithable, p. 372. s. 44. Mills, the Law concerning the Tithes thereof, p.
417. Millstones, in what cases Tithes shall be paid of them, and how, p. 420.
Mines or Minerals, whether Tithable, p. 420. and p. 368. Sect. 36. Mixed Tithes,
what, p. 420. Modus Decimandi, what the Law therein, p. 420, etc. Cognizable in
the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 119. Sect. 17. p. 125. s. 33. p. 127. s. 42. p.
364. p. 373. s. 48. p. 379. s. 67. p. 363. s. 28, 29. p. 128. s. 43. In what
case it may be Triable at Common Law, p. 368. s. 36. A Modus pleaded to obtain
a Prohibition, p. 377. s. 60. Moieties of Tithes, if between two Parsons,
whether the Parishioner be obliged to divide them, p. 362. s. 24.
Monastery-Lands, the Law touching them in reference to Tithes, p. 422, 423.
Monuments erected in Churches or Churchyards, if defaced or pulled down, what
Action lies, and for whom, and where Cognizable, p. 142. Sect. 9. p. 139. s. 5.
p. 154. s. 33. Mortuaries, the Law concerning them, p. 423, 424. Mulier, what
at the Common Law, 478. s. 2. p. 486. s. 17. What by the Civil, p. 487. s. 19.
How it differs from Bastard, p. 478. sect. 2. p. 486, 487. s. 18, 19.
N
NAg, whether Tithes due for the Pasture of a Riding Nag, p. 425. p. 360. Sect.
18. p. 371. s. 43. and p. 429. Ne admittas, what that Writ imports, the end and
use thereof, p. 646. s. 4. Ne unques accouple en Loyal Matrimony, is to be
tried by the Certificate of the Bishop, p. 122. s. 21. Next Avoidance, what, p.
284. sect. 3. Nomination, what, p. 259. sect. 11. Qualifications thereof, ibid.
In what case it may be the same with Presentation, p. 260. s. 12. It may be
corrupt and Simonical as well as the other, p. ibid. sect. 13. Non obstante, in
Faculties granted by the Pope, of what efficacy in Law, p. 109. s. 8. Non
Residence, what, p. 319, sect. 9, 10. What shall excuse it, p. 320. s. 9, 10.
p. 321. s. 13. What shall be held Non Residence within the Statute, or not, p.
ibid. sect. 12, 13. p. 323. s. 16. The Ancient Canons touching Non Residence,
p. 320. s. 10. p. 322. s. 15. Whether Non Residence makes void a Lease of
Tithes made by the Parson, p. 323. s. 16. and p. 384. s. 18. Notice of
Avoidance, when and how to be given to the Patron, p. 181. Sect. 4. p. 245. s.
2. To be given in case of Cession, p. 287. s. 11. Whether Notice of setting
forth Tithes is to be given to the Parson, p. 376. s. 58. p. 450. Novatius, his
Error concerning Bishops, p. 23. s. 1. Nurseries of young Trees and Plants,
whether and in what case Tithable or not, p. 426.
O
OAth of Supremacy, the Original thereof, p. 3. Sect. 3. Oath of Residence, p.
320. s. 11. Oaks, the Law of Tithes touching them, p. 426. Oblations, what
properly they are, and the Law thereof, p. 426, 427. What are not such, that
are commonly so supposed to be, p. 156. s. 38. Obligation to Resign a Benefice,
whether good, p. 189. sect. 7. Obligation not to accompany such a Woman, taken
in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 114. s. 12. Odo, Brother to William the
Conqueror; he was Bishop of Bayeux in Normandy. Offerings, Oblations, and
Obventions, the Law concerning them, p. 426, 427. Office of Register to a
Bishop, if controverted, where Cognizable, p. 126. sect. 35. The difference in
point of Jurisdiction between a Right to and the Exercise of an Office, p. 93.
s. 20. Officiales Foranei, what, p. 81. s. 1. p. 89. s. 15. Orchard, the Ground
thereof sowed with Seed, whether Tithable, p. 427. Tithes of Orchards by
Custom, p. 367. s. 35. Orchard formerly Arable, to whom Tithable, p. 361. s.
21. Ordinary, what, p. 32. sect. 14. Why the Bishop so called, p. 23. sect. 2.
What the Civil Law understands by that word [ Ordinarius,] ibid. Whether he may
Cite a man out of his own Diocese, p. 33, 37. s. 17. p. 104, 105. s. 6. Whether
he may dispose of any of an Intestates Goods to pious uses, in what case, and
under what Cautions and Limitations, p. 106. s. 6. He has Curam Curarum, p.
32. s. 14. Organs in a Church, to whom they belong, p. 167. s. 18. if taken
away, where the Action lies, p. 161. s. 2. Ornaments of the Church, at whose
charge to be provided, and how the same shall be charged, p. 137. sect. 4. p.
152. s. 29. p. 154. s. ^4.
P
PAgans, the strange Punishments inflicted by them on Adulterers, p. 470. Sect.
4. Pallium Episcopale, a description thereof, p. 23. s. 2. Pander, whether to
call one so be Actionable, p. 524. s. 21. Pannagium, what that word signifies,
p. 383. Pardon, whether it may extend to prevent a Deprivation, p. 312. s. 15.
Whether a General Pardon shall bar a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for
Slander, p. 121. s. 19. In what case it may bar Costs of Suit, p. 116. s. 12.
P^rk disparked, how Tithable, p. 361. sect. 20, 21. p. 364, 365. s. 31. p. 427,
428. How to be Tithed, if converted into Tillage, p. 361. s. 20. and p. 380. s.
75. Parish, the various acceptance of that word, p. 355, 356. sect. 8. By whom
Parishes were first divided, p. 72. s. 8, 9. Parochial Bounds, where
Cognizable, p. 126. s. 37. p. 128. s. 28. p, 125. s. 31. p. 157. s. 40. p. 153.
s. 31. and p. 380. s. 74. Being Controverted between Spiritual persons, are
Cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 123. s. 27. Otherwise at the Common
Law, p. ibid. s. 28. p. 124. s. 30. p. 126. s. 37. Parish-Clerk, by whom to be
chosen, p. 166. s. 12. and p. 192. s. 15. Parson, who properly such, p. 185,
186. s. 1. He has a double Capacity, p. 193. s. 16. Parson Imparsonee, what,
p. 186. s. 2. How he ought to be qualified to be a Parson, p. 187. s. 4.
Requisites in Law for that Function, ibid. What his Rights are, p. 186. s. 3.
The difference between Parson, Pastor, Rector, Vicar, and Curate, p. 186. s. 1.
Parsonage, Church, and Rectory, are terms Synonymous, p. 188. sect. 6.
Patridges and Pheasants, though not Tithable, yet paiable in lieu of Tithes, p.
361. sect. 20. What Tithes tame Patridges shall pay, p. 428. Pasture, the Law
in reference to the Tithes thereof, p. 428, 429. Patria obedientiae, and
Patriae consuetudinariae, the difference between them, p. 130. s. 44.
Patriarch, what, p. 20. s. 13. A Style or Title anciently given to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, p. ibid. Patron, what he is, and why so called, p.
178. sect. 1. p. 205. s. 1. Who is properly the Patron of a Vicarage, p. 199.
s. 9. Whether a Patron has any thing to do in the Church during a Plenarty, p.
191. s. 12. His Consent requisite to Commandams, Unions, and Appropriation of
Churches, p. 229. s. 8. Paul or St. Paul, whether he Preached here in England,
p. 16. Sect. 4. St. Paul's Church London, by whom first built, p. 17. Sect. 7.
Paulinus, Archbishop of York, p. 14. Sect. 2. Pease, in what Case not Tithable,
p. 429. Pelagius, a Monk of Bangor, his refusal to appear at Rome upon the
Popes Summons, p. 111. Sect. 8. Pelagian Heresy, when this Kingdom first
infected therewith, and by whom suppressed, p. 16. Sect. 5. Peculiars, or the
Court of Peculiars, what it was, p. 119. Sect. 16. How many Peculiars in the
Province of Canterbury. ibid. Pelts or Fells of Sheep dying of the Rot, whether
Tithable, p. 429. Pensions suable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 127. Sect.
41. p. 188. Sect. 6. p. 198. Sect. 5. p. 376. Sect. 57. Pentecostals, what, and
whence so called, p 73, 74. Sect. 10. Peter's Church in Cornhil, London, once
the Cathedral of a Diocese p. 17. Sect. 7. By whom founded, ibid. Peterpence,
what; The Original thereof, and why paid to Rome, p. 73, 74. Sect. 10. p. 112.
Sect. 8. p. 356. Sect. 9. The Conquerors Law concerning the same, p. 73. Sect.
10. Anciently taken from the Pope, and given to the King, p. 100. Sect. 2. Pews
in the Body of the Church, at whose disposal they are, p. 137. Sect. 3. p. 156.
Sect. 38. p. 158. Sect. ult. vid. Seats. Pheasants, of what kind are Tithable,
p. 430. Though properly not Tithable, yet as a Modus may be paid for Tithes, p.
380. Sect. 75. Pictures in Church-windowes, if pulled down, whether Actionable,
p. 138. Sect. 5. Pigeons, in what Case Tithable or not, p. 430. Spent in the
Owners House, not Tithable, p. 368. Sect. 37. p. 375. Sect. 53. Otherwise if
sold, ibid. Felony to steal them out of a Dove-house, ibid. vid. Doves. Pigs,
how Tithable, p. 430. Pilchards, and other Sea Fish, whether Tithable, and how,
p. 379 Sect. 68. Pimp, whether and where Actionable to call one so, p. 521.
Sect. 16. Pits of Stone, Lime, etc. whether Tithable, p. 430. Plants,
transplanted, whether Tithable, p. 431. Plato 's Law concerning Adulterers, p.
473. Sect. 9. Plurality, what, p. 292. Sect. 1. Who may grant or receive
Pluralities, p. 294. sect. 3. Qualifications in Law touching Dispensations for
Pluralities, p. 295. Sect. 4. Whether the taking of a Parsonage with a Vicarage
endowed, amounts to a Plurality within the intent of the Statute, p. 296. sect.
5. The Text of Canon Law against Pluralities, p. 300. sect. 15. Pope, when his
usurpation in England first began, p. 97. Sect. 1. When and by whom here first
abrogated, p. 18. Sect. 8. What his power was in granting Dispensations, p. 5.
Sect. 7. Postulation, what, p. 49. Sect. 8. Prebends, what, and why so called,
p. 35. Sect. 19. Prerogative Court of Canterbury, the Jurisdiction thereof, p.
104. Sect. 6. Prescription, p. 431. to 436. The Law thereof in reference to
Tithes, ibid. and p. 358. Sect. 12. In what Court cognizable, p. 367. Sect. 29.
p. 125. Sect. 33. In what Case a Parson prescribing for Tithes may sue on that
Prescription in the Ecclesiastical Court, ibid. Prescription merely Spiritual,
Cognizable in that Court, p. 156. Sect. 39. Prescription to a Seat in a Church,
or to Priority in that Seat, whether cognizable in the Temporal Court, p. 138.
Sect. 5. p. 140. Sect. 7. p. 142. Sect. 9. p. 149. Sect. 21. p. 155. Sect. 38.
p. 147. Sect. 18. p. 151. Sect. 25. Whether a Prescription to Ecclesiastical
things be Cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 153. Sect. 33.
Prescription pleaded by a Parson against the first Endowment to the Vicar,
whether allowable, p. 375. Sect. 54. Prescription de non decimando not denied
to a Spiritual person, p. 399. The difference between the Civil and Common Law
in point of Prescriptions, p. 129. Sect. 43. Praemonstracenses, how discharged
of Tithes, p. 402. Presentation to a Benefice what, p. 254. Sect. 4. Where the
Right of Presentation is cognizable, p. 256. Sect. 6. What the Law touching
Presentation is, in case of Copareeners, Joynt-Tenants, and Tenants in Common,
p. ibid. Sect. 7. How the Presentation is to be in case of Coheirs, p. 255.
Sect. 4. Whether a Presentation be revocable before Institution, p. 258, 259,
Sect. 9, 10. What Presentation shall serve for a Turn, p. 262 Sect. 19. To what
things a Presentation may be, p. 263. Sect. 21. In what Cases the King shall
have the Presentation by his Prerogative, p. 263, 264. Sect. 23, 24. The
difference in Law between the King and a Common person as to Presentations, p.
265. Sect. 28. Primate and Metropolitan of all England, when and how that style
on title first vested in the Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 18. Sect. 8. Priority
in the Seat of a Church, whether it may be prescribed, p. 140. Sect. 7.
Privileges of the Clergy, p. 193, etc. Sect. 18. Privilege in respect of
Tithes, what, p. 436. Procuration, what p. 67. Sect. 1. When and to whom
payable, ibid. Whether due without the Act of visiting, p. 68. s. 2. p. 69.
Sect. 4. p. 75. s. 10. p. 78. Sect. 11. Anciently paid in victualibus, when and
how changed into Money, p. 68. Sect. 3. How the Canonists define it, p. 69.
Sect. 5. Only one Procuration to be paid to the Ordinary, how that is to be
understood, p 70. Sect. 6. Prohibition, in what Cases it has been granted, p.
89. Sect. 16. p. 114. Sect. 12. p. 121. Sect. 17. p. 93. Sect. 20. p. 122.
Sect. 22. p. ibid. Sect. 23, 24. p. 126. Sect. 36, 37, 38, 39. p. 128. Sect.
43. p. 138. Sect. 4. p. 140. Sect. 7. p. 144. Sect. 13. p. 113. Sect. 11. p.
121. Sect. 20. p. 148. Sect. 20. p. 151. Sect. 24. p. 149. Sect. 22. p. 151.
Sect. 25. p. 152. Sect. 26, 28. p. 153. Sect. 30, 31. p. 127. Sect. 40. p. 119.
Sect. 15. p. 163. Sect. 5. p. 114. Sect. 12. p. 149. Sect. 21. p. 188. Sect. 5.
p. 142. Sect. 9. p. 152. Sect. 29. p. 153. Sect. 32. p. 155. Sect. 38. p. 157.
Sect. 40. p. 374. Sect. 49. p. 377. Sect. 62. p. 379. Sect. 67. p. 387. 393.
409. 410. 407. 425. 429. 430. 436. p. 473. Sect. 7. p. 485. Sect. 15. p. 177.
Sect. 8, 9. p. 373. Sect. 47. p. 190. Sect. 9. p. 166. Sect. 12, 13, 14. p.
167. Sect. 19. p. 176. Sect. 8. p. 277. Sect. 12. p. 92. Sect. 19. p. 101.
Sect. 3. p. 104. Sect. 6. p. 119. Sect. 17. p. 147. Sect. 18. p. 298. Sect. 9.
p. 166. Sect. 15. p 198. Sect. 4. p 258. Sect. 10. p. 267. Sect. 34. p. 115.
Sect. 12. p. 299. Sect. 11. p. 281. Sect. 22, 23. p. 116. Sect. 12. p. 164.
Sect. 9, 11. p. 319. Sect. 7. p. 359. S. 14. p. 369. Sect. 40. p. 192. Sect.
15. p. 364. Sect. 30. p. 368. Sect. 37. p. 361. Sect. 20, 21. p. 362. Sect. 22.
p. 368. Sect. 38, 39. p. 371. Sect. 43. p. 375. Sect. 53. p. 362.. 25. p. 365..
31. p. 369.. 39. p. 378.. 64. p. 382.. 82. p. 520.. 12. p. 517.. 5. p. 505..
12. p. 521. Sect. 14. p. 523.. 19. p. 524.. 21. In what Cases the Prohibition
has been denied, p. 83. Sect. 4. p. 115, 116. Sect. 12. p. 119, 121. Sect. 17,
18. p. 122, 123.. 25, 26, 27, 28. p. 124.. 29. p. 125.. 31, 32, 33, 34. p.
126.. 39. p. 127, 128.. 42, 43. p. 137.. 3. p. 144.. 11. p. 148.. 19. p. 153..
30. p. 174.. 1. p. 152.. 27. p. 364. sect. 29. p. 380. sect. 74. p. 156. sect.
39. p. 166. sect. 16. p. 198. sect. 5. p. 318. sect. 5. p. 359. sect. 15. p.
120. sect. 17. p. 92. sect. 19. p. 366. sect. 33. p. 376. sect. 57. p. 364.
sect. 29. p. 386. p. 389. p. 412. p. 413. p. 420. p. 429. p. 451. p. 456. p.
464. p. 520. sect. 13. p 512. sect. 18. p. 507. sect. 12. p. 521. sect. 15. p.
523. sect. 17. p. 525. sect. 24. p. 526. sect. 24. p. 527. sect. ult. Whether a
Prohibition may be granted after Sentence, and in what Cases, p. 192. sect. 15.
p. 381. sect. 76. p. 116. sect. 12. p. 120. sect. 17. p. 124. sect. 29. Whether
a Prohibition may be after an Appeal, p. 148. sect. 21. A Prohibition whether
grantable after a Consultation, p. 147. sect. 18. or de novo to an Appellant
who had a Prohibition in the first instance, p. 360. sect. 19. p. 431.
Prohibition granted against Costs of Suit, given to an Informer, p. 473. sect.
7. Whether a Prohibition lies, in case proof by one single Witness be
disallowed in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 362. sect. 22. p. 113. sect. 11. p.
115. sect. 12. p. 123. sect. 26. p. 128. sect. 43. Whether a Prohibition may be
granted the last day of the Term, p. 147. sect. 18. Or to stay Proof in
Perpetuam rei memoriam, p. 374. Sect. 49. Proxies, what, p. 70. Sect. 5. p. 75.
Sect. 11. The same with Procurations, ibid. Whether extingnish'd by the
dissolution of Religious Houses, p. 76 etc. Sect. 11. Not known to the
Primitive Church, ib. Whether grantable by a Bishop to the King,. ibid. The
Case of Proxies aptly compared to the Case of Tithes, p. 79. Sect. 11. A Case
of Remark at Common Law touching Proxies, p. 75, etc. Sect. 11.
Q.
QUare Impedit, for and against whom that Writ lies, p 645. Sect. 3. Of what
things it lies, p. 649. Sect. 20, 21. Whether it lies for an Archdeaconry, p.
66. Sect. 14. Quarta Episcopalis, what, p. 77. Sect. 11. Quaries, whether
Tithable, p 436. Queen, whether Action lies for calling one so, p. 517. Sect.
5. p. 523. Sect. 18. p. 520. Sect. 12. Queen Elizabeth, her Declaration
touching her Supremacy, p. 10. Sect. 11. Declared Supreme Governess on Earth of
the Church of England, p. ibid. Sect. 14. Questmen, what, by whom Eligible, and
wherein their Office does consist, p. 163. Sect. 6. Quorum Nomina, Process of
that kind prohibited, p. 60. Sect. 6. p. 82. Sect. 3.
R.
RAbbits, whether Tithable, p. 367. Sect. 36. Rakings of the stubble of Corn,
whether Tithable, p. 384. p. 436, etc. Rapeseed, whether shall the Parson or
the Vicar have the Tithes thereof, p. 381. Sect. 77. Rate-Tithes, in what Cases
payable, p. 391. p. 437. Rectors, how distinguished from Vicars, p. 186. Sect.
1. Refusal of a Clerk by a Bishop, because he could not speak the Welsh
Language, p. 276. Sect. 36. Once Refused for Insufficiency, may not after be
received, p. 268. Sect. 39. Register to a Bishops Consistory, the Office
controverted, where Cognizable, p. 126. Sect. 35. Registry-Book of a Parish for
Christnings and Burials, the Original thereof, p. 145. Sect. 14. p. 164. Sect.
10. Release by one Churchwarden, whether any Bar to the Suit of his Companion,
p. 144. Sect. 12. p. 165. Sect. 11. p. 161. Sect. 2. Release of a Next
Avoidance, made after the Church becomes void, is void, p. 286. Sect. 7.
Religion Christian, when and where first planted in this Kingdom, p. 13. Sect.
1. Rents, of what kind may be sued for in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 126.
Sect. 34. Where the Tithe of Rents in London are suable for, and how, p. 379.
Sect. 70. Reparations of Churches, where Cognizable, p. 137. Sect. 3. 4 p. 143.
Sect. 10. p. 152. Sect. 26. In what Case it may be Cognizable at the Common
Law, p. 166. 15. Whether within the Cognizance of the Archdeacons Visitation,
p. 60. Sect. 7. Who and what shall be charged with such Reparations, and how,
p. 137, 138. Sect. 4. p. 144. Sect. 11. p. 145. Sect. 14. p. 147, 148. Sect.
19. p. 150. sect. 23. p. 152. Sect. 26. p. 175. Sect. 4. p. 153. Sect. 30. p.
157. Sect. 41. p. 149. Sect. 22. How the Tax for such Reparations shall be
apportioned between Landlord and Tenant, p. 154. Sect. 34. By whom the Chancel
shall be Repaired, p. 175. Sect. 4. Inheritances not to be therewith charged in
perpetuum, p. 144. Sect. 13. Whether a Tax for such Reparations may be made by
the Churchwardens only, p. 148. Sect. 20. How to be in Case of Union of
Churches, p. 146. Sect. 16. How in respect of the Fabric of the Church, in
distinction from that of the Ornaments thereof, p. 154. Sect. 34. Whether those
of a Chapel of Ease shall contribute to the Repairs of the Mother Church, p.
146. Sect. 16. p. 152. Sect. 28. p. 153. Sect. 33. p. 156. Sect. 39. p. 152.
Sect. 28. Whether the Land next adjoining ^o a Churchyard shall Repair the
Fences thereof, p. 166. Sect. 15. Residence in what Cases not required, p. 320.
Sect. 9. Resignation, what, p. 284. Sect. 3. Resignation-Bonds, whether good in
Law, p. 189. Sect. 7. What words sufficient in Law to import a Resignation, p.
191. Sect. 13. To whom it may be made, p ibid. How and to whom the Resignation
of a Donative may be made, p. 191. Sect. 14. Whether it may be made
conditionally, p. 278. sect. 14. Whether the Church becomes void thereby,
before the Bishop accepts it, p. 261. Sect. 17. Review, or the Court of Review,
or Commission Ad Revidendum, p. 118. Sect. 15. The Ground thereof, p. 4. Sect.
5. Revocations in Law of the Kings Presentation, p. 266. Sect. 31. Right of
Advowson, how and for whom that Writ lies, p. 649. Sect. 22. Right of Tithes,
Cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 127. Sect. 42. Rogation-weck, whence
so called, with the Original thereof, p. 130. Sect. 44. Roots of Coppice-wood
grubbed up, whether Tithable, p 437.
S.
Sacrilege, what; whence so called, how many ways it may be committed; and the
severe punishments thereof, p. 528, etc. The Sacrilegious were not anciently
allowed the Sanctuary, p. 141. sect. 8. Saffron, what Tithes it pays, p. 438.
To whom, whether as great Tithes to the Parson, or as small Tithes to the
Vicar, p. ibid. p. 198. Sect. 8. p. 361. Sect. 21. p. 366. Sect. 32. Salary of
a Chaplain, Triable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 198. Sect. 4. Salt, whether
Tithable, p. 438. Simpson, whether the first Archbishop of York; by whom
established, p. 14. Sect. 2. Sanctuary, the Law thereof anciently, p. 141.
Sect. 8. Heretofore the foundation of Abjuration, ibid. Not allowed to Traitors
nor Sacrilegious persons, p. 142. Sect. 8. Saxon Kings, their care for the
Government of the Church of England, p. 97. Sect. 1. Their zeal for erecting
and endowing of Churches, p. 208. Sect. 4. How severely they punished Adultery,
p. 470. Sect. 4. Scotland, when the Bishops thereo revolted from the Archbishop
of York, p. 14. Sect. 2. Seals of Office of Bishops, etc. how to be engraven
and used, p. 27, 28.. 5. Scutcheon or Banners taken out of the Church by the
Parson, whether, and for whom Action lies in that Case, p. 61. Sect. 2. Seats
in Churches, p. 137. Sect. 3. p. 138. Sect. 4. p. 142. Sect. 9. p. 154, 155.
Sect. 36. p. 147. Sect. 18. p. 149. Sect. 22. How and by whom to be disposed
of, p. 137. Sect. 3, 4. p. 149. Sect. 21. p. 150. Sect. 22. p. 154. Sect. 36.
p. 155, 156. Sect. 38. They belong of Right to the Ordinary to dispose of, p.
138. Sect. 5. p. 140. Sect. 7. p. 142. Sect. 9. p. 158. Sect. ult. p. 157.
Sect. 42. p. 151. Sect. 25. Whether the Ordinary has any thing to do with
Noble men's Seats in Churches, p. 151. Sect. 25. p. 157. Sect. 42. Custom may
(as to the Body of the Church) six the power of disposing the Seats in the
Churchwardens, p. 151. Sect. 25. The grant of such a Seat to a Man and his
Heirs, whether good in Law, p. 138. Sect. 4. To whom the chiefest Seat in the
Chancel properly belongs, p. 141. Sect. 7. The Cognizance of Seats in Churches
properly belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 157. Sect. 42. Whether he, who
having Lands in the Parish, but living out of the Parish, be chargeable with
the Repairs of the Seats of the Parish Church. p. 150. Sect. 23. Sees, or
Bishops Sees, whence so called, p. 347. Sect. 1. Sepulchers and Monuments in
Churches or Churchyards, how and where the defacing thereof is punishable, p.
142. Sect. 9. Sheep, the Law in reference to the Tithe thereof, as also of
their Pasture and their Wool, p. 438, 439. p. 464. p. 359, 360. Sect. 16, 17.
Sidemen, what their Office is, p. 163. Sect. 6. Anciently called Synods-men, or
Testes Synodales, p. ibid. Sect. 6. in the Margent. Significavit, what that
Writ ought to contain, p. 631. Sect. 10. p. 632. Sect. 12. p. 649. Sect. 19. p.
635. Sect. 21. Silva Caedua, the Law in reference to the Tithes thereof, p.
439, 440. Simon, the Monk of Walden, supposed to be the first Canonist in
England, p. 132. Sect. 44. Simony, whence so called; a Description thereof, p.
537. Sect. 1. How many ways it may be committed, p. 539, 540. Sect. 5. p. 541,
542. Sect. 8. The penalty thereof, p. 537. Sect. 1. A Bar in Law to the
Parsons demand of Tithes, p. 542. Sect. 10. p. 548. Sect. 17. p. 551. Sect. 26.
p. p. 34. The difference in Law between Simoniacus and Simoniace promotus, p.
538. Sect. 2. p. 552. Sect. 27. In what Case Simoniacal Contracts are
Cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Court, p. 120. Sect. 17. Slander, where
Cognizable, p. 516. Sect. 4. Son, whether he may succeed the Father in an
Ecclesiastical Living, p. 258. Sect. 10. p. 263. Sect. 20. Spoliation, what,
and in what Case, and for whom the Writ of Spoliation lies, and where
Cognizable, p. 439. p. 650. Sect. 24. Striking in the Church or Churchyard,
how punished, p. 139. Sect. 6. An Indictment for Striking in St. Paul's
Churchyard, p. 155. Sect. 37. Stork, the History of that Jealous Bird, and his
revenge on his Adulterous Mate, p. 475, 476.. ult. Stubble of Corn, whether
Tithable, p. 394. Subscription to the 39 Articles, what not good, p. 163.. 8.
Sufficiency or Insufficiency in an Ecclesiastical Officer, where Cognizable, p.
92. 93.. 19, 20. Suffragan Bishops, anciently invested by the Ring, without the
Staff, p. 25.. 3. Their use and Office, p. 30, 31.. 11. Suggestion for a
Prohibition, in what Case it need not be proved within Six Months, p. 374.. 51.
Summoner, what; a description of his Office, p. 86, 87.. 12. What the Canon
enjoins concerning such, ibid. What the ancient Canon is touching Summoners, p.
88.. 13. A Case at Common Law against a Summoner, p. ibid. Sect. 14.
Superstitious Pictures in Church-windows, whether they may be pulled down
without License of the Ordinary, p. 138. Sect. 5. Supremacy, or the Kings
Supremacy, a description thereof, p. 1. Sect. 1. Established by Statute Laws,
p. 2, 3. Sect. 2. p. 7. Sect. 10. The Oath of Supremacy, the original and
occasion thereof, p. 3, 4. Sect. 3. The Impugners thereof censured with
Excommunication ipso facto, p. 4. Sect. 6. Asserted by King. Ed. 6. p. 7, 8.
Sect. 13. Also by Queen Eliz. p. 8. Sect. 14. Synods, the several sorts and
kinds thereof, p. 584. Sect. 1. Under what Archbishops of Canterbury they have
been anciently held here in England, p. 590, 591. Sect. 7. Synodale, what; when
and to whom payable, p. 67. Sect. 1. Whether it be due without the Act of
Visiting, p. 68. Sect. 2. p. 69. Sect. 4. Originally paid in Victualibus, p.
68. Sect. 3. When and how changed into Money, ibid. The diverse significations
of the word Synodale, p. 71. Sect. 8. vid. Procurations. Synodies or Synodal,
what; the Ordinary's Right therein, p. 34. Sect. 17. p. 73. Sect. 9.
T.
TARES, cut green, to feed Cattle, whether Tithable, p. 440. Tartarians, their
great Chastity; they held Adultery Capital, p. 471. Sect. 6. Tax for
Church-Reparations, by whom to be made, p. 148. Sect. 20. p. 162. Sect. 4.
Templars, discharged of Tithes, p. 402. Temporalties or Barony of a Bishop, how
obtained, p. 27. Sect. 4. p. 28. Tenant in Common, in what case the same person
may be said to be Tenant in Common with himself, p. 193. Sect. 16. Testis
singularis, whether sufficient proof for payment of Tithes, p. 362. Sect. 22.
vid. p. 378. Sect. 63. p. 430. Theanus, Archbishop of London in the time of K.
Lucius, p. 17. Sect. 7. He was forced by the Infidel Hengist to fly into
Cornwall and Wales, p. ibid. Sect. 5. Theruma, what it was, p. 351. Sect. 4.
Timber Trees, what shall be reputed such, as not Tithable, p. 441, 442. If
wasted on a Bishopric, it is Dilapidation, p. 176, 177. Sect. 8, 9. Tithes,
What, by and to whom payable; when, how, of what things; the manner of Right
Tithing; what the Setting forth thereof is according to the Statute, and where
cognizable, p. 347. etc. The several kinds of Tithes, p. 349. Sect. 1. p. 351.
Sect. 4. whence the word [ Tithes] derived, p. 347. Sect. 1. By whom the Church
of England was therewith first endowed, ibid. They are now at Common Law
Temporal Inheritances, p. 353. Sect. 6, 7. Whether they may be leased or
released without Deed, p. 358. Sect. 11. p. 363. Sect. 27. Composition thereof
for life, whether good without Deed, p. 372. Sect. 45. Whether so, if but for
one year, or more, p. 377. Sect. 61. p. 382. s. 81. The Right of Tithes in
contest between Parson and Vicar, is properly cognizable in the Ecclesiastical
Court, p. 127. s. 42. p. 369. Sect. 41. p. 380. Sect. 73. What Tithes are
properly due to the Vicar, p. 199. Sect. 8. Tithes not set forth, Actions
thereon, p. 376. Sect. 55. p. 378. Sect. 65. Tithes to two by halves, whether
the Parishioner must so set them out, p. 362. Sect. 24. Tithes are of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, p. 357. Sect. 9. Objections against Tithes answered,
p. 350, and 351. Sect. 3. Whether Tithes are grantable by Copy, p. 431.
Tobacco, what Tithes that pays, p. 366. Sect. 32. Tombs and Sepulchers
defaced, where punishable, p. 142. Sect. 9. Trades, whether gain gotten thereby
be Tithable, and how, p. 442. Transaction, how it differs from Composition. p.
ibid. Translation of Bishops, needs no new Consecration, p. 49. Sect. 8. p. 27.
Sect. 4. p. 29. Sect. 7. Trebel Damages, where and in what Case suable, p.
442. Trees, what, Tithable or not, p. 442, etc. p. 377. Sect. 62. To whom the
Trees growing in the Churchyard do belong, p. 150. Sect. 22. If cut down, to
whom the Action belongs, p. 137. Sect. 3. p. 153. Sect. 32. Turkeys, whether
Tithable, p. 444. Turves, whether Tithable, ibid. Tyle-Stones, and Brick- Tyle,
whether Tithable, p. ibid.
V.
VALUE of a Benefice, in Case of Plurality, whether to be computed according to
the Kings Books, or the very Annual Value thereof, p. 295. Sect. 5. p. 299.
Sect. 12. p. 303. Sect. 21. Venison, whether Tithable, p. 361. Sect. 21. p.
454. Vestry, whence that word is derived, p. 162. Sect. 5. Vetches, whether
Tithable, or not, p. 454. Vicar, what; the original thereof p. 186. Sect. 1.
Where and in what Case he may sue for an increase of Maintenance, p. 199. Sect.
10, 11. Vicarage, how created, p. 198. Sect. 6. How it differs from a
Parsonage, p. 197. Sect. 2. In whom the Freehold of the Glebe thereof is,
ibid, Whether a Vicarage endowed may be appropriated, and to who, p. 197. Sect.
3. Who properly is Patron thereof, whether the Parson or the Parsons Patron, p.
199. Sect. 9. Whether a Vicarage Perpetual may be dissolved, p. 202. Sect. 17.
In what sense a Vicarage may be compared to a Commendam, p. 203. Sect. 18. In
what case a Vicarage may determine, p. 199. Sect. 11. What amounts to an Union
of the Parsonage and Vicarage, p. 199. Sect. 11. Vicario deliberando occasion
cujusdam Recognitionis, what that Writ imports, p. 648. Sect. 15. Vi Laica
removenda, in what case that Writ lies, p. 646. Sect. 5. Vine-Trees, or Vines,
what Tithes they yield, p. 454. Violent hands laid on one in the Church or
Churchyard, what the penalty thereof, p. 139, 140. Sect. 6. p. 155. Sect. 37.
p. 89, 90. Sect. 16. Visitation, the power of the Ordinary therein, p. 34.
Sect. 18. p. 89, 90. Sect. 16. Whether an Archdeacon has power of Visitation
of Common Right, p. 63. Sect. 7. What number of Attendants allowed by Law to
Visitors, p. 71. Sect. 7. Underwoods, whether Tithable or not, p. 455, 456.
Union of Churches, what, and by whom to be made, p. 169. Sect. 1. What amounts
to an Union of a Parsonage and Vicarage, p. 199. Sect. 11. Unity of Possession,
the Law thereof in reference to Tithes; also the properties thereof, p. 383,
454. Vodinus Archbishop of London, slain by the Tyrant Vortiger, p. 16. Sect.
5. Vortiger the Tyrant, burnt in a Castle besieged by Aurelius Ambrose, p. 16.
Sect. 5. He surrendered Kent, Suffolk, and Norfolk to the Infidel Hengist, p.
ibid. Usurpation of the Pope, how and when it originally began here in England,
and the progress thereof after the Conquest, p. 97, 98. Sect. 1. p. 111. Sect.
8. p. 130, etc. Sect. 44. Usurper, who properly is such, p. 205. Sect. 1.
Whether he may gain possession of an Advowson from the Crown, p. 215. Sect. 18.
p. 218. Sect. 22. vid. p. 219. Sect. 24. In what case an Usurpation puts the
very Patron out of possession, p. 272. Sect. 5. Three Writs at Common Law
against an Usurper, and what they are, p. 205. Sect. 1.
W
WAges of Servants, whether Tithable, p. 457. Wall of the Churchyard, by whom
to be repaired, p. 144. Sect. 11. Wales, when first subject to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, p. 17. Sect. 6. Waste Pastures, in what case
Tithable or not, p. 457. Wax, or Beeswax, how to be Tithed, p. 457. Way
obstructed for carrying of Tithes, Cognizable in the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, p. 382. Sect. 82. vid. p. 394. Weapons drawn in the Church or
Churchyard, how punished, p. 139. Sect. 6. Indictments thereon discharged, and
why, p. 149. Sect. 22. p. 155. sect. 37. Weild or Woad for Diers, to whom the
Tithe of that Dying Plant belongs, whether as Great Tithe to the Parson, or as
Small Tithe to the Vicar, p. 366. sect. 32. p. 381. s. 77. p. 457, 458.
Westminster-Abbey, by whom Founded, p. 328. sect. 5. When the Revenues thereof
were first vested in a Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church thereof, p.
15. s. 3. How it became Originally the place of Consecration and Coronation of
the Kings of England, p. 6. Sect. 8. Whitson-Farthings, what, and when paid, p.
73. Sect. 10. Whore, whether Actionable, and where; to call one so, p. 519.
Sect. 9. Willows, whether Tithable, p. 457. Witness, one single Witness
disallowed in the Ecclesiastical Court for sufficient proof; whether
Prohibition lies in that case, p. 113, 114. Sect. 11. p. 115. Sect. 12. p. 116.
Sect. 12. p. 123. Sect. 26. p. 128. Sect. 43. Witch, or the Son of a Witch,
whether those words are Actionable, p. 524. Sect. 24. Wolsey Cardinal,
empowered by the Popes Bull, to retain the Archbishopric of York, and the
Abbey of St. Albans in Commendam, p. 111. Sect. 8. Wolstan Bishop of Worcester,
his Resolute Answer to King William the Conqueror, p. 97. Sect. 1. Wood, the
Law in reference to the Tithe thereof, p. 458, to 462. Computed among the
Predial and Great Tithes, by whom payable, whether by the Buyer or the Seller;
whether due for Fuel spent in the Parishioners house, p. ibid. In what sense it
may be either Great or Small Tithes, p. 365, 366. Sect. 32. Whether Wood
Tithable at the Common Law, p. 372. Sect. 46. Wood for Hedging and Firing,
whether Tithable, p. 369, 370. Sect. 42. In what case the Vicar may have the
Tithe thereof, p. 381. sect. 79. Wool, the Law in reference to the Tithes
thereof, p. 198. sect. 3. p. 359. sect. 16. p. 366. sect. 32. Of Sheep pastured
in diverse Parishes, p. 462, etc. Of Rotten Sheep, whether Tithable, p. 359.
sect. 15. Worcester-Church, anciently a Priory, p. 74. sect. 10. Words of
Contention in the Church or Churchyard, how punished, p. 139. sect. 6. Writ of
Right of Advowson, for whom it lies, p. 214, 215. sect. 17. The Writ De
Haeretico Comburendo, when taken away and abolished, p. ult. sect. ult.
Y
YOrk, the Original of that Metropolitan See, p. 14. sect. 2. It anciently had
a Metropolitan Jurisdiction over all the Bishops in Scotland, p. 18. sect. 9.
ERRATA.
Page 25. lin. 25. read Potestatem, p. 35. l. 2. Archidiaconum, p. 200. l. 37.
Provenues, p. 203. l. 7. Vicaria, p. 205. l. 5. be with the Cure, p. 209. l. 3.
An. 1505, p. 285. l. 17. to his Father by the true, p. 293. l. 31. too late, p.
403. l. 38. Mepham's Canon, p. 448. l. 23. to the Parson, p. 470. l. ult.
Adulterum, p. 471. l. 7. Hoel Dha, p. 439. l. 15. Cognatio, p. 497. l. 11.
Adulterous Wife, p. 501. l. 7. Thore, p. 503. l. 6. Viro, p. 530. l. 40. Crown,
p. 543. l. 18. Pardon, l. 40. Doctors.

Advertisement,
THE ORPHANS LEGACY, or a Testamentary Abridgment, in Three parts, viz. 1. Of
Last Wills and Testaments. 2. Of Executors and Administrators. 3. Of Legacies
and Devises:
Where the most material Points of Law relating to that subject are succinctly
Treated, as well according to the Common and Temporal as Ecclesiastical and
Civil Laws of this Realm. Illustrated with a great variety of select Cases in
the Law of both Professions, as well delightful in the Theory, as useful for
the practice of all such as study the one, or are either active or passive in
the other. By the Author.


