Imprimatur.

Geor. Stradling S. T. P. Reverendo in Christo Patri Gilberto Episc. Land. a
sacris Domest.
Ex. Aed. Sabaud. 14. Jun. 1662.
Self-contradiction censured, OR A Caveat against inconstancy, and the
inconsistent contrariety of the same men's pretenses, principles, opinions and
practices, Dialogue-wise digested into a deliberative discourse between
Affection and Judgment; AND Intended to serve as spiritual Physic for two
great diseases of Phanatick spirits, HYPOCRITICAL DECEITFULNESS, AND
ENTHUSIASTICAL DELUSION.

By Christopher Harvey Vicar of Clifton upon Dunsmore in the County of Warwick.

GAL. 11.18. If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton 1662.

To the right reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord BISHOP of LONDON, And
President of the CONVOCATION IN THE Province of Canterbury.
My Lord,
THis discourse I penned in the year 1642. under the borrowed name of Irenaeus
Philalethes. Since when, some written copies of it have privately passed through
many hands, not without approbation from some, both loyal Subjects of the
Crown, and obedient sons of the Church of England: unto whom, for their eminent
worth, I have great reason to to bear much respect. That now, being altogether
a stranger, I take upon me the boldness, in mine own name, and publicly, to
present it with my humble service to your Lordship, is because I am confidently
persuaded, that you are a very zealous, and will be a constant Assertour of
that religious Loyalty, which is pleaded for in this discourse Concerning
which, although I must confess, that there is no such appearance of learning,
art or wit in it, as may be sufficient to render it considerable unto curious
heads, yet I hope there is some such evidence of truth and sincerity, with
peaceable humility and moderation, as may serve to show it not unfit for
entertainment amongst honest hearts. Howsoever I am preswaded, that there is
nothing in it, which will be offensive unto any, except they be such, as think
themselves wiser then the holy Scriptures can make them, or purpose to promote
their own particular and private ends, although it be to the general and
public prejudice of Christianity: Whom I never did either desire to please by
complying with them, or fear to offend by dissenting from them: but in all the
long time of my almost perpetual sufferings, in one kind or other, have still
lived in a confident and patient expectation of that, which now with joy and
gladness I behold, the happy Resurrection in our land of Christian Orthodox
Principality and Prelacy, or Monarchy and Hierarchy in abstracto: which I have
ever esteemed to be the most lively representations of the two witnesses, Rev.
11. and most exactly comparable unto them, if not rather purposely intended by
them (as I have intimated in the 25. Section of the right Rebel) and that all
their adherents were in a far more comfortable condition, when most abased in
their own wants, then any of their enemies could be, when they most abounded
with the spoils of other men. Blessed be the God of peace, that of his abundant
mercy has once again spoken peace unto his people, and restored comfort unto
them and their mourners: He of his infinite goodness give them grace, not as
pretended only, but as real Sains indeed, to continue in his goodness, and
never to turn again unto any of their former follies. That your Lordship may
live long on earth to enjoy the comforts, and ta last in heaven receive the
reward of all that you have done, and shall do worthily, for the glory of God,
and the good of his Church, is, and shall be the prayer of,

Your Lordships very humble and obsequious servant, Christopher Harvey.

The Author to the Readers.
Christians Readers,
I Mean you which make account, that under God one day, your own consciences,
either must be your most cordial comforters, or will be your most bitter
adversaries, I earnestly entreat you, by all that is, or can be dear unto you,
to credit me in this, that this discourse is not offered to the view of others,
with any intent of purpose to raise scruples in the minds of any, who exercise
themselves to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward
men; but to put some men in mind of their own unadvised rashness, who use to
take up both pretenses, principles, opinions and practices on trust from
others, and (being carried with the current of example) to follow on in the
tract they see traced before them, although for ought they know, it may be but
a by-way, non qua eundum, sed qua itur. Whereof God himself did long ago give
warning, when he said, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus
2^.2. and Be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive; But speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.14, 15. Daily experience tells
us what a strong compulsive power example has, and he knew well enough that
said Vivitur exemplo. When St. Peter at Antioch withdrew, and separated himself
from the Gentiles, fearing them which were of the circumcision, the other Jews
dissembled with him insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their
dissimulation. Whereupon St Paul complained, that he compelled the Gentiles to
live as did the Jews, Gal. 2.12, 13, 14 And whether the public distractions of
our times, not only in matters of Religion, and Church government, but likewise
of the State and Commonwealth, may not be justly imputed unto the weakness of
those men's resolutions, who (suffering themselves to be carried away with the
wind and tide of popular applause, or a prevailing faction) have sought to
please others, by complying with them in their opinions and practices, rather
then unto any weight of argument, and strength of reason, whereby their
judgments might be swaid, and drawn that way, I leave it to be resolved by
them, who seriously consider what St. Paul's censure is of them that troubled
the Galatians about circumcision, Gal. 6.12, 13. As many as desire to make a
fair show in the flesh constrain you to be circumcised, only lest they should
suffer persecution for the cross of Christ. For neither they themselves, who
are circumcised keep the law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they may
glory in your flesh. As though their intent and aim were not to stand fast in
one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel: but
having men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, to make a party, and
maintain a side, oppressing others with an heavy load of prejudice, and
bolstering up their own with a potent prop of partiality. And they prevailed so
far that way, that though St. Paul withstood St. Peter to his face, and gave no
place by subjection to the false brethren, no not for an hour, that the truth
of the Gospel might continue with the Galatians, yet he was afraid of them,
lest he had bestowed labor upon them in vain: and is forced to break out into
that terrible Apostolical imprecation, I would they were even cut off that
trouble you. Which imprecation although I dare not imitate him in, with
relation to any particular persons, yet, with an indefinite generality of
comprehension only, I hope I may be bold to say, as he does, He that troubles
you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be. Such troubles St. Paul not only
met with in the Churches where he had to do, as appears almost in all his
Epistles, but likewise has fortold unto others, which to the end that all
might be freer from the danger of, he not only gives ordinary Christians
warning to beware of them, but especially lays a weighty charge upon them that
are watchmen over others, upon that occasion, to take heed unto themselves, and
to all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made them Overseers. And to
that purpose he sets diverse marks upon them whom he would have to be avoided:
as, Acts 20.^9, 30. Grievous wolves, not sparing the flock, speaking perverse
things to draw away disciples after them. Romans 16.17, 18. which cause divisions
and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned: they serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple. 1 Cor. 3.4, One says, I am of Paul, and
another, I am of Apollo. 2 Cor. 10.12. Measuring themselves by themselves, and
comparing themselves amongst themselves. Gal. 1.7. That trouble you and would
pervert the Gospel of Christ. Gal. 2.4 False brethren unawares brought in, who
came in privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that
they might bring us into bondage. Gal. 4.17. They zealously affect you, but not
well: yea, they would exclude you (or us) that you might affect them. Phil.
1.15, 16. Some preach Christ of envy and strife, of contention not sincerely.
Phil. 2.21. All seek their own not the things which are Jesus Christ's. 1 Timothy
1.5, 6, 7. which having swarved from the end of the Commandment, have turned
aside unto vain jangling, Desiring to be teachers of the law, understanding
neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Giving heed to
seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their consciencies seared with an hot iron. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. Proud, knowing
nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy,
strife, raylings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds,
and destitute of the truth; supposing that gain is godliness. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8.
Which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 2 Timothy
4.3, 4. The time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers having itching ears: And
they shall turn away their ears from hearing the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables. Tit. 1.9, 10, 11. Gainsayers, unruly and vain talkers and
deceivers, who subvert whole houses teaching things which they ought not for
filthy lucre sake. ver. 16. They profess that they know God: but in works they
deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.
Agreeable whereunto is that which we find foretold by St. Peter, in the second
Chapter of his second Epistle, and complained of by St. Jude: especially that
which seems to be the most peculiar and proper sin of these times, despising
dominion, and speaking evil of dignities. The truth of all which, although in
the general it cannot be denied, yet in the particular application thereof is
bandied like a tennis ball by Christians of several professions against one
another, none daring to let it rest on their side, lest withal they should be
forced to confess a loss. Which though it may appear to be an argument of that
generous disposition which the very name and title of a Christian seems to
bring with it, possessing them that profess themselves such, with a general
aversness to acknowledge any thing as justly laid unto their charge, which they
suspect may bar them of that claim: yet I cannot conceive it altogether to
agree with that ingenuity, or rather sincerity, by which the spirit of truth
may be distinguished from the spirit of error, whose property it is to make
men willing to confess the truth, although it be against themselves, and to
acknowledge with St. Paul, that they can do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth, 2 Cor 13.8. For truth, as the God of truth, is but one, and can no
more contradict it self, then cease to be: so that they who are once convicted
of untruth, must of necessity either acknowledge themselves in an error, or
else be left for ever inexcusable, unless they can show some special
privilege, by which they are exempted from the general condition of all
mankind. In which respect, methinks, there is no equity at all in
recriminations, unless the parties accused can as well acquit themselves, as
charge their accusers. Which though some men may do sufficiently in some
particulars, yet that any man can do in all, I cannot easily believe, until I
see some limitation put upon that general pronunciate of St. James, Jam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all: and that by the same authority, by which he spoke
it. So that laying aside all partiality unto our selves, and prejudice against
others, I suppose the readiest, and indeed the only sure and certain means, to
decide all controverted points, either of opinion or practice amongst men,
purposely maintained and avowed by them, is to examine them how they agree with
that which they pretend; and that which they pretend, with that which all good
Christians are agreed upon, the clear and undoubted principles of religion, so
plainly expressed in the holy Scripture, that an ordinary understanding may
easily apprehend the meaning of them. I mean not so, that every one who hears
them shall be effectually wrought upon both to believe them, and obey them, or
be enlightened so, as to see evidence of truth in every conclusion, that in
direct form of argument may be deduced from them: but so, that he agrees with
others, in the general sense and understanding of them, and will acknowledge,
that what is contrary thereunto cannot be truth. In which regard, though many
men have done worthily in confirming the truth, and convincing gainsayers, yet
I conceive the most effectual means to reduce them that wander from the error
of their ways, is to represent unto them apparent evidences of their own
inconstant contradictions, and the irreconciliable inconsistence of their own
opinions and practices. For who shall justify him that is condemned of
himself? Or, what exception can any man take to his own evidence? Out of thy
own mouth will I condemn thee, says our Savior in the parable, Luke 19.22.
and, Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? says St. Paul,
Romans ^.21. Such an argument ad hominem, although it be not always sufficient
to confirm what men undertake themselves to maintain, yet may it be very
available to convince their opponents, either of error, or enormity: which as
I conceive there is no man but is subject to, so hardly can I think any man so
unreasonable, but in his more retired thoughts he will acknowledge it unto
himself, although peradventure, if not modesty, yet pride will make him
unwilling to confess it unto others. To set such men before themselves, and
bring them to take notice of that which their own deceitful hearts would fain
conceal from them, I have taken this pains. Wherein I shall have this
advantage, that if it conduce not any thing to the public good of others, yet
I my self in private may make use of it. For first, by this I hope it will
appear, that the course which I have held (whatever success it may meet with
for the present) was not unadvisedly and rashly undertaken, but upon serious
consideration; and that I could not with a good conscience, alter my practice,
unless I had been sufficiently convinced of error in mine opinion. And
secondly it may be that which I seek to teach others, I may have occasion to
learn my self, or at least many times to renew the remembrance of it. And I
shall take it thankfully from them, that will favor me so much, as to inform
of mine own contradictions, if they find me in any. Which that I may expect,
with all the freedom that I can from a personal engagement, I make bold to
continue the use of the same borrowed name, under which I have formerly
shadowed my self.

October 21. 1642. Irenaeus Philalethes.

The Contents of this Discourse.
SECT. I. AN Introduction to the ensuing discourse p. 1 Sect. 2. Of the ends,
which men do, or should propose unto themselves in all their actions p. 5 Sect.
3. How to try the truth of our own pretended ends p. 7 Sect. 4. How to judge of
other men's intentions, whether they be agreeable to their pretenses, or no p.
11 Sect. 5. Some probable ocasions to suspect, although not necessary evidences
to conclude, what other men's intentions are p. 16 Sect. 6. Men's actions and
intertions are not always of the same kind, either good, or bad p. 21 Sect.
7. Rules of direction for the better discovery of the truth, or falsehood of the
ends which men pretend p. 23 Sect. 8. Pretenses are not always to be taken
upon trust from other men p. 25 Sect. 9. The best means to try the truth, or
the falsehood of other men's pretenses p. 26 Sect. 10. The same illustrated by
some examples p. 31 Sect. 11. Other evidences for the further perfecting of
this discovery p. 39 Sect. 12. A real purpose of pretended ends is not enough,
unless the intended ends themselves be such as they should be p. 42 Sect. 13.
Instances of exceptions, that may be taken to the choice of such means, as may
be conducible to the ends, which they are used for p. 45 Sect. 14. Means
effectually conducible to any end must not be used, if either unlawful in
themselves, or unto those that use them. p. 52 Sect. 15. Amongst different
opinions of what is lawful, or unlawful, necessary, or indifferent in it self,
nothing is to be done against conscience p. 56 Sect. 16. The right information
of Conscience, concerning what is unlawful, or necessary in it self, is to be
sought for from the written word of God rightly understood and applied p. 59
Sect. 17. Amongst diverse opinions, concerning the true understanding of
Scripture, their doubtful differences are to be tried by their concord and
agreement with undoubted truths commonly received and agreed upon as
principles. p. 61 Sect. 18. Special immediate revelations from God, to show
what is unlawful, or necessary to our selves in particular, although useful
heretofore, are neither to be expected, nor easily to be believed now p. 68
Sect. 19. Some directions to try the pretended revelations of private spirits
by p. 72 Sect. 20. What to do in such things, as are neither necessary, nor
unlawful in themselves, nor unto us in particular, but indefinitely, only unto
men of such particular places and callings, estates and conditions, as for the
present we are in p. 76 Sect. 21. Things in themselves indifferent may become
either necessary, or unlawful to inferiors, being commanded, or forbidden them
by their superiors p. 79 Sect. 22. Of passive obedience insuffering wrong
patiently. Whether subjects to defend themselves, and maintain their own right,
may by open violence, and force of arms, resist their supreme Magistrates? p.
85 Sect. 23. The question stated p. 89 Sect. 24. Cautions, with which the
affirmative is limited by them that maintain it p 92 Sect. 25. Exceptions to
some principles, upon which they endeavor to ground their opinions, who
maintain the affirmative p. 94. Sect. 26. The question whether subjects may
resist their sovereigns, belongs not peculiarly to Kings or Monarchs, alone,
but is common unto them, with all supreme Magistrates, in what form of
government soever it be p. 106 Sect. 27 Means warranted by God, as effectually
conducible to any end, must not be refused, or neglected, under any pretense to
the contrary whatsoever p. 109 Sect. 28. Means probably destructive of the
supreme must not be used, though possibly they might be available for
subordinate ends p. 114 Sect. 29. What means in their use are inconsistent
with, or contrary to the advancement of the glory of God. p 119 Sect. 30.
Whether the glory of God may be advanced by the sins of men p. 121 Sect. 31.
Some means sometimes probably conducible to the supreme and principal, if
necessarily destructive of, or inconsistent with a particular subordinate end,
are not always to be used p 123 Sect. 32. Men eminently virtuous, or
notoriously vicious, how far to be trusted, and adhered unto, or shunned and
declined p. 126 Sect. 33. Partiality and prejudice two great occasions of
confusion in the world p. 128 Sect. 34. What difference is to be made between
the opinions and practices of men eminently virtuous, and notoriously vicious
p. 133 Sect. 35. A multitude must not be followed to do evil, nor the doing of
good abstained from, though it be to avoid the society of a multitude of evil
doers otherwise p. 141 Sect. 36. The conclusion p. 147
Self-contradiction censured, In a Dialogue between AFFECTION and JUDGMENT.
SECT. I. An Introduction to the ensuing discourse.
SIR,
Affection. THE discourse which you fell into the other day, concerning the
necessity of a right judgment, a good understanding, and a good conscience in
all things, made then so deep an impression in my mind, that since it has
given me occasion to enter into a more serious consideration of mine own ways,
and to examine both mine actions and intentions more narrowly then heretofore.
And now I would gladly make use of this opportunity, to advise with you in some
particulars, of which, if my resolution should be only ruled by my self,
peradventure I might find cause hereafter to repent me.


Judgment. I am glad that discourse wrought with you so well: for the truth is,
my special aim therein was at your good, having for the love I bear you often
observed your behavior, and sometimes seen you so carried away with a vehement
desire of compassing the ends you aimed at, without due consideration of the
means, whereby you might attain unto them; sometimes so transported with a
liking of the ways which you were in, without looking to the end whereat they
might arrive; sometimes so applauding some men's persons, and so admiring their
graces, without taking any notice at all of their infirmities; sometimes so
detesting some men's particular opinions and practices, that you have fallen
into a general disliking of their persons, and vilifying all (though otherwise
good) that they have had any hand at all in; that I have almost been ready to
accuse my self of a mistake, and to resolve that it was not Affection which I
had set mine eyes upon, but Affectation. But if you be resolved hereafter to
use more circumspection, I shall be as ready to assist you with the best advice
I can, as you to desire it.


Aff. There is nothing, whereby you may oblige me more, nor can I imagine how I
should testify my thankfulness better, then by resolving for the future to
follow your directions, and for the present freely to unfold my doubts unto you.


Judge. As for your doubts, you shall do well to deal freely in discovering
them: but for my directions, you had better reserve your resolution of
following them, until you see reason to induce you thereunto. For Judgment is
in danger sometimes to be blinded, as well as Affection is to be ensnared: and
therefore it is best, that we both join together to assist one another in using
the means, whereby we may come to be rightly informed, both what we should
think, and what we should do, and wait for a blessing upon our endeavors, from
him who gives unto all men liberally, and upbraideth not.


Aff. That blessing I hope he will not withhold, having begun already to give
it, by directing you so rightly your self to single out the main particulars,
concerning which my purpose was to desire your advise: viz. the proposal of the
ends which I ought to aim at, the choice of the means, which I should use to
those ends, and that esteem I ought to have them in, whom I observe to be
richly adorned with eminent graces, or notoriously overtaken with false
opinions, or evil practices. And as before I apprehended a possibility, that
hereafter I might be, so now by your speech I perceive there is some cause I
should suspect, that I have been already mistaken in that kind.


Judge. Nor do you need to wonder at it, and to think it strange, since it is no
more then humane frailty makes all men subject to, and that which the best
sometimes have had too much experience of: as I shall show you by particular
examples, if you will propound your particular doubts concerning each of them
in order.


SECT. II. Of the ends which men do, or should propose unto themselves in all
their actions.
Aff. IF you be so pleased then, I will begin with that, which is the first in
all men's intentions, the end which they propose unto themselves in all their
actions: and which for mine own part, I conceive is the principal thing to be
enquired of. This I am resolved should be the advancement of the glory of God:
and that nothing should be intended at all, but that which may be, not possibly
only, but necessarily also, or probably at least subservient thereunto.


Judge. So far you are right. But I doubt all men are not of the same mind: for
St. Paul in his time found it otherwise. Phil. 1.15, 16, 17. He says, Some
indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will. The
one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to
my bonds: But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the
Gospel. And speaking of Timothy. Phil. 2.20, 21. He says, I have no man like
minded, who will naturally care for your state. For all seek their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's. Whereby it appears, that St. Paul not only
thought it possible that some men might, but likewise found it by experience
true, that many men did propose unto themselves one end in pretense, and
another in truth. Nay, that which is yet more miserable, men's own deceitful
hearts many times are apt to carry them away with a false persuasion of their
own ends, and make them think they seek indeed the glory of God, when in truth
it is but their own repute and credit amongst men.

Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord, says Jehu to Jehonadab, 2 Kings
10.16. Yet Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with
all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel
to sin. verse. 31. Jehu it seems had more regard to his own royalty, then Gods
religion, notwithstanding his pretended zeal for the Lord. What a fair intent
of doing justice unto every man did Absalom profess, 2 Samuel 15.4. when his
purpose was to steal the hearts of the men of Israel from their own King, and
his own father, David? And how did he make the pretended payment of a vow,
which he had vowed to the Lord, in Hebron, the color of his escape from
Jerusalem, and a cloak to cover his conspiracy? So usual a thing it is, as
Solomon observes; Prove. 26.23, 25. to find the potsheard of a wicked heart
covered with the silver dross of burning lips, and for him that speaks fair
to have seven abominations in his heart.


SECT. III. How to try the truth of our own pretended ends.
Aff. THat this is too often true I dare not deny: but the difficulty is to
discover this deceit. For counsel in the heart of man is as deep water. Prove.
20.5. and though a man of understanding may draw it out, yet every man is not
always furnished with means sufficient to that purpose. Therefore you shall do
me a special pleasure, if you will give me some rules of direction to guide my
self by in the trial both of mine own and other men's pretended ends.


Judge. For your own, as it concerns you most to be well assured of the truth of
your intentions, so the means are more certain, if you will deal sincerely
with your self in the use of them. The principal is to beg of God, that he
would discover you unto your self, as David does, Psalm. 26.2. Examine me, O
Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart: and Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me,
O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any
wicked way in me. As it is he that knows, so it is he that declares unto man
what is his thought. Am. 4.13. And if you be not willing to have your
intentions thus tried and discovered unto you by him, but dig deep to hide your
counsels from the Lord, you have just cause to suspect, that you heart goes
about to deceive you, and that you purpose something else then you pretend.
Subordinate unto this may be your examination and trial of your self in two
particulars.

First, if your pretended end be that which you intend indeed, you will not
rest satisfied with any thing else, until you have attained it: nay rather you
will be impatient of every thing (though otherwise good and convenient) that
you think may intercept, or interrupt the accomplishment of what you mainly
desire. Thus Abraham's servant showed plainly, that he came not unto Labans
house for entertainment, but dispatch of his business, when he said, I will not
eat, till I have told mine errand. Genesis 24.23.

Secondly, if your pretended end be that which you intend indeed, you will rest
satisfied with the accomplishment of that, although you fail of other things,
which otherwise you might have had: nay rather you will be glad, and desire to
be deprived of, or debarred from any thing else, (how good, or convenient
soever it may be) by loosing whereof the fruition of your main intended may be
furthered. Thus St. Paul shows plainly, that the propagation and defense of the
Gospel was his main design, when he says, None of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course with
joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God. Acts 20.24. Thus Mephibosheth showed plainly, that
he was sincerely indeed affected unto David's safety, when he was content to
have parted, not only with the half of his estate, but even with the whole,
unto his own treacherous servant Ziba, so long as he saw the King come again in
peace to his own house. 2 Samuel 19.30.


SECT. IV. How to judge of other men's intentions, whether they be agreeable to
their pretenses, or no.
FOr other men's intents, though you cannot so certainly know them, as your own,
nor need always to enquire after them: yet, when they are of public and
common concernment, and are urged as motives to draw you into action with them,
it behooves you to take heed, that your opinions of them be not lightly
undertaken, but upon good ground of reason: which must be gathered from that
evidence you find of likelihood and probability (for absolute assured certainty
there can be none) that what they pretend they purposely aim at, and intend
indeed: and in the right apprehension, and application, of that evidence
especially consists the exercise and use, of that sound wisdom and discretion
wherewith a good man guides his affairs, as the Psamist speaks. Psalm. 112. 5.
and whereby he is taught to walk uprightly and evenly, between that weak and
simple partiality, which believes every word, and that uncharitable prejudice,
which not only suspecteth, but censureth also as unsound, the most seemingly
sincere professions. To lend you some light in making this discovery, let me
commend to your consideration these particulars.

First, that men's intentions are many times varied by the success of their
actions, and they alter their ends, as means, occasions, and opportunities,
either frown upon, or favor them. And so sometimes that which was at first
intended as an end, comes afterward to be made use of only as a means unto
another end. Thus the end that Absalom intended, when he sent Joab unto David.
2 Samuel 14.32. was the regaining of his fathers grace and favor, but afterward
he made use of that grace and favor for another end, the promoting of his
treasonable intent of usurping the kingdom, which it may be before he dreamed
not of. And sometimes that which was at the first intended only as a means unto
a further end, comes afterward to be rested in as intended it self, without
relation unto any other end. Thus Jeroboam and the ten tribes intended, or else
pretended, as the only end they aimed at, the making of their burdens
lighter; and their revolt from Rehoboam and the house of David, seemed only as
a means to compass that end: but afterward they rested in that, as if they had
all that they desired, and never regarded to return again to their obedience
upon any terms. And sometimes men being crossed in the ends that they before
intended, and coming to discover the impossibility, inconvenience, or error of
them, utterly forsake them, and set upon others. Thus when St. Paul went to the
high Priest, and desired of him letters to Damascus, the end he intended was,
that if he found any disciples of the Lord, he might bring them bound unto
Jerusalem. Acts 9.1, 2. But when he returned to Jerusalem, the end he aimed at
was the propagation of the Gospel, and the confirmation of that faith, which
once he had destroyed. If therefore you would judge aright of other men's
intentions, you must be careful to distinguish between their intentions that
have been heretofore, and those that are now, otherwise you may be much
mistaken.

Secondly consider, that the success of men's actions many times either is, or
may be, much different from the ends which they intend in them. Thus Joseph's
brethren intended nothing less then his advancement in Egypt by Pharaoh, when
they sold him to the Ishmaelites: yet God by that means brought it to pass. And
it may be the alteration of Religion to Idolatry was not intended by Jeroboam
and the ten tribes, when they revolted from the tribe of Judah, and rebelled
against Rehoboam, and the house of David, at least they made no show thereof;
but only the making lighter of that yoke, which they conceived to be grievous
and heavy; yet the change of the government quickly brought forth the change of
the Religion too. Therefore you may be mistaken, if you think that always to
have been the end intended in other men's actions, which you find to be the
effect that follows thereupon: or if you think, that such an effect will
never follow upon such an action, because it is not the end intended in it.

Thirdly consider, that many men employed, at the same time, in the same
action, may notwithstanding have diverse intentions, and propose unto themselves
different ends. Thus St. Paul complains, Phil. 1, 15, 16, 17. Some indeed
preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will. The one
preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my
bonds: but the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the
Gospel. Therefore it is no good consequence to say, Such a man does the same
that other men do, therefore he aims at the same end with them.

Fourthly consider, that diverse men employed, at the same time, in different
actions, may notwithstanding aim at, and propose unto themselves, one and the
same end. Thus the thirty thousand that lay in ambush against Ai, and Joshua
with the men of Israel, that made as though they were beaten before the men of
Ai, and fled by the way of the wilderness, all intended the destruction of the
City. Josh. 8. Thus Ittai, that would not be persuaded to return into
Jerusalem, but passed over the brook Kidron before David, and Zadok and
Abiathar, that carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem, and carried there,
and Husha^ the Archite, that returned to the City, and aboda with Absalom, all
intended David's safety. 2 Samuel 15. Therefore it is no good consequence to say,
Because this and that man's actions are different, therefore their ends are not
the same.

SECT. V. Some probable occasions to suspect, although not necessary evidences
to conclude, what other men's inintentions are.
Aff. GIve me leave, Sr. to interrupt you a little. I thought you would have
given me some rules, whereby I might have known what other men's intentions are,
and whether they purpose that indeed, which they pretend, or no. But for ought
I perceive, these considerations which you offer me, are such, as rather tend
to darken the discovery, and make me doubt, whether all endeavors in this kind
will not prove altogether vain and fruitless.


Judge. How apt you are to be mistaken? My purpose is indeed to give you the
best directions that I can, how you may judge of other men's intentions, and not
be deceived therein: but first I thought it requisite to let you see, how many
ways you may be missed, and what appearances you ought not always to give
heed unto, as necessary evidences to ground a certain resolution on: although I
deny not, but that they may give just occasion many times to some suspicion, or
surmise, especially then when you plainly perceive them agreeable unto, or
differing from that which is openly professed and pretended. As if you perceive
the ends which any man does now pretend, to be different from those which he
formerly professed to intend, you may very reasonably suspend your resolution,
that he deals sincerely now, until you have more then his own bare word to
warrant it. Thus when St. Paul was come to Heirusalem, and assayed to join
himself to the disciples, they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he
was a disciple, but Barnabas took him and brought him to the Apostles, and
declared unto them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken
to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus, in the name of Jesus; and
then he was with them coming in and going out at Heirusalem. Acts 9.26, 27, 28.
So if you see the success of men's actions directly contrary to the ends, which
they pretended to aim at in those actions, and yet that they are well pleased
with, and glad of such success, you may probably suspect, that notwithstanding
their pretenses, the ends which they intended before, were the same with the
effects that followed after. And on the contrary, if the success of men's
actions be agreeable unto the ends that they pretended, and yet they appear to
be grieved with it, and displeased at it, you have then just cause to conceive,
that either their pretenses before were false, or else that their intentions
are altered since. Thus David discovers the falsehood of his feigned friends,
indeed his treacherous enemies, by their rejoicing in his adversity. Psalm.
35.15. And by their magnifying of themselves against him, when his foot
slipped. Psalm. 38.16. But Saul pretending that he delighted in David, and meant
his advancement by the marriage of his daughter, desiring no other dowry of
him, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, it plainly appeared, that he
meant not truly, but dissembled with David, in that he was grieved with his
good success, and was the more afraid of him the more he prospered. 1 Samuel
18.12. etc. So when you see many men at the same time, engage themselves in the
same actions, you must have other reasons more then their own professions
only, to induce you to be of another opinion, or else you may very well
suppose it probable, that the ends they aim at are the same. Thus Sampson would
have the three thousand men, that came to him in the top of the rock Etam, to
swear unto him, that they would not fall upon him themselves, before he would
believe, that coming to bind him, as the Philistines did, they meant not to
kill him too, Judge. 15.12, 13. And when you hear diverse men professing to aim
at the same end, and yet notwithstanding see that they engage themselves in
different actions, you may probably conjecture, if you should give credit to
their bare pretenses, that you might be deceived. Thus the disciples, till they
were better instructed by our Savior Christ, forbad him whom they saw casting
out Devils in his name, because he followed not with them. Luke 9.49. So that
every appearance, though it be not a sufficient evidence of truth in that
opinion which is guided by it; yet may be an occasion to suppose it so, till
further enquiry discover what it is indeed.


SECT. VI. Men's actions and intentions are not always of the same kind,
either good, or bad.
Aff. IT seems then you think, that even in the prosecution of good actions,
some men may have evil intentions, and that some men who aim indeed at good
ends, may take advantage of some evil Actions to attain them by.


Judge. It is true that they may, for experience shows plainly that they have
done so. Judas his end in saluting his Master with a kiss, was to betray him.
Mat. 26.48, 49. David's end, in the kind entertainment he gave unto Vrijah, was
the cloaking of his own adultery. 2 Samuel 11. And on the contrary Hushai his
counterfeit kindness, and professed fidelity to Absalom, was purposely intended
to defeat Achitophels counsel, 2 Samuel 16.26. etc. Rebecca, to get the blessing
for her son Jacob, persuaded him to lie unto his father Isaac, Genesis 27.8, etc.
Sarah, to provid for the propagation of the promised seed, persuaded her
husband Abraham to go in unto her handmaid Hagar, Genesis 16.2. Therefore to
argue the goodness of the end from the goodness of the action, or that because
the action is evil, the end is also such, is never a necessary, but may be
sometimes a false illation.


SECT. VII. Rules of direction for the better discovery of the truth, or
falsehood, of the ends, which men pretend.
Aff. WHat other rules of direction will you give me then, whereby I may guide
my self better, in discovering the truth, or falsehood, of the ends which men
pretend?


Judge. First, I would have you, as much you can, to rid your self of all
partiality and prejudice, and when you enter upon this enquiry, to do it with
all possible indifferency. A preconceived opinion in the mind, like perspective
made of colored glass, will render every thing as like it self as may be: and
if before you enter into your enquiry, you entertain an opinion of other men's
pretenses, that they are either agreeable unto, or different from, the ends
which they intend indeed, it will be a difficult matter to persuade you to the
contrary almost by any argument.

Secondly, I would have you to take heed of trusting too much unto any one
apparent evidence: for in conjectural cases, where the resolution must be
swaied by the most probabilities, many circumstances must concur, as several
items, to make up the total sum of that concluded argument, wherewith the mouth
of contradiction may be stopped.

Thirdly I would not have you too apt to entertain an opinion that any man's
intended ends are otherwise, then he himself pretends and professes,
without very probable inducements to persuade you to it. For though distrust as
well as dissimulation, be many times more agreeable to humane worldly policy,
then confidence and single hearted sincerity; which made him in the Satyr say,
Haud recte facit, qui facile credit: yet the rule of religious piety, and
Christian charity, is rather to bear, believe, hope and endure all things, then
to be easily provoked to think any evil* 1 Cor. 13 5, 7. And I would rather
have you be mistaken twice, in esteeming better of men's intentions and
purposes, then they deserve, then once, in judging worse of them, then you have
just cause to do. For though there be a woe pronounced against them, that call
evil good, as well as against them, that call good evil, Isai. 5.20. Yet of the
two (so they do it not wilfully, or carefully) I doubt not but they find more
favor with the Lord, whose own sincerity makes them apt to be deceived by
other men's hypocrisy, then they, whose own hypocrisy makes them
over-suspitious of other men's sincerity.


SECT. VIII. Pretenses are not always to be taken upon trust from other men.
Aff. WEre it not best then, for fear of offending in censuring too hardly of
other men's intentions, to give credit to their own pretenses, and take them
upon trust, without any further inquiry concerning them?


Judge. No, for our Savior requires in his sheep serpentine wisdom, as well as
dove-like simplicity, Mat. 10.16. and St. John says expressly, Believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God. 1 John 4.1. which
certainly he would not have done, unless it were possible as well as necessary,
and unless there were some means to do it by, as well as reason why it should
be done. And that which I have hitherto said, tends not to discourage you
altogether, from entering upon such an inquiry, but only to give you warning
to be circumspect and wary what you do, that you may not be deceived with
seeming shows, instead of solid truths.


SECT. IX. The best means to try the truth, or falsehood, of other men's
pretenses.
Aff. I Pray you then, if you can, at last deliver me of this doubt, how I may
discern between falsehood and truth, in the pretenses, and professions, which
other men make of their intended ends.


Judge. This it were easier to do in some particular cases, then to give any
general rule, that shall hold indiffently in all. Yet as well as I can, I will
endeavor to satisfy your desire therein. And to that purpose I would have you
consider, that as unity and verity are always insepaparable companions, so
falsehood is seldom or never severed from such variety, as makes it
inconsistent with it self, which gives occasion to that common saying, Oportet
mendacem esse memorem. Our Savior himself speaking of the devil, the father of
lies, says, He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him. John 8.44. His meaning is not, that the devil
can never speak any truth at all, but that he cannot continue constant to that
truth he speaks: the truth is not in him, no more then he is of the truth: and
the truth that he speaks sometimes, is an evidence against him, that at other
times he lies. Thus the spirit that undertook to persuade Ahab, that he might
go up, and fall at Ramoth Gilead, spoke truth, when he said, he would go forth,
and be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs prophets. 1 Kings 22.22. But he
quickly fell off again from that truth, when he contradicted Micaiah, by the
mouth of Zedekiah, and pretended himself to be the spirit of the Lord. They
went out from us, says St. Paul, but they were not of us: for if they had been
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. 1 John 2.19. and Chap.
4.5, 6. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them. We are of God: he that knows God hears us: hereby know we the
spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. By this I suppose it may appear,
that the best means to try the truth of other men's pretenses, is to examine
their own agreement with themselves, and how they keep constant to their own
professed principles: for if it appear, that indeed they contradict themselves,
and that there is an inconsistent contrariety between the ends that they
pretend to aim at, and the principles upon which they ground their proceedings
in action, as with relation to those ends, they must of necessity confess a
falsehood in the one, or in the other, and either renounce their own
principles, and so condemn their own actions, or else, if they will stick fast
unto those, and justify these, you may certainly conclude, that what ever they
did before, yet now they aim at other ends than they pretend. For actions are
never undertaken as means, but with relations unto ends, and it is impossible,
that any man should purposely persist in the use of those as means, which he
knows are destructive of the ends which he intends. This I suppose is that
which St. Paul aims at, when he says, If I build again the things which I
destroyed, I make my self a transgressor. Gal. 2.18. and I doubt not but it
would have been as true, if he had said, If I destroy again the things which I
had built. A man that is an heretic says the same Apostle, after the first
and second admonition reject: Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and
sins, being condemned of himself. Tit. 3.10, 11. And though there be no note
of connection between those two verses, and the two former, yet it may not be
amiss to observe, that the Apostle has placed these words next unto those,
wherein he had said, This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that
thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful
to maintain good works: these things are good and profitable for men. But avoid
foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions and strivings about the
Law: for they are unprofitable and vain. As intimating, that the self
condemnation of heretics appears in this, that the errors in opinion, and
enormities in action, which they purposely maintain and practice, are contrary
to, and inconsistent with the ends, which they profess to aim at, namely, the
glory of God in their own and other men's eternal good, and spiritual profit,
that they may be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life, as he
speaks ver. 7. so that if you see men avow such actions, allow themselves
liberty to keep such courses, and plead such principles in their defense, as
are contrary to, and inconsistent with the ends which they pretend, you have
reason to suspect their pretenses to be false: if when that inconsistent
contrariety is plainly discovered, and made known unto them, they renounce
those principles, condemn themselves for those practices, and apply themselves
afterward unto those other courses, which are undoubtedly available unto those
ends, you have good cause then to conceive, that what they professed they
purposely intended, and that in undertaking those actions, and urging those
principles to ground them on, they did but humanum pati, discover that common
infirmity, which all mankind is subject to, errare, labi, decipi, and so
deserve rather to be censured of ignorance and misunderstanding, then of
hypocrisy and dissimulation. But if when the inconsistent contrariety of the
means they use, and the ends they pretend to aim at, is evidently demonstrated,
and laid open before them, they either wilfully shut their eyes, and will not
see it, or obstinately persist in their courses notwithstanding, you may then
conclude (with as much certainty as other men's intentions can be known with)
that those ends, which they intend indeed, are not the same which they make
show of, and profess.


SECT. X. The same illustrated by some Examples.
Aff. IN this that you have said there seems to be so much evidence of truth,
that I do not see what can be objected against it. Yet I should be better
satisfied, if you would be pleased to illustrate it a little, with some few
particular examples.


Judge. For the first, that there is cause to suspect those men of falsehood in
their pretenses, whose courses are inconsistent with the ends which they
profess to aim at, you may see by St. Paul, who blamed St. Peter, and withstood
him to his face, when he saw that he walked not uprightly, according to the
truth of the Gospel, and said unto him, If thou being a Jew live after the
manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Gal. 2.14. St. Peter's behavior in withdrawing
and separating himself from the Gentiles for fear of the Jews, was in St. Paul's
apprehension inconsistent with that Christian liberty, which they both
professed to intend the maintenance of, against the false brethren unawares
brought in, who came in privily to spy out their liberty, which they had in
Christ Jesus, that they might bring them into bondage. ver. 4. Therefore St.
Paul says he was to be blamed, as both dissembling himself, and giving
occasion unto others to dissemble with him. If you say, that the dissimulation
there was not in the end, but in the action: I grant it true, yet withal I may
add, that the dissimulation was not of the action, but of the end. For the
action is always more apparent then the end, and there is greater cause to
suspect that which is secret, then that which is open. So that St. Paul might
well ask St. Peter, why he did so, and could not be certainly assured, that he
dealt sincerely in publicly professing the end with himself, until he knew
some other seeming reason, that misguided him to take such a contrary course of
practice as he did.

For the second, St Paul showed himself indeed to be zealous of the Law, even
whilst he was a Pharisee, in that when he was converted, and came to
understand, that Christ was the end of the Law for righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10.4. and that the Law of righteousness was not to be
attained unto by the works of the Law but only by faith. Rom: 9.30, 31, 32. he
conferred not with flesh and blood, which would have persuaded him still to
have continued, as he had been formerly, exceedingly zealous of the traditions
of his fathers, having profited in the Jews religion above many of his equals
in his own nation, Gal. 1.14, 16. But what things had formerly been gain unto
him, those he counted loss for Christ, etc. Phil. 3.7. Not making void the Law
through faith, but establishing the Law, Romans 3.31. Whereas the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the rest of the unbelieving Jews, rejected or made frustrate,
and of none effect, the Commandment of God, that they might keep their own
traditions: as our Savior complains, Mar. 7.6, etc. and taxes them expressly
of hypocrisy therein: which could not be ascribed to any falsehood and
dissimulation in their actions (for what they practiced they purposed, as well
as professed) but in their ends, which they pretended to be the strict
observation of the Commandments of God, but meant those doctrines of their own,
by which they taught men, not to obey, but to transgress the Commandments of
God; as there he makes it evident, by their false gloss upon the first
Commandment, and upon others, Mat. 5.17, etc. By vindicating of the Law from
which he made it appear, that he came not to destroy, but to fulfill it. And
therefore when the Jews accused St. Paul, that he taught all men every where
against the people, and the Law, and the Temple, Acts 21.28. he pleads not
guilty unto all: that they neither found him in the Temple disputing with any
man, neither raising up the people, neither in the Synagogues: but he openly
confesses, that after the way which they call heresy, so worshipped he the
God of his fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets, and having hope toward God, which they themselves also allowed, that
there shall be a resurrection of the dead, etc. Acts 24.12, etc. and Acts 25.8.
Neither against the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, nor yet
against Caesar have I offended any thing at all. And therefore though Tertullus
pretend, that when they took him they would have judged him according to their
Law, and complain of great violence in the chief Captain Lysias, when he took
him away out of their hands, commanding his accusers to come unto Foelix the
governor to be examined, Acts 24, 6, 7, 8. Yet he charge Annanias the high
Priest with injustice, that sitting to judge him after the Law, he commanded
him to be smitten contrary to the Law. Acts 23.3. And though he himself appeal
unto Caesar, and say, I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where I ought to be
judged. And if I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I
refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things, whereof these accuse
me, no man may deliver me unto them: yet he urges Festus his own knowledge for
it, that unto the Jews he had done no wrong, Acts 25.10, 11. The reason was,
because he did indeed, that which they only pretended to do: as appears by the
like apology, which he makes unto the chief of the Jews at Rome, Acts 28.17,
etc.

For the third, when Johanan the son of Kareah, and the captains of the forces,
and the people that were with him, besought Jeremiah to pray unto the Lord for
them, that he might show them the way, wherein they might walk, and the thing
that they might do, Jer. 42.2, 3. professing that they would obey the voice of
the Lord their God what ever it were, ver. 5, 6. Jeremiah tells them plainly
ver. 20. that they dissembled in their hearts, when they said so: and their
behavior afterward made it plainly to appear, that he was not mistaken, when
they directly contradicted, not him alone, but themselves also, and said, As
for the word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee: But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our
own mouth, Chap. 44.16, 17. Thus our Savior convinces the Jews, that what
ever they pretended, yet he knew that the love of God was not in them, because
he came in his fathers name, and they received him not, and yet were ready to
receive another, that should come in his own name, John 5.42, 43. That for all
the great confidence in Moses which they boasted of, yet they believed him not
in deed: There is one, says he, that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye
trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of
me. ver. 45, 46.

By this you may perceive, how necessary it is, that to clear the sincerity of
men's pretended ends, they should order all their actions so, and especially
produce such principles only to plead for them by, as that there may appear a
constant accord and uniformity between them all; and that the apparent
contrariety, and inconsistent contradiction of men's actions practiced and ends
pretended (so long as those actions are avowed and persisted in) is the most
unanswerable evidence that can be gathered, of falsehood and hypocrisy in that
which they profess to aim at and intend.


SECT. XI. Other evidences for the further perfecting of this discovery.
Aff. BUt may there not be some other evidences, which joined with this may
help to perfect the discovery?


Judge. I doubt not but there may, and I will give you Instances of some. One
shall be this, If you see an understanding and considerate man, that is wont to
do nothing but advisedly (for there is no certain hold to be had of them that
do all things as at random rashly) making show to intend some particular end,
as conducible, or agreeable unto some other general end, which you are
confident he stands engaged for, and really intends the accomplishment
thereof, you may well be persuaded of the truth of that, as well as of this
intention. But if there appear an express contrariety, or inconsistent
contradiction, between the one end and the other, you may easily conceive, that
the more particular pretended end (especially if it be not of so great
importance to the agent, as the other more general) is not really intended
indeed. Thus the Philistines general intended end being the oppression of the
Israelites, and weakening them so, that they might subdue them at their
pleasure, it might easily appear, that the policy they used, in suffering no
Smith in Israel, was purposely intended, as they said, lest the Hebrews should
make them swords or spears: because this particular end was both agreeable, and
conduceable unto that general end. 1 Samuel 13.9, etc. Thus Hushai his faithful
friendship unto David being generally known, and that he really intended indeed
the safety of the King, it was weakly done of Absalom and the men of Israel, to
believe at the first, without any other evidence besides his own testimony,
that Hushaies coming unto Absalom was purposely intended, as he professed, to
serve in his presence, as he had done in his fathers, 2 Samuel 16.16, etc.
because it agreed not with his other more general and more important end, and
therefore might justly have been suspected of falsehood and dissimulation.

Another shall be this, If you see an understanding man make profession of
proposing such an end unto himself, as you are sure he knows well enough it is
impossible for him to obtain, you may easily believe, that he intends it not:
nay hardly shall you find, that any man really intends any end, of which he
has not some probability at least to ground an hopeful expectation upon. Thus
had not the Lord of purpose infatuated Absalom and the men of Israel, to defeat
the good counsel of Achitophel, that he might bring evil upon Absalom, they
might easily have seen, that Hushai intended nothing less then David's
destruction, when he propounded the drawing of that city into the river with
ropes, into which he supposed David might be gotten, 2 Samuel 17.13, 14. a
project, if not altogether impossible, yet so improbable, that no reasonable
man could imagine he ever intended it indeed.

But I will add no more concerning the discovery of other men's intended ends:
because as I said before, there is no such absolute certainty therein, but that
do the best you can, you may per-adventure be mistaken, unless you had that
extraordinary gift of discerning spirits, whereof St. Paul speaks* 1 Cor.
12.10. which is not now adays to be expected, Therefore if you will, let us
proceed unto your next enquiry, about those actions, which are used as means,
for the obtaining of those ends, that are pretended.


SECT. XII. A real purpose of pretended ends is not enough, unless the intended
ends themselves be such as they should be.
Aff. NAy, one thing more before we proceed, I pray you give me leave to
enquire further of you. Taking it for granted, that the ends which men profess
to aim at, are really indeed intended by them, yet that I suppose is not
sufficient to warrant them. For though no man I presume will pretend, or can
indeed intend any ends, but those which either are indeed, or else at least
appear unto him to be good; yet many men I doubt are mistaken in their own
ends, and propose those things unto themselves to be obtained, which they ought
not to seek.


Judge. It is true as you say: and therefore, as the end of every action, though
last in execution, is first in intention, and consequently holds a principal
place in the affection of the agent, so the first and chiefest care, about both
your own and other men's ends, must be to be rightly informed, whether they be
good indeed or no. But for subordinate ends, because in respect of those that
are supreme, they are but intermediate means, we shall speak of them
afterward: and for the supreme end of all, you said well at the first, that it
must be the advancement of the glory of God, and that nothing must be intended
at all, but that which may be probably at least subservient thereunto.
Therefore without any further enquiry let us take it for granted, that they who
indeed propose unto themselves the advancement of the glory of God, and they
who profess and pretend to do so, are so far forth to be approved of: and they
that so far neglect the glory of God, as either to propose unto themselves, or
pretend unto others, that they aim at such ends, as are altogether contrary
unto, or any way inconsistent with, the advancement thereof, are so far forth
blame worthy. This I suppose there is no man so impudent as to deny, and
therefore I will not go about to prove it, but proceed unto your next enquiry.


SECT. XIII. Instances of exceptions, that may be taken to the choice of such
means, as may be conducible to the ends, which they are used for.
Aff. THe next thing that I desire to be informed in, is the choice of the
means, which I should use, for obtaining of the ends, which I propose unto my
self. These I suppose must be such, as either of necessity must, or at least in
probability may be effectually conducible unto the ends I use them for.


Judge. That rule may be generally true, and for the most part: yet it is
subject unto some exceptions, and must be limited with diverse cautions, whereof
I will give you these particular instances.

First, some means may be conducible unto the general supreme end of all
things, the advancement of the glory of God, which are not properly conducible
unto some one particular subordinate end, which you may aim at as subservient
unto the general. As for example, the advancement of the glory of God was the
general supreme end that St. Paul aimed at in preaching the Gospel, in
preaching the Gospel to the Corinthians freely, and in taking wages of the
Philippians, he had diverse particular subordinate ends, yet both subservient
unto the general, and as the partticular ends were diverse, so the means he used
to that purpose were different, or rather contrary. That the Philippians should
communicate with him, as concerning giving and receiving, he was well content,
because he desired fruit that might abound to their account, Phil. 4.15, 17.
But amongst the Corinthians he would be chargeable to no man, that he might cut
off occasion from them which desired occasion, 2 Cor. 11.9, 12. and being
crafty might catch them with guile, 2 Cor. 12.16. To preach the Gospel freely
at Philippi, and to take wages at Corinth, though alike conducible unto the
supreme and general, had yet been destructive of the particular subordinate
ends, that St. Paul did aim at and intend.

Secondly, some means may be properly conducible unto some particular
subordinate ends, that are not always conducible unto, but rather sometimes
destructive of the general supreme end. For instance, the advancement of the
glory of God was the supreme end that St. Paul aimed at in Preaching the
Gospel: the preservation of St. Paul's life and liberty was a special
subordinate end subservient unto that general: which both himself was careful
of, and the Churches prayed for, Acts 23.6, 17, etc. Acts 25.10, 11. Phil. 22.
St. Paul's forbearance to go up to Jerusalem might in all probability have been
a means to preserve his life and liberty, but had been a means withal to
prevent him of that opportunity which there was to be offered unto him, of
advancing the glory of God, in being set for the defense of the Gospel, which
makes him so passionately put them off, who earnestly besought and would fain
have persuaded him not to go up to Jerusalem. What mean you to weep and to
break my heart, Acts 21.13. And himself professes afterward, that the things
which happened unto him, had fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
Gospel. Phil. 1.12.

Thirdly, some means in the eye of humane sense and reason, may probably seem
to be contrary unto, or inconsistent with either the general and supreme, or
particular subordinate ends, which men aim at, and yet may be requisite and
necessary to be used, for the obtaining of those ends, being specially
warranted to that purpose by Gods own direction. Thus to the end that God might
advance his own honor, by delivering the Midianites into the hands of the
Israelites, Gideons army of 32000. must be reduced unto bare 300. by Gods own
appointment, Judge. 7.

Fourthly, some means in the eye of humane sense and reason, may probably
appear to be either requisite and necessary, or at least conducible unto the
ends intended by them, which yet must not be used, as being either in
themselves unlawful, or by some special direction from God prohibited. Thus the
cutting off of Saul's life had in all probability been a speedy and effectual
means of advancing the glory of God, in hastening David to the quiet possession
of the kingdom of Israel, whereunto he had been ordained by God, and anointed
by Samuel: yet David neither dare himself stretch forth his own hand against
the Lords anointed, nor suffer Abishai to smite him, 1 Samuel 26.8, etc. nay his
own heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt, 1 Samuel 24.5. Thus the
destruction of the Gibeonites was a probable means to perfect the conquest of
the land of Canaan, yet the children of Israel might not touch them, because
Joshuah had made peace with them, and the Princes of the Congregation had sworn
unto them: although therein they had dealt unadvisedly, yea contrary to the
general direction, which they had received from God himself, Deuteronomy. 7.2. and in
sundry other places: and though all the Congregation murmured against the
Princes for it, Josh. 9. Yea, when almost 400. years after, Saul in his zeal to
the children of Israel and Judah, sought to slay the Gibeonites, God punished
it in the days of David, with three years famine year after year, and God was
not entreated for the land, till after that they had performed all that the
King had commanded, according to the Gibeonites request, 2 Samuel 12. So to take
the next way through the land of the Philistines, might appear to be a ready
means, for the advancement of Gods glory, in the speedy performance of his
promise to his people, in putting them into possession of the land of Canaan,
the lot of their inheritance: Yet because God would have it so, they must be
led about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea, though there they
wandered forty years together. Exodus 13.17, 18. Nay, rather then go the direct
way through the country of the Edomites, without the Kings leave, he refusing to
permit them passage, although they promised to behave themselves peaceably,
they must turn away from him, Number. 20. So long before they had kings of their
own, did God begin to teach his people what respect was due unto them. Yea,
when one day, contrary to Gods appointment, they would go up that way, which
the day before they had refused at his commandment to go, God punished their
presumption, and suffered them to be chased by their enemies as bees. Number.
14.40, etc. Deuteronomy. 2.1, 26, etc.

By this I suppose it may sufficiently appear, that your general rule for the
choice of means to be used for the compassing of ends intended, is not so
generally true, but that it may meet with some exceptions, and therefore the
practice thereof may have need to be limited with cautions.


SECT. XIV. Means effectually conducible to any end must not be used, if either
unlawful in themselves, or unto those that use them.
Aff. IT is true Sr. I can say nothing to the contrary: and therefore, as you
have discovered the necessity of cautions in this kind, so I pray you be
pleased further to inform me what they are.


Judge. The cautions I conceive may be easily collected out of the former
instances: yet for better evidence I shall not think much to answer your
desire, and offer to your consideration these particulars,

First, whatever means you have a mind of your self, or are by others advised,
directed, persuaded, or commanded to use, as effectually conducible to any end,
resolve not upon it, until you have thoroughly tried and examined the lawfulness
of it, both in it self and unto you. For you may not do the least evil of
purpose to obtain the greatest good, Romans 3.5, etc. Job. 13.7. Excellently St.
Austin to this purpose, lib. contra mendacium ad Consentium. cap. 7. Interest
quidem plurimum, qua causa, quo fine, qua intention quid fiat. Sedea, quae
constat esse peccata, nullo bonae causae obtentu, nullo quasi bono fine, nulla
velut bona intention facienda sunt. It matters much for what cause, to what
end, with what intent a thing is done. But that which is known to be a sin must
not be done under any pretense of a good cause, nor as if it were done for any
good end, or with any good intention. And a little after in the same Chapter.
Quis ista dicat, nisi qui res humanas omnesque conatur mores legesque
subvertere, etc. As if there were no readier means (as indeed there is not)
utterly to undo the world at once, to digg up the foundation of obedience to
all laws, both humane and divine, and to let loose the reins to all impiety,
injustice and prophanes, then to suppose it lawful to do evil, that good may
come thereof. Therefore though the end be never so good, which is intended,
though the means propounded seem never so requisite and available unto that
end, if you cannot use it without sin, you must resolve to let it alone; and
that is, when in using that means, you shall do that, which is either unlawful
in it self, or else unlawful unto you. And that you must esteem unlawful in it
self, which by God is forbidden unto all men in general: that unlawful unto
you, which God has forbidden to your self in particular, or though not unto
all men in general, yet to men of such particular places and callings, estates
and conditions, as for the present you are in. Thus for the first case, Lot
should not have offered to prostitute his daughters to the Sodomites, though it
were to prevent their intended violence unto the angels. Thus for the second,
Saul should not have spared any of the cattle of the Amalekites, though it were
to offer sacrifice unto the Lord. Thus for the third, Joab and Abiathar, being
subjects, should not have followed Adonijah, and helped him, when he exalted
himself, saying, I will be King without the knowledge and consent of David
their supreme sovereign upon earth. Therefore Joseph, enticed to lewdness by
his Mistress, pleads not impotence so much as impossibility, when he says, How
shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. as if what he
ought not he could not have done. Laban, though he thought he had just cause to
complain of Jacobs dealing, and power in his hand to do him hurt, yet durst not
but forbear, because God had said unto him, Take heed that thou speak not unto
Jacob good or bad, Genesis 31.28, 29. Nehemiah, though persuaded by a Prophet to
go into the Temple to save his life, yet would not, because it was unfit for
such a man as he to flee. Nehem. 6.10, etc.


SECT. XV. Amongst different opinions of what is lawful, or unlawful, necessary
or indiffernt, in it self, nothing is to be done against conscience.
Aff. SUppose this that you say to be true (and I confess I know nothing that
can be justly objected against it) yet you know there are many particular
cases, yea sometimes general questions, not so certainly decided, but that
different opinions concerning them are professedly maintained by diverse men;
one condemning that as utterly unlawful, which another is confident may
lawfully be done; one requiring that as absolutely necessary to be done, which
another is resolved is either unlawful, or at most but indifferent, and in such
cases what course shall I resolve to take?


Judge. You are now indeed upon the point of greatest difficulty: for resolving
whereof you must always remember that general rule of the Apostle, not to do
any thing against the dictate of your own conscience: for even an erroneous
conscience binds, though it do not excuse, a to^o but a tanto only. And when
the Apostle says, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: and, Have
thou faith? have it to thy self before God. Happy is he, that condemns not
himself in that thing which he allows: and he that doubts is damned if he
eat: because he eats not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
Romans 4.5, 22, 23. By the judgment of all interpreters, I think it is agreed,
that he does not leave every man at liberty to do what he lists, but directly
requires, that every man be persuaded certainly of the lawfulness of every
action, that he undertakes. Which persuasion of lawfulness (according to the
scope of the Apostles speech) must be extended not only to the nature and
essence of the action, but likewise to those adherent circumstances, the
variety whereof may alter the case: as upon what ground, to what end, with what
intent it is done, and what the success of the action either must, or may be.
So that you must resolve not to do any thing of which you are not fully
persuaded in your own conscience, that it is lawful for you to do it; nor to
leave any thing undone, whereof you are not fully persuaded in your own
conscience, that it is not necessary to be done by you; whether simply in it
self, or ex concesso, rebus sic stantibus. Not that the persuasion of your own
conscience is a sufficient warrant to justify you, either before God or man,
for your doing of that, which you are confident your self is lawful, or for the
leaving undone that which you are satisfied in your self is not necessary. For
that may be necessary to be done by you, which you are persuaded is not, and
that may not be lawful to be done by you which you are persuaded is. But that
your own conscience, being a power established by God in your soul, to judge
between him and you, the voice there is a law unto you: which if you
transgress, by doing contrary thereunto, you are condemned of your self; and if
you neglect it, by doing any thing without the direction thereof, you overrun
your warrant, and act without authority.


SECT. XVI. The right information of Conscience, concerning what is unlawful,
or necessary, in it self, is to be sought for from the written word of God
rightly understood and applied.
Aff. IF then I must do nothing, but that whereof I am fully persuaded in my
conscience, the main thing that I must look unto is, that my Conscience may be
rightly informed, in every particular I undertake, in every thing I do, or
leave undone, that so it must be, and not otherwise. But where shall I meet
with that right information?


Judge. With God, if you go to him to seek it, as you ought to do, and wait upon
him with patience, in the use of his means, which is his word rightly
understood, and applied by the direction of his holy spirit and according to
the rules of right reason. It is Solomon's advice, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the
Lord with all thine heart: and lean not to thine own understanding. In all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. For, as David says,
Psalm. 25.8, 9. Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in
the way. The meek will he guide in judgment. Therefore Psalm. 119.8. having
asked the question, Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? he presently
gives the answer himself, by taking heed thereto according to thy word. And St.
James, If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, etc. Jam. 1.5, etc. And
St. Paul, All Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2 Timothy
3.16.17


SECT. XVII. Amongst diverse opinions, concerning the true understanding of
Scripture, their doubtful differences are to be tried by their concord and
agreement with undoubted truths commonly received and agreed upon as principles.
Aff. LEt this go for granted: yet two things there are, that I must as well be
satisfied in, as in the sufficient perfection of Scripture, or else I shall be
as far to seek as ever I was. The one is this, that diverse men are of different
opinions, concerning the true understanding of the Scriptures: and those not
only ignorant and ungodly men, but even those that are learned and judicious,
yea, religious, and such as make conscience of their ways. And therefore when
I come to examine any action by the touchstone of the Scripture, the soul
whereof is the sense and meaning of the words, and find it so differently
rendered by diverse, that both cannot possibly accord in one, what shall I do?
Let all alone until they be agreed? Or how shall I satisfy my self, which of
the two I must be guided by?


Judge. This I confess is a great inconvenience, and such as the consideration
thereof may give men just occasion to break out, as St. Austin does, into this
passionate exclamation, O ubi estis, fontes Lachrymarum? and quid faciemus? quo
ibimus? Or as the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night (I will not say
only as he does, for the slain of the daughter of my people, but) for the
strifes of words, the profane and vain bablings, the oppositions of science
falsely so called, the foolish and unlearned questions, yea the doubtful
disputations of those men, who many times more obscure, then illustrate, what
they take in hand to clear. But you must not think it strange, it always has
been, is, and ever will be so: so long as men see, but as through a glass
darkly, they cannot expect to know any thing perfectly, but only in part. I
Cor. 13.9, 12. And though some, in comparison of others, may be men in
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.20. yet St. Paul would have the Corinthians, even in
himself, and in Apollo, to learn not to think of men above that which is
written: that none of you, says he, be puffed up for one against another, 1
Cor. 4.6. When therefore you meet with such differences, remember that
direction of St. John 1 John 4.1, etc. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits, whether they are of God, etc. And the rule that he lays down
to try them by, is their concordance and agreement with undoubted truths. All
things in Scripture are not doubted of, or drawn into dispute: some things are
so plainly and clearly laid down, that all men, by whom the Scripture is
received as the word of God, agree upon them. Let those then be your scantlings
of the rest, and what you find most agreeable to that, which is confessed by
all, that cleave unto. As falsehood is always inconsistent with truth, and
contrary unto it, as light is to darkness; so good and evil can no more close,
and be firmly united unto one another, then diamonds unto dust or dirt. This
reducing of doubtful differences, in all matters both of opinion and practice,
unto commonly received principles, generally agreed upon, and tying them to
stand to the trial thereof, is that which St. Paul so often calls for: as Romans
16.17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine, which you have learned, and avoid them,
etc. 1 Cor. 3.11, etc. For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is
laid, Jesus Christ, etc. Gal. 1.9. If any preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that you have received, let him be accursed: and in other places.


Aff. I shall better understand your meaning, and the truth of this, if you
will be pleased to illustrate it a little, with an instance or two.


Judge. That I will: and first for matter of opinion. You know it is much
disputed, between the Divines of the reformed Churches and those of Rome, how
those words of our Savior, Mat: 26.26. This is my body, must be understood:
whether in respect of natural existence, or of sacramental use. To try which of
these is the true meaning of the words, bring them both to those undoubted
principles, which no good Christian does or dare deny: that the body of Christ
was a true natural body, conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary:
and that in the same individual body he was crucified, died, was buried, rose
again from the dead, ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God. That interpretation, which accords with these and all other principles,
you may be sure is true, as the latter evidently does; and that which is
contrary to, and inconsistent with these, or any other certain principles, must
needs be false: as the later apparently is. And the like may be said in other
controverted points of doctrine.

Secondly, for matter of practice. It is disputed between the divines of the
reformed Churches, and those of Rome, how that passage of St. Paul, Romans 13.1,
etc. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers etc. must be understood:
whether of the subjection of all persons and causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
civil, unto those Magistrates, in whom the supreme authority resides, or of
civil only. To try which of these is the true meaning of the place, bring them
both to those undoubted principles, which no good Christian, no nor reasonable
man can deny, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, and suum cuique,
which we may see attested by our Savior, Mat. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do you even so to them. Mat. 22.21. Render
unto Caesar the things which are Cesars: and by St. Paul Romans 13.7, 8. Render
unto all their dues, etc. That interpretation, which accords with these
principles, as the former does, you may be sure is true: and that which is
contrary to, and inconsistent with these principles, as the latter is, must
needs be false: and the like may be said in other cases and questions.


Aff. But what if I be not able to resolve of that accord or contradiction?


Judge. Such a case can hardly happen, if you seriously consider all
particulars: and if it could, the equal evidence on either side, which should
leave you without any certain ground of resolution, would manifest the question
it self to be but vain and frivolous, and the indifferency such, that it would
be no matter at all, whether ever you resolved or no. But however, having used
all the means you can for your best information when you resolve, let it be
according as you shall be led by the most convincing evidence. What is the
other particular, wherein you desire to be satisfied?


SECT. XVIII. Special immediate revelations from God, to show what is unlawful,
or necessary to our selves in particular, although useful heretofore, are
neither to be expected, nor easily to be believed now.
Aff. YOu said even now, that as I must esteem that unlawful in it self which
by God is forbidden unto all men in general, so I must esteem that unlawful for
me, which God has forbidden to my self in particular, or though not unto all
men in general, yet unto men of such particular places and callings, estates
and conditions, as for the present I am in. For the former you have told me,
that my resolution must be guided by the holy Scriptures, interpreted according
to the rules of right reason, and the general received principles of religion:
but for the latter I am yet to seek. How shall I know, that that which is lawful
in it self, as not being simply forbidden by God unto all men in general, is
yet unlawful for my self in particular, or that that which is not absolutely
necessary, as not being by God required of all men in general, is yet necessary
for my self, as being particularly required of me?


Judge. Whilst special immediate revelations were in use, as in the days of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, the spirit, by which those particular
instructions and directions were given, was able also sufficiently to manifest
his own authority, and as well to subdue and incline the will and affections,
to assent unto and embrace the truth of such discoveries, as to enlighten the
mind and understanding to apprehend the meaning of them. This made even Balaam
to say, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go
beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. Number. 22.18. And the
Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 20.9. Then I said, I will not make mention of him: nor
speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart, as a burning fire
shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. St
Luke of St. Paul and Timothy says, That after they were come to Mysia, they
assayed to go into Bithynia, but the spirit suffered them not. Acts 16.7. That
when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in spirit,
and testified unto the Jews, that Jesus was Christ, Acts 18.5. and St. Paul of
himself, that he went bound in the spirit to Jerusalem. 20.22. But this was
extraordinary, proper unto those times, and must neither be expected now, nor
easily believed either of our selves or others: although I doubt not, but that
even now adays there are some that are both deceived themselves with false
persuasions, and deceive others with fair pretenses, that in some particular
cases they are immediately directed by the spirit of God, when indeed it is
either the voice of their own corrupt hearts only, which they hearken to, or
the subtle suggestions of Satan, who sometimes transforms himself into an
angel of light, and his ministers into the Apostles of Christ, and ministers of
righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. And we need not think it strange, since
the holy Ghost has so long ago expressly given warning of it. 1 Timothy 4.1, etc.


Aff. Do you think there may be no special immediate revelations now adays,
whereby some men may be guided and directed themselves, and stirred up and
enabled to guide and direct others in the performance of particular actions, as
necessary, or effectually conducible to special ends?


Judge. I doubt not but there may, for the holy Ghost is not limited or
straightened any more in respect of time, then place, but divides severally to
whom, and where, and when, and how he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. But it is not
ordinary now, nor easily to be believed (as I said before) either of our selves
or others, for fear lest in stead of the spirit of truth and of Christ, we
either be deceived our selves, or deceive others, by the spirit of error and of
Antichrist.


SECT. XIX Some directions to try the pretended revelations of private spirits
by.
Aff. WHat directions can you give me then to try the pretended revelations and
instructions of private spirits by?


Judge. Even the same that I mentioned before, viz. their accord and agreement
with, or their inconsistent contrariety to, and contradiction of themselves, or
of the written word. The good spirit, the spirit of truth, is always constant
to it self: the evil spirit, the spirit of error is always contrary either
unto it self, or unto the spirit of truth. Bring them then unto the royal
standard of the word, wherein the spirit of truth undoubtedly does speak, and
try them there. It is Gods own advice to his people Israel by his Prophet
Isaiah, Is. 8.19, 20. And our Saviors to the Jews. John 5.39, etc.


Aff. This indeed may be a means to try such motions as proceed from private
spirits by, in regard of the matter, whether it proceed from the spirit of
truth, or the spirit of error: but how shall I know in regard of the manner,
whether it be by an ordinary, or by an extraordinary work of the spirit, that
such motions in the mind are stirred up?


Judge. The only means I know to this end is to consider these two things.
First, the causes and occasions of such motions, as proceed from an
extraordinary work of the spirit, have themselves something more then ordinary
in them: as in Gideons encounter with the Midianites, Judges 7. Jonathans with
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14. David with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. When the holy Ghost,
in the book of Judges, had often said, that the spirit of the Lord came upon
such or such a one, or that God raised him up to be a deliverer, and that he
judged Israel, intending thereby an extraordinary, special, and immediate
motion of the spirit of God, whereby he was both stirred up, and warranted, to
undertake that employment, he adds in the end, In those days there was no
King in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes: as
intimating extraordinary motions of the spirit to take place only in the
absence of ordinary means. And therefore when the government was once settled,
we hear no more of that phrase, to import an extraordinary motion of the spirit
stirring any man up to undertake and exercise that charge. So since the sacred
volume of the Scriptures is complete, for them that acknowledge the
sufficiency thereof, to be the light of faith, and rule of life, either to
expect in themselves, or pretend unto others, extraordinary revelations now, is
in effect as much, as to light a candle at noon day, and fetch water in a
bucket from a spring to pour into, not a river only, but the Ocean it self.

Secondly, the adjuncts and effects of such motions, as proceed from an
extraordinary work of the spirit, have themselves something more then ordinary
in them: as in the former examples, of Gideon, Jonathan, David, their
extraordiconfidence before hand, and their success beyond expectation afterward.

But both these marks may be indifferent common to all extraordinary motions of
a private spirit, whether good or bad: and therefore that which I spoke of
before, is that which you must chiefly look unto, to try the spirits by the
word of God. If by your own private spirit, whether speaking in an ordinary or
extraordinary manner, you be moved and guided to any thing that accords and
agrees with the written word, that hearken to, as the voice of the good spirit
of God, and of truth: but if unto any thing contrary unto, and inconsistent
with that word, that stop your ears against, as the voice of the evil spirit,
of Satan, and of error.


SECT. XX. What to do in such things, as are neither necessary, nor unlawful in
themselves, nor unto us in particular, but indefinitely only unto men of such
particular places and callings, estates and conditions, as for the present we
are in.
Aff. BUt what shall I do in the last place by those particulars which are not
by God forbidden in general unto all men, nor unto my self in particular, but
indefinitely, unto men of such particular places and callings, estates and
conditions, as for the present I am in?


Judge. All that you have to do in this case is, First to consider what
particular place and calling, estate and condition, for the present you are in;
as whether a superior in authority over, or an inferior in subjection unto
others; whether poor or rich; in prosperity or in adversity, and the like.
Secondly, to consider what general rules the holy Ghost in Scripture has laid
down, for the ordering and governing of all men, in such a particular place and
calling, estate and condition, as yours is. The result of these two must be
your resolution, as that which is the conclusion of a practical syllogism:
whereof the proposition, or major, is given you by God in his word: the
assumption, or minor, you find by experience in your self: and can no more
deny the conclusion, then you can renounce your reasonable soul, and yield your
self to be a beast.


Aff. I pray you, Sr. give me an example of this, as you have done of the other
particulars.


Judge. Take that of Joab then, though otherwise not so good a man as he should
have been, yet in this an eminent pattern of loyalty. Joab was a subject and
servant unto David, entrusted by him with the managing of the war against the
children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 11.1, etc. The general rule for those that are in
that estate and condition, wherein Joab then was, is not to seek their own
honor to the disadvantage of the honor of them, by whom they are employed,
whose subjects and servants they are. For a son honors his father, and a
servant his master. Mal. 1.6. In consideration hereof, when Ioab might have
perfected the victory himself in David's absence, yet he will not, but sends for
David to come and be present himself in his own person: and gives the reason,
least I take the city, and it be called after my name. 2 Samuel 12.27, 28. So 2 Samuel 24. when David bade Ioab number the people: though the Kings word were
abominable to Ioab, as the phrase is, 1 Chronicles. 21.6. that is, though Joab were
altogether of another mind, and would have dissuaded David from it, as a
needless, or unfitting thing: yet, being an action not unlawful in it self,
Ioab is content to yield, and the Kings word prevailed against Ioab and the
captains of the host, and they did as they were commanded by the King. The
neglect of which respect at other times, in that he treacherously slew Abner
and Amasa, and traitorously attempted to advance Adonijah to the throne of the
kingdom in David's life time, without his knowledge and consent, cost him his
life: nor could the horns of the altar protect him, though he thought to take
sanctuary in the Tabernacle of the Lord. 1 Kings 2. 28, etc.


SECT. XXI. Things in themselves indifferent may become either necessary, or
unlawful, to inferiors, being commanded, or forbidden them by their superiors.
Aff. IT seems then you think, that things in themselves indifferent, as those
which are neither commanded nor forbidden by God, unto all men in general, may
become either necessary, or unlawful, unto those that are inferiors, being
commanded, or forbidden them by their superiors.


Judge. It is true, I do so: and so must you too, and every one else, that will
not be an utter enemy to all humane authority and professed friend of
confusion, For order is the life and soul of action, and subordination the
essence of order: which can never be maintained, without authority established
in those to whom of right it does belong, both to make laws, that must be
obeyed, and to exact obedience to the laws that are made.


Aff. But if by those laws there be any thing forbidden, which God has
commanded, or any thing commanded which God has forbidden, what must they do
then?


Judge. Obey God, rather then men: for his authority is absolute and supreme
originally of, and finally, for himself; theirs but subordinate and limited, of
him, from him, by him, through him, to him, and for him.


Aff. But you said before, that lawfulness must be extended, not only to the
nature and essence of the action, but likewise to those adherent circumstances,
the variety whereof in things in themselves indifferent, may alter the case; as
upon what ground, to what end, with what intent, and the like: and actions
considered, not simply in themselves, but together with such adherent
circumstances, are no longer indifferent to their agents, but either necessary,
or unlawful; and so humane authority may seem not to extend to them; for that
which is necessary may not be forbidden, and that which is unlawful may not be
commanded.


Judge. It is true that you say: and if the constitutions of supreme Authority
had not a special place in the determination of those adherent circumstances,
there would be no use of humane laws. But when the general rules of equity,
laid down in Scripture, are limited in respect of particular circumstances by
humane laws, all that live under that supreme authority, by which those laws
are made, are bound in conscience to submit themselves unto them: and the
necessity, or unlawfulness of actions considered with their adherent
circumstances, depends upon no one thing so much as the voice of that
authority, whereby they are determined.


Aff. Is not this to make men the servants of men, contrary to the precept of
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.23. and to entangle them again with the yoke of that
bondage, from which Christ has made them free?


Judge. No: for the liberty wherewith Christ has made men free, is not civil,
but spiritual; and spiritual liberty is neither contrary to, nor inconstent
with civil subjection; as the Apostle plainly shows in the next foregoing
verse, and Gal. 5.13. when he says, Brethren ye have been called unto liberty,
only use not liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another: and St. Peter having said, Submit your selves unto every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, etc. adds, As free, and not using you liberty as a
cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. 1 Pet. 2.13, etc.


Aff. But you say that men are bound in conscience to submit themselves unto
those laws which are made by that supreme authority, under which they live: and
is it not spiritual bondage to be bound in conscience?


Judge. If you speak of such spiritual bondage as is evil, and from which the
liberty purchased by Christ has set men free, all bond of conscience is not
spiritual bondage: for to be bound in conscience to serve God in obedience,
according unto his revealed will, in holiness and righteousness, is not
contrary, but subordinate unto spiritual liberty, the very end for which we are
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, as Zachary speaks, Luke 1, 74, 75.
But carnal liberty, to obey unrighteousness, is spiritual bondage indeed, yea
sinful slavery. If Superiors command such things, as are unlawful, or forbid
such things as are necessary, their inferiors are not bound in conscience to
obey them: for such obedience is contrary to, and inconsistent with their
spiritual liberty. But when the things commanded by supreme authority are not
unlawful, nor the things thereby forbidden necessary, those that live under
that authority are bound in conscience to yield obedience: and the bond is put
upon the conscience, not by those men, in whom the supreme humane authority
resides, but by God himself, from whom they receive, and under whom, for him
and in his stead, they manage that authority; and by whom their subjects are
commanded to submit themselves, and obey them that have the rule over them: and
so those things, which before the determination of authority were in themselves
indifferent, afterward become, either necessary or unlawful unto them, who owe
obedience unto that authority for the Lords sake.


SECT. XXII. Of passive obedience in suffering wrong patiently. Whether
subjects, to defend themselves, and maintain their own right, may by open
violence, and force of arms, resist their supreme Magistrates?
Aff. ALL this may be true of active obedience, in doing good willingly: but
what will you say of passive obedience, in suffering wrong patiently? Are all
inferiors bound in conscience to submit themselves unto their superiors, in
suffering patiently what they inflict upon them wrongfully? May they not stand
upon their own defense, and for the maintenance of their own right, even by
open force of arms, resist them?


Judge. Many men I know are of diverse minds in this particular: but if you
seriously consider what arguments are urged upon either side; I think you will
find more principles of humane policy, and worldly wisdom, then rules of
religion, and Christian piety, pleading for the lawful liberty of resistance,
and more evidence of grace, then nature, appearing in behalf of patient
suffering. Besides that of them who are most earnest to maintain the former,
some are constrained to fly to such principles, as for ought I can perceive,
are either false in themselves, or in the application of them tend to the utter
overthrow of all good government, and take away the very foundation of all
humane authority: others are forced to limit and restrain it with so many
cautions, that it is difficult, if not impossible to instance any particular
example, wherein they have been all observed. So that it may seem a great deal
safer for subjects to suffer according to the will of God, and commit the
keeping of their souls to him, in well doing, as to a faithful Creator, as St.
Peter speaks. 1 Pet. 4.19. then to hazard the miscarriage of his good cause, by
their own ill handling of it.


Aff. I see, Sr. you are not willing to express you opinion in this particular
so fully, as you have done in the rest: and therefore, although I heartily
desire satisfaction in a case of such importance, yet will I not press you
further for it.


Judge. You need not, if you remember what I said before, in my second example
of doubtful differences reduced unto commonly received principles, generally
agreed upon. For if the case be such, that subjects may, by resisting with
force, defend their own right, against their Sovereigns, in whom the supreme
authority resides, so, that withal they shall not be in danger to offer the
like wrong unto them, or to others in them, from which they desire to defend
themselves; nor to withhold any thing from them, which is due unto them, it may
be lawful; otherwise not: because then they should do contrary to those general
rules, Suum, cuique, and Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris; which no
man can deny: and such self-contradiction makes a man inexcusable, as St. Paul
tells us, Romans 2.1, etc. But the true reason why I forbear to enlarge my self
in this as far as in other particulars, is, because the question cannot well be
resolved in these, unless there were some particular case propounded in
Hypothesi, with all the several circumstances of it, that the answer might be
drawn accordingly. And such a case, wherein it might be lawful for subjects to
resist their Sovereigns, in whom the supreme humane authority resides (any
otherwise, then only by denying, withholding, and withdrawing active obedience
unto their unlawful commands) I am as loath my self to imagine, as it may be
you are unable to give instance of. Yet to say some thing toward your
satisfaction in this particular, I will first state the question, as I
understand it, and then show you some of the cautions, with which I find
resistance for defense restrained and limited, by them that take upon them to
maintain it lawful: which cautions if they be not duly observed, the supposed
lawful liberty must by their own confession cease.


SECT. XXIII. The question stated.
FIrst, you must consider, that the question is not of resisting wrong done by
private persons, without the consent or warrant of supreme Authority: for in
such a case, the rule they give holds good, Contra quos licita est defensio per
magistratum, contra eosdem est licita defensio privata in casu necessitatis,
cum ea quae fit per magistratum haberi non potest: quoniam tunc reges armant
etiam privatos. And in such a case indeed, the resistance is not against, but
in the behalf of the supreme Magistrate.

Secondly, you must consider, that the question is not of resisting the supreme
Magistrate by mere private men, without the consent or warrant of the ordinary
power, as they call it: for this they confess were gladium sumere a Deo and a
legibus sibi non concessum.

Thirdly, you must consider, that the question is not of resisting those that
only pretend, and have no just title to supreme authority: for this will
easily be granted to be lawful; so that it be not done with an intent to detain
that supreme authority from them, to whom it does belong, or to transfer it
unto others.

Fourthly, you must consider, that the question is not of resisting by
refusing, or endeavoring only that we may not be active our selves in doing
that which supreme Magistrates themselves, or others by authority from them,
would force us to do, and which without sin we cannot do, or by endeavoring to
restrain them from doing it themselves; so long as that endeavor tends not,
either unto the danger of their persons, or the diminution of their authority
and power otherwise, or take, or withhold from them any thing that of right
belongs unto them: for in this case neither the Magistrate nor his authority is
hurt, or hindered, but helped, and furthered. As when the King of Israel sent a
messenger to take away Elishaes head, Elisha bade the Elders, that sat in his
house with him, shut the door, and hold him fast at the door. 2 Kings 6.32.

But the question is, Whether in any case subjects of themselves, by joint
consent, or by the direction of inferior magistrates, may lawfully resist, and
by force of arms defend themselves, and one another against supreme
Magistrates, acknowledged such, and those that are employed by authority from
them, yea though it be to the danger of their persons, the diminution of their
authority, and the depriving them of any thing, that otherwise of right they
might lay claim unto. In answering this question, they that maintain the
affirmative yet limit it with these cautions.

SECT. XXIV. Cautions, with which the affirmative is limited by them that
maintain it.
FIrst, that the supreme Magistrate be actually degenerated into a tyrant, and
publicly declared so to be: such a one as does open and intolerable injury
unto his subjects generally; or seeks by violence and force to constrain them
unto manifest idolatry or blasphemy.

Secondly, that the injustice and violence, which they pretend to defend
themselves against, be manifestly such, and great and grievous, not barely
suspected or surmised only, or frivolous and light.

Thirdly, that it be only in case of extreme necessity, when the whole
Commonwealth is in imminent danger to be utterly overthrown, and no other
means of safety left, for the preservation of themselves, their lives, their
states, and the liberty of their consciences.

Fourthly, that all other good means have formerly been used for his
reformation, but in vain.

Fifthly, that under the pretense of religion and justice, private ends and
advantages, be not aimed at, intended and sought.

Sixthly, that in all their proceedings they carefully observe such equity and
moderation, that they themselves infringe not those liberties, and transgress
not those laws, which they take upon them to maintain: for here that rule they
give themselves must hold. Quod justum est just persequaris.

Seventhly, that it be not only intended for, but likewise accompanied with a
greater public benefit, Ne Resp. volens vitare Charybdim incidat in Scyllam.

When you propose a particular case of this kind, wherein these cautions are
observed, that I may take notice of all the considerable circumstances
appertaining thereunto, I will tell you what I think of the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of it.

SECT. XXV. Exceptions to some principles, upon which they endeavor to ground
their opinion, who maintain the affirmative.
Aff. YOu said even now, that some of those, who take upon them to maintain the
lawfulness of resistance in this kind, are constrained to fly to such
principles, as you conceive are either false in themselves, or in the
application of them tend to the utter overthrow of all good government, and to
take away the very foundation of all humane authority. I pray you let me hear
some instances of such principles.


Judge. One is, that the supreme Magistrate, in respect of those that are under
his authority, is major singulis, but minor universis. This I take to be false:
for the supreme Magistrate, as such, is Solo Deo minor, and unto all his
subjects, not divisim only, but conjunctim also, is in stead of God, who is
greater then all. Another is, that the power of government is originally in the
people, and only derived from, and entrusted by them, unto the supreme
magistrate. This I am persuaded is false: for the power of government is
originally in God, derived from, and entrusted by him, to the supreme
magistrate, even then when the person, in whom that authority resides, is
designed by the people, as in elective governments, much more where the
government is successive, and hereditary. The holy Ghost in Scripture styleth
Magistrates the ministers of God, and the servants of the Lord: but never that
I know the ministers of the people, or the servants of their subjects.

Another is, that subjects have an interest in the supreme Magistrate, which is
of a far more excellent and high nature, then that interest, which the supreme
Magistrate has in his subjects. But this I am confident is false: for the
interest, which the supreme Magistrate, as such, has in his subjects, is Gods
interest, although not absolute, as his is; yet such as, however limited, he
has for God, and unto him must be answerable for his management thereof.

Another is, that Salus populi est suprema lex, which is a truth indeed, if
rightly understood: But being so applied, as that the people themselves, or any
deputed by them, shall be esteemed competent judges of what is necessary for
their own safety, without the concurrence and consent of the supreme
Magistrate, tends utterly, as I conceive, to take away all authority from him,
yea to loose the bands of all humane society. For if subjects shall stand no
longer bound in conscience to obey their Sovereigns, then they themselves shall
esteem it expedient, and that it is not necessary to do otherwise, the
apprehension of the like necessity may as well warrant children to withdraw
their obedience from their parents, servants from their masters, yea equals
their friendship and fidelity from one another. Yea, though the necessity be
not really apprehended indeed, but only pretended, and this supreme law pleaded
for it, and that subjects, either severally or jointly, may themselves, or by
any deputed by them, be Judges of that law, against, or without the approbation
and allowance of supreme Authority, actum est de imperio, the Magistrate must
hold his estate but of courtesy, at the will and pleasure of the people: for
when ever they have a mind to disobey, and find themselves in case to make
their party good, it is no more but to pretend an extraordinary case of
necessity, and then they have their commission to show, from Salus populi est
suprema lex.


Aff. What say you then to the cases of nonage, natural disability, or
captivity of the supreme Magistrate, by which there is a necessity, that his
Authority, for the time, should be managed by others?


Judge. To this I could say, first, that God himself then declares the
necessity, and not the people.

Secondly, that the necessity, in such cases, respects not the people
immediately, but the supreme Magistrate himself.

Thirdly, That the Authority of the supreme Magistrate, in such cases, is not
managed against him, but for him.

But I would rather say, that in such cases the known laws of each particular
state, rather then general rules of reason and analogy, are to be resorted to,
and consulted with. For in many cases, the general rules of reason and analogy
may indifferently be urged on either side: and supreme Magistrates, as well as
their subjects, will plead extraordinary cases, and the necessity of their own
safety, both for their own and for their subjects sakes.

Another is, that subjects are not at all obliged to their supreme Magistrates,
but under condition, viz. so far forth only, as they govern aright; and that
cessante condition cessat obligatio. But this, if generally understood of all,
as well passive as active obedience, I presume is false: and if it be so meant,
that subjects themselves shall have authority, without the consent of supreme
Magistrates, to determine the rectitude, or irregularity of their government,
and accordingly to yield, or withdraw their obedience, why may not the same be
said of all inferiors to their superiors, children to parents, servants to
masters? Ego te meum dici tantisper volo, dum quod te dignum est facis. And
what then shall become of all humane authority?


Aff. And what shall become of all the propriety, and liberty of subjects, if
they may not lawfully defend themselves, and by force of arms resist the unjust
violence of their governors, and remove them, or constrain them to reform
their courses? Yea, what shall become even of the law of nature, which teaches
not only reasonable men, but even brute beasts, to defend themselves, and the
things they enjoy, against rapine and spoil? Much less may we think, that God
would have whole nations left destitute of means, or lawful liberty by those
means, to defend themselves from the violence of particular men abusing their
authority, and making their own wills and pleasures only the rules of their
Government. What is this else, but to let loose the reins to a licentious,
unbounded sway of arbitrary govrenment, and to teach supreme Magistrates, that
they may do what they list?


Judge. I see you would fain draw me to declare my self, and to tell you what I
think of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of subjects resisting, and by force of
arms defending themselves against supreme Magistrates, and those that are put
in Authority by them. But in vain: for I told you before, that I will not, and
indeed cannot well tell what to resolve of the question in general, unless some
such particular case were propounded, as whereof all the several circumstances
might be seriously considered, and compared together. Yet for your argument,
how ever the question in general may speed, I presume it is such, as will not
stand under that weight you seek to lay upon it. For first, it may easily be
retorted thus, What shall become of all the preeminence, propriety of
prerogative, Majesty and Sovereignty, of supreme Magistrates, if subjects have
Authority to declare their Sovereigns actions tyrannical unjust, and violent,
and then have lawful liberty to right, or rather to revenge themselves, and by
force of arms depose their Sovereigns, or constrain them to govern so as
pleases them? Yea what shall become of the law of nature, which teaches not
only reasonable men, but even brute beasts, not to break order by resisting,
where they are to be subject, not to permit themselves to be contemned, where
they ought to be obeyed? Much less may we think, that God would have supreme
Magistrates, who bear the image of his Majesty, and govern for him, left to the
discretion of their people, and destitute of means or lawful liberty by those
means, to compel them unto, and keep them in order, and to punish them for
their disobedience, when they perceive them minded to make their own wills and
pleasures only the rules of their subjection. What is this else, but to let
loose the reins to a licencious, unbounded sway of arbitrary disobedience, and
to teach subjects, that they may do what they list?

Secondly, the bounds and limits, both of the rule and government of supreme
Magistrates, and of the subjection and obedience of the people, that are under
them, are set and determined by laws. First, by the law of God; I mean as it is
revealed in his written word. Secondly, by the law of nature, I mean as it is
imprinted in the minds of men, and there discovered by the light of reason.
Thirdly by the law of nations: I mean those common rules and principles of
commerce and society, which are generally agreed upon by all men. Fourthly, by
the proper and peculiar laws of every particular state, whether fundamental, or
additional, agreed upon, or made by the supreme Magistrate, either by the
advice, or with the consent of the people. By all these laws the proprieties,
both of supreme Magistrates, and of their subjects, the preeminence,
prerogative, majesty, sovereignty, and Authority of the one, the liberty,
rights, and privileges of the other, are both defined, and defended: and unto
them the defense of these, and their propriety in these, does of right belong
unto whom the defense of those laws does belong: and that is unto them that
bear the sword, as having it put into their hands by God; and those that are
warranted by them that bear it, supreme Magistrates I mean, and those whose
Authority is derived from them. Of whom if it were granted, that their subjects
might not lawfully by force of arms resist them, yet would it not follow, that
therefore they might do what they list, and had the reins of an arbitrary
government left in their hands: for they would be no less bound by all the
several sorts of laws before named, then if their people had lawful liberty in
their own hands, to punish them for transgressing those laws. Which liberty
when they assume unto themselves, and plead for as lawful, they seem at least
to lay aside the condition of inferiors, and to change places with their
superiors- For subjects, as subjects, can no more exercise the sword of
justice, by any authority of their own, not derived from their Sovereigns, then
supreme Magistrates, as such, can be accountable unto any, but to God himself,
for the managing of that authority, which as his immediate Vicegerents and
substitutes they have from him. And this is a stronger tie upon supreme
Magistrates, to keep them within their bounds, then any in the world besides
can be. For the force of arms, that their subjects can prepare against them,
they may peradventure provide for the defeating of: but to fall into the hands
of the living God is a fearful thing, against which there is, there can be no
defense. The less then that subjects are allowed to right themselves against
their Sovereigns, the more God himself is interested on their behalf, to
revenge their wrongs, and his own, upon them that abuse his Authority. This
made David, that he would not use the power which he had in his own hand, to
right and revenge himself upon Saul, but left it to God, as belonging to him.
The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee; but mine
hand shall not be upon thee, 1 Samuel 24.12. Nor would he suffer Abishai, that
was willing, and desirous to do it: for who, says he, can stretch forth his
hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? As the Lord lives, the Lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into battle,
and perish. 1 Samuel 26, 9, 10.

Some, I know, answer, that David might lawfully have slain Saul, and that his
forbearing to do it was for example sake, lest others in imitation of him
should have been encouraged to kill Kings: and that it was singular and
heroicum exemplum, quod hosti pepercit, vitandi scandali causa. But this answer
seems to me to contradict, both it self, and the text. To contradict it self:
for that which is done for example sake, and to avoid scandal, is necessary to
be done, and to do otherwise is unlawful: and therefore according unto this
answer, if for nothing else, yet for example sake, and to avoid scandal, David
might not lawfully have slain Saul. To contradict the text: for David says,
Who? that is, none can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be
guiltless. David could not have lawfully done that, which at least in his own
opinion, no man could do and be guiltless. But I pray you let us leave this
question: which has been so often, and so much disputed by Protestant Divines,
against Anabaptists and Papists, yea by the moderater Papists themselves,
against those of their own profession, that call themselves Jesuits, and are
indeed the most notorious incendiaries of the Christian world, that it is hard
to say any thing now to the purpose, which has not been already said.


SECT. XXVI. The question, whether subjects may resist their Sovereigns,
belongs not peculiarly to Kings, or Monarchs alone, but is common unto them,
with all supreme Magistrates, in what form of Government soever it be.
Aff. YEt one thing I pray you, Sr. satisfy me in however. In that which you
have said, concerning the cautions in this case propounded by some, and
principles pleaded by others, I observe that you have not only of purpose
forborne to answer directly to the question, but likewise to use the word
Monarch, or King; instead thereof saying the supreme Magistrate, or Sovereign:
which, if it were done purposely, I should be glad to understand the reason of.


Judge. I confess I did it purposely: not to avoid that odium and prejudice
which many men are too apt to entertain against all those, whom they think to
cast scorn upon, when they call them Monarchists, or Royalists: for I have long
ago learned to esteem all unjust aspersions, and uncharitable censures, worthy
only of neglect. But the reason why I did it was, that you might take occasion
thereupon to observe, that whatsoever is said in this question, concerning the
lawfulness, or unlawfulness of subjects resisting, or defending themselves by
force of arms, belongs not peculiarly to Kings, or Monarchs alone, but is
common unto them, with all supreme Magistrates in what form of Govrnment soever
it be. And therefore if to maintain the affirmative be to oppose Monarchical
government, it must be as well prejudicial unto any other form: and if it be
necessary for the preservation of any state whatsoever, to maintain the
negative, it will be as necessary that it should be maintained for the
preservation of the state of Kings. For the distinction of the duties of
Governors, and those that are to be governed by them equally concerns all
states under heaven; and the confusion of them has the like influence upon a
Republic, as it has upon a Monarchy: except there be this diffeference, that
as Monarchy is a more perfect form of Government, then any other, so a little
blemish may sooner be seen, and will appear more odious, and dangerous in it,
then in any other form, and therefore is to be the more carefully avoided.


SECT. XXVII. Means warranted by God, as effectually conducible to any end,
must not be refused, or neglected, under any pretense to the contrary
whatsoever.
Aff. LEt this then, if you please, suffice for your first caution, that before
I resolve upon the use of any means, as effectually conducible to any end, I
must try and examine the lawfulness of it, both in it self, and unto me. I pray
you now go on unto the rest.


Judge. The second shall be this. Whatever means is commanded by God, and
warranted by his word, as effectually conducible to any end, you must not
neglect or be dissuaded and discouraged from the use of it, how improbable
soever, yea or impossible it may seem to be, in the eye of humane sense and
reason, that it will be effectually conducible, and available, unto the end it
should be used for. Thus that the walls of Jericho may fall down, Joshua and
the Israelites, by Gods direction, must compass the city, and go round about it
with the Ark, once a day six days together, and seven times the seventh day,
seven Priests must blow before the Ark, with seven trumpets of rams horns, and
when they make a long blast, then all the people must shout with a great shout,
Jos. 6.2, etc. and doing so the walls of Jericho fell flat before them. Thus
the means to be delivered from the danger they were in by the Caldeans, which
God by the Prophet Jeremiah directed Zedekiah and the men of Jerusalem, was to
go out of the city and fall to the Caldeans, Jer. 21.9. Jer. 38.17, 20. which
because they neglected to hearken unto, the thing that they feared fell upon
them, Jer. 39.1. Although, as the same Prophet speaks, Lam. 12. The Kings of
the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have believed, that
the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem.


Aff. True, Sr. but these directions were given by special immediate revelation
from God himself: which as you said before, is not to expected now adays, nor
easily believed, either in our selves, or others. And therefore this caution,
at least these examples, may seem to be but of little use now.


Judge. If you think so, you are deceived: for these examples serve sufficiently
to prove the necessity, and excellent use of this caution: which is general,
and respects not those directions alone, which are given by special and
immediate revelation from God, but likewise those, which are guided by general
rules recorded in his written word: the truth whereof is no less certain, being
rightly applied unto particular cases now adays, then if God himself from
heaven should utter them, as is evident by that comparison, which St. Peter
makes between the word of peophecie concerning Christ recorded in Scripture,
and the voice from heaven, which they heard when they were with him in the holy
mount, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. and by that which our Savior in the parable says to
the same purpose, Luke 16.31. and more plainly to the Jews, concerning the
writings of Moses and his own words, John. 5.47. And according unto this rule,
when Solomon says, If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee: leave not
thy place: for yielding pacifieth great offenses. Eccl. 10.4. how contrary
soever that direction may seem to the ways of humane wisdom, yet it is better
to obey God, by humble submission to, then men, how wise soever they may seem
to be, by obstinate oposition of supreme authority; according to the counsel of
Solomon. Eccl. 8.2, etc. So the particular practice of passive obedience, in
suffering wrong patiently, is more agreeable unto the will of God, and a better
means to advance his glory, and credit the Gospel of Christ, by putting to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, and winning them that obey not the word,
then to resist, and defend our selves by force against the consent, and without
the warrant of those, in whom the supreme authority on earth resides: and is so
warranted to be, by those general rules, that are given to this purpose, by St.
Peter in his first Epistle, from the eleventh verse of the second to the end of
the fourth Chapter: and by St. Paul. 1. Tim. 6.1, etc. and in sundry other
places: though worldly-wise men, consulting with flesh and blood, will be ready
to reply, as many of our Saviors own disciples did, upon another occasion,
Joh. 6.60. This is a hard saying, who can bear it? though they should break out
into open blasphemy, and say as it is reported some have done, that passive
obedience is assive obedience. Of whom I doubt not but I may truly say, as St.
Peter does, 2 Pet. 2.1, 3. They bring upon themselves swift destruction, and
their damnation slumbereth not.


SECT. XXVIII. Means probably destructive of the supreme must not be used,
though possibly they might be available for subordinate ends.
Aff. LEt this suffice likewise for your second caution, that the means which
are warranted by Gods direction, as effectually conducible to any end, must not
be refused, or neglected, under any pretense whatsoever to the contrary. What
shall the third be?


Judge. The third shall be this. What ever means is effectually conducible unto
any particular subordinate end, how good soever, if withal it be destructive
of, or inconsistent with the supreme and general end, you must resolve to let
it alone, and not to meddle with it. Thus they of Cesarea, and they that were
of Paul's company, though they earnestly desired, that he would not go up to
Jerusalem, supposing that his tarrying from thence might be a means to preserve
his life and liberty, yet when they saw that he would not be persuaded, as not
willing to be prevented, or deprived of that opportunity, which there he might
have, to do God better service, in testifying the Gospel of the grace of God,
they ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done. Acts 21.14. On the contrary,
when our Savior began to show to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem,
and there suffer and be killed, Peter in kindness would counsel him better, as
he thought, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee: but
he receives this sharp reply, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense
unto me: for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of
men. Mat. 16.21, 22, 23. And afterward, when he would needs be as busy with his
sword to defend, as before he had been with his tongue to dissuade his master
from danger, he meets with the like reproof again, not without a severe
commination of revenge for his rashness, Put up again thy sword into his place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword, Mat: 26.52. St.
John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, who leaned on his breast at supper, has
it, Put up thy sword into the sheath, John 18. As if he knew, that a subjects
sword out of the sheath was not in its place, unless by Sovereign Authority it
had been called forth. And our Savior, as if he himself had been bound in
conscience to make restitution for the wrong that his servant had done against
his will, heals the servants ear that Peter had cut off: and that not without a
kind of leave asking, Suffer ye thus far, Luke 22.51. And yet I presume no
Christian dares deny, but that in the exercise of that authority, which Peter
then did offer to resist, there was maladministration in the highest degree.
If ever power were abused, it was when Christ himself was apprehended by it,
yet in Christ's own quarrel, against the officers of Annas and Caiphas, Christ
himself says to Peter, Put up thy sword into his place, into the sheath. Not
that our Savior wanted power to make his party good: for he adds in the next
verse, Think thou, that I cannot now pray to my father, and he shall
presently give me twelve Legions of angels? but, as it follows, verse. 54. How
then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? The preservation
of Christ's liberty and life, was in it self a good end, and a good particular
subordinate end, so long as it served for the advancement of the glory of God,
the general supreme end, that is so long as his hour was not yet come, and so
long he himself provided for it: but when the Scripture was to be fulfilled,
which had said, he should be numbered amongst the transgressors, and make his
soul an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10, etc. when God was to be more glorified by
his death, then he would be by his life; then neither others, nor himself, must
any longer interpose for his preservation, and deliverance. No, not though he
were provoked unto it, not only by one of the malefactors, that was hanged,
and by the soldiers, that crucified him, but likewise by the rulers, and the
people generally; and that with the strongest inducements that invention racked
on the rules of art could reach unto. He saved others, let him save himself, If
he be the Christ the son of God. Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from
the cross, that we may see and believe. This one, How then shall the Scripture
be fulfilled, that thus it must be? is an argument beyond them all, which
Christ himself cannot answer any other way, but by obedient suffering. And that
he did it, not for our sakes only, but for our example also, St. Peter tells
us plainly 1 Pet. 2.21.


SECT. XXIX. What means in their use are inconsistent with, or contrary to the
advancement of the glory of God.
Aff. BUt how shall I know what means are inconsistent with, or contrary to the
general supreme end of all things, the advancement of the glory of God?


Judge. By that, which I told you before, in the first caution: if they be such,
as the use thereof is, either unlawful in it self, or unto you. For herein,
says our Savior, is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit: so shall ye
be my disciples, John. 15.8. and the fruit that God expects from men, to the
end that he be glorified by them, is obedience. 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Our Savior
of himself says, I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work,
which thou gave me to do, John 17.4. and to his disciples, Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father,
which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16. So to the end that Christians may shine as
lights in the world, St. Paul's direction to the Philippians is, Do all things
without murmurings and disputings: that ye may be blameless and harmless, the
sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
Phil. 2.14, 15. When any thing is done agreeably unto the word of God, which he
has magnified above all his name, Psalm. 138.2. then his glory is advanced, But
when any thing is done contrary thereunto, he is dishonored. Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he
that does the will of my my father, which is in heaven. Mat. 7.21. This people
draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips: but
their heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, Mat. 15.8, 9. That is done to Gods
dishonor, what ever it be, and under what pretense soever, which is done
against the rule of his revealed will.


SECT. XXX. Whether the glory of God may be advanced by the sins of men.
Aff. IS the glory of God then never advanced by the sins of men? Does not St.
Paul suppose, that the truth of God may more abound through a man's lie, unto
his glory? Rom 3.7. and does he not expressly say, that where sin abounded,
grace did much more abound? Romans 5.20.


Judge. It is true, that God, who in the creation brought light out of darkness,
yea made all things of nothing, can when he pleases bring good out of evil,
and raise honor to himself out of those very actions, whereby he is most of
all dishonored. Yet we cannot say properly, that his glory is advanced by any
sinful action, but only that is advanced in it, or through it. Not by it, as by
the cause, but in it, or through it, as the occasion. And if this were a
sufficient warrant for a man to do any thing amiss, that God will work himself
honor out of it, the same plea might serve to justiany the most heinous
offenses, and enormous crimes, that the devil himself can ever devise to tempt
men to. Our rule then must be to enquire, not what is inconsistent with, or
contrary to that advancement of the glory of God, which he will raise unto, and
work out for himself, but which he directs us to labor for, and would have
to be aimed at, and intended by us: and that, as before, is the honor that
accrews to him by our obedience.


SECT. XXXI. Some means sometimes probably conducible to the supreme and
principal, if necessarily destructive of, or inconsistent with, a particular
subordinate end, are not always to be used.
Aff. SO much for the third, that means destructive of the supreme must not be
used, though they might be available for subordinate ends. What is the fourth
caveat?


Judge. The fourth is this. What ever means is effectually conducible unto the
supreme and general end of all things, if withal it be destructive of, or
inconsistent with, the particular subordinate end, for which you stand engaged,
you must resolve to let it alone, and not to meddle with it, unless the
particular subordinate end it self be such, as may be forborne, without any
hinderance at all unto the general supreme end: and unless that means be so
necessary, that the general supreme end cannot be obtained without it by any
other means. Thus for them that preach the Gospel to live of the Gospel, is
effectually conducible unto the advancement of the glory of God: who has
ordained, that he that is taught in the word should communicate unto him that
teaches him in all good things, Gal. 6.6. But for St. Paul to take wages of
the Corinthians, amongst whom he conceived it necessary for him to preach the
Gospel freely, was, though not unlawful in it self, yet so unfit for him, that
he resolves it were better for him to die, then that any man should make his
glorying void. 1 Cor. 9. 15. I will only add one caveat more, and then I
think I shall have said all that is necessary for the resolution of your second
question, and that shall be this. What ever means you apprehend, or is offered
unto you, as effectually conducible to any end, consider well, whether there be
not some other effect, of another nature and of more important consequence,
likely to follow thereupon, rather then run the hazard whereof, it were better
to forbear the use of the means unto that end, and wait the opportunity of some
other means, that may not be subject to the like inconvenience. Thus Amaziah,
intending war against the Edomites, thought it a good means to strengthen
himself, by hiring 100000. mighty men of valor out of Israel for 100000.
talents of silver: but being warned by a man of God, that the assistance of the
Israelites was like to bring a curse upon the whole design, he rather chose to
loose his 100000. talents of silver, and separate the army of Israel to go home
again, then run so great an hazard, as by retaining them he should have done. 2 Chronicles. 25. Thus Achish, although he were confident enough of David's fidelity,
and thought that he and his men might do him good service in his wars against
Israel, yet when he was put in mind, that David, for his own interest, was
likely to be an adversary to them in the battle, sends him away. 1 Samuel 29. So
though David had a mind to go forth with the people to battle against Absalom,
yet was he easily persuaded to tarry in the city, when he understood that it
was better, and that the loss of half the people would not have been a matter
of so great importance, as the hazard of his person only. 2. Sam. 18.2, etc.


SECT. XXXII. Men eminently virtuous, or notoriously vicious, how far to be
trusted, and adhered unto, or shunned and declined.
Aff. SIr, I thank you: you have said so much already, to give me satisfaction
in those two particulars, wherein I have desired your advice, concerning the
proposal of the ends which I ought to aim at, and the choice of the means,
which I should use to those ends; that now, for the other two, concerning that
esteem, which I ought to have them in whom I observe to be richly adorned, with
eminent graces, or notoriously overtaken with false opinions, or evil
practices, I think I may be able to answer my self: viz. that I must only so
far trust and adhere unto the former, as I find both their ends and means to
be good; and only so far forth decline and shun the latter, as I see that they
either propose unto themselves some evil ends, or use bad means, of purpose to
attain unto those ends, which they propose unto themselves, whether good or
bad. For by your former speech I perceive, you would have nothing false or
evil, embraced, nor any thing that is true and good indeed, rejected, upon any
occasion, or under any pretense whatsoever; nor any thing looked upon as such,
either good and true, or evil and false, out of any respect, that either
partiality, or prejudice, in any kind, can cast upon it; but only as reason
ruled by religion shall manifestly make it appear to be such.


SECT. XXXIII. Partiality and prejudice two great occasions of confusion in the
world.
Judge. YOu apprehend me rightly: and I heartily wish; that you and all others,
were not only persuaded of the necessity, but would also be careful in your
practice to make use of that rule. For the neglect (if I may not more properly
say concerning some, the contempt) of this caution breeds as great a confusion
in the world, as almost any thing beside: so apt men are to take all things
upon trust from them, of whom they have once entertained a good opinion, and to
dislike whatsoever they see proceed from them, whose persons they like not.
Thus David, having said of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, he is good man, presently
adds, and comes with good tidings, before he knew what the tidings were, 2 Samuel 18.27. And Gedaliah would not believe, that Ishmael intended any treachery
toward him, though Johanan and all the captains of the forces, that were in
the field, endeavored to persuade him to it, Jer. 40.13, etc. And Achish,
though to please the Lords of the Philistines he yield to cashier David and his
men, yet will not forgo his good opinion of him, 1 Samuel 29.6, etc. But on the
contrary, Joab will not be persuaded, that Abner, who formerly had made himself
strong for the house of Saul, came to David to Hebron, with any other intent,
but only as a spy to deceive him. 2 Samuel 3.25. When Saul was once grown
jealous and afraid of David, his own son Jonathan goes in danger of his life,
if he offer but to speak a good word for him, 1 Samuel 20.30, etc. Yea David
himself misled by the slanderous report of Ziba, will scarce give good
Mephibosheth leave to plead his own innocence, but cuts him off from his just
apology, with this short answer, why speak thou any more of thy matters? I
have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land, 2 Samuel 19.29. And therefore it has
always been one special point of Satan's subtily to garnish errors with great
names, and to cast all the scorn and contempt, that possibly he can, upon the
patrons of truth: together with an overweening opinion of some men's worth, to
steal into the minds of the multitude an implicit persuasion, that they must
not entertain any sinister suspicion of any thing that is said or done by
them; and by infusing into their affection, an utter dislike of other men's
persons, to turn their stomachs against any thing, that they see practiced or
approved by them. Thus Balak makes no question, but he shall prevail against
Israel, if he have Balaam on his side: for says he, I wot that he whom thou
blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed. Number. 22.6. And Micah
having entertained a priest of his own consecration in his house, says, Now I
know that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have Levite to my Priest. Judge.
17.12, 13. Yea Simon the sorcerer, giving out that himself was some great one,
so bewitched the people of Samaria, that they all had regard and gave heed unto
him, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of
God, Acts 8.9, etc. On the other side, Ahab, hating Micaiah, has no mind to
hear him, yea though he knows, and tells Jehoshaphat, that by him they may
enquire of the Lord, yet he resolves before hand he shall hear no good but evil
from him, 1 Kings 22.8. This made St Paul have so much ado among the
Corinthians, because there were some, that thought of him, as if he walked
according to the flesh, and stuck not to say plainly, His bodily presence is
weak, and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.2, 10. Thus the chief Priests and
Pharisees, yea even Nathaniel, an Israelite in whom was no guile, at first had
an hard opinion of our Savior himself, for his very countries sake, Search and
look, for out of Galilee arises no Prophet, say they, John 7.52. And can there
any good thing come out of Nazareth, says he, John 1.46. These as the two
great rubs, that usually lie in the way of religion, I suppose St. Paul
endeavors to remove from amongst the Corinthians, when he would have them
learn not to think of men above that which is written, that none of you, says
he, be puffed up for one against another, 1 Cor. 4.6. And he gives the reason
of that weighty charge, which he lays upon Timothy, to preach the word, and to
be instant in season, and out of season; For says he, the time will come, when
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap
to themselves teachers, having itching ears: and they shall turn away their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned to fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. And
therefore that general rule which he gives. 1 These. 5.21. is of perpetual use,
Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.


SECT. XXXIV. What difference is to be made between the opinions and practices
of men eminently virtuous, and notoriously vicious.
Aff. WOuld you have men make no difference then between the opinions and
practices, of those that are generally known to be orthodox, honest, and
religious, and those whose credit has already been cracked, and liable to just
exception for errors and enormities, whereof they may be apparently convicted?
For I presume your instances already given reach not so far, but only to
false, or vain, unjust, or ungrounded surmises and suspicions only. Or do you
think it is to no purpose, that our Savior says, A good tree brings not
forth corrupt fruit; neither does a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit, etc.
Luke 6. 43, 44, 45.


Judge. Yes I deny not, but there is a great difference to be made, between the
opinions and practices of men eminently virtuous or vicious indeed; yea, if
they be but generally reputed* and esteemed such: but that difference must
reach no further, but unto the first apprehension which we have of them, not to
the final resolution, whereupon we must settle, and set up our rest. The
consideration of the persons, whose opinions or practices they are, may give us
just occasion to suspend the censures, which at first we may think them worthy
of, until we have further examined and tried them. Or rather indeed for the
honor that we owe to truth and holiness, and the detestation which we should
have falsehood and wickedness in, we ought to do so. But when it comes to the
upshot, that we are to resolve which side we will sit down upon, or as our
Savior speaks of the choice we would make between two masters, whether we will
hate the one, and love the other, or else hold to the one, and despise the
other, then the adherent circumstances of the persons must be wholly laid
aside, and the things themselves must be considered, as they are, or as they
ought to be: otherwise we may be much mistaken. An handful, yea a grain of
wheat is no less good corn, because it is covered with an heap of chafe, and
tares are tares, although they be shed amongst good seed. Dead flies will send
forth a stinking savor, even in the ointment of the Apothecary: and a jewel of
gold should not be undervalued, although it be found in a swines snout. But it
may be you look for examples rather then similitudes: and the holy Ghost in
Scripture has furnished us with those, as well as these. That mirrrour of
divine, and miracle of humane wisdom Solomon, even he whose name was called
Jedidiah, beloved of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.25. yet loved many strange women, who
when he was old turned away his heart after other gods, 1 Kings 11.1, etc. Even
Peter, that made that famous confession concerning our Savior, Thou art the
Christ the son of the living God, and received from him that excellent
attestation, Blessed art thou Siman Bar: Jona, for flesh and blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven: shortly after
presuming to advise his master, as he supposed for his own good, receives this
sharp reproof, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me: for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men, Mat. 16.16,
etc. And though he seemed to be a pillar, yet St. Paul, when he saw that he was
to be blamed, made no scruple to withstand him to his face, Gal. 2.9, 11. It
were easy to be almost infinite in instances of this kind: and to confess the
truth, it is a more ordinary thing to find a little folly in him, that is in
reputation for wisdom and honor, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 10.1. then to
observe in them, that are notoriously evil, any thing worthy of praise and
imitation. And yet we are not altogether destitute of examples to that purpose.
Even Balaam that loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. yet blessed
Israel more then once, Number. 23. and 24. Ahab, that did sell himself to work
wickedness, and did very abominably in following idols, yet took so to heart
the judgments threatened against him and his house by the Prophet Elijah, that
he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly, 1 Kings 21.25, etc. Yea upon Elijahs motion, he
sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the Prophets of Baal
together unto mount Carmel, and permitted them by Elijahs direction, to be
apprehended and slain, 1 Kings 18.20, etc. Jehu took no heed to walk in the law
of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart: yet he destroyed Baal out of
Israel, and did well in executing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord
against the house of Ahab, 2 Kings 10.28, etc. Even Pilate, that condemned our
Savior, and Judas that betrayed him, and one of the thieves that was crucified
with him, testified his innocence. Yea the Devil himself acknowledged Christ to
be the holy one of God, Luke 3.34. and Paul and his companions to be the
servants of the most high God, and the Gospel which they preached, the way of
salvation, Acts 16.17. So hard it is, or rather impossible to find any wisdom
or goodness upon earth so pure and perfect, but that there may be observed in
it some course allay of error, ignorance, or evil; which ought to be
entertained with no more respect, then poison in a golden cup: and scarce is
there any man so desperately given over to a reprobate mind, but that in one
particular or other, at least now and then, some beams of truth, and sparks of
honesty, may be discovered in his words and actions, which ought no more to be
rejected, or despised, then pearls in a dunghill to be trodden under foot. And
though it be true, which you alledg, that every tree is known by his own fruit:
and that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: to which you may
add that of St. James, Jam. 3.11, 12. Does a fountain send forth, at the same
place, sweet water and bitter? Can a fig tree bear olive berries? either a vine
figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh. Yet withal you must
remember what the Prophet Jeremiah says, The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. and St. Paul, Gal.
6.3, 4. If a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself alone and not in another. A regenerate man has not one fountain
alone in him, but two; a fountain of nature, and a fountain of grace: and that
of nature is never so quite dried up in this life, but that it will sometimes
be dropping, if not pouring out some of its own salt bitter water. And though
unregenerate men be not trees of righteousness, that planting of the Lord,
which brings forth spiritual fruits of grace, yet many times there may be
gathered from them those blossoms of truth, and buds of moral obedience, which
a sanctified servant of God, for the matter of his opinions and proctises, need
neither be ashamed, nor afraid to use: and having brought them, as metal, to
the royal standard of the word, and tried them there, if the fault appear to be
want of weight or fineness only, he may let them pass for good bullion, though
not for current coin. And if every tree be known by his own fruit, it is not
enough to look upon the fruit, but we must taste it too, that we may know what
kind the tree is of. And when we have all done, it is not the tasting of some
fruit alone, that can assure us the rest, that comes from the same tree, is all
of the same kind, unless withal we can certainly tell, whether the stock and
branches all grow naturally of themselves together, or have been graffed on:
Nay rather, by the different taste of the fruit, we may persuade our selves,
that either the sap is not the same, wherewith it was nourished, or not alike
conveyed unto it.


SECT. XXXV. A multitude must not be followed to do evil, nor the doing of good
abstained from, though it be to avoid the society of a multitude of evil doers
otherwise.
Aff. THis that you say per adventure may be true concerning the opinions and
practices of some few particular persons, that I should not take them upon
trust from them that are generally well esteemed of, nor reject them because
they come from such men, as are commonly ill reported of: but what shall I do,
when I see such opinions and practices generally received, or rejected, by
whole multitudes, it may be by all, that I either know or have heard of, to be
such?


Judge. In such a case you have the less cause to be doubtful; but yet withal
take heed you be not too confident: for you must not follow a multitude to do
evil; no, nor abstain from doing good, though it be to avoid the society of a
multitude of evil doers otherwise. A multitude of honest well meaning men may
be led aside, out of the ways of truth and holiness, into the bypath of
error and wickedness, by the subtle suggestions of a few deceivers: and the
devil himself does not always work so powerfully in the children of
disobedience, but that some good opinions and practices may be retained, even
amongst whole multitudes of them. Thus for the former, ten of the twelve men,
that were sent to search the land of Canaan, bringing up an evil report of the
land, which they had searched, set all the congregation of the children of
Israel on murmuring; so that Caleb and Joshuah could not still them: yet Moses
and Aaron regarded not the greater number; nay God himself took part with the
two against the ten, Numb. 13. and 14. Two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that
went in their simplicity, and knew not any thing, were drawn into action of
rebellion against David, by his traitorous son Absalom: and the conspiracy was
strong, says the text, for the people increased continually with Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.11, 12. One Benjamite, a man of Belial, Sheba the son of Bichri, with a
blast of a trumpet, and a words speaking, draws all the men of Israel, to go up
from after David, to follow him: even then, when they were in the heat of their
quarrel with the men of Judah, for pretending more interest in David, then
themselves were willing to acknowledge that they had, 2 Samuel 19. and 20. When
Peter at Antioch withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them that were of the
circumcision, the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation: yet St. Paul withstood
him to his face, and sticks not to say plainly, that he was to be blamed, and
that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11,
etc. So for the later, The Pharisees, though hypocrites, and such as had made
the word of God of none effect by their traditions: yet in the point of the
resurrection were so orthodox, that in behalf thereof they make a party for St.
Paul against the Sadducess, Acts 23.6, etc. Thus Festus says, It is not the
manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is
accused, have accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself,
concerning the crime laid against him, Acts 25.16. and verse. 27. It seems
unto me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes
laid against him. Though the Romans were in other things given up unto a
reprobate mind, as St. Paul complains, Romans 1.28. yet this care in the public
administration of justice, to proceed, not upon suspicions or surmises, but
secundum allegata and probata, was nothing the less commendable in them, or
necessary to be practiced by others. For as the same Apostle speaks, Romans 2.14,
15. When the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, these having not the law are a law unto themselves. Which
show the work of the law written in their hearts: their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another. Therefore, as it follows verse 27. Shall not uncircumcision, which is
by nature, if it fulfill the law, judge thee who by the letter and circumcision
do transgress the law? And as our Savior, Mat. 12.41, 42. threateneth the
Jews, that the men of Nineve, and the Queen of the south, shall rise up in
judgment with them, and condemn them; because they repented at the preaching
of Jonas, and she came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, yet they neglected and regarded not him, though greater then
Jonas, and greater then Solomon. So if we take upon us to be more sincerely
affected unto truth and holiness, then other men are, and suffer our selves, in
matter of opinion or practice, to be overswaied and carried away with
partiality and prejudice, that we would rather sell the truth, then purchase
the displeasure of them, whose persons we have in admiration because of
advantage; and hazard the comfort of a good conscience, by neglecting the
discharge of the necessary duties, that we owe to others, rather then incur an
unjust uncharitable censure, such as the Jews cast on our Savior himself, when
they called him a friend of Publicans and sinners, those honest heathens shall
rise up in judgment against us, and condemn us, that said, Amicus Socrates,
amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas: and, Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo
discrimine agetur. Yea, we our selves shall be our own judges, either that we
profess that which we should not, because we practice not that which we
profess; or else that we practice not that which we we should, because we
profess that which we practice not. And self-concontradiction, in what kind
soever, in word or deed, or both, must of necessity be self-condemnation:
unless we can produce some authentical charter from heaven, whereby we our
selves are privileged, exempted from the common condition of mankind, and
allowed liberty, as often as we list, to new mould the nature of truth, and to
make our own expedience alone the rule of our obedience both to God and man.


SECT. XXXVI. The Conclusion,
Aff. SIr, I thank you for this favor, in that you have thus freely imparted
your mind unto me. And now methinks some of those things, which you have said,
in answer unto my demands, if rightly applied, might be of good use, for the
deciding of those differences, wherewith our Church and Commonwealth are now
distracted.


Judge. I doubt not but they might: and to that purpose I often make use of them
my self in private, for mine own satisfaction; and so may you do, if you will.
But I will not presume in a business of so great importance, to publish mine
own opinion to others, unless by authority I were required, or allowed so to
do. And, to deal plainly with you, I think, that though you, and I, and others,
may privately seek satisfaction for our selves, and find it, according to that
information which we have, yet no man can be fit for that employment, whereby
public satisfaction in this case should be offered unto all, except he be very
well acquainted with every considerable circumstance: and especially, unless he
be such a one, as has been honored, and entrusted with the knowledge of those
arcana imperij, the sacred secrecy whereof might seem to be profaned, if they
should be exposed to the view of the vulgar. Therefore let us leave that
resolution of those doubts, which others look for, unto them to whom of right
it appertains to give it: and humbly beseech the only wise God, the fountain
of all goodness, so to govern the counsels, and give such a blessed issue unto
the endeavors of all those that sit at the stern of the state, to guide the
great affairs of Church and Commonwealth, that the success of all their
consultations, and actions, may be the turning of his hand upon us, purely to
purge away our dross, and take away all our tinn, that his rest amongst us may
be glorious, who is the blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords: who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man
can approach unto, whom no man has seen, or can see: to whom be honor and
power everlasting. Amen.


A Postscript.
ALthough, when I penned the precedent discourse, in the year 1642. I had much
occasion to conceive, that many men were apt to be misled, into errors and
enormities, by false pretenses and principles, by factious prejudice against
some, and partiality toward others; yet I did not suspect that the malady was,
or would be accompanied with so much malignity, as since that time has showed
it self, in rendering some men deaf unto divine direction, and incapable of
cure, by making them willingly ignorant, or rather wilfully insensible of their
sickness, and to dote upon their diseases themselves, as if they were signs and
symptoms of their health: but hoped at least, that gentle applications would
have been sufficient to digest, or to disperse the distempered humors, before
they were grown to any settled and confirmed strength. Therefore intending to
endeavor the prevention, or discovery, of such deceits, both in my self and
others, by a brief and plain representation of what I thought considerable, in
diverse particulars of important concernment relating unto matters of opinion
and practice, I resolved to do it in the mildest, and most familiar manner that
I could, even striving to decline the speaking out of those conclusions, the
premises whereof I studied to fortify as strongly as I could, and bring men's
affections to be guided by their judgments, rather then their judgments to be
swaied by their affections. I desired to imitate the practice of St. Paul, who
says of himself, 1 Cor. 10.31. I please all men in all things, not seeking
mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved, and 1 Cor.
9.19, etc. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant to
all, that I might gain the more, etc. Or rather to obey those precepts of the
holy Ghost, by the same Apostle, Gal. 6.1. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness: and 2 Timothy
2.24, 25. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men;
apt to teach, patient: in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves.
But now ( Apr. 5. 1662.) considering what gross impieties have been practiced,
what devilish doctrines have been divulged, what horrid villainies have been
acted amongst us, since that time: especially in the most execrable murder of
our most gracious Sovereign King Charles the first, with all the
circumstantial aggravations of it, the antecedent preparations thereunto, the
concomitant adjuncts, and consequent effects thereof: as St. Paul desired to be
present with the Galatians, and to change his voice, because he was in doubt of
them, Gal. 4.20. being afraid of them, lest he had bestowed upon them labor in
vain, ver. 11. and threatened the Corinthians, that if he came again he would
not spare, 2 Cor. 13.2. So intending to make that discourse more public by the
press, which for almost twenty years space has passed through many private
hands, in written copies only, I find my self much inclined, though not to
alter any thing material in it, yet to change my voice, and to speak out the
exorbitancies of the three great wheels, upon which the motions of all our
miseries have turned, Popery, Presbytery, and Popularity, (rightly understood,
as I have said elsewhere, with relation to their rebellious principles,
opinions and practices) so loud, as that those who are deafest, if withal they
be not dead in those trespasses and sins, might be awakened to repentance, and
those that have yet any kindness for them, might be ashamed of their own
inadvertency, when they should hear them apparently convinced of notorious
guiltiness, in those four particulars, which in that discourse I have
endeavored to dissuade men from, false pretenses and principles, factious
prejudice and partiality. But considering withal, that much has been done to
that purpose already by others, especially in the Mystery of the two Juntoes,
and the History of Independency; and conceiving it very difficult at least, if
not almost impossible, to use sharpness, and speak bitterly against those
enormities themselves, without a particular reflection upon some men's persons,
which would be a likelier means to alienate their affections, then to rectify
their understandings, I set down my rest upon my former resolution, and have
altered nothing, either in respect of the notions or expressions, from that
which I had written at first. Nor will I now add any thing more, but only a
serious admonition, and earnest exhortation, unto all them that have read, or
shall read that discourse, to consider, how much it concerns them to take heed,
that presumptuous sins have not dominion over them, and that they may be
innocent from the great transgression of Self-contradiction: which first or
last will be sure to bring with it self-condemnation: to beware of giving
credit unto false pretenses, of building their opinions upon false principles,
of giving entertainment unto any unjust, uncharitable prejudice against, or too
indulgent partiality toward others. Especially to take heed, that they do not
pull down more by their practice then they build up by their profession, nor by
their actions bolster up and underprop the very same things, which by their
opinions they pretend to demolish and pull down. For mine own part I think,
that of the three great wheels, upon which, as I said before, the motions of
all our miseries have turned, it is not easily to be resolved, whether Popery
have been more beholding to Presbytery, or Popularity; Presbytery to
Popularity, or Popery; Popularity to Popery, or Presbytery: or which of the
three is the greatest enemy to Catholic Christian Principality and Prelacy.
But, oh, what a strange kind of Self-contradiction would it be, if those that
profes they love and honor them both, and do it indeed, so really and
cordially, that they would not spare their estates to do them good, nor fear to
adventure both limbs and lives in their defense, should yet in the course of
their conversations fight against them, by obstinately disobeying their holy,
just, and good Commandments, and not theirs alone but Gods also? Out of
question, an Orthodox Libertine, a Schismatical Saint, an holy heretic, a
covetous conformist, a proud Prelatist, a riotous Royalist, are all of them
equally contradictions in adjecto, and each of them as odious in the sight of
God and of all good men, as any of the rest: what ever success they may have
for a time, at last they will find that prediction of our Savior true, Every
plant that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted out. Mat. 15.13.
And that censure of St. Paul will one day fall heavily upon them all, Therefore
thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge: for wherein thou
judge another thou condemnest thyself: for thou that judge, do the same
things, Romans 2.1. When Jerusalem had grievously sinned, Lam. 1.8. God in the
indignation of his anger despised the King and the Priest, Lam. 2.6. Nor is it
only violent resisting the power of Governors, but obstinate disobeying their
authority also, that tends to the depriving their people of them; and may be,
if not the means whereby, yet the meritorious cause for which God may be
provoked so to punish them, subjects sometimes may say of their Sovereign, as
the Prophet Isaiah does of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, though not in the
same sense, Is. 53.5, 6. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
man to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Great
need we have all therefore to take heed, that none of us presume to keep a
course in any sin, for fear lest by that we should, though but unwittingly
against our wills, take part with our professed enemies, Rebels and Traitors,
to deprive both our selves and others of that happiness, which we might all
enjoy in the prosperity and peaceable government of those higher powers which
would be the ministers of God to us for good, if we did well; to whom we must
be subject, not for wrath, but for conscience sake; and for whom we are
exhorted by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. first of all to make supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: which then only we can hope to
do, when (as the same Apostle beseeches the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.1, etc.) we walk
worthy of the vocation, wherewith we are called, with all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love: and endeavoring
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. When we are no more
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive;
but speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in all things, which is the
head, even Christ: to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. Line 5. read end may, p. 16. l. 9. r. abode. p. 23 l. 3. r. like a.
l. 20. r. concluding. p. 24. l. 20. r. carelessly, l. 21. r. shall find, p. 27.
for Paul r. John, p. 33. l. 15. r. the same, p. 35. l. 4. r. fifth. p. 39. l.
15. r. as is, p. 58. l. 26. r. therefore, p. 65. l. 23. r. former, p. 73. l.
20. r. David's. p. 86. l. 16 r. to take, p. 87. l. 4. r. your. p. 88. l. 6. r.
Thesi. p. 90. l 20. r. to take. p. 101. l. 8. r. nor. p. 110. l. 23. r. Lam.
4.12. p. 111. l. 4. r. to be. p. 113. l. 12. r. yea though p. 116. l. 6. r.
John. 18.11. p. 117. l. 20. r. could. p. 119. l. 18. r. may be.


