THE Bank of England, And their Present Method of Paying, Defended from the
ASPERSIONS Cast on them in a late Book, ENTITLED, A Review of the Universal
Remedy for all Diseases incident to Coin. With Application to our present
Circumstances. In a Letter to Mr. Lock.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal
Exchange, in Cornhil, 1697.

Price Three Pence.

THE BANK of England, AND THEIR Method of Paying Defended, etc.
SIR,
THE Defense of the Bank of England, and their Present Method of Payment, will,
I fear, seem at present so great a Paradox to the generality of people, that
one might very well take a fair Excuse from thence to save ones self the
labor: But my sentiments of their Management being directly contrary to those
of the Town, which I find collected with a great deal of Prejudice against them
by the Author of the Book which I received from you; I shall make the less
difficulty, in answer to your desire, to send you my thoughts of their
Complaints and his Performance, with Respect to the Bank, without farther
Apology.

The Design of the Author seems, in short, (for I must ask his pardon if I
forbear to transcribe the length of his Expressions) to prescribe a Remedy for
the present obstruction, and interrupted Currency of our Coin. In order to
which, he sets himself to prove, That there is now in the Kingdom Good Money
sufficient, and more than sufficient to answer our Expenses, Commerce, Markets;
and, in fine, to make us all easy in all our occasions. And here very much
offers itself to be disputed, even upon his own Computation: But for quietness
sake, and that we may proceed, I shall at present suppose with our Author that
this is true.

Well, how comes it then that we are in this Lamentable Condition, this Woeful
Plight, that is the occasion of such Tragical Exclamation? Why these are the
Reasons, says our Author, First, the Dilatory Payment of Notes by Goldsmiths,
and others; and at last, for the greater respect, of Bank Notes. This he
insinuates only as yet, the violent and great Charge is reserved till after.
Secondly, The hoarding of the Weighty Money and Guinea's, in expectation that
they will be raised the next Parliament. Thirdly, The hoarding of Money
designedly to keep up, and to take advantage of its scarcity. Fourthly and
lastly, Having discharged the last Relicts of Veneration, which it seems he had
been some time troubled with for the Bank of England, he lays it once more upon
them, and indeed the endeavor to cast and fix the Blame upon them chiefly,
after all his wandering and smooth Pretenses, seems to be the great End, and
main Design of his long Letter.

These being the Causes which our Author has laid down for the Reasons of the
Present Scarcity of Money, I shall go on to give you my Remarks on them as
briefly as possible.

The slow Payment of Notes by Goldsmiths and others, must needs be confessed to
be a great hindrance to the free Currency of Money: But that it ought to be
attributed wholly or generally to their ill Management and dishonest Practices,
as our Author would most charitably persuade us, I can by no means consent to;
and shall take occasion to speak farther to, when I consider the Reasons for
the slow Payment at the Bank of England.

The Hoarding of Guinea's and Weighty Money, in expectation of their being
raised the next Parliament, is undoubtedly another Obstacle to the Circulation
of the Coin: And whoever does so, it must be acknowledged that their
Expectations are both very unreasonable, and extremely prejudicial to the
Interest of the Nation; for which reason I shall freely turn them over to be
Disciplined for their ill aimed Obstinacy by our Author.

And pass to the other sort of Hoarders which he mentions: Such as hoard to
take Advantage of the Scarcity, which they themselves occasion; and these are
the men indeed for whom no terms are too disgraceful. Had our Author, instead
of the Bank, discharged his Spleen against these unnatural Misers, he could
scarce have said too much against them, at least I should never have
interrupted his Declamation.

And thus at length we come to consider the force of his Charge against the
Bank, and to examine the Justice of those Imputations, which he so harshly lays
upon them; That the slow Payment of their Bills, is the chief reason for the
present Hardship of the Money.

And here I shall without scruple confess, that the ready Payment of their
Bills would be a great help to the free Passage of the Money. But this is not
the Case: The Question is, Whether they have Money; I mean such as will give
satisfaction? Will those who so impatiently demand Payment, be satisfied to
take it, in the same sort of Money, which their Bills were given for? the
greatest Part it is well known having been, taken in, either in Clipped Money, or
Gold at an overvalue: I know this cannot but be a very Offensive Question to
these very hearty People; now that the Coin is in so much better condition but
if they will be pleased to consider, if they have not yet absolutely resolved
to be deaf even to Truth and Reason, if they appear in favor of the Bank. I
say, if they will yet reflect calmly upon this Matter, they will soon find,
that it is to this very Alteration of the Coin, and not to any Mismanagement of
the Directors, that their present Slow Payment i^ owing, and by Consequence
that they are as far from Dishonesty in their present acting, as our Author is
from Truth and good Manners, in his false and groundless Aspersing of them.

However, let us trace this a little further, for the sake of some People.

It is well known, that just before the calling in of the old, adulterated,
diminished Coin, the Bank had a very great number of Bills and Notes out
against them, all which were readily answered in the Coin, to which they
referred, the then current Coin of the Nation, and which before the Parliament
began to take the Cure of the Money into their Consideration, was as readily
accepted by those who demanded Payment of them. Thus far then the Bank was
honest, as honest as any that made Payments in the Kingdom. How came they then
to alter their Method? How came they that were bu^ just now so honest and so
punctual, to be forced to hazard their Reputation, their most advantageous
Bottom; and expose themselves to these heavy Censures? Why this our Author, out
of his profound Respect for so Considerable a Body, cannot attribute to any
thing but either their Mismanagement, or their Impotency, the effect of their
Mismanagement; which he has very wisely noted to be the same thing. And upon
this Chapter it is that our Author treats them without Mercy, though not
without good Counsel, which hie is very full of: First gives them a stroke or
two by way of Preparation, then reads them a Lecture of Morality, with an O
Tempora, O Mores! Laces them, half Latin, half English; Lucri honus est Odor. O
detestable! bids them sell all they have, throw the Helve after the Harchet,
Plate, Tallies, Bonds, Lands, any thing, every thing; rather than suffer this
Dunning at their Door: and if they will do this, then all will be well. But if
not, nay, if they do but entreat, tho in a manner never so languishing, for
some Forbearance, some little Pity, this brings him upon them ten times more
furious than before. O Vipers! Work Gentlemen, do as I bid you, or else you
must expect no favor. And thus having reduced them to the lowest estate of
wretched Mortals, given them some good advice, as proper to restore them as to
cure the Toothache, he leaves them to comfort themselves, with Ends of
Philosophy, and Scraps of Poetry.

But after all this, if our Angry Author will yet hearken, if a word or two may
yet lay hold of him; Is he really in earnest in this matter, or has he only
chose it as a fit subject to exercise his Talent on? Had his pretended Respect
for the Bank, or but some Members of it been real, he might sure have found out
some way to have determined this concern something more in their favor. I say,
I cannot imagine but he might have found some appearance of Reason in a Case so
plain, to have helped them with on this occasion.

For my part, this I am confident of, that if he had made but any Enquiry, if
he had asked any but their Mistaken, or their Malicious Enemies, the Reason of
this faultering, as he terms it, in their Payments, they must needs have
referred it to the Regulation of the Coin, and the Method which has been taken
to make good its Deficiency.

When a stop was put to the Currency of the old Money, and those who had
accepted it but just before, refused to take it any longer; what could the Bank
do on this Occasion? They had no other way but to stand still till the Business
was determined, and when all other ways of disposing of the Money they had by
them, except to vast loss, was shut up, but that of throwing it into the
Exchequer, I cannot for my life imagine how they could have excused themselves,
if they had not, with the whole Kingdom, made use of the Opportunity. From
which it evidently appears, that it was Necessity and the public Good, and not
any private advantage that obliged them to throw their Money by way of Loan
into the Kings hands.

But let us follow this yet a little further, for the sake of our Author, who
seems as if he winked hard on purpose to mistake in this matter. The small
Money being thus forced into the Exchequer, what could be expected of the Bank,
till they were supplied from thence again, they could not make Brick without
Straw, to pay new Money while they had it not was impossible; from whence too
it easily follows, that when they should have it, they were obliged both in
Wisdom and Justice to order their Payments according to their Receipts of it,
which is by Parcels and by Time, so that every one might have a little; and
that is, in plain terms, to act as they do, since they can do no better. Had
our Author considered this, as I am sure he ought to have done, he might easily
have seen, that it is the Hardship of the Time and the unavoidable consequence
of the reinstating of the Coin that occasions this Difficulty, and not any ill
Design of the Bank or the Goldsmiths, as was said: I am sure his not
considering of it gives too great an occasion to question either his
Understanding or his Sincerity.

And now, Sir, if you have yet any doubt of the partiality, to say no worse of
this Writer, I desire you would look over the Apology, which he says they are
so ready to make for themselves on this occasion, p. 32. of his Book, and
observe how disingenuously he passes it over without an answer, instead of
which he only directs them, as if their Fortunes were at his disposal, to sell
all they have, that so they might increase the public hardship with their
particular Ruin.

Oh, but says he again, if they had called in their 40 per cent. upon the first
sense of their Distress, that would have saved their Credit and kept them in
Reputation. But can he believe himself, when he reflects once more upon this
Proposal? Can he think the calling in of 480000 Pounds in Bills only from one
part of them, would have satisfied the other that demanded to be paid in Money;
the bare Proposal of this Chimera is Answer enough to it, without giving it any
further consideration.

Page 56. But let them call in the 40 per cent. now says our Author, retaining
the 20 per cent. which they have borrowed upon courtesy. And what then* Why
then, says he, having given such a Pledge to the worl^ of their Integrity,
every Body will return to them, and throw their Money into their Hands again,
as they did at the beginning; and here indeed the Author has at last found the
true way to oblige his Friends the Members of the Bank, and to bind them to him
for ever. But suppose if the Bank should do this, yet People should not bring
their Money so fast to them as he promises, but notwithstanding this great
Pledge, should rather choose to keep it themselves to answer their more
pressing, occasions. I say what would our Author say to this, what Recompense
could he make these Friends of his, after they had so straightened themselves to
no purpose to oblige others. Why it may be, good man, he would hold up his
Hands, exclaim upon their Ingratitude, and then send 'em to the very Beasts for
more humane Examples.

Page 58 he sets them to cast up their accounts, and to consider their affairs,
as if they had been hitherto as unthinking and as wild as Epicurus his Atoms;
and then if they cannot pay ready money to allow interest for Forbearance; in
which our Author discovers himself extremely ignorant in the Business he
pretends to, for had he taken never so little pains he might soon have learned,
that whoever has Notes to the value of 100 Pounds, may when he pleases
exchange them for Interest Bills; but I perceive he is resolved to order this
matter according to his own fancy, tho it sets him never so much beside the
Cushion.

But his most endearing kindness for the Bank, as well as the great expedient
for the restoration of the Money comes at last, all his other laid aside, and
that is the total decrying of the Bank, and that they shall pay nothing at all
but Interest; and this he thinks would set us all upon our Legs again. But how
in the name of Goodness can this be, does their paying some money, make greater
scarcity than if they paid none, will they who think it so hard to receive but
a little now, be indeed better satisfied to receive none at all. Impotent
Director!

But, says he, if their Bills or Notes, which is the same with him, had no
currency, then it must be Money; but what can he mean by their having no
currency. However, they are ordered still, those that own them, will have the
propriety, and by consequence a right to the disposal of them, under what form
soever they are considered. For my part, except they could pay more money, I
don't know how they can act better than they do at present, and I think it need
not be suspected, but that they will pay more as soon as they are able, least
of all that they designedly keep up a scarcity which they themselves are such
great sufferers by: In the mean time they must have patience, the best Remedy
for us all, till Time, the further consideration of the Parliament, and the
Success of the Public Affairs, bring this great Concern to an issue, which
that it may be honorable and happy, is the hearty desire of

SIR, Your Servant, P. H.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns inCornhill, near the Royal
Exchange.
THe Duties of the Closet: Being an earnest exhortation to private Devotion. By
a Divine of the Church of England. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. Conversation in
Heaven: In two parts. Part the first, being Devotions consisting of Meditations
and Prayers o^ several considerable Subjects in Practical Divinity. Written for
the raising the decayed Spirit of Piety. Part the second, being Sacramental
Devotions, consisting of Meditations and Prayers preparatory unto a worrby
Receiving of the Holy Communion: As also Meditations, and Prayers suited to
every part of Administering and Receiving it. By the Reverend Dr. Lawrence
Smith, Rector of South Warn^orough in Hampshire. The Second Edition. Price
bound 3 s. A short discourse on the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Wherein
its Primitive Practice, with the reasons of its disuse and ^eglect are fully
set forth. What are meant ^y eating and drinking Unworthily, and ^aating and
drinking our own Damnation, are made plain to the meanest Capacit^ Also all the
most material Scruples an^ Objections, commonly urged for not R^ceiving the
Blessed Sacrament are fully a^swered. To which, are added a serio^^ Exhortation
with directions and forms o^ Prayer for the Receiving of the Lords Supper. By
John Shank late Lecturer of St. Ma^^ Magdalen Bermondsey. The second Editio^
Price 1 s. Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven A Sermon Preached before
the Queen (...) Whitehall, Oct. 12th. 1690. By William ^^veridge D. D. Rector
of St. Peter's Cornhi^^ The second Edition. Price 6 d. A Sermon at the Funeral
of the Revere^^ Mr. Thomas Gray, late Vicar of Dedham ^^ Essex, preached in the
Parish Church (...) Dedham, Feb. 2d, 1692. With a short ^^count of his Life. By
Joseph Powel, A. (...) Rector of St. Mary on the Wall, in Colch^^^^^ Price 6 d.
The death of Good Josiah lamented. (...) Sermon occasioned by the Death of our
(...) most Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary, (...) ever Blessed Memory. Preached
at Bal^ in Cambridge-shire, March 3d, 1695. Jofeph Powel. M. A. Rector of
Balsham Cambridge-shire. Price 6 d. Religion the only Happiness. A Po^^ In a
Letter to a Friend. Price 6 d.

