Gods Mercy and Justice Displayed, IN THE WICKED LIFE AND PENITENTIAL DEATH OF
DOROTHY LILLINGSTONE, Executed the 7. of April, 1679. at Kennington, for
Murdering her Bastard-Childe.

Published at Her Earnest Request.

With Allowance.

London, Printed by J. Bennet, for R. Miller. 1679.

The Life and Death of Dorothy Lillingstone.
I Acknowledge it a mercy beyond my expectation or desert, that the Almighty
should please to spare me this time and opportunity, to make my peace with him,
who by my repeated Impieties I have so often and hainously offended, as
likewise to confess my crimes to others, thereby to deter and warn all from
treading in those paths that have brought me into the condition I am now
miserably groaning under; the latter of which works, as it may conduce in some
measure to accomplish the former, is the intent of the ensuing lines; wherein
to pretermit all matters unnecessary, I shall in the first place give the world
some account of my former ill-led life, and the crime for which I stand under
sentence of Death: and in the next, my present sense of the state and condition
I am in: As to the first of which, I am to acquaint you, That I was born in
Oxfordshire, and received my Education under godly and religious parents, whose
names in respect to the reverence I owe to their memory, I shall in this place
spare; with them till the age of thirteen years I lived, in which space (the
most innocent part of my life, I can reflect upon) I began to find the
sprouting of those Sins which afterward in my life and future conversation,
did grow to greater maturity, and bore the bitter fruits of my present
sufferings: The first of which that came under my observation, and now sticks
hard upon my conscience, was disobedience to my parents, in those instructions
and commands their love and my interest put them upon laying before me, (to
wit) the service of that God, to whom my being and well-being was indebted, but
careless of those instructions, and my own good, I trampled upon their advice,
and like the Swine disregarded the pearl, not knowing the value of it, and
wallowed in the mire and dirt of my own evil heart and affections, forsaking my
Duties to God both in private and public prayer, reading, and hearing, with
other duties of his worship, which was the first cause that provoked God to
leave me to my self, and so consequently to all the evils I have since fell
into: in the consideration of which my conscience flies in my face, and
upbraids me with this great truth, that the breach was not on Gods part but
mine, for if I had continued in those ways and courses, my parents by the
inculcation of Scripture had taught me, and not trusted to my self or my own
manadgery, God would never have forsaken me, nor permitted me to fall into
those inconveniences I now sink under the weight of. I left my parents about
the age of thirteen, and betook my self to a service in Becconsfield in the
County of Bucks, where growing in years I grew in sin, and day by day added
guilt to guilt; to my former disobedience of my parents and neglect of God I
now joined lust and pride, those two reigning and destructive sins, the root
and beginning of all my future failings; to which as to the head spring I owe
all the motions and gradations I have made hellwards; the strength of which two
sins, especially that of my lust, the Devil that great deluder of souls made
the bait of his temptations to ensnare and keep me in the net of his
Jurisdiction, wherein I then commenced and have ever since continued a slave.
How great the power of this sin is when once it has made an inroad upon
Chastity the bulwark against it, those only know who feel the powerful
operations thereof in themselves, or behold it in the sad instances and
effectives of its strength in others: from Becconsfield I removed to Wattleton
in the same County to another service which happened in a public house, in
which place being not fifteen years of age, I made my self a prostitute to
those lusts I had before that time only approved of, and was delighted with in
the revolution of my thoughts; the remembrance of which sin (at that time a
most sweet and delicious morsel to my palate) is now the bitter ingredient of my
misery: It is now I see how deceitfully fair were all those false apples of
Sodom, my former pleasures: Rottenness was lodged in the core, pollution in the
touch, and destruction in the taste thereof. From Wattleton I removed for
London, but though I changed my residence, my heart was not changed, and I
still continued in those courses, the suggestions thereof and my own impure
affections led me to, and grew more hardy and bold in my crimes; Sins I
formerly trembled at the commitment of, I could now meet without the least
reluctance or tremulation, swallowing greedily my own poison, esteeming it my
pleasantest food and choicest provision, such as wherein neither danger of
surfeiting my soul or destroying my body was ever in the least to be feared:
yet at some time the Devil though his power was sovereign in me, could not
stop the mouth of that rebel to him my conscience, but it would tell me how
great a criminal I was to my self, and slave to an unjust master in the courses
I prosecuted: this in the heat and vigor of my enjoyments would sometimes
quell and damp them; but like a sickly Qualm, the health of my pleasure would
quickly rid my stomach thereof; the Devil turning Physician (as at such times
he was always readiest to do) and administering a pill or dose of false comfort,
to relieve me. From London I returned to my parents in Oxfordshire, where after
some short stay with them, I removed to Chesham, little delighting in the
company of those whereby I might have been benifited in relation to my soul,
knowing that that would put me upon bridling my lust, too great a self-denial
to be thought on with patience: At Chesham I alighted into a Family where I
lived about two years, one year and three quarters of which I lived in the
constant commitment of whoredom with my Master, who was at that time a married
man, and by him I had a Child which is yet living, to bring which into the
world, and to cover that sin I had committed, I was removed for London, where
after some short time being delivered of the burden of my sin and shame, and
the issue thereof provided for, I went in the quality of a wet-Nurse into a
very honest and Religious Family in Roderith, where I might if my own evil
heart had not been foolish and desperately wicked, been warned both by their
example and precept to other courses then I did then or since follow; but when
once God gives up a person or people to a reprobate sense and state, neither
examples can allure nor precepts oblige them to what may be for their own
benefit; so besotted and foolish a creature is man in that state, that though
he knows his own good, yet he either neglects or disowns it as a trifle, nay,
many times esteems it as an injury to be put in mind thereof. From Roderith I
removed into Frogmorton-street, where likewise in a very honest Family I was
well placed, wherein I observe the goodness of God in affording me those means
of return to himself which my own evil heart at all times eschewed; and how
well might it now have been with me had God given me grace to have followed the
counsel and advice of the Mistress in whose service I then lived; how many
harsh reflections of a guilty conscience, how many besmeared cheeks and swollen
eyes, and above all how many sins, besides this for which I must go hence and
be seen no more, might have been spared thereby? In this service though often
warned against it I became acquainted with a person (whose Name though I might
have cause, yet having forgiven all the world, I shall not mention) who did
prevail upon me to the committing of that crime, the issue whereof has justly
contracted my days; by him I found my self with child, and upon some
difference thereabouts with my aforesaid Mistress, I parted thence, and went
to live in a very reputable Family within the County of Surrey, where I saw the
Service of God duly and faithfully administered, and every minute met with
those examples of good and religious living, that had I not been hardened to the
highest degree, I should certainly have taken notice of it: But so strong was
the infatuation of the devil upon me at that time, that I grew hardened under
the means of mercy, and the more God extended his kindeness to me, the less
good was wrought on me thereby; the sunbeams of his mercy shone upon my clay'y
heart only to its hardening, whilst the hearts of others were melted like wax
into a through-obedience of those commands I trampled upon and spurned at: In
this condition the devil had brought me and kept me, the issue of my body still
growing more mature, and I senceless of my own folly, more regarding the shame
of the matter toward me, and amongst my acquaintance, then the crime I had
committed against the great God of heaven and earth, whose holy commands I had
so repeatedly violated: The time of my delivery growing nearer each day then
other, I had several thoughts of providing for the infant, and accordingly had
taken a room, but the temptations of the devil overpowered all good resolutions
in me, and when the hour of bringing forth approached, leaving the principles
of Christianity, and laying aside the bowels and tenderness of a Mother,
forgetting the laws of God and nature, and disregarding the checks of my own
conscience, I basely and inhumanly strangled the issue of my womb, and strove
to conceal as well the sin as shame of this horrid Murder from the eyes of the
world, by hiding the infant in my Trunk, so great, so crying a sin, that were
the blood of Christ, or the mercy of God of less value then it is, I should
utterly despair of ever obtaining a pardon therefore. Lord! what a wretched
creature is man divested of thy grace! how are all those noble faculties
wherewith thou did at first endow him, disfigured? his highest wisdom
perfect madness, his greatest mercy extremest cruelty, all his actions,
foolish and besottedly ignorant; the Devils engine to ruin and destroy as
well his own as others souls: even such a creature Lord am I; and can I ever
hope to see thy face? can thy holiness admit so vile and impure a wretch as my
self to be in thy presence? I that have so often affronted thy Majesty,
trampled upon thy honor, abused thy mercy; I that am a Whore, a Murderer, a
Liar, the very worst of thy creation, can I ever expect thy mercy? The Laws of
men have left no Asylum for me to fly to, and will thou, oh Lord, tender thy
bosom to receive and preserve me? infinite is thy mercy and thy sons
intercession, therefore will I not despair. This crime thus committed, Justice
has overtaken me for, and before an earthly Tribunal; I have received a most
just sentence therefore, and am now under the daily expectation of taking my
last farewell of the world, and shaking hands with all the follies and troubles
thereof, which leads me to the second thing premised, viz. an account of my
present thoughts in relation to the condition my sins have reduced me to; the
which to methodize, for the benefit of others, though it is my earnest desire,
yet am I sensible the task is difficult, considering the confusions and
disturbances thereof, the many mixtures of fears and hopes arising from the
different considerations of my former miscariages and present but imperfect
assurances; wherefore I shall first of all in general lay before you a draft,
though but an imperfect one, of my said thoughts upon my first conviction, and
then proceed to show you, how God has pleased to work upon me in order to the
settlement of those confusions I was then disturbed with: wherefore in the
first place, no sooner had I received sentence of Death from an Earthly throne,
but it put me in mind of that sentence I was shortly to receive in the highest
Heavens from that God, and for those crimes, whereby during all my life I had
so highly provoked his anger and vengeance against me; which consideration
filled me with terrors of the Almighty, and made me cry out under the weight of
my burden, that it was greater then I could bear: Hellfire flasht in my face,
and the devil who formerly hurried me presumtuously to persist in my impieties,
now turned the drift of his temtations to force me to despair, making use of
the memory of my former crimes, in all the black aggravations thereof to
inhance my infidelities, terrifying me with the justice of God, who before he
had represented as a merciful father, ready and easy to forgive his failing
children, he now shapes as an angry Judge bound to condemn offenders: In this
condition never was misery greater then the thoughts of that chance I was and
am shortly to make; neither ever had any creature a more perfect portraiture of
the ugliness of sin then at this time I met with: Imagine but then how little
pleasure, or rather how great was my torture in the revolutions of the idle
expense of my former hours and days, of my former pleasant and as I then
thought innocent pastimes: These were my torment, but how much more, how
exceedingly and inconceiveably greater was the thoughts of my disobedience to
my parents, my neglect of God in all the duties of his worship, my excessive
pride, my repeated and continued whoredoms, and above all my unnatural
destruction of the offspring of my own body: These were as mountains of Lead
under which helpless and hopeless I lay overwhelmed; my comfort came slowly
upon me, and though sometimes a Beam of hope would shine in upon my soul from
the consideration of the merits and blood of Christ (my dear Lord and Savior)
yet the same was imediately clouded by the revolution of the thoughts premised,
and now it was I found how hard the work of repentance, (let the world pass
what sentiments they please thereon) was to bring about, how many were the
conflicts with the flesh and the Devil that I grapled with, how many bitter
sighs and groans, how many fears and terrors was I wrapped up in ere I could
bring my self to a serious and hearty repentance for my past crimes? It is
true, the condition I was in, under a sentence of Death, made me sorry, that I
had committed the offense that had brought me thereto, yet the fear of death
more then the greatness of the crime against God was the cause of that sorrow,
and had not that sentence been past upon me, I fear my heart would never have
been affected with that sorrow: Whence I would beg and request of all to whom
these lines shall come, that they take it as the advice of a dying woman, who
being nearer, can see further into the things of another world, then those who
stand at a distance thence, that they would not deferr the great work of
repentance, till they come within prospect of eternity, which every day brings
them nearer to then other. Thus much in general; I shall descend to
particulars, in showing you, how God has pleased to work upon me in order to
the settlement of my thoughts under these confusions I was at present under,
wherein notwithstanding all those suggestions the Devil and my own evil heart
did terrify me with, I have found that God is a merciful father to repentant
and returning sinners though just against obstinate offenders: To his free
grace in Christ Jesus my Lord I attribute all the comfort I have and must
receive, here and hereafter: Wherefore in the first place I shall show you,
that God has been pleased by a graciously powerful hand to work upon me, in
turning me to a perfect detestation of my sins, more in that they are and have
been an affront to his Majesty, then the Cause of that temporal Death I am to
suffer therefore. To make out this, I am to acquaint you, that having received
my Sentence on Thursday night, I continued in great confusions as aforesaid for
two or three days, and though a good Friend who tarried most part of the time
with me, assisted me with his advice and prayers, yet could I not bring my self
to so settled a temper, but that my fears clouded my hopes, and deprived me of
those comforts, which otherwise and under other Considerations I might have
received, the devil being all this time busy in stirring that mud, my own evil
heart had too readily raised. On the Monday following I was visited by a
Minister of worth within the City of London, who after several questions by him
propounded, and threats of the Law against such criminals as my self were laid
open, I began to see my transgressions, without that vizard the Tempter had
generally masked them with; the uncomely shape whereof, did administer that
amazement to me, which was the first step of that abhorrency I have since
conceived against them, and no wonder that poor creatures are so much deceived,
in their opinion of sin, considering the specious advantage under which a
representation by that evil one is made thereof: the which till the purblinde
eyes of man come to the nearest view thereof (to wit,) in a punishment
therefore, or by Gods special grace, he can never discern it in its true
proportion or color, but continues under a fancied deceit, that there is in
sin somewhat exceedingly amiable, profitable, or reputable amongst men, without
which he could never live under that enjoyment of happiness and content, as the
same would at all times afford him: Thus (with many thousands in the like case
with me) I was always deluded, and on this account did I run on in those sinful
courses whose end is a scertain'd destruction, as I to my cost have found it;
but the time is now come, that the vail is drawn aside, and I begin to consider
the inside and bottom of those crimes which before that time lay covered under
a specious and fair superficies: and thereby came to a discovery of what before
I never did really possess my self with: I now considered every sin a breach of
Gods Law, and a provocation of that vengeance that might every moment have
spurned me into an abyss of misery, and turned me out amongst those who are
weeping, wailing, and gnashing their teeth, in the pit of perdition, from
whence to the throne of grace and mercy no appeal can be: and that it was the
exceeding patience and forbearance of God that he had spared so vile, so impure
a wretch as my self, so long under such continued and repeated impieties, to
violate his laws, and contemn his most Sacred and august authority: which
considerations, as they raised my detestation and hatred against sin, so did
they inhance the value and price of Gods mercy, the two first stones to that
great work of conversion, which I hope God has in me the unworthyest subject of
his choice in some measure graciously effected, as arguments of which my own
heart gives me these five evidences, which laid together confirm the same to my
comfort.

1. That under the sense of my Sin, I confess and acknowledge my self
deservedly a condemned creature, unless the application of the blood of Christ
my Savior and his intercession, at the throne of grace, joining with the free
love of God, shall repeal the sentence against me.

2. I do thoroughly and from my heart detest and abhor sin in general, and
should God please to lengthen out my days, I should continue my resolutions of
a through repentance and reformation of life, forsaking all courses contrary to
Gods holy word and Law.

3. I find in my Spirit a delight in reading and prayer, things I formerly
omitted and eschewed.

4. A fiduciary expectation of forgiveness from God, of all past crimes,
through Jesus Christ, freely relying and reposing my self on him for Salvation.

5. I do freely and from my heart forgive all the world, and bear to none the
least ill will.

Which considerations, are the ground of that hope, that balmes my wounded
heart, and cordialls my decaying spirits, under the great change I am so
shortly to make: To discourse of which is the next, and last thing I have to
say, and would to God I could now lay by all the cloggs of flesh, and earth,
and mount up upon the wings of faith, into such a state as the Apostle was when
he desired to be dissolved, and be with Christ; but alas! how many
difficulties, am I now to graple with, what Mountains of opposition stand in my
way, too high and great, to travel over: before me I see a fair Heaven,
inviting and alluring the aspect to an enjoyment thereof, but distant from my
Eye, by depth seemingly stormy and impassible, into which I am fearful and
loath to lanch, fearing the weight of my sins, should sink me, ere I could
compass the other shore: I look back, and see my former habitations in the
flesh, which knowledge and custom had rendered pleasant to me, ruined and
destroyed, nothing commendable in it for my stay, or entertainment: my
familiars forgetting despising, and forsaking me, under disgrace with all,
through my own crime and folly, and a Judicial necessity upon me, to speed my
way; in this case, perplexed, comfort flys me on all sides, if I look, down I
am startled at my own ill representations and shadow; to Heaven therefore is my
best and last refuge, whether when I extend my Eyes, my soul breaths our, in
desires to this or the like effect. (Lord thou know my past frailties and
present perplexities, be thou my streersman to guide me, through this Sea of
tears to thy self, without thee and thy assistance, I should immediately split
upon the Rocks of despair, or sink into the Gulf of infidelity, where I should
ever remain, without hope to bring my Shipwrackt Soul into the Haven of thy
mercy, which stands at all times open for repenting and believing sinners.) To
such breathings of my Soul, God is sometimes pleased to give the answer of his
spirit, in the return of peace, at which time, as the Sun that has long lain
hid in a dark Eclipse, darts forth its refreshing rays, to the comfort of
beholders, so from that black scene of sorrow, under which my breast is
troubled, radiates a joy unspeakable, and so great, that I cannot express it,
but in the blessed effects thereof, which leads me to the despising the world,
in the greatest pleasures of it, and mounts up my Soul so high, above the
nether Sphere, that when I view it, methinks it seems so little and despicable
a spot, what were it to be purchased by the rate, of one of the least crimes I
ever was guilty of, it would be unmercifully over rated; and in this condition,
imagine whether I have any mind or desire, to take up a habitation therein,
and neglect those divine mansions, where cares and troubles, and above all, sin
is a stranger; Mansions where God and Angels inhabit, and enjoy themselves, in
a continued Halelujah and harmony, to which I am a going; it is then I can kiss
the halter that shall strangle me, and the hand that shall dispatch me to these
enjoyments, accounting my self happy in my troubles, and blessed in my miseries:
But thus it fares not at all times with me, but flesh will get the upper hand,
and sometimes drag me down to Earth, and keep me from mounting Heavenward,
which as it is against my peace, so likewise much against my will and prayers
to God, that he would please to prevent it: Thus have I gone through, with what
in the first part of this Discourse was premised, (viz.) an Account of my Life
and crime, for which I received my sentence of Death, as also the sense of my
condition, upon consideration of both: it remains now only upon the whole, That
the Reader would heartily interpret, of what these lines have contained, and
make use of them as a warning, from running on in those ways, the Devil and my
own heart has led me in, whose end will be certainly bitter, to all that
pursue the same; which that the same use may be made thereof, shall be to the
last gasp, the prayer of Dorothy Lillingstone.

A Supplement to the Preceding Discourse.
IT is certainly the highest Judgment, as well as the greatest misery of this
Age, that the frequent and many Examples which every day present themselves, to
the view of the World, should work so little upon the Inhabitants thereof, to
turn them from their evil ways to repentance, and make them forsake those
courses, whose end will be assuredly grievous to them; one main reason whereof
may be this, That so few amongst the many, that are by Gods Justice set forth,
as Examples to others, are regarded as such, but are esteemed as the worst of
creatures, and so not worthy the serious considerations of such, that think
themselves paramount, above the fear or danger of falling into such crimes, as
brought those to their deserved ends; little considering the deceitfullness of
their own hearts, and the pronenesse of every one of us, if once deserted by
God, to fall into the worst of crimes, or else the Example intended by God, is
stiffled by the sufferers silence, or the reputation of Relations, who are not
to expose their friends failings, and disgraceful ends to the World; To
prevent both which false uses of Gods providence, the preceding discourse was
intended and penned, wherein the truth of the Relation commends the same to the
Reader: And I shall say but little Additional thereto, only request that into
whose hands this small Treatise may fall, they would make this treble use of it.

1. To see the deceitfulness of the heart of man.

2. The great mischeifs that arise, from the seemingly little and
inconsiderable beginnings of sin.

3. To take this as an Example, to warn others from trusting to their own
hearts, or venturing upon sin in the least degree thereof, lest thereby they
may be brought to those mischiefs, which be certainly destructive to the
pursuers: This only by the way.

I now proceed, to give an Account of Dorothy Lillingstone, since the end of
her own Narrative: The day before her death, being with her, I made an inquiry
in what condition she found her self; and whether she was settled, and disposed
for the great work she was the next day to go through. To which she answered
me, that it was no easy work to dye, but such wherein the greatest difficulties
imaginable, were to be encountered, and she had upon the first thoughts of the
same so found it, but through the grace of God, she had been so wrought upon,
that she could then easily, and willingly meet and embrace it, in the worst of
its appearances, or words to this effect; after which, upon further discourse,
I inquired upon what grounds she became willing to dye, who had been formerly
so terrified thereat, to which she replied, God had been so merciful to her,
and made her sencible of the greatness of her crimes, whereby she had been
wrought to a real Repentance therefore, and thereby was under the great hopes
of forgiveness, through the blood and merits of Christ, her dearest Lord and
Savior, the which temper of mind, she was further encouraged to, through the
certainty of her Death, which every minute she was put in mind of, by the sight
of her Coffin and shroud, (then being in the Chamber with her;) after which I
began through the great hopes I perceived of her, to give her consolation and
encouragement in her present temper of mind, and assured her, that her sins,
though never so many and great (as she had confessed hers to be) were not
sufficient to stand between God and her happiness; for that Gods Mercy was
infinite, and her iniquities in the highest sum, but finite. I then enquired of
her, how she intended to spend the ensuing night, to which she answered, she
had taken her last farewell of her bed, and did intend to set up in Prayer and
Reading all night; against which, considering her weakness, I dissuaded her,
telling her her strength could not bear it out; to which she suddenly answered,
Persuade me not against it, for I am resolved this night to serve my God,
though in weakness, and I am encouraged to hope he will accept thereof; After
which being about to leave her, she only desired me to provide her a little
Bible (having then only a great one by her) to carry in her hand the next day
to the place of Execution, saying, she would there read a Chapter and a Psalm,
and in a few words give warning to the Spectators of her death, and the causes
of it, and so commend her self and soul to God in prayer. After which I left
her to God: And the next Morning I came to her early, and rejoiced to find her
in a very quiet temper of mind, submitting to the Justice of God in the great
work she was that day to undergo; the which she told me she was encouraged
unto, in that God had pleased to lift up the Light of his Countenance upon her,
and give her some assurance of his love to her (notwithstanding her manifold
crimes) in and through Christ: and that now she could leave the World
willingly, expecting those happinesses in the place whether she was going, that
all the greatnesses and pleasures, could be met with in her abode here, could
never afford her; I then enquired whether according to her former desire this
Manual should be exposed to the World, to which she answe^^d me, she was very
desirous it might, and that I would cause the same to be Printed, saying, she
had spoken to several Ministers therein, who had commended her former
thoughts, in relation thereto, and that her friends did expect it: but above
all, she hoped it might be for the public benefit, to warn others from crimes
that were her destruction, saying, she hoped that her ruin might stand as a
monument of Brass, to give notice to the world, of the evil and pernicious
work of Sin. After which I left her, and met her again at the place of
Execution, where she behaved her self Exemplarily penitent, amongst the number
of those who suffered with her, and were obstinately hardened under the
sentence of Death; at which time she read the 7th. Chapter of Job, and the 51.
Psalm, and addressed her self to God in prayer, desiring the spectators there
present to pray for her, and to take her example as a means to deter them from
the courses that brought her to that deserved and shameful end, which she was
now come at that place and time to accomplish: After which she quietly
surrendered her soul to the Almighty, and her body to Execution; which work
being over, her friends removed her Corpse in a Coach in order to her Burial:
and accordingly was decently interred in in the Parish Church of St. George's
Southwark.

FINIS.

