A SERMON OF THE Transfiguration of our LORD, Preached before the
Queen-Dowager, IN Her Chapel at Somerset House, On the Second Sunday in LENT,
1687/8.

By THOMAS GODDEN, D. D. Preacher in Ordinary to Her MAJESTY.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. MDCLXXXVIII.

A SERMON OF THE Transfiguration of our LORD, Preached on the Second Sunday in
Lent.
Assumit Jesus Petrum and Jacobum and Joannem fratrem ejus, and ducit illos in
Montem excelsum seorsum; and transfiguratus est ante eos, Matthew. 17. 1. Jesus
taking Peter and James and John his brother, leads them into a high Mountain
apart; and was transfigured before them.
IN the last Sundays Gospel, Matthew. 4. 8.
as St. Matthew relates, the Devil took our Savior up into an exceeding high
Mountain, to show him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them: In
this present Gospel our Savior himself leads three of his Disciples into
another high Mountain, to give them a Prospect of the Glory which is prepared
for the Just in Heaven: Opposing Mountain to Mountain, and Glory to Glory; the
Glory of Heaven to that of Earth, to defeat the designs of the Tempter by the
same method he had made use of to overcome. But as the Objects were different,
and the Mountains too; the one deservedly called by Historians, Adrichom.
Mons Satanae, the Devil's Mount, for having been the Theater of his greatest
Temptation; the other by St. 2 Pet. 1. 18.
Peter, Mons Sanctus, the Holy Mount, for the excellent Glory which was
represented on it: so was the manner of ascending them different also. For
whereas the Devil, as St. Matthew says, took our Savior up into an exceeding
high Mountain; that is (according to the Explication best agreeing with the
Context) carried him through the Air (as an Angel had formerly done Habacuch)
without giving him the least trouble or pain to ascend; Dan. 14. 35.
the same St. Matthew tells us, that our Savior did not so with his Disciples,
but that he led them up; duxit illos, that is, went himself before them, and
caused them to follow him, on foot, to give us to understand, that the Way to
Perdition is pleasant and easy; ducunt in bonis dies suos; those who walk in
it, pass their time in mirth and jollity, Job 21. 12. But the Way to true Glory
is hard and difficult; Strait is the Gate and narrow the Way which leads unto
Life, Matthew. 7. 14.

But how strait and narrow, how hard and difficult soever it be, the greatness
of the Reward more than recompenses the Labor of acquiring it, as appears by
what passed with the Disciples of my Text; for being arrived at the top of the
Mountain, our Savior there became transfigured before them, so that the
brightness of his Face vy'd with that of the Sun in his richest Attire of
Light, and the whiteness of his Garments with that of the Snow when arrayed in
its whitest Dress. Which of Us, Dear Christians, had he been present at this
Glorious sight, would not have cried out with St. Peter, Domine, bonum est nos
hic esse; Lord, it is good for us to be here! And who is there of us now, that
is not inflamed with a holy Desire, or, as I may call it, Curiosity, as Moses
was when he beheld the burning Bush, Exodus 3. 3.
to know how it came to pass that the Body of our Savior, which till then had
appeared different in nothing from the Bodies of other Men, should be suddenly
invested with a brightness like that of the Sun; and what End or Design he had
in the doing of it?

To satisfy this twofold demand of how and why he would be thus transfigured,
is what I have designed for the Subject of my present Discourse, and
accordingly shall divide it into Two Parts. In the First I shall give you an
Account (as God shall enable me) of the Mystery it self, that is, how it came
to pass that the Body of our Savior was so transfigured, that it became bright
and shining as the Sun. In the Second, why he would work this wonderful change
in his Face and Garments, and that in the sight of his Disciples: Et
transfiguratus est ante eos; And he was transfigured before them, or in their
sight.

Whilst the Disciples were absorpt with wonder at this Glorious Spectacle, the
Evangelist says, that a bright Cloud over-shadowed them; which Cloud, St.
Augustine says, was a Symbol of the Holy Ghost, in which he appeared (as he
formerly had done in the Figure of a Dove at our Savior's Baptism) to Grace the
Solemnity with his Presence: That the Assistance of this Divine Spirit may not
be wanting, whilst we treat of this Glorious Mystery, let us humbly implore it
by the Intercession of that Sacred Mother, who in the Conception of her Son was
over-shadow'd by the same Divine Spirit.

Ave Maria.
The First Part.
Et transfiguratus est; And he was transfigured.
TO give an Account how the Body of our Savior was so transfigured, as to
become bright and shining as the Sun, it will be necessary to enquire into the
meaning of the word Transfiguration. When we say a thing is disfigured, every
one understands the meaning of it: but if we say a thing is transfigured, the
sense is not so easy and obvious to all, at least to the Unlearned, as not to
require some Explication: Which yet I shall endeavor to manage so, that whilst
I am instructing those of the lowest Form, such as are in a higher Class may
not lose their time; remembering, with the great Apostle, that I am a Debtor to
both; Sapientibus and insipientibus debtor sum.

A thing then is said to be transfigured, according to the proper acceptance
of the word, when its Shape or Figure, not its Essence, is altered, so that it
puts on another appearance, more Noble and Glorious than it had before; for the
Particle trans here signifies an excess, or passing beyond or above what is
commonly and usually found in the Thing. An Example of this we have in a Cloud,
which of it self is nothing but a dark Vapor or Mist exhaled from the Bowels of
the Earth: yet dark and misty as it is, no sooner is it penetrated by the Rays
of the Sun, but presently it becomes bright and shining; and what before seemed
a black Veil, which muffled the Light of that Glorious Planet, having now drank
in his Beams, is transformed into a radiant Mirror, in which he seems to
rejoice to behold himself so gloriously reflected. This change of the Cloud so
much for the better, may fitly be called its Transfiguration; and gives us,
though not a Parallel, yet a glimpse at least of what passed in the
Transfiguration of our Savior; when his Body, till then dark and obscure, like
those of other men, became bright and shining like the Sun.

But now, because this Transfiguration, or change so much for the better, may
proceed from a twofold cause; either from without, as in a Cloud, when
penetrated with the Rays of the Sun; or from within, as when a Globe of
Crystal is enlightened by a burning and shining Lamp set in it: the Question
still remains, Whether this bright Illumination which discovered it self in the
Face and Garments of our Lord, proceeded from some Celestial Splendour without,
like that which appeared to the Shepherds at his Birth; or from some
Intrinsical Principle, or Fountain of Light, which, like the Lamp upon the
Crystal, diffused it self upon his Body?

The Solution of this Question depends upon that generally known Doctrine of
Divines with St. Thomas, 3. P. q. 34. a. 4.
That the Soul of our Redeemer, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union with the
Word, enjoyed the Beatifical Vision, or sight of the Divine Essence, and so was
full of Glory and Brightness from the first instant of his Conception; Ibid. q.
45. a. 2.
And that from hence, as the Stream flows from the Fountain, there ought to
have issued, by a Connatural Emanation, a Communication of proportionable Glory
and Brightness to his Body. For, Ep. 56. ad Dioscorum.
as St. Austin says, Tam potenti Natura Deus fecit animam, ut ex ejus
plenissima Beatitudine redundet etiam in Corpus plenitudo Sanitatis, id est,
incorruptionis vigor: God created the Soul of Man of so powerful a Nature, that
from the fullness of its Bliss there should redound also upon the Body a fullness
of Health, or vigor of Incorruption, under which terms he comprehends all the
four Prerogatives of a Glorified Body, viz. Clarity or Brightness, Agility,
Immortality, and Impassibility. All these Qualities then were due to the Body
of our Savior, as being united to his Glorified Soul, from the first instant of
his Conception. But the end of his coming into the World being to Suffer and
Die for our Salvation, 'twas necessary his Glory should remain shut up within
his Soul, without being communicated to his Body; for had his Body been
glorified as well as his Soul, he had not been in a capacity to suffer for us.
Thus did the desire he had to suffer for us cause him to work a constant and
prodigious Miracle upon Himself, by forcing, as I may say, the Stream of his
Glory, like the Waters of Jordan, to roll it self up, and stand on a heap,
without pouring it self forth upon his Body, which otherwise it would have
done. But now the time being come, in which the Divine Wisdom thought fit, not
so much for His Own sake as for Ours, that his Pure and Innocent Body before it
suffered, should enjoy one Sun-shiny day among so many Cloudy ones: Behold He
opens the Sluice, as I may call it, of that Light and Glory which till then had
been kept shut up within the Floudgates of his Will, and gives it leave to pour
it self forth in a full Stream upon his Body, which presently was so penetrated
and steeped in a glorious Flood of Light, that (as the Text says) his Face
shined like the Sun, and his very Garments became white as Snow.

Thus it was, Dear Christians, that the Body of our Savior became so gloriously
transfigured, not by an Illumination from without, but by an Irradiation from
within; by which it appears to have been not so much the effect of a New
Miracle, as the suspension or discontinuation of a former one. For as in the
Waters of Jordan the Miracle consisted in that they stood on a heap, and not
that they afterward flowed into the Sea, for that was their natural course: so
in the Transfiguration upon Mount Thabor, the Miracle was, that the Stream of
Glory should remain pent up within the Soul of our Redeemer from the first
Instant of his Conception, without any other Bank than that of his own Will,
and not that it poured it self afterward upon his Body, for that was but that
natural consequence of the Glory of his Soul.

And now, Dear Christians, (to make some Application of this to our selves) how
much are we bound to our Dearest Redeemer, both for the One and the Other!
First, that he repressed his Glory, and kept it from communicating it self to
his Body, through the whole course of his Life for the space of three and
thirty years; and then that he let it flow and manifest it self in his
Transfiguration, in the brightness both of his Face and Garments, since both
were done for our sakes! Had he not been pleased once at least to permit that
Flood of Glory, of which his Soul was full, to pour it self forth upon his
Body, happily we had been, if not wholly ignorant, yet not so sensible at least
of his Love and Mercy in miraculously suspending its Emanation all the rest of
his Life, that he might be in a condition to suffer and die for us. And is it
not reason, that now we know it we should both thank him for it, and make it,
in the best manner our condition will permit, the Pattern of our Imitation? Not
that we can transfigure our Bodies as His was; this is a Privilege reserved for
the next Life: but that we may and must prepare and dispose these vile and
mortal Bodies of ours to be configured (as the Apostle says) to the brightness
of his Glorified Body hereafter, Phil. 3. 21.
by repressing within us at present a Flood of another nature, that Flood I
mean of Original Corruption, which we bring with us into the World from our
first Parent Adam. For such is the condition of man since his Fall, that the
Soul is no sooner united to the Body, (which is in the very first Instant of
its Creation) but it contracts the Guilt of Original Sin, and together with it
a strong Propension or Inclination to the Love of it self, and of all those
Objects which are grateful to Flesh and Blood. So that the heart of man is like
a corrupted Fountain, out of which, as our Savior himself has told us, Mat.
15. 19.
proceed evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false
Witness, Blasphemies, and the like. And although the Guilt of Original Sin be
washed away by the Waters of Baptism, yet (as the Council of Trent has
declared) Concupiscence, Sess. 5.
or the Propension to these and the like Vices is permitted to remain even in
the Regenerate, for the Exercise of their Virtue, in withstanding the first
suggestions of sin, so as not to suffer it, Romans 11. 12.
as the same Apostle says, to reign in our mortal Body, in such manner as to
obey it in its inordinate Lusts and Desires.

This is what we obliged our selves to do, in the solemn Promise we made in
Baptism of renouncing the Suggestions of the Devil, the Desires of the Flesh,
and the Pomps and Vanities of the World. And that the doing of this is a
Miracle, and such an one as may and ought to be done by us, Ecclici 31.
the Son of Sirach declares, when speaking of the Just man, whom he calls
Beatus, or Blessed, he lays this down for one of the conditions of his
Beatification, that he has done Miracles in his Life; fecit enim mirabilia in
vita sua: And that we might know what Miracles these were, he presently adds,
Qui potuit transgredi, and non est transgressus; facere mala, and non fecit;
He, says he, is the man that has done Miracles in his Life, who when it was in
his power to transgress, transgressed not; and when he could have done the
evil, to which his corrupt Nature inclined him, withheld himself from
committing it. And for this reason it is, that when our Savior, among other
Signs or Miracles which he foretells should be done by those that believed in
him, puts this for one, Marc. 16.
That if they drink any thing that is deadly, it shall not hurt them: St.
Gregory tells us, St. Greg. Hom. 29. in Evang.
That then it is this Miracle is wrought in a more Sublime, because Spiritual
manner, by the Faithful, when feeling in themselves the venomous suggestions
and persuasions of the Devil, or their own corrupt nature, they are not drawn
by them to commit any thing that is evil. Dum pestiferas suasiones audiunt, sed
tamen ad operationem pravam minime pertrahuntur; mortiferum quidem est quod
bibunt, sed non eis nocebit: In this case, says he, they drink that which
indeed is deadly of its own Nature, but not consenting to it, it shall do them
no harm.

And now, if the repressing the first motions of Sin be so miraculous in
respect of other Vices; how much more in regard of that of Pride, which is the
Source and Spring of all the rest? In Ps. 7.
Whoever has thoroughly considered, says St. Augustine, Quo primo vitio lapsa
est anima, hoc ultimum vincit.
or which is more, experienced in himself the different degrees of difficulty
which occur in the subduing of Vices, knows very well, that the Sin of Pride
and Vainglory is the chief, if not the only one, to which those who have
attani'd to Perfection are obnoxious; and as it was the first which infected
the Soul, so also it is the last that is overcome. From whence St. Peter
Damianus doubted not to affirm, Sermon. 60.
That if so so great a man as Elias could shut his mind from admitting a
thought of Vainglory, Facilius obserare Coelum, quam Animum.
'twas a greater Miracle than the shutting Heaven by his Prayer, that it rained
not for three years and six months together. Jac. 5. 17.


Here then it is, that a Christian truly shows himself to be a Thaumaturgus, or
Worker of Miracles, when finding thoughts of Pride, Envy, Gluttony, Impurity,
Anger, Blasphemy, Revenge, and the like, to arise in his heart, ready like an
impetuous Flood to overflow, by his Reason or Superior Will, assisted with the
Grace of Christ which was given him in Baptism, he forces them back, and will
not suffer them to gain upon his consent, nor to reign in his Mortal Body;
Fecit mirabilia in vita sua; he has done Miracles in his life: And by
depriving himself of those undue delights and satisfactions which are the
natural consequences of Concupiscence, he both prepares and disposes his own
mortal Body to be configured to the Brightness of the Body of his Glorified
Redeemer; and shows his Gratitude to him, for having deprived himself of that
Glory and Brightness which was due, and as such would and ought to have
redounded upon his Body, from the Glory of his Soul, (had he not miraculously
repressed and kept it back) from the first Instant of his Conception to the day
of his Transfiguration. Why he permitted it then to pour it self forth in a
glorious Flood of Light upon his Body and Garments, and that in the presence
and sight of his Disciples, is what I come now to treat of, as the Subject of
the Second Part of my Discourse.

The Second Part.
Transfiguratus est ante eos; He was transfigured before them.
AND why before them, or in their sight, but to excite them more efficaciously
to labor for the obtaining of so Glorious a Reward? To give light to this
Answer, it may not be unuseful to premise, what the Scripture relates to have
passed with the Patriarch Jacob, when his Sons brought him the News of his Son
Joseph's being alive. The Case was this:

Joseph being now Viceroy of Egypt, Genesis 45.
and having made himself known to his Brethren, commanded them to go tell his
Father Jacob of all his Glory, and to bring him along with them into Egypt, to
preserve him from the Famine, which was yet to last five years. To accomplish
this design, he provided them of Carriages, and all things necessary for the
way, adding over and above a Present of the good things of Egypt, which might
serve as an Earnest or Pledge of the Riches of the Place, to excite him to the
Journey. No sooner were they arrived in the presence of their Father, but they
acquainted him with the good News; Joseph, Filius tuus, vivit and dominatur in
universa terra Aegypti; Joseph, that Son of thy Love, whose Absence, not to say
Death, thou have so bitterly lamented for so many years, is yet alive, and is
Governor over all the Land of Egypt, and nothing is wanting to complete his
Happiness, but to have his Father Jacob with him. How may we imagine was the
heart of the Holy Man transported with joy at the hearing of this News? and how
would he give order to get all things ready for the Journey, that he might go
and enjoy the presence of his Beloved Joseph? This indeed might have been
expected; but not a word of any such thing. On the contrary, the Scripture
says, That when Jacob had heard these things, his heart fainted within him; or
(as the Vulgar has it) he remained as a man awaking out of a heavy sleep,
without knowing what to think, for he did not believe them; Quo audito Jacob
quasi de gravi somno evigilans, tamen non credebat eis. What then was to be
done? They give him a more particular account of all the words of Joseph which
he had said to them. And when this availed as little as the former, they showed
him the Wagons and rich Presents which Joseph had sent him; and the Text says,
That when he had seen them, cumque vidisset plaustra and universa quae miserat,
his Spirit revived within him, revixit Spiritus ejus; and, as if he were now no
more the same man, but another, he said, It is enough, I am now convinced that
my Son Joseph is yet living; and so, without regarding either the Feebleness of
his Old Age, or the Difficulties of the Way, he resolved to go and see him
before he died. Behold here, how much more powerfully our Affections are moved
to act by the things we see, than by those we only hear! And can we then
wonder, if our Dearest Redeemer, whose Wisdom suggested, and Goodness prompted
him to make use of the most efficacious means to inflame our Affections with
the Love of Heaven, led the Disciples of my Text up to the top of Mount Thabor,
and was there transfigured before them!

He had often told them of the Glory of Heaven, and proposed it as a Reward to
all those who should deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow him.
He had foretold them also, that himself would rise again the third day, as the
first Fruit of those that slept, and promised that his Followers should shine
like the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Mat. 13. 43.
And what did all this work upon them? If they did not look upon it as a Dream,
they remained at most but as men awakened out of a deep sleep; for St. Luke
says in express terms, that when he spoke to them of his Passion and
Resurrection, Luc. 18. 34.
Ipsi nihil horum intellexerunt; they understood nothing of these things, and
what he said affected them no more than if he had spoken in some unknown
Language; and verbum hoc erat absconditum ab eis. What remedy then to disengage
their Understandings from this stupidity, and engage their Wills to labor
heartily for Heaven? The remedy was, (and blessed be his Goodness in
condescending so graciously to our Weakness) to suffer himself to be
transfigured before them, and by communicating that Glory to his Body, which
hitherto he had kept restrained within his Soul, to give them a sight of that
Glory of which he had so often discoursed to them: And that they might not
doubt but that a participation of the like Glory was designed also for his
Servants and Followers, he caused Moses and Elias to appear in like Majesty and
Brightness with him. The same was also signified in the brightness of his
Garments, which (as St. Thomas observes upon this place) were a Type or Figure
of the Saints; of whom the Prophet Isay says, Isa. 41. 27.
that he shall cloth himself with them as with a Robe of Glory, and wear them
for an Ornament in the day of his Nuptials. From whence the Devout St. Austin,
with his wonted Acuteness, took occasion to apply those words of holy David,
Ps. 147.
He gives his Snow like Wool, (the usual matter of which Garments are made) to
what passed in the Transfiguration of our Lord; Merito fulgebat Vestis Christi
sicut Nix, tanquam de illa lana jam facta erat Tunica.
giving us to understand by his appearing then as it were clothed with Snow,
what kind of Fleece his Garment of Glory was to be made of, that is, of those
who had washed their Stoles in the Blood of the Lamb, S. Aug. in Ps. 147.
and so were become pure and white as Snow; or* as St. Paul expresses it, a
Glorious Church without spot or wrinkle; without spot, as washed white in the
Blood of the Lamb; and without wrinkle, as having been extended with him upon
the Cross.

How much more efficaciously the Affections of the Disciples were inflamed to
action by the sight of so Glorious a Reward, than by what they had only heard
discoursed of it, the Transport of St. Peter, and the have he was then in to
fall to building of Tabernacles, and (when that was not permitted, as being out
of season, because before the time) the Immense Labors both himself and the
rest courageously undertook, and cruel Torments they cheerfully underwent for
the obtaining of it, are too well known to be insisted on. What concerns our
selves, Dear Christian Auditors, is to imitate the Example of those, who (as
the same St. Peter says) have made known unto us the Power and Coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 16.
having been spectators of his Majesty when they were with him in the Holy
Mount, and not to suffer our selves to remain so dull and stupid as not to be
moved with it. When Nehemias had restored the Temple and the Altar, 2 Machab.
1. 22.
he caused the Sacrifices to be sprinkled with a thick Water, which the Priests
had found in a deep and dry Well, where their Ancestors had hid the Holy Fire
when they went into Captivity. The Sun was then in a Cloud; and whilst he
remained so, the Water also remained as before: But as soon as the Sun break
forth out of the Cloud, accensus est ignis magnus, ita ut omnes mirarentur; a
great Fire was presently kindled, to the wonder and astonishment of all that
beheld it. And will it not be a matter of greater Wonder and Astonishment, if
now that the Sun of Justice, after having so long remained under a Cloud, has
displayed the Beams of his Glory, both in his Face and Garments, our hearts
shall still remain like thick Water, that is, cold and earthy, and not be
converted into Fire? The consideration of this made Holy David cry out, Filii
hominem usquequo gravi cord? Ye Sons of men, how long will you suffer your
hearts to lie grovelling upon the Earth? And why will you spend your days in
hunting after the vain and transitory, and therefore false and lying Goods of
this Life, without aspiring to those Eternal, and therefore only true and
substantial Goods, which are prepared for you in Heaven? If a Prize be proposed
to be run for of any considerable Value, how do those who are to run for it
pluck up their Spirits, and abstain from all things, however otherwise pleasing
and dear to them, that may hinder them in the Race? And if they do this to
obtain a corruptible Reward, how much more, as St. Paul presses the Argument, 1
Cor. 9. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 5.
ought we to abstain from all those things that are hurtful, and may hinder us
in our Course to Heaven; since what we contend for, is no less than a Crown of
never-fading Glory? They, when they have done their best, may miss of what they
run for, because many run, but only one can get the Prize: But for the Prize of
Heaven, every one (to use the Apostle's expression) that runs lawfully, that
is, keeping the Commandments of God, (though not with equal Swiftness and
Perfection, for our Savior tells us, that in his Father's House there be many
Mansions) is sure to obtain it.

Alas, Dear Christians! had it been our hard Lot to have been born in some
Barbarous Nation, where there had been no certain Knowledge of the true Reward
of Virtue; or to have been brought up among the Philosophers, of whom St.
Augustine reports, that they had above two hundred different Opinions
concerning the last end or Happiness of man, not knowing which to fix upon, or
to prefix to themselves, as the Prize they were to run for, or the Mark to
which they were to direct the course of their Lives and Actions: some shadow of
excuse might have been pretended by us, why we poured forth our selves upon the
things of this World, and placed our satisfaction in the enjoyment of them. But
now that we both know the Prize that we are to run for, and that if we run
lawfully, that is, observing the prescribed Rule of God's Law, we shall
certainly obtain it; what can we pretend to save our selves from falling under
the Sentence of that Servant, who because he knew the will of his Master, and
did not do it, was deemed worthy not only to be deprived of the Reward, but to
be beaten with many stripes? Let us not deceive our selves, One way or other we
must be finally like to Angels. Mat. 22. 26.
What our Savior said of the Just, that they shall be as the Angels in Heaven,
(and who, says St. Austin, would have believed it, if He had not said it?) is
as true of the Wicked, that they shall be like to the Apostate Angels in Hell.
No medium to be expected; Eternal Happiness must be our Reward, or Eternal
Misery our Doom. This may seem a hard condition to the inordinate Lovers of
this World, and perhaps to some faint-hearted Christians, who could wish to be
in Heaven, so it might cost them nothing: But who ever thought the Children of
Israel were hardly dealt with, because God, after he had led them on dry ground
through the middle of Jordan, let the Waters flow in their ordinary Channel,
and hinder their retiring back, so that they were reduced to a necessity of
being either Conquerors or Slaves? This happy necessity whetted their Courage
to that degree, that in a short time they became Masters of the Earthly Canaan,
which was a Type and Figure of the Heavenly One. And God seems to make use of
the same Stratagem to encourage us to fight for the Glory of Heaven, when
having led us through the Waters of Baptism, he puts us upon a necessity of
making our selves eternally happy, if we will not be eternally miserable.

What then if some difficulties occur in regulating the inordinate desires of
our corrupt Nature to the Law of God? What if it cost some pain and labor to
mortify and repress the absurd and extravagant suggestions of our sensual
appetites? Is there any thing of satisfaction even in this World, (how short
and momentary soever) but costs pain and trouble to obtain it? Does not the
Merchant undertake long Voyages at Sea, and expose his Riches to the danger of
being lost, to augment them? Does not the Soldier undergo the greatest
hardships, and enter the Combat with manifest hazard of his Life, to gain the
empty Honor of a Triumph? Does not the sick person abstain from all things
which the Physician commands him, and swallow many a bitter Potion, to recover
his Health, which may be lost again, as soon as re-established? And if the
transitory things of this World are not attainable without much toil and labor
(which when they are gotten are upon the brink of being lost) can we expect
that Heaven alone should be cast upon us without any pains or labor on our part
to obtain it? Surely nothing can be more unjust, nor more unworthy a Creature
endued with Reason, than this unequal Proceeding. Nor can I imagine any other
cause of it, but the want of true Faith, or a supine neglect to render it
lively by framing a right Judgment of the greatness of the Glory of the next
Life in comparison of this? Did we do this, it were impossible we should not
ardently desire, and heartily labor for it; and instead of repining at the
pains we are to take for it, wonder, as St. Austin did, that so great a Reward
should be exposed for so little Labor. In Ps. 36.
Miraberis tantum dari pro tantillo labor: It were but just, says he, that
Eternal Labor should be exacted of us for the obtaining of Eternal Rest; Pro
aeterna requie, aeternus labor subeundus erat. But because then the Reward
could never be obtained, because the Labor would never be at an end, God has
been so gracious as to order, that it shall not only be temporal, but short.
Non solum temporalem voluit laborem tuum Deus, sed brevem. And I may add, not
only short, but momentary: For if this Globe of Earth on which we live,
compared with the vast Extension of the Heavens, bears no greater a proportion
than that of a Point to the Circumference; what can the few days we have to
live upon this Point, be, in comparison of Eternity, but a Moment? And yet how
much of this Moment do we daily pare off, and squander away upon the Vanities
of the World, as if a whole Moment of Labor were too much for an Eternity of
Glory? Whatever our Conduct has been hitherto, let us not henceforward be so
ungrateful to the Riches of God's Goodness, and so treacherous to our own true
Interest, as not to employ the remainder of it at least in the Duties of a
Pious and Holy Life, for the purchasing of so Great and Glorious a Reward.

To conclude, and sum up in brief what I have discoursed in this Part, that,
like good Seed laid up in your hearts, it may bring forth Fruit with Patience:
God has allotted to man two Lives, the One in this World, short, and subject to
many miseries; the Other Eternal, in the next, and to those who live well free
from all Misery, and replenished with all kind of Goods. This supposed, nothing
can be more evident, than that the latter is infinitely and without comparison
to be preferred before the former. What then can we conclude from these
premises, unless we will renounce our Reason, as well as our Happiness, but a
strong Resolution to set our selves seriously to work, and not suffer any day,
or hour, or moment of our Life to slide away, without making an advance toward
the obtaining of so great a Good? What was represented on Mount Thabor, though
Great and Glorious, as you have heard in the First Part, was but a Glimpse or
Reflection of that Essential Glory, which the Blessed shall enjoy in Heaven. If
then the Labor of acquiring it deters us, let the Greatness of the Reward
invite us; so Great, that St. Paul says, Neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the good things
which God has prepared for those that love him. May his Infinite Mercy bring us
to that happy Station, where we may behold him, as he is, face to face, and see
and enjoy what here we cannot comprehend. In the mean time, let us say from our
hearts with St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 17. To the King of Ages, Immortal, Invisible,
only God, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty for his Household and Chapel: And are to be sold at his
Printing House on the Ditch side in Blackfriars; where all Gentlemen may be
furnished with them at the Prices following.
PRimitive Fathers no Protestants, or a Vindication of Nubes Testium, etc.
Price 6 d.

The Papist Misrepresented and Represented, with a Preface, containing
Reflections upon two Treatises, the one of the State, the other of the View of
the Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer. Price 1 s.

Good Advice to the Pulpits, delivered in a few cautions for the keeping up the
Reputation of those Chairs, and preserving the Nation in Peace. Price 6 d.

A Letter to a Peer of the Church of England clearing a Point, touched in a
Sermon Preached at Chester, before his most Sacred Majesty on the 28th. of
August, in Answer to a Postscript joined unto the Answer to Nubes Testium.
Price 2 d.

A Sermon Preached in the Chapel of his Excellency the Spanish Ambassador, on
the Second Sunday of Advent, 1687. On which was Solemnized the Feast of St.
Francis Xaverius. By the Reverend Father Lewis Sabran, of the Society of Jesus.
Price 6d.

A full Answer to the second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in a Letter to the Defender. Price 2d.

A Letter from the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom, to the Author of the
late Discourse concerning the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Price 1d.

Dr. Sherlock Sifted from his Bran and Chaff, or a certain way of finding the
true Sense of the Scriptures and discovering who are the true living Members of
Christ, in a Dialogue between the Master of the Temple and a Student there.
Price 4d.

A Sermon of the Nativity of our Lord, Preached before their Majesty's at
Whitehal. 1687. By B. Gifford, Doctor of Sorbon, Chaplain in Ordinary, and
Preacher to their Majesty's. Price 6d.

Further Remarks on the Account given by Dr. Tenison of his Conference with Mr.
Pulton, wherein the Doctors three exceptions against Edward Meredith are
examined, several of his other Misrepresentations laid open, Motives of the
said E. M's. Conversion showed, and some other Points relating to Controversy
occasionally treated, together with an Appendix, in which some passages of the
Doctors Book Entitled, Mr. Pulton Considered, are reconsidered, and in the
Clofe the best means of coming to true Faith proposed, to all which is added, a
Postscript in Answer to the Pamphlet put forth by the Schoolmaster of
Long-Acre. 1s. 6d.

A Short and plain Way to the Faith and Church; composed many years since by
that Eminent Divine Mr. Rich. Hudleston of the English Congregation of the
Order of St. Benedict, and now published for the common Good by his Nephew Mr.
Jo. Hudleston of the same Congregation. To which is annexed, His late Majesty
King Charles the II.'s Papers found in his Closet after his Decease. As also a
brief Account of what occurred on his Deathbed in regard to Religion. In
Quarto, Price 6d.

An Answer to D. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery, etc. Price 1d.

A Defense of the Doctrine, and Holy Rites of the Roman Catholic Church, from
the Calumnies, and Cavils of Dr. Burnet's Mystery of Iniquity Vnveiled. Wherein
is showed the Conformity of the present Catholic Church with that of the purest
Times; Pagan Idolatry truly stated; The Imputation of it clearly confuted; And
the Reasons are given why Catholics avoid the Reformation. With a Postscript to
Dr. R. Cudworth. By J. Warner of the Society of Jesus. The Second Edition. In
Octavo, Price 2s.

C. Julii Caesaris quae Extant de Bello Gallico ex emendatione Jos. Scaligeri,
In Octavo, Price Bound. 1s.

D. Joannis Chrysostomi de Sacris precibus, Oration Prima Cum Interpretatione ad
verbum and Grammatica vocum Explanatione. In Greek and Latin. Twelves, Price
Bound 8d.

Aesopi Phrygis Fabularum, jam recenter ex collatione optimorum exemplarium
emendatius excusarum. Pars Prima. In Twelves, Price 2d.

A Pious Exercise of Devotion to the Sacred Passion of our Savior, for
obtaining a happy Death. To be performed every Friday in Their Majesty's
Chapel. Twelves, Price 3d.

The Office of the B. V. Mary in English, with the Vespers or Evensong, in
Latin and English, as it is Sung in the Catholic Church upon all Sundays and
Principal Holy Days, and the Compline, Rosary, Hymns and Prayers that are Sung
at the Benediction of the B. Sacrament, the Prayers for the King and Queen,
etc. The ordinary of the Holy Mass, the Sequence, dies Irae, dies illa, that is
Sung at Solemn Masses for the Dead, and the Libera that is Sung after Mass for
the Dead, all in Latin and English. Together with several other Devout Prayers
in English. In Eighteens, Price Bound 2s.

The Office of the Holy Week according to the Roman Missal and Breviary. In
Eighteens, Price Bound 2s.

A Short Christian Doctrine, composed by the Reverend Father Robert Bellarmin,
of the Society of Jesus and Cardinal, now Revised and much Amended. In
Twenty-fours. Price 1d.


