depiction of a hanged man

GODS Justice against Murder, OR The Bloody Apprentice Executed.

Being an Exact and true Relation of a Bloody Murder committed by one Thomas
Savage an Apprentice to a Vintner at the ship Tavern in Ratliffe upon the Maid
of the House his fellow Servant, being deluded thereunto by the instigations of
a Whore. How and in what sort he performed the same, how he Robbed his Master,
and was persued and taken by Hue and Cry at Coome Farm betwixt Greenwich and
VVoolwick, Sent to Newgate, afterward Arrained and Cast at Justice Hall in the
Old Bailey, condemned to be hanged over against the place where be committed the
fact, and b^ing once hanged and cut down afterward reviving again, was the
second tim^ hanged till he was dead, on Wednesday October 28. 1668.

Exodus 21. v. 12. He that smites a man so that he dye shall surely be put to
death.

London, Printed for John Clarke at the Harp and Bible in West Smith-Field.

Gods Justice against Murder.
OF all crimes committed by Mortals here on earth, there is none which cries to
heaven for louder vengeance then that sin of wilful Murder, when men play the
Beasts and in humanly gore each other to death, making the world a shambles for
humane slaughters, by desacing Gods Image in others, murdering their own souls,
the Vshers to which sin is commonly covetousness, and whoredom, Covetousness,
faith St. Paul, is the root of all evil, and a Whore says Solomen, will hunt
for the precious life of a man, for those who prostitute their be^tes to all
comers, will not fear to prostitute their souls to all vices, and thus
covetousness provokes whoredom, and whoredom causes Murder to be committed,
one sin deawing another as it were with Cart-Ropes, when the final conclusion
is the destruction both of body purse and rep^tation, and (if God be not the
more merciful) the eternal punishment of body and soul in hellfire.

Youthful extravagancies have commonly had consequences, and more perish by too
much indulgence, then too much severity, men abusing their liberty, so that
where discipline is neglected, all vices flow in which a monstrous impetuosity.

That which we shall now relate is a sad example for the evidencing of these
tenths, in the person of one Thomas Savage, a Vintners man, at the sign of the
Ship at Rateliff-Cross, in the Parish of Stepacy, near London, who by the
instigation of a Whore, blinded with lust, was wrought upon to Murder his
fellow servants, who indeavou^^d to hinder him in the Robbing of his Ma^^er, the
story whereof follows.

This Thomas Savage was born of honest Parentage, his Father dying when he was
young his Mother ma^ried again, to one who proved a loving step-father to the
Son as a careful Husband to the Mother, and both of them by their care and cost
endeavoring to have their son well educated, which they expressed in bringing
him up to Schooling whereby he might be fit and the more capable of a Trade;
which afterward (coming to more maturer years) they bestowed upon him,
placing him with one Mr, Collins a Vintner at the sign of the Ship, at Ratcliff
Cross, where he continued with much love and good will of his Master and
follow-servants for some space of time, though that was likewise attended with
some ^outh^^l extravagancies, for which his Master would much blame him.

Thus you see here was an endeavor to have had the ^ds of virtue, and good
living implanted in his heart, but where grace wants, all outward means will
fail, Paul may plant and Apollos water, but it is God alone that (...) give the
increase, young persons like t^s are flexible, and as war fi^ ^^ceive any
impression that is put upon them (...) more easily inducible to that which i^
had then good, by reason of the depra^e^ness of our nature. He happened to light
into some Whore-houses, the nurseries of wickedness, and seed plots of all
filthiness, pro^hanene^s, and debauchery whatsoever. Sin is chargable, and many
persons ruin their estates out of the love they bear to filthy v^ces, the^ is
forced to maintain lust, and so the whore has it, she cares not by what means
or from whom, by such means was this young man brought to ruin, for a wh^re
seldom leaves a man till she has brought him either to the Hospital, or the
Gallows.

It so happened that one Sunday morning going with his Master to the Church he
gave him the slip, and instead of the house of God, rambles to the sink of sin,
the Bawdy House, ^here he takes his pleasure, his whore is plyant to him, they
drink and dally without control, but this full of pleasure causes an ebb of
Money, he complains ^o her of the emptyness of his pockets, this was to go to
the Devil for counsel and who a better spokes-woman for him then a whore, she
tells him he was a fool to have so little, and his Master so much, why should
locks and bolts hinder him, a picklock or a Hammer would remedy that, he replys
that he was never left at home alone, the Maid was with him, and therefore the
b^ness was not sensible, she returns answer knock her on the Head, a sure way
to find employment for the Hangman, as be afterward too sadly felt to his cost.

Thus we plainly see that a whore is the highway to the Devil, he that looks
on her is entering on the Road, he that talks to her mends his pace, and he that
injoys her is at his Iourneys end. O how many baits and alurements have they to
sin, using pa^^ing to set forth their Corpses of diseases, which having been
long in the Chyrurgions hands, is ready to drop in piece^ through rottenness,
the love that they pretend to bear to men, is worse then the deadliest hatred
of men, for where they kiss they kill, their breath is more venomous then a
Dragons, their sight more deadly then a Basilisks, and their embraces more
dangerous then those of a Serpents.

But to return where we left, time posting away, calls to the Prentice to
hasten home, which he does, but finds his Master at dinner already, who
questions him where he had been so long? the Devil is a ready prompter of
lies, he returns him answer that he was at Church, his Master misdoubting the
truth of his report, tells him that for his so late staying in the forenoon, he
should keep at hour in the afternoon, this was as he would have it, the Maid
and he are appointed to stay, the rest are gone to Church, Now he begins to put
the Whores instructions in execution, Money he will have though he venture his
neck for it.

And now his chief endeavou^ is to fall out with the Maid, to effect this he
goes to make clean his Masters dirty shoes on the ^ew washed Dresser: this
angers her much and some cross words passes betwixt ^h^m a Hammer lying by he
catches it up strikes at her with it and knocks her down, the blood gashing out
of the wound abundantly, she crying out be redoubles his blows so long until
he had killed her, and then laid a dish clout upon her wound which gushed forth
in streams of purple gore.

Then with the same Hammer he brak open his Masters Cupboard, from whence he
takes sixty two pounds, and with it returns to his Whore again: where having
spent ten pence he informs her of what he had done. She knowing the danger he
had brought himself into, like a right Whore indeed, forsakes him in his
greatest extremity and re^es to give him entertainment. Now knows he not what
to d^, what course to take, like the first Murderer Cain he must become a
Runnagate upon the earth, fearful that any one which should find him would
apprehend him, he having the brand of a guilty Conscience sticking within him,
London was to hot for him, he therefore crosses the water and goes toward
Greenwich accompanted only with fear, horror, and guilt of Conscience.

In the mean time (Sermon being ended) his Master returns home, and finding the
doo^s shut knocks and calls, but receives no answer, after much fruitless
knocking, the door in forced open, where ent^ing he finds his Maid murdered
and himself Robbed; this strikes him into much grief and astonishment, but
perceiving some Life in the Maid, they strive to recover her but in vain who
only living so long as to detect the the Murderer, (God enabling her so much
that such wickedness might be the better found out) ^he then yielded to Fate,
and surrendered (...) her innocent soul to death.

H^reupon immediately Hue and Cries are sent out after the Murderer, who
commin^ ^o Greenwich, went t^ one Charltons a Watermans house to drink, laying
the Money down by him, where having no^ long been, but hearing some whispe^ings
of a murder do^e at Stepney, and a Hue and Cry after the murderer, guilt of
Conscience and fear so po^ess^s him, that leaving the Money behind him, he quits
the Chamber where he was, and b^takes himself to his heels. Weary and dismayed
with the guilt he carried about him, a^ Coom Farm betwixt Greenwich and
Woolwich he again betakes himself to an Alehouse, where sitting down and
calling ^or a pot of Beer, he presently falls fast a sleep, where the Hue and
Cry overtook him, from whence he was guarded toward London, and had in
examination before Major Manley one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for
the County of Middlesex, where he freely confessed the ^act in manner as is
related before unto ^ou, detecting the Whore that enticed him ^n to his
destruction, who with her Spiders Web of wickedness had entangled him in her
Nets, whereupon he was Committed to Newgate, and a Warrant being also issued
out for her, she was taken, examined before a Justice, and committed also unto
Newgate.

Thus you see sin goes before, and shame follows after, the danger of keeping
had Company, especially Whores, those instruments of the Devil, the bane of
youth and Lyme-twigs o^ w^ckedness, the center of all mischiefs, and the
Gulphs that devours the lives, estates, and reputations of all that use them.

At the Sessions house in the Old-Bayly October 24. 1668. he had his Trial,
where confessing his fact sentence of death was passed upon him to be executed
again (...) the place where he committed the fact. Hannah Blay also who had
persuaded him t^ this execrable act, by bidding him to knock the Maid on the
head, was also condemned to be executed at Tyburn, but pleading tha^ she was
with child she was for the present reprieved.

But Thomas Savage the principal in the murder, according to the sentence
aforesaid was Wednesday, October the 28 conveyed to a Cart from Newgate to the
place of Execution appointed for him, being over against his Masters house, at
the sign of the Ship in Ratcliff-cross, where was assembled a great concourse
of people to be spectators of his sad Catastrophe, he seemed to be very
peninent, desiring all people, especially young persons to take warning by him,
what company they addicted themselves unto, which was either the bane or making
of youth, he gave them an Item as near as they could to get into such services
where the word of God was constantly read and practiced, to beware of whores
and whore-houses, those seed plots of wickedness, being such labyrinths of
ungodliness, that nothing but the Clue of Gods grace can bring them forth
again, when they are once entered into them. With many other words to the like
purpose after which he was turned off the Ladder, where having hung some space
of time he was cut down and carried to the sign of the Rose by Ratcliff, where
his body was laid upon a Table, diverse Seamen being in the Room, ^ut long he
had not lain when they might ^erceive some signs of life in him, where^pon
having a fire kindled, warming their hands they bathed his body with spirits,
and an Apothecary being in the room desired to have him in a warm bed, when
presently he began to move his arms and legs, with several other symptoms of a
living creature. In the mean space some Officers belonging to Newgate, going to
view the dead corpse, but finding it in such a living posture, one of them posts
to the Sheriff, to acquaint him with it, whom he found at Dinner, who suddenly
hasted thither, the Officer by the way meeting also accidentally with the
Executtion^r, took him along with him, whereby ^he way we may note, ^ew every
thing ^onsentred together, for the speedier execu^ion of Gods Justice upon this
sin of wilful Murder, for seeing all things were thought to be done before, it
was accidental for the Officer to meet with either of them both just so on a
sudden,

When the Sheriff came to the sign of the Rose aforesaid, he found Savage
sitting in the bed, perfectly living, but wanting the use of speech, though
(...) was ju^ged ^ot of sense or reason; wher^n exec^^^^^ o^ his sentence of
Condemna^^^n he comma^^^d him to be put in a Blank^t and (...) in a Cart, it
being the spac^ (...) four ho^^^ (...) the time of his first ha^^^^g, to his
second going to Execution, ^e did strive and str^gle some what both at his
(...), ^ay and to the Cart, giving a kick to t^^ executioner and one of the
Baylive^ a (...) on the mouth, but soon he was had to the Gibbet aforesaid, and
there hanged till he was quite dead.

And this was the end of Thomas Savage one who by the course of Nature might
have lived many years had he not by his wicked courses caused the hand of
Justice to shorten his days. He was said to be very penitent in Prison, free in
the confession of the horridness of his crime, earnestly imploring Gods mercy
for the pardon of the same, and no doubt but God who is the God of mercy had
compassion on him, his end may be a warning to others for committing the like,
least trying the same sins they taste of the same punishments that he did.

His Corpse was afterward conveyed to Islington, the place where his sorrowful
Mother dwelt, and that night there buried, notwithstanding the idle reports of
some, who (forsooth) would have him to be alive still, such idle rumors when
they are once got into the nodles of the more idler multi^ude, gain still by
report, and like snowbals increase with being roled from one to another.

Hannah Blay who had given him that wicked Counsel of knocking the Maid on ^he
head, remains still a condemned pri^oner in Newgate. She pleading that she was
with child, which has gained her a re^rieve for a time.

And thus we may see the ill effects that ^^n produces, for as the Apostle
says, the ^eward of sin is death, which though it ma^y times scapes the death
of the body, yet ever falls to kill the soul the^ more nobler art, in
comparison of which the body is but a mere dunghill, yet if we look also upon
the punishments that it brings on the body, w^ shall find enough there to work
in us a detestation of it; how does it impair our healt^ consume our riches?
destroy our credits? making us a scorn to our foes and a detestation to our
friends, even wicked me^ hating those in whom they see their ow^ vices
predominant.

But for this bloody sin of Murder it is crime of a crimson dye, which nothing
bu^ the tears of true repentance, can wash of t^^ guilt of it, from off the
soul, yet man ha^^ no greater enemy to himself then manki^^ bi^ds, beasts and
fowls, go lovingly tog^gether in Troops and Herds not hurtin^ each other, oh
let us then learn at least much civility from those which we cou^^ beasts,
least by our bloody actions at the d^^ of Judgment we be found to be great^^
beasts our selves.

FINIS.

