VARIOUS INJURIES and ABUSES IN Chemical and Galenical PHYSIC: Committed both
by Physicians and Apothecaries, DETECTED. For the benefit of such, who being
Conscientious and Studious in Physic, aim chiefly at the welfare of the Sick.
And of those Patients, whether Rich or Poor, who are willing to preserve their
lives and healths.

By Robert Godfrey, Med. Londinensis.

Antimonium quamdiu vomitum aut seeds movet, and Mercurius revivificari potest;
venena sunt, nec boni viri Remedia.

Licensed, December. 1. 1673. Roger L'estrange.

LONDON, Printed by John Darby, for Richard Jones, at the Golden Lion in Little
Britain, 1674.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Shall not go about to persuade thee, that this my Discourse saw the Press
through the importunity of Friends, and that it was only Pen*d for my own
private Use; seeing I at first designed it for public view; and to detect
Abuses in Physic; seeing that instead of being persuaded to it, I was rather
dissuaded from it, lest I by writing too tartly might offend some. To do which,
after serious perpension, I was easily inclined, knowing it to be a weighty
Matter to appear in Public, especially with a Physical Discourse. Besides, I
ofttimes reflected on my years, and was thereby mightily disheartened, for all
the many Advantages I had in a faithful Tutor, knowing that such a Discourse
rather became some Gray Headed Physician, than one so young as my self. And for
that cause I assure thee I would willingly have declined it, could I have had
peace in so doing.

For though I knew I had wrote nothing dissentaneous with Truth, yet I
suspected I might incur the anger of some selfish Physicians, as also of some
incurious Apothecaries, whose own Consciences would tell them I wrote the
Truth, and that they were such I spoke of, Selfish Physicians, I say, and
Careless Apothecaries: For I believe there is not any Learned Truehearted and
Conscientious Physician, whether Chemical or Galenical, nor any Industrious
Ingenious Apothecary can in the least be offended at this Discourse. But if any
are, I care not, seeing a Public Good ought to be preferred before their
Private Gain, and that I have content in what I have done; Seeing also whilst I
detect Injuries in Physic, I mention not the Persons offending; and that

-- Licuit semperque licebit
Parcere Personis, dicere de vitiis.
It has been lawful, and will always be,
To speak of Vice, but let the Name go free.
Are any therefore displeased? It Is a sign I have touched them to the quick: But
such should rather be displeased with themselves for being no wiser before,
than to do th^gs worthy of sharp reproof; and to be so foolish now as to show,
by applying things to themselves, ^^^t they are the Persons deciphered, or at
leastwise such. However, touched or not touched, I regard it not; and may well be
allowed to find fault* seeing my most dear Father (I being young) was killed,
Secundum Artem, through the deceit of the Physician and Apothecary, by taking a
Preventive Purge: And seeing that I my self also in my younger years, had my
Vitals so much weakened by their poisonous and debilitating Methods, that I
believe, as long as I live, I shall fair the worse for it: But if they will not
allow me to find fault, I am resolved to do it whether they will or no, whilst
men's Lives and Healths are so little set by, and that Money is the only thing
sought after, whilst it is little minded what Medicines are given for Relief to
the Sick, so Money can be gotten by giving them; and so that if they die, we
can but lay the blame on the Disease, and pretend we walked according to Art and
Method: And whilst Sincerity and Charity are no Ingredients in Physic, and to
act the good Samaritans part is out of fashion.

As to the study of Physic, I will assure you 'twas not my juvenile Design,
nor did I enter on it till about seven years since, in the twentieth year of my
Age. When coming to be intimately acquainted with a true-hearted Chemical
Physician, and having been from my Youth a great lover of Art and Science, I,
for diversion-sake, whilst I Tabled in the Doctor's House, and had his Physical
Library at command, addicted my mind to the study of it: Hoping thereby only
to acquire so much knowledge in Medicine, as to keep me from being killed, as my
Father had been by a Poisonous Dose: and to preserve my own health for the
future, which had been formerly much impaired by bad Remedies.

Thus I proceeded, and before many years were past, my Fancy and Genius was
wholly inclined to it, nor was there any Art or Science under the Sun which I
so much fancied as Medicine; though sometimes when my Physical Studies had
brought a wearisomeness, I now and then, for some years together, studied
Astrology; but finding it a conjectural Art, and a thing that broke my peace, I
wholly declined it. Then with the greater eagerness I fell on the study of
Chemistry, nor regard I my Moneys; so that I, who always hated ^otchery, might
have real Art: But spent hundreds of pounds Sterling to that end; which once
attained, I hoped in my mind I might be profitable in my Generation, and
benefit the miserable Sick.

But when after several years were past thus in study, I seriously considered
the danger of working with such Physical Tools, or such Medicines as Books (the
which are for the most part a Mass of Transcriptions, and things taken upon
trust from one another) could afford me; forasmuch as many of those
Recipe-Medicines, not only through their Earthy, and sometimes Poisonous
Qualities, do more harm than good; but also through the confusedness of their
Composition. I say, when I seriously considered this, I was afraid to attempt,
being very loath to turn Experimenter; and as the Phrase has it, Ludere cum
corio humano.

I was also more frightened from it, by the untimely death of my Father, and by
observing the Errors of Physicians. I then thought upon Helmont, and believed
he wrote not so sharply for nothing, as also that Medicine (as he said) was
abused. Which made me, having been hurt by Physic, know the better how to
pity the Sick, and avoid all means of hurting them.

But at length the Almighty favoring, and my good Friend dearly loving me: He
conferred his whole Knowledge in Pharmacy on me, and the result of above twenty
years diligent search in Chemistry: Nor was I wholly ungrateful.

So that then being not the veriest Botcher in Medicine, and having the liberty
daily to discourse with the Doctor, and the advantage to raise various
Objections, and have them answered: I by diligent observance, by Operating, and
by studying for several years, not sluggishly, having gained the knowledge of
some Injuries in Physic;

Reader, for thy benefit (my Tutor being deceased) I have thought it fit to
make them public. If thou shall ask whether or no I am or ever was a Member of
the University, (for that is a thing carries a great face with it) I shall tell
thee, Yes: But moreover assure thee, I was more happy than to spend years there
about Genus and Species, and such unprofitable Notions and Arts, that could not
at last teach me how to cure a cut Finger radically, much less a violent
Disease. Yet truly I exceedingly honor them, as they are Schools of Learning,
and could wish they did not mind Words more than Things.

And prithee, Reader, don't ever the more under value this Discourse, because
thou find it neither dedicated to some Great Man, nor yet set off with
flattering Verses in commendation of me and my Work. The last I disesteem,
because though some ingenious Physical Tracts at a chance comes forth with
some, and deserve them, yet almost every Mass of Collections, or Bundle of
Insignificancies, have them to persuade the Reader to buy it. I am therefore
resolved to have mine come simple and naked, that if thou likest it so, thou
may buy it; if otherwise, let it alone.

Nor did I not Dedicate it through want of those to whom I might have tendered
it, or those who would willingly have accepted on it: But that which made me not
do it, was an unwillingness to sooth and flatter any Man, and to follow the
custom of ascribing all Virtues to One scarce acquainted with them. For I am
somewhat of an humor differing from the generality, in that whilst they
ascribe all Virtues to a Rich Man, I am prone to ascribe all Riches to a
Virtuous Man: And to account him that is Wealthy and Virtuous, (for some such
there are) to be rich in a twofold measure. However to the most Virtuous of
them, without Your most humble Servant Sir in the close of it, I should have
tendered an unacceptable Gift: And therefore did not Dedicate, whilst I
savouring more of a Rustic than a Courtier, could never yet frame my mouth to
such artificial Speeches.

Besides, if I had dedicated it to the most Noble and Wealthy, be could not
have preserved it from the censures of the meanest Peasant, much less from
those of the Ingenious; whilst every one has the privilege to speak his mind in
his Chimney-Corner, and to censure and dispraise what he please. So that with
or without a Dedication, I shall be counted and called a Fool, if I have writ
like one, or have written what is prejudicial to Mankind. But if I have writ
what is not disagreeing with Verity, nor detrimental to Humane Society, and the
Nation, I shall be commended by the Impartial and Honest; which thing is as
much as I expect; Knowing that it is impossible to please all men; And that
what the Father of Lights does not bless and defend, will be but as Chaff, and
will fade in spite of the greatest of Patrons. Also that he which builds on
ought but the chief Cornerstone, will come to confusion at last.

Therefore, Reader, without a Complement, or calling thee Courteous or Kind* I
desire thee thoroughly to view what I have written, and if thou art benefited by
it, give thanks to the Almighty, and thou will please thy Friend,

Robert Godfrey.

VARIOUS INJURIES AND ABUSES, IN BOTH Chemical and Galenical Physic, detected.
TO hear the groans of the Sick unsuccesfully lying under cure from ill-applyed
and oftentimes worse-prepared Remedies, might, and undoubtedly would,
considering the daily growth of Diseases, have excited the Studious in Physic;
to a more curious pursuit, after such Virtuous Medicines, whose Piercing and
Innocent Liveliness might extinguish the Venomous Characters of Diseases: and
without any Additional Weaknings of Nature by poisonous Medicines and
Phlebotomy: have radically not cloakatively cured the Sick had not too great
belief in the Doctrines of Galen, an unwillingness in many to be Wise beyond
the Ancients, with too much adhering to Sloth* like the Tares in the Parable,
spoiled their good intents. But this happening in the time of Ignorance is
scarce worthy of note, if with it we compare the Stubbornness and incuriousness
of some in this Generation, who oppose the breakings forth of fresh advantages
in Medicine, whilst the poverty of the Galenick method is discovered; Some
using and pleading for Venomous Purges, Vomits, etc. Taking a dirty besome to
sweep a dirty house; and others using and defending Blood-letting,
notwithstanding manifest, frequent, and Safe cures are daily done without it,
yea more safely and certainly than with it.

The first of which, were not Diseases themselves, especially if they be of
somewhat long continuance, in a manner poisonous and Fermentive, and therefore
to be withstood by Alexipharmick not Poisonous Remidies, would be somewhat
pardonable* and so would the second, were not the Blood the nourisher, and
enlivener of the whole Body; and by consequence of the Stomach the prime
preparer of nourishments. For doubtless, as Anatomists confess, the Various
Arteries and Veins which it has, are bestowed on it, to nourish it, and that it
may reap some of the fruit of its own Labor, after the subservient Digestions
have fully maturated it. Which thing considered: how hurtful is Phlebotomy that
takes away the Blood which gives vigor to the Stomach?

And if the Blood is grown bad through a weakness in the Ventricle, and
Scorbutic impurity introduced; think you ever to remove it through renewed
Weaknings, and taking away from the Stomach part of that Blood which
envigorates, enlivens, and nourishes it? Which you do when ever you breath a
vein, seeing whilst it runs out or soon after, through the Bloods circulation,
all parts are co-sharers in the loss. Therefore is Phlebotomy the direct way to
make the Blood worse instead of taking away the Scorbutic impurity of it;
because the Stomach being debilitated through a loss of that Crimson-juice will
be more disabled for the future: whereby through weakness a worse Chyle being
made, a worse nourishment will be sent through the Venae Lact^ae to the Blood,
and the whole Fabric of the body more impaired. Therefore for a Physician,
under pretense of relieving Nature, to rob her of her prime Treasury and Force,
instead of fortifying her with Medicines; is as equally ridiculous, as if one
pretending to defend a Country already invaded, should take away from them a
great part of their Ammunition, and Weapons.

To declare which more amply I will venture to Tautologize, and tell you it is
unfit to take away the Blood, unless better can be put in its place. Which can
no ways be rationally expected, because from a loss of that lively juice, a
weakness ( as I said before) is conferred on the Stomach's, and other
digestions, all parts being nourisht therewith. But we ought rather to consider
the cause of its impurity: to wit, whether it had its Original from the Air
being so, or from any precedeing Digestions of the body caused by an Ill* di^t,
overmuch Study, Grief, or Anxious thoughtfulness etc. If from the first, to
wit, impure air, whereby a foreign Ferment is bestowed on the blood and
Stomach too: what good can be expected from opening a Vein, so long as the
spurious Ferment in both Stomach and Blood is unremoved? seeing that good and
bad will be lest behind as well as emitted, and that the Vitals being weakened
by it will be less able to subdue the spuriousness in the remainer. Besides,
the Digestions being debilitated, will be hindered from thoroughly concocting
what shall be taken for nourishment, and thereby damnify the whole mass of
blood, and produce a greater weakness, if the party be not vigorous, and active.

But if he is strong and Lusty he may outwear it as many robust stout people
do; who are accustomed to be bleeded once a year; and by that means make it so
customary, that their bodies expect it, in the absence of a good Medicine.
Though such are not much to be he^ded, because the loss of four ounces to one
that is sick, is more injurious than thrice four to once that is strong and
healthy.

But if the bloods impurity is from an error in the first shops of digestion,
caused by those enormities mentioned, what good does Phlebotomy so long as the
cause is not removed, and the Digestions send immature aids through debility?
For if it be granted that we make several ounces of blood daily, and dismiss as
much through the Pores of the Skin; likewise that the blood is subject to
mutation, by adhering to what succors are sent from the Stomach, as truly it
is; and that through deficiency* and debility impurity enters the blood; is it
not agreeable and consentaneous to Reason, that after a through and perfect
strengthening it, and removing the occasional cause, the same Crimson-juice
should grow healthy again, whilst all digestions are gradually cleansed? Yes
it is. But this can no ways be better, and safelier done than by Spirituous,
Valiant, and Innocent Healers, seconded by a regular Diet. By such Healers I
say as are assistant to Nature, and may help her to expel the Diseasie leaven,
and insinuate into the private recesses of Life; such as may subvert all
Foreign, Hostile ferments without craving the assistance of the Lancet.

For notwithstanding the Taunts and Negations of careless Men, such Medicines
are to be found; but I can assure them not by sleeping, nor only reading of
Books; which may be the cause some mere Notionists say thus of themselves, and
discover their own Sloth by their Scoffs.

For all the boastings and Vain talks of these Chemists (say they) we can find
no Remedies that can Dissipate a Fever certainly, and cure Scorbutic affects,
without having recourse to Phlebotomy; much less in a Pleurisy to deliver a
Person from the Jaws of Death that is almost suffocated with blood. For surely
had there been any such Medicines, we should have known them who have tumbled
over so many Volumes.

But they should consider, that although to be well-read is a thing needful,
and so requisite that he which is not deserves not the Name of a Physician; yet
that he, who on the contrary is so incumbent on his Books, as to neglect that
most Material part of Pharmacy, the making and improving of Medicines by
Pyrotechny, may doubtless pass for a good Scholar unless he be egregiously
Dull, but will scarce work Wonders in Physic. Because good, virtuous and
lively Medicines must cure the Sick, for all words: and such are not obtained
without practice in making.

For if Hippocrates and Galen were well-studied and good Linguists: yet it is to
be understood, that they spent not their whole time about the Nominative case
and the Verb, or in Readings only, and subscribing to the errors of their
Predecessors: but the greatest part in Materia Medica, and in procuring such
noble Remedies as might credit a Physician, and cure the Diseases of their Age.
For if the first of them had not, he scarcely ever had obtained such excellent
Medicines as he did, wherewith to outdo all the Physicians of his time: had
scarcely ever been solicited, and promised great Honors and Rewards, to attend
on King Artaxerxes's Court, and stop a depopulating Plague in Persi^ that had
baffled the Kings Physicians, and all other; and for his famous cures to have
been by his Nation counted one descended of the Gods. Five hundred years after
him was Galen: who for composition of Medicines and making them with his own
hands, as also for curing or at leastwise palliating those Diseases which were
Grassant in his days, was famous.

But seeing that as Generations succeeded maladies were entailed on the world
as well as lands, and do still grow worse and worse, through the intrusion of
several Diseases, whose footsteps were unknown to the Ancients: it must needs
be necessary, to exalt the Virtues of Medicines as much, as Diseases are
exalted in Malignity, by making them innocent, piercing, and lively; and by
withdrawing all nauseous, and hurtful qualities from them, whilst Agents are
duly applied to Patients.

And for a Physician to affirm, or think, that no man is a Possessor of such
lively innocent Remedies, as may safely, and certainly cure Diseases without
Phlebotomy; because through either his Neglect, want of a Physical genius, or a
faithful Tutor, to communicate the result of twenty or thirty years experience
in Pyrotechny, he never was owner of such: or because he has unsuccesfully
tried, some weak if not mischievous Chemical Remedies, such as Apothecaries
frequently buy of incurious and mercenary Operators, to wit, Spurious
Mercurial, and ill-made Antimonial ones, that will purge and vomit
unreasonably, or have the Mercury unslain: That are rather disturbers than
aiders of Nature, and that were at their first entrance banished the
Laboratories, and Repositories of the Ingenious; who will harbor no Medicine
that may not be safely taken by the healthy. I say, for such a one to
undervalue, and desame those innocent, and virtuous Chemical remedies he never
knew, nor experienced, and to affirm or think no Man a Possessor of such,
because he himself is not, is a thing both ^idiculous, and idle. For he should
call to mind the old Adage vix gemma in trivio; that things excellent are not
found in common Roads: And that the Poet tells us and that not untruly, Gods
sells Arts to sweats; therefore not to readings only, though to be well-studied
becomes a Physician.

This with many other such like absurdities I should scarcely have Detected,
had I not preferred peace of mind, and the welfare of my Neighbor before my
ease and leisure. Neither should I have thus attempted a public discovery of
some Injuries in Physic, caused through the Ignorance and conceitedness of
some, and the carelessness and dishonesty of others. For when I observed some
through a Vulgar abuse to make a prey of the People, and under the notion of
preventing future Diseases, like Lice fatten themselves with Men's blood, or at
leastwise grow rich by their miseries, and by the poisoning the good juices of
the Body: and saw others, whilst Diseases themselves are in a manner poisonous,
give poisons and venoms to the Sick to cure Diseases, take Beelzebub to cast
Beelzebub out* and thereby hurt, and leave them worse than they found them, and
exasperate the Disease if not kill them: beheld others also, whilst Nature is
loaded and clogged, give Medicines more cloging by far, and destructive to the
Stomachs ferment. I say, when I beheld these things it made me to wonder not a
little. Especially when I saw such Poyson-mongers were commonly they that
depretiated Chemistry and its innocent remedies ( like the Fox) because they
could not come at them.

For Chemical Remedies, say they to the People, are like fiery mettlesome
Horses, that will, if you mount them, either carry you quickly to your Journeys
end, or otherwise break your Neck, ( i. e.) either quickly kill or quickly cure
you. This I remember was once in my hearing objected against Chemistry by a
favourer of Gal^n: And if by Chemical Remedies he meant such perverse Mercurial
and Antimonial preparations as are made by Mercenary Operators, and retail'd by
Apothecaries; as also Oil of Vitriol, with other such like corrosive Medicines,
which I am confident no Intelligent and Learned Chemical Physician, that
regards the Life of of his Patient, will make use of. If by Chemical Remedies
he did mean such as those, I wholly agree to his assertion; and am so far from
disproving what he or any other shall say against such that I give them my
helping Hand.

Against Mercurial, and Antimonial Remedies.
FOr to unmask Mercury and Antimony, and to show the Danger of such Medicines
as are vulgarly made of them, was no small cause of my penning this Discourse:
that I might admonish, and precaution those who are Lovers of Chemistry, and
wish well to the Miserable Sick; not to endanger their credits, and the Health
of their Neighbor by administering such mischievous things; nor yet vainly
spend their time, own healths, and moneys, in fruitlesly handling those
Subjects.

For he that will tame them especially Mercury, had need to have as many eyes
as Poets bestow upon Argus, and a well nigh Immortal Menstruum: had need have
so much understanding in the more abstruse Philosophy, and in the gradual
operations of Nature, as not to give credit to every Fabler, or else he will
Labor in vain. As too many have done; some of whom I more than a little
admired at, whilst they went, without reason or understanding, to build Castles
in the Air: and promise themselves great things from a science they knew not,
and an Art whose Theories they were ignorant of. And so like blind men groping
in the Dark, whilst through want of Study they want for no ignorance, hope to
get something by hook or by crook, though it is but burned fingers for their
pains.

Nor is there any thing much commoner amongs our Junior Chemists, after Reading
two or three Authors that write Mysteriously, than after meeting with these
words; Mercury, Antimony, Gold or Sol, Luna or Silver, Venus, Sulphur etc. To
fall dismally foul on those Subjects, but chiefly the first four, till they
have well nigh made all their Gold Volatile. And whilst they inconsideratly put
confidence in any author they meet with, as also in the literal sound of
Aenigmatical Writings; in seeking for the Lapis, invent ill-contriv'd things
that must pass for strangely-good Medicines.

Not considering in the interim that those very Authors say, where they have
spoken plainly they have said nothing; and that where they have Written Darkly,
there is the Truth; And that Helmont confesses their Writings were but for
excitements; also that Chemical Authors wrote not to be promiscuously
understood by all, but that they might not be understood: lest ( says ^e) in
speaking plain we should cast Pearls before the unworthy. But it is no matter
for that, they mind not what such idle men as Helmont say, for they are in the
Right they think: and therefore without following Nature, or in the least
understanding her Laws, judging whatever they read must be so meant as they
humbly conceive, presently go to work. Though there is no more reason to expect
what they desire from their operations, than to hope a fire will be made of
flint-stones and water, or a Horse generated from a Dog and a Tree.

Nor do they count themselves a little beholding to the Stars, if they meet
with some Lapis-teaching Books: but hugging themselves up in their Fancies
conceit they all shall be -- Yea, what will they not be? seeing commonly upon
twice or thrice tumbling a Bookover, and thoroughly believing such a thing is
in Nature; having met with some passage that pleases not a little, though they
underst^nd neither head nor feet of the Discourse, they forthwith fall to work,
and soon spend ten or twenty pounds in vain, and are at last as wise as at
first. Therefore having scratcht their heads well for vexation, the Book must
have the other slight reading, and perhaps we may have another Book to expound
it; but their fingers itching to be lapising, after a week or two spent in
slightly tumbling the Book, to work they go afresh: and if they meddle not with
the old Subjects, yet doubtless they have ingredients every whit as Foppish;
which being likewise workt upon, after a perdition of their costs, they sit
soppishly down and lament, And some of these Juniors are so disingeniously
witty, that because such Authors talk of their Mercury sublimed, Precipated
Mercury, and Mercury of Mercury, with other such like things: therefore
forsooth to work they go on common Quicksilver, with Sulphur, Sal, and other
adjuncts, adding also Gold that it may partake of the Solar Tincture; because
(say they) if it have not the Tincture of Sol, how can it give it? ( Nobly
Philosophiz'd!) seeing nil dat quod non habet, nothing gives that which it has
not. And thus when through tedious and repeated operatings, they at last find
not what they seek, to wit, their much coveted Elixir or Lapis: yet being
unwilling to think they should work so long in vain, they begin to imagine That
their -- may we call it a Medicine? must needs be a succedaneum, or next in
virtue to it; in regard it is made of Mercury and Gold, or perhaps of Mercury
with some other adjuncts. And are somewhat confirmed if they find it at a
chance to do some good: For if at other times it does mischief, the Mercury
being unslain, that they ascribe not to the Medicine, but to a mistaken or too
great a dose.

Others also Reading such Books, and there most fortunatly meeting with the
word Antimony: acoordingly fall foul on it, and are resolved to get wonderful
things from't whether Antimony can afford them or no. But when they also have
spent much upon inconsiderate projects, and cannot come at the coveted Elixir or
Lapis: yet being also unwilling that their Works, and expenses, should produce
nothing; such Hot^hpo^chly mixtures must pass current for Medicines: And though
they Purge, and Vomit so notoriously that they are enough to Kill a horse; yet
must they have splendid Titles, to Gull the World with words.

And undoubtedly after this manner, whilst many were seeking for the Lapis,
were most if not all those pernicious Mercurial, and Antimonial Remedies
invented that currently pass in the Shops, and are taught by the Writers of the
Beginnings of Chemistry. For there is scarce any name given by Hermetick
writers to their science; but the same, by some or other, has been given to
some ill-contriv'd Medicine, which is founded on Mercury or Antimony.

This I thought meet to hint for the good of such, who are so extremely
Lapified, that merely upon the account of getting the Lapis Philosophorum
(though they oftener get the stone in the Kidneys) attempt the study of
Chemistry: thereby losing much Silver in catching of Gold, and in unfortunately
plundering the Golden fleece.

Whereas if they did but consider the sayings of those very Authors, That it
requires the whole-man; which how can he that is incumbered with Physic allow?
also that many that sought if ever they got it, obtained it not under nigh
thirty years study and Labor: And that several Nobles, and Knights in pursuit
thereof spent great part of their Estates before they obtained i^; and some
such never did get it, but spent vast sums of money in vain. I say if they did
but consider this, it might put some stop to their procedure, and teach them so
much wit as to keep their moneys, and not venture it upon they know not what;
as also to be better satisfied and informed about what they would have, before
they set to operate.

Besides, many are dubious whether or no, there is such a thing as the Lapis in
Nature. Arbor vitae P. 793.
And truly for my own part, were it not that noble Helmont confesses, that he
had some of the Gold-making powder given him by a Friend of one Evenings
acquaintance: and that he was Constrained to believe there was such a thing,
because he had made projection Cogor credere lapidem aurificum, and
argentificum esse: quia distinctis vicibus manu mea unius grani pulveris, super
aliquot mill grana argenti viviferventis, projectionem feci, adstante multorum
corona, etc.
therewith several times, and confirms the same in diverse places of his
writings. Were it not for this; the lovers of the Hermetick Science must pardon
me if I should desire my own liberty in thinking. However I can assure you, I
am so little an admirer of their prescribed processes, because some of them
seemingly contradict other some; that I should count my self worthy of blame,
if I should spend five pounds on five the most plausible receipts in their
whole works: being better admonisht by the Dogs mishap in the Fable, that
catching at the shadow lost the Substance. But to return to our Physical
affairs.

Let those who read Helmonts works, diligently observe, and they shall soon
find, he speaks but sparingly, and Aenigmatically of his Medicine the Alkahest;
which (as he says) was the Menstruum whereby he reduced things into their
first being: and without which he denies, that his Horizontal Gold, Fire of
Venus, and other his most potent Remedies may be made. Also they shall find,
that without it he denies the destruction of Vulgar Mercury: and says, that
Paracelsus in speaking about his Arcana, does commonly hide the Operation of
his Alkahest? Of which though I am not a Possessor, yet have I seen so much as
to confirm me that Helmont wrote not like a Novice, and that such a thing is in
Nature.

However in the absence thereof it is admirable that our Mercury-mongers and
pretended Helm^n^ians, will offer to meddle with that Proteus, who derides
their endeavors: and make such a talking about rendering Gold volatile, and
potable as also about extracting its Tincture, when Helmont plainly declare*
that he profited more by the Decoction of a Simple than by its Potest: Med.
potable juice* For (says he) after P. 480. that I knew how to unloose bodies
by things agreeing with their radical Principles I then first began with a
pleasant weariness to laugh at my foolish credulities, which caused me in times
past to dissolve Gold: yet I profited less by its potable juice, than by the
Decoction of a simple. But after that I could dissolve Gold, and make it look
like Butter, Rosin, and Vitriol, I no where found the Virtues attributed to
Gold, because it was reluctant to our Ferments. I perceived therefore that Gold
without its own proper corrosive is dead; Dead I say, unless it be radidically
pierced by its own Corrosive.

Elsewhere he says it is impossible to alter Gold radically without the aid of
one only Liquor: which I dare warrant you is not Aqua Regis, or any such
pitiful Corrosive. Besides, if the Almighty, who is the God of the Poor as well
as Rich, has made all Nations of the Earth curable as says the Holy
Scriptures, it need not be doubted but in the absence of Gold Salutiferous
Medicines may be found. Yet seeing all the harm Gold in a Medicine can do, in
regard it is not corrosive, is the increasing an Apothecaries, or Doctor's bill,
and making the Patients purse lighter; I shall let it here alone, and speak of
Mercury

Against which I cannot say enough, so long a it is not killed, and its malignity
wholly destroyed. Which I believe all the Vizards of Salts, and other adjuncts
will be in no wise able to do; it being a Body more strong, than to suffer
Death through such. Of which I can speak partly from experience; having not
only operated on it with my own hands, to make it confess its virtues; But
morover seen two others variously attempt, to fix, open and subdue it, whilst
it apparently derided their endeavors, and made us conclude with Helmot, Nec
mori potest per machinamenta sublunaria hujus seculi, to wit, that it cannot die
through the sublunary engines of this World. He confesses indeed it may be
radically pierced and divided by the Alkahest; but he deems not that a
sublunary Engine, seeing it is an immortal Menstruum; and in resolving all bodies
into their first being, burns up their hurtsul qualities, and sets their
Virtues at Liberty. For (says he) the Common People burn with fire, we with
Water.

But does not Helmont, in his Ignotus Hydrops, highly commend Mercurius
Diaphoreticus, and say, that it being once obtained is sufficient for many 100
sick people, as also for him that is a Physician, and his Son? Yes he does: but
adds moreover, That that thing may succeed according to thy desire, P. 521.
the Mercury ought to die, without any association of external salts, or
fellowship of Foreign Spirits. Yet it is meet that it so die, that in the
Chariot a living being may remain, which may be able in the middle life of the
Mercury, to carry it to its appointed places. A little before he also declares,
that in the Dropsy, Paracelsus commends his Praecipiolum, or Mercury drawn dead
out of its mine: where the word his, plainly shows it was not the common
praecipitate; neither is that dead. And he more fully manifests that his was
not the common, by quoting Paracelsus saying; that he reverenceth and admires
the endowments of simples as they arose from God, but not as they are a kin to
Mineral Mercury. Which Praecipiolum, says Helmont, is difficult to be
obtained; doubtless more difficult than the Vulgar Precipitate.

I could heartily wish they would for the future be admonisht, and not refuse
to learn at a cheaper rate than an utter loss of their expenees: Seconded with
a ruin of their healths by its volatile fumes, if not a destruction of their
Neighbor by the Medicine. Such rash, and heedless, procedures in handling
Mercury and Antimony, whilst they sought they knew not what, and despised the
footsteps of Nature; being doubtless one cause that Chemistry in former Ages
was so exceedingly undervalued. And the Medicines (if we may call them so)
produced by its Professors, so very much exclaimed against, and shunned.

And what ever some opine, and imagine concerning Mercury's being the basis of
the Alkahest: were I willing to declare my sentiments concerning it; I could
easily prove, and back my assertions with Authority of good Authors that that
neither it, nor Antimony is the Parent of the Alkahest, nor any ways
contributing to its structure: and that they who think they are are no better
than hood-winkt; will doubtless by operating on them prove dangerous knowers;
and be Adeptists at Latter Lammas. This the Learned, and Ingenious may find
with facility, if they studiously peruse, and thoroughly compare, and digests the
sayings of its Wise-Possessors: especially if they bring all things to a
Rational Taste, and to a Possibility in Nature.

But as for the more Ignorant and Unlearned sort of Chemists, it is in vain to
admonish them; for they dearly love to buy Wit, or at leastwise they commonly
do so: as being those that dote on Mercury and Antimony, and expect wonders
from them. For as soon as they get them into their clutches, having huddled over
some wonderful Author; they think they sha'l be for ever made, and can talk of
little else but Arcana: such as Aurum Horizontale, the Lapis Philosophorum, or
Glaubers Aurum potabile, which many times they so long pursue till they have
well-nigh spent all their Aurum Portabile, and obtain the Vast secret of making
Card-matches.

And though Helmont (whose Disciples they would fain be counted) does tell
them, that Mercury so long as it may be revived, and Antimony so long as it
purge or vomit, are Poisons, and not the Remedies of a good man: yet will they
sometimes drive a subtle Trade with such Mercurial and Antimonial Medicines,
that either Purge, or Vomit, and have the Mercury nor s^ain; till by the Death
of several and loss of their own credits, they are somewhat startled. But they
do not intend to leave them so. For Noble Mercury and dear Antimony is their
All-in all; take them away and you half undo them. Well, let them keep them for
all me; for I had rather the^ should run hazards with their Patients, tha^ I.
And now to speak concerning Antimony, and Medicines made of it.

Which cannot possibly be enough disprais'd, so long as they either Purge or
Vomit* because by such many are hu^^ and some do loose their lives.

And notwithstanding the Galenists blame the Chemists or using ^azardous
remed^^s, and pretend, wh^lst they themselves use Poisons, to go safely to
work; Yet who are more subject to give venomous Antimonial Medicines than they
are? No^e I am persuaded. For with such, which are bought of Mercenary
Chemists, the Apothecaries Shops are well (or rather badly being they are
Poisons) furnished. And amongst many other perverse things called Medicines,
there is Crocus Metallorum, a remedy fitter for a Horse than for a Man, though
enough to infect and hurt the Stomachs of either* and of which there is such a
Dose sometimes prescribed, that it is enough to make a well-man Sick, and almost
Vomit his Heart out as the People phrase it.

But it is no matter for that, the Doctor he must have his F^e; which he well
deserves were the Medicine good. And if the Patient happens to be killed by
means of it, it is but the Doctors laying the fault upon the malignity of the
Disease, (though had one in health taken it 'twould almost, if not altogether
have killed him) and telling you the Patients time was come; also that he
prescribed secundum Artem; and then all will do well, and 'twill be
fundamentally done. So the Earth must hide his fault.

But I believe, if any amongst you should be so inhumane, as with a weapon to
wound one to Death; and plead afterward, that you could not help it, for his
time was come* 'twould be counted but a shallow excuse. For that God had
permitted such a thing to come to pass is Apparent: ye^ doubtless was not his
time so come, but that if the Weapon, (as it should have been) had been kept
out of his Bowels, he might have lived many years longer. In like manner after
taking a Poisonous Remedy, that destroys the life of his Patient; though the
Doctor to excuse himself tell you his time was come: yet grant me leave to tell
you, had innocent Remedies been given, he might doubtless have lived some years
longer.

But if the Doctor prove so happy as not to kill, yet if the Disease is
stubborn, and deeply impre^t through the vigor of the Stomach, or some other
noble Bowel, ^ailing, the Disease not being Acute but Chronick, it is much if it
is not exasperated by such Poisons, (I may not well call them Medicines) and if
the Patient is not made worse by much. Whereas were it not much better for the
Physicians Credit, and the Patients good, to give such Medicines as are
harmless, yet cleansing and Virtuous? Yes it must needs. Only such are gained
by Sweats, as well as Readings; both which together agree well.

But to speak in a word; I verily believe there are several Physicians, who
would not take some such Vomits, as they order for their Patients for twenty
pounds sterling: however I speak seriously, if they would, I would not for
thirty; and therefore should think my self exceedingly Wicked, if I should give
such a Vomit to another. These are commonly given under pretense of cleansing
the Stomach, but it oftener defiles it, and lays the foundation of future
weakness. I speak experimentally: for I heretofore, in my youthful days* took
several of them, according as I was ordered, to my small comfort but great
hurt: away with such poisonous Medicines; away with them.

And not go to prescribe Crocus Metallorum for a Vomit, as one did not long
since; and the Apothecary in a jest showing the Bill said 'twas a great deal
too much: and he might have added as fit to Kill as Cure. But being asked why he
would send it, answered What was it to him, he must do as the Doctor ordered.
The event of which I have not heard of, by reason the Patient lived far off in
the Country. But a Lady in the West of England, a few years since took a Vomit
that was prescribed for her: and the poison being great she never left vomiting
till she died: as her Daughter told, complaining against poisons to my friend a
Chemical Physician. Helmont also in one place gives an account, of three
Persons which were destroyed by Vomits: one of whom was his Wifes Brother, and
the other two were young N^ble Ladies, and Sisters: but to be brief, both of
them died at once, for which they may thank, (I should say blam^) their
Physician. But all three, after Death, being dissected, Blackish and stinking
Liquor (see the excellency of Poisons) floated on the Pylorus or lower mouth of
the Stomach, which was contracted through indignation against the admitted
Venom.

But are only Antimonial Vomits hurtful? No: For all other whose virulency is
such, as with indifferency to work upon the Healthy and Sick, are poisonous.
The cause of Vomiting after admitting such Venoms (I must not wrong them by
calling them Medicines) being no other than a close shutting up of the Pylorus.
For though the Palate, and tongue, being cheated by the vehicle which it is put
in, unadvisedly admit it unto the Stomach: yet the lower mouth of the Stomach
through its great sensibility, perceiving an Enemy to the Life to have entered,
presently shuts up the passage into the Guts by contracting it self like a
Purse: Wise Nature by this designing the preservation of other cohereing parts.
Which being done, she with her whole might endeavors to cast forth the
Venomous Dose, and at a chance if the Disease was from a surfeit, and of no
long continuance, dislodgeth the cause of faex, but not without hazarding the
Life: as also of leaving some Venomous Character, or Thornynest behind it. But
if at any time whilst vomiting is intermitted, the Pylorus having pretty well
freed it self, gives passage to any of the Poisonous Medicine: then the
neighboring Blood, and Latex, is summoned out of the Mesenterick veins, and
other cohereing parts; to help Nature to cast forth the Venomous guest, and
thereby cause stools. But if on the contrary (as it sometimes happens) the
Lower mouth of the Stomach, does not open, Death unavoidably follows.

Let this admonish People to take a special care of their Stomachs, and not
endanger their Lives and Healths by poisonous or clogging Medicines: but let
them be assured it is a blockish, and Heathenish trick, to cast out one Poison
by another, or Diseases which act like Poisons, and are virulent and leavenous.

My thus handling Mercury and Antimony, reminds me of an eminently-unlearned
pretender to Chemistry; one that used not to write much above thirteen words of
false English in twelve lines; and one that for all he understands Latin scarce
more than a Horse, yet has the confidente to tell us he read over the writings
of those accounted the best Authors. However I will clear him from a Ly; for I
verily believe that those Authors he read were counted the best, by Himself,
his Wife, and same other such Sublime Learned Head^. For you may, without being
counted a Cunning Man, guess that his Authors were no l^s^ than N^ch: Culpepers
works, or some such ^^n^er-working Books of Physic: seeing hr utterly defied
all pitiful Latins Authors, and such as write intelligible phrases. Only he
now and then amongst the honest Women, would thunder forth such an
All-astonishing word or two, that were enough to amaze'em: frightning'em with
no less Bully-boes than Lapis Philosophorums; for either such Aurum Potabile,
or Aurum Horozontale he much desired. And having abused himself into a belief
he should do wonders, and obtained some small skill in Chemistry, he resolved
to get one of them by hook or by crook. To which end therefore, and the better
to inform himself, he would sometimes visit a Grave Ingenious Chemical
Physician, that for several years together had kept his Body in good plight,
though otherwise he was naturally of an infirm constitution.

This our Piece of Vnlearnedness you must understand, by being the Doctors
constant Patient, had sometimes admittance into his Laboratory, and was thereby
doubtless the more excited The event of Chemical Physicians showing their
Laborarities to their Patients, or other busy desi^ers.
to the study of Chemistry. For he having seen various Furnaces and Glasses,
imagined according to likelihood that he could do very strange things: yea what
could he not do? For I have heard as if he could break Glasses as well as most;
and that he was an able Man at it too.

But as I said before, he sometimes visiting this Grave Man, amongst many other
things, would often exceedingly please himself in talking Taratan-tara about the
Philosophers stone and Horizontal Gold, and gazing in our faces would magnify
Mercury and Antimony, and tell us there was a noble thing in'em; to which the
Grave Doctor would say, so; what then; or nod a little; and that was as much as
he could get. Thus at last when he had told out a Tale of two or three hours
long, home he would go as Wise as he came. But in the mean time you must needs,
think that to have our ears weekly boxt about with the Philosophers-stone,
Horizontal Gold and Noble Mercury, was a very irksome thing, as indeed it was:
yet I assure you, the Repetition of his Mineralline conceits did abundantly
recompense that injury, by often produceing a smile or two at least.

But to proceed; many such visits being past, to work he went on Gold and
Mercury; amalgamized the first with the last; conjoined them with Antimony
after a previous preparation; and firmly resolved, after he had made it into a
Cinnabar that it should be Horizontal Gold: and enumerating praises in no wise
due to it, strived to recompense the fewness of its virtues by a Swelling and
Glorious Title. This we having the sight of easily perceived that 'twas a Mock
medicine, first from its Taste, secondly from its flying the Fire, thirdly from
the sparkling of the quicksilver dispersed, but not fixed in the composition: so
we, or to say more truly, my Tutor in my hearing, told him 'twas not the true
Horizontal. However he esteemed on it not a little, but would tell the People
'twas a rare Medicine for there was Gold in it, and would thereby make them
think that it was strangely good indeed: inasmuch as it is the custom of those
who are ignorant in Physic, to judge a Medicines Virtues according to the
costliness of its ingredients, or Mysteriousness of its composition, not
considering in the mean time that a price happens not in Nature; that a Disease
will not be baffled with a naked name; and that God who is the Patron of the
Poor, has chosen in Nature, as well as in Divinity, the Mean things of this
World to confound the Mighty.

This Medicine which wanted not for Price, he therefore liberally made use of;
and managed his business so untowardly, that few Practisers had worse success
than he had, till he had lost his practice wholly in a manner. However I would
not have you think but that some received good, for many Mercurial, and
Antimonial Medicines don't hurt always: Nay, I verily believe believ that
some, and those not a few, received great benefit by it. But yet some others
were very much injured. For when such Mercurial Medicines do meet with a
stomach whose Ferment goes to work and resolves them, and by consequence sets
the Mercury at liberty, then is it that the Villain, Mercury plays knavish
Tricks, and makes the Patient wish him out of his body: and if I my self were
Sick, and should send for a Physician, if he give me a Mercurial Medicine that
six others before me had done well after, whilst their Stomachs did not resolve
it; yet my Stomach through the propriety of its Ferment, setting the Mercury at
liberty (which none of theirs could) it might be a means to Kill, or mischief
me. Therefore I say with Helmont, that Mercury so long as it may be revived, is
a Poison, and not the Medicine of a good Man. I remember,

A young Man falling Sick was persuaded by some Visitants to accept of our
piece of unlearnedness for his Physician, and accordingly took as I was
informed a Dose of a certain powder, which, by its descriptions, I deemed was
either the conterfeit Horizontal, or some such hazardous Mineralline
production. But in short, the young Man's head sw^l'd so exceedingly that (as
one related to us that saw him and was a next neighbor to him) his eyes were
ghastly, and his swelled very much ( Oh Noble Mercury and Antimony) also his
Tongue black, and so swelled as not to be easily contained within its limits;
and thus being in very great Misery he breathed his last.

Another cure though less mischievous than the former was on a Gentleman of his
acquaintance, and of the same Neighborhood; one that for many years together
had been a Patient to my Sober Tutor. By whom having now for several years been
kept sound, through taking when need required such innocent, and lively
remedies as were meet: was at length overperswaded (thinking perhaps any one
might be a Chemist, and that all Medicines called Chemical were safe) to accept
of our piece of Unlearnedness for his Physician; and when his Body required
converse with Medicines, to take some of him, which he did. But after a few
months following his ill-contriv'd mixtures, was reduced to that weakness, that
his Legs seemed unable to support his Body. Thus being tormented with a daily
declining of his strength and an almost incessant gnawing in his Stomach, ( Oh
Noble Mercury and Antimony! He sends his Wife to his former Chemical Physician,
with requests to send something to give him ease, forasmuch as he supposed, and
so did his Wife, that the Medicines taken from the other; had exceedingly
weakened him, and were the cause of that Gnawing. His desires were answered, as
to obtaining ease, and getting strength; but not a real Cure: Mercury and
Antimony scorning to be baffled after that pitiful rate, whilst the very
texture of his Stomach and other vital bowels was vitiated. Insomuch that about
six months after, whilst as yet he was infirm, his occasions calling him to
London, he relapst; and there being helped forward in his Heavenly journey, by a
Mineralline dose which another half-witted Ignorant, and unlearned Chemist gave
him, he fairly breathed his last.

But leting our Piece of Unleardness pass I will give you another relation. A
Learned Physician my very familiar acquaintance, who from his Infancy was
educated in Physic, and chiefly in Pyrotechny; accidentally about the one and
twentieth year of his Age, met with an Author that magnifies some Mercurial
preparations, and impertinently styles on an All-curer, This the studious young
Physician reading, was no little animated to follow the Authors prescribed
process, and prepare this Medicine: but before hand acquaints his experienced
Father with his design, and accordingly was dissuaded from attempting. Nor was
it without cause; for his Father had been deceived in his Junior searches by
that Pr^t^an Subject, and such Collecting Authors, who not seldom write untried
Processes and Recipes taken upon Trust, that are too often Decipes.

But he notwithstanding believing the Author, Proceeded, Operated Variously
according to order, and that at no mean Charge; and at last having finished it,
took a few grains of it first himself: which made him so unmercifully Sick, and
paid him off so cruelly; that he would gladly, have been freed from his
perverse Guest, if he could. But in brief his Life being in Danger, ( Oh Noble
Mercury!) he applies himself to some Valiant, and innocent Remedies, which they
had in their Repository, that quickly dispatched it out of his Stomach, and
other the more Vital Bowels: and sending it to his Throat, it raised a small
sore so painful, that for nigh half a years time, it disquieted him day and
night; but in the end by strengthening Remedies he was cured. Whereas, for
ought I know, had they wanted good Medicines, he might have been Killed by
Noble Mercury.

And since, for this and diverse other good Reasons, he is so much an Enemy to
Mercurial Medicines; and so irreconcileably angry with them: that I persuade my
self he will not deal with them on any account; nor give such to the Sick were
he hired.

Neither is he only averse to Mercury; For Antimony so long as it Purges or
vomits he hates even as much: And that not without cause. For his ingenious and
grave Father, who in his junior studies hoped well concerning Antimomy, was
several times very much hurt by it: Whilst he honestly (because he would not
damage the Health of his Patients, and because he had good Medicines to cure
himself) would venture to take such Remedies first himself, to the loss and
hazard of his health. And to what end was it? That he might not give a
hazardous Medicine to the Sick, but might cast away such as he found were
disturbers of Nature. But this his tenderness toward his Patients, and Love to
the sick, once almost cost him his Life; for trying an Antimonial Medicine, as
he had oftentimes done several, he Purged and Vomited, so cruelly, that had he
not had good Medicines to put a stop to its Venom, it might have cost him his
Life however it hurt his stomach. Here was candor and honesty indeed! Oh that
we had many more such as he; or if not such; yet such as would be admonisht, to
take heed of Poisons, and defend the Lives of their Patients: As this
true-hearted Physician used to do: For when he by taking a Medicine found it
malignant, his next work was to cast it away; that he might not hurt his
Patients, nor discredit himself by giving such.

Though by this means amongst some people he lost the Repute of a Skilful
knowing Man; ^s if there were any skill in filling a Cupboards head with
insignificant Glasses, and Gally-pots; or as if there were any Art, or
Knowingness, in giving Poisonous Medicines to the sick. But he minded not, as I
tell you, the Poisoning Trade; having run through that before: and was more
willing to be counted unskilful by the Ignorant and Foolish, than to be both
Fool, and Knave, in walking against his Conscience; and in giving such
Medicines as were hurtful.

But to reassume our Discourse about Mercury, and to show our great adorers of
it Helmonts judgment; I shall desire them to take notice, he says. Therefore
although the Mercurial part of Metals, as also in the very Body of Mercury,
Pa. 408.
may resemble Vitrol, Oil, Salt, or Water, by reason of things put to it; yet
are they nothing but the deceivings of the Eyes, as being that which always
returns, from those masked forms, to Mercury again: because it is always
therein, according to all its properties, and Nature. Also a little after
denying the dividableness of Mercury* he says. For Nature cannot destroy the
seed which cannot die, nor be separated from its own matter; neither through
the sublunary Engines of this World can it die. Thus does he not only deny the
Separation of Mercury; but hints, that mixing it with other ingredients, is no
ways able to alter it, nor its properties. The which had he been silent
experience would have manifested from miserable events, as well as others have
declared it in their Works. But he elsewhere tells you that the Mercury ought
to die, without the association of Foreign Salts, or spirits: Upon this word
Foreign lies the stress: for he teaches that his Alkahest turns Mercury into
Horizontal Gold, but that it, to wit, his Alkahest is a thing so much unworthy
of the name Foreign, that he calls it a thing Consentaneous or agreeing with
the Radical Principles of Bodies, for says he Postquam scivi corpora denodare,
per consentanea suis principiis radicalibus, tum primum caepi cum salutari
^^dio irridere etc.

And now to let our Piece of Vnlearnedness see his mistake about Horizontal
Gold, I will borrow a few lines more from Helmont. He says. For as Gold is
reckoned to be bred in the Horizon of the D^ Lith. P. 69.
Hemisphere, so Mercury when it is made Diaphoretical, Sweet as Honey, and as
fixed as Gold; is Gold in its Horizon; and in Med icine is so much more Noble
than Gold, by how much an Oriental, Pearl, exceeds a Scottish one. He also, in
the foregoing Discourse, telling us of some, who with requests and threatenings,
would have obtained from him the secrets of Horizontal gold and Fire of Venus
says, First of all I have answered that the secret of Paracelsus his Liquor
Alkahest does hinder, to wit, the teacher and dispenser, of which the Almighty
has decreed to remain even to the end of the world, for reasons in part known
to adeptists.

But those who go to transform Mercury into the likeness of Salt, Water, or
Oil; therein following the Writers of young beginnings of Chemistry, do err:
as says Helmont, who adds by way of Confutation, amongst other things: I^ I
had not ( says he) seen Quicksilver to delude every endeavor of Artificers,
so as that it wholly flies away, as yet entire, or does wholly remain in the
Fire; and after either manner keeps its unchangeable Identity, and
undissolvable hom^geneity of sameliness: I should say that that Art was not
true, which is true, without a Ly, and most exceeding true. You may remember I
declared in the forgoing discourse, how mightily our Piece of Unlearnedness
would talk of the lapis Philosophorum, and on that account was well pleased with
Noble Mercury: But I forget to tell you how he was seconded in his attempts, by
the assistance of another, who was neither wellstudied, nor very Learned; but a
great Admirer of ^he Lapis. This his assistant ( who was counted a very honest
Man) unhappily had a Receipt conferred on him by a Woman which had found it, (
as she said) in an Old-Doublet left at her house; yet you must know, that he
had it on strict engagements of privacy; for if I thought you would not blab it
abroad, I could tell you it was no less than how to make the Philosophers
stone. This Receipt being presented to our Piece of Unlearnedness, and he
having seen it was pleased exceedingly with the thoughts of being a
Philosopher, and thereupon regarded not his money: nay he spared not to say
that were he worth thousands he would venture it, not doubting but that the end
would pay him with Usury.

Whereupon to work he went; and after long, tedious, and charegable Operatings
to no purpose, he pulls down his Laboratory, and builds another much larger;
but all proved in vain and to no purpose: For the Old-Doublet was defective,
and made him ineffectually cast away more money on it than would have bought
many new New-Ones. Only whilst he was a stone-hunting, he obtained the secret
(as he thought and boasted) of making Gold Volatile. For, (says he) I having
Amalgamiz'd many pounds worth of Gold with Mercury, and incorporated it with
other things, put it into heat; But the Glass breaking, away they flew, Gold
and all. Which in my opinion was neither a profitable Project, nor more an
argument of Volatility in the Gold, than it is of Life in a Dead Child,
forceably carried by an Active Man to the Top of a House. For the Gold being
almost Atomical, at least wise eaten into very small Particles, was by the
adjuncts carried away.

But what if the Old-Doublet had produced a Philosophers stone? What could you
have said then? You must needs have not only called it Miracle: But have
consequently concluded, and reasonably expected that a New-Doublet should
produce two.

Several such pretty stories I could afford you were I willing to spend Ink and
time in vain. In vain I say, seeing this one instance about Lapising is enough.
For my desire is (and to that end I inserted it) that such unwary ignorant men
may take heed: and not trust every Fabler and receipt they meet with; nor every
conceit of their own sublime Heads. Lest whilst they hunt after Gold they ruin
and undo themselves, and by following a crew of secrettellers prove themselves
such, of whom Augurellus speaks. Ut videas quandoque bonum sua praedia civ^m
Vend^nt^^, patriasque domos, mercesque repostas;
Fornaces inter versari: ac follibus auram
Captare, in tenuem, nefas, convertere fumum,
Rem dubias dum quaerit opes insanus, avitam.
Difficilem interea conjux, maestissima vitam
Protrahit, illachrimant nati, sit sordidus ipse
E lauto, ludusque patens, and fa^ula vulgi.
As thou may see a Citizen that is rich,
Sometimes to sell his farms; and houses which
His Fathers were, and hoarded wares to sell,
To catch the Bellows breath, and likewise dwell
with Furnaces, and (wicked it is!) presume,
His Grand-sires wealth to turn to slender-fume,
Whilst for uncertain gain he madly hoes
His Wife most sad and Melancholy goes,
His Sons lament, and being dirty, he
The vulgars sport and Fable comes to be.


Besides they themselves whilst to the ruin of their Estates and healths; they
run blind-folded on in their Operations, never consider what those Authors,
from whose writings they take the confidence of seeking it, do say. Therefore
that I may a little admonish such forward and over credulous Persons to take
heed for the future, and let them see such Receipts are worth nothing; I will
quote two or three of the most noted amongst them, and begin with Count
Trevisan first. Quicunque cupit artem veram addisc^re, versetur cum
sapientibus, (i. e.) istorum Libros legate and non impostorum, licet obscuris
verbis eam doceant nullibi eni^ claris and apertis verbis, descriptos ejusmodi
Libros reperies. Whosoever ( says he) desires to learn true Art, let him be
conversant with the Wise, that is, let him read their Books (and not those of
Impostors) though they teach it in obscure words. For thou shall nowhere find
such Books written in words plain and clear. Which saying of Count Trevisan
much contradicts the Actions of Receipt mongers, or such who would find it
stitcht up in an Old-Doublet; for if we shall no where find it written in plain
and intelligible phrases, never expect that the secret of secrets (for those
who write of it call it so) will be committed to half a sheet of Paper. And if
it is impossible, as Dionysius Zacharias says it is, to find all things
written in order, which are necessary to the Art; and that one Book expounds
another, because what is wanting in one is supplied in another: doubtless all
Recipes and suchlike half witted-stories must needs be exploded as error: his
words are, Unus liber alio declaratur, siquidem quod fortasse in uno deest
suppletur in alio; impossible namque est (sic disponente divino consilio)
reperiri omnia ex ordine Scripta quae ad hanc artem sunt necessaria. Thus he.
Nor says the Author of Correctio Fatuorum much less in his Prologue, whilst he
speaks of the benefit of Study. Imprimis (inquit) est, necessarium perstudium,
hujus suavis operis scientiam acquirere. Qui autem studuere abhorruerint, and
tamen laborare voluerint; impossible est iis secreta Philosophorum, ad
perfectum finem praeparare. De his sapientes dicunt, quod ii transeunt ad
practicam, sicut asinus ad coenam, nescientes ad quid rostrum porrigant. Ideo
omnes hujus artis apicem diligentes, studiis conentur insistere, and ex libris
haurire veritatem, and non ex mendosis (alias nidosis) neque fabulis fictis,
quia haec ars non inveniatur nisi per continuum studium, and Philosophorum
dictorum cognitionem. It is ( says he) a thing chiefly necessary, to obtain by
study the knowledge of this pleasant work. But they who abhor study, and yet
are willing to go to Labor; to such, it is a thing impossible, to bring the
secrets of Philosophy to perfection. Concerning these, the wise say, that they
go to practice like an Ass to supper, not knowing to what they reach forth
their snouts* therefore all the lovers of this Arts perfection, endeavor to
persist in their studies, and to gather Truth from Books, and not from lying,
though otherwise plausible Fables, nor yet from seigned ones. Because this Art
is not found unless through continual study, and through the knowledge of the
sayings of Philosophers. Many more Authors I could quote you to this very
purpose, did I not judge these three had said enough to satisfy those that are
intelligent. Therefore I shall next with as much brevity as I may speak a
little concerning the Writings of Johannes Rudolphus Glauberus, as being those
that have injured and abused many.

Concerning Glauber.
When I view Glaubers works and examine the forepart of them, I must needs
conclude he wrote not a few things that were very good and useful; though
methods tedious enough in Praeparation are delivered: But when I view the
latter part, to wit, the Appendix to the fifth part of Phylosophick furnaces,
his Annotations to his Appendix, his way of making Aurum Potabile, and his
separation of Gold out of Flints, Sand, Clay, etc. By the assistance of the
spirit of Salt,, it makes me even admire at the Man: and judge if he was not
mad nor out of his Wits, when he wrote those impertinent discourses, yet
conclude he was resolved to abuse the World with a parcel of Figments and
fictions, and out of a desire to impose on the toocredulous, pretend to teach
lucriferous secrets. I could wish with all my heart, I might be acquainted
with; or at least wise hear (which I never yet could) of some persons that had
been profited by his gain-bringing Arts; or that ever made his Aurum Potabile,
and found its virtues answering his Charactet; or that ever produced Gold from
Flints, Sand, Clay etc. in such wealthy quantities that they could get a
tolerable subsistence at it; that so I might, without wronging my own
judgment, count him neither Knave, Fool, nor Madman. For on the other hand I
have in his discommendation met with an Anonymous Latin Treatise published in
Holland in the year 1660. that Sudum philososph. pro Secret. Chym perspic.
has fully painted out his deceit.

Concerning which had the Author been silent and not blamed him for defrauding
several Persons of their moneys, under pretense of selling wonderful secrets;
his own writings would have so amply manifested it to the intelligent, if
thoroughly con'd, that no other proof had been wanting. For if it was not to
defraud the too-credulous, and persuade them into the belief of an imposture,
what meant he by exposing Gainful Arts to sale, whilst himself was poor, and
use whining Religious Phrases, and make use of the name of the thriceholy God,
to back and cloak his deceit: Truly I could heartily wish, that the name of the
Almighty and the Lord Jesus Christ were not thus made a cloak for roguery, But
it ever was, and ever will be in this world we may believe, that where true Men
are associated in fellowship; a crew of whining smooth-tongu'd Hypocrites will
enter, that under the notion of Religion they may with more ease and a fairer
gloss impose on the simple and unwary.

But to return to Glauber again: I say unless it were to deceive his Reader,
what made him publish gainful Arts whilst he manifests himself a wanter of
such: for in his Preface after his Appendix, he tells us: He had lived in these
places, meaning Holland, many years with disprofit, and therefore was resolved
whether the peace of Germany succeeded or not, to betake himself to such
places, where he might have opportunity to handle Coals and Mines -- Of which
what need was there, seeing he himself could teach such gainful Arts as the
separation of Gold out of Flints, Sand, or Clay. If these Arts were really
such, how came he to live idle with disprofit? What were neither Flints, Sand,
nor Clay in Holland, nor the Provinces adjoining, that he might in some sort
profit himself? For Charity begins at home: what were none of them there?
Surely then it is such a Country as is not in the World beside. Besides, is it
not strange, that he himself could never meet with one of those whole rocks
(nor half ones) and mountains of Gold, and great mountains filled with Golden
Sand and Clay, of which he speaks in the first part of his Mineral Work, Page
412, and concerning which he says how poor soever, Gold may be extracted out
of it, by the spirit of Salt, with Gain: and tells us it is such a secret by
which no man can be an impediment to another? It Is very strange he could never:
and may we not suppose him in his generation to have been Tantalus redivivus?
another Tantalus that in the midst of Golden Arts was poor? Who can suppose him
to be otherwise?

Doubtless these very pretty Crotchets, no little pleased him, when he
considered how they would be admired and star'd at. But I wonder with what
confidence he could send them to the Press. I remember the beforequoted
Anonymus Author says: how that he used to agree with the Printer for to have
some hundreds of the Copies for his Book; and how he used to bind them
curiously, and put his name encompassed with a Laurel, and the marks of the
seven Planets to set them off, and present one to this Plenipotentiarie,
another to another Great Man, and thus get same and greater rewards for them,
and excite them to buy his strangely gainful secrets: which was I must confess
a subtle trick, but I cannot say an honest one. Nor did he this alone, but the
same Author affirms, he cheated several of abundance of money; pretending to
teach wonderful secrets, and then put a trick on them at last.

To one Plenipotentiarie (he says) Glauber sold a Tract entitled Explicatio
Miraculi mundi, as it was in its manuscript for a hundred Ducats, and
afterward published it in Print: that Glauber for some highly praised secret,
had bargained with the same Great Man, and had received six hundred Imperials
before hand: and though a time was set wherein he was to prove the certainty
and truth of the secret; secret; yet that, and a longer, time being past the
expected certainty of it no where appeared. Another Person (he also says)
complained to him how he was defrauded by Glauber, and lost but four hundred
Imperials.

After this, the Anonymus says, he came into England, and at London found that
the writings of Glauber, which were translated into the English Idiom, did
excite many detractions and filthy speeches against him (to wit) because the
prescribed processes of the Author were most vain; and that frequently many
men, had vainly tried the greatest part of them, to their very great loss.

He says also that in Germany, Holland, and other places, complaints
concerning him were then frequent. One says, Alas for me! who have spent so
much money on Glauber, and have not indeed received on Pins worth of profit, or
gainful retribution from his Arts.

Says a second, I was seduced after this manner; in that I saw a little honest
good from Glaubers works: But all things in great quantity being bought for the
Process in laboring, and all things being effected according as I was
commanded; I received nothing again from thence but an utter loss of my
expenses.

A third says, behold what incredible naughtiness is in Glauber; his own
Conscience tells him, he cannot perform the Concentration he so exceedingly
boasted of. For notwithstanding, as he desired, wonderful Cauldrons, with all
other requisits for Concentration of Corn, and Wine, were prepared for him, and
that at other Men's costs: yet in lieu of these large expenses he produced
nothing of worth, insomuch that the most poor and indigent, were unwilling to
drink the Beer which he made; And yet desists not for all to invite even the
whole World, to such his Fallacious Arts.

Thus writes our Nameless Author; who I am persuaded was a Man singularly
honest, and wrote no ways out of design, but for the real benefit of his
neighbor: however his Principles are consentaneous with the Chemical, whilst
Glaubers seem uncouth and foreign. And whether or no he did write, what he did
did causlesly, ask those who have attempted Glaubers Mineral Work, and if you
can meet with one that came not off a looser at last, you will prove by farmore
fortunate than I have. On the other hand I knew one, a quick-witted, and
confident unlearned Junior Chemist, that was a mighty adorer of Glauber, and
gave no little credit to his writings: who on a time (doubtless he had read
Glauber well) boasted he could get twenty pounds a week by working on Minerals,
which made us not smile a little: But after his roving conjectures were put
into practice, he easily found his mistake; in that instead of getting twenty
pounds a week, he, I believe did not convert much less than a hundred pounds
yearly into Fume. And it is a wonder my Honest Tutor had not been caught amongst
the rest; however I believe he went not altogether Scot-free: and had doubtless
confounded a great deal more, had not this Anonymous Latin Treatise which I
have before cited, been sent him as a Present out of Holland, by a learned
acquaintance of his, not long after he had met with Glaubers works.

Who can sufficiently admire at the Folly of Glauber, and his ridiculous and
foppish impertinencies? surely I think none. Nor can any man skilled in
Chemical Science count him ought but such a Fantastical Scribler as the Author
of a book some years since Printed in London of five or six shillings price:
the Title of which promised to teach the Knowledge of all things past present
and to come. When the Book to give it is due, it was at the best, but a bundle
of Blockish Impertinences.

It seems to me our forecited Anonymus did not too-too-egregiously err, when
by an Anagram he called him Vah longus Verbo sed nil supra! For about his non
sen^ical Aurum Potabile, separating Gold from Flints, and other such like
gilded stories, he has made such a clutter in Print; that many who meet with
his Books, and believing all that they read is true, count themselves more than
ordinarily happy, and that hundreds a year are at their footsteps* If they are
not I heartily wish they were, and that so many had not been deceived by his
writings as have been; for then I had not had the trouble of mentioning him
here, to give warning to others for the Future.

To make Aurum Potabile he says Recipe (which you may make Decipe by changing
the first Letter) Of living Gold one part and three parts of Quick-Mercury, not
of the vulgar but the Philosophical, every where to be found without Charges,
and Labor; thou may also add of Living Silver equal weight with the Gold:
put them mixed in a Philosophical vessel to dissolve, and in the space of a
quarter of an hour, those mixed Metals will be radically dissolved by the
Mercury, and will give a purple color.

At the Abortiveness and irrationality of which Recipe who is able enough to
admire? First he bids us take living Gold, but tells us not wh^re it is to be
found: for common Gold is Dead. Next Quick Mercury not the Vulgar, but the
Philosophic every where to be found, without Charges, and Labor: yet gives us
no account, whree this every where is, nor tokens whereby we may know it. He
calls it also the Mercury of the Philosophers, yet confesses in another place
he knew it not; for speaking about the Philosophers stone, (which by some of
them is called their Mercury) he says in the fourth part of his Philosophic
furnaces, that he needed not to add any thing; of himself who was altogether
ignorant of the thing and if he was altogether ignorant of the thing, he knew
not their Mercury; and therefore blockishly bids others take what he knew not.
But must not Glaubers be a strange kind of Mercury, that being found without
cost or labor, is nevertheless so powerful and corrosive, that in the space of
an quarter of an hour shall dissolve the Living Gold and Silver too. Verily I
am persuaded, and that not groundlesly, he at last for the sake of money, and to
get profit by Printing, cared not (whilst he was idle) what fables he publish^,
so he might but make a noise in the World: for as says the often fore named
Anonymus. In praef. pa^. 2.
After that Glauber too much confided in the preganncy of his own Wit, and was
wounted to expose in public for certain truth what ever came into his head, he
inserted in his Books very many Vanities, Trifles, and Toys; against which not
a few have hitherto Dashed, but may as yet dash.

Now if Glauber had professed himself an Aenigmatical writer, as many others
have, and had told us he was not to be understood according to the Letter, he
had had some cloak for his Folly: But he on the contrary so much disowns such a
thing, that he professes himself a plain writer of Receipts. Only like a
Cunning Sophister, in the first part of his Mineral work, he says to his
Reader.

Impute the fault if the errest not to me, but to thine own ignorance, if thou
know not to extract the Gold; For I have written clearly, though thou
should not know any thing that were omitted: for it is certain, and no
fiction, that in many places there are found Golden Flints, and Golden Clay,
and Sand, oft-times abounding with Gold; and if they do not abound with it yet
may they be extracted with profit. And thus he G^lls the unwary and leads* them
along, that having once ^^Spdn^^d they may^er hazard more moneys, the^ count
him ^f Lies.

I cannot but exceedingly wonder, that any persons should be so stupidly idle,
and vain, to publishes unexperimented Processes: seeing that though they may
for some time, deceive the ignorant with their gilded impertinencies, and
fruitless Receipts; yet such must needs in the end be manifested false, and
even render them odious to Posterity. What may it be that they expect, as the
result of such Actions? Is it fame, and an honorable name, for the future?
Surely no; for they steer a wrong course, seeing no honout can proceed from a
publishing untruths, or an imprinting of that which is false: in regard it is
the custom of the veryest, Deceivers, much more of those Men who are True, to
speak against Vice and Falsity.

What is it an unbounded desire after money the root of all evil, and mischief
amongst men? If so I cannot but pity their Follies, and stand amazed to think
any should, for a little momentanie Wealth, hazard their Souls Eternally; and
venture the lose of a Crown Immortal for ter^estrial D^oss. Whilst forgetting
that Golden Law do as you would be done by, they make self the center of their
actions, and build lofty Fabrics on the Ruins of the unwary. Nay that is not
all; for though Glaubers lucriferous Arts, have plunged a pretty many lovers of
Chemistry (...) poverty, or at leastwise mad^ their po^ke^s ^^ghter by far; yet
many other Receit-Mongers amongst the Galenick, and Astral Tribe, do as much
(if not far more) hurt; whilst they fill the Press with Collections of
Collections, and pretend they do it for the good of the Country. But that
pretense only serves to mask their ambition, and to make the Book go off the
better; for the business is they would be in Print, but they want abilities to
accommadat the Press. Therefore because their small portions in really
Medicinal knowledge as also in literature, incapacitates them to produce such a
Physical Discourse, as as might prove truly advantageous in Medicine, they
forthwith turn Plagiaries, and hunting up and down, steal a few Receipts from
this Book, burying the Authors name (who perhaps himself took them but on
trust) and making some small and inconsiderable alteration, or none at all, add
more Receipts to them, taken out of another; as also more from a third, fourth,
and fifth Book, with some small and senseless additions (perchance) to make them
more Mysterious, or else diminutions, to alter them, lest any should cry
Stop-thief: and having digested them into a New-Method, this piece of Patchery
must pass for a New-Book, when it is several Scraps of Old-ones stufttogether

And thus Booksellers Shops, as also our Libraries, abound with Books upon
Books, but with few that are really Authors: How Injurious which thing is in
Medicine let any sober Physician judge, whilst Diseases are more malevolent
than to be played with.

Now the honest Country Gentleman, or his Charitable Wife, hearing of such a
wonderworking Book, that is come forth in English, (for it wants not a Splendid
Title,) presently has two or three shillings to spare for it, that they may
knock down Diseases by Lapfuls. The better to perform which the Author (I
mistake I should say the Collector or Plagiarist) tells them that this Remedy
is good for this Disease, that Medicine for another, though he never tried
them; and only have read so also a third for a third disease, and so on to the
end of the Chapter. Insomuch that now not a Disease must offer to be so bold,
as to peep where this Book is, least he pay the Punishment of his Sauciness.

For does he appear? away runs the well- intending Gentlewoman presently to her
Receipt-Book, and there meets with a Medicine that has twenty or thirty
Ingredients, or we will suppose but ten or fifteen in it: yet it being made is
at last so untoward and clo^ging, that it rater hurts than benefits the Sick;
whilst the mutinous ingredients are at a scuffle amongst themselves, who shall
fall foull on the Disease, and predominate.

One, two, or perhaps three of the Ingredients in the Composition, who were
formerly the Basis of the Medicine before 'twas confounded, they are willing to
do it, and would, but that some other Cross-grained ones wont let them, but are
rather fit to oppose then lend them their helping hand. And thus whilst some
Ingredients in the Medicine would, but are clogged and hindered by others, and
others cannot being improper, and only put in through want of no unskilfulness
in Nature; the Disease takes the greater Liberty of Tyrannizing.

Whereas if the honest Country Gentlewomen or Ladies for the relief of their
Poor Neighbors, would but make use of some such simple Medicines as a Carduus
posset etc. or a Medicine made of two, or three Ingredients, (for commonly the
simpler a Medicine is, the better it is) which the long experience of Mothers,
Grand-Mothers. and Great-Grand-Mothers, have told them is good, and profitable:
the Sick might be sooner relieved, than by such Recipe confused Medicines, as
are commonly huddled into Books, and Printed through desire of Fame.

There being scarcely one Receipt of ten that is good for any thing, but that
is subject one time with another to damage more than help Nature: and those
that are good in such books are commonly some few Balsams, Unguents, Emplasters
or Salves. But now to speak of a Fever, and its seat.

Concerning a Fever, its seat, and and the Nature of Remedies most proper for
its Cure.
ANd first, I judge it will not be amiss as Perliminary to Treat a little of
the vices of Ferments, and the contrary. They being of Genuine, proper and
true, the producers of quietude, and health in the Body, and e contra if
spurious, malign, estranged, and foreign, the Authors of all disorders and
Fevers. Thus a Thorn or Splinter in the hand, makes such disturbance through
its forreigness to the part, and its spurious fermentive odor, that it excites
a preternatural heat; and sometimes make the whole hand, and arm, sensible of
its power: thereby so altering and corrupting the Saline Blood which flows
thither, as summoned by the enraged Spirit of the part (which by Helmont is
called the Archeus) to expel the incroaching Enemy, as to make it put off
vitality.

So that thus in the mean time the Blood is busy to expel, but not able, and
for that cause angry, and hot; in approaching the Thorn (which through the
excitemenes of heat sends forth a spurious odor) it is changed from its saline
and Balsa^ick nature, and becomes as injurious as the Thorn. Insomuch that at
last instead of a Hostile Thorn only, a Thorn and Thorniness are present to the
more violent exalperating the Archeus. And indeed Optima Corrupta pessima, the
Blood the most lively juice of the Body being thus once deviated, and infected,
is no less mischievous than the Thorn. For it having through adheering to the
thornyleaven put on corruption, lost its salineness, and its vitality, is
thenceforth forbidden to circulate in with the Blood, and enjoy the benefit of
Life. However a ferment being begun, it glanceth forth its vicious rays; and
whilst the Archeus is enraged at what does afflict him, and neglects the
defense of his Territories, the neighboring good Blood is gradualy perverted (
for a little Leaven leavens a whole Lump) and the Life of the part is
endangered.

Thus you may see the cause of a Fever, and that though it takes its
denomination from Heat, yet that heat is but the effect, and therefore not so
much to be minded; seeing the thorn, or thing causing is cold, and Deadly. But
if whilst the thorn in the hand is unremov'd, or if removed whilst the begun
Thorny Ferment or leaven is in being, they should, to abate the accidental
Feverish-heat, let the Blood out, or apply coolers outwardly or inwardly;
opposing the preternatural heat with contraries, could you possibly, forbear
smiling, and not think them half- witted, or at least wise well furnished with
Ignorance? surely I think not: yet this way might, and should, doubtless have
served, had not Chyrurgical experience proved it Vain; and not only have
served, but we should perhaps have been able to bring, some old musty rotten
Axiom, to have proved it Authentic: if not backed with sufficient Authority.

For a great many of the Ancients, who were wonted, as at this day it is too
common, to strike at the effect not the cause; loving sloth, and ease, and
being loath to swim against the stream of a received opinion, lest they should
be accounted Heretics in Physic: deemed it better, more safe, and profitable,
to Transcribe Collect from, and comment on their Ancients, than in the least to
oppose their dark notions. Insomuch that till within the space of an hundred
years, there was rarely any, who sung not the same Cuckows note.

But Diseases growing more obstinate daily; and baffling the common method of
healing, whilst the Pox and Scurvy prevailed. God whose Mercies are beyond his
judgments, mercifully sent us Men, tender of the health of their Neighbor, and
that sought not wealth so much as Wisdom; who have so effectually laid open the
errors of Galen, (who was but a man at best, and therefore Subject to err) and
manifested the defects of the Ancients; who were likewise Men, that unless we
will wilfully shut our eyes as ( the greater is the Misery) too many do, we may
plainly enough see their barrenness.

I remember a Learned Gentleman of my acquaintance, no Physician but a general
student, and by that means intimate with some Court-Physicians, seriously told
me; that on a time he lately Discoursing with an eminent Doctor; a lover of
Chemical Principles, and asking him why he let his Patients be bleeded, seeing
he knew better things; had what follows for an answer. Sr. (says the Dr.) I am
forced to do it, otherwise I should have little to do, for the people will be
bleeded and look strangely on him that wont admit on it, and they must be
humored. I must needs confess the Doctors dealing is politic: but how in the
interim it fares with his Conscience, I know not: but surely I think, mine
would fly in my face, should I do any thing which I knew might prove injurious
to the Sick, though the Patient being ignorant persuaded me. Much good may his
gain by bleeding do him.

But to reassume our discourse about Foreign Ferments, and to prove them the
cause of heat in a Fever, leaving our Thorn, let us consider a Mote in the eye,
not unlike a Thorn to the part: of which I will Treat, after I have desired you
to take notice, that all Ferments are injured by strange ones, and that all
parts and Liquors of the Body abhor the intrusion of a forreigner. Thus a Mote
in the Eye stirs up a Feverish heat in the part, whilst Nature being hurt
sends moisture plentifully to wipe it away: But laboring in vain, grows
enraged, and angry, and gives leisure to the Mote ( heat being present) to lay
the foundation of a spurious* Acrimonious Ferment that corrupts' the Latex
flowing thither, and endeavors a total extirpation of the life of the part.
Insomuch that unless a Medicine contradictory to Acidity, and the Spurious
Ferment subvenes; a a continual weakness if not loss of the sight is threatened;
whilst the Latex, or Liquor which flows Saline from the Eyes when well, is
corrupted by the acid acrimonious Ferment.

Thus a certain Merchant from some Haydust or such like Motes that fell into
his Eyes, contracted a violent soreness; he took various remedies, as ordered
but they still grew worse and worse: at last, when he had for nigh too months
used many Medicines to cure them, and all attempts proved unsuccesful, because
they struck* not at the cause; a judicious Chemical Doctor my acquaintance,
whose many years converse with Pyrotechny had made him well skilled in
Physiology, and the Doctrine of Ferments, hearing the Merchant complain to his
Physician, that told him he must have Blisters Blisters raised in his Neck, to
draw the humor backwards; after the pretty ill-contriv'd old way strike at the
effect but neglect the cause) I say the Chemical Doctor hearing him complain
and seeing him like to loose his eyes sight; out of compassion offered him his
help contrary to his custom, (for I believe he hates that shabbed trick of
asking people to buy health) and told him he would give him something to cure
him; should not cost above half a Crown: the Merchant replied, he cared not
what it cost provided he could be cured: and thereupon coming next day to the
Doctors house, he gave him a Liquor that kills Spurious acid Ferments, and is
very friendly to the eye; which being dropped into his eyes, three or four
times a day, they were well in the space of ( as I think) three days. By which
you may still see the force of Ferments, and what Medicines are likeliest to
prevail.

And as a Fever in the hand is caused by a Thorn, a forreigner and an enemy to
the part; as also the like in the Eye by a Mote, both the begetters (heat being
present) of Spurious Ferments: so if it happens that any thing is admitted into
the Stomach (which I have in following Discourse endeavored to prove the Prime
seat of life; and there through its weakness, or neglect of the Vitals called
away from their duty, by some sudden fear, surprisal, or otherwise (for there
may be twenty ways to cause it) what ever is received in for nourishment,
deviates, and puts on a Hostile dress, and through debility is detained in that
Noble Bowel longer than it should: know the thing so detained is an Enemy, and
Metaphorical Thorn to the Stomach the prime seat of Life, and consequently the
Parent of Feverishness in the whole body byeconsent. The which thing happens
not to the Eye, or Hand, in regard they are less noble and nourished; and are
not those on whose welfare the life of the Whole Body depends: therefore no
more to be compared to the stomach in point of Excellence then Servants are to
their Masters. wherefore seeing the blood, which is innocent, is commonly
charged with the guilt of harboring the cause of a Fever, and is therefore let
out and Nature impoverisht, I will proceed to prove, that it is mightily
wronged, and lay the blame on the Stomach as its due.

To tell you that with Stomachical Medicines, and those that resist Spurious
Ferments, I have known of many hundreds that were cured of Fevers, without the
least assistance of Phlebotomy or endangering the Life of the Patient; and such
Fevers that the single and associated endeavors of several Galenists before
the Doctor that at last cured them with such, was called; will be, I suppose,
much to weak an argument to prove it; inasmuch as some may on on the other hand
object, that those Medicines I call stomachical, might be as well adapted to the
Blood, and might destroy the Spurious Ferment in it. I therefore shall
endeavor more amply to prove by arguments as well as examples.

And first I will begin with a Hectic Fever; which though numbered by many, and
that not ineptly, in the Catalogue of Consumptions, I shall here Summon in to
prove the stomach the seat of a Fever.

To tell you its definition, and to spend time and paper, to tell you the
opinion of the Ancients about it, would be a thing besides the matter: it being
not my intent to spin out a tedious Discourse, whilst the Disease is too
notoriously known. That the foundation of that febrile heat, which accompanies
a Hectic, is in the stomach, and that its weakness is the causer thereof, is
so apparent to any one that has but half an Eye, that to deny it would be vain:
whilst in the beginning of the Disease, and when it is in its Bud, a
Feverishness is wonted to possess the palms of the hand, and sometimes the
whole Body, in less than an hour after eating any thing liberally: and this
when as yet the food is in the stomach, and no chyle sent from thence to the
Venae Lacteae: much less to the blood in the Veins; that it might there prove
the cause of that Heat. Nor does the Aestuating and Feverishness cease, till
the stomach has overcome the oppression of the food, and in some sort fitted
it for the Duodenum: yet at last having digested and cleared it self of it, the
Aestuating spontaneously cease, till the stomach is over-loaded a fresh. Here
we see that a Fever is caused, and cured again, whilst the Blood in the Veins
is unconcerned.

That this is true my own experience has told me, besides what I saw from
others. For being some years since a little too Bookish, I in studying for the
health of others, lost my own. Yet not so, but that I could pretty well walk
about; for 'twas only my Spirits were flag'd, and the digestion of my stomach
weakened. This I felt for a mouth together, and could by no means be drawn to
give over, till by apparent signs I fully perceived my self in a Hectic Fever.
For usually at noon, after eating a moderate dinner, or at evening a supper,
the palms of my hands would burn, my head ach, and I was sometimes more than
ordinarily Feverish: that this Feverishness was from my Stomach, and that the
Blood was not concerned, any otherwise than as 'twas hot for the sake of the
vital Spirit, I will thus prove.

I usually about an hour (sometimes less) after Dinner or Supper, whilst as yet
the meat was in my stomach, was wonted to have the palms of my hands hot, and
sometimes other parts too, with no little pain in my head. Being therefore a
Tabler with my C^rdial Tutor, I knew how to come at Medicines; and would
usually, when I found the Fever and Headache violent, drink about four spounful
of two Medicines which were stomachical and abstersive, and as usually remove
them both in half an hours time hy enabling my stomach to master the food,
whilst it destroyed all inclinations to Spuriousness. Whereas should the food
have laid long, have declined, and proved Thorny, and the stomach not able to
dismiss it; the thing to be expected had been a continual Fever from Natures
endeavoring to expel it.

Nor is the heat in a Hectic, otherwise differing from that in a continual
Fever, than that the one is occasioned by food received into a stomach that is
unable to digest it, through an ill-habit and general weakness: and that the
other is caused from food received into a healthy strong stomach; which either
through its being too too much or from some other accidental error, Nature
being unable to dispose of it, lies there and degenerates, and Thorn-like
produces a Fever.

But a Fever which assaults Persons strong, and lusty, is commonly by far the
more vehement and raging; therefore wants the most excellent remedies. For
their stomachs being vigorous, a small matter hurts them not; and their
strength being confirmed bear`s them out: so that if they are caught, commonly
the offense is to some purpose, and they sometimes dearly pay the punishment of
their offense. For what is more common, than to have robust, and jovial people;
if after surfeiting and surcharging their Stomachs, they fall into a continual
Fever: for want of potent abstersive remedies to destroy the foreign ferment
and enable the stomach to do its duty, to take their last farewell of this
World, when Phlebotomy and the Doctors coolers have done their best. And all
because they mistaking the matter fall soul on the innocent Blood, and never
level at the cause in the Stomach. Whereas they that are weakly, tender, and
feeblish, not daring to be so bold with their stomachs; if they exceed their
little Doses, and their healths are prejudiced by it; yet it not being so over
much to excess, they make shift to wade from under it, with some slender
disturbance, and pretty easily recover again:

But what is the seat of a Continual Fever, always in the Stomach and no where
else? If you mean those Fevers which are bred by themselves alone, and don't
borrow their being from strange passions: I say yes* for experience tells me so.

To the truth of which Helmont testifies, after he had said, I will Tract. d^
Feb. Cap. 9.
show both the seat and manner of a Fever, in such manner as experience, and a
long diligent search of things, has made manifest unto me. Thus he delivers
himself, First of all therefore a Diary, and that which is called an Ephemerial
Fever from the duration of one day, si^s in the hollow of the Stomach, and is
for the most part from vitiated food; therefore also after ^omiting or the
finishing of digestion it cease of its own accord. Likewise a consumptional
or Hectic Fever, is a certain quotidian or daily Diarie, returding soon after
the taking of food, from a part of it being corrupted. And in chapter 10. he says,
that they are so much the worse Fevers, which shall not sit in the hollowness
of the Stomach, but in its unequal parts; because none but an extraordinary
Arcanum can reach unto those places. And therefore all Camp and all Endemical
Fevers are more stubborn than others and for the most part without Thirst;
wherein the heat is scarce perceivable, and a continual perplexity alone brings
the sick unto their Coffin: for suchlike Fevers defile only from without, and
affect the last nourishment of the stomach. Because indeed so long as we live,
our whole Body according to Hippocrtes is transpirable, and exspirable. For I
have elsewhere demonstrated the Lungs, and Diaphragma, are on every side
passible with pores in live-Bodies. Through which while Endemicks pass, and
smite the unequal part of the Stomach, they oft-times infect the last
nourishment -- Elsewhere in the same Chap. he says, that those Fevers that
are nearest to the Orifice of the stomach, are by so much the more molesting,
and formidable in their perplexities.

To confirm the truth of which Doctrine concerning a Fevers seat in the
Stomach, a loathing, just after the beginning of a Fever, an abhorring of
fleshes, fishes, and those things which readily corrupt, do offer themselve; as
likewise thirst, and want of Appetite do prove it. Pain in the forepart of the
head, Do tages, a great Drowsiness sometimes and watching other some, pain
about the mouth of the Stomach, and sometimes in that part of the back on which
the stomach rests, do also show it. Burntish and stinking belchings, a
prostrated Digestion, and Vomitings plainly attest it; as also roughness,
foulness, Dryness, and Blackness of the tongue and mouth.

But to prove more fully that the stomach is the harbinger of the Thorn, and
the Blood only hot by consent, and for the sake of the Vitals; as also to
manifest that Helmont was no wa^es mistaken when he said, that the nigher the
seat of Fevers are to the Orifice of the stomach, they are by so much the more
troublesome and formidable in their perplexities, take these following examples.

In the year 1660. being the fifteenth year of my Age, about Mid-Summer
occasions requiring my taking Coach for London, I returned from thence into the
Country again about a month after; and the last night upon the road, my Jovial
companions requiring it, by consent after supper we went to be merry or rather
to speak more properly be Mad. We having drunk pretty high though not to
drunkenness, I that always before was accustomed to moderate drinking, was
illish next morning; and about noon had a pain in my Stomach. But at night when
I came home was assaulted with a violent fever, whilst my Head and stomach
grievously ach'd and a violent pain possessed my Back, doubtless caused by the
stomachs leaning on the backbone. In this plght I was when next morning they
sent to a Physician, who sent me a purging dose: I took it the next day, and
had six or seven stools, but my pains were more and more increast, insomuch
that I did little but roar.

At night after taking some Kitchen-Physick, I went to bed being ill, and next
morning when I awakt I found my sel^-well; and accordingly arose and came down.
They wondered to see me whilst with Joy I told them I was well, and had not the
least pain or Fever: But a few hours after they viewing my hands, and face,
found the Small Pox coming out thick and three fold, as being I believe made
worse by the purge.

Hereupon, my bed being warmed, I was sent back again to it, and with
Difficulty escapt with my life: but for five years after this with, what with
the weakennings of this fit, twice bleeding an Issue, often vomitting, and
oftener purging; I was every year as duly as autumn came, laid up with a
continual Fever, or an intermitting one. Though ever since through the benefit
of such healters whose properties I have described, I was not sick, to say
sick, two days.

By this my sickness was manifested the seat of a Fever, and that Helmonts
assertion is true. For if the seat of a Fever is the Blood at which the
Galenists shoot their arrows; how came it to pass I was not pained through all
parts, seeing the Blood does circulate through all? and that only my stomach as
chief and my Head and Back by consent should be punished by the Feverish cause?
also how came it to pass that after it was out of my stomach, and that the pain
from thence and from my Head and Back was removed* that the Fever ceased, and
all illness was banished, whilst yet the impurity was in my Blood? For if a
Fever should have its Throne in the Blood, to wit a forreigner or Enemy being
in it: It should then at that time when I thought and felt my self perfectly
well have Aestuated most, and been Feverish; seeing at that time the morbous
Fex was present in my Blood, and was going to be driven to without.

Where will they find lurking-holes now? and how will they prove Phl^botomy
needful? They will tell you, or at leastwise they may, that they love to walk
safely in the footsteps of the Ancients; though were those Ancients now living
in our Northern Climats, doubtless our modern, and more stubborn diseases would
baffle both them, and their frigid methods: and that (though some of them wrote
like Ignoramus's, and were scarcely in the least acquainted with Dame Nature)
they had rather persist in their ( Heathenish) methods, whilst Diseases in the
interim get footing, than now being old, and wanting Medicines to cure, leave
destructive Plebotomy off. They would do well in the mean time to tell us, if
the Ancients were such excellent Naturalists; why the Romans who were a people
not void of sense, by the persuasions of Ca^o the Censor, banished the Method of
Physic from their City: he alleging how easily a man might live without it,
having lived fourscore and five years himself without a Physician; but
doubtless not without Physic, for all things that are good, and by experience
found innocent and healthy, may without a solecisme be termed Physic: but
whatever is destructive, disgustful or a weakner of the Faculties, is
improperly called so.

But that which I believe was banished from Rome as hurtful, and exasperated
their spirits against the Art, was their poisonous dos^s, and those methods
that rather weaken than strengthen a man. I could wish they, to wit poisonous
Remedies had never returned, and had never been counted more, as Physic; for
then my Father for ought I know might have been alive to this day.

However I will not leave the matter thus, but will prove by one example more,
that the occasional thorn, and cause of a Fever has its seat, and residence in
the Stomach: and that therefore to let the Blood out whilst it is only hot by
accident, is a needless thing, if not hurtful.

A Gentleman my acquaintance falling sick after the eating of something that
disagreed with him, fell into a Fever, an eminent Galenist was sent for, and
for a fort-night labored in vain to abate the Fever; notwithstanding his
Bleedings and his Coolers.

Hereupon the Gentleman being given over as incurable, though as many are, he
was afraid of a Chemist, yet sent for my honest Tutor, knowing at last he could
but die, as the Alder-man his Father, and also his Mother, had done about six
weeks before of a Fever and were buried together in one day; after they had
each of them been bleeded once or twice at least.

The Chemical Doctor hereupon visited him, and finding him very weak, and in a
Fever, with a very great pain in his stomach went home and sent him two
Medicines, on an enemy to Acidity, and Acrimonious spurious Ferments, and the
other Cordialine to revive his drooping spirits.

He took the first as ordered several times, and about six hours after when the
Doctor visited him again he found him a small matter better, but the Fever not
removed, and the pain in his Stomach remaining: because the Medicine taken
inwards was not strong enough alone to conquer the Diseasie Leaven in his
stomach, which as a thorn, or rather thorniness, there Implanted, was the cause
and parent of the Fever. Hereupon he took another Remedy that kills acidity and
that was somewhat akin to the first, and applies it outwardly to the Pit of his
Stomach: and then gave him Medicines as before plentifully to drink. These by
their insinuating and subtle liveliness so narrowly on both sides, beset the
foreign spurious Guest, that next morning there remained no footsteps on`t (
see here the power of Ferments) so that the Doctor visiting him found him
pretty well, only weakened with his fortnights sickness: for which cause
cordials and such Medicines still were successively given him; and Sack, and
good strong Beer with a Tossed in moderate quantities were not omitted.

By following of these he in less than four days space left his bed, and
walked about the chamber: a fame of which flying abroad, a certain pretender to
huge skill in Medicine and to as great in feeling the Pulse, (concerning whom
also elsewhere) came boldly to give him a visit. Whereupon seeing him so well,
to the end the Chemical Doctor might not have the whole honor, feeling his
Pulse, tells him he was in a continual Fever, and that 'twould hazard his Life
if he were not bleeded.

This exceedingly disturbed the young Gentleman, ( for Death is the King of
Terrors) and caused him forthwith to send for the honest Doctor in haste to
hear what he would say to it. The Gentleman having told what the Apothecary had
said concerning bleeding him; The Chemical Doctor asked him how he found
himself: he replied very well, and that the pain was removed from his Stomach.
Upon this the Doctor heartned him up, and admonisht him not to let in fears,
for he doubted not of his doing well; adding, that if a Fever had been present
his Body would have been out of order, and cheerfully bad him farewell. The
Gentleman got strength apace, and yet kept his blood, and saw the Cunning
Pulse-feeler mistaken: for within seven or eight days after he walked abroad,
and remains well now it is several years since. But by this means he is become
such a Chemical Convert, that he cares for none but Chemical Remedies: nor
cares he for them unless they are stomachical, and agree with the Life of that
part.

Abundance of instances as remarkable as these I could bring, did I think it
needful here: but omitting them, I shall desire you to consider how little
benefit Phlebotomy affords, whilst the Blood is not concerned in the matter.
For though the Blood seems to look of various colors when it is let out, as
being inflamed for the sake of the Vitals at the Disease that intrudes: yet
does that not argue in the least a necessity of letting it out, seeing a Fever
is and may be safely cured without it* to say that there is putrefaction in the
Blood, and that for that cause it should be emitted won`t do neither; seeing if
it be deviated or putrefied, good and bad together will be retained, as well as
let out. Besides, that the Blood is not putrefied plainly appears, from its
return to vitality when the Fever is overcome, though not an ounce of it was
transmitted: also from its losing that discolouredness which appeared in the
Fever when the cause in the stomach is removed and the preternatural aestuating
cease. Whereas were the Blood really putrefied it could not be, seeing a
returning from Real corruption to Life and Health is denied. Besides if the
Blood should putrefie in the Veins, the Veins themselves would putrify as in
Gangrenes, etc.

But what are the Signs of the Blood being putrefied?

Is it not from Diverse colors appearing in the porringer, after it is let out?
As Black, Yellow, Duskish, White, and somewhat Greenish color? is it not from
a slimy, gross, watery thin matter? and lastly is it not from a consistence not
thready or fibrous, scarce cleaving together? And if these be the tokens of
Blood being putrified, let us hear what the Learned Chemical Physician Van
Helmont faith concering it, from whom I made bold to borrow these queries.

In answer to them, says he, I declare under the penalty of a convicted Ly, if
any one De feb. Cap. 2.
will make trial, that I have examined the Bloods of two hundred wanton Country
healthy people in one only day, and many of them were exceedingly unlike like
in their aspect, color, matter, and consistence. Many Aspectu valde
dissimilares color, materia, and consistentia.
of which I destil'd and found them a like profitable in healing. For our
Country People are wonted at every Whitsuntide, to let out their Blood, to to
the end they may drink the more largely: and though many of them seemed to be
putrefied, others Cankery or Black-Chollery; yet nevertheless the Countrymen
from whence those bloods issued were very healthful: Therefore they confirmed
me, the tokens of corruption not gain saying it, that they had their bloods not
alien'd in the least, or estranged from the Nature of a Balsame. Wherefore I
have laughed at the Table of judgments from the beholding of Blood emitted; and
have really concluded, that by Physicians the venal Blood is commanded to
bekept, on this account that at leastwise they might number one visit to the
sick. For if corruption of the Blood has any where a place, and if under that
name it betokens the letting forth of it self, surely that must be in the
Plague. But in the Plague the cutting of a Vein is destructive. Therefore
Putrefaction is no where in the Blood of the Veins, nor a fear lest the
putrefaction of that Blood should prevail; and by consequence the scope of
letting out the Blood is in this respect erroneous. Thus said Helmont.

Nor is his Doctrine coatradictory to experience; for let others talk of the
Blood being faulty in a Fever and of its being the cause of the aestuating, and
corrupted, if they will call it so. Yet I testify, I have known of many
hundreds cured safely and happily of a Fever, by remedies that were innocent
Stomachical and lively, and the destroyers of foreign ferments, without the
least assistance of Bloodletting. Nor were months required to cure a Fever with
such, whilst commonly five days space did it: sometimes four, sometimes three
sometimes two. And sometimes if the Patient was pretty strong, and not much
weakened in his Vitals, one days time would do it, without attending the
leisure of a Crisis. But if the party had been one that had long languisht
under other Physicians, and was thereby much impaired and debilitated: though
it required many times three weeks, if not longer, to regain his lost strength,
yet four or five days time at most carried off the Fever.

One thing there is which I have observed very injurious in Physic, that is
masked under the vizard of Art. To wit, that a Physician being called whether
in a Fever or otherwise, does, notwithstanding his pretenses to Method, and
withstanding the Disease, see it violently get footing, whilst he gapes for a
judicial Crisis. And for all he tells them,

Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas convaluere moras.
Withstand at first, for healers late I say
Prepared are, when evils through delay
Have waxed strong --
And is permitted, by being sent for in time, obstare principiis; yet by
clogging drossy Medicines and debilitating methods, lets the Disease grow
worse; And when through the ineffectualness of his Remedies he sees the sick
party dangerously Ill, he tells the bystanders that the Disease is
pertinacious, stubborn, and difficult to be cured; and that he has done the
utmost Art and method will allow him, and therefore now he will wait for a
Crisis. But if in the inte^im, or a little after* Nature being not wholly
defeated does (like a Fire almost extinguished with water and dirt) through the
benefit of a few sparks of life left in its Embers, revive and get strength by
the assistance of a little Kitchen Physic, when the clogging Medicines are
laid aside, and non-plust; how is the Doctor applauded for his mighty Cure, and
Nature not in the least commended: notwithstanding ^hee (opposing the Disease
and Medicine too), did the Cure by her proper strength. This I have often
beheld* and wondered to see that the people could suffer themselves to be so
signally deluded. For if a Person is slightly affected and illish and the
Doctor, being sent for, gives him medicines so ineffectual as to exasperate the
disease, or let it grow stronger; thereby confining his Patient to the Dungeon
of a sick bed* and yet after all this if Nature by her own strength does the
work* and restores the sick again; or if by other remedies aiding she does it;
Know this for certain the first Method and Medicines were destructive, and no
ways assistant to Nature. For shall Remedies not be able to deliver one out of
the hands of a slight Disease, and yet be able to effect it when it is twice
worse? I say no: For you may as well imagine that person able to carry five
hundred weight on his back, who upon trial could not carry three. But indeed
that their Remedies do not do it is plain, and it is as manifest that Phlebotomy
is useless: for commonly when they have brought the Sick to that pass that it is
dubious whether they will live or dye, and only attend upon a Crisis, then they
apply themselves to Cordials, and to Kitchen* Physic, and their Patients are
sometimes recovered by them.

Whereas if Medicines are truly Stomachical, the destroyers of foreign
Ferments, Friendly to the life, Resisters of poison, and innocent, they do not
use to permit the growth of diseases: But laying the Axe to the Root, cut them
down (if they are acute) in the space of four or five days: And the first day
give the Patient such a Testimony of their Vigor, and of their Power and
abilities in healing; that instead of growing sicker, they arefar more
cheerful, and have thereby encouragement to take them. But if such Medicines
have been exhibited* as I have several times known, and the Patient has
vomited them up; and has after taking them often still done the same, so that
no such Medicine could be admitted to work upon the Disease: It was an apparent
sign of the Patients not recovery, and that the morbous Faex reigned in his
Stomach.

And if such innocent Medicines as I have before spoken of (with others as
occasion) have been taken in some Diseases of long continuance, and that
therefore required the longer time for extirpating them, and their Semina, And
have not in six days time, or less, given some testimony of their Vigor and
Virtues; but have nevertheless suffered either the Disease to stand at a stay,
or get strength: I say the Remedies being thus non-plust, if the Disease did
more narrowly beset the life in the Stomach etc. It was a real sign of the
Patients not recovery, and that the best shop Remedies would be baffled.

Therefore I say, and say it again, that that Physician who lets a Patient for
several days decline, whilst he makes use of Remedies in a Fever, or other
such like Acute distempers; and yet at last the Party recover: deserves not in
the least to have the honor of the Cure, whilst Nature by her goodness
effected it. For had she not done it, for all his Crisis the Patient had died
at last.

And let it not suffice to say this learned man, or that learned man uses
Phlebotomy in a Fever, and therefore we may do so: for if they do so, know it is
through a penury of good Remedies, for where noble Remedies are, there is no
need of it. And know also that Helmont who out of compassion to his neighbor
wrote expressly against it, was as Learned as the Learndest o^ them all: and
that not a few Learned and Graduated Doctors in this Nation have appeared in
Public against it. I remember one of our ingenious Moderns, in a treatise of
his lately published, heartily confesses that he, through a penury of good
Remedies in some high Fevers, made use of the Lancet. I must needs highly
commend his candor, whilst he does his best to find better; and could wish more
Physicians had so much good will toward their Neighbor as to be as diligent
as he.

^or Purging and Phlebotomy, the two main Pillars of the common Method, where
found by learned Helmont so fruitless and destructive in Fevers: that with a
serious Character he affirms he should be guilty before God, if he did not
persuade we must wholly abstain from them.

What must we do then? Go to labor as other honest Physicians have done, and
take heed of Mercury and Antimony, by which means you may get Medicines that
will credit a Physician, and certainly cure a Fever. Such Medicines, I say, if
you are as fortunate as some others have been, that will not stand shall I?
shall I? but will fall to work on the Disease presently; and if Nature be not
too weak, will enable her to cast it out the doors, either by Vomit, Sweat,
Stool, or Urine, according as she best can dispose ont.

But what, is a Fever by no means safely to be Cured by Phlebotomy and
borrowing the assistance of the L^ncet? do not we see that a person in a Fever
that is exceeding hot, has that aestuating abated by bleeding, and it
afterward the heat increases, and the Fever is renewed, cooling again is
produced by sanguimission? is not this obvious and manifest? I answer it is
obvious that after bloodletting the Patient is cooled, but you do not consider
how; for it is no otherwise then as the Vitals are weakened, and so a desisting
for a time from the Combat between Nature and the Occasional cause in the
Stomach is admitted of. For when she has rallied, and gained a reinforcement,
and is enabled to give another onset, the Fever renews, and is as ill as
before, and if you think meet requires a cooling. But I don't mean by a loss of
more blood; for if you go that way to work, your cooling will but add weakness
to weakness, and take away strength from the shoulders of Nature. And yet after
a second or third opening of a Vein, and a loss of that Crimson Treasure, if
the Cause, the Cause, the Cause I say, in the Stomach remain and Nature is not
wholly prostrated, the Fever will again renew in spite of the Lancet's
assistance. For Manente causa, non tollitur effectus.

A Thorn in the hand remaining, a heat and Fever in that part does not cease.
And the occasional matter (like a Thorn) remaining in the Stomach, heat in the
whole body will not cease, so long as the Life can make resistance. But when
you have let out too much of the Bload, so that not enough remains to make good
the Combat, the Patient is fairly cooled, and to the small honor of
Phlebotomy, dies: whilst the numbers of the Fatherless are increast.

Whereas had a Medicine that is able to preserve it self from Mouldiness in the
Glass or Gally-pot, and not only so but also lively, innocent, friendly to the
Stomach, and a resister of Spurious ferments, been administered; with some other
Cordialine Medicine, according to the necessities of the sick* to revive and
keep up his spirits: Nature might not only have been enabled to expel the
Occasional cause, by ways most meet and easy; but likewise the Thornyness, or
bad Character imprinted on the stomach, and its dependants, might be
obliterated; as also the faculties and functions strengthened. So that a person
cured after this method and way might be as lusty in few days as before.

When as those that are cured after repeated Phlebotomy and such like
exhausters of the strength, if they at length recover through the benefit of
Nature or otherwise: How slowly do they get strength? how thin and weak (like
small beer its own self) are they for a long time? and how subject on the least
error or cold to suffer a relapse. The last of which De Feb. Cap. 1. and alibi
the learned Dr. Willis confesses, saying, They who let their blood often out
are the more prone to Fevers.

Neither, as some suppose, is Putrefaction in the Heart or Stomach the producer
of heat of it self; and so consequently the cause of heat in the whole body:
For if so that Putrefaction which of it self is so Hot, as to extend its heat
to the Extremes and Surface of the Body ( i. e.) to the hands and feet; must of
necessity scorch or burn thot bowel wherein it resides. But that the real
producer of that aestuating and Feverishness, is not an inflamed mass of
putryfyings, I shall prove by a Thorn thrust into the hand; which is so for
from being hot, that it is actually and potentially could: and yet through its
being an Enemy to the life of the part, inrageth it, and exiteth a Fever: Which
cannot better be extinguished than by a strengthening of the injured life, and
enabling it by good remedies to expel the Thorn and Thornyness. By doing which,
the Praeternatural heat will of its own accord cease, without the aid of
Coolers, or taking away the Blood. Therefore is the Heat in a Fever a thing by
accident, a latter product, not the being or occasional cause; and consequently
not so much to be regarded, as for that cause, and for fear of inflaming the
sick, by adding a kind of Fire to Fire, as they phrase it: to deny, when the
Patient desires it, a Glass or two of comfortable Liquor (to wit) Good Beer,
Ale* or Sack in moderate quantities. It having been by long experience proved
that through the assistance of such in Fevers, much good may be done: Seeing
many have recovered by their sole aid, when the Apothecaries Drugs have proved
aidless without them. But if with them, good, innocent, yet lively Remedies are
given to corroborate and strengthen the functions, by destroying all Spurious
Ferments: The Disease must needs with more ease be expelled, and cast forth by
a twofold assistance. But to let you see the excellency of Lively Liquors in a
Fever, I have inserted these following relations.

A Gentleman my acquaintance, being in a Fever, was forbidden, though he
desired it often, the use of strong-beer by the Doctor, saying 'twas as much as
his life was worth. The Fever continuing, and whilst he languisht, not being
able to obtain any of his wife and attendants, who were frightened with the
menaces of the Doctor; the Gentleman was resolved to try the event, not
doubting but he should do well, and therefore watching his opportunity, in
their absence privately steals to the place where the Strong-beer lay, and
drawing two large Tankards full drank them off, and carried a third to his
bedside; the which he also drank off, and laid himself down, and began within
few hours to mend upon it. The Doctor not long after coming to see him, he
asked, and earnestly requested he might have some Strongbeer: The Doctor
answered not by any means, adding 'twill inflame you; Well (replies he again)
come what will on it, I have taken three Tankerds full, and so he tells him how,
to which the Doctor knew not what to say, seeing him so much mended. And there
upon contrary to his adored Small-beer Method the sickman quickly recovered,
who otherwise had undoubtedly laid Languishing a long while, if not perished at
last, by following Heartless Slops and Spiritless Small-beer.

Also a man and his wife, both my Quondam acquaintance, and neighbors, being
in a Fever, and prohibited by their Doctor to drink Strong-beer, Ale, or Sack;
where thereupon through about two months sickness so very weak, that their
recovery was despaired of by many. But whilst they were thus languishing, and
the Doctor not coming as he used to do, necessity required them to send their
son to him: who found the Doctor indisposed and feverish. But the prettiness of
the Knack was that Master Docter who denied strong-beer to his two Patients,
wanting a refreshing dram or two whilst the youth was there, was almost angry
with his servant for not quickly bringing up a Cup of the Best-beer to quench
his thirst. The youth observing this at his coming home tells it to his
Parents, and thereby renewed their desire to drink a cup of Good Beer, etc. But
being unwilling to do it without a Doctors advice, resolved to consult another,
and accordingly send for him. Who being a Chemical Physician spontaneously
advised them to follow lively corroborating liquors* and drink now and then a
Glass of Wine ot Ale, with a Toste to warm it. These conditions of peace were
mighty pleasing, and proved no less efficacious and profitable: seeing that
with the aids of such, and a Dose or two of Physic (I don't mean purging) they
both shortly recovered.

Many such remarkable instances I could give you, which were in
complaining-wise told me by the very Parties themselves, that in sickness were
thus forbidden strong liquors, and that on no less penalty than Death it self.
One of them (a Gentlewoman) told me, that had she not, when some years since
she was in a Fever, drunk Sack liberally, contrary to the Doctors strick't
command, she had been in the black Box (meaning the Coffin) e're now: For, as
she seriously told me, by the help of it and other Kitchen Physic, whilst she
took none of those Decoctions the Doctor ordered, she safely recovered in the
space of ten or twelve days, the Doctor thinking she followed his orders. But
on the seventh o^ eighth day the Fever being vanished, the Doctor told her she
might drink Sack or Strong-beer: Whereupon she replied she had done it all
this while, and that if she had not she had been in the Black Box. The Doctor
hearing which, told her if she was wiser than he ( as truly I think she was
in this) he would come nigh her no more, and in a chafe went away and proved as
good as his word: But she recovered, and I saw her well lately.

Such like passages as these almost every Nurse-keeper can tell you; some of
whom are so ingenious and witty, that when the Doctor has told his tale, and
has anathematized strong liquors they will nevertheless use them, and that
succesfully: Concerning which I could give you one remarkable instance, but it
being too long I must omit it. I wonder in the mean time however that the
people should be so unwise as thus to be led by the nose, and frightened with
the threatenings of the Doctor. For if the Doctor whilst he is sick may follow
the dictates of his own stomach in such indifferent things, I know not why the
Patient may not. For it is well known, and by some taken great notice of, if a
Doctor himself be sick of a Fever; not a spoonful of Small-beer shall enter
his stomach if he find it rather crave Strong. Though he command his Patient to
drink Small: I will not say to keep them long under cure, but shall leave
others to consider the reason of it. It Is true, and cannot be denied, that
Strong Spirituous Liquors, Sack, or Ale, do a little heat the body for the
present: Yet if they be moderately taken (to wit a Glass at a time) the
strength which the Vitals receive theref^om, does in a five-^old measure
recompense that Injury, by enabling them the better to withstand the disease.
Others there are who having desired cold water, and laid for want thereof in a
more violent Fever, have begun exceedingly to mend and grow better, when their
earnest requests were fulfilled: Only care must be taken to give a little at a
time, least instead of refreshing with watter they do harm.

These Examples I have brought to Confirm the use, and necessariness, of Strong
wholesome Liquors in a Fever, be it never so high, if the Patient desire it, and
it be given in moderate quantities. It being the office of a Physician in these
indifferent things to follow the guidance of wise Nature, (who says Helmont is
wiser than all the wits of the Schools) and always to aim at a confirmation of
the faculties, not exhausting the strength and Vitals.

For, as many times only through a failing in them, diseases are caused, and a
hurtful guest introduced to the damage and detriment of the functions; which
otherwise, had they been vigourous, had not been admitted: Therefore a
Physician aim ought to be the strengthening of them by Medicines well agreeing,
and such that may prove true helpers and corroborators of the Vitals. For that
being once well performed, Nature who before was weak, and admitted the Diseasy
Faex, will again expel it by ways most requisite and advantageous. For, as
says Hippocrates, Natura est Morborum Medicatrix, Nature is the Physicianness
of diseases: and therefore ought by no means to be impoverisht. Thus far
concerning a Fever.

I intending to discourse of a Pleurisy next, and of the safety of curing it
without Bloodletting, by the assistance of virtuous Remedies: as also of the
needlesness of opening a Vein, provided Remedies that will cure are at hand.
Though in their absence, to prevent a greater mischief, the use of the Lancet
may prove advantageous: we being admonisht by the vulgar proverb To choose the
least of Evils.

Concerning a Pleurisy, and the^ curing of it without Blood-letting.
And first it will not be amiss to take notice, that as Salt is the Savourer
and preserver of all things, so is it next to the life, the preserver of
integ^ety in the Humane Fabric: and that no otherwise than from a pricking and
stimulating Sharpness entered into the Blood and laid aside in the Pleura, has a
Pleurisy its rise. For as the Blood, the most livelyliquor in the body, is
Saline, and consequently an enemy to Acidity and Acidity to it, if through an
error in any of the preceding Digestions, to wit the Stomach, Duodenum, etc. or
through a contagion in the inbreath'd Air, a hostile Sharpness is admitted into
the Blood, and (it proving like a Thorn to the part it fixes in) does take-up
its residence in the Membrane which clothes the Ribs called the Pleura, whilst
the circulating Blood, would dismiss it: Then does the life in the part muster
up the neighboring Blood in endeavoring to cast forth this forreigner, which
whilst it runs thither to assist the life of that part, and by the
stimulating Sharpness, the life being incensed, that membrane is torn from the
Ribs: the new-made cavity is filled by the Blood running thither. Whereas had
there not been that hostil Acidity (Thorn-like) in the Blood and Pleura, that
Crimson juice would, of its own accord have been quiet, and contained it self
in its limits.

But it being the property of the Blood to flow where pain is, according to
that ^^ the Ancients: Vbi dolor et calor eo ^ffluit cru^r. Where Pain and Heat
is, to that place Blood flows; what profit may Revulsion bring, seeing that
when part is let out, the remaining Blood will in short time be equalliz'd in
the veins; and that if Nature is not too much debilitated by her loss, she will
give the other onset so long as the Enemy is conversant in her Territories? I
say, what can be expected from Phlebotomy, unless an enervation and weakening
of Nature (though some respit from Death be granted) and a laying the
foundation of some Chronick disease, so long as the acidity is not removed from
the Blood and Pleura by suitable Medicines, or by Nature?

For by a loss of Blood, a desisting is only caused from the combat between
the Metaphorical Thorn and Nature, no otherwise then as she has scarce
strength left to defend her self. But what in the mean time will become of the
acidity, if any is in the Blood, as well as Pleura? how shall that be taken
away? for good and bad will be left behind as well as emitted after the Lancet
has done its best? what must that be left to be overcome by the strength and
vigor of Nature, who after the Blood is let out, and she weakened, has
enough, and sometimes too much to do, to preserve her self and dispose of the
begun Apostem? Yes, that is the way: For striking at the cause, and omitting
Phlebotomy, is somewhat a strange Doctrine yet, though not half so Heretical as
formerly, since Experience has proved it Safe and Useful. But for all the poor
relief of Phlebotomy does diminish the Blood, and consequently hinders the
Growth and increase of the Pleurisy, through forbidding the Bloods flowing too
fast by the Vein Azugos etc. Yet it withdraws none, or very little that is
out-hunted, nor hinders it in the least from Apostemizing: Which thing ought
chiefly to be look after by the Physician, though that whole burden is
commonly left on Natures shoulders; who failing through want of good Remedies
and proper assistants, the Patient dies at last.

Nor is this all; for if she struggling out-wears both the loss of Blood and
the Acidity, whereby some recover after long lying by it, whilst others lose
their lives through want of Medicines: yet by reason of so great weakening of
the Vitals by the Lancet the functions and ferments of the body being impaired;
it is not many of those that prove not Scorbutical or consumptive, if they do
not next year relapse into the same.

It Is a miserable thing that so many should yearly perish of this Disease,
whilst the Venal* Blood is emitted, by lavishing the strength through taking
away its magazine, and neglecting the cause in the Blood and Plenta: seeing
that the bountiful Father of Lights has afforded Medicines for its Safe and
Perfect cure without exhausting the Vitals in the least. As Van Helmont
testifies who cured Ple^risies safely Helmontius, in ple^rae furent^s Tract:
nec non Libr^ ejus de* Feb: cap. 4. and alibi, Sparsim ^ulgaria remedia ad*
s^nandam absqu^e venae-sectione pleuritidem, tradit.
without Blood-letting: nor* have a few of our Moderns frequently done the
same. As I also can testify who am owner of such, and that have known of many
safely cured of Pleurisies without the loss of one ounce of Blood. But as long
as sloth dictates, and Paganish Ego sane nemini pleuritico Sanguinem mitto
(inquit Helmontius) estque enratio ejusmodi tuta, certa, commoda, and solida.
Nemo illorum perit: ubi interim sub Phlebotomo, plures longa tandem tabe
pereunt, and quotannis recidivam experiuntur* de Feb. cap. 4.
Doctrines are doted on by Christians; as long as Physicians shall refuse to be
wise beyond their Ancestors, who were Men, and Humanum est errare; So long must
we expect an impoverishing of Nature, under pretense of aiding and assisting
her: besides could a Pleurisy be cured safely by breathing a Vein, which it
cannot; yet curing it by the sole aid of stout and innocent Remedies, must
needs be the excellenter way: seeing that Nature by not diminishing her
strength, which is the Blood, may be much sooner enabled after her enemy is
Vanquished to recover the loss she sustained.

Whereas if the Blood be let out, though, the Patient escape choking, and is
perhaps delivered from the jaws of death, yet is he so shattered and shaken in
his Vitals by the loss of that Vital juice that if he recover it is very long
First. But if the Patient Die than the blame is imposed on the too vehementness
of the Disease, when the Doctor is often more in fault; in that he let out the
Blood which is the strength of Nature, and neglected that sharpish cause, which
from an error in digestion was let slip into the Blood, and furiously assaulted
the Pleura. For though sharpness is grateful in the Stomach if it exceeds not
its Ferment, yet out of it it is as a Thorn to the part it fixes in, it is the
causer of gripes, the Parent of a Consumption, and of all other Diseases
almost. To which Hippocrates testifies, and says Non calidum, frigidum,
humidum, siccumve, sed quod acre, amarum, acidum, and austerum morbi sunt.

But, omitting narratives concerning such who have miscarried in this Disease
under the Lancet, it being a thing too too frequent; I shall only relate what
was accidentally told me by the Brother of a Person not many years since
Pleuritical: it being extorted from him by hearing another declare, how his
Grandfather perished by Phlebotomy, and his Father being four times Bleeded
Died Consumptive through that loss in the space of two months. He said.

His Sister falling sick, a Physician was sent for, who when he came found her
Pleuritically affected; therefore orders fourteen ounces of Blood to be taken
away presently, and the next day at his coming again six or seven ounces more:
by which means she (whose age was but ten years) was so extremely debilitated
and consequently her life endangered, that for the space of a month she was not
able to go, and recovered not her strength as formerly in many months after.
But now at length she has outgrown it.

Whereas had the Physician given her an excellent Medicine or two inwardly to
strengthen the Stomach, kill spurious ferments and slay the stimulating thorn
in the Pleura and Blood; also had applied another to her side for the same
purpose; he might without a loss of Blood, and exhausting her strength, have
taken away the occasional cause and with ease have strengthened Nature, so as
to have disposed of the out-hunted Blood to her greatest advantage and profit:
either by admitting it again into the Veins, which thing is very common if a
good Medicine is present; or by dismissing it by the mouth or fundament. So
that a Person thus cured without Phlebotomy may be well and vigorous in a week
or little more.

Or if through the far absence of good and able Medicines he had for the
present drawn out six or eight ounces of Blood, and had afterward exhibited
remedies to slay Acidity in the remainer, and the Foreign guest in the Pleura:
he might with more ease and less hurt to the Patient, have head her without
running a hazard. Only observe that though this way brings greaer ease yet
scarce so much benefit to the Doctor: forasmuch as a months time keeping people
in hand produces more Angels than a Week.

However 'twas well the young Woman recovered at last, when her Fathers pocket
had paid well for it. But had one forty or fifty years old been dealt with
after this Bloody rate the loss would not have been so easily made up; But in
all likelihood 'twould have made the party weakly, if it had not cost her her
life. Or which is oft-times the event of a great loss of Blood, have laid the
foundation of some bad Disease. Witness Helmont, Pleuritis quae per
Phlebotomiam est restituta saepe post annum recurrit, saepiusque tabem post se
relinquit. The Pleurisy which is cured by Blood-letting, oftentimes after a
year returns, and oftener leaves a Consumption behind it. And which Helmont here
takes not notice of, so great a loss of Blood lays often the Foundation of the
scurvy: as is daily too too obvious.

Nor do I write feigned Notions or imaginary Conjectures; having, whilst I was
for many years conversant, and a tabler in the House with an ingenious aged
Chemical Physician, known of a great many cured after this manner, to wit,
without Blood-letting; nor to the best of my remembrance did ever any one
miscarry under his hand. Yea so acute was he at it, that several have recovered
by following his mehod without the least assistance of Phlebotomy, that have
been given up for Death by eminent Galenists.

So that observing such cures frequently done by him; and on the contrary often
Miscarriages by others: I set upon the study of Physic out of a desire to
inform my self, that I might prevent being purged out of my life, as my Father
was. And after a twelve months pursuing my studies, and observing curative
passages, I began out of an affection to the Chemical Science to prove a
general student in Physic, being daily improved in my intellectuals by hearing
my experienced Intimate Discourse, and his patients declare the effects of his
Medicines.

Nor was I less admonisht by hearing them amongst the rest to intersperse
complaints; some against Mercurial, and Purgative, or Vomitive Antimonial
Medicines; others against other horrible Vomits; declaring how such a Person
took one, and was thereby so weakened that she never left vomiting till she
died.

Another declares how her Husband was Bleeded by an Apothecaries order, and had
twentyounces taken away, whereby he through weakness fainted and died.

Another relates how a Doctor (I might call him a Horse-Doctor) had given a
Dose of Pills to her Neighbor, that killed him before the had done working.

These with many more suchlike narratives minded me of my Fathers Death, and
the harm I my self had sustained by twice bleeding, often Purging, and
Vomiting, and an Issue: So that for many years, I, at every Autumn, had a
tedious fit of sickness; and was often indisposed at other times. Thus it
continued till about the twentieth year of my age, when I happily came
acquainted with this Chemical Doctor: who by ordering me to take his abstersive
wholesome Medicines kept me so healthy, that now for seven years together I have
not been sick (to say sick) two days. Only through too closely pursuing my
studies, I once made my self somewhat Hectical, but with good wholesome
Medicines, and laying my Books aside a little, I in about a month was cured
again.

Yet believe that what with the hurts of the Smallpox when I was a Youth,
seconded with the damage received from Purges, Bleedings, Vomits, etc. I have
been so weakened; that I shall scarce ever regain my former Complexion, and
cheerful countenance, whilst I notwithstanding (through Gods mercy) am pretty
healthy.

But to return. Thus having spent about four years in my studies I began to
fancy the practice of Physic. But when I considered on the other hand, the
dangerousness of working with unexperienced tools, and such remedies as Books
alone will afford me; without a faithful Tutor to open my understanding in the
Analyzing of Bodies, the reasons of applying Agents to Patients, and the
compounding and applying of Remedies. I say when I considered this I was
somewhat disheartened, through an unwillingness to turn Experimenter, and as
Physicians too often do Ludere cum corio Humano.

Because I saw much of the mischief frequently done by Physic was effected
through too great confidence in Vulgar Prescripts and Authors, whilst Diseases
were not the same. But Providence favoring, and my most Cordial friend
entirely loving me, I obtained (he being aged) the knowledge of all his Method
and Medicines, with what was the result of twenty I might say, ( for he himself
had an Aged and Learned Tutor in Chemistry) almost forty years experience in
Chemistry: nor was I wholly ungrateful.

Being therefore for several years since no Botcher in Medicine, I
thence-forward applied my self to a more narrow search: and from frequent
Readings, Operatings, and daily converse, having made some discovery of Abuses,
and Injuries in Physic, I thought meet at length for a General good to publish
them. That the Physician may be admonisht to defend himself and his Patient;
and the Patient likewise fore-warned to take heed of such, who being confident
and careless mind nothing but their Ease and Profit; and by administering
hurtful Remedies under the notion of Physic, through mere ignorance and
carelessness Kill not a few: as likewise of such who under pretense of Healing,
are continually busied about Exhausting the strength and Vitals.

To give you a rehearsal of those cures in Pleuritical affects which this
Chemical Physician did without Phlebotomy, will be too tedious; such narratives
requiring more time and Paper than can I now spare. However as a Taste and for
example sake, I will mention one which I cured after his manner, in that
interim whilst this Tract was penning.

A person who heard well concerning me and the safety of my Method, sends for
me to cure his Wife that was ill, and had through the violence of her distemper
lately sounded, and sainted away. I went, and by that time I came to her she
was pretty well revived, insomuch that she could answer to my Quaeries: Only
she had an almost intolerable pain in her left side, and her Stomach was
disordered. I therefore judged 'twas a Pleurisy; and asked her what she lately
had been eating of, that disagreed with her Stomach.

She replied that last night she had too freely eaten of a thing she loved, but
it did not agree with her: This confirmed 'twas a Pleurisy and that her Stomach
not well digesting the last nights Supper had sent a Pleuritical sharpness into
the Blood. Wherefore as I had learnt from expert Helmont, and my no little
experienced Tutor, I gave her a Medicine to fortify her Stomach, and make sure
work there by slaying foreign Ferments, and hinder a further procedure that
way: not doubting in the least ( as I had often known) to expel the Acidity in
the Pleura, and put the Blood in good order again without borrowing the least
aid of the Lancet. To do which I appointed a Medicine that is an Enemy to
sharpness to be applied to the place where the pain was; having long since
learnt, ubi Dolor, ibi Morbus, that where the pain is there is the Disease; and
so I took my leave of them.

These so operated and beset the Spurious ferment on both sides that they
proved a little too hot for it, and banished it: so that when about six hours
after I visited her again, my Patient (being persuaded to it by a Female
acquaintance of hers) was gone into the City. I exceedingly admired at her
rashness, nor less at the suddenness of the Cure: so that desiring they would
take care at her coming home, if she relapst, to give her liberally of the
first Medicine without fear, I took my leave for that night: and coming the
next morning I found her very well; but she told me she was at coming home
illish, that the pain returned after her walk, and that the first Medicine
removed it again:

Thus to Cure a Pleurisy in a Day is somewhat unwonted, but I had an advantage
in taking it in its Bud: Nor will I undertake to do the like again in so short
a time. However in four or five days, I have known a Pleurisy commonly cured,
by the sole aid of suchlike Remedies, without bleeding: and will venture one
more than an equal lay, by Gods blessing, to do it at any time, if I have the
Patient in due season.

Next it will not be amiss to discourse of the Stomachs Priority, and the
excellency of Stomachical Remedies. Only take notice that I by such don't mean
Syrups or such like Sugary Medicines; which how pleasing soever they are to the
healthy, are clogging and hurtful to a weak Stomach. But I by Stomachical
Remedies mean such, that though not very sweet, are pleasing and friendly to
Nature, and no ways disgustful to the Stomach.

The Stomach's prae-eminence asserted, and the necessariness of suiting
Remedies to it.
NOr must we here forget to assert the Priority of the Stomach, and
consequently the needfulness of adapting Medicines that are to be taken into
it, to an agreeableness with it: in regard it is the most Vital bowel and prime
Seat of the Soul; as also does nourish all other regions of the Body, and
correspond with them through an intercourse of Veins, Arteries, and Nerves.

That the Soul has its prime residence in the Stomach the Acute Philosopher
Van Helmont has affirmed: Nor do I believe he spoke by conjecture, but what he
experimentally knew; having not only (as he confesses) through a denial of
self, been admitted to that happiness to see his own nothingness, but likewise
(I believe) to be truly Regenerated, Regenerated I say; which ought above all
things to be sought after, seeing our Blessed Savior has said, there is no
entering into the Kingdom of God without it.

Nor has he affirmed it only, but proved it by arguments: against which when
the learned Anatomist Bartholinus, has raised some objections* yet a little
after confesses.

Dici tamen lato modo potest vitae Anatom. reform. P. 51.
principium, quia ibi seeds appetitus, and prima alimentorum apprehensio; cujus
vitium in sequentibus coctionibus, nusquam mutatur in melius. That it may in a
large sense be called the principle or beginning of Life, because there is the
seat of Appetite, and the first reception of nourishment, and that its error is
never mended in the following Digestions.

But to prove it, and at present to omit the bringing a loss of Appetite on
sudden frights or ill news, with other like arguments to prove that the seat of
the Soul is in the Stomach; I shall refer you to those who have undegone a
New Birth or Regeneration, and in whom Christ's Spirit inhabiteth: Who can tell
you experimentally by pointing to the Pit of their Stomachs; or a fingers
breadth lower, That the Spirit of Christ (which is not an imaginary thing but
real substance, obtained through Tribulation by the goodness of God) appearing
to refresh and consolate the distressed and thirsty Soul, glanceth forth its
amiable, and thrice welcome beams in the Stomach: and that as often a^ he
withdraws himself* (to wit the Spirit of God or Christ who are one) a load, and
heavy burden, is there felt; until the most gracious and merciful Father of
Lights extends forth his bowels of compassion, and removing that Load and
Burden, causes his most Holy Spirit, that gentle Dove, (in his own time) to
appear and abound like over-flowiag streams, to the unutterable consolation of
the Soul.

Unto which alludes that most true saying of our Savior, he that believes in
me (that is confides and can deny Self in all appearances) out of his Belly
shall flow rivers of Living waters, metaphorically intimating an abounding of
the Holy Spirit to refresh such Souls as believe.

He happy is who from Experiment,
Knows where his Soul is fed; and is content.
To leave his darling Sins that he may come,
To be Regenerated, and brought home
To know himself: and with an humble mind,
Wait on our God, till he his Spirit find
Over flowing like a stream, and bringing rest,
Unto his Soul, of Treasures it is the best.
Yea such a Treasure that no one shall gain,
Who wicked lives, and who his Soul does stain,
With what corrupts: whilst living such are Dead,
And cannot eat of Israel's daily Bread.
Besides it is certain as the Sophi say,
Nose teipsum is the leading-way
To Wisdoms gate: whatever Fools do cant,
Who opened-Eyes, and understanding want.
Neither does the ignobleness of it office, in that it concocts for, and is as
a Servant to the whole Body, at all gainsay or hinder it: or because it is
always full of Crude Meats, as Bartholine objects; those being no more
arguments of ignobleness in the Stomach than it was in the High Priest of the
Jews for the good of the People to have played the Butcher in sacrificing. Nor
does the seeming meanness of its office at all hinder, that the Soul chiefly
and the most Holy Spirit of God that refreshes it may not in the Regenerated
reside there: seeing that his ways are not as Man's ways, nor his thoughts as
Man's. And that oftentimes that which is mostly in esteem with Men, is
disrespected by the almighty: and e contra.

Forasmuch therefore as the Stomach is the prime seat of the Soul and by
consequence of the Life; or if but as Bartholine says in a large sense the
Principle, beginning; or original of Life: yet because its error is never
mended or corrected in any of the subsequent Digestions, it must needs be
undeniably requisite, to level our intentions in cure, so as not to hurt it,
but rather to please and cherish it. Especially in regard (as I said before) it
corresponds with other noble Parts, and Regions of the Body. to wit, the Brain,
Spleen, Oesophagus, mouth, Liver Lungs, Heart, Mid-riff; and in a word there is
scarce any eminent part of the Body which converseth not with it through the
mediation of Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and Membranes. Whereby it (like a careful
Patron) is made sensible of any injury those corresponding parts sustein, and
not seldom shows it by Vomiting.

Nor is it only sensible of what injury other parts undergo, but it likewise
makes them feel, and grow sensible of its own. And even likeas when a good and
careful Father is sick, on whom alone depends the life and welfare of his
Family, his dependants and those who are nourisht by him are disconsolate or
distressed: so do the less Noble Ferments, and depending functions of the Body,
pine away and languish, when the Stomach the prime digester and preparer of
nourishments is indisposed and does languish. And on the contaary are prone and
Subject to cheerfulness, if the Ventricle or Stomach beams forth healthy and
pleasing rays; yea though they are otherwise indisposed, and debilitated.
Which may be easily proved from the cure of the Iliaca Passio, or griping of
the guts, Splenic affects, Cephalalgia or Headache inveterate and stubborn
Fevers etc, by Medicines truly Stomachical. But now I shall proceed to answer
an objection that will perhaps be offered to prove the seat of the Soul not in
the Stomach but in the heart.

But does not the Psalmist David say, Create within me, O Lord, a New-heart
etc. And thou have made my heart to rejoice etc? by the word Heart the Psalmist
meaning? his Soul, putting the containing for the contained?

I answer, that though Holy David was undoubtedly a true Divine; and did
sufficiently experience the Almighty's merciful benignity, and frequently enjoy
the overflowings of the Spirit in his Soul; yet might he nevertheless be so
wholly unskilful in Anatomy, as not to distinguish whether that Refreshment he
felt was in his Stomach or Heart: seeing that Galen who was after him above a
thousand years is upbraided by several with a dissercion of Apes through a
penury of humane Bodies. But granting on the other hand that Holy David and all
the Prophets were well skilled in Anatomy as they might, the contrary not being
proveable: yet doubtless was it a great error in the First Ages of the World,
to impose the Word HEART which is a Word of a very large signification on that
one small part of the Body commonly called so; when it sometimes signifies the
affections of the Soul or Mind, and sometimes the whole Soul it self; which
doubtless is not confined to any one part of the Body but inhabits in the
Heart, Stomach, Head, Liver, Blood etc. Though I am persuaded chiefly about the
upper Orifice of the Stomach.

And therefore if by reason of its being an accustomed Phrase amongst the Jews,
the Prophet David utters those sayings; and our Blessed Savior in speaking to
the People uses the Word Heart frequently for the Soul, yet it is to be
understood that Christ did speak to the People in their own phrases, to the end
they might understaud him; which otherwise they could not: and that the end of
speech is to impress our meaning to the hearers. Likewise we ought to consider
that had either the Liver, Spleen, or Lungs through an accustomed Error, been
used Rhetorically to signify the Mind or Soul; Christ in speaking, and the
Prophet in writing, must have used their manner of phrasing, and delivered
themselves in words suiting the capacities of the People, if they would have
been understood by them: and therefore cannot this deny the Souls not residence
primely in the Stomach.

For if we grant the Life of the Body to be the Soul, as it is; and that where
the Soul chiefly resides must needs be the most sensible and necessary Bowel,
We shall easily prove it to be in the Stomach: from its so great necessariness
that no Animal lives without it, and from its so great sensibility that it will
not endure the pressure of a hand on its upper Orifice without grief; nor a
wound without sudden death. Whereas Mullerus relates a story of a man wounded
in his heart that survived fifteen days, of which it is said he hung up a Table
at Grouingen. And all the Anatomies or histories I ever could meet with never
yet gave an account of any man, that after a wound in the Stomach, especially
if toward the upper Orifice which lies just under the Pit of the Stomach,
lived one day. But to prove the mistake of the Ancients about the Heart, lets
hear what Bartholine himself says that objected against Helmont. He speaking
about the Orifices of the Stomach thus delivers himself.

Sinistrum vulgo superius dicitur, alias os ventriculi simpliciter, aliis
Stomachus ob amplitudinem: Veteribus* cor, quia Anatom. reform. P. 50.
ejus affectus animi deliquia, alique sympt^mata Cardiacis similia gignunt, tum
ob exquisitissimu^ sensum, tum quia cor condolet per consensum and vicinitatis,
and nervorum ab eadem ramo Prodeuntium. In English thus: the left Orifice* is
called the upper, otherwise singly the Mouth of the Stomach: by some it is
called the Stomach because of its largeness. By the Ancients 'twas called the
Heart, because the Diseases thereof causes faintings Fits or soundings and
other symotoms like* to those of the Heart; likewise because of its most
exquisit sense, and because the heart does Sympathize therewith through
consent, both of Neighborhood and of Nerves proceeding from one and the same
branch. Here Bartholine tells you the mistake of the Ancients in calling the
Stomach the Heart: and says 'twas because of its most exquisite sense, and
because the Diseases of the Stomach caused fainting fits, and soundings like to
those of the heart: and truly he might have said without injuring the Truth,
that it not only causes symptoms like to those of the Heart; But even that
it is the Harbinger and Parent of those Diseases, for which the Guiltless Heart
is often blamed. However if those Generations after which the Holy Prophet
David lived, did mistake it is no wonder; seeing then Anatomy was little in
request, and so they minded not the situation of parts. Also seeing that we
who are in an Age of greater understanding cannot lay aside that word yet, but
use it commonly, for so much is it the mode still to call the Stomach the
Heart, that people frequently say their Hearts were at their Mouths, when on a
sudden fright or surprisal their Stomach's have been moved. I remember that on
a time I Discoursing with an Ingenious Woman, and speaking of the Stomachs
Prae-^, in that the Prime seat of Life as also of the Soul was in it: she
presently replied the chief place of Life, and therefore of the Soul, was in
the Heart; forasmuch as she found upon sudden frights or grief, that trouble
and a load lay at her heart. Whereupon I asked her where her heart laid, and in
what part of her body; And she forthwith pointed to the Pit of her Stomach, and
told me there; which still confirmed my argument of the Souls being chiefly in
the Stomach reminding me of the saying of experienced Helment. But the vulgar
(says he) are of my opinion, who for the vital beginning or seat of the Soul
do show with their hand the Orific of the Stomach, as often as shey are pressed
with streights; to wit, as well with the anxieties of the Body and Life, as with
the afflictions of the mind.

However Reader be pleased to take notice, that this Discourse is not penned to
the end, I may bring up new Modes of speaking in Divinity: or to persuade the
Teachers of the people to tell their Auditors, that they must Love God with all
their Stomachs, instead of hearts; for 'twould be vain, needless and
ridiculous, seeing that the holy Scriptures use the word heart commonly for the
Soul, and the people understand it signifies so. Nay if amongst the Ancients
the Liver had been used to sighifie the Soul, and those Holy-Men who gave forth
the Scriptures had uttered it customarily, whilst they spoke to the capacities
of the People that heard them; it had been no ways convenient to alter it. But
the drift of this Discourse is to prove the nobility of the Stomach; that
Physicians may take a little more care on it, than they are w^nted; and not by
their poisonous Medicines destroy the health of the Body, in ruining the Vigor
and health of that Bowel.

But to reassume our Discourse concerning the Stomach:

We find that it is so useful and necessary a Bowel that no Animal lives without
it, or can live in its absence: and that Nature has been so solicitous and
careful in the formation of it, and has taken such care to preserve it; that
those Animals that want teeth to grind their food with, have two Stomachs. As
for instance Birds etc. who have besides their real Stomach which lies more
inward another kind of Stomach called Ingluvies the Crop, which receives the
meat, that it being lightly digested may be fitter for the Stomach succeeding;
or as occasion may be cast forth for the young ones. This first Stomach, (or
the Crop) one of our moderns tells us may be wounded and sown up again, which
our loss of the Life: but not the second or true Stomach, which is most Viral.
Also Beasts that chew the Cud have that prerogative to enjoy more Stomachs than
one. And chewing the Cud being a meliorating, and making the food more fit for
nourishment, does tacitly hint to us that Chewing of Food well (as really it is)
is very advantageous to Health: seeing we read also that those Beasts that
chewed the Cud were in the Old Law counted Clean.

And though I believe it was never found on record that any man after his
Stomach was pierced or plucked out spoke one only word: yet the Lord Verulam
speaks of a man that uttered three or four words of a prayer when his heart was
out and in the Executioners hand, which argues that after his Heart was out his
Soul was in his Body, else he could not have spoken. To omit what Galen says
of Beasts that lowed at the Alter after their hearts were taken out, and what
Pliny (which another to wit Julius Obsequens confirms) says of those Beasts
which when Caesar sacrificed were found without Hearts: but doubtless not
without Stomachs. To let pass what Schenkins says of those that had no Hearts,
and Tilesius his declaring how 'twas wholly consumed. And lastly Paraeus his
relation of one wounded in his heart that ran two hundred paces: with several
others too tedious to quote, though I never yet could Read or Hear of any that
wanted a Stomach, or that having been wounded therein have not presently died.

But Helmont tells of a certain strong and stud^ous Man, that did strik another
sitting at a Table with his fist, about the Orifice of his Stomach; who
presently sunk down with a foaming mouth, and being lifted up by the company,
was forthwith deprived of Pulse, and before Grace was said his body was as
Cold as Ice.

Another relation he has of a Carter, who being with a Dagger thrust through
about the Mouth of his Stomach presently died with a foaming Mouth, and was
also deprived of all Pulse, and Heat: which proves that the prime seat of the
Soul was there by so quick a departure of Heat and Pulse with the Life. When as
those that die from some other defect, or a wound elsewhere, are scarce cold
in many hours; which the same Author proves by notable instances. One of which
is concerning a Woman, on whose Head an Image fell down from a high place, so
as that the top of the Skull depressed her brain, for almost two fingers
breadth: and though she was rcekon'd to be Dead, yet had a slender pulse in
both Arms six hours after.

Some there are who would have the Soul equally dispersed through-out the whole
Body, and that all parts enjoy it alike: not granting it to be in one Part more
than in another. But such in the mean time forget a thing daily obvious, to
wit, that a Man loses his legs or Arms, and yet the Soul remains entire and
has all its faculties. Nevertheless I will not deny, but that it may reside in
more parts than one, being unwilling to testify what the Scripture, in this
thing, and my own experience will not warrant: however I am sufficiently
confirmed that the chief seat thereof is in the Stomach, for reasons before
mentioned; though likewise persuaded it in some sort inhabits in the Head,
Spleen, Heart, Blood, etc.

Others would endeavor to prove the Prime or chief seat of the Soul to be the
Brain: but in the first place experience denies it, from trouble and grief
suddenly possessing the Stomach, and bringing a loss of Appetite with it; which
does not in the least affect the Brain, unless the Life grows outrageous, and
then it affects it, by mediation of Arteries and Nerves. Secondly, the
appearance of Christ's Spirit withstands it, in regard solace is felt in the
Stomach not in the Brain. Thirdly, the Holy Scriptures gainsay it, which
declares, out of the Belly not out of the Brain or Head of Believers in Christ,
shall flow Rivers of Living Water.

Thus far with Arguments, to excite the ingenious and studious in Physic to
strive after Remedies suitable to the Stomach, such being most excellent and
safe: yea with such I have seen almost incureable Diseases healed, At leastwise
such, that had not only increased, and grown worse, under the aids of
Phlebotomy, and the Drossy Medicines of the shops, with their clogging
Electuaries and Syrups: but also such as had vanquished with loud laughter the
single and associated endeavors of Physicians. For alas as pitiful a fellow
as a Disease seems to be, he scorns to be frightened at a Bombast word, or
Fustian Term: or in the least scared at an Aphoris^^ of Hippocrates's though I
never so cunningly quoted, and though it may carry a great gloss in the tail
on it. Nor is he more astonished at a rehearsal of one of Galen's, Celsus*
Sennertus, Riverius, or Helmont^ sayings: whilst he domineering through
deficiency in Medicine, causes the lamenting Patient to cry out (if he is
able) Give me a Medicine or else I die -- A Medicine I say, for Non Verbis, sed
herbis, Diseases are not cured with words.

Nor with Medicines without endangering the Life, unless they are homogenial
and lively: Forasmuch as Malignant ones not seldom do mischief, and exasperate
the Disease: thereby assuredly telling us, if such at any time profit the sick;
the praise is due to Nature not to the Medicine. Because being provoked, had
she not been strong enough for both the Disease and the Remedy, Death had
inavoidably followed. But with Remedies truly Stomachical, Vital, and the
destroyers of Spurious foreign ferments; I have seen and known of Various
Tough, slurdy, and Venomous Diseases cured, when they had non-plust Methodical
Prescriptions. A few of the cures I will heartily relate, and such, whose
occurrences may not be unworthy your remark.

A young Gentlewoman my acquaintance falling into a violent Vomiting of Blood,
at several times brought up about two quarts. Hereupon one, and afterward a
second Physician was sent for, who forthwith ordered a Vein to be Breathed: but
in the interim praescrib'd, and ordered various cooling things; neglecting the
Sharpish-cause which entered the Blood, through a more than accustomed converse
with White-Wines, and had there being corrosive, and Turgent, fretted a Vein
and given vent to it self. So that the occasional Acidity not being heeded all
arrows were shot at the Vi^als. And although Phlebotomy was often repeated and
Spiritless Medicines oftener given, all was in vain: For whilst the Acidity in
the Blood was in being, she frequently, even almost every day, vomited up
Blood; yea sometimes twice or thrice a day, and that not by ounces but by
greater Quantities. Insomuch that in less than fourteen days, notwithstanding
the united endeavors of the two Galenical Doctors, she was almost Dead through
daily languishing, and the loss of about two Gallons of Blood; was grown so
weak as unable to lift up a spoon to her mouth; or which is worse to sit up
right in her bed against a Pillow, unless they held up both her and it.

She being in this condition, A Chemical Physician my acquaintance was sent
for, who when he came and saw in what a weak state she was, told the
Bystanders he doubted of her recovery: and that her other Physicians had done
ill, to let out so much of her Blood, and neglect the O^^asional cause, and
preternatural sharpness in it* However seeing that they sent for him, and the
other Physicians were Nonplust; if they would give him that liberty he would do
his utmost endeavor, and use the best of his skill to recover her. 'Twas
yielded to; and Medicines being sent, he gave her a Dose or two of one of them,
that is heating, but not inflaming, Stomachical, and an enemy to sharpness the
Parent of this mischief, and turgency in her Blood: aiming thereby at
fortifying her Vitals and the Stomach their prime seat; shooting his arrows
directly at the cause, the which being removed he easily foresaw the Blood
would soon be placid; and that it would not he very difficult to close the
Newmade Orifice, and confine the vital juice to its channels. By taking this
Medicine often she began to revive, so that other Medicines were admitted
likewise; yet did not the Blood presently stop: nor did he mind that much but
aimed at dulcifying the remainer; knowing that must be the way to quiet it, and
judging the loss of two or three ounces of Blood in a week not material, seeing
she got strength. Thus with his Remedies he gradually subverted the sharpish
ferment, and in about ten days time made her cheerful and much stronger;
though then through so great a loss of her* blood she could not go alone: but
in less than six weeks he st^pt her Bleeding quite, and made her without help
able to walk about the Chamber. Nor did he retard the Cure by denying her
generous liquors: but being a professed enemy to the Small-Beer Method gave her
orders to drink strong smooth-ale liberally, after the Cold was taken off with
a Toste.

Whilst she thus gained strength daily, and through Cold-weather was confined
to her Chamber, one of her former Physicians came to visit her again. Who
perceiving a very great amendment, and no fear of her Death; that he might
preserve his own, and the Credit of his Brother Galenist, and that he might say
she recovered soon after the taking something of him, when the Chemical Doctor,
(under God) had snatched her from the very Jaws of Death: persuaded her that for
all she was pretty well, and that the Chemical Medicines had revived her, there
was something in her Body that if nor carried off would certainly hurt her for
the future; and moreover with many submissives tells her, if she pleased, he
would order a gentle Purge. As if forsooth the Chemical Doctor who was a
Learned and well-studied Physician, and the Son of a Physician, knew not
Extractum Rudii, Pilulae Ruffi o^ some such dispensat^ry purge, but must be
beholden to him for one for his Patient.

But of this the Young Chemical Physician must not know at any hand; lest he
should be offended, as he had cause. For doubtless if it had done her no harm,
it had been enough to turn him off, upon sight of a full Glose-stooll and
imagining all diseasiness in it: and to have given* the Fame and Name of curing
her to the Galenist. For so they used sometimes to serve his ingenious and
true-hearted Father before him, and with some musty Electuary, or Syrup, muddy
Cordial, some trivial Dec^ction or a Purge, carry away the Credit, when he had
done the cure: and by railing against Chemistry; though those Remedies which
were Chemical cured the Patient* sometimes get such an Antipathy in him against
them for fear of mischief four or five years after, that Chemical Medicines and
the Doctor* must be sh^^ out. But Providence had not designed that he should
than* complain with the Poet.

Ego hos versiculos feci, tulit alter honore^^*
I cured her, another has the Name.
However notwithstanding I as an acquaintance visiting her several times in her
sickness, had taken up the Gally-pots and Glasses, with their moldy Medicines
left on the Cup-boards head by the two other Physicians; and had asked her how
she could reasonably expect a cure and preservation, from Medicines so
Spiritless, a^ unable to preserve themselves, and had told her 'twas
unreasonable to expect it: yet so much was she over-perswaded, and taken with
the gilded, and pretty name Purge, that she took a purging Dose and had six or
eight stools thereupon. That all Diseasiness was banished, and that the
Close-stool had imprisoned it, was doubtless confidently believed; but the
Scene was suddenly altered: for before eight next morning the Chemical Doctor
was sent for in have to the lately purged Gentlewoman, forasmuch as nothing
but Death was expected.

The Doctor saw it, and was very sorrowful, therefore giving her a little of a
Medicine to revive her languishing feeble Spirits he returns home, and I being
present, tells his Father ( who was both his and my Tutor in Chemical Pharmacy
etc. He believed Mris. -- would not recover, because he saw his Medicines
nonplust: And experience had told him if those Medicines he had given her could
not prevail, naught else he, or any Galenist in Town, could give would. This I
had known various times verified, and therefore likewise believed the same;
however we agreed upon it that Medicines should be given her, because as l^ng as
there was Life their was hopes: lest the relapse might be from some Peccant
matter more narrowly besieging the Life in the Ventricle. Which was too true,
for though we knew not of it then, 'twas a Really Peccant Purge.

In brief she again followed the same Medicines and took them successively as
ordered, which blotted out the venom of the Laxative and in about a week
recruited her strength.

With which she being confirmed that the Doctors Method and Medicines were
safe, innocent, and virtuous; pleasantly relates the whole story of the Purge:
and thereby unfolded that Riddle which is so exceedingly puzzled us, to wit, how
she came so violently to Relapse, in the presence of such virtuous healers.
However she recovered, and has continued well several years, without Relapsing,
to the nodiscredit of Chemistry.

Another Gentlewoman having contracted a Disease through catching Cold and
want of Digesture, had her Vitals so narrowly be set, and violently assaulted
that her recovery was even despaired of, whilst the Consultations and mutual
endeavors of two Learned, and expert Galenists, were in vain. She being in
this weak condition sent for the Chemical Doctor, and was very well pleased
with his rational Theory, the description of her Disease, its cause and manner
of cure. But words would not heal her; therefore he sent two Medicines,
Stomachical and Abstersive, which she took: and for the first two or three
days very much mended. But the Digestions whilst weak having heapt up
abundance of Phlegm, Nature after she was reinforc't attempted the expulsion of
it, to ease her self of that load: and not being strong enough fell under the
burden to the well-nigh choking the Patient. Hereupon the Doctor was sent for
in have, who gave her lively Medicines plentifully, which brought abundance of
tough viscous Phlegm, and in a short time he left her much better. After this
she took the same Remedies, and was by that means so vigorous and stout, that
Nature resolved to have the other brush with her Enemy, and clear her self of
the clogging Phlegm: In which combat the Sick party being in danger of
suffocation, the Doctor was sent for again, and plying her as before he brought
it all up, to the no little hastening the cure. Which being done, he did his
endeavor to cleanse and strengthen the Ferments and Functions of the Body,
with Medicines which were lively and innocent; and in nine or ten days space
fully recovered her, to the credit of Chemical Physic.

Also an ingenious Gentleman my good friend having for many months labored
under a Galloping Consumption and made use of diverse Physicians in vain; at
length recollecting his memory remembered how I had formerly commended this
Chemical Doctor. And thereupon ( though afraid of those dreadful things called
Chemical Remedies, because he had heard how some had done mischief with
Remedies so called) was induced, health being a thing desirable, to see what
the Doctor could do. A desire of health doubtless it was inclined him to it,
for he was in no wise a friend to Chemistry; and would never have craved the
assistance of its Medicines, could those of the Shops have cured him. But
necessity had no Law: he had also heard from others a good Character of the
Doctors Medicines, and his Method commended for its innocence.

At leastwise the worst that could come was but Death he thought, toward which
he was hastening apace: whilst the most Authentic Bills, and costly Prescripts,
were exposed to a mock by the Disease. For his flesh was so wasted that he was
little else but Skin and Bones: his Stomach was so weak, and made worse by
Spiritless drossy Doses, that he almost continually spitted, and daily grew
worse and declined. Whilst he was in this languishing state, he consulted this
Chemical Doctor: who to cure him gave him innocent Remedies, yet lively,
Stomachical, cleansing, and pro^est enemies to foreign ferments, with such
good success, that about two months following them restored him.

About a year after the same Gentleman through drinking wines and eating a
thing he could not digest, surfeited and contracted a Quinzy. After some days
the Doctor visiting him, and finding him scarce able to speak and in a Fever
withal, gave him Medicines to fortify his Stomach, and break the neck of the
Fever: and applied likewise two other Medicines to his throat outwardly that
were enemies to Acid Thorninesses. These so abated the fury of the Quinzy and
vanquished the Fever and its cause; that in the morning when a friend of his
came to make his Will, as supposing him not for this World, he was well, and
said he could swallow a leaden-bullet, to the great astonishment of the Person.

For a certain pretender to vast skill in Pharmacy, and to no less in feeling
the Pulse, having been at the Sick Gentleman's house overnight, had caused that
party to come down to make his will: for he was pleased to tell the Mistress of
the Family, that if her Husband was not Bleeded in both Arms ( for take notice
he had felt his Pulse) he would be a Dead-Man before ten of the clock next
morning. The tender Gentlewoman having dismissed him, comes up big with trouble
for fear of losing her Loving Husband; and being asked what she aild? relates
the Cunning Pulse-feelers opinion, and that in the presence of the Doctor. Who
knowing what his Medicines had oftentimes done, and could do, smiled and
animated his Patient; and to prove that Whiningman a notorious lier, and no
less an ignoramus did sit up all night with his Patient; and by applying
Medicines often both outwardly, and inwardly, made him sound ( God blessing his
endeavoars) by eight a clock next morning, without opening a Vein in the least,
or without the least inclination to relapse.

Another Man aged fifty years and upwards being sick, was almost suffocated
with Phlegm: and whilst he had for several days taken various prescribed
Remedies grew worse and worse notwithstanding, and was yielded up as incurable:
So that his Galenical Physician was dismissed, and my Friend a young Chemical
Physician sent for* He came, and finding the Disease stubborn, gave him a
Medicine in a fourfold quantity almost; but 'twas such a one as could no wise
hurt nor inflame him, if he had given him four times more; by which ye may
judge 'twas neither Purge, nor Vomit. This somewhat relieved the Man* and began
to work upon the Disease to some purpose; which done the Doctor departed
elsewhere. And in his absence in came an Illiterate Man a pretender to
Physic, and counted a knowing Astrologer: yea with the Vulgar he goes under
the name of a Conjurer, in that he undertakes to predict Life and Death to the
people from Astrology, and takes Toll for the Discovery of Lost Petty-coats.

This unlearned man's opinion was asked: and thereupon after he had observed the
Planets well, profoundly like a Fool, (and no Physician) in the sick man's
presence condemns him to die without Mercy. Thus O. with all their smiling
Trines, pleasant Sextiles, and kind Conjunctions* could do nothing it seems*
and stood in this Scheme for Ciphers. This news was bad to the Sick-man* and as
much believed by the Women as an Oracle.

But when the Chemical Doctor came, who was not ignorant of Astrology, they
telling him what the Conjurer had said, and he knowing that the Conceit of
Death might do as much harm as the Disease, bad his Patient not fear, for the
Conjurer was an Ass. And proved him little better before he had done: for with
wholesome and lively Remedies in the space of a week he fully restored him, and
he was well not long since when I saw him.

These instances with the Arguments preceding them, will I hope be sufficient
to let Physicians see that the Stomach is no contemptible bowel, and that
Medicines innocent, and adapted to it, must needs be good healers. But if they
will be wilfully blind and still persist with their poisonous untoward
Remedies, and such that many times make a Disease instead of curing one; and
very commonly exasperate Maladies instead of pa^ifying them, I cannot but pity
their Patients: and deem them unfortunate who fall into the hands of such
Physicians, that ^eading of a few Books can content themselves with a parcel of
ill-contriv'd Recipes so they have but the name of Art to back their Artless
procedures and that whilst their Remedies are baffled are fit to say and do
with that Physician of whom the ingenious and noble Robert Boil Esquire speaks.

There was (says he) a witty Doctor, who being asked by an acquaintance* of
mine of the same profession, why he would not give such a Patient more generous
remedies, seeing he grew so much worse under the use of common languid ones, to
which he had been confined, alleging that at last he must needs die with them
in his Mouth; he briskly answered, Let him die if he will so he die secundum
Artem.

But may Secundum Artem serve in the presence of the Almighty, when their own
Consciences shall fly in their faces, and tell them, that they knew better
Remedies were to be had, only their Sloth and Carelessness hindered them from
them? May that excuse when those who through their deceit, and pretending to
Cure have been miserably and untimely Butchered, shall appear as accusers? It Is
to be doubted hardly. Therefore ye Physicians act wisely, for the good of your
own Souls, and the health of your Neighbor; and consider if the Priest and
Levite who took not compassion freely on the stranger that fell amongst
Thieves, were fore it counted unneighbourly and by consequence worthy of Blame:
How much more worthy of it will such of you appear, who having the life of the
distressed Sick committed to your charge, and a promised reward at your Elbows,
are nevertheless so much unneighbourly, and inhumane, as to take the reward
without regard had to his welfare.

Surely if you d^l but know the Comfort and Peace which attend Virtuous
actions, and that quietude which follows welldone deeds and safe-walking in
medicine, you would many of you not do what you do: But the greater is the
Patients misery, it is not minded what Medicines, or Method may best cure, But
which Method is most Easy, which least Heretical and which most in Vogue. This
was not the way that those, who desired Wisdom, and Peace of Conscience before
all fading enjoyments and Mundane Treasures, walked in. Nor was it the Path of
Helmont, who confesses that out of Charity he forsook the Common Roads of
Medicine, as supposing it to be a cruel thing to heap up Moneys by the miseries
of others.

It may be objected (as I heard it was by a Dunce of a Physician) against him
that he was a Papist. It Is true: he confesses it in his works. which (if you
will make it a fault) is to be born with, considering 'twas the Religion of his
Country. But the same pretty Objector forgot in the mean time that Galen was a
Heathen, for all he lived in the days wherein Christianity was professed; and
amongst Christians (to wit) at Rome, almost two hundred years after preaching
of the Gospel.

Truly I wish that those Doctors we call Protestants, and Professors, would but
show more of Christianity in their lives than he did, and then I should say
more against him, than now I may think. However I am one of those who doubt
whether or no the most holy God minds a Name or a Form so much as the Heart of
a Person; seeing he says by his Prophet My Son give me ^^y Heart. Thy Heart:
not whining Formalities, for a Contrite-heart God never despises. And if
indifferent things every one were allowed to walk as he is persuaded, seeing
it is Antichristian to domineer over, and prescribe Laws to men's Consciences,
and that God gives what number of Talents he pleases to every man or woman, (
provided they take up no Weapon against the Regal and governing Power of the
Land,) it would do very well.

For the Scripture tells us They shall come from the East, from the West, from
the North, and from the South, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Also I perceive (says the Apostle) that God
is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that Fears God and works
Righteousness is accepted with him. And it is to be doubted that the greatest
part of the World, whilst they contend one for this, another for that, and a
third part for a third Form and opinion; in the end through their disobedience
to Gods Spirit placed in their hearts, and through their neglect of Justice and
Mercy, whilst they pay Tithe-Mint and Rue, and perform the less weighty matters
of the Law, ( Strain at Gnats and swallow Camels) will be cast headlong to
infernal punishment.

We may also suppose that it will not be said in the last Day, come hither, ye
Episcopalians, that is as such an associated people, or ye Papists, or ye
Presbiterians, or ye Independent's, or ye Anabaptists, or ye Quakers, (which
are all but Nicknames) and en^oy the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World: But rather; Come hither ye that served me with an
upright Heart in Self-denial: That did to others as ye would be done by: That
obeyed my Law of Light in your Hearts, and washed your garments clean from
defilements: That abhorred Deceit in all its appearances, and faithfully to the
best of your understandings withstood it: That Fed, and Clothed me in my
despised little ones: That imbrued not your hands in the Blood of the Innocent,
but rather for my sake endeavored their preservation: I say to such as these
it will rather be said, Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherit a Kingdom
etc.

On the contrary we may believe, that the most just God, who is no respecter of
persons, will cast all of all Religions, that shall work wickedness, and do
things unbecoming a Christian, to wit, shed innocent Blood, as the Papists did
the Noble and true-hearted Protestants Blood; or which is less, shall so far
forget their neighbor as to make Self the Center of all their actions; such I
say we may believe, the Almighty, who will not behold Iniquity, will cast into
Eternal flames where the Worm never dies.

And if so why may we not charitably think well concerning Van Helmont who was
an honest man, and merciful to the Poor and Distressed; one that Studied
Physic chiefly, that he might profit Mankind and relieve the miserable Sick,
one that believed in Christ, and was an experienced ( not literal) Divine: In
some of which he manifested himself a true Physician, and in all of them a
Christian indeed. To speak of what he was as to a Linguist is in vain, whilst
his Works written in a florid Latin-style do it loudly: But concerning his
Education and Progress in Physic he speaks as follows. Van Helmont's Education
etc. with some other passages not unworthy remark.
IN the year 1580. my Father (says he) dying, I being the youngest and of
least esteem of my brethren, and sisters, was brought up in studies: But in the
year Stud: Auth: Page: 16.
1594. which was the seventeenth year of my Age, I finished the Course of
Philosophy: therefore seeing that I had only a Mother, I seemed to be the sole
disposer of my right and will. But when I saw none admitted to Examination but
in a Gown, and masked with a hood as if the Garment promised learning; I began
to know that Professors for some time past, did expose young-m^n that were to
take their Degrees in Arts to a mock: And I admired at a certain kind of Dotage
in Professors, and so in the whole World; as also at the simplicity of
young-mens Credulity. And that I at least wise might in my own judgment know,
how much I was a Philosopher: I took my self to task, and examined whether or
no I had gotten Truth or Knowledge.

I found for certain that I was Puffed up with the Letter and as it were (the
forbidden fruitbeing^ eaten) plainly naked; save that I had learn Artificially
to wrangle: Then first I came to know within my self that I knew nothing, and
that I knew that which was of no value. For the sphere in Natural Philosophy
did seem to promise some knowledge, to which I therefore joined the Astrolobe,
and the use of the Circle, and Theories of the Planets. I studied Logic and
Algebra also for delights sake, as often as a reading other things had brought
Wearisomness: to which I joined Euclids Elements, and made this Doctrine
sociable to my Genius, because it contained Truth: But by accident the Art of
knowing the Circle of Cornelius Gemma, as it were an other Metaphysick, came to
my hand. He afterward speaking of other his Studies, and how Astronomy was of
little Account with him, because it promised little of certainty or truth but
very many vain things, goes on thus: Therefore (says he) my Course being
thoroughly finished seeing I knew nothing that was Sound and nothing True, I
refused the Title of Mr. of Arts; being unwilling that Professors should play
the fool with me, and declare me Master of seven Arts who was not yet a
Scholar. Therefore I seeking Truth and Knowledge, but not their appearances,
withdrew my self from the University.

A wealthy Cannonship was offered me, if so be I would make myself free to
Divinity; but S. Bernard frightened me from it, because I should eat the sins
of the People. But I begged of the Lord Jesus, that he would Vouchsafe to call
me thither, where I might most please him.



Next he goes on and declares many occurrences, which I for brevity sake omit;
but amongst the rest tells how he was pleased with L. Annaeus Seneca's works,
as also Epictetus's; and that after he thought he had found the juice of Truth
in Moral Philosophy, and had prayed to the Prince of Life diverse times that he
would give him strength whereby he might contemplate of the naked Truth and
Love it; as also had believed that in Stoicisme he did profit in Christian
perfection; God mercifully discovered to him in a Dream that he was but as a
Bubble, and that in Christ Jesus we live and move and have our being; that no
man can call even on the name of Jesus to salvation, without the special Grace
of God; and that we must continually pray, and lead us not into Temptation etc.
He tells us also how he rould over Mathiolus and Diascorides, and found the Art
of Herbarisme to have nothing increased since the days of the latter, to wit,
as to the knowledge of the Properties, Virtues, and Uses of Plants and Herbs:
And being in a doubt to what Profession he should resign himself, he viewed the
Law, and saw it to be uncertain, because 'twas men's Traditions; at least wise
(he says) to govern himself he found was a thing hard enough, but the judgment
concerning good-men and the life of others to be obscure, and subject to a
thousand vexacious difficulties. But at last he fell in love with the Knowledge
of Nature, and gives this account of his procedure. I therefore (says he) read
the Institutions of Fuchius, and Fernelius, in which I knew as by an Epitome I
had looked into the whole science of healing; and smiled to my self: Is it so
that the Science of healing is thus delivered without a Theorem and without a
Teacher, Who has drawn the gift of healing from the Adeptist? is the whole
History of Natural properties thus shut up in Elementary Qualities? I therefore
read Galen's works twice, Once Hippocrates (whose Aphorisms I almost learned by
heart) and all Avicen: I seriously and attentively read through as well the
Greeks and Arabians as Moderns happily six hundred; and noted in Common places*
whatever in them seemed singular to me, and worthy the Quil. At length reading
again my collected household stuff, I knew my want, and it grieved me of my
pains and years bestowed: To wit when I observed all Books singing the same
song with the Institutions, did promise nothing of soundness; And that there
was nothing which might promise the Knowledge of Truth, or the Truth of
Knowledge. Elsewere he says.

I have always even from a Child sought after the Truth above every delightful
thing, because in all places I found In Prae^at: Tum: Pest:
every man a Liar: And so from the impiety of the World, all false, ignorant,
devised, deceitful things, and things full of imposture have been Invented. And
when I had opportunely searched into all states, Religions, and Conditions by
their individuals; I saw indeed the certain and immutable Truth in Numbers and
Measures. Finally in created things I found the Essences and Properties of
things were True, and Good: But Truth it self however I enquired amongst men I
no where found. I greatly griev^d that Truth had hid it self from my capacity,
being ignorant that that was my own Vice, but not the fault of things. At
length when I had considered that God himself was the naked Truth, I took the
New Testament in my hand: In which although I every where noted Singular Truth,
yet I found it interpretable to the Will of the Flesh: Yea at this day, I have
observed some diligently studious to excuse excuses in Sins, especially in
those of great men: and so I perceived Evangelical Truth to be professed but
not Consented to as it ought. For there is none who having two Coats puts off
one, that out of mer^ love he may cloth the Poor therewith as if Christ were
present: none turns the other Cheek to the striker: And so through the
endeavor of some at this day Evangelical Truth is grown out of use amongst
Christians.

In which consideration whilst once I had tarried out almost all night, after
the studies, and very many anxieties, of some Years: I resolved with my self,
that I would every were assault the Plague Gratis, the which had invaded our
Contrymen, and from which all fled. And although I had on every side from
books, contracted into a compendium the choicest Remedies described by others,
and had them ready: Yet I having tried them found them all to be Feeble, vain,
and to no purpose. For the forsaken Sick and Poor, did often cast their
Vomitings and belchings upon me; and breathed out their Soul between my arms,
to my grief: But God preserved this ignorant and unprofitable servant. After
this discoursing how naked he sound the Art of healing he thus goes on.

I therefore grieved that I had learnd that Art; and being angry with myself
grieved that I who was Noble, had Tum: Pest: P: 10:
(against my Mothers will, and my kindred on my Fathers side being ignorant of
it) as the first in our family dedicated my self to Medicine. I long time
bewailed the sin of Disobedience, and it repented me of the years and pains
bestowed in a Chosen Profession. With a sorrowful heart also I humbly besought
the Lord, that he would vouchafe to lead me unto a calling, not whither I was
carried of my own accord, but wherein I might chiefly please him: and I made a
Vow I would follow and obey him, to the utmost of my power, whithersoever he
should call me. Then first as having fed on the forbidden fruit, I acknowledged
my own nakedness, because I found neither Truth nor Knowledge in my Pu^atitious
Doctrine: supposing it especially to be a cruel thing, to heap up moneys by
others miseries.



After this, amongst other things too tedious to be mentioned, he tells how he
entitled his Inheritance on his Sister; and being a youngman, unprofitable in
all things, he recommended himself to God* with an intent of going far from
home; Of forsaking Medicine; and of never returning into his own Country; And
so went on hoping the Lord would clementiously direct him, and says that by how
much the more he detested Medicine, and cast it far from him as an I^posture or
Juggling Deceit; by so much the greater occasion of healing invaded him. For
meeting with a Novice who had known at least the Manual Instruments of
Pyrotechny; forthwith so soon as he beheld the Penetrale or inward part of some
Bodies by the Fire* he perceived the separation of many: And in few years
after, though absent, was in great esteem with the sick, by reason of his
Medicines; as also with Ernestus Bavarus the Elector of Collen, who sent for
him to help him. And a little after, after giving an account of some passages*
which I shall omit, he thus proceeds.

Finally (says he) God cut off the means of Preferment from me, as well in the
Church as amongst Civil Potentates; and so also ample fortunes seemed to be
promised me by Rodolph the Emperor, but I had incurred the danger of my Soul.
In exchange whereof he gave me a Godly and Noble Wife, with whom I withdrew
myself to Vilvord: and for seven years space dedicated myself to the Art of the
Fire, and succored the Calamities of the Poor. I have found, and indeed I have
certainly found (says he) that none shall be forsaken of God, who with a pious
affection, and firm faith performs the office of a Physician. For although I am
the sillyest of all men, yet I have apparently found that God is Charity itself
toward the Miserable; and that therefore from his own effluxing goodness of
Charity, he always took care of me: For the inheritances of my* Wife were
increased, and ample Patrimonies of my Family befell me: And though I was
pressed down with suits of Law by the malice of men, Yet I became a Conqueror
by some revisals so as that the Mercies of God openly appeared to me an
unworthy Person.

Moreover he pressed down those that excelled in might, who under the Cloak of
Piety persecuted me unto disgrace, and hidden Death. And the Darts were
reflected on those that cast them, so that it now more shameth than repents
them of their manifest Crimes. Thus the noble Helmont.

And truly methinks he wrote like a Christian, and one that was a Physician
indeed. Nor did he only write, but did so, in Curing the Poor freely, and in
conscientiously exercising the office of a Physician toward the Rich, as also
in detecting the Errors of Galen, and such his Drowsy followers who aim more at
curing their Patients pockets of a Plethora than their bodies of a Consumption.

Indeed I the more willingly collected these things concerning his Education,
and progress in Physic, that Galenick Physicians may see, or, if they will be
wilfully blind, that other intelligent persons may see, against whom they have
been Bawling so and Railing; because he struck at their Master Galen's frigid
Notions and sour Humors, that have no existence unless in the Brains of the
vulgar. But I must confess they were a little concerned, whilst he strikes at
their Silver Shrines, to cry out with Demetrius; Great is Diana of the
Ephesians: thinking that if this fellow prevailed, he would clearly spoil the
Trade of Stirring Dung and Urine, and diminish their Gain.

As to diminishing it I have nothing to say, only as to making Gain the chief
aim that Helmont wrote against; as also against their neglect of the Poor, and
did well in so doing: For Physic doubtless had its rise in Charity, though
since (as all things are) it is corrupted. He tells you in the words of the
Wiseman, That a Physician shall receive a Gift of a King, not of a Poor-man:
thereby implying that we are not to neglect the Poor though they are not able
to bring Angels nor Crowns in their hands for scribbling a few words to an
Apothecary; nay though they are not able sometimes to bring half so much in
their hands to pay for a Medicine: For the Almighty who is the God of the Poor,
has sometimes a Lazarus in his Sores.

Nor is it unfit in the mean that those whole can should pay, and reward a
Physician well for his Labor and Studies, as a Physician ought to be: which
Helmont in the words of the wiseman signifies. Besides some Physicians, who are
owners of but indifferent Estates, would be ruined in doing otherwise, and
thereby by disinabling themselves to relieve, injure the distressed Poor. But
then be sure let Equity and a good Conscience be made use of, and when they are
under your hands do not, as it is to be doubted too many do, play such
unhandsome Parts with them, as to protract cures out of love to Angels; Golden
ones I mean: Nor out of Deceit, whilst your own Consciences tell you the only
preventive Physic is sober, moderate, and orderly living, without R^oting and
Drunkenness, go to persuade people to take your Preventive Purges when they are
already in good plight, though many of you yourselves will not touch one of
them in the case; knowing a Cup of Sack or Ale drunk moderately is better.
Neither deal unreasonably, as too many frequently have done in cure of Sick
persons of mean Estate, running them to such needless and great expenses as to
make them Beggars for ever after; or at least thereby so to impoverish them
that several years s^ar^e make good the Loss, if the very Conceit of being so
extremely Poor make them not as Sick as the Disease it self made them.

The Truth of it is too too apparent, and yet many times, at least when the
Disease is curable, they go uncured through deficiency in Medicine. Nor do some
Physicians mind that; for so long as there is Money, the Sick shall have their
Company, with Your Humble Servant Madam to boot, And although their own
Consciences tell them, that their Lifeless Medicines will not Profit; yet they
will tell you, Their life for yours you will recover, wish they had a lease of
your life or something to that effect: and speak twice more confidently than
one that has better remedies, and makes a Conscience of what he does and says.
Thus a rich Physician, but as ignorant as his Neighbors, was wonted to serve
his Patients, (as several persons concerned and that too well knew it, told
me;) and as long as they gave him his Fee, to tell them that the Sick Party was
like to Recover. And for all he apparently saw they were worse daily, and that
his Remedies were at best but Insignificancies, also that there was no hopes of
recovery by his Cooling Method: Yet would he not tell them so, lest I believe
another Physician should be sent for, to effect the Cure to his dishonor. And
which was remarkable, many times when the Physician has thus promised life the
Party has died in an hour or two after, and was sometimes struggling with Death
when the Doctor praedicted Life. One Gentleman told me himself, that this
Doctor visiting his Wife every day would give him comforting words, though he
and the Nurse apparently plainly saw that she declined, and the Doctor might
too doubtless have seen it had he not been made blind by Pl^tus; And that the
last day the Doctor visited his Wife (who was then dying,) he gave him great
hopes of her recovery, but was scarce gone a Bow-shot from the house before she
was Dead. On the other hand, when the same Physician has been called to others
that have not ^ed him as he expected, then would he denounce Death to them:
perhaps on purpose to get clear of such Moneyless Patients.

On a time a Poor Washer-woman (as 'twas told to my Intimate by her self) being
very ill, and having as I remember but three Half-Crowns in the World, was
over-perswaded to employ this Doctor, she did; but did ill in it: for she
should have sent to some Physician who prepared his own Medicines, and then her
advice would have cost her nothing. Or she might have gone or sent to some
Apothecary that was judicious and sober, and he would have done her doubtless
less harm than that Doctor did. For if she was not right-down sick the loss of
her Money ( poor-creature) for Fees was enough to have made her so.

But to the matter. The Doctor visited her once, and had one half-crown, which
was more than she could clear by a weeks washing; The second day he came again
without sending for, for the Doctors custom was, being once sent for, to follow
his Game close, and then he had the second half Crown; And the third day when
he called in without sending for, the poor-womans last half Crown being hard to
be parted with she did not give him it: Whereupon being angry he asked her at
his departure, whether she thought he could run up and down for nothing? she
might have told him she did not send for him; And truly in my Opinion, if
Physicians are so unwise as to run up and down to Mean-peoples houses without
sending for, the People should be so wise as to thank them for it, but give
them no Money for coming. Now whether or no the woman was sentenced to dye by
the Doctor I cannot tell, but I remember I heard she recovered by better
Medicines. But what an unchristian trick was this to rob the Spittle-house! and
how contrary to what the good Samaritane did! Surely if such Physicians should
have no more mercy shown them from the Father of Lights than they show to their
fellow creatures, they would soon descend the Infernal Lake.

However I persuade myself there are not a few Learned Physicians that are
tenderhearted, industrious, Conscientious, and Merciful; and many more that
would do better did they know better: But such should be diligent, and
inquisitive, (for as the Poet tells us, God sells Arts to sweats) and not
content themselves with barely tumbling over a few volumes, and such that, were
the very Authors themselves living, they would not know what to say to the
stubborn Diseases of this Age. But though there are many such honest
Physicians, yet there are many more it is to be feared otherwise; which thing is
very lamentable. For though Botchery and Deceit in any Art is unpleasing, yet
in Physic it is most dangerous, and prejudicial: whilst men by them sometimes
lose their lives, and oftentimes the^r healths.

Therefore for an example to such as are not as they ought to be, I will by and
by declare what I saw, and was an Eyewitness to, after that I have detected
one abuse more, that too frequently is put on the Gentry: To do which take this
following example.

A Wealthy Knight and Baronet not many years since fell sick: At first he was
but slightly affected, but under welnigh half a dozen Physicians which did
their endeavor off and on, instead of being better he declined; and at last
itterminated in a Paralytick Gout, or the Gout and Palsy together because the
disease lying much in the Genus Nervosum contemned their feeble succors, or
was rather strengthened by them. But before it came to this pass, and (though
he was weak) had as yet the use of his Legs and Arms, he was visited by his
Brother an Esquire that entreated him to make use of his Chemical Doctor:
adding that he cured him safely, and soundly, when the ablest Galenists
thereabouts could do no good, and had since cured his Wife of a Paralytick
Lethargy, when two or three Physicians had after three days endeavor left her
insensible, and sleeping as they found her. At length the Esquire prevailed so
much that his Doctor was sent for, and retained, not doubting but to recover
him with lively and good Remedies: Therefore he sent such. But before he (to
wit the sick-man) had taken one spoonful of any of them, the Galenists with
their Agents (of which they have too many) subtly Workt him out, under the
Notion of wishing the sick-man well: Buzzing into his head, that the Chemical
Doctor gave hot Medicines that were Dangerous.

And why dangerous? Because the Medicines being vital and penetrative (which
are properties in a medicine, that must su^^ in with, and assist the Life) if
the Sick-man should have taken them he might doubtless have recovered; and is
not ^at dangerous? Now when they take their Coo^ng Medicines, which carry
Deaths property, ^ Death is cold enough, there is little danger ^ fear (unless
Nature be stubborn, and vigorous) ^^t that they will die according to Art.

But to go on. One of the first Doctors, though before he could do no good,
after he had workt out the Chemical Doctor, that he might ^ot be readmitted
and to keep the Sick-man in play, told him he had found out something that
would doubtless Cure him safely in a Month or Six weeks. The words Cure him
safely were mighty pleasing: and so they went on. But after this he daily
declined, whilst they fed him up with Fancies, and told him 'Twas all for the
better. But in short, he that before had the use of his Limbs in the space of
six weeks could neither move Legs nor Arms, and was three times worse than
before: So that the Promised Cure no where appeared.

When the Sick Knight and Baronet complained of this, the Apothecary would tell
him that they aimed at preserving his Life within, and were loath to set upon
the Disease in his Limbs, lest they should drive it in upon his life, and so
kill him, as if there had been no other way to cure him but by driving the
Disease upon his Life. Reader can forbear smiling at, or rather pitying a
Sick-man under such unfaithful helpers? However this quieted him for the
present. But daily growing worse and worse, he still complained how that now he
was in great pain in this joint, and part of his Body. The Doctor told him '
it was all for the better. At another time telling him he was much disturbed in
another part, and in almost half his body: The Doctor would still reply ' it is
all for the Better. And thus he grew better and better, till he was almost
Dead. Whereupon when this languishing Person, after many months trial of this
Doctor, was nothing mended: but was worser by many Degrees at last, than he was
when he took him in hand the second time, notwithstanding 'twas all for the
better: Yet he imploys another Galenick Physician and in about six weeks after
fairly dies Secundum Artem. But whether or no that was all for the better, I Will
leave you to determine.

Thus are the Gentry liable to be imposed upon for their money, as well as the
Poor slighted for want on it. Neither have Nobles themselv's because they are
Rich been freed from Casualties, Nor will they ever be free, as long as Poisons
must pass for Medicines, and so long as Nature must be weakened instead of
helped, and so long as Words are more studied than Things. Witness the sudden
and untimely death of Marquess Charles Spinelli some years since General of the
Genoans by white Hellebore which was given him by a Company of Phy^cians: As
also the Death of that Emperor (to ^mit narratives nigher home) on whose Tomb
History tells us was Engraven, He perished through a Rout of Physicians.

Nor may I pass by the death of a very Lusty and stout young Gentleman, and an
eldest ^rother, through extract of Black Hellebore, given him by an eminent and
Learned Doctor ^o Purge away an Ague. For he after he had ^een walking abroad
in the City wherein he ^v'd, came home, and took it at eight at night, and was
dead about three hours after: Purging and Vomiting most cruelly having preceded
Death. The which, when I heard it from ^he mouth of the Brother of that Party
that was ^ill'd, and the manner how, made me no little ^dmire; and more admire
that such can have the face to cry out against Chemistry as a ha^rdous Art, and
exclaim against its Medicines ^s Venomous: When their very Dispensatory in
point of Purging sounds forth little else but Poisons; and that they scarce
ever effect any ^otable Cure but they do it by Chemical Re^edies, and such,
that were they faithfully prepared, and not Adulterated through desire of ^ain,
would do much more than they do.

It Is pity that Physic, an Art so useful, should be thus corrupted; and that
Self should thrust Charity out of doors. I believe if any Shopkeeper with whom
a Physician deals should defraud him of a Pound or two, and act dishonestly, he
would take it ill, and call him Knave not causlesly: But how much greater are
such, who with lying deceits, not only many times get peoples money for
nothing, or at best for a parcel of they know not what themselves: but also
under pretense of curing, Kill them with Poisons Secundum Artem, when their
lives can never be regained: And rather than another shall come to cure when
they cannot, anoint them with the Oil of Fool, and feed them with fancies till
they are dead, knowing then they are past telling tales.

Therefore I say (Pray Reader take notice on it,) that that Physician who takes
a Patient in hand, though it be in a Chronick disease, and does not in less
than fourteen days time show an apparent sign of Recovery: and by the fifth or
sixth day does not give some refreshment to the Patient, and put a stop to the
procedure of the disease, I say, if he does not do this, Let him pretend what
he will, his Method and Remediesare feeble, and will in no wise profit.

For if the life do not merely fail, which failing no Medicine can cure, Nature
will in a few days in some sort revive, in the presence, and through the aid
of lively innocent remedies, and such as suit with the life. But if Medicines
shall let a Patient languish and grow worse for a week or two, and yet the
Patient after that recover by other Medicines: Know assuredly those first
Medicines were unfit, or spiritless and dead, if not fitter to kill a Well-man,
than cure a Sick one.

And if a Physician being called in an Acute distemper, to wit a Fever or a
Pleurisy: and cannot give ease, and great comfort, in less than four and twenty
hours, and put a stop to the advance of the Disease: Also cannot in the space of
seven days, cure either of them without opening of a Vein; provided Medicines
be well followed, and the candle of life does not fail: Tell him that I who
have known hundreds upon hundreds cured so, affirm his Medicines are not the
best in England.

And now to perform my promise madeafew Pages back, having brought you Helmont
that noble Physician for an example of Charity, and Christianity; I will give
you one president more, that you may have two to imitate, and may be excited to
well-doing by Example.

This person was my I have for the present concealed his name, lest it should
be thought I wrote this to promote his Sons Interest who not unfortunatesy
succeeds in his practice.
Tutor, who now being deceased, I may lawfully commend, and tell you he was a
practical Divine: And one that though he did not use to whine as some do, and
take the Lord's name vainly in his mouthto make an outside religious show, (for
he as well as my self abominated Hypocrites) yet carried the fear and love of
God always in his heart. And of all the Physicians I ever yet met with, I
never found one whose humor was more like to Van Helmonts than his. For in the
first place above twenty years since when he had a good Galenick Practice,
finding as he told me that 'twas a long way to Cure diseases, but a short and
easy way to get Money, he gave to a learned chemical physician, to wit, one
Sommerskil, Medicinae Doctor, that had formerly been Secretary to Prince Henry
the eldest Son of King James, and was a man very Aged and judicious in Physic,
and a Practiser many years. I say, to him he gave above a hundred pounds to
teach him his Skill in Chemistry. Which he did, because he loved him well, and
shortly after died; through grief some say because he could not obtain the
Lapis to get which he vainly attempted. But that not concerning our Physical
affairs, I shall pretermit.

And tell you that he by this means having many years experience, studiously
went to work himself, till at last he obtained remedies after some years
endeavor of a Large extent in Point of Curation. Then he left off prescribing;
and being at that time the only Physician there that cleav'd to the Chemical
Method, had all the Doctors and Apothecaries against him; so that he was forced
to make good his Ground by Real Art, and oppose their Reproaches with Cures.
Which he manfully did till he died, and left in his place his eldest Son of the
same Name, a Person Ingenious and Learned.

Nor did this honest Physician appear like to Helmont, only in leaving the
Galenick for the Chymick-Method; but also in Charity. And had he had but
Helmont's Alkahest, and his hundreds a year, he would, I am persuaded, have
given his Medicines away Helmont* like. For though he lived by his Practice, as
other Physicians did and do, yet was he so charitable to the Poor, and tender
of the Health of the Distressed, that I verily believe he cured more People
yearly for nothing, than some Physicians in that City did for a hundred pounds.
For 'twas but going and telling him they were Sick and Poor, and it was the way
not only to have Advice, but Medicines too for nothing. Nay, which is more than
ordinary, he would not only Relieve some that were Poor with Medicines and his
Advice freely, but with Money in private likewise, as I by diligent observance
and watching him found; for he did not use to blow a Trumpet when he did it;
nor would he speak on it, unless I took an occasion to discourse with him about
it: And then he would like a good Man (as he was, if a Man may be called good)
reply, The Rich have many Friends, but the Poor have few: And would add, That
perhaps whilst the poor Person languish'd, and could not work for his Family,
his Wife and Children almost starved at home: And therefore to let the sick Man
languish because he had no Money, would be a thing very hard-hearted. He would
also use to make their Case his, and say, He would be glad of relief if he were
sick, though he had no Money to pay for it.

Sometimes others who were pretty well to Pass, having spent four or five
Pounds on other Doctors in vain; when their Money was almost all gone, would
come to him; and if when they came they could but plead, 'twas low with them,
and they wanted Money, etc. he would commonly Cure them for a Crown or an Angel
charge; to wit, by giving some of his Medicines away, whilst he sold
other-some. And when Persons who lived well by their daily Labor, but not very
Rich have come to him at any time about a Fever, or any other such like Acute
Distemper, his Advice they had for nothing, and commonly a Cure for a Crown or
less, and that quickly and safely too.

But the Rich rewarded him as they ought, and all the Reason in the World for
it: For if they do not, who shall reward him that is a Physician, for all his
Pains, Studies, and Expenses? But he would not, I am confident, have given to
either them or the Poor, a Malignant Remedy, or such a one he durst not take
himself, if he might have been hired to do it. Which was, in my Opinion, an
excellent property in him* and a thing that gave great encouragement to many of
his Patients, to cleave to him whenever there was a necessity for Medicines.
And some of his Patients when they have come, and have desired of him some
Venomous Dose, perhaps a Vomit, etc. have had a positive denial, and that was
all; for he would rather at any time venture the loss of his Patients love,
than hazard their Lives and his Credit. But if they (being self-willed) have
got what they desired elsewhere, and have soundly paid the punishment of their
Folly; then would they come to him many times to make up the Breach, and take
leisure to repent of their Indiscretion.

It was also his custom (though he oftentimes hurt himself by it) after
inventing or making a New Remedy, if none of his Family would venture on it, to
take it first himself before any of his Patients should touch it. For, says
the honest Man, I that have Medicines by me, better know how to cure my self,
if Malignity be in it, than another that has no Medicine to help himself.
Besides, he considered if he should try a New-made Remedy on a Rich-Man, and he
be hurt by it, it would discredit himself and Chemistry. And to try it on a
Poor-Man, as too many do, he considered if it should hurt him, though not kill
him, yet it spoiling his Health, might ruin him, and undo his Wife and
Children (if he had any) that depended on his daily Labor; and therefore to do
that would be cruel.

Thus did this true-hearted Physician too often hazard his own, to recover the
Health of his Neighbor; endangering it, not only by operating in the Fire, to
produce good Remedies, various times undergoing the fumes of Mercury and
Antimony, till he was as weary of them as I am: But after he had, by Directions
from other Authors, some true ones, some false ones, made many preparations too
tedious to be named, and had wrought upon most Subjects that werein the least
counted Medicinal; He, by taking many of them into his Body, mightily impaired
his Stomach. And afterward because he would not hurt others, (to wit, his
Patients) he threw all such as he found Disturbers of Nature, and Hazardous,
away; and only kept to such Remedies, as he was well assured were Wholesome,
Innocent, and Virtuous.

Here is a President for such Physicians that mind nothing beside Self, whilst
the good of their Neighbor is least thought of; not regarding what they give
to the People, so they may but live in Ease and Pleasure; no^ caring what
Method they follow, (whether Chemical, or Galemical) so they can but get money.
As if to deal honestly and heartily with the oppressed, or to act with the good
Samaritan, were out of fashion. They may believe it will not be asked in the
great Reckoning day how many hundreds a year they had when they Died: but
rather how many hundreds of the distressed Sick they have faithfully Relieved.
I will not say for nothing, seeing, The Labourer is worthy of reward, but even
for money and a stipend being tendered. They may consider that this life will
have an end: And that although those many Souls, that by their Carelessness and
sloth, are so civil, That they never come back to complain: Yet that the Ears
of the Almighty being pierced by the cries of the Widow and Fatherless, they
must once give an account of their Stewardship, and with what Conscience, they
have exercised Physic. In which juncture I persuade my self, if God's witness
in their Consciences stand on their side, they will find it more than a little
prevalent.

Another property my honest Tutor had, which I highly commend in him, or any
other ingenious Physician; to wit, he cared not, nay, abhorred to turn
Mountebank; and as too many do, make a noise in Print about their Pills,
Elixirs, and Spirits. For such let them pretend what they will, and tell you of
the Name of the Lord God to boot* yet the business in the bottom is Money. And
though many of them would persuade you into a belief that their hazardous
Purging Pills, etc. are Allcuring, and can make a Disease it self on sight of
it Diseasie: Yet they rarely Cure any Disease radically with them, unless it be
the Consumption in their own Pockets. Nor must you hear how many have been
Killed and Mischiev'd by them, for that would not be to their Advantage.

I remember on a time, That one who found great benefit by a certain Medicine
which my Tutor made, that would Cure several Acute Distempers safely;
prevailing with his young Son many years since, got a few Bills printed of the
Virtue and Use of it, with intent to sell the same only to his private
Acquaintance and Friends, and to take away the trouble of writing Directions.
But when this ingenious Physician saw it, he contemning that pedling trick of
Mountebanking, was exceedingly ashamed on it, and gave strict orders to the
contrary* for the future. For if a Physician is qualified as he ought, a
possessor of Excellent Medicines, and one that prefers Wisdom before Wealth, he
will doubtless never so highly undervalue his Profession, if he live on Bread
and Water.

The Cure of those most inveterate Distempers, the French Pox and Scurvey, is a
small matter with some of these Bill-men, when, poor-hearts, they would cure it
if they could. Infallible Cures other-some thunder forth, though they have
little skill in Medicinal Affairs. Pish, this is nothing with us; London and
most Cities in England can show you Pills good for All Diseases; and which is
more, some good for more than All being those ( it requires a long Faith to
believe it) that outdo all Pills hitherto extant: So that ( Monstrum
horrendum!) those very Pills their own selves that Cure all Diseases, are in no
wise to be compared to them.

Most of these notwithstanding are Complete, Neat, Delicate, Fine; sometimes
Curing, often hurting, and now and then Killing-Catharticks, or
Emeto-Catharticks; that is to say, Purging-Pills, or Pills that Purge and Vomit
notoriously, and not seldom fatten Buryingplaces prettily. But I command and
charge you not to read any thing of that in their Books and Bills, on the
penalty of being counted one that read what they never publish in them.

But here is the worst on it, The more to deceive the People, and to put the
better face on the Matter, we must have a pretense to Chemistry, (for that
takes) if we have not some ill-shap'd Picture of a Chymical-Furnace, to make it
daintily fine; and must tell them Chemistry had a finger in the
Pill's-formation, for that will make it go off. When alas, Poor-Things, they
understand nothing less than the real Art of the Fire; which teaches us, if
truly understood, to shun all violent Purges and Vomits, and to avoid all
hazardous Remedies.

I do not write this to have these persecuted or put by, unless the Poor may
have better Assistants; But to have People take notice, That, as good Wine
needs no Bush, no more do good Medicines a printed Bill; as also to desire such
Physicians who are intelligent, to be Sincere, True-hearted, and Merciful, and
to eat some Grains of Self-denial. For it is the hardheartedness and haughtiness
of some such, that gives encouragement to these, whilst those who want an Angel
or a Crown to Fee a Doctor, must go to them many times or no where, though they
receive not that benefit they might. Whereas would intelligent Physicians keep
a few Medicines by them to sell to the meaner sort of People without, whilst
the richest give Fees, they would soon work them out of Credit. Or, if instead
of an Angel or a Crown, they would take a Shilling, or Nothing, and write them
a Bill to some Conscientious Apothecary, prescribing a few cheap, yet Virtuous
Ingredients, it would be a means to suppress the Bill-Trade. Which otherwise
they will never do, and in reality it is pity they should; for a small Aid, and
somewhat uncertain, is better to the Poor than none.

Concerning Medicines both Chemical and Galenical.
THat the Common Method of Medicine, called Galenical, is too languid and
feeble to tug with those violent and stubborn Diseases which are grassant and
assail us in our days, Experience has so apparently evinced, that there is
scarce one in four of our late Physical-Writers but confess it: And therefore
exhort Physicians to apply themselves to search after more vigorous Remedies,
which by their Virtues may vanquish Diseases. Thus far they do well and nobly,
but in my Opinion they are sluggishly obeyed, especially by such who have
either grown gray headed in Ignorance, and will know nothing in a manner beyond
a Purge, a Vomit, a Syrup, or the Lancet; or by such, who not much regarding
the Good of the Sick, mind mostly their Ease and Profit.

Nor is it wholly without cause that they are no better obeyed, seeing some few
of those who Preach forth this Excellent Doctrine, and plead for a Renovation
of Medicine, are so far short of what they would have others do, that they
themselves defend Blood-letting, and are not startled at hazardous Remedies.

For shame let us cast Poisons out of Physic, and all such Medicines as are
disturbers of Nature; unless with Helmont we are able so to correct them, that
we may not expose the Diseased to danger, nor to the Mercy of Merciless-Doses.
Nor let us forget Mercury and Antimony, unless we are able to tame them;
especially the first, who derides all endeavors unless you bring him an
Alkahest. For notwithstanding as otherwise prepared, with an addition of other
Ingredients, it sometimes, as being Alcaleous, effects a Cure.

Yet considering it may expose, as it sometimes has done, a Person to damage
and danger, if not perniciously destroy him; I verily persuade my self, 'twould
be for the honor of Physic and their safety, never to admit it into our
Stomachs. Next I think it would no ways dishonor Chemistry, could we find all
our Pretenders to Helmontianism, steer their Course safely in Physic; (as some
I know do) and not by their perverse Mineraline Remedies gainsay Noble Van in
Works, whilst in Words they seem to defend him. Perverse I say, for such as
Purge and Vomit I can assure you deserve no better Name, and no little defame
Chemistry.

Which as it is an Art most useful, so is it a Word of no ill signification;
being derived, as some say, from (...), others from Alchymus a King. But it is
the real knowledge of the Art and its Principles, not the Name, which is the
thing that makes a Physician Excellent: Seeing it separates Crudities, and
corrects Medicines by the Fire, through a proper Application of Agent to
Patient.

Nor is there any greater difference between Well-prepared Chemical Remedies,
and vulgar Shop-ones called Galenical, than that the last are Crude and Raw, at
leastwise not cleansed from their Terrene and Drossy Shackles, and therefore
unfit for a weak Stomach: And that the first, to wit, the Chemical Remedies,
through the assistance of the Fire and Art, are rendered Spirituous, Virtuous,
and Innocent, being divested of all cloging Qualities.

For if the Fire be so needful a thing to prepare Food when we are well, much
more when we are sick; forasmuch as the Stomach is then usually so impaired, as
that the least thing offends it, if it be not lively and suitable. Besides the
Stomach not being strong, is incapacitated to make a separation of Parts, and
suck out the Virtues, which are but small, in a crude, and therefore unfit mass
of Terrestrieties or drossy Medicines. Whereas a studious and industrious
Chemical Physician, professing himself Natures Servant, separates the drossy
parts from the more pure that should nourish; and by only exhibiting the
latter, saves Nature the trouble of expelling the Dross, and of casting forth
what otherwise would hurt Her. So that She being delighted and enlivened by the
approach of such pure Remedies, begins to revive and get strength, and finally
routs Her Household Enemy, to wit, the diseasie faex.

Which thing doubtless many Galenical Physicians observing often, whilst they
railed against Chemistry and its Medicines; after a trial of such as they could
get from their own or others hands, found them not undeserving Protection; and
do since embrace them with such loving hearts, though they subtly rail
against Chemical Physicians, as such that give hot dangerous Medicines; That
being put to a nonplus by the stubborn Disease, and their Syrups, Purges, and
Electuaries being baffled, they will apply themselves to such, and sometimes so
fortunately, that the almost-dead Patient recovers.

For which their care I must needs highly commend them, and should more commend
them if they made such Chemical Medicines themselves: But I cannot say they are
too honest and candid in railing against an Art, which their own Consciences
tell them is most useful, and to which they are so much beholden. For if
Chemical Medicines are good in an Apothecaries Hand, who ignores their Dose or
Composition; or if they are excellent, being prescribed by a Physician that
never made a Chemical Medicine, or at leastwise that Medicine he gives order
for; Why may not such Medicines, being more faithfully made, be much better in
a Chemical Physitian's Hands? I am sure there is no reason to the contrary, but
much reason for it; and it seems most agreeable to sense, That he should best
cure with Chemical Remedies, that spared neither cost nor labor to make them
Excellent and Innocent, and knows well what Ingredients they are made of. But
what do Galenical Physicians who prescribe to Apothecaries, make use of
Chemical Medicines, and yet nevertheless rail at Chemistry and its Professors?
Yes, they do, notwithstanding their railing, which is but to blind the World;
and which is worse, those Chemical Remedies they make use of, are (besides
badly made) oftentimes Sophisticated and Adulterated. How! Sophisticated and
Adulterated? It Is so, and all from this cursed thing Self, and a desire of
Gain. For in the first place the Doctor cannot, because he must mind his Fees,
and keep delicate white hands to feel the Pulse of his Patient. And in the next
place the Apothecary loves Money, and will not, because he can buy them of
Mercenary Chemists much cheaper than he can make them. But this cheapness
sometimes costs the Patient dear, to wit, his Health, if not his Life, in
regard the Remedies are Adulteraeted and Abused, that they may be afforded so:
Though to cloak their own deceit, if the Medicine does harm, they, like
Politicians, will say, His time was come.

But why do the Mercenary Chemists thus abuse their Remedies? That they may get
a tolerable Subsistence and live. For the Apothecary, who (like other
Tradesmen) buys where he can buy cheapest, offering low rates, so low, that
the Medicine cannot be faithfully made for the Money; does thereby tempt the
Mercenary Chemist to Adulterate and Sophisticate, or else make the Medicine by
halfs: How destructive this is to many a poor Soul, I shall leave others to
determine. Thus instead of Spirit of Salt, Phlegm of Salt is sold; and not only
so, but it is sometimes Sophisticated, and Oil of Sulphur (with other Remedies
too tedious to be named) adulterated, etc. I omit with what, because I will not
make Fools Knaves.

Nor are many of our Modern Writers silent concerning this; for even Van
Helmont seriously professes, That he was loath to speak plainly of any Medicine
of Note, Because almost all Chemical Remedies in the Shops being full of
deceit, and adulterated, through desire of Gain, gave him cause to think all
would be served so: And truly I am of his Opinion. But the ingenious and noble
Robert Physiolog. Essays.
Boil Esquire, having found it too true, says, That he so often met with
Chemical Preparations unsincere, that he dare scarce trust any in the
Administration of Physic, which either his own Furnaces did not afford him, or
was given him by some faithful skilful person he had a good opinion of. The
other day (says he) having occasion to use some Spirit of Salt, whereof I was
not then provided, I sent for some to a Chemist, who making it himself, was the
likelier to afford that which was well made: But though I gave him his own rate
for it, at the first rectification in a Retort, a single pound afforded us no
less than six ounces of Phlegm; and afterward being further rectified in a
high Body and gentle Heat, the remaining Spirit parted with a scarce credible
quantity of the like nauseons Liquor. And after all these sequistrations of
Phlegm, 'twas not pure enough to perform what we expected from it. Of which
complaining to an excellent Chemist of my acquaintance, he sent for Spirit of
Salt to a very eminent Distiller of it, who gets much by his Profession, and
passes for a very honest Man: But this Spirit (besides its weakness)
discovered it self to be Sophisticated, with either Spirit of Nitre or Aqua
Fortis; Which betrayed it self by its peculiar and odious smell. Whereas Spirit
of Salt skilfully and sincerely drawn, is commonly of a greenish Color,
bordering upon yellow, and has usually a peculiar and not unpleasing smell.

I shall bring here no more Instances, though I could produce many to the same
effect, seeing it would be but actum agere. Only be pleased to take notice how
well a Patient is likely to be recovered by such ill-made Medicines: And what is
the cause the Galenists often prevail little more in a manner with their
mercenary Chemical Remedies, than they do with their own cloging drossy
Galenical ones, as also what is one cause they cry out against Chemical
Medicines.

But why then do Galenists rail at, and give reproachful Titles to Chemical
Physicians and their Art? There are many Causes, one of which I desired you to
take notice of lately, but the most usual one is, because they outdo them in
Cures, through faithful preparing their own Medicines. And thereupon lest the
People, especially the Gentry, should be inclined to make use of them, they Buz
into their Heads, That Chemical Remedies either Kill or Cure quickly. Who, not
perceiving the Doctors Design, believe it, till they are brought almost to
Death's door; and then when they perceive themselves as 'twere incurable,
knowing they can but die, a Chemical Physician perhaps shall be employed; and
if they be not too far spent, (which sometimes they are before the Galenist
will leave them) by wholesome, lively, innocent Remedies they recover. And by
this means, notwithstanding their Reproaches, is Chemistry in repute with many.

I remember about four years since, a worthy Gentlewoman falling into a
Paralytick Lethargy, several (I think three) Galenick Physicians were sent for.
They tried various Ways and Means, and Medicine upon Medicine, but all was in
vain; and after three days endeavor could not awaken her, or cause her to
move, but were forced to leave her as they found her, whilst the Disease seemed
to laugh their lifeless and feeble Remedies to scorn. Thus when she was yielded
incurable, my ingenious Tutor was sent for; who sending his Son, because
himself could not conveniently go, recovered her by innocent yet valiant
Remedies, insomuch that she could move and open her eyes in few hours space,
and afterward, to the wonderment of many, he made her well and sound. One or
two of the Doctors hearing this, and seeing her within few days so much mended
after their ineffectual attempts: To save their Credits, and salve their
Bungling, buz'd into the heads of the Women, that he, to wit, the Chemical
Doctor, corresponded with the Devil, or some bad Spirit; adding, he uses
Astrology, (which the Vulgar call the Black Art, though it borrows its name
from Light Bodies) but they mistook. However this was not a little believed, by
not only the credulous Women, but some Men; insomuch that enquiery was made
concerning it, and that with diligence, whereby they were better satisfied* and
plainly saw the Heathenish Christianism, and deceit of the Doctors; and we by
this means came to hear on it.

But what a piece of Villainy was this, to reward so good, so charitable, and so
ingenious a Physician, with so base and ignominious a reproach, for all his
Labor and Expenses to find out better Medicines than they had! Nor was this
all, for they used and tried many ways to depretiate, and bring his Medicines
into contempt; only because he could do more than they could, and oftentimes
cured where they were non-plust. But this reproach was so blockish, That surely
had I not then been a Tabler with him in the House, and heard it there, I
should not easily have believed that any Physician had been so stupid, or so
unphilosophically bred, as to ascribe the cure of Diseases to the Devil. I must
confess it is something like the trick of the Pharisees, who abused the Prince
of Physicians, our Lord and Master Christ, for casting out Devils, and curing
Diseases, which they could not; saying, he did it through Beelzebub the Prince
of Devils: Wherefore if the Master was defamed, well may his Servants.

However let not such Reproaches deter you, ye noble and true-hearted Chemical
Physicians, from pursuing after more refined Medicines; being assured, (as
Helmont says) That none shall ever be forsaken of God, who with a pious
Affection, and firm Faith, performs the Office of a Physician.

Nor be ye startled at their crying out against the Heat of Chemical Medicines,
seeing through a defect in the Natural Heat of the Body, Diseases are commonly
bred, especially Fevers. For if Heat, which is the Exciter, though not the
Efficient of Digestion, did not fail, as well as the Ferment it self, and
thereby disinable the Stomach; so many Fevers, and other Distempers as are,
would scarce be: But when the Natural and Vital Heat fails, a preternatural one
either is caused in the whole Body soon after, through the Archeus being angry,
or the whole does gradually decline. Besides we ought to consider that Death is
cold, and that Diseases are the Harbinger of Death, therefore to be withstood
by Vital Remedies, if we intend not to labor in vain: But how a Remedy that is
Vital can be Cold, Dead, and Spiritless, I shall leave them to prove, seeing
Life and Heat in Man are so much akin, that where the first is, there is the
last; and that where the last is wholly absent, the first is not present.

But here by Vital Remedies, I do not mean such as will inflame, to wit, Vinous
Ones: though such, if mild, when the diseasie cause is removed, are good for
nourishment. But I by Vital Medicines do mean, such as are friendly to the
Life, and the Stomach, the Prime Seat thereof; such as are benign, and in their
heat not exceeding the Vital Heat of the Body. Such Heaters, I say, as shall
certainly by their lively and abstersive Properties, assist and reinforce
Nature, to the expelling what hurts, and thereby undoubtedly cool.

Provided Death, and an extinction of the Candle of L^fe is not at hand: Yet
then (which is worthy of note) such shall keep the Tongue smooth, as also the
Mouth unfur'd; shall give Ease when vulgar Remedies cannot; And commonly
preserve the Senses entire to the last; as much as then can be expected. For,
Contra vim mortis, non est Medicamen in hortis.

Yet am I not so much wedded to the Chemical Science, as to exclude all things
from Physic which have not been Spagyrically handled: or to go to persuade the
World that in the absence of Pyrotechny, no Remedies may be produced for some
particular Maladies, whilst experience tells me the contrary. For doubtless the
Art of Healing amongst the Ancients was first founded on a Proper application
of Simples, which they found good against many remote, and less dangerous
Diseases, whilst daily experience dictated.

Nor can I be persuaded otherwise than that they had Remedies; with which many
violent Affects, and such that beset the Vitals in their chief Inns, were not
unfortunately removed: could we be so happy as to know them in their naked
simplicity, unmasked and singled from their hotch-potchly Adjuncts. Which we
have reason to believe Posterity added, more from a desire of hiding the Art of
Healing, to make the People believe it is most mysterious, and to beget
admiration in them; than in the least to advance it, or that they might
safelyer Cure Diseases: Seeing the multiplying of Ingredients in a Medicine is
so common at this day, that scarce a wholesome one which is simple and innocent
can be invented by any Sober Physician, Motherly Gentlewoman or expert Nurse
(which two last have been doubtless the finders out of a great many Remedies);
but if it come into the hands of some half-witted, and Ambitious Doctors;
presently their aims are to Monopolize the same, and render it far more
intricate.

To which end therefore, one he adds to the already virtuous Simple (or
Medicine made of two or three ingredients) this thing, another he adds a
second, as they think analogous; a third perhaps two or three more ingredients:
And thus they add more and more till the Virtues of the Simple are Confounded,
whilst the Medicine is Compounded. Besides, think they, (who are in the interim
ignorant that Nature rejoices in Simplicity) if we mix a multitude of
Ingredients together, it is much if one don't cure but an other will; And that
if a Medicine has thirty or forty several Ingredients in it, 'twill not be
difficult to persuade the weak-sighted People that 'twill Cure half as many
Diseases; at leastwise knock down one as dead as a H^rring: For thirty to one
is odds at the football; and that (Reader) thou know as well as I.

But truly herein they mistake, for we are not to go to Football, but to heal.
Besides, let us suppose that that Simple, or perhaps two or three, which were
originally the true Medicine, had any considerable Virtues: Yet they may well
believe, and according to the Rules of Nature too, that the other adjuncts
though they make the Medicine m^sterious, do weaken and E^lipse its Virtues;
and render it disgustful and oppressive to the Stomach, when otherwise it might
allevia^e Nature.

Hence is it that the Sick frequen^ly complain against vulgar Remedies that are
given for relief: Says one, I no sooner see a Gally-pot or Pill-box but it
presently inclines me to lo^^h^ng and vomiting. Others there are who having
been soundly paid ^ff, will by no means hear of a Physician till they are
right-down Sick, and almost at Deaths door; Yea will rather venture their lives
under the hand of a Nurse, with some Home spun simple Decoction, than in the
least adhere to such confused Prescripts: So that till he is much spent, and he
find his strength daily to fail, no Physician or Physic (as they unprope^ly
call poisonous Purges, Vomites, or Spiritless ho^ch-potches) must p^ss over the
threshold of the door. And when he is consulted, the Patient is apt to ^ry out,
and that not causl^sly, Good Doctor give me nothing to Clog, Vomit, or Disturb
me. And why is it? Perhaps Experience told him that last time he fell under the
Doctors hands; he had weln^gh as much trouble, and felt as much oppression from
the Medicine he took* as from the Disease it self: Whilst poor Nature under two
Egyptian Task masters, was even forced to make Brick without Straw, and had a
double trouble, instead of ease, to cast forth the Disease and Medicine.

Thus many times by clogging lifeless Medicines* as also by poisonous and
churlish Purges and Vomits, Nature is not only even jaded, and hag'd, but
likewise for the future admonisht. And I my self was in my youthful years, so
grieviously perplexed with such, and harmed in my Vitals; that several purgative
Ingredients cannot approach my Tongue or Palate, without welnigh causing me to
Vomit: For Nature, who formerly paid punishment for admitting them, will hardly
be cheated again.

And though some there are, and those not a few, who (with me) know that the
most simple Remedies are most virtuous and benign, provided the ingredients be
not poisonous; And thereupon will not in the least, for any sinister ends, walk
contrary to their understandings: Yet others there are, who making Gain
Godliness* and their Bellies their God, mind not so much their Patients good,
as the esteem of the World, which (as it always did) loves things of least
worth, if they are splendid; And therefore oftentimes, out of policy, give them
a tedious Receipt to frighten them into a belief of the All-skilfulness. For
perhaps such Doctors imagine, that if they shall prescribe a few things, the
Patient or Bystanders will count them not knowing, and highly undervalue their
Art: And think that if they shall order Common Things, and such as may be had
at home, that the Women will get away their Skill: And that if they shall
prescribe one Medicine twice, to one and the same Patient, without addition,
'twill manifest their Knowingness to be small they suppose, or else discover
their Art to the Apothecaries.

To keep all of them therefore in ignorance, and make them adore them the more,
Foreign and costly Ingredients, with cruel and perversely hard names shall be
ordered, and that in no small number: notwithstanding that by this means the
Medicine is made cruelly and perversely clogging, and the Patients Vitals are
injured whilst they seek to be admired.

Some others there are, who being ignorant of Nature, and not well knowing the
rise and cause of Diseases; when they meet in consultation, because the Disease
shall not escape their clutches, sometimes mix twenty or thirty (if not more)
Ingredients together: Perhaps hoping that if one don't frighten him, a second
may scare him, a third may box his Ears, a fourth may cut his Nose, a fifth
break his Pate, or a sixth knock him down dead a^ a door Nail. But if none of
these shall do the work, yet at leastwise hope that so great a number of
Simples will so closely beset the Disease on all ^ides, that he shall never
escape their fingers, when many times there is more harm than good done by them.

I remember a certain Author relates, how that on a time several Physicians
being in consultation, after viewing their Patient, resolved to join their
forces together, and invent a Medicine to cure him. Whereupon one of them
orders several things, another as many more, and a third must have his
Ingreedients in too; so they went round, and round again, being resolved that
some of the Ingredients should do the Work. But one who was more ingenious and
intelligent than the rest, observing the nonsensicalness of the Compound, and
the multitude of Simples, mixed without Reason; tells them, They should put in
one thing more, to wit, a Hay-Cock, and then 'twould be a Medicine fit for a
Horse. Methinks he touched the Mark, and spoke like one of understanding, for
doubtless before 'twas as fit to Kill as Cure, but the Hay-Cock might have made
it good for something.

But can we seriously suppose that such a Medicine, so diversely and
irrationally mixed, and wherein are so many differing Ingredients, can ever
prove a Pacifier of Nature? Or, may we not rather suppose, if any of them are
Alcal^ous, and others Acid, that Nature will be disturbed by their
cross-grained litigiousness and quarrelling? I am fit to think nothing less.

Well, but imagine that the Ingredients are as quiet as Lambs, and don't one
fall foul on another; also that there are in such a Mass-ofaltogether, four or
five Ingredients, which are Homogeneal and Innocent, and would, if given by
themselves, do good: Yet they being exceedingly shackled and overwhelmed, if
not wholly destroyed by the other Additions, are thereby made so feeble and
weak, that if the Medicine, by its cloggingness, proves not an Enemy to Nature,
it seldom gives ease to the Patient.

Give Ease did I say! Alas how can it possibly? 'Twould be a thing most
unreasonable to expect it: Seeing the Necessary and Virtuous Ingredients, are
so hood-winkt by the Adjuncts, that they are unable to peep out of the mixture.
Which doubtless gave one of our Moderns occasion, with a serious Character, to
say, There were very few Medicines in the whole Dispensatory, which contained
not as much hurt as good in them.

But as for some of the more virtuous Simples, in their Integrity and
Nakedness, they are in no wise to be denied our Repositories, nor excluded from
the Classis of Medicine; nor some few such Specific Remedies, as are composed
of two or t^ree Ingredients, and which Experience has proved innoce^^ and
good; though it manifestly appears (daily experience dicta^ing) that Chemistry
produces Remedies more Universal, and of a far more swift, certain, and safe
Operation, in Malevolent and Dangerous Diseases; to wit, if the Ingredients are
primarily Innocent, or made so by the assistance of Art: In that it separateth
the parts terrene, deadly, and malign, from those that are most benign, lively,
and virtuous. Whereby the last with greater ease are admitted into the
Privy-Chambers of Life, and enable it to expel the Disease.

To call which injurious, I suppose there is no man so blind, seeing even when
the strength is entire and confirmed, so small a quantity of what Food is
received into the Body, is assimulated and turned into nourishment. Seeing that
after the m^st nourishing and vital parts are sucked out by the Venae-lacteae,
the Drossy and Earthy (which are far greater commonly than the nourishing) are
rejected, and cast forth by the Guts: Seeing also a separation is needful in
Health, much more requisite in Sickness. But then Nature being debilitated, and
unable to do it, it is the Office of the Physician to do it for Her, else he
merits not the name of her Helper: That the Stomach and other Digestions which
do fail and decline, may be aided with innocent Healers, and not be loaded and
jaded with spiritless Medicines, insignificant, earthy, and raw.

Opiates blamed.
TO omit Opium likewise, whilst it too often hurts and sometimes gives People
their bane, is a thing I deem most inconvenient. For I aim not in reflecting on
Damages in Medicine, to do my Work sluggishly by halfs; nor partially to
condemn some Physical Ingredients for their malignity, and let others as
Venomous got Scot-free.

Would it not make one admire to see how many are murdered, yea plainly
murdered, by the stupifying venom of Opium, and no warning taken thereat? But
as if it were nothing to sport with men's Lives, those who have been the
unfortunate Actors of such lamentable Tragedies, having prescribed such, and
thereby killed their Patients secundum Artem, have nevertheless adventured
('it is cruel Ignorance!) to give the same again with no unlike deplorable event.
Yea, with many, not only confidently ignorant ones, but also the more Learned
and Acute-witted, what is more commonly ordered for procuring gentle Rest, when
the violence of the Disease hinders sleeping, than the mischievous, and not
half-guilded Laudanum of the Shops? When the gentle Rest which it produces, is
not seldom a sleeping to Death, and that it so exceedingly stupifies many that
take it, and so immeasurably preys upon their Vitals: That if after long
sleeping they being forceably awakened, do mutter out a few words to their
Friends, they serve for no more than a last farewell, or to hint that Death is
approaching. But some it ^o severely intangles in its Narcotick-Chains, and so
benums and freezes their Vitals, that their pretended gentle Rest, to the shame
of Medicine, is a hor^id irrecoverable Sleep.

And what then can any harm be in that? Seeing the Dead are generally very
courteous, and are usually so little addicted to revenge, that they never come
back to complain, or in the least to tell stories against the Doctor? It is to
be wished they could, that then if Physicians Consciences smite them not, nor
excite them to studiousness in Physic; yet being admonished for the future,
they may learn to make use of more innocent Remedies and not hazard the life of
the Sick: May be thereby taught so much honesty for the future, as not to
exclaim against men studious and learned, and because they recede from perverse
Remedies and Methods, brand them with the name of Empericks, whilst themselves
who know not what Remedies they give, are much more worthy thereof.

But suppose that an Opiative Medicine is given that has not so bad and
malevolent tricks, but is by far better corrected than the Laudanum, for all
its specious and spicy additions; which with Sp. Vini, are no more able to tame
the Opium, than a Mouse is to tame a Lion, though the Medicine is made
mysterious by it. I say, suppose one better corrected than the Laudanum is
given, yet the event is not always as it should be. For Matthews's Pill, which
in many Apothecarys shops in the Country is called Magisterium Anodynum, and in
which the Opium is six times better corrected than in the Laudanum, is not only
at a chance so great an enemy to the life as to destroy it: But also frequently
a great causer of Thirst, Costiveness, and Headache the morning following, and
sometimes watchfulness a night or two after.

You may perhaps say this is through the Pills ill composure, the Corrector not
being good, or through the Opiums ill commixture with it; caused from Lazyness
and carelessness in him that made it: But not from any Vice in the Pill, as a
Pill. In behalf of its innocence I can say little: only I can assure you that
notwithstanding I can make it as well as another, yet I use it not, because it
is hazardous. For, whatever others think, it is not an ordinary thing to sport
with men's lives, nor is it in my Opinion lawful to give that Medicine to
another which I would not willingly take. Besides the miscarriage of a Father,
Mother, or Son, upon taking an untoward Remedy, may do so much injury in a
family as to give them cause of blaming, if not of cursing the Physician and
Apothecary too. And the killing of a Man, though it be secundum Artem, with a
Medicine known to be dangerous, is a crime not easily expiated. Others perhaps
may think well on it, and being adventurous, not dread it in the least: And so
they may for all me; though I wish them success and prosperity in their
affairs, even as much as their hearts can desire.

And as to Laziness, and Incuriousness in the Preparer of it, on which you
would lay the blame, when the Pill does harm and destroys the life of the
Patient: I confess they are detrimental in Physic, and do make the Pill much
more hazardous. Notwithstanding which, some of those Physicians who pretend to
make their own Medicines, as well as Apothecaries, especially such as live in
the Country, are and have been accustomed to buy such like Remedies of
Mercenary Chemists and Operators. Of the illmaking and compounding of which
they being ignorant, and hoping they are truly and wellprepar'd, do sometimes,
and that not seldom give them to the sick with events not answering their
desires.

For such incurious Operators, if they make not their Remedies of perished
Drugs, yet they bestow not the pains required to make them well, or at
leastwise Adulterate and Sophisticate them at last that they may get a
tolerable subsistence: And why is it? Because it is the humor of most
Apothecaries, especially of those who are ignorant of Chemistry, without any
regard had to due and honest preparation, to buy where most may be had for
money; and (which is a wonderful cheapness) to purchase some remedies so cheap,
that the same money, without being paid for Labor, will but defray charges of
ingredients, Glasses, Fire, and house-Rent, if the medicine were duly and
honestly made. Which humor of theirs in seeking after cheap, (not good)
remedies is doubtless detrimental to the Sick, and one cause why they sometimes
go uncured: whilst to please them their Operators scarce regard what they do,
being loath to be deprived of their Custom.

I perhaps by this discourse may anger some of the Apothecaries whose
Consciences on sight hereof will fly in their Faces; As also some Physicians
who pretending to make their own Medicines; do buy their Chemical preparations
of others. But if I do, truly they must pardon me: For where the lives of men
are concerned it is bad foothing; My desire is that they would be candid and not
seek more after wealth and ease than the good of the sick. I that lost a Father
and had my own Vitals clipped in their prime, through ill-contriv'd and
pernicious medicines, may well be allowed to speak. At leastwise whether they
will allow me or not, I will take the liberty to do it.

Yet would I not have you think that all Apothecaries are thus incurious. No:
No: for I am persuaded that there are not a few in London, and some few here
and there in the Country that are persons very ingenious, and candid, and such
as make their own Chemical preparations. Only I could wish that those candid
ones were the quarter part of the Apothecaries in the Nation: For then though
it would be bad enough, it would be better by far than it is now. But to return
to Magisterium Ancdynum otherwise called Mathews his Pill, and to let you see
it is not the safest of Medicines, but sometimes destructive, take this example.
A certain person a man of good credit falling violently ill of a Fever had
Mathews his Pill given him by a Physician that made it, or at leastwise
pretends to make his own Medicines: But whether 'twas to make him sleep or cure
him of his Fever I know not; however the sick taking it, it so perniciously
freez'd and stupify'd his Vitals that although after some hours were past,
being awakt he could open his eyes a little; Yet returning to sleep, all their
Art could not awake him, so he soundly slept till he died.

Several more instances I could give you of such who with Opiates slept to
Death: But I know not certainly whether they took the Laudanum, or Magisterium
Anodynum: Only an Esquire and his Wife in the Country not many years since
taking Magisterium Anodynum as the Physician ordered, and they persuading him
to do so too, to prove the safety of his Medicine: the Physician died that
night after taking it, and his Patients died in few days after him, their
disease having been much exasperated.

An other person not being currently well, was thereby deprived of sleep,
whereupon she consulting a Physician, and a Learned one too, he prescribed her
an Opiative medicine to cause sleep, as also a Cordial with it. She took it and
sleeping soundly all night was awak't by her husband in the morning; when
asking for a little drink, she suddenly fell asleep, and slept so long till
she died; whilst they did their utmost endeavor to awake her.

A certain widow being somewhat ill fell under a course of Physic, (her Doctor
being he that ordered a sleeping dose for the last) And first of all she was
Purged and Vomited, which being done her Stomach was so hurt she could not
sleep at night. Hereupon a Dormitive medicine was given her, which she taking
overnight, next morning (whereas she used to be up at seven a Clock) she not
being Stirring at nine, one of her chief servants enquired for his Mistress,
and asked why she was not come down: says the maid presently, the Doctor gave my
Mistress something to make her sleep, which said: The man fearing lest as some
others had done she should sleep to death, took the boldness to go up and call
her. When he came and found her fast a sleep and in a cold sweat he awak't her;
and she desiring it, reached her something to drink: But the Cup was no sooner
taken away, than she was a sleep again, and gave the man a second trouble of
awaking her: However that would not do, for to sleeping she returned, whereupon
he called up more company; and they not prevailing they sent for the Doctor to
see if he could do any good: But he with all his Art Force and Violence, could
not make her open her eyes, for the Poisonous Opium prevailed. At length when
fair means would not do, the Doctor ordered redhot coals to be laid to her
back; and when he had soundly burnt her, she not awaking slept to Death
Secundum Artem, and left several Fatherless and Motherless Children.

I think I need mention no more, for these will suffice seeing such pranks are
too often acted every where. But I wonder what such Doctors think of
themselves, whilst they thus through carelessness fatten Burying places, and
increase the numbers of the Fatherless and Motherless? Do they think God is
just, and will ever call them to an account? Doubtless though the Outward Law
cannot reach them whilst they murder by authority, and send people Methodically
to Orcus: God will one day let them know what a good Conscience means, and that
there were and are Medicines not Poisonous to be found, if they had been
diligent. However we Physicians have one great benefit above many other
Professions, and it is that which keeps the Poisoning trade on: For if some
others commit errors they remain in sight to posterity, but the Earth forthwith
covers Our faults; By which means they being forgotten, we may without
interruption next year Kill another Secundum Arte^.

But does not Opium many times profit the sick in provoking rest, and causing
them to sleep which otherwise they would not after watchful nights and days? I
cannot say it really profits, as it is commonly corrected, but that it brings
sleep and sometimes Death is apparent: nor does it seldom appear that the
sleep which it causes is not nourishing, as almost every intelligent woman
that has been conversant with sick people, or has taken it her self can tell
you. For it procures not sleep in that it takes away the cause of Watchfulness
from the Midriffs and Stomach, but only through Stupifying the Vitals: For
after the taking of an Opiative Medicine to wit Laudanum if the occasional
cause of Not-sleeping remains; the night or two following the Party who took it
is commonly more restless than before.

And if Mathews's Pill does at any time effect a cure I can hardly ascribe it
to the Opium or Hellebore but to the Correcting Sapo: For that being Alcaleous
and an enemy to Acidity by its abstersive property (whilst so much of the Opium
in it does more harm than good) sometimes effects a cure and removes the
Occasional Cause; which being taken away sleep comes naturally, and of its own
accord; therefore we should chiefly aim at that. What I speak is not
conjectural, but can assure you I am fully confirmed that if half the Opium in
the Pill and half the Hellebore were left out, and a larger quantity of the
Liquorish put in, 'twould be a far more innocent, less disturbing, and far more
virtuous Medicine: for whereas according to Mathews his way the Opium was one
to four, yet now being but one to eight it cannot have that stupifying force,
nor so exceedingly display its Narcotick Venom.

But be sure whatever you do let the Sapo be well, truly, and duly made, and
then mix the Opium thoroughly with it, beating them two together for a good while
in a Mortar till they are fully incorporated: which being done, at last put in
the other ingredients after you have mingled them likewise; and by this means
'twill be made the more safe. Though after all if you would be ruled by me you
should be very cautious in using it.

Preventive Physic a cheat, and a trick to get Money by.
Amongst other Injuries and Abuses I cannot pass by that mischievous one of
giving purges to the healthy at spring and fall under pretense of keeping a
future integrity. Having not only under that speciousness been reduced to
weakness my self, but had likewise the unhappiness whilst a youth to lose my
Most dear Father. Who being about the fourtieth year of his age, and pretty
healthy, in the springtime some occasions calling him into that City wherein
we lived, accidentally (as I think 'twas) meets with a Galenist, and one Med:
Doct: This Doctor having for several years been his Physician used not much
Rhetoric to persuade him; but taking his fee, Prescribes, and sending the Bill
away to the Apothecary gives order for a Preventive Purge to be taken next
morning. My Father complied with his order and took it, but Nature not being
able to expel and conquer the Venom, it notwithstanding all their endeavor,
derided all their succors, and so debilitated Nature, that things past through
his body unaltered as it were, unless by the Poison of the Purge: and the
fourth day after taking it, it giving him thirty or forty stools (if not more)
Killed him about six the next morning. Thus my Father through Ignorance and
Deceit was murdered under the notion of Prevention, and of anticipating future
Diseases: whilst the Doctor and Apothecary strived each to find excuses and
discharge themselves of the Blame.

But had the Purge been safe as it was not; they would do well to give a reason
why such a Dose must be given, to Oppose a Disease not in being, and is but
supposed to come: Seeing they are wholly ignorant whether o^ no 'twill, (if it
do come take up its Inn next in the Head, Heart, Stomach, Guts, Spleen, Liver
or Joints etc. Seeing that also they know not which of the four Humors (pardon
the Phrase for I speak to the Humourists) will next abound, and therefore must
needs be ignorant which of them to Select and Purge forth: Seeing also that the
taking of Physic can bring no man to a more happystate of body than health,
and therefore he that enjoys it wants none of their Preventives.

Yet will I not say that Physic (as the people call it) at Spring and Fall is
unworthy of that appellation; it being most true that it is efficacious, and
has a Diverse Operation at Once: yea and so effectual a one too that I will
not not be so audacious as to rob it wholly of its name, seeing it in some sort
deserves it. For if it takes away superfluous humors from the Patients body as
they tell you; I am sure it adds necessary ones to some of the Doctors Purses:
and whilst it cures that of a Plethora, cures this of a Consumption; which must
inevitably follow were there not a supply and a proper Preventive at hand. But
it is no matter think some, and their Actions declare it: If we meet not with a
Disease we will make one; for it is a sad thing to be without work: Oh misery of
miseries! What a horrible thing is this, that Medicine mercifully created by
the Father of Lights for the relief of distressed mankind, should thus be
perverted and abused? Honest Helmont that thou wrotest not so satyrically in
vain, nor yet without sufficient cause, we may with facility see.

It may perhaps be objected that some Persons if they take not a Purge at
Spring and Fall, are subject sometimes to Sickness in the Summer or Winter
succeeding. This word Sometimes is well put in; for doubtless it is not always;
Neither are they always well in the succeeding Winter or Summer who take them;
Which I with many others can testify from woeful Experience. But many times on
the other hand they who don't take them, are more healthy and less subject to
lapse: Whilst they only crave the assistance of a Cup of Wormwood-beer, or some
such innocent haustus in the springtime.

But granting what they say, to wit, that it is needful for some, and so
requisite at the forenamed Seasons; that the omission thereof has made them
infirm, and not seldom less healthy by far: Yet they ought to consider that
Custom is the cause thereof, and that as Customary does the body require it,
no otherwise than it does the use of Tobacco when many Years converse therewith
had made it familiar. And if too frequent smoking has made Tobacco so
necessary that some persons can better be without their food than without it,
must that forthwith prove it convenient for all persons to take it? Experience
tells us the contrary whilst not a few are hurt by the use of it, and wish they
never had known it.

And therefore I shall say no more to such, whose converse with Preventive
Purges has made that custom useful, and too sudden a declining it dangerous,
than to advise them to take heed of whom they Make use, and be sure that the
Solutive be safe. Lest after they have consulted too confident and careless
Physicians, they dearly pay the punishment of their folly. I say, let them be
sure that the Purge, if they must have one, be safe, and such that shall not
hurt them, nor in the least impair the Faculties and Ferments of the Body. They
who give other, deserve sharp reproof, and whether learned or unlearned, want
no ignorance in Physic.

Yet would I not have you think there are no Preventives, or means to preserve
Health for the future, for I can assure you to the contrary; only they are
neither Purgatives nor Vomitives. For in my opinion, the best Preventives, are
sober and moderate Eating and Drinking; keeping a good order for Sleeping,
Exercises, etc. and avoiding too much Sedentariness; shunning all Drunkenness
and Debauchery, and taking care upon s^dden or great Heats not to catch cold:
As also not to be too studious or thoughtful, (both which, or either of them
weakens the Body more than Labor) but sometimes to slacken the Cords of
Intense Study. It Is an excellent way also to prevent Diseases, and more
profitable than the best Preventive Purge or Vomit in England, Never to Eat or
Drink any thing that disagrees with you, or is disgustful and loathsome to your
Stomach: Not forgetting at any time when your Spirits are flag'd and fail, to
refresh and enliven them with a moderate cup of Ale, Sack, or other generous
Liquor that agrees with your Stomach and Purse. In doing these, I dare assure
thee, Reader, thou will do well, through God's blessing, and may laugh at all
their Preventives. But now to give you a second Narrative.

Some years after the untimely death of my Father, it being thought meet in
Autumn, for all I was pretty well, to purge my Body; that is to say, to take a
Poisonous dirty Besom to sweep a clean House, and diminish my Venal Blood, a
Purge was ordered, and I took it, but was thereby purged into an Ague, that
continued a good while after; whereas had I been let alone, I might undoubtedly
have been healthy that Winter.

Not much disagreeing with the History of my Father's Death, is an account
which Helmont gives concerning a noted Brabanter. Of late, says he, a
judicious Man of the Privy Council of Brabant, that he might preserve his
Health, had taken an usual Pill of washed Aloes, (to wit, gilded) and whilst he
found not the effect thereof, declares it to a Physician passing by: Who blames
the sluggishness of the Aloes, and so turns Picron or bitter, into Pigrum slow.
I will prescribe, says he, corrected Pills of greater virtue; the which being
taken, after a whole weeks vainly endeavoring to restrain the Purges unbridled
effect, he miserably perished, thus that he might free himself from a future
Disease, he perished by the deceit of the Physician, and left eleven Children.

From whence (says Helmont) it is chiefly manifest, that it is free for a
loosening Medicine to tyrannize on him that is in good health, as well as on a
sick Person: to wit, it is lawful, under the name of a Physician, and deceit of
a purging Medicine, to prey upon the Life of Princes without punishment,
because the Earth covers the cruel ignorance of Physicians.

Also a Merchants Daughter of my Acquaintance told me seriously, That having
some defect in her Speech, to wit, a Lisping, and thereby pronouncing some
words not very plainly, though otherwise she was in very good health; was
partly promised a removal of that Defect by a Physician. Who accordingly
prescribes a Medicine or two for her whilst an Angel mediated. They being sent
from the Apothecaries, the young Gentlewoman according to order took them, and
was at four days end sick in good earnest, (this is worse than what Tinkers
do, to make a Hole in a whole Vessel) and therefore had the Doctor's aid to
repair the breach he had made in her Health. which he, by strengthening
Remedies, did in four or five days more. But the defect in pronunciation, her
Lisping remains still, after that the Doctor had got some Angels for making her
Sick: Whereas had he sent for a Chyrurgion to cut off a piece of her Tongue, he
had had some seeming pretense; yet that had been* as equally blockish and
dangerous. Seeing the cause of Lisping is the Tongues being too large for the
Mouth, thereby hindering a clear pronunciation, whilst it cannot move readily,
and is subject to close with the Teeth when it should not.

Surely the Physician (if I may call him one) was either sufficiently ill-read
in Anatomy, or else little honest, either of which agree badly with Physic;
for if he had not been one of them, he would never have prescribed Medicines to
cure what cannot be cured. The over-bigness of the Tongue being caused at
Nature's pleasure, no otherwise than a large Hand, Arm, Leg, Foot, Nose, Mouth,
or Head; and therefore it is every way as rational to expect to lessen any of
them by taking of Medicines inward, as to hope to make the Tongue less; to
attempt which nevertheless would be Sottish. Also why may we not expect, after
the same rate of Curing, that a Person having six Fingers on a Hand, should
have one of them taken away by a Medicinal Potion, seeing that also is from an
Error in Formation. But of this enough, which though not proper in this place,
I thought meet to hint; That if such Physicians will not learn to be wise and
honest, yet that the People may learn to shun them. I shall only add one
Instance more to show the perniciousness of Preventive Doses, and then draw
toward a conclusion.

A certain Tradesman, some years since, being desirous to take some Preventive
Physic, consults a Physician; who thereupon prescribes him a Purge (to wit) in
Pills, which were accordingly sent home to his house: But he, by reason he had
urgent Affairs, neglected the taking of them for two days. The Doctor coming
by, and seeing him in his Shop, demanded whether or no he had taken them, the
man replied No, but said, he would, and by the Doctor's permission did so: But
the Poison being strong, too strong for Nature, he was dead in two hours space.

These Examples I bring, for an admonishment and caution to such who may at any
time be tempted to take Preventive Physic, when they are already healthy, and
Nature in a good plight, through the Stomach and other Digestions performing
their Office. It not being seldom that such a Prevention does weaken the
strength and Vitals, as well as the Purse; at leastwise it does them no good,
all things being considered. And some Physicians there are who are worthy of
blame, in that notwithstanding their own Consciences, as well as the Scripture,
tell them, The whole have no need of the Physician, and therefore want no
Physic: Yet will, in hopes of an Angel, be persuading the Healthy to take
their Preventive Doses, when some of them themselves would not take them were
they hired to do it, but a cup of good* Ale or Sack shall supply its place.

Also it is worthy of note, that if at any time a Person is Sick, and by the
Physicians order a Medicine brought; if the sick Party request him ^o prove the
innocence of it, by taking the like quantity he orders; it is five to one if to
avoid taking it, he answers not, That the whole have no need of the Physician,
or something to the same effect, and so evade it. Which thing considered, it is
admirable the World is so stupid to be thus bul^'d out of their Moneys,
Healths, and sometimes their Lives, under a pretense of Prevention. It being a
thing as altogether needless to converse with Medicines when we are well, as
it is needful to use them when we are sick; lest, be the Medicines never so
good, by too familiarly taking and making them daily Food, as it were, they
prove not Medicinal when occasion requires. Yea, so much harm has this
preventive Purging, and other abuses formerly done, as to make it a Proverb,
Qui Medice vivit, misere vivit, (i. e.) He that lives Physically, lives
miserably: And to make Physic the byword of the Vulgar.

It may be Objected, That many take such Purges at Spring and Autumn, and are
not at all hurt thereby; and it is doubtless true. Yet let me tell them, that
not hurting such, and not impairing their Strengths, is not sufficient to
counter-ballance those injuries many others receive, if not by being killed,
yet by debilitating and weakening their Vitals. Besides, I am sure if they are
not we^kned, yet all things considered it profits not; notwithstanding much
corrupt Liquor is cast forth; which some call bad Humors, and truly so they
are when in the Glose-stool, for it is Venal Blood slain by the venom of the
Laxative, and rendered u^fit for nourishment. Though before the Purge was
admitted into the Body, 'twas well enough. That it is slain Venal Blood, the
putrid smell of a dead Carkase possessing those Humors (as Helmont ^inteth)
does amply prove: As also if the Purge was violent, the scarce appearance of
those Veins which the day before were full, and the weakness of the Vitals,
whose strength is the Blood.

What miseries (alas) thus attend us Mortals! As if it were not enough to do to
wrestle with Diseases, that do daily get strength, and grow more malign and
stubborn: But we must be preyed upon by venomous Remedies, and unfaithful
Helpers! As if it were requisite to preserve Health, and a future integrity, by
diminishing the strength, and poisoning the good Juyces of the Body! Surely let
him believe it that can, for I cannot; having been taught better, though at a
dear rate, by the loss of my Fathers Life, and by weakening my Vitals heretofore
by such mischievous tricks.

FINIS.

