GOD'S Strange and terrible Judgment IN Oxfordshire: Being a true RELATION How
a Woman at Atherbury, Having used diverse horrid Wishes and Imprecations, Was
suddenly Burned to Ashes all on one side of her Body, when there was no Fire
near her; the other part of her remaining untouched, and not so much as Sindg'd.

The like heavy and visible Judgment from Heaven having scarce been known or
heard of in any Age.

For our God is a consuming fire. Licensed

May the 10. 1677. To. L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed for D.M. 1677.

A true and wonderful Account how a Woman was found half burnt without any fire
near her, etc.
BEcause Judgment is not executed speedily (says Holy Writ) therefore are the
wicked hardened in their impieties. If we consider the horrid Oaths, the
abominable Curses and Imprecations daily practiced and used in this sinful Age,
we might justly expect that the Earth should open to swallow such Miscreants
alive to the pit of Hell; or the Heavens dart down Thunderbolts on their
guilty heads: But there is mercy with our God, that he may be feared: He waits
upon rebellious Mortals to be gracious, having sworn that he delights not in
the death of a sinner, but rather that he return, repent, and live: Yet will he
not always suffer his holy Spirit to be grieved with a froward and obstinate
Generation, but sometimes, for manifestation and glory of his Justice, takes
sudden Vengeance (even in this life) on notorious Transgressors of his holy
Laws, and such as may make every ear to tingle, and heart to ache, that hears or
considers it: For this is certain, though Divine Vengeance may seem to have
leaden feet, yet it has iron hands: Though Heaven strikes slowly, it smites
surely, and bruiseth every stubborn Soul that stands out against it in
rebellion, to powder, or everlasting destruction.

Not to amuse the Reader (who we hope is a better experienced Christian than to
need it) with a tedious Preamble to demonstrate this apparent Truth, or quote
(as we might do) various Histories from worthy and credible Authors; as The
Theater of God's Judgments; Clarks Examples, etc. to parallel it; We shall only
impartially relate what within very few days happened in our own Nation; and
which is not only most notorious in all the neighboring Countie^, but also
ready to be testified by diverse sober persons of unblemished Credit in this
City for an undoubted Truth, too certain to be denied by any but an Infidel,
too remarkable to be slighted by any but an Atheist.

We could tell you the Persons Name and Abode which is the unhappy Subject of
this Relation, but that our business is to make a Report of the Judgment,
without blasting the Person to whom God in his mercy may yet have granted the
grace of a timely Repentance, for ought that is known to u^: So that since it
has pleased Providence to take her out of the Land of the Living, we shall pay
that respect to the charitable Proverb, which advises, Not to speak ill of the
dead, as not to blazon her Vices or Infirmities further than is necessary to
the declaration of Truth, and cautioning of others surviving; the main and
indeed only end of this Publication.

This unhappy Woman, then, keeping a small Ale house, had too much addicted
herself to lewd Speeches, sometimes Oaths, and frequently Curses, as well on
herself as others: It happened some few days since, being all alone in her House,
a woman, one of her Neighbors, came thither for some strong Drink she had
occasion for; which she having drawn, and received Twelve Pence, or some such
piece of Money, instead of justly returning the full Change, stopped and abated
two pence or three pence out of it, besides what the present Drink came to,
pretending there was so much formerly due and owing to her. Which the other
resolutely denying, the Hostess began to Swear, and use several profane and
abominable Wishes and Imprecations, saying, God damn me, and the Devil burn me
if it be not so: which last words she often repeated. However, the other,
confident perhaps in the certainty of her knowledge to the contrary, still
persisting to deny it, and refusing to be gone without the rest of her Money;
The Ale-wife at last violently thrust her out of her house; and to prevent her
coming in again, shut the Door, and locked it against her.

Thus with many horrid sinful expressions (if not down right perjuries) this
poor Wretch made shift to wrangle her Neighbor out of this petty
inconsiderable sum, but is like to pay lamentable dear for the same. For,
behold! by a stupendous and terrible Judgment from Heaven, as we cannot but
suppose, she was immediately called to an account, and burnt to Death, as she
had foolishly and wickedly wished, in a wonderful and unheard of manner: For
having so shut and locked the door, the same was not opened, nor any further
news heard of her, till several hours after, her Husband chanced to come home,
and wondering to find his Door fast shut, in the middle of the day, without
being able to make any body answer within, enquired amongst his Neighbors, if
they saw his Wife go forth? Which they all denied; adding, that they rather
believed, having wearied herself with scolding and railing at Goody such an
one, she was fallen asleep; whereupon the man at last forced open the door,
with one or two of his Neighbors: which was no sooner done, but their Eyes
encountered one of the most sad and dismal Spectacles that ever Mortal beheld;
For in the midst of the floor lay the Relics of his Wife, one Side of her
Body and the Clothes thereupon, from the Soal of her Foot to the Crown of the
Head being consumed and burnt to Ashes, and nothing left but the Skeleton, or
part of the Bones; whereas the other Side remained whole, and the Clothes there
on not so much as touched or sindg'd; though it was observed, that the Flesh and
Skin there was all turned black, as if it had been blasted with Lightning.

I need not stand to relate how affrighted and amazed her Hu^band and Friends
were to behold this ghastly sight, especially for that they could no where near
her see the least spark or symptom of Fire, and were well assured that there
had not been any at all in the house all that day. Their consternation indeed
was inexpressible, and therefore I shall not vainly attempt to shadow it forth
in words; nor any further descant on this strange and astonishing procedure of
Providence, save only to recommend it to the serious consideration of all
those that have been, or may be guilty of such Crying Provocations. How know
thou, oh thou wretched sinner, when thou art impudently blaspheming Heaven, and
at every other word in thy drunken Frolicks, or hairbrain'd Passion, calling
upon God, but not to have mercy on thee, or pardon thee, but to damn thee,
wishing (as if thou would dare Omnipotent Justice) that he would confound,
sink, rot thee, or the like detestable Expressions; how art thou assured, I
say, that whilst thou art thus ranting, and treasuring up so fast wrath against
the day of wrath (as the Apostle speaks) God will permit that roaring Lion that
goes about seeking whom he may devour, to tear thee in pieces, or hurry thee
quick into the Eternal Flames? Can you, dare you pretend your selves
Christians, and live in the practice of such, worse than heathenish
Blasphemies? Know you not that there is a sure and dreadful account to be given
for every idle word? and oh, then, what will you in that day be able to say in
excuse of these black and frightful Imprecations? If the Righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly (such profligate Sinners, Swearers,
Cursers, Blasphemers, and Atheists) appear? Destruction and Bitterness shall be
their latter end, yelping and gnashing of teeth their employment, tormenting
Devils their Companions, and Fire and Brimstone, Pain and Anguish, Rage,
Despair, and horrible Darkness their portion, and that (Oh that they would
consider it before it be to late too prevent it) to all Eternity.

FINIS.

