THE Godly Man's LEGACY To the SAINTS upon EARTH, Exhibited In the LIFE of that
Great and Able Divine, and Painful Labourer in the Word, Mr. STEPHEN MARSHAL,
Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Finchingfield in ESSEX.

Written by way of Letter to a Friend.

Si populus vult decipi --

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

THE Stationer TO THE READER.
AT the close of this Letter (which you are here presented with) the Author has
given a fair account of his Design in writing these Memorials, viz. in Charity
to undeceive such well-meaning Persons as are still unhappily misled in the
same way, and miserably gulled and abused by the usual Artifice and Cunning of
those grave Sinners, who will needs call themselves the Saints, the People of
God, the Secret Ones, and take a Pride in many such fine Names, which in the
Eyes of discerning men, look not much unlike curious Ornaments throw'n over a
foul and loathsome Carcass. But I have a farther thought in being assistant to
this Publication, and that is, to gratify the Leaders themselves; who (Good
men) not content with the Kings Gracious Pardon, are now become so very bold,
as not only to give some Commendations of what has been the Cause and Ground of
all our late Distractions; but stiffly to contend for it, and vigorously to
endeavor the acting over the same Tragedy, and raising the same Devil again by
the same Noise and Outcryes, which they were taught to make use of in the
memorable Year of 41.

Amongst other Methods, the memory of those precious Persons (as they love to
call 'em) who were the grand Ringleaders in the late Rebellion, is recommended
and endeared to the People; and what can be less intended hereby, than that the
People should by this way be brought to entertain a good Opinion of their
Practices, and be in a readiness to be stirred up, whenever a fit and
convenient Opportunity shall present it self unto them.

Thus we have seen the Lives of several of these Seducers creep out of the
Press, and every day expect to see more. When therefore it shall please them
(by publishing his Life) to Canonize Mr. Marshall, they are gratified by being
here furnished with Materials toward that Great Work. And it were easy, and I
shall be ready to do the like kindness for those which shall be writ hereafter,
and for the new Editions of such as are abroad already.

As to this, I shall assure thee, Reader, that (whilst the aim of those
Designers is to allure thee with a Godly Varnish, into a false Opinion of the
Persons and Practices of such men) this Relation has no other end, but to keep
thee from being cheated and befooled amongst the Common Herd of Mankind.

If now what is here sent abroad be either ill taken, or interpreted worse, it
is not to be looked upon as a fault in the Author, but imputed rather to the
distemper of such, who are unwilling to be severely and sincerely dealt
withal, though it be in order to their Cure. He has not here used any Arguments
to dissuade such Guides as now-a-dayes profer themselves almost in every Barn
or Marketplace; partly because it is foreign to his purpose, and partly
because he is sufficiently assured, that if Matters of Fact be weak and unable,
Arguments (though never so good) will be of little force to prevail with them.
For such is the resolved obstinacy of the ordinary sort of People, that the
cleerest Argument shall not convince, but rather confirm them in their beloved
Fooleries. And this is one of their greatest unhappinesses, that they take
pleasure in being abused; for if any one be so friendly, as to deal freely and
plainly with them, and venture to give them good and sound Advice, they
presently kick and fling, thinking themselves injured by what is given out of
pure love and kinduess.

Farewell.
THE LIFE OF Mr. STEPHEN MARSHAL, etc.
SIR,
ALthough this is due to Humanity, that the Reputation of those that are dead
should sleep in quiet with their Ashes: yet having the Influence of your
Requests (which have always had with me the Efficacy of Commands) to awaken the
Fame of him, who Achan-like for a Wedge of Gold has troubled the Peace of that
State; the Tranquillity whereof he should have preserved with the greatest care
and industry. I suppose what I write concerning this Man, will not amount to a
Violation of that Law: Especially if we remember how severe an Observer, and
how immodest a Publisher of other men's rather supposed than real Crimes, he
himself has been. Why should the Failings of Loyal Subjects (both The grand
Impostor. A malicious gloss upon the Dying Speech of Archbishop Laud.
Ecclesiastics and others) be shamefully divulged, and the black and horrid
villainies of those who style themselves The Godly, lie covered under the Cloak
of Religion. Therefore as for the Fame of that Person, whose Actions you so
importunately desire should be recorded for the undeceiving of such as have
been deluded by his Imposture and Religious Juggling; I am willing and ready to
present you with as exact an Account of it, as either mine own Knowledge and
Observation of him, or the truest Information that I could obtain from others,
will allow me. And though I am not able to give you so full and perfect a
Relation of him (especially in reference to our late unhappy Times, in which he
was not a little busy) as may be expected from such an Undertaker; yet this I
shall assure you, I shall not knowingly blot him with any Fiction, nor shall I
need to make use of my Invention, since the baseness of his Actions are
sufficient to render him, and that Cause which he undertook, odious to
Posterity.

His Birth.
And First, concerning his Pedigree; which though it be obscure, yet it is not
altogether so hard to trace it, as to find out the Head of the River Nile. He
was born (as I have been informed) at Gormanchester near Huntington, his Father
a Glover and very poor; yet the meanness of his Birth would have been no
Reproach to him, if his own bad Life had not made him more infamous than his
Original: For as the x in ye title page of ^is Sermon (...) a fast day before
ye H. of Com^ons, (Nov. 17. 1640) He is styled. Batchelour of in Divinity,
Minister of ffinchingfield in EssexGlory of Ancestors is a vain Boast in those
whose Actions degenerate from the Nobleness of their Family, so the mean
Descent of those whose Virtues have laid the Foundation of their own Honor, is
no disparagement; but where a base and ignoble Extraction, is seconded by a
more base and infamous Life, it doubles the Ignominy. That this person has more
disgraced his Family, than their beggarly Condition, will notoriously appear in
the following Character; which I dare assure you will find more Credit about
Finchingfield, than in remoter places, where he was known only by the Fame of
his Preaching and his Parasites.

How his younger days were spent, I am not able to inform you, as they were
more obscure, so it is Charity to believe they were harmless; but having got so
much Grammar Learning as his poverty and industry would attain to, he goes to
Cambridge, to Emanuel College (that College that has hatched too many such
Birds) which he rather visited than continued in: For as I have heard, he left
it without a Degree, or at most was but Batchelour of Arts, and for his first
Preferment, was entertained in a Gentleman's House in Suffolk.

Shortly after Mr. Richard Rogers Lecturer at Wethersfield deceases, and Mr.
Marshall is chosen his Successor, where they purchase him a Library at the Cost
of Fifty pounds, and do many other very friendly Offices for him. He being
sensible of their kindness, engages himself by a voluntary Promise never to
leave them.

He had not long continued there, before Mr. Pickering (a Reverend and Learned
Divine) Minister of Finchingfield dies. The Fatness of the Benefice helped the
Patron to Suitors enough; but amongst all, our Marshall was the Man whom his
Affection made choice of, to bestow his Presentation upon; who having unluckily
married himself to Wethersfield, knows not what course to take to sue out a
Bill of Divorce. The great Living (worth 200 l. per annum) is a strong
Temptation to the Holy Man's concupiscible Appetite, (for though our new Saints
talk much of Heaven, yet it is the Earth they most desire to inherit) however
Wethersfield holds him to his promise, Never to leave them. A little Assembly
of Divines (as wise almost, and as honest as the great one) is called; it is
there debated how far Mr. Marshall's promise is obligatory. The Casuists
knowing his mind before, conclude, that it bound him, not to leave them for a
Lesser Salary; but left him at Liberty to take a Bigger Living when he could
get it: and in very deed, there is no reason why any promise, though never so
solemnly, so deliberately made, should stand a perpetual Palizado to any Godly
Man's Preferment. Well, however this Decision satisfies his Corvan: For he
leaves Wethersfield, and away he goes to Finchingfield. This is the first noted
Essay that he gave of his Fidelity in keeping Promise.

Mr. Marshall's Name is now up, and he may lie in Bed, which he cannot
comfortably do without a Bedfellow, who seeks him; not taken with any Comeliness
of his Person, but ravished with the zealous delivery of his Sermons: For
whatsoever good his Preaching does upon Men's Souls, it works mightily upon
Women's Affections. A Gentlewoman of a considerable Fortune hears him, and
concludes, that so warm a Preacher, could not choose but make as warm a
Husband; whereupon she discovers her Meltings to some of the Sister-hood: They
glad to advance their Ghostly Father, presently acquaint him with the Happiness
that gaped for him. He (a man never slow to do himself good) accosts her, wooes
her in the Language of Canaan, and at last wins her; For a Castle is never hard
to take, where the Gates stand open without a Sentinel. But her Friends
unwilling she should match to nothing but a Stipend, (for I think he was not
then removed from Wethersfield) deny consent, unless a Jointure can be made
her. What shall the Good Man now do, who was never born to one Acre of Land?
Great care is taken; Prayers are put up for the Success of this Match;
Endeavors are used; but the obstinate Kindred are resolved to have a
Settlement of an Estate, or else no Match goes forward. And it shall be had
rather than Mr. Marshall shall lose his rich Wife. One Wiltshire (whom Mr.
Marshall was wont to call Father) will now show, that it was not in vain, that
he owned him by that Title; and therefore settles an Estate of 30 or 40 l. per
annum (as I have heard) upon him and her. This pretense of her Friend's
unwillingness was by many supposed to be a Plot to get Wiltshir's Estate, who
was thought to dote so much upon Mr. Marshall, that he would do any thing to
advance him. However it was wrought, he parts with it, and Mr. Marshall enjoys
his Love; but whether she enjoyed her Love is not altogether so certain: It Is a
common Complaint, that the Devoutest Preachers are not always the kindest
Husbands, nor does the rest of their Conversation answer that Affection, that
they make show of in a Pulpit. She finds it so.

Truly the Woman, though she was not of that politic reach, that some others are
of, never wanted Ornaments of a meek and quiet Spirit; but her Simplicity, or
something else made her to be slighted, if not scorned by him: For after she
had made him a Father of one Son and six Daughters, he grows weary of her Bed.
(I will not say to go to another; though to stop the the Mouths of People that
began to mutter, he was forced to frequent a Sisters House less than he had
been observed usually to do before) insomuch that they seldom lay together. And
it has been observed, that when he had been for many Weeks together absent, and
came into the Country to take his Tithes and fresh Air, he chose rather to suck
it in at Sculkins, than at the Vicaridge; and to supply the want of his Wife,
her Company, he frequently read himself asleep with a Play-Book or Romance.

To his Children he was (to give him his due) a very indulgent Father, and
perhaps more indulgent than was allowable. The most of their Education was
going from one good House to another, to eat Chees-cakes and Custards. They
were like Gentlewomen in nothing besides their Habits; and therein they
exceeded persons of good Degree and Quality. They followed the height of
Fashions with changeable Taffata's, and Naked Necks, insomuch that the Godly
Party were sorely scandalized at it; but durst not complain, because it was Mr.
Marshall who was concerned. He gave them great Portions; and (as the History of
Independency says) Married one of them with the Book of Common Prayer, and a
Ring; and gave this for a reason, That the Statute establishing that Liturgy
was not yet repealed; and he was loath to have his Daughter Whored, and turned
back upon him for want of a Legal Marriage: Nevertheless he could declare
against the use of it by others. And so the Jugler played at fast and loose with
the Service Book, as he had done before with the People of Wethersfield.

We will view him next in his Pastoral Relations; where (to speak the Truth) he
was for many years so well beloved of his People, that I think few Ministers
could boast of a greater happiness in that kind: being not morose, but of a
free and sociable Humor in his Conversation, and in his Preaching very taking
with a Country Auditory: For though in his Sermons penned, there was nothing
extraordinary; yet he had such a kind of Delivery, that he carried away the
credit from all: besides which I think these may be some causes of his
Popularity.

First, (till he began to meddle with State Affairs) he always preached
Catechistical Divinity; (how happy had the man been, if he had never done
otherwise?) and that in as plain and familiar Expressions as could be, that he
might suit himself to the meanest Capacity, and gain the People, which was his
great, if not his only aim and ambition.

Secondly, he had an art of commending every thing that he delivered, before he
delivered it, as being most serious, and of highest Concernment to their Souls;
which the people always took upon his Word. Yea, he would solemnly profess,
that what he preached to them, he had experience of the work of it upon his own
Soul, which conduced much both to the gaining of Credit to his Doctrine, and to
himself.

Thirdly, Whenever he dismissed them, before he had finished the Text or point
he was upon, 'twas his Custom to assure them, that the best was still behind,
which was an invitation to come again and hear the rest.

Fourthly, He was acquainted with all the Vulgar Proverbs, and odd Country
Phrases, and Bywords which he would sprinkle up and down in his Sermon; which
captivated the People at a strange rate.

Fifthly, He toward his latter end, insisted much upon Notional (which he
called Spiritual) Divinity, and the many Privileges of the Saints; and seldom
or never would meddle with particular Sins (unless it were the Sin of
MALIGNANCY, or not promoting the PARLIAMENT CAUSE.) Yea, he has been heard to
say, that he durst not preach against their Vices, lest they should be scared
from his Ministry; (this is much of the same Complexion with the Jesuite's
complying Divinity to gain Disciples) but if he could make them in love with
Jesus Christ, they would soon grow weary of their Sins: As if any man before he
knows the Evil of Sin, would see any need of Christ. Oh wise Master Builder!

Sixthly, He preached much abroad, and then had his Agents to give notice ten
miles about, when he came to any Lecture; (this is the mode of all the
Patriarchs of that Gang, by which they gather more Disciples to themselves than
to Jesus Christ.) When he had well heated himself with preaching (which was
much to his honor) he had a Sister or two (No Nuns) that waited upon him with
Towels and a clean Shirt, which (after they had every where well wiped him to
prevent catching of cold) they put upon him with more Affection, than if it had
been a Surplice. And having well refreshed himself with some preparatory
Caudle, he is ready for his Dinner.

Though the Nonconformists counted him theirs, yet all this while he was wary of
hazarding his Benefice, by venturing in public any thing against the
Established Government or Liturgy: Nay, he was as conformable as could be
desired, reading Divine Service, wearing the Surplice, receiving and
administering the Sacrament kneeling, approving, commending, extolling
Episcopacy and the Liturgy, observing all the Holy Days with more than ordinary
Diligence, preaching upon most of them. This the man did, so long as he had any
hopes of rising that way: For that his Ambition was such, I have great reason
to believe, being assured by a worthy Person, that he was once an earnest
Suitor to the late unhappy Duke of Buckingham for a Deanery, which is the next
step to a Bishopric. The loss of which (as the same Misfortune made Arrius
turn Heretic) so it made him turn Schismatic. His Son-in-law Nigh was heard to
say, That if they had but made his Father a Bishop, before he had been too far
engaged, it might have prevented all the War; and since he cannot rise so high
as a Bishop, he will pull the Bishops as low as himself; yea, if he can, lower
than himself was at Gormanchester. Discontented Pride has made more
Schismatics than Conscience; if this has slain its thousands, that has killed
its ten thousands.

There wants not a Conspiracy of many Mediums to assist him in this Design.
First, the too many discontented, and upon several occasions) dissatisfied
Persons in this Nation, every where spurring one the other on, to foment
Troubles and Distractions. Then followed the Scottish Rebellion, breaking out
first at Home, and presently advancing it self into England; which afterward
forced the Princely Martyr to call that Black Parliament which proved the Ruin
of Him, of the Nation, and at last (by the just hand of Providence) of
themselves too.

During their Session, an Assembly of Divines is called, not chosen by the
Clergy according to Law, but selected by themselves; amongst these our Reverend
Marshall (by means of Friends) is preferred to be one: He quickly grows to be
Master, and is so called by all (like the the old Pharisee he affected the Name
of Rabbi;) they sit, not to consult for the Reformation of Religion in things
that were amiss, but to receive the Parliaments Commands to undo and innovate
Religion. In which Work, or rather Drudgery of the Devil, (falsely styled The
Cause,) our active Stephen needs neither Whip nor Spur: Tooth and Nail he bends
himself to the overthrow of the Hierarchy, Root and Branch. Those few honest
men that were chosen either absenting themselves (because they would not be
involved in their pernicious and heady Suffrages) or being thrown out by them,
they do all their Wickedneses nemine contradicente, till Independency began to
check, and at last Mate- Presbytery. They assist to their Power, if not in
Voting down the Bishops, yet in keeping them down by their trepanning Covenant,
(a Scottish Jig played and danced by the giddy Brethren in England.) In which I
cannot but take notice of their base Hypocrisy, in suffering the major part of
the Nation (that bowed to that Dagon) to take it in the plain Grammatical Sense
of it; yet to strengthen their Party, giving leave to some more precious and
eminent persons to take it in their own Sense. This Falsity God does judge and
will judge.

To Countenance their Proceedings, they consult with Foreign Divines of the
Presbyterian Churches: as Johanan (Jer. 42.) and the rest consulted with
Jeremiah concerning their going into Egypt, resolved to follow his Counsel, if
it agreed with theirs, yet to go, though God and He said nay; if the advice of
those Divines had seconded their Intentions (which they never questioned) they
would have heard it, and the World should have heard it. But yet they resolved
to take their own Course, though Geneva should advise the contrary; as indeed
they prudently did, and therefore they bury the Foreign Letters, till time
brought them to light by a strange Resurrection. And that the Foreign Divines
might trouble them no more with fresh Letters, they clap them in the Mouth with
a Lie, that they intended no harm to regulate Episcopacy, but only to the
Lordly and Tyrannical Regiment of it. Let their Actions be heard speaking
against them, they do not only uncover the Roof, and take down the Pyramids and
Battlements of Episcopacy; but like the rough Sons of Edom, they raze it even
to the Ground; and instead thereof, set up its Rival, the proud, swelling,
domineering Faction of Presbytery; which Mushroom-like, suddenly sprang up, and
as suddenly disappeared, or at best does truckle under its younger Brother
Independency. Which our Stephen observing, (and as he could not be the
Protomartyr, so he was resolved not to be the Deuteromartyr of that Name)
quickly disowns his own sweet Babe, and (with a little of honest Ny's
Assistance) puts himself into the thriving Sect of the Independents, bidding
New England welcome into the Old.

And because the Church could not be destroyed without the King, who was more
firmly wedded to it, than Mr. Marshall either to his Wife, or his first Living;
the King and all who adhere to him and the Church must be destroyed with it: to
whose Ruin Mr. Marshall contributes not a little. Witness Thundrings in all
Pulpits; his Cursing all people who were backward in their engaging against
him; his encouraging all those, whose Villainy made them forward in the
Undertaking that great Work, warranting them no small Preferment in Heaven, if
they would lay down their Lives for the Cause: Witness his Menaces, and private
Incitations, becoming Drummajor, or Chaplain-General to the Army; praying from
Regiment to Regiment at Edgehill.

Witness his riding Post into Scotland, to treat with the Scots, in order to
their coming into England; in which business he so demeaned himself with the
Kirk Party, pawning his Soul, and his Brethrens here in England (for a less
Pledge would not be taken) in a wicked League for Conformities Sake, that the
two Nations might be one in a Religious Conspiracy; that they espouse their
Cause, and in it defend their own Guilt, by an Additional Conspiracy with the
English Rebels. This Journey, men say, was worth 500 l. to him; I believe more.

Witness his persuading the City to lend the Parliament 50000 l. to pay their
Soldiers, who were ready to mutiny in a seasonable time: then persuading the
City to let the Army march through them, and possess the Tower. This he did to
assure the Independents, that he is really theirs: So he is sent down a Second
time into Scotlend, to lie again for his Master's Profit; and thither goes
Balaam again for love of the Wages of Unrighteousness. But this Voyage was not
so acceptable to the dear Brethren as the former, if all be true that I have
heard, viz. that in a Storm it hailed rotten Eggs upon his Head at Edinburgh:
They being cunning Juglers themselves, soon smelt a Cheat. Besides it is
supposed, that though he rode Post, some body had outstript him with Letters, and
acquainted the Kirk, that he was become a Changeling and Apostate from
Presbytery, then which a greater Crime could not there be charged upon him. So
he returns to the Rump, to tell them he lost his Journey.

Having lost his Credit too in London, and his Parish at St. Margarets growing
cold in their Affections to him, and his 300 l. per annum for preaching at the
Abbey failing, he returns to his old forsaken Love (I do not mean his Wife, but)
Finchingfield; and there he finds neither the Welcome nor Respect that he was
wont. His Slightof them had taught them as little to esteem him. They construe
his Retreat thither but a forced Putt, and say openly, that if he could have
bettered his Maintenance any where else, he would have sold them for two pence
profit: and instead of sending Tithes, when demanded, they send him Jeers and
Frumps; rate him above what he could make of his Living, overruled him, who was
wont to overruled all men. His high Stomach not brooking this Carriage, he
grows weary there, and waits the next opportunity to be gone, which offers it
self thus:

The Lecturer of the great Church in Ipswich dies. He is thither invited by the
Town, with this Proviso, if his Conscience could relinquish his present Cure: A
Scruple that troubled him not at all; for he had often seared his Conscience
before with the same Iron. However, being a Man of an affected Gravity, and
loath to do any thing lightly or passionately, he therefore pretends Reasons to
depart from Finchingfield; among which this was the chiefest: He found his
Ministry ineffectual. Those who were good of Old time were good still; but in
his late years teaching, he could not find any new Convert.

Truly the People had little reason (I confess) to credit him in any thing, who
had so perfidiously betrayed their Souls, by leading them into Rebellion. But
how knew he that none were converted? The Signs of Grace do not always
presently appear to the Convert himself, much less are they visible to the view
of others. Besides, since God had forsaken his Ministry at Finchingfield, what
assured hopes had he of doing good at Ipswich? Yet Balaam Saddles his Ass, and
will go with the Men; but a few Idolizers of him, first petition him with a
Scroll of hands to stay, thinking that horrible darkness must needs overspread
that Horizon, if so great a Luminary should bid a final farewell to it. This
will not do; Baal will not hear; next they petition God Almighty. A private
Fast is appointed to be kept at Mr. Mede's in Finchingfield: Three Ministers
carry on the Work of the day. Mr. Daniel Rogers being the Oldest, begins the
Devotions; but instead of supplicating for his Stay, he tells God Almighty a
very foul Story of his Rambling. I cannot give you the very words, it is so long
since they were spoken, and I heard them; but as I remember, they were to this
purpose, That Mr. Marshall loved the Company of great Personages, that he had a
gadding Humor, before he had left his Parish to go live at London, and follow
the Camp, and would now be gone to Ipswich, etc. You shall not need to wonder
at this: For it is verily believed by many, that there was never any Cordial
Affection between these two Grand Schismatics; one envying another's
Popularity: For they seldom met, but they hunch't at one another. Once a Dish
of Apples being brought before them, and the Company, as every one liked,
preferring one Apple before another, Mr. Rogers said he loved a Living. I think
so, quoth Mr. Marshall; for you are always whining for more. And you, says Mr
Rogers, love a Runnet, for you can never keep at Home.

But to return from this Digression, neither Petitions to Man, nor Prayers to
God, will stay him: For he packs up his Tools, and is gone for Ipswich, where
he joys not long; for he is followed with Affliction upon Affliction: Indeed he
had lost his Eldest Son before, who was drowned at Hamburgh, which was a great
vexation to him, that his Name should perish. In a short time, he buries three
Daughters, and several Grandchildren, and last of all his Wife, whom he could
best have spared; (some of his Ipswich Neighbors were bold to interpret these
Losses to be the punishment of his deserting Finchingfield) soon after, himself
was visited with a Consumption, which ended his Days at London. Of which
afterward:

His Religion stood most in Externals; a Jewish Observation of Sabbaths,
Praying, Preaching (especially according to the new mode) in Fasts, and
Thanksgivings; under these specious shows, the Mystery of Iniquity lay hid. For
to what end were their Fasts, but for Strife, and to smite with the Fist of
Wickedness, and to break the Strength and Heart of the King? And wherefore were
their Thanksgivings, but for Success in Rebellion? Whereas they had more reason
to thank God for his Forbearance, that the Earth did not open, and swallow them
up quick, as it once did their Fellow-Rebels. But this made a great Noise among
the silly People, who saw no farther than a Man may look into a Millstone.

His Jureverence about Holy things was abominable, and hardly credible; when he
baptized a Child in Private, to sit in a Chair upon his Breech, while he
administered that Sacrament. What Superstition could equalize that Rudeness?
Perhaps he thought the same posture would as well become that Sacrament as the
other: such doings have brought both into Contempt. Indeed to him and his
Brethren, we owe not only the loss of our Government and Liturgy, but of the
Sacraments themselves: Baptism having been restrained, and the Lord's Supper in
many places disused. Mr. Marshall himself having not had a Communion in
Finchingfield for seven Years together, which is far worse than Promiscuous
Communions.

That he was of all Clergymen, the most mischievous to his Sovereign, is
without Controversy, every where robbing him of the Hearts of his Subjects,
creating Jealousies in them, stirring them up to Arms and Contributions of
Moneys, engaging all Persons of Quality, whom he had any hopes to work upon:
and when he found the man backward, he plays the Devil, tempts the Woman to
betray her Husband. He had always a strong influence upon that Sex, and wrought
that by their Importunity, which he could not effect by his own reason or
persuasions. By this means he became a Murderer, a Murderer of those Souls that
he had seduced into Rebellion; a Murderer of those Bodies which were slain by
such as he stirred, up to the War; a Murderer of all such as died by the Hands
of the Royalists; a Murderer of his Prince, by taking away his good Name, by
that means rendering him in the esteem of his Subjects, unworthy to govern or
live; and this he did not only by his Preaching and private Calumnies; but in
those absurd, dins-ingenuous, and malicious Animadversions of his upon the
Kings Letters taken at Naseby; Letters so full of Modesty, Ingenuity, Wisdom
and Piety, yet if he had not had the Heart of a -- very bad man, he would never
have so maliciously Commented upon them, and made them speak contrary to their
own Grammatical Sense: Letters, that when Malice had done its worst, and its
religious Votaries had picked out of the Cabinet such as they thought would
best serve their turn (suppressing such Papers as might have given all the
World satisfaction of his Majesty's Love to his Subjects and the Protestant
Religion,) and had discanted upon those select Papers; yet were so far from
prejudicing his Majesty, that they convinced thousands of his Integrity, who
were before doubtful. The worst that could be laid to his Charge, was, that
contrary to former Resolutions, he sought help from Foreigners, forced
thereunto by their implacable Violence. Besides this, he is thought to have
instigated them (who were forward enough) to the hastening the King's Death. He
has been heard to say, That the King was too wise to be suffered to Rule. That
he had as live see his own Death, as the King in his Throne. His revengful
Spirit could not forget that Affront (as he accounted it) which the King put
upon him at Holmby; when being to say Grace for his Majesty, while he was long
in forming his Chaps (as his manner was) his Majesty said Grace for himself,
and was fallen to his Meat, and had eaten up some part of his Dinner, before
his Chaplain had ended his Blessing the Creature. The King then checking him,
and saying, that he intended not to stay till his Meat was cold, whilst he
stood whistling for the Spirit: Which Check never went out of his Stomach till
it rotted out. That well might one of his own Gang say, He died in time, or
else he might have taken a Turn with Hugh Peter's at Charing Cross: of which his
Arrest at Cambridge was an unlucky Omen, which was a mistake and no mistake. I
know, some affirm, that when the King was dead, he was much perplexed, and
repented of what he had done. For my part, I rather think them transient Pangs
and Gripes of Conscience, than true remorse for his public Sins.

First, because he never publicly recanted.

Secondly, he never labored to undeceive those whom he had seduced.

Thirdly, He still joined himself to his old wicked Company, even the King's
Murderers.

Lastly, He acted under the Grand Usurper; was as harsh and severe as ever to
the King's Party: for he was no less malicious to his Friends all along than to
him; always opposing them, if they came to the Assembly for Examination, or
after the Tryers at White Hall, (for he was one of those Spanish Inquisitors)
pretending, forsooth, only Care to advance Godly and able men; and yet could
prefer his Son-in-law Nigh, to a Living of 400 l. a year, who never deserved one
of 40 l. I come now to describe his Virtues.

His Charity in giving, was as little as his Charity in forgiving; never so
much as bestowing a penny, or piece of Bread at his Door the year throughout,
though he had many poor Kindred, and some who lived not far from him; yet out of
his abundance, never gave them the worth of Twelve pence, as themselves have
said. Nay, (when he had the World flowing in upon him) he suffered his poor
Father to beg about the Country; which showed he had neither Shame nor pity,
nor yet any Natural Affection.

And though men say, the Puritan will not swear, but will lie damnably. This
Impostor both swore and ly'd, having several times taken the Oaths of
Allegiance, and Canonical Obedience, the Protestation, and his own Solemn
League and Covenant; all which for the Glory of God, and undoing this Nation,
he as solemnly broke and persuaded others to break: that if his Soul had not
load enough of his own personal Perjuries, he might sink it with the addition
of other men's.

Having said this, you shall not need to question his Truth: For verily he was
a man that would not deceive him who never trusted him. He is a Liar in Print,
of which there needs no other Proof than his own Preaching up of Rebellion for
God's Cause, which is a Lie in Text; and what were all his Fasts and
Thanksgivings, but Lies in Hypocrisy, lying not only to men, but to the Holy
Ghost? At the Funeral of Mr. Borradel Minister of Bumsted in Essex, he had this
reach in his praise, That upon his knowledge, he had wept a Bushel (that is a
dry measure) of Tears for the Sins of his People. If so, how many Bushels would
the rest that he was not privy to have amounted to? Sure Mr. Borradel had a
very moist Brain, or Mr. Marshall a slippery Tongue; for certainly without an
Hyperbole of the largest size, this must be a loud one. A Lie not inferior to
this, was that, which he had at the Funeral of Daniel Rogers (where after he
had made a Lying Face or two) -- Manuque simul veluti Lachrymantia tersit
Lumina -- For not one Tear came; he very gravely told the People (who were no
Strangers to Mr. Rogers's Infirmities) He had Grace enough for ten Men, but not
for himself: He was, (as I told you) at the Fight at Edgehill (when he had
better have been in his Pulpit at Finching field) very sore distressed for
perceiving his side to run, and hearing the Cavaliers cry, Have at the
Black-Coats, meaning himself and Mr. Ash, when Mr. Ash complainingly misappli'd
that Scripture to the Rebels which was spoken of the People of God, What shall
we say when Israel turns his back upon his Enemies? He knew not what to do; at
last (if he did not by himself) to save himself, he made use of his Cousin
Bass's Man's Device, who threw up his Cap, and cried, Hey for King Charles, Hey
for King Charles, and under the Covert of that Lie, and the Dark, he got by
Midnight to Warwick Castle; But the Fright had such an effect upon him, and
made so deep an Impression upon his Spirits, that some stuck not to say, that
for the time he was beside his Wits; which he no sooner recovered, but he comes
into Essex to Lie (as a Jack-an-apes does Tricks) for his Master's Advantage.
And here he tells the People strange Stories of the Fight (but not a word how
valiantly like Peter the Hermit he ran away) and that to his knowledge (though he
was in too much haste to tell the Slain) the King's Party lost five to one of
the Parliament; which in one sense was true; because one of the King's Party
was worth five of them; else it is an untruth: For the even Scales of days
Fight, was too sad a presage of that lingering which followed.

I am now enquiring after his Humility, if I could find it: I see him among his
Leathern Doublets, and the makers of Leather and Doublets; these he loves by
instinct: surely I have found it now. But while I judge him by this Company
(whom he makes believe are precious to him) one whispers me in the Ear, and
tells me that I take a wrong measure: For these poor Christian's Backs are but
Blocks to mount him high in the esteem of the round World. He would have made
an excellent Judge; for he was no Respecter of Persons. If Knights, or Ladies,
or Persons of ever so good Condition, had come where he was sitting, he would
neither stir his Breech, nor his Cap; it was condescension enough to give them
a gracious Nod with his Head; (for his stiff Neck did not often bend) which
Carriage of his, made some of his own Party say in my hearing, That they
thought there was not a prouder Parson upon Earth than Mr. Marshall. Mr Symonds
will tell you enough of this, and how his Pride would not suffer any man to
cross his irrational Dictates; and how he treated that Holy and Reverend man
the World knows. Though I have sometimes heard, that his not answering Mr.
Symonds, was because he could not answer; and in such cases he was so wise as
to hold his peace: For I remember, when he boasted before Mr. Fuller of
Stebbing, That he had brought Burial of the Dead out of Fashion in his Town;
Mr. Fuller told him, That their Directory gave leave to exhort at the Grave.
His answer was, then may they have a Funeral Sermon who desire it; but when the
other replied, the Poor would complain, that the Rich should have Christian
Burial, and they, because Poor, be buried like Dogs. Mr. Marshall's answer was
Mum.

And though he was a severe Censurer of Bishops and others of the Episcopal
Clergy, for meddling in Civil Affairs, as excentrick to their Calling; yet
himself could make it his business (as well as Nigh, Peter's, etc.) for seven
years together. And though he had been an earnest promoter of the Kingdoms Good,
as he was a disturber of the public peace, yet could he never be able to avoid
the recoil of his own supercilious judging of others. Not that I think the
Ecclesiastical Function necessarily deprives his Majesty of the benefit he may
have from the prudential abilities of Clergymen; but I think it wretched
impudence in him to charge that as a Crime upon them, who was doubly guilty
himself. First, in meddling in the State. Secondly, In meddling to do mischief,
and (which is no small aggravation of his fault) in that he acted the Statist
in the Pulpit; where, instead of promoting the Gospel, he promoted
Insurrections. I know, some asking him, what Peace and Satisfaction he had in
acting in Secular Affairs? His answer was (though not without Stomach to be asked
such a question,) that he had always in his Eye the Glory of God; (of which God
and the World too now judge) but if you had asked the Pope the same question,
he would have given you the like answer, viz. In ordine ad Spiritualia. Well,
though this, and to be bold, two Livings be unpardonable Crimes in an Episcopal
Divine, yet Mr. Marshall's Godliness can qualify him for both.

His not being scrupulous himself about State affairs, made him (perhaps) less
solicitous about the Scruples of others in reference to the State: For when
some of his Parish (and those none of the meanest) desired his Judgment
concerning the taking the Engagement, he ( Prevaricator-like) reasoned pro and
con; but would not resolve what was safe for them in point of Conscience, nor
what himself had practiced: for he was loath the World should know, that he had
swallowed the Engagement, after he had taken the Covenant, which the Hangman
has now burnt.

He was esteemed a painful Preacher: Himself was wont to compute, from the time
that he entered into the Ministry, to almost the end of his days, he had
preached three times a week, setting those weeks wherein he preached four times
against those wherein he had preached but twice. He preached indeed often, but
not much; he had an art of spreading his Butter very thin; some men in one
Sermon having more Pious and profitable Divinity (besides-Learning) than he
usually had in four. Besides, as another allay to his painfulness, he often
preached the same Sermon over and over again; himself has boasted, that he
preached one Sermon (I believe that was Curse ye Meroz,) threescore times: Yea,
many of his Sermons cost him no more pains than the transcribing verbatim: And
this I can assure you is no Slander.

As to his Learning (though he had little Greek, and no Hebrew,) yet he was
competently furnished with Abilities for a Pastoral Charge in the Country, but
no higher; of which himself was conscious: And therefore would never accept any
University Preferment (lest he should make himself ridiculous,) nor never
Commenced Doctor: Indeed he took the Degree of Bachelor in Divinity per
saltum; but it is said his Tutor Dr. Garnons made his Excellent Position, and
that somebody else made, or helped him to make his Clerum. His sitting so long
time in the Assembly had somewhat improved his Abilities; and therefore he was
judged fit with Mr. Vines to be a disputing Commissioner at Vxbridge in the
point of Episcopacy. A point which they had canvass'd threadbare in the
Assembly. Indeed they did little else but beat down, and trample upon that
Reverend and Apostolic Government (one Divine in a months time would have done
as much as they did in seven years) and to the overthrow of which they had all
of them contributed their several Mites, An insignificant Directory, fit to
have accompanied the Covenant. They Epitomiz d Bishop usher's Body of Divinity,
which they called their larger Catechism; and again epitomized that Epitome,
abolishing the ancient Church Cotehcism: hence so much ignorance in the
Fundamentals of Religion, and the ill Consequences of that.
which these two doughty Champions having budgetted up, carried with them to
the Treaty. The Evening before they were to dispute, these two Eves-droppers
stole to the Chamber door of the opposite Doctors, where they overheard them
reading over their Arguments (this is Mr. Marshall's own Confession, as well as
his Boast) which when they had done, they sat up all Night examining their
reasons, and preparing answers; of all which helps they had need, having to
oppose so good a Cause, and such able Defenders.

And now you have heard of his Learning, take a cast of his Wit: for he was
venturous at that sport. But first stop your Nose, because the Jests smell
rank. Once this Scoggin requested a Lady, (whose name it is not fit to stain by
making it here public) that he might speak his mind freely to her, which she
very innocently granting, the rude Presbyter spoke (like a Pythoniss) from the
hollow of his Belly, giving such a burst, as some Beast would do, that had
newly eaten green Tares. The same reply he is said to have given another
Gentlewoman, asking his Judgment concerning the Lord's Prayer. If the other was
a clownish affront, this was unhallowed profaneness. And now my hand is in the
Honey-pot, take another, (provided that you read not these upon a full Stomach)
It once happened that he took Physic in an House which he much frequented, and
at the same time the Mistress of the House also had taken a Purge; and having
but one Easement, which stood conveniently between both their Chambers, the
Gentlewoman had got possession of it, when Mr. Marshall's Physic began to
wring and gripe, and desire a Writ of Ejectment; he therefore calls to his
Mistress to make haste, which her own need delaying, she cries out for his
patient stay; his retentive faculty being almost overcome, he tells her, if she
does not give way, he must discharge himself in her Lap; but this being a
matter ex officio, out of modesty I shall contract it with an etc. And now I
have mentioned modesty, it puts me in mind of a Sermon that I heard him preach
at Saffron Walden about 15 or 16 years ago upon this Text, Hosea 13. v. 12, 13.
The Iniquity of Ephraim is bound up, his sin is hid; the sorrows of a
travailing woman shall come upon him, he is an unwise son, for he should not
stay long in the place of the breaking forth of Children. Which Metaphor he did
so plainly open, and so closely pursue, and so pertinently apply, that the
modest Women hung down their Heads blushing: And some of them in my hearing,
said, they never heard such a bawdy Sermon in their lives.

His wit was not without wealth; for by a kind of Omnipotence, he created to
himself out of nothing an Estate (as it has been computed) worth 10000 l. and
left it to his Children; which is more than one of the last Archbishops of
Canterbury, out of his great Revenue had to bequeath to his Relations: Which
his Sister Newman took an occasion to note, when at a Meeting, she told a Lady,
that the World was well amended with her Brother (who was present) since the
time he and she used to go a Gleaning together, when he would cudgel her Coat,
if she did not ply her business; and thus she was even with him for saying
before some Gentleman, that she looked like a Witch in a Play.

But to let these small things pass, and draw to a Period with my Subject:
Honest Stephen, for all his Favor, Wit, Learning, Honor, Cunning, Wealth,
must die, die of a Consumption too, who had helped to consume so much of the
Kingdom's Blood and Treasure, and of the Churches Vitals and Beauty. His
Sickness was long and tedious, which made him a very Skeleton, and ghastly
spectacle before his Death. Some report, that like Henderson, he died full of
horror and despair; they that speak most sparingly of him, say, he had not
that assurance of his Salvation, that he expected to have had at his Death.

Death and Judgment are solemn things, and give a man a truer, and less
flattering view of his actions, than covetous and ambitious Interests will let
him see. I presume not to judge his future Estate; to his own Master he stood
or fell: his Conscience being awakened, he might, and so others may find more
truth and comfort in the first sentence of our Liturgy (though they call it a
Lie) than in all their thin notions of Divinity.

He was of a middle Stature, thick Shouldered, swarthy Complexion, his Eyes
always rolling in his Head. when he talked with any man, he never looked in his
face, but cast them this way and that way, which some interpreted as an
argument of a jealous mind and suspicious of Mischief. His Deportment was
clownish, like his Breeding; his Garb slovenly (sometimes preaching without his
Cloak) his Gate shackling, and the Furniture within not unlike the outside.

Now Sir, though I have exceeded the length of an Epistle, yet I am not conscious
to my self, that I have any where exceeded the Truth; and now let the World
judge, if there were not more scandal in this man's Life, than in eating Sack
and Custard, or in both White's Legends put together. And do you Presbyterians
judge, what an able Builder your Cause has had here in England; for it is not to
leave an infamy upon this persons name, that I have given you this copy of the
man, but purely for your sakes, who have been unhappily deluded by his seeming
merit. I know some of you have discovered him to be another man than you first
took him for; but the most of you are ignorant of his Private Carriage, and
underhand practices, and diverse of you are so firmly wedded to your old
Opinions, and which is worse, still justly those ungodly means whereby you have
maintained them. For God's sake, let not the King's Pardon, which extends but
to your Goods and Lives, be an occasion to betray your Souls: There must pass
an Act of Indemnity in Heaven, before you can be secured; and this will never
be without Repentance. Repent then, and let the World see that you are forry
for, and sensible of your sin; this will not be your Shame, but your Honor.
That part of the Kirk of Scotland at Aberdene, have buried all their Infamy in
their Ingenuous acknowledgment of their foul Miscarriages. God Almighty accept
and pardon them, and stir up you to do the like Penance in a white sheet of
Paper; which shall be the hearty desire of your Friend, and more particularly,
Worthy Sir, of him who is

Yours Humbly Devoted.

FINIS.

