blazon of the Newdigate family Sr. Richard Newdigate of Arbury in the County
of Warwick Baronet 1709



THE Negro's and Indians ADVOCATE, Suing for their Admission into the CHURCH:
OR A PERSUASIVE to the Instructing and Baptizing of the Negro's and Indians in
our Plantations.

SHOWING, That as the Compliance therewith can prejudice no Man's just Interest;
So the wilful Neglecting and Opposing of it, is no less than a manifest
Apostasy from the Christian Faith.

To which is added, A brief Account of Religion in Virginia.

By MORGAN GODWYN, Sometime St. of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

Judges 19. 30. And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such
deed done nor seen from the day that the Children of Israel came up out of the
Land of Egypt, unto this Day.

Acts 4. 20. We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

If we must answer for our idle Words, how much more for our idle silence?

St. Augustine. LONDON, Printed for the Author, by ^. D. and are to be Sold by
most Booksellers. 16^0.

To the most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM by Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, his Grace; Of all England Primate and Metropolitan,
and one of his Sacred Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
IT is at once both the Duty and Interest of these Papers to beseech your
Favor and Patronage, and to beg leave to carry in their Front a Name so
sacred; as being not only a Sanctuary from danger, and a Preservative against
the infection and poison of Malicious Censures; but also so rich an Ornament,
as in it self sufficient to give them that Reputation and Luster which of
themselves they wanted, and to supply all the Defects and Errors of the
unskilful Author.

An Ambition I should confess unpardonable, were the Temptation less, or the
Subject meaner; which in truth does so much pertain to your Graces Inspection,
that to have addressed themselves to any other, had been an alienation of your
Graces Property, and no less than Sacrilege. Which being considered, I trust
the apprehended Guilt will vanish; And by that Acceptance, which your Graces
wonted Humanity promises, the Crime will borrow another Name, and be transmuted
into a Virtue.

I do not crave your Graces acceptance of these Papers upon any score of their
Merit, unto which they dare not pretend; But do only beseech that charitable
Kindness to be extended to them, which is due to Strangers: Especially coming
so far, and upon such an Errand, as to implore Relief for those Myriads of
hungry and distressed Souls abroad; most of them within the English Dominion,
tho without their Care; and even vast Numbers being no other than our Peoples
Slaves and Vassals; but from whom also the Bread of Life is most sacrilegiously
detained. And by this your Condescension and Kindness to these
stranger-Suppliants, it is not impossible, but that Blessing may be repeated to
you, Of entertaining Angels. The dignity of their Message being sufficient to
qualify them for those Titles and Names, which otherwise they durst not
assume, and could no way challenge.

It would be but gross Impertinence for me to undertake to acquaint your Grace
how zealous our Ancestors were in promoting Works of this nature, the
advancement of Religion in foraign Regions, even beyond their own Power, and
Jurisdiction. Nor need I to mention how some others do make this very thing an
Essential Mark of the Catholic Church, and from thence would prove their
Religion true, and ours, at the same time, false: And do therefore conclude
that they have sufficient grounds to unchurch us, and to determine us no
Christian Nation. Nor shall I go about to parallel our Crime with that of the
Ancient Britains, it being indeed much blacker; of whom yet Gildas complains
(as a most grievous Impiety), that they never took care to preach the Gospel to
the English and Saxons, their (not Domestics and Vassals, which these, we speak
of, are, but) most cruel Invaders and Oppressors; and even to this he ascribes
his Peoples and Countries overthrow. But instead thereof shall offer up my
Prayers at the Throne of Mercy, that the like fatal, (but infinitely less
excusable,) Neglect of our People abroad, not to say at Home also, may not
prove alike Ominous, nor hasten the accomplishment of those Evils, which have
so lately threatened, and do still hang over us; and of which, it is possible,
that very mischievous and scandalous Neglect has been the prime occasion. And
at the same time bemoan our hard Lot to be born and live in an Age so utterly
barren of those Rich Fruits, with which the former did so abound: And that when
the most opposite Parties do compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, We only
are charged with the Neglect, I shall not add the opposing of it; that being
the Crime of such degenerated English, who with that air, have imbibed the
Barbarity and Heathenism of the Countries they live in: And with whom, through
the want of Discipline, Christianity does seem to be wholly lost, and nothing
but Infidelity to have come in its place.

And thus, I have given your Grace the Motives inviting me to this bold
attempt, together with tbose other for this Publication; which assuredly will
not prove ineffectual whilst your Grace shall continue what you have always
been: It being impossible that that flame of Religious Zeal, which has
hitherto so vigorously acted in your Grace, should be Extinguished whilst you
are alive; But must needs excite you to further endeavors for the good of
Souls, tho at a remoter distance than both the India's; or that you should
suffer a thing of that Consequence for to sleep. Which doubtless will give you
a Name in the blessed Records of Eternity, equal to those Primitive Pious
Bishops and holy Patriarchs, who have been most Industrious and Vigilant in
publishing the Doctrine, and promoting the Service of their Lord and Savior.

But I begin to be tedious, nor will your Graces occasions of greatest Moment,
admit of unnecessary Avocations: Wherefore (to avoid being further troublesome)
I shall humbly submit this whole Affair to your Graces Wisdom and Conduct, and
no less my self to your disposal: As being

My Lord, Your Graces most Dutiful and Obedient Servant, and most Devoted
Orator, M. Godwyn.

THE PREFACE.
THe state of Religon in the Plantations is such, as that to stir up all Men's
Zeal and Commiseration, there needs no other Argument than its being rightly
understood and known.

This is industriously avoided and prevented by such, who as public Agents for
those parts, should in the first place represent the Wants and Grievances
thereof; being of greatest consequence both to the Souls of Men, and to the
Government under which they live, and by which they are Protected and Employed;
and therefore ought in Conscience to preserve it.

But the Gospel being become stale News, and those glad Tidings sounding but as
some Anile Fable or Dream, the necessity of this needless and troublesome
Charge about Religion, cannot enter into such, who for the most part do know no
other God but Money, nor Religion but Profit. Which, with some other prouder
Considerations, provokes them to obstruct all designs for the good of those
Churches, and to report all things already so well settled, as not needing the
least amendment or alteration. Presuming (belike) that no half-starved Caitiff
coming from those parts, will be so hardy as to gainsay Men in Authority,
befriended with the Purses and Power of whole Provinces to defend them; and
thereby enabled to support their own, and to blast any other the most innocent
Man's Reputation.

But being my self fully persuaded, that God will assuredly make good his
Promise to the World, of causing his Gospel to be published, his Name called
upon, and his Church established among the remotest Nations, I have here
attempted to break through this Opposition; and as not knowing how to justify
my silence, which perchance might be more safe; without any regard to those
Gentlemen's displeasure, which I must expect even to the utmost degree; I do
here tender to the Public this Plea both for the Christianizing of our Negro's
and other Heathen in those Plantations, and for settling (or rather reviving)
of Religion amongst our own People there.

And as the Epidamnians (a Colony also, but oppressed by a Faction) coming to
Corcyra their Mother Country, Thucyd. l. 1.
are said to have pointed to their Ancestors Sepulchers, and chalenging Kindred
with them, did thence infer their natural Righ to relief and assistance from
those Corcyreans; So I doubt not but, besides these, (which are no less true,
and may as well be alleged by us,) many nobler Considerations will prevail for
the Relief of those parts. For our Church being, as is too evident, indebted to
the Wise and Unwise, to the Barbarians and others, both Bond and Free; how can
she, the former Veil being removed, forbear to impart her Bread, the Word of
Eternal Life, to the many wretched Souls there, who do daily perish through the
want thereof?

Rather as St. Paul's Macedonian, Acts 16. suing for help, was to him an
infallible token, that God had called him to preach the Gospel unto them; so I
question not but the miserable state of those People thus represented to our
most Reverend Fathers and C^^ntry-Men, and alike needing and imploring their
help, may stir up the same Zeal and pious Sentiments; and in the end prove no
less effectual for the propagating and preserving of Christianity in those
Colonies. And since the detecting of Conspiracies against Religion, is a work
so grateful, as at this time does especially appear; I hope I shall deserve no
blame (from good People) for thus offering my Mite of Discovery also; not
against some one Party or Division in Religion, but of a more dangerous
Conspiracy, even against Christianity it self, with the very Life and Being
thereof. To defend and preserve which, against the Hellish contrivances of our
Anti-Religionists (such as we find, Acts 13. 8. and who are grown very
numerous,) ought to be the united and joint endeavors of all Persons (of what
Sect or Party soever) who do retain any Sense or Affection for it: Each Soul
vowing with himself, (in the Comedians Language) Nunquam eam se deserturum, non
si capiundos sciat esse inimicos omnes Homines: And resolving not to desist
from p^osecuting those Enemies to God and Man (its implacable Adversaries,)
until they are exterminated from off the face of the Earth. We having certainly
as much reason to be zealous for Christ's Laws, Dic Hospes Spartanos re hic
vid^sse iacan^es, D^m Sanctis Patriae legibus obsequimur.
as those Heathens, who thought a bare Inscription on their Graves, a
sufficient reward and recompense for bravely attempting (tho perishing in) the
defense of their Countries.

But here it is possible that they may be apt (as it is certain they have
Confidence enough) to deny this whole Charge, even to their refusal of the
Christianizing of their Slaves, were it a thing less known. But this last being
so manifestly true, can any Man once so much as doubt of the rest? There being
(questionless) nothing so black, which he for his profit (if with impunitie)
will not perpetrate, who, without scruple, can so glibly swallow that Impiety.
Nor is it against Charity to think the worst of one, who, by that single
Omission, lives in a perpetual contempt of Christianity, and hourly affronts
that Faith he professes to believe. And I do here once for all declare, That
whatever Passages I have in this Discourse delivered of them, are either what
have proceeded from my own Knowledge, as being an Eye or Ear Witness, and
(perhaps) a Patient under them; or else which have been attested to me by
Persons of as great Veracity and Credit, as any those parts do afford, (of whom
diverse are now residing in England); who could have no design in the Imposture,
and therefore are not by me in the least suspected. Nay further, even
themselves, (unless resolved to be Perjured upon Record), if examined upon
Oath, must confess as much. Nor do I desire any thing more, than to be brought
upon a Justification; which they cannot but know can never (here) succeed to
their Advantage. And for their Threats (I have heard) of throwing Dirt, and
smiting with their Tongues, (besides that this is but a shifting off of the
Question); as they shall not take me unprepared, so let them know, that whilst
I have this shelter to fly unto, Nil conscire mihi, nulla and pallescere
culpa; the very worst they can vomit forth will never in the least prejudice me
in the opinion and esteem of Good Men.

Lastly, Whereas some may perchance object against my spending Time in this
Discourse to prove the Negro's Humanity, and to show that neither their
Complexion nor Bondage, Descent nor Country, can be any impediment thereto. Tho
I have spoken to it, Page 13. and elsewhere, yet here I shall further give
this Answer, That this is as needful (the contrary being believed, or at least
made a pretense) as any of the rest. And here let the Objecters also remember,
that a thousand Years since, it had been as ridiculous for any Man to go about
to prove that Bread was Bread, and not Flesh: Whereas now the greatest Divines
of both the Protestant and Romish Persuasion, have though it no disparagement
to their Learning, to write large Volumns, the one for, but the other against
that Faith. And for other (whether Imaginary or Real) defects in this
Discourse, if Charity and the goodness of the Design will not veil them, I hope
that at least it may find some mitigation of the Censure, from the
consideration of its being written in Terra barbara.

The CONTENTS.
The INTRODUCTION.
WHerein the Temper and Inclination of our People in Barbados, etc. as to the
promoting of Christianity among their Slaves, etc. is described; and the
Motives for writing this Discourse are showed, with the Necessity thereof. Page
1.
Chap. I. That the Negoro's, etc. have naturally an equal Right with other Men,
to the Exercise and Privileges of Religion; of which it is most unjust in any
part to deprive them. P. 9. Chap. II. That the Profession of Christianity
absolutely obliging to the promoting of it, no Difficulties nor
Inconveniences, how great soever, can excuse the Neglect, much less the
Hindering or Opposing of it; which is in effect no better than a Renunciation
of that Profession. P. 86. Chap. III. That the Inconveniences here pretended
for this Neglect, being examined, will be found nothing such, but rather the
contrary. P. 106. alias 122. Chap. IV. Wherein certain little Shifts and
Pretenses from England are examined, and found weightless. Also some few
Proposals preparatory to this Work are laid down; with Exhortations to both
Ministers and People, to a cheerful and speedy betaking themselves thereto. P.
151. To which is added, A brief Account of Religion in Virginia, in a Letter to
Sir W. B. P. 167.
Errata.
PAge 24. read Herm-aphrodite. P. 31. r. (...). P. 38. r. jure, for modo. P.
44. l. 12. r. could. P. 48. l. 26. r. 2. 5, 6, r. 7. 8. P. 52. l. 26. f. [ The,
r. the] and dele does, and l. 31. before And, make). P. 63, 64. r. (...) and
(...). P. 113. (otherwise 97) l. 23. f. here, r. so. P. 114. (or 98) l. 16. r.
persuade. P. 116 (or 100) l. 28. r. empty. P. 119 (or 103) l. 13. r. in, f.
of. P. 128. l. 17. r. who, f. and, P. 171, l. 4, and 11. r. him, f. them. l.
10. r. his, f. their.

THE NEGRO'S and INDIANS ADVOCATE, SUING For their Admission into the Church.
OR, A PERSUASIVE to the Instructing and Baptizing the Negro's and Indians in
our PLANTATIONS.
Showing that as the complying therewith can be no Prejudice to any Man's just
Interest; so the wilful Neglecting and Opposing of it, is no less than a
manifest Apostasy from the Christian Faith.
The INTRODUCTION.
Wherein the Temper and Inclination of our People here (viz. in Barbados) as to
the Promoting of Christianity among their Slaves, or other Heathen, is
Described; and the Motives for writing this Discourse are showed, with the
Necessity thereof.

. 1. IT having been my Lot since my Arrival upon this Island, to fall sometimes
into Discourses touching the necessity of Instructing our Negro's and other
Heathen in the Christian Faith, and of Baptizing them (both which I observed
were generally neglected;) I seldom or never missed of opposition from some one
of these three sorts of People: The first, Such, as by reason of the Difficulty
and Trouble, affirmed it not only Impracticable, but also Impossible. The
second, Such who looked upon all Designs of that Nature, as too much savouring
of Popish Supererrogation, and not in the least Expedient or Necessary. The
third, Such (and these I found the most numerous) who absolutely condemned both
the Permission and Practice thereof, as destructive to their Interest, tending
to no less Mischief than the overthrow of their Estates, and the ruin of their
Lives, threatening even the utter Subversion of the Island. Who therefore have
always been very watchful to secure that Door, and wisely to prevent all such
mischievous Enterprises. Themselves in the mean time employing their utmost
Skill and Activity to render the Design Ridiculous, thereby to affright the
better disposed (if any) from ever consenting to an Act, which, beyond all
peradventure, would so much call their Discretion and Wisdom into Question.

2. This spirit of Gentilism (for that is the mildest Name it will deserve) was
principally occasioned through the want of care in the seating of these
Colonies, where Religion ought to have been planted together with the first
Inhabitants; as amongst all Christians, besides our selves, has elsewhere been
generally practiced: But the English, for being of the best Religion, are to be
excused. It Is true, the Negro's ignorance of our Language was for some time a
real Impediment thereto, and so long a tolerable plea for the Omission; but
none afterward, when they had arrived to an ability of Understanding, and
discoursing in English equal with most of our own People; which many thousands
of them long since have: Whilst now after such a long Risk of Licentiousness,
an ungodly Custom grown strong, is kept as a Law: To gainsay which is looked
upon as no less impious, than elsewhere it is (and formerly it universally was)
reputed Meritorious.

3. Now to represent this more plausible to the World, another no less
disingenuous and unmanly Position has been formed; and privately (and as it
were in the dark) handed to and again, which is this, That the Negro's, though
in their Figure they carry some resemblances of Manhood, yet are indeed no Men.
A Conceit like unto which I have read, was some time since invented by the
Spaniards, to justify their murdering the Americans. But for this here, I may
say, that if Atheism and Irreligion were the true Parents who gave it Life,
surely Sloth and Avarice have been no unhandy Instruments and Assistants to
midwife it into the World, and to Foster and Nurse it up. Under whose
Protection getting abroad, it has acquired sufficient strength and reputation
to support it self; being now able not only to maintain its ground, but to bid
defiance to all its Opposers; who in truth are found to be but very few, and
those scarcely considerable. The issue whereof is, That as in the Negroe's all
pretense to Religion is cut off, so their Owners are hereby set at Liberty, and
freed from those importunate Scruples, which Conscience and better Advice might
at any time happen to inject into their unsteadie Minds. A Fiction hardly to be
paralleled throughout the Fables of the Poets; and which I presume never before
found entertainment amongst any, beside those above mentioned; or perhaps our
Neighbors of Holland, whose Religion is also governed by their Trade, and (as
has, I fear, been too justly charged upon them) for the sake thereof shall be
denied.

4. Now whilst in my thoughts I reflected upon these wild Fancies and absurd
Positions, which I had often heard (tho not in express words, yet in terms
equivalent) no less impudently urged and asserted, than I saw universally
practiced. A petty Reformado Pamphlet was put into my hand by an officious
FRIEND, or Quaker of this Island, (I suppose, in order to my Conversion); upon
the perusal whereof, which was strictly enjoined me, I met with this malicious
(but crafty) Invective, levelled against the Ministers, to whom it was by the
way of Interrogatory, directed and applied in no other than these words: Who
made you Ministers of the Gospel to the White People only, and not to the
Tawneys and Blacks also? (with many other the like insolent Queries, following
in a tedious Harangue, I think, to this effect, for I shall not undertake to
rehearse his words exactly): Why do you not teach your People in this part of
their Duty, or at least show them the way by your Example, beginning at HOME
with those of your OWN FAMILIES, whom you cannot deny but you neglect as much
as you do the rest? What should be the Reason that you spend so much time in
Railing against us, whom you call Quakers, and other peaceable People; but
where there is Occasion, have not a word to say? As if this Ignorance of Christ
in them were not as well worth your Pains and false Zeal, as the beating down
of Phanaticism, as you are pleased to term Innocent People's belief and
persuasions? Does not this silence proceed from a fear of Men, whom you are
loath to displease by this Doctrine, for what covetous ends your selves best
know? And do you not thereby testify that you are Men-pleasers and Hirelings;
but not the Servants of God, nor as you falsely pretend Ministers of Jesus
Christ, who, as as your Catechism (if you ever read it) does confess, came to
Redeem all Mankind, without excepting NEGRO'S and INDIANS? And therefore his
Ministers and Apostles were by him commanded to preach the Gospel to all the
World, and to be Witnesses of him to the uttermost parts of the Earth. Is this
the way to set forward the Salvation of all Men; and to make the Ways of God
and of the Gospel known unto all Nations, and to all Conditions of Men therein,
not omitting Slaves, nor any other? Is this to prepare the Way of Jesus Christ
against his second coming to judge the World, by turning the Hearts of the
Disobedient to the wisdom of the Just, and to approve your selves faithful and
true Pastors, earnestly feeding the Flock of Christ, and preaching his Word
unto them, as in your Collects (as you call them) you pretend to pray? Is this
to follow the Saints in all Godly and Virtuous Living, who as you read, Mark
the 16th and the last Verse, went forth preaching every where, and ventured
their Lives into all the World to preach the Gospel to the Heathen, when you
neglect it in your Parishes and Families? Is this to take upon you the Office
of a Minister, to serve God for the promoting of his Glory, and the edifying of
his People committed to your care and charge? Is this to be ready with all
faithful diligence to use both public and private Monitions and Exhortations,
as well to the Sick, as to the whole within your Cures? Is this to be diligent
to frame and fashion your own Lives and your Families according to the Doctrine
of Christ, and to make both your selves and them, as much as in you lies,
wholesome Examples and Patterns to the Flock of Christ, laying aside all study
of the World and the Flesh? For shame cease to call your selves Christ's
Ministers, unless you will be contented to work in Christ's Vineyard, to preach
his Doctrine truly, and to exhort and edify the poor of his Flock, as he
commanded you; and to testify both to small and great, bond and free, (as his
Apostles and Ministers did) the whole Counsel of God, lest hereafter you be
found partial in your selves, against which both Paul and James do warn you,
etc. This was the scope and substance of our Quakers Harangue (if my Memory
fails me not) with a great deal more to the same purpose, which I have neither
will nor leisure here to repeat; what I have already delivered, being
sufficient to silence us as to any Reply, besides that of the Poet, -- Pudet
haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
The Duties there by him urged, (tho doubtless with cursed intent, and as Judas
became Spokesman and Orator for the Poor) being evident from the avowed
Principles of all Christians; no less then from the express words of our own
Liturgy, by him collected from the several parts thereof: As will be seen upon
the perusal of the Collect for the Ember Weeks, the general Prayer for all
conditions of Men, the Collect for Good Friday, that for the second Sunday in
Advent, and for St. Peter's, and All Saints Days; and lastly, from the
Responses in the Book of Ordination of Priests and Deacons. And the Neglect
reprehended, being too apparent to be either shifted off, or extenuated by any
palliation, or excuse.

5. Now upon this I began to question with my self, If the Gospel be good
Tidings, why should it be concealed, or hid? And since designed so to all
People, why should not these partake of it as well as others? If we are bound
to pray for their Conversion, why are we not also to endeavor it? And since
that our Blessed Lord commanded his Apostles, St. Mat. 28. to go and make
Disciples of ALL the Heathen, why may it not be alike lawful for me, with the
great Apostle, Heb. 2. 8. to both argue and conclude, In that he said All, he
had excepted none? I then also fell to reflect upon the Doom of the
unprofitable Servant; and that since Christ had been thus merciful to me,
putting me into the Ministry, so unworthy of it; I could have no pretense to be
silent; and that I ought not to lay my (tho slender) Talent up in a Napkin,
lest thereby I should justly incur the like sad Doom. And withal, observing
that no abler Advocate for them had appeared, I concluded my self under some
Obligation, to endeavor to wipe off these Blemishes, and to repair the Honor
of our Religion and Profession. But withal, chiefly to admonish our People of
this Neglect; and if possible, to convince them of the wickedness of those
horrid Positions and Principles before mentioned; as also of the necessity of
their speedy applying themselves to that great Duty hitherto so unchristianly
omitted. Whereupon my thoughts after some time, resolved themselves into these
three general Assertions.

1. That the Negro's (both Slaves and others) have naturally an equal Right
with other Men to the Exercise and Privileges of Religion; of which it is most
unjust in any part to deprive them. 2. That the profession of Christianity
absolutely obliging to the promoting of it, no Difficulties nor Inconveniences,
how great soever, can excuse the Neglect, much less the hindering or opposing
of it, which is in effect no better than a renunciation of that Profession. 3.
That the Inconveniences here pretended for this Neglect, being examined, will
be found nothing such, but rather the contrary.
And this I do the more confidently here undertake from the encouragement and
counsel of the Wise Man, Eccles. 11. 6. thus advising: In the morning sow thy
seed, and in the evening withhold not thine Hand, for thou know not whether
shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall prove alike
good. And as not in the least despairing of a due success, tho even Briars and
Thorns should be with me, and my dwelling should be among Scorpions; since the
Almighty has by the Mouth of his Evangelical Prophet given us this assurance,
Isa. 55. That as the Rain comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and returns
not thither, but waters the Earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it
may give Seed to the sower, and Bread to the eater: So shall my Word be, that
goes forth out of my Mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I
sent it.

Ezekiel. 8. 9. And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked Abominations
that they do here.
CHAP. I.
That the Negro's (both Slaves and others) have naturally an equal Right with
other Men, to the Exercise and Privileges of Religion; of which it is most
unjust in any part to deprive them.

. 1. ANd thus our Negro's and Indian's case as to Religion being sum'd up and
truly stated, and our People's temper and inclination toward the Conversion of
them being represented; I betake my self to my first general Assertion; which I
shall divide into these three Propositions.

1. First, That naturally there is in every Man an equal Right to Religion. 2.
Secondly, That Negro's are Men, and therefore are invested with the same Right.
3. Thirdly, That being thus qualified and invested, to deprive them of this
Right is the highest injustice.
1. For the first of these, viz. That naturally there is in every Man such a
Right: There are none can easily doubt, who do understand either what Religion
is, or the true end for which Man was made; namely, to glorify and serve God;
which is no other than to be Religious. Now this being the certain End for
which Man was made, a Right to perform that End cannot be denied him.

2. Which Right was not superinduced as an additional supply of any imaginary
defects of his Creation, but was at first planted and formed in him. Nor does
he enjoy it in common with other Animals, but claims it as his special
Privilege peculiar to him [as Man], and in a distinct manner from the rest of
the Creation: Nothing here besides being endued with a Capacity suitable, and
therefore not pretending thereunto.

3. And as Man alone lays claim to this high Privilege, so it is most certainly
every Man's, there being none so despicable or base, but has as unquestionable
a Right thereto, as the most illustrious and wise Virtuoso; holding the same
equally and in common with all others of the like species with himself. The
reason whereof is, because he claims it upon the account of his being Man, and
only [as such] has that Right. Now, Quatenus and de omni reciprocantur: As
also, A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia, say the Logicians: That is,
whatsoever is avouchable of any Creature [as such], must be equally true of
every individual Branch and Member of the whole kind or species; all being
equal sharers in those common gifts of Nature.

4. As for Instance: The sensitive Faculties, as Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
etc. As also the natural appetite to Food, desire of Sleep and Rest, with other
the like affections, are common to all Animals; but not to Plants or
Vegetables, because peculiar only to the other. These they do claim [as such],
and therefore may not be denied to any the most inconsiderable Animal of the
whole Creation. For being thereof once deprived, they instantly cease to be, or
to be reputed [such.]

5. Even so, Ex tot generibus nullum est Animal, etc. said the Roman Orator; Of
all Creatures here below, Man only has the notion of a Deity, and a propriety
in Religion. Which Right and Propriety does belong unto him only upon the
account of his being Man; that is, because he is endued with a reasonable and
immortal Soul, which alone constitutes him a Man, and capacitates him for
Religion. For without this he were not a Man; could neither be subject to Laws
or Discipline, nor capable of Rewards or Punishments after this Life: Nor in a
word, could be any longer separated, a grege brutorum, as the Poet speaks:
Above whom he is only advanced by that Prerogative of Reason implanted in his
Soul, the only proper and apt seat for Religion.

6. For that the Soul of Man is that alone, which qualifies and enables him to
be Religious, and that Man's grosser and heavier parts do contribute nothing
thereunto, is manifest: For that Religion being an exercise wherein the Mind
and Understanding only are concerned, the Body abstracted from these, (by whom
it is to be led and directed) can supply no other part in this Work, than of a
secondary Agent therein, and as subservient to the other. For otherwise
Atheists, and resolved wicked Men, might serve God and be Religious; whilst
like Engines compelled thereto, their Bodies showed some little compliance with
the present Action, so far as outward Gestures would go; tho they believed
nothing of the work they were about: and even a Beast might be taught to do the
like; but could never be governed by Laws, be reduced under Discicipline and
Government (of which Man by his understanding is alone capable) or be subject
to the impressions of Conscience; have a prospect of Happiness, or be
apprehensive of future Dangers and Contingencies; much less be able to provide
against them. All these Faculties being peculiar to the Rational Being, or
Soul, seated in Man only: Of whose Species, if our Negro's can be truly said to
partake, then will it of necessity follow, that they are Originally stated in
the like Natural Right to the Privileges of Religion. The thing that I am next
to prove.

. II. 1. I must confess the Antecedent is by our Anti-Religionists, (as was at
first remembered) and even by some others who would be thought less Enemies to
Piety, with no small resolution opposed, tho not always expressly, yet in words
equivalent, and withal most fully explained by their subsequent daily Practice.
Which Practice, because their words may be capable of a milder construction,
(tho in this case not in the least deserving it); I intend for the sole, at
least chief Rule or Measure to judge of and to understand the other. And here
let no one account it incredible, that Interest should seduce Men into such a
monstrous opinion, (which diverse even in England have been heard to defend) and
(as prejudging the cause and matter) conclude it time misspent, in laboring to
refute it: But remember how much stranger opinions, a much greater part of the
World upon the like Motive have elsewhere, tho in another kind, embraced. And
as to this, there wanting not Irrational Creatures, such as the Ape and Drill,
that do carry with them some resemblances of Men. The too frequent unnatural
conjunctions (as Taverneir discourses in his Voyages) of some Africans with
those Creatures, (tho not so as to Unpeople that great Continent) giving
occasion for such surmises as to some few there, tho never of any that were
brought hither; our Factors being too worldly wise to commit such gross
oversights in their Civil Affairs, whatever greater may escape them in their
Spiritual. And the Spaniards question (which the same Taverneir also mentions)
touching the Brutality of the Americans, (and, which I have heard was held in
the Affirmative in one of the Universities of Spain) serving not a little to
make my report more credible; and to acquit me of all fictitious Romancing
herein. Wherefore it being granted for possible that such wild Opinions, by the
inducement and instigation of our Planters chief Deity, Since my return to
England, the Reverend D. of H. told me, that an Inhabitant of B being by
himself urged to get his Attendant Negro's Baptized, made the like Objections,
with those which he found recited in the Papers I showed him, which were no
other than a part of this Book. And tho such Practices may seem strange to
People in England, yet the same Persons going thither are suddenly changed, so
that they make nothing of it.
Profit, may have lodged themselves in the Brains of some of us; I shall not
fear to betake my self to the refuting of this one which I have spoken of. For
the effecting of which, methinks, the consideration of the shape and figure of
our Negro's Bodies, their Limbs and Members; their Voice and Countenance, in
all things according with other Men's; together with their Risibility and
Discourse (Man's peculiar Faculties) should be a sufficient Conviction. How
should they otherwise be capable of Trades, and other no less Manly
employments; as also of Reading and Writing; or show so much Discretion in
management of Business; eminent in diverse of them; but wherein (we know) that
many of our own People are deficient, were they not truly Men? These being the
most clear emanations and results of Reason, and therefore the most genuine and
perfect characters of Homoniety, if I may so speak. Or why should they be
tormented and whipped almost (and sometimes quite) to death, upon any, whether
small or great Miscarriages, it is not material, were they (like Brutes)
naturally destitute of Capacities equal to such undertakings? Or why should
their Owners, Men of Reason no doubt, conceive them fit to exercise the place
of Governors and Overseers to their fellow Slaves, which is frequently done,
if they were but mere Brutes? Since nothing beneath the Capacity of a Man might
rationally be presumed proper for those Duties and Functions, wherein so much
of understanding, and a more than ordinary Apprehension is required. It would
certainly be a pretty kind of Comical Frenzy, to employ Cattle about Business,
and to constitute them Lieutenants, Overseers, and Governors, like as Domitian
is said to have made his Horse a Consul.

2. Their Objections against this, are poor and trivial; yet because with a
great many here, seeming to carry no little weight, (for otherwise they could
never both argue and act so absurdly, as they do); And because found
serviceable to their great End, which I have before spoken of, not rejected by
the Wiser; they must not, silly and idle as they be, for these Reasons be
slighted. They are of diverse sorts. The first whereof are certain impertinent
and blasphemous distortions of Scripture; out of which they would fain bribe
four places, to wit, in Genesis 1. 27, 28. and 2. 7. and 4. 15. and lastly, 9.
25, 26. to give in evidence for them. Now in the two first of these they strain
hard to derive our Negro's from a stock different from Adam's: but by the
third, they bespeak them as descendents from Cain, and to carry his Mark: And
yet by the last, as if condemned to contradictions, they make them the
Posterity of that unhappy Son of Noah, who, they say, was, together with his
whole Family and Race, cursed by his Father. Of which Curse it is worth the
observing what blessed use they to themselves do make, and what variety of
advantages they thereby reap. For from thence, as occasion shall offer, they will
infer their Negro's Brutality; justify their reduction of them under Bondage;
disable them from all Right and Claims, even to Religion it self; pronounce
them Reprobates, and upon a sudden (with greater speed and cunning than either
the nimblest Jugler, or Witch) transmute them into whatsoever substance the
exigence of their wild reasonings shall drive them to.

3. I confess, as for the third of these, which is Cain's Mark, they insist not
much upon it, because thwarting their Pre-Adamitism, of which they are
extremely fond, tho many times it is by their less skilful Disputants pressed to
the Service. But the Pre-Adamites whimsey, which is preferred above the Curse
(because so exceeding useful to undermine the Bible and Religion, unto both
which they have vowed never to be reconciled) they believe invincible; tho upon
but a very superficial trial, found (as will instantly appear) to be in some
things false, in other, empty and silly; but in nothing, of any considerable
weight or moment. For the fuller proof whereof, I shall crave leave to refer
the Reader to that no less Learned than Judicious Person, Judge Hales, in his
Book lately published concerning the Origination of Man, wherein the whole
Mystery of that foul Heresy is unravelled, and most strongly refuted.

4. But that I may not seem wholly to shift my Reader off to that Reverend
Author, and as it were shelter my sloth and ignorance (which last does, I
confess, stand in need of such an able Supporter) under his learned Pen, I
shall beg his patience a little, whilst I take upon me to entertain him with
some two or three of that learned Doctor's Arguments, who was the first Author
of that Opinion; all by him borrowed from Genesis 4. 2. etc. from whence he
undertakes to confirm his unheard of Hypothesis.

5. Of which, the first I shall attempt to unbowel is that, wherein he takes it
for granted, (I cannot point out the Chapter and Page, it being long since I
read it) that before the commencement of that History, there must be a numerous
race of Men, not derivable from Adam. For first he there observes, that Abel
was a Keeper (the Hebrew, as our Margen also directs us, says a Feeder) of
Sheep. This without more ado he concludes was to secure them, not from straying
or being devoured by Wolves, but from being stolen: And by whom? Not by his
Parents, or Brother, that being unlikely; but by other Sheep-stealing Rovers of
the pretended former Creation.

6. Secondly, he observes from the same Chapter, that Cain was a Tiller of
Ground, that is, an Husbandman. This, says he, does suppose diverse Trades to
be at the same time in being; to wit, Smiths, Plow-Wrights, Carpenters, etc. to
furnish him with Instruments of Husbandry. (The like he might have inferred,
and 'twas a gross oversight if he did not, from Adam's being put to dress Eden;
Gardening-Tools (tho it is said, that there was not a Man to make them) being as
requisite for that work, as Plows for the other). But had this learned Man
traveled the more Southern parts of Africa; or most, if not all the parts of
America; he might perhaps there have learned a more Orthodox Comment upon these
Texts, and more decently have solved his Doubts. For there he might have beheld
the Natives (probably still retaining the fashion of those Elder times)
planting each Man his own provision of Maiz; room being first made for the Seed
to pass into the Ground with no subtiler Engine than a simple Stick thrust into
it, or it may be with his Finger: And after this weeding his Corn with Fish
shells, instead of Hoa's, used by the English, and other wiser People. And this
they still practice, without craving the least assistance (unless, possibly,
some few of them since our Arrival) from those Trades; of which, as indeed of
almost all other, they are wholly ignorant.

7. Thirdly, turning to the Septuagint Bible, he there reads that Cain,
talking with his Brother, invites him in these words, (...), to go into the
Field. From which Clause, not found in the Hebrew, he is sure they must needs
at that time dwell in some Town or City, not so soon to be built by Adam's thin
Race. And therefore other Architects and Workmen must be fetched from that
imaginary Elder Creation. But this Logic, even admitting that Clause, would
never hold in Virginia, where there is neither Town nor City (their Metropolis
excepted, lately consisting of some twelve or fourteen Families, but since the
late Rebellion and Burning of it, I suppose of fewer) throughout that, nor even
the Neighboring Provinces. And even in this Island, we know that Men do not
always take their way through the Bridg-Town into their Plantations. And no more
necessity was there for Cain and Abel's not doing the same. And here also the
Natives (and I shall suppose no less of the South of Africa) could have taught
him to erect places for Shelter and Lodging, such as it is possible both Adam
and his Children for a long time might be contented with, without the aid of
Masons or other Builders, than what were needful for platting of Arbours,
covered only with Leaves, or the Bark of Trees, which generally are the Royal
Mansions and Basilicks of their greatest Kings and Emperors. But this Eutopian
or Atlantean City, having no Foundation nor being, any where extant, but in our
Quixots rambling Fancy, there is no need to produce either Builders, or
Inhabitants for it.

8. However, to put an end to this Dispute: There is no doubt but that these
places in Genesis, viz. Chap. 2. 5. and 3. 20. and 7. 21, 22, 23. and 10. 32.
All levelled as it were expressly against this Doctrine of Pre-Adamitism, (as
the learned Judge has observed) do certainly carry in them no less truth, than
those other, which its first Author, (contrary to the sense and judgment of the
whole World, both Jews and Christians, who have gone before him) has wrested
to that his wicked purpose; and ought with as great certainty to be believed.
So also does Saint Paul's affirmation at Athens, in the hearing of the Wits and
Virtuosi there, (who refused not to acquiesce with him in the same judgment*)
That God had made [of one Blood] all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the
face of the Earth, Acts 17. 26. I say, these with many other weighty Arguments
and Testimonies from sacred Scripture, ought to challenge from us at least an
equal measure of credit with those Dreams of that Fantastic Author: And may no
less at the same time inform us, how misbecoming Wise Men and Christians it is
(without consideration of what may be said on either side) in a moment to run
down and explode such ancient received Principles, for an irrational Novelty,
never before thought on; and thus to shake the foundation of the Christian
Faith, only to gratify a silly Humor, and to show how bold they dare be with
the Almighty. Who yet, if they are resolved not to be satisfied with the
Account which Moses gives of the Creation, as hitherto it has been generally
understood and received; It much stands them upon since, they reject the Old,
to find out a New and better; which, to give them their due, they do not in the
least pretend to, beyond bare and empty Conjectures, void of all Ground and
Reason: Which tho themselves may admire, they must allow others a due liberty,
at the same time, to esteem ridiculous.

9. But here, (after this Deviation to return to the matter in hand) we are to
take notice that their objected Pre-Adamitism, does not at all prejudice, nor
even relate to this Question, which is touching the Homoniety of our Negro's,
not their Origination or Descent. That Creation which they pretend to be
Antecedent to Adam's, being, according to the Principle of its first Author, no
less of Real Men than this latter; their Posterity therefore must needs be
such. And our cause has this further Advantage, that as Cham's African Race,
and the Curse said to be annexed thereto, do make nothing against our American
(nor yet Asian) Slaves, nor Tributaries; so this Pre-Adamitism does utterly
evacuate and overthrow whatever they from thence might otherwise infer, tho in
it self never so conclusive and good.

10. Nor are they like to speed better from the Ninth, than from the three
former Chapters; unless they can make it appear that that Curse did deprive all
Cham's Posterity of their Reason, and so metamorphose them into Brutes. Nor yet
even so will it do their Work, unless they also prove that all Negro's,
wheresoever found, are his Posterity, and particularly Descendents from Canaan,
against whom alone that Curse was denounced, (as in the progress of this
Discourse I shall show) which will be no very easy task. But this I shall
refer to the next Section to be further considered; what at present I shall
think requisite to be spoken being only this, that since Man alone is capable
of Discipline, of which our Negro's, equally with other People, are: Nothing
but Malice can be supposed to bespeak them less, which even at the same time
must be thought to belly it self. And so for the present letting this and such
other Arguments rest, which they pretend to borrow from the Holy Scripture,
where in truth not the least syllable can be wrested so as to favor this their
brutish supposition; I shall proceed to examine whether the voice of Reason,
the thing they so mightily pretend to, will determine more on their behalf,
than either Religion, or the sacred Writ.

11. For to do them Right even in this so bad a Cause, they are not of those
who shun to answer at this Bar, so long as they have any thing which they
imagine will make for them, there to be insisted on. But here at last failing,
which, it is to be presumed, in such a Case they cannot but soon do, we may the
less blame them, if, for their ultimate refuge and defense, they betake
themselves to Railing, or even to worse Arguments. Their specious Reasons on
which this pious belief is grounded, do seem to have been drawn from these four
Pretenses; the Complexion, Bondage, Pretended Stupidity, and Barbarousness of
our Negro's Manners, because different from ours. Of the second of which, they
make this twofold Use, first to Brutifie them; and then, that proving
defective, to deprive them of all both Temporal and Spiritual Rights, which
their Manhood, notwithstanding their being Slaves, would otherwise infer: Of
which last, I shall speak in its proper place, and in the mean time consider
only what relates to the present Matter.

12. I shall begin with the first, and that is their Complexion, which being
most obvious to the sight, by which the Notion of things does seem to be most
certainly conveyed to the Understanding, is apt to make no slight impressions
upon rude Minds, already prepared to admit of any thing for Truth which shall
make for Interest, especially if supported with but the least shadow of
Argument: And therefore it may not be so improbable (as I have (elsewhere)
heard affirmed) that from so poor a Medium, our Negro's Brutality should be
inferred, by such whose affection to so gainful a Doctrine, cannot but make the
Way smooth and easy to their Conviction. Such People in these Cases being not
apt to reflect, (and, probably not caring) how derogatory to the Goodness and
Justice of God it is, to represent him thus idly Propitious to empty Shadows,
and even to White and Red, that so out of his infinite regard thereto, he
should throw off all respect to the Work of his Hand, and to unman and unsoul
so great a part of the Creation. Nor yet, (which is more strange, because their
own immediate concern) that the Argument may come one Day to be turned against
themselves, and improved to chastise their Brutishness, who from thence did at
first so maliciously infer that absurd Conclusion to the prejudice of so
numerous and vast a People.

13. For it is well known, that the Negro's in their Native Country, and
perhaps here also, if they durst speak their inward Sentiments, do entertain as
high thoughts of themselves and of their Complexion, as our Europeans do; and
at the same time holding the contrary in an equal disdain, (the like whereof is
affirmed of the Natives of Japan, as to their own, and the Fashions and Manners
of all Strangers, as Mr. Bloom in his Geography witnesses): Whereby the
Missionaries of the Roman Church, (who to facilitate their Conversion, do
condescend to humor them in diverse things) are said to represent our Blessed
Savior in the Negro's Complexion; themselves also describing the evil Spirit
in ours. Now if Fancy and Opinion against Reason must carry it, there is no
doubt but they will not spare for that, even to vie with the best of us; and
then for number, it is certain they can out-muster us. So that without a
recourse to Force, the Contest on our part will be managed upon very unequal
terms, and in no case is like to succeed but to our disadvantage. And for
Force, I shall in due place show, how little it can avail in things of this
Nature.

14. But the determination of this Point will much depend upon the right
understanding and knowledge of Real Beauty, a true standard whereof the Nations
have not yet pitched upon. That being Deformity with others, which amongst us is
the only perfect and complete Figure. As a certain Author in a Treatise upon
this Subject, by infinite Collections and Instances in the practice and
behavior of more distant Nations, has abundantly shown. So that if the other
part of the World should once come to agree upon this particular, without
consulting us here (which it is possible, when ever they go about it, they may
omit), and like unto us, maliciously determine the Matter in favor of
themselves, they only may be the Men, and our selves but Beasts.

15. And that no better is like to be the Issue of such a Consult, may be from
hence concluded, for that the largest proportion of People, perchance five out
of six parts of the World, will upon a due survey, be found of a more dull and
sable Complexion than the Europeans. Of whom, as may be probably conjectured,
many by mingling with other Nations, as Spain with Moors, Jews and Saracens,
are, for the general, short of the English clearness. The like may be suspected
of other bordering Regions; and of Britain it self, if we call to mind the
Epithets [Picti and Caerulei] which the Poet Martial, Epist. 45. l. 11. and 99.
l. 14. bestowed on its Inhabitants. And even of those Countries that are more
Northerly, the Natives Countenances do differ much from ours. As the swarthy
Americans about Hudson's Bay, and of Canada, with the adjacent parts, do
testify. And those of our own Nation, or our Neighbors, who have betaken
themselves to these hotter Climes, do in a short time after their setting foot
here, discover a very discernable alteration, not only from those at Home, but
from themselves also as to what they were at their first arrival. Whose
Offspring, after the Succession of some few Ages, may, (judging by what is
already visible of many of them) become quite Black, at least very Duskie and
Brown, like our brindle Mulatto's and Indians. The Persians also, and
Madagascars, with other Eastern Nations, do carry more swarthy Complexions,
inclining to the Color of the former, and even blacker than the Moors: That
observation of the Poet, Et mauro obscurior Indus; being still no less true,
than when 'twas first made: Now if the like should happen here to our English
Offspring, we should one Day have too much cause to repent of our large
Discoveries in these Parts, which of Men, (by their being Transplanted hither)
must so inevitably make them to degenerate into Brutes.

16. This Fiction of the Brutality of the Negro's, does contradict that Maxim
in common observation concerning the Non-generation of Monsters; for these
being no part of the first Creation, did not obtain from God that Blessing of
being fruitful and multiplying, and of replenishing the Earth, Genesis 1. 28. and
8. 17. which other created Animals then did. According to which our Mulatto's
and Mestizo's (the production of Negro or Indian mixtures, with other less
swarthy People) would want this prolifie faculty, and never be able to
procreate their like; the contrary whereof is daily seen in this and in the
other Colonies. The like also would be the condition of the African Moors,
opposite to Spain and Italy, of whom it is scarce to be doubted but that they
are a mixed Generation; descendents of Negro's, the first Inhabitants, and
Europeans, from the opposite Shores, by whose People they have formerly been
Conquered; Their Hair, Figure, and Complexion (the same with our Mulatto's)
bespeaking no less. Whereas our remoter Africans, into whose Territories those
Nations never till of late had pierced, and so had no opportunity of the like
Mixtures, are perfectly Black, their Hair frizled like Wool, as the many
thousands here do witness. Now all these Moors, must, like the Mules (from whom
the term Mulatto is borrowed) be for ever Barren, admitting the said
Supposition and Maxim to be alike true.

17. Herein does also concur every Man's Sense and Judgment touching other
Creatures, nothing doubted (tho Black) to be of the same species, with the
Whiter: As is seen of Birds, which do often differ much in the Feather, yet
nevertheless are one and the same in kind. But, alas! for this the poor African
must be Unmanned and Unsoul'd; accounted, and even ranked with Brutes. A
partiality highly becoming Christians, pretending to so much Justice and
Knowledge, which some do arrogate to themselves, and would even be thought to
profess, whilst they practice and assert Principles so opposite thereunto!

18. Here also it might be demanded, Why Colors should do more than
Deformities, by all granted not to prejudice the concerned party as to his
Species? A Crooked Person, Dwarf, or Hermophrodite, being as truly of the
Species of Man, as any the more Complete, Simple, and well Proportioned. The
Canons of the Church formerly (and for ought appears still) allowing even those
last, as capable of Benefices without Dispensation, says one, and to be
promoted to Holy Orders. And both the Civil and Common Law not prohibiting them
to be instituted Heirs, to succeed to an Inheritance. And even Monstrous Births
partaking of Mankind, having the benefit and help of Reason, may very well,
says the same Person, be admitted to succeed to their Parents dying Intestate,
according to the custom of most Countries, which wills that the Dead should
give Seizin to the Living.

19. To this, I shall not think it time misspent to rehearse a Story, borrowed
out of a French Author made English; which happened, as he says, not many
years since, near Argenton, a Town in Normandy. It is this: A certain Gentleman
complotted with some Neighbors there to play certain Plays, wherein should be
acted certain Devils, to the intent that the Pleasure and Pastime of their
Pageant might be greater. And this Gentleman would needs himself be attired in
the habit of a Devil, and did personate such a part; Insomuch, as after the
Plays were ended, he chafed in his Furniture, went home to his Wife, and had
company with her clad in the same attire wherein he played the Devil. By means
whereof, she at the end of nine Months, was delivered of a Son so Monstrous, as
in his Countenance, Head, Face, and all the parts of his Body, especially in
his Feet, he resembled and was more like unto a Satyr, such as the Poets have
described, than unto an ordinary and natural Man. After this he had other
Children; all which, together with their brother the Monster, did survive both
their Parents. Upon whose decease there grew a Contention and Variance between
them, touching the succession of his Inheritance; all of them endeavoring to
exclude this Monster, not only from the birthright of being Heir and Eldest
Son, but even from the total Succession of any thing that he should claim, that
might in Right appertain unto him. Hereupon was the Process sued, and the
Matter proceeded in suit between them, before a Judge of an Inferior Court: By
whom it was ordered that they should make their Entry upon the Estate, and that
the Eldest Brother should Inherit, as next Heir to his Parents, according to
the Custom of Normandy. From this Sentence, the younger Brethren brought their
Appeal, and removed the Suit into the Court of Parliament of Roan, where it was
by them pleaded, that he was a very Monster born, and that there was no Reason
that he should be accounted a Man. But hereunto it was replied, That those were
not in any sort to be allowed Monsters, who are born of Mankind, and are
capable of Reason, and of the future Resurrection. But those only are to be
held for such, who are born of some Beast, and not of a Man; which last, as
they are forthwith to be slain, so the former may not in any sort be so dealt
with, whether they have the use of Reason or not; but be so Monstrous as not
having so much as the Face of a Man, but rather of some Beast. Nor are they
ever denied due succession in Inheritance; but the Monster does either Bellow
like an Ox, or eat Grass as a Sheep, performing only the actions of a Beast.
And therefore the Defendents concluded, that the Judgment had been well and
rightly yielded: And the Court by a solemn Arrest, did confirm the same, and
pronounce that the Sentence, from which the Brethren had Appealed, should be
fully and wholly Executed, etc. Thus far our Author. Wherein may be observed,
that as Interest induced the younger Brethren to conspire together to deprive
the Elder of his Inheritance upon the advantage of his Deformity, so the
Reasons and Arguments used in his behalf, together with the Sentence thereupon
awarded, do prove as much for our Negro's, as for that supposed Monster. To
this I shall add, that in the Book before mentioned (Numb. 14. of this Section)
consisting of strange Representations and unusual Features, both of Face and
Body, agreeable to the Fashions and Customs of the several places they relate
unto, but much exceeding the deformity of Complexion; the Author does not
therefore in the least seem to suspect any of them, as if thereby the further
removed from perfect and real Men.

20. This opinion also, if driven to the head, would infer another no less
strange and before unheard of conceit in Divinity, viz. That Colors are a
means of Grace, and have a power in them to recommend us to God. Whence it
would follow, that Virtue should be an unseparable attendant upon Beauty; and
the fairest Bodies must then inevitably inshrine the purest and brightest
Souls; the contrary whereto was the Satyrist's observation. The holy Scripture
no less informing us the same, when it teaches us, that God looks not upon the
Countenance, or the height of the Stature, nor sees as Man sees, but God
looks upon the Heart. And in truth, this whole Argument is fraught with too
many evil Consequences and Absurdities to be relied on: and therefore deserves
to be thrown aside, and be forgotten into a disuse, as too dangerous a Weapon
for Slaves to learn the use of from us. And which being turned to the other
end, may be so improved as to humble us to the same Brutality, which we so
ridiculously have imputed to our Negro's.

21. NOR will Bondage, which is the next thing to be treated of, do any more
toward this Metamorphosing and Brutifying of our Negro's, than Deformities
could: It being not to be imagined by sober Men (whatever the distracted Tribe
may do) that Misfortunes and evil Accidents should carry that force in them as
to alter Substances; there being no so great Fascinations attending the
mightiest changes of Fortune, as thereby to take away the nature of things. For
he that before was a Rich Man, or Potentate, is still a Man, tho like
Belizarius, become a Beggar. Marius was as much a Man when conceiled in the
Marsh and Dungeon, as when he arrived to be Consul the Seventh time. And Caesar
when in the Pirates hands, was the same Man, as when he got to be Perpetual
Dictator. David was but a Man when he was King of Israel; and so he was too,
when pursued by Saul. Nor did Job become a Beast upon his great Losses, any
more than he could be supposed more than a Man, upon his Restoration. Now
Slavery is but a lower degree of Poverty and Misery; but not the lowest; for
there are conditions more Calamitous; As to be deprived of all the Comforts of
Life by a perpetual Confinement and Necessity, with a continual dread and
expectation of a miserable Death. So also to be vexed with loathsome Ulcers,
and sharp tormenting Diseases, all hopes of Relief and Respite being cut off;
are conditions to which Slavery, simply and alone, is to be preferred. Yet none
of these do unman the Party, tho they may much humble and debase him. Such
evils altering only the outward state of things, but making no impression upon
the inner Man, further than as our selves shall give way thereto; which froward
and impatient Minds can as well do without it. An adverse Fortune may deprive
us of our Goods and Liberty, but not of our Souls and Reason. Of which whilst
we are possessed, and do quietly enjoy, it is neither the Ambition nor
Covetousness, much less the Frowns and Menaces of any Imperious or Tyrannic
Lord, can bereave us of that Right which we naturally have to be ranked within
the Degree and Species of Men.

22. And to manifest this, I will suppose, what I would be loath should happen,
that some one of this Island going for England, should chance to be snapt by an
Algerine, or Consaire of Barbary, and there to be set on Shore and Sold; Does
he thereupon become a Brute? If not, why should an African, (suppose of that,
or any other remote part) suffer a greater alteration than one of us? This
certainly must either not be, or must proceed from some secret power peculiar
to that Soil and Air, where Slaves are gendred and made; and then what Spell
have we against such powerful and strange Brute-Anthropies?

23. If Slavery had that force or power so as to unsoul Men, it must needs
follow, that every great Conqueror might at his pleasure, make and unmake
Souls; and a Servant running away, or buying his Freedom, would make himself
one: As on the contrary, he that suffered his Ears to be boared at his Master's
Door-post, Exodus 21. 6. must in that act annihilate and destroy his Soul, his
Body nevertheless surviving. And the having, or not having of a Soul, would
signify but the bare enjoyment or want of Liberty; of which a Horse is no less
capable than a Man.

24. But that Conquest and Subjection can make no impression upon the Soul, is
plain even from this, that it cannot effect a less thing; not subdue the Will,
which yet is under the command of the Soul, but not within the Adversaries
power: A Victory being rarely heard of which makes the Affections to yield, and
reduces the Will of the conquered Party: as the Poet long since sang; --
Victoria nulla est,
Quam quae confessos animo quoque subjugat hosts.
Now Religion being, according to Lactantius, of all things most Voluntary,
cannot be expelled its hold at another's pleasure; nay, it is not under the
power of the Owner; for a Man cannot believe, or not believe whatever he
pleases. Now all that can be said to abate the power of Conquest over the Will
or Mind, does conclude more strongly against our Plagiaries, who are invested
with a less full and complete Authority over their Captives and Slaves, then
Conquerors are.

25. And here withal it might be considered, how monstrous and inhumanly cruel
they are, who do both buy and retain in this Soul-murthering and
Brutifying-state of Bondage, those whom they might so easily restore to their
pristine Homoneity, and of mere Beasts, with one little blast of their Mouths,
even but a word or two, convert into Men; and be at the same time the happy
Authors of life to Souls, as well as freedom to Bodies. A Privilege too great
and glorious for the rest of the World to enjoy, and yet not regarded here.

26. Again, If Slavery has such a faculty or power as to transmute Men into
Beasts, or if all Negro's be naturally such, may we not be bold to demand what
will become of those Debauches, that so frequently do make use of them for
their unnatural Pleasures and Lusts? Or of such of our People, who have
Intermarried with them? Sure they would be loath to be endited of Sodomy, as for
lying with a Beast. It would be therefore convenient for them to renounce that
Beastly opinion; or else that the Law may have its free Course, and be let
loose upon them: Of which they would have no cause to complain, but of that
first wicked Principle.

27. Lastly, If a Slave setting foot upon the Soil of some Countries, (as of
France) be thereby at the very instant made a Freeman; or else, (as in the same
Kingdom is also customary) by receiving Baptism: It must needs follow that
these several Actions have the faculty to transubstantiate Things and Persons:
because by setting Slaves at Liberty, they furnish them with Souls; and of
certain Creatures, of a different Species, (for that will necessarily follow,
if they were not such before) do create them Men. But if this be false, then
being become free, they either must still be without Souls, or else were endued
therewith in their very Slavery; the latter of which must needs be true, the
first being not in the least suspected.

28. And here also it may be demanded and considered, why Liberty and Freedom
should effect more upon Men, than upon other Creatures; who according to this
Supposition, the wilder they are, because thereby the more at Liberty, would so
much the nearer approach to Humanity, and be endued with Souls too; But (which
of all the rest, is most Monstrous) with such Souls, as must in all things
agree with an Animal, or Brutish (not a Rational) being, the transformed into
Men. And so all Subjects and subordinate Governors would be Men but in part;
but yet by so much the more, by how much they approached nearer to
Absoluteness. And in all the Grand Seignior's spacious Dominions, where there
are none but Slaves, there would not be so much as one Man besides himself; not
excepting the very Christians. The evil consequences of which Belief, the
Authors thereof may sooner feel, than they are willing to understand or see.

29. There were no Men in the World so likely as the ancient Greeks and Romans,
to have entertained this base esteem of Slaves; because void of all impediments
to their Sensuality, and free from those ties of Conscience unto which
Christianity is subject, had they had any color of Reason for it; and, being
such from whom are transmitted to us the greatest presidents of Severity
toward their Slaves, as having no Restraints besides the goodness of their
Disposition and Genius, which were not always very operative in diverse of them;
yet Reason prevailed so far with them, as to confess them to be Men, nothing
appearing upon Record in contradiction thereto, but very much from their Poets
and Writers in the confirmation of it. Hence that trite Distich, ascribed to
Cato, advises, Si fueris servos mercatus, etc. Homines tamen esse memento:
Agreeable to that of the Greek Poet Philemon, thus expressing the same Article
of the Gentiles Belief; (...), etc. That is, That no one is the less a Man for
Servitude. And no less does the good natured Master in Juvenal acknowledge, when
on his Slaves behalf he delivers this Oracle, Nulla unquam de morte hominis
cunctatio longa; That no consideration could be too great where a Man's Life
(then, as is said, pleading for his Slave) was concerned. Which the Virago
Mistress in her Reply, durst not Contradict, O Demens! Ita Servus Homo est? Tho
she derided her Husbands tenderness. And Augustus Caesar, as I think Dion
relates of him, being invited to a Dinner, where he overheard the outcrys of a
certain Slave, condemned to be Impaled for a miscarriage about some Cristal
Glasses, forbad the Execution, affirming, That the Life of a Man (that is, of
that Slave) was of too great value to be destroyed for Trifles. And Tully,
speaking of Justice, declares it due, Etiam adversus Infimos, even to the
basest sort of Men, which he there affirms Slaves to be. And tho these Heathens
did not much trouble their Slaves with Religion, yet their allowing it to them
(which these words of Aristophanes, in his Acharnens. page 572. where he
introduces one, (...), Vna cum servulis sacrificantem, as the Paraphrast
reads it, (The same (...) being used Eccles. 10. 25. in opposition to (...),)
do not obscurely intimate) does plainly discover in what rank of Creatures they
accounted them. And for the Jews and Turks, their being admitted to the
Passover, Exodus 12. 44. by the first, and the others zeal to proselyte Slaves,
both Negro's, and others; do testify their esteem of them. And even the last,
the under the like temptation of Profit, yet do not think it worth their giving
the Lie so palpably to both their own and every Man's Reason.

30. THE two last things objected, are the Negro's Stupidity, and the pretended
barbarousness of their Manners; both which, for brevity, I shall dispatch
together. Their Barbarousness (which I shall treat of first) must be
discernable either from their Demeanor and Conversation in the World, or else
from their behavior and practice in their Worship and Ceremonies of Religion;
or from both. Now for Religion, It cannot be denied but that nothing is more
barbarous, and contrary to Christianity, than their Polygamy, their Idolatrous
Dances, and Revels; in which they usually spend the Sunday after that the
necessity of labor for their Provisions (for the Planting of which, that Day
alone is allotted them) has been complied with. But as to these, the blame does
lie wholly upon such, who pretending themselves Christians, do suffer and even
compel them to those Actions; part whereof are against their Wills, and where
even a Check or Frown, would restrain them from the rest.

31. And here, that I may not be thought too rashly to impute Idolatry to their
Dances, my Conjecture is raised upon this ground (besides their being
Gentiles), for that they use their Dances as a means to procure Rain: Some of
them having been known to beg this Liberty upon the Week Days, in order
thereunto. Now it is certain, that the Gentiles anciently did esteem and
practice Dancing, as a part of Divine Worship: And no less also did the Jews;
as may be proved from Exodus 32. 19. and from David's Dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. Add to this their placing confidence in certain Figures, and ugly
Representations, of none knows what besides themselves (which very decently for
want of more Magnificent Temples, they usually enshrine in some stately Earthen
Potsherds;) The Fugitives and Runaways believing these Deities able to protect
them in their Flight, and from Discovery, (like as the Egyptians worshipping of
Baal Zephon, was to detect them): Their companions and fellow Slaves also, that
remained at Home, having been overheard upon the seizure of these Puppets, in a
search after the other, instantly to give assurance that there was no
possibility of their further concealment. And this doubtless is a manifest
token of their Impiety in this kind, and no less of their Barbarity. But as
Christianity would soon (if duly applied) cure this evil; so I see not how it
should prove them to be Brutes, more than the rest of the World, formerly, and
even to this Day, more or less, addicted to the same vanity and deception of
false Worship.

32. And then as to their Civil Conversation and outward Demeanor in the
World, it cannot be expected it should be so Gentile and Modish as our
Europeans, who perchance must be acknowledged as not to be paralleled by any
other of the three Quarters thereof; upon whom yet as great Barbarity was
formerly no less chargeable; as most Authors do agree. Plutarch, in the Life of
Theseus, tells us that the Athenians lived scattering like the wild Nomader of
Scythia, before they were by him reduced to a better order of Life, formed into
civil Societies, and acquainted with the blessings of Government. And the
Aborigines are by Salust, described to have been, Genus hominum agreste, sine
legibus, sine imperio, liberum atque solutum, Certain wild People, without
Laws, or Government, loose and destitute of all positive Obligations. And
Cesar's account of the Ancient Britains, is not such as should make us proud;
For he informs us that they were clad with Skins, and did paint their Bodies;
(from which custom the name of Britain is by our Cambden derived). He also
adds, that Brothers with Brothers, and Parents with their Children, had Wives
in common: A greater Barbarity than I have at any time heard of amongst the
Negro's. And this we find, of them, very late, and but a few Years before our
Saviors Birth, tho situated much nearer to the civilized World, and withalin a
colder Clime, than any part of Africa, and most of America. And so little were
they advanced in Civility by their converse with a gentiler People, that even
two hundred Years after this entrance of Caesar, we find the forementioned
Epithets of [Picti and Cerulei] continued to them. Nor does Tacitus give any
more honorable account of the Germans, from whom the Saxons, our immediate
Ancestors are sprung. Of whose Barbarousness also Gildas a Britain, with other
of our Writers, have delivered no very creditable Account. The Danes, who
supplanted them, were full as bad, if not worse. And the Picts who inhabited
the North of Britain, had that Name continued long after the other had lost it;
for no better Reason than that, for which the first had it given them. Neither
is it improbable but that the Gaities and Adornments of Elder Ages, did much
consist in Discoloring and Painting themselves, which is still practiced in
America. Our greater Personages no less affecting the like diversity of Colors
in their Attire; and yet must be reputed (not Barbarous, but) Gentile for it.
The like Custom it is possible was in use amongst other Nations, were their
Antiquities raked into. And tho Ireland in times past, as is intimated by V.
Bid, Eccl. Angl. Hist. l. 3. c. 24. and 47. be reported to have been a place
of Lear^ing, so that other Countries are said to have sent their Youth thither,
as to another Greece, or Athens, to be trained up in Learning; yet so much are
they Degenerated, or at least so little Fruit thereof has of late accrued to
their Posterity, that the Natives of that Kingdom, who have been Imported
hither, are observed to be, in diverse respects, more Barbarous than the
Negro's: And this in its kind is so notorious in some of them, as to fall under
even the Negro's observation; by whom this petulent Taunt has contemptuously,
and in reproach of their doltish Stupidity, been returned upon them, viz. That
if the Irishman's Country had first lighted in the Englishman's way, be might
have gone no further to look for Negro's: That is, Slaves, such as the Negro's
here generally are. (These two words, Negro and Slave, being by custom grown
Homogeneous and Convertible; even as Negro and Christian, Englishman and
Heathen, are by the like corrupt Custom and Partiality made Opposites; thereby
as it were implying, that the one could not be Christians, nor the other
Infidels.)

33. Which Indication of our Negro's contempt of that dull and phlegmatic
People, does show the cause of their Ignorance to be the want of Converse and
Education, which may also befall other Nations, and even the Inhabitants of our
Mother Country. It being certain, that Africa was once famous for both Arts and
Arms; that Carthage did rival with Rome for the World's Empire, and had well
nigh gotten it, tho now become an Aceldama of Barbarism; even to the degree of
rendering its Inhabitants suspected for Brutes, as we here find and see. And it
is also evident, that all our own People do not exceed these either for
Knowledge, or Piety; nor yet always for Civility, whatsoever Brutishness is by
some proudly objected to them. And without a provision for Schools (of which
the scattering way of living in these Colonies is scarce capable) together with
a stricter Care taken to suppress Debauchery (hardly to be outdone (therein) by
Sodom, were it standing) may at last end in the like Barbarity; and like that
lasting monument of God's Wrath against Impiety, may, without a timely
Repentance and Reformation, be made a like Spectacle and Example to such as
desire to live (...) without Religion, suffering for it the vengeance of
Eternal Fire.

34. But in our own People, neither their Ignorance, nor Vicious Lives, nor any
never so barbarous Practices, does render their being Men the more suspected;
nor cause any question touching their Right to Religion, tho not at all prized
by them. Which yet is plainly upon pretense thereof (how justly I shall
elsewhere discover) denied even to the Infants of the other, tho their Parents,
or at least one of them, were Baptized, and (according to that measure of
Knowledge they had attained to) Professors of Christianity; it may be imported
out of England. For even of those they take no more care; Nor yet of such
other, whom themselves, tho but seldom (yet sometimes) have for fashion sake,
upon their being there, caused to be Baptized: I say, even to these, they
permit the exercise of Religion, no otherwise, then as they do to the most
Ignorant of them. But rather upon their return, untwisting as it were that Web,
they seemed to weave in England. Remitting them to their former Stations, and
compelling them to herd it with their wilder Countrymen, and as it were forcing
them to revive their Paganism. Not allowing their Children Baptism; nor
suffering them upon better terms than direct Fornication, to live with their
Women (for Wives I may not call them, being never Married). And accounting it
Foppish, when Dead, to think of giving them Christian, or even decent Burial;
that so their pretense for Brutifying them, might find no Contradiction.

35. Nor would I be thought to speak this at Random. For I cannot easily forget
the supercilious Checks and Frowns (to say no worse), which I have upon this
occasion alone met with; and for such innocent Arguments and Persuasions, I
have, in the opinion of some chill Professors (otherwise called Atheists),
perhaps less prudently, (I am sure to the Ruin of my small Interest) been
sometimes bold to urge to our People, in order to their Conviction, as to the
necessity of this Duty. Particularly once, soon after my arrival into this new
World, for minding a Negro of his Baptismal Vow formerly made in England, not
doubting it to be grateful to his Master, whom I took for a discreet Person:
Which indeed he was, so far as getting of Money, quo modo, quaeque injuria,
would amount to; in which his Wisdom, I afterward found, did wholly consist. By
others it has been demanded of me, What I had to do with their Servants, when
once affirming them to be a part of a Minister's Care and Charge. Another time
it was told me with no small Passion and Vehemence, and that by a Religious
Person (for so in all things else she appeared), that I might as well Baptize a
Puppy, as a certain young Negro, the Mother whereof was a Christian, and for
ought I know (notwithstanding her Complexion) as dear to God as her self. Nor
was this Gentlewoman in the least infected with Anabaptism, but a frequenter of
the Church, and very carefully procuring always for her own, what she thus
denied to her Negro's Children. And another of the same Sex, upon my baptizing
a Male Negro of hers, of about thirty Years old, speaking English plainly, and
earnestly beseeching it; caused this Message to be delivered to me, That
Baptism, I was to understand, was to one of those no more beneficial, than to
her black Bitch. Others also of both Sexes, I have heard Scofsing and
inveighing at it, with no little spite and inveteracy; tho not appearing such,
whom I might take for absolute enemies to Religion; which I fear too many, in
these parts, are. And in truth, the hard Words, and evil Language I have upon
this account received (and do expect will now again be repeated) would take up
too much room here to be rehearsed; nor is it very pleasant for me to remember,
further than to blame that first horrid Principle, the natural result whereof
these Discourses and Practices have most certainly been. There being no doubt
but that (to use the words of one of our Homilies, in an almost parallel case)
they take the multitude [of Negro's, I shall add] for vile Souls, of whose loss
and safeguard no Reputation is to be had; for whom yet Christ paid as dearly,
as for the mightiest Prince, or the wisest and best learned in the Earth. And
they that will have it generally taken for indifferent, that a very few take no
hurt (herein alone the Case differs, all being involved in the same Neglect and
Danger) tho infinite multitudes besides perish thereby, do show that they put
little difference between the Multitude and brute Beasts, whose danger they so
little esteem. And in this belief, I am the stronger confirmed, for that some
of them are more indifferent, as to the baptizing of their Mulatto's, as
conceiving these a less degree removed from Men, whose Parents on the one side
are English, or of the Whiter sort; whilst to such as are wholly the Offspring
of Negro's, they utterly deny it.

36. Since the committing of these Papers to the Press, even while the last
sheet was Printing, a certain Berbadian openly maintained these Positions, That
Negro's were Beasts, and had no more Souls than Beasts, and that Religion did
not concern them. Adding that they went not to those parts to save Souls, or
propagate Religion, but to get Money. Which, with much more to the same
purpose, he uttered with so much passion and vehemence, that all who heard him,
believed he spoke not more his own, than the seas^^ and opinion of the place.
I am not ignorant but that upon the dispersing and publishing of these
Discourses (if ever such a thing should happen) the Correspondents and Factors
for our People residing in England, (no less than those here) disliking to see
their mystery of Iniquity laid open to the view of the World, may be apt (as
most certainly they will) to decry the whole charge as a piece of Calumny and
Slander; notwithstanding that their Practice is so notorious, and there is no
one, not perfectly blind, that can avoid the seeing of it; Nay, even such
cannot but know it. Which must be granted by all to arise either from Infidel
Paganism, with a Contempt, and even renouncing of the Gospel of our LORD (which
is much the worst); or from that other of their conceiving their Negro's to be
but Brutes. Unto which last, their Discourse does rather incline, tho there be
no small cause for suspicion also of the first. Others again may hope to
shelter themselves under that common subterfuge for Blasphemies, That what of
this kind has at any time escaped them, was only to sharpen their
Understandings and Wits, by thus whetting them with Dispute; or else that they
uttered nothing further than by way of Railery. For my part, I shall not
presume to dive into their Intentions, nor judge of their Thoughts; but only beg
this kindness of them, That if I must take their Arguments for feigned, they
would favor me so far as to suppose the same of my Answers; and withal accept
of this further Advice, viz. Not to practice Opinions, which they are ashamed
to own amongst better People. It being most certain, that what elsewhere they
would per^hance have thought to be Dispute only, and in jest, is here acted in
the strictest earnest; even beyond the equity of their Hypothesis, treating
their Slaves with far less Humanity than they do their Cattle. For they do not
use to starve their Horse, which they expect shall both carry and credit them
upon the Road; nor to pinch the Cow of her Fodder, by whose Milk their Families
are sustained: Which yet (to their eternal shame) is too frequently the lot and
condition of these poor People, from whose labor their Wealth and Livelihoods
do wholly arise: But yet, whose possessours [whilst they] slay [and starve]
them, (not only their Souls but their Bodies also, which are worn out in
perpetual Toil for them) do nevertheless hold themselves not guilty; and they
that Sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own Shepherds
pity them not; as the Prophet Zechariah speaks. A Cruelty capable of no
Palliation, and for which Vengeance cannot be long expected ere it fall upon
the inhumane Authors. Nor to speak truth, without that (...) of their Negro's
brutality, do I see how those other Inhumanities, as their Emasculating and
Beheading them, their croping off their Ears (which they usually cause the
Wretches to broyl, and then compel to eat them themselves); their Amputations
of Legs, and even Dissecting them alive; (this last I cannot say was ever
practiced, but has been certainly affirmed by some of them, as no less
allowable than to a Beast, of which they did not in the least doubt but it was
justifiable). Add to this their scant allowance for Clothes, as well as Diet,
and (which is often the calamity of the most Innocent and Labourious) their no
less working than starving them to Death; all which could never otherwise be so
glibly swallowed by them, but upon a persuasion of this, or of the former worse
Principle. Both without doubt contrived in Hell, receiving their first
impressions in no other than the Devil's Mint, purposely designed for the
murdering of Souls; Invented only to defeat the Mercies of God in their
blessed Redeemer, and to render void and ineffectual his precious Blood shed
upon the Cross, for the saving of the World. And thus much shall suffice for
proof of the Antecedent of my second Proposition, deduced from my first general
Assertion.

. III. 1. My Antecedent being thus made evident, I shall betake my self to
consider the Consequent, viz. Of the Right which our Negro's have, and may
justly claim to the exercise of Religion, upon the truth of what has been said
touching their being Men. A thing that of it self, one would think should
naturally follow, and be granted even of course; did not the Adversaries
thereto hope, tho our Antecedent were acknowledged, yet notwithstanding this by
some other ways, to invalidate this Right, and to continue them Heathens. In
order whereto, they are not wanting of a twofold Argument; First, The
Imprecation of Noah; Secondly, Their forfeiture of this Right by Servitude. Now
as before, they employed the first to unman their Negro's; so, that failing,
here they no less generously wrest it to rob them of Religion (no less than of
all other Rights): An injury (as in the end I shall show) far exceeding the
former, of making them Brutes simply, and abstracted from the latter.

2. Before I shall go about to answer which, I shall desire the Reader to
remark that what they have hitherto urged, is only against the Christianizing
of Negro's, with such only of other Nations and Complexions who are under
Bondage: Bearing it in hand (be like) that the condition of the Tributary
Indians upon the Continent, of Hostages of Peace delivered up to the English
upon the Public Faith, or of the Manumissed and freed Slaves, whether from
Persia, Madagascar, or the East and West Indies, brought hither, (none of them
likely, especially the last, to have been descendants from Cham, any more than
our selves;) enjoyed amongst them a more happy and blessed state, as to
Religion. Which in truth they cannot affirm even of such of them, who do live
in their Families in the nature of Hirelings; nor of their Neighbors, whose
Habitations are environed by the English. Who yet have been accountable upon
all occasions for Taxes; even as the Hostages before mentioned have been (like
Bondmen and Captives) strictly kept to Labor, by those to whose care they were
committed for Education and Security of the Peace; which certainly had been the
most effectual way to disturb it, had their Relations and Friends been strong
enough. To whose Temper and Disposition, nothing is more contrary then hard
Labor, nor esteemed so miserable a condition; which the Parents tears (one
whereof was a Werrowanza, that is, a Toparch, or Royetlet of the place; and the
rest his principal great Men) shed at the view thereof, did sufficiently
evidence.

3. And so betaking my self to the first Objection, which certainly is their
chief strength; I shall consider these People as Negro's, abstracted from their
condition of Bondage, and only as Natives of Africa, at least Originally;
believed to be Descendants from Cham, and under the Curse, as is pretended;
which is all we shall speak of in this place; reserving their Condition to be
discoursed of alone, and by it self, in the ensuing Section.

4. And here, in the first place, I cannot but take notice, that this Objection
is founded on a Supposition, including in it these five Falsehoods, or (at best)
Uncertainties. 1. That the Negro's are of Cham's Race. 2. That both Cham and
his whole Posterity were under the Curse. 3. That this Curse was in its effects
to be perpetual, even to the last Generation. 4. That it extended to their very
Souls, and was a kind of Reprobation. 5. That this is a sufficient Ground not
only for enslaving them, but for keeping them from the exercise of Religion.
Nothing of which last can possibly from thence be deduced; nor even the former
of enslaving them; unless, after the rest is proved, they make this appear
also, that we are the Brethren, whom they were to serve; and that the Curse did
confer on us a full and perfect Right of Dominion them.

5. However, to make out the first, they tell us (or at least do insinuate) that
Noah and his Sons descending from the Ark, did, as it were all upon the sudden
(as if afraid of each other), instantly retire into the most distant parts of
the World (for so Guinea is to Mount Arrarat); of whom Cham directed his course
to Africa, his Posterity the Negro's (they are sure) there keeping possession
till this very Day, notwithstanding the great alterations elsewhere.

6. But to answer this: First, It is wholly improbable that Noah's Sons should
make any such separation, before being bescanted of Room, they found it
necessary to remove; not, it is to be presumed, so far as they would go, but
some convenient distance only, for their better Accommodation; which doubtless
they might find, before they had crossed all Africa.

7. But secondly, Supposing both to have happened, yet it is not likely, at
least not certain, that his Posterity have kept possession there ever since,
and that upon the Reasons before mentioned, viz. The Possibility of being
removed and driven thence back again by Invasion and Conquest; by none less to
be suspected or questioned, than by us here in America, to whom it is evident
how little security against such alterations, the Remoteness of places have
been. So that the present Inhabitants of Africa, (even that supposure of Cham's
Race seating there being granted) might have as little Relation to its first
Seaters and Planters, as the Spaniards, or our selves, had to the Natives here;
the Saxons to the Britains, or the old Romans to the Aborigines.

8. Thirdly, This, as to a great part of it, is not only uncertain and
unlikely, but plainly false. For in an Account we meet with in the holy
Scripture (other Accounts being hardly to be met with, or relied on) of three
Sons of Cham (the fourth being believed to have been Childless) we find two of
them were feated in Asia; only Mizraim, for the Name, shall be allowed Egypt;
part whereof, viz. on the other side Nilus, must be in Asia too; that River
being the bounds to these two spacious Quarters of the World. It being also not
to be forgotten, that the Philistines (living also in Asia), were his
Offspring: Nor will this concerning Mizraim (for we have nothing but the
concurrence of the Name to prove it) bring any great comfort to the Cause, if
we consider its Remoteness from the parts we speak of, and the many great
changes (probably (if known) no less objectable against the rest) these
Egyptians, or Mizraimites, since first carried Captives by Nebuchadnezzar, that
is, for above two thousand Years, have felt. In so much that the true Egyptians
do seem since to have been swallowed up, and even lost in these Conquests. And
now supposing the like of the other parts of Africa, from which no Region in
the World can boast of an Exemption, what certainty or ground can there be for
Conjectures of this nature?

9. But to come nearer to the Matter: Either the Sons of Noah, with their
Families, kept themselves distinct, each of them united in a body by it self,
or else did intermingle and live together, without regard of such distinction
of Tribe, or Family. If the first, then it is evident that the Family, or Tribe
of Cham, following Nimrod, its Head, did seat themselves in Shinar, and the
parts adjacent, unto which the holy Scripture gives witness. But if the second,
then what certainty can there be from whom any Nation or People is derived, the
Jews only excepted? Now it is plainly recorded by Moses, Genesis 10. that Nimrod
the Son of Cush, Cham's Nephew, began his Kingdom at Babel, in the Land of
Shinar, (for that cause, Micah 5. 6. called the Land of Nimrod) and from thence
went and built Nineveh in Assyria, far enough from Africa; which, if Josephus
speaks truth, was left for Epher, Abraham's Nephew by Keturah, and his
Children, to be by them possessed, a long while after; and these no Descendents
from Cham, but from Shem, his Elder Brother.

10. But lest these Transactions of Nimrod might be pretended to have been
after he had traveled into Africa, and left a Colony there; (to omit the
tediousness and difficulty of the way) it is said expressly, that they journyed
thither from the East, not to be understood of Africa, which is South from
thence. It Is true indeed, the Scripture speaks of the Earths being divided in
the days of Peleg, but determines not what that Division was, whether of its
Inhabitants Minds and Affections, or that which happened upon the Confusion of
Tongues; or whether it were about this or that way of Worship, and of Religion.
Or even supposing it to have been no less then a parting, or dividing the
several Territories and Quarters of the World, yet, unto which of their Lots
each Parcel or Province fell, who had Africa, or which went to America, we
there meet with no Account, or at best but a very dark one. And for that of
Josephus, as it labors with the like uncertainty, so it is not for their
purpose to mention, for the Reasons there given.

11. And whereas the learned Dr. Heylen supposes this Quarter of the World to
be Peopled from Arabia, by Cham's Posterity, crossing the Red Sea: He should in
the first place have showed how so great a part of that Family diverted another
way, not to be imagined if the Tribes each of them kept together. And then,
secondly, Why this might not be as well done by any other of Noah's Children,
considering the improbability thereof, upon the account of the other Journeys
and Aboads made by Cham's Posterity. And so much for the first Supposure.

12. THEIR second carries a more apparent Falsity, viz. That, that severe
Imprecation of Noah, was denounced against the whole Family of Cham; whereas
it is evident that none besides Canaan his youngest Son, was mentioned, and
therefore not concerned therein; it being no less than thrice, Genesis 9. expressly
said, that Canaan should be their Servant. And so before, Cursed be Canaan, a
Servant of Servants shall he be. Now whatsoever may be presumed of the nearer
Inhabitants of Africa, (which also is disputable) there is not the least
probability from holy Scripture (but certainly very much to the contrary) that
the Remoter are Canaan's Offspring, whatever might be suggested for his three
Brothers. Now it ought here to be taken notice of, that in all severe sentences
found in holy Scripture, we are not to strain the words beyond their natural
sense. And seeing Canaan alone was mentioned, (for which reason his Children
are, Wisd. 12. 11. styled the accursed Seed) there remains not any likelihood
for our Negro's being concerned therein. For 'twas in Asia that the Canaanites
dwelt. There Abraham sojourned amongst them; and there Joshua afterward found
them. Whom having well near exterminated, he condemned the Survivers to be
hewers of Wood, and drawers of Water to the House of God, Josh. 9. 21. and 23.
27. Which sentence was afterward by Solomon confirmed, and more fully
executed, 1 Chronicles. 2. 17. So that in the whole, this supposed Imprecation of
the Patriarch, does seem to be little more than a Prophecy of the Canaanites
overthrow and reduction, under the Power of the Israelites, Shem's Posterity,
some eight hundred Years after to be accomplished; but not plainly an absolute
Curse, or determination thereto. Even as the recording thereof by Moses, does
seem to have been especially done only for Israel's justification in
dispossessing of them.

13. But our Negro's who are quartered in the Remotest parts of Africa, may
justly be concluded as too far distant from Palestine, to be any way concerned
with these Canaanites; whose guilt was no doubt then expiated by their
expulsion and loss of their Country, and of their Liberty, together with the
destruction of such who did abide the brunt of the War, or were detained
afterward.

14. However, supposing Servitude to be the thing intended in that Imprecation,
(or Prediction, as I rather believe it) and that our Negro's, improbable as it
is, were the very Parties concerned therein; yet, as it touches not their
Right to Religion, (which I shall immediately show, so) neither does it
therefore confer any Right or Authority over them upon any, nor commission us
to be the Executioners of the Sentence: Any more then Jeremiah's threatening of
Jerusalem, did justify Nebuchadnezzar's burning it, and murdering the
Inhabitants; for which he was to expect a fearful judgment, Isa. 10. and Jer.
25. etc. And so Isaac's foresight and prophetic Declaration of Esau's fate,
Genesis 27. and the fall of his Posterity under his Brother's power, did confer on
the Israelites no Right of thus Tyrannizing and Domineering over their Elder
Brother's Offspring; as will appear from Deuteronomy. 7. 8. compared with the
forementioned place in Genesis. Besides this Sentence upon Canaan, being once
so thoroughly executed, there is no reason it should now again be repeated, even
supposing that (for which there is no ground), the Negro's are his Issue; it
seeming too unmerciful to punish Men to that extremity twice, for one and the
same Crime.

15. THEIR third Supposition is the continuation of this Punishment, which our
People are desirous to extend to the last Man of that Generation, against whom
'twas first denounced; notwithstanding no mention is made of any beyond
Canaan's Person. Now this, as it is contrary to that so equitable a Rule in
expounding of Scripture, which I before mentioned; so it thwarts the Method
which God Almighty uses in punishing Offenders; who seldom or never stretches
the iniquity of the Parents, beyond the third and fourth Generation, where the
Children do not add new Guilt of their own. And thence it is that we read,
that these very Canaanites we are speaking of, notwithstanding the Curse, whom,
of all other, it was most likely to reach, had their punishment deferred till
their own Sins had more fully deserved it, as may be seen, Genesis 15. 16. And
therefore the unjust effusion of the Gibeonites Blood was, 2 Samuel 21. revenged
upon Saul and his bloody House; tho in truth they were no other than the
Offspring of these cursed Canaanites. Besides, God has been pleased since to
declare, that for the future, there should be no more occasion to use that so
harsh and ill relishing Proverb in Israel, of the Father's eating of sower
Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth being set on edge: For that from thenceforth
the Son should not bear the iniquity of the Father, but that every Man should
suffer for his own Sins, Ezekiel. 4. 20. and 18. 2. And even in the Curse of Eli's
House, 1 Samuel 2. That they should die in the flower of their Age, and that
there should not be an Old Man of his House for ever: Yet upon their
Repentance, and a betaking themselves to a sedulous study of the Law, it is said
by one, that the Curse was turned into a Blessing, and the line Masculine,
before always dying young, lived to an honorable Age. For God, says the same
Person, changes his purpose concerning the punishment of Men upon their
Repentance. And as [for ever] does in the Hebrew Idiom, appear many times to
intend no more than some considerable space of time, which yet by God's Mercy
may be shortened; so had that Particle been here affixed to Canaan's Curse,
which it is not; yet there is no question but (as the Apostle testifies of the
obstinate Jews) that they also may be grafted in, if they abide not in unbelief
and impenitence; for God is able to graft them in.

16. THEIR fourth Supposure is borrowed from the fancied nature and design of
this Curse; which some will affirm to be a kind of Transubstantiating of them
into Beasts; others, to strike not only their Souls (in this Life), but to be
an irrecoverable devoting them to Perdition and Misery in the Life to come.
Whereas the Text mentions no more but Servitude in the Curse; not to be
exceeded in the Gloss, or Interpretation, where the words are void of
Ambiguity, especially in severe Cases. And this Service was also restrained to
his Brethren, which cannot be supposed to be spoken of the Devils; it was to
touch only their Bodies; it being not in the least probable, that Righteous
Noah would curse the Soul of his Son, which was none of his, had he been so
uncharitable; but was derived from a better Author, and therefore beyond his
power: God having declared, that each Soul is his; the Soul of the Son, as well
as of the Father, Ezekiel. 18. And out of whose Hands none shall be able to pluck
them, St. John 10. And then as to the other part of these pretended effects;
Should we suppose our Negro's to be the very Seed of Cham, and that they were
no less under the Curse: Nay further, that the Curse had been denounced against
the whole Posterity of that graceless and unhappy Son; yet as we have no
assurance of the first, so neither does it follow that Servitude should be
attended with such dismal effects, as of Men to transform them into Brutes.

17. Which objected Brutality, had it carried any appearance, or likelihood of
truth, could never possibly have escaped the notice of (at least) the wiser
Jews and Heathen: who for the general, are found to treat them with a contrary
respect. For the Jews, I shall instance only in the Septuagint Interpreters,
who, as it is to be observed from Psalm. 74. 15. and 87. 4. did none of them
scruple to allow their (...) (the general current Appellative both in Greek and
Latin, (like as Cush, the name given to Cham's Nephew, Nimrods Progenitor, is
in the Hebrew) for those sooty People, the Negro's of those times) the style of
Men. To these I might also add St. Luke, Acts 8. 27. but that possibly it may
be replied, that he was none; wherefore I shall let that pass. But for the
Heathen, Lucan in his Pharsalia, lib. 9. brings them in as Partners with the
Arabians and Indians, in the worship of their God Amon, who it seems had
monopolized him to themselves; for so much the Poets words do seem to imply;
Aethiopum quamvis populis, Arabumque beatis
Gentibus, atque Indis unus sit Jupiter Amon, etc.
And long before him Homer, in his 1 Il. bespeaks Jupiter and his fellow
Dieties, as vouchsafing them their presence at a Banquet, and to become their
Guests, (...)
(...).
He in the same place conferring on them the character of [unblamable,] as is
to be there seen; nothing of which had been compatible, nor any way suited with
the quality of Beasts. And to show that those differed nothing from ours, their
Complexion is proved to be black, both from the sacred Writ, as Jer. 14. 25.
and from the same Poets and Writers of the Heathen, particularly from Ovid, l.
2. Met. where speaking of Phaeton's burning of the World, he thus discants upon
it, as to the effects 'twas believed it had upon these People; Sanguine tum
credunt in Corpora summa vocato,
Aethiopum populos nigrum traxisse colorem.
And from Juvenal in his second Satyr: Loripedem rectus derideat, Aethiopem
albus. And likewise from his sixth, -- Esses
Aethiopis fortasse Pater: Mox decolor haeres
Impleret tabulas, nunquam tibi mane videndus.
And that they were a distinct People from the Arabians (contrary to what some
have, I fear, without ground conjectured); Also, that they were seated from
them Westward, at least nearer Italy, where Lucan wrote, than the other were;
his method and order in mustering them, does partly imply. And lastly, That the
Scripture Aethiopia, (no less than this of the Poets, and of the other Heathen)
was in Africa, lying between Egypt and the Red [or Arabian] Sea, and
consequently the same with ours. The Scripture does in two places of Ezekiel,
viz. Chap. 29. and 30. (in both which Ethiopia and Egypt, are represented as
Neighbors, but the first (agreeable to what was above mentioned) bearing the
more distant Situation; And also in the 68 Psalm (where the same things are
observable, as in the former) does not obscurely intimate. And this I have
added by way of prevention, and to defeat a little Argument of our Adversaries,
most impertinently borrowed from the above mentioned groundless Conjecture of
some one or two of our Writers, viz. That the Scripture Aethiopia (and even the
Heathen too), was situated not in Africa, but in Arabia; That so nothing there
recorded, might be said to concern our present Negro's, nor be alleged in
their favor.

18. Which yet, if certainly true, will not upon Examination, be found so
advantageous to them: The distance of Guinea, our Negro's Country, being
considered. For if the Scripture Ethiopia be in Arabia, then, for ought
appears, Guinea (and even the rest of Africa) is clear of the Curse; so that
more is lost by that Argument, than it ever got. Again, if according to the
signification of [Cush and Aethiops,] they will allow its Inhabitants to have been
Black, (not denied by any hitherto, and it being no less consonant to what is
before said thereof;) 'twill make as much for our purpose, or even more. For
thus it is usually discoursed; Because they are Black, therefore they are
Cham's Seed; and for this under the Curse, and therefore no longer Men, but a
kind of Brutes. But contrary hereto, I shall thus argue: Either all Negro's, or
black People, are of Cham's Race; or some are not: If the last, then it is
evident there will be no necessity for our Negro's being under the Curse; But
if the former, 'twill follow, that notwithstanding the Curse, they might, in
the general opinion of the World, still continue to be Men. To conclude; I do
not in the whole, see that this Curse did touch any more than the Persons,
Goods, and Possessions of Canaan and his Posterity; who some eight hundred
Years after, were to fall into the power of Abraham's Children: When, the
Canaanites being subdued by the Israelites, and the remainder of them condemned
to Servitude, that prediction was accomplished to the full.

19. Their fifth and last Supposition is borrowed from the horrible Decree, (as
one calls it) of Reprobation. For tho our People are for the general no great
friends to that severe Doctrine, as being too frightful for them to hear of,
yet in this case it must serve the turn. But granting it true, that a certain
number of Men, and amongst the rest this whole People of Blacks, and even all
the rest of Cham's Race, were thus devoted to Misery, and become the objects of
God's Wrath; yet will not this justify our barring them of the Knowledge and
Exercise of Religion. For they that hold this Doctrine, do nevertheless affirm
it our duty, To tender the Gospel unto all; And that, first, because they are
uncertain who they are that are thus Reprobated, (and doubtless ours have had
no new Revelation concerning it): And, secondly, because their refusal (of
which our Negro's are not guilty, it having never been tendered to them) is to
be a principal Motive for their Condemnation. So that nothing in this Doctrine,
taking it altogether (tho we should suppose it most Orthodox) does prejudice
the Negro's Right; at least excuse our not tendering the Gospel (to omit food
and bodily Necessaries) to them, whether in order to their Salvation, or
further Damnation.

20. And thus these ridiculous Supposures of themselves vanishing, as not able
to endure a narrow Scrutiny or Examination; it will not be amiss if, after all,
we bestow some little time to enquire into matter of Fact, and consider the
Event of things; ever held for the safest way of interpreting Prophesies. In
searching into which we shall find the whole current of History, (so far as we
have any certain Records, wherein mention is made concerning Cham, or his
Posterity) to be no other than as it were a plain refutation of these
groundless Fictions. For in the Bible, Cham's Grandchild, Nimrod, is
represented the first Monarch. And Egypt (or Mizraim) is described as a place
of Learning, and its Inhabitants a free People, holding some of Shem's
Posterity in Bondage, for above two hundred years. And after their subjection
to the Chaldean Yoke, not more Slaves than most other Nations in their several
turns have been, and some even to this day are.

21. And then for the Abissins, supposing them Cham's Race no less than our
Negro's; we have them represented in History for a very flourishing People: As
in a Treatise written originally in Portuguez, by one who had spent many Years
there, is to be seen; which Treatise being since translated into English, was
by the Royal Society ordered to be made public. It begins thus. The Abissins
Emperor (vulgarly Presbyter John of India) is Lord of the most ancient and
largest Dominions of those many Kingdoms and Provinces; into which Africa is
divided. The Empire, the most Easterly part of all Africa, called Aethiopia
above Egypt, etc. And then, Page 5. and 6. this Empire anciently commanded many
Kingdoms and Provinces; their own Annals, and some Historians, count above
twenty, with almost as many Provinces. What at present passes for current is,
That its greatness was once Notorious, tho now limited to five Kingdoms, each
of them about the bigness of Portugal* and to six Provinces, every one little
different from Beyra, or Alenteyo, two Provinces in the same Kingdom. Thus much
that Author. To this I may, it is possible not impertinently, add that of Memnon,
in Virgils. 1. Aen. who is there styled Niger, but yet a free Prince; who, with
others from the East, (Eoasque acies and Nigri Memnonis Arma.) Brought his
Forces to assist the Trojans; and being, agreeable to his Name, by Authors
reputed for a Black or Negro. The Queen of Sheba also in Solomon's time, and
Candace of Aethiopia, Acts 8. (if their Dominions were not the same) were in
all probability in their several times great Princes, (as by the rich and
splendid Presents of the former, with the great Officers and Attendants of the
others Court, (one of which, being her Treasurer, was withal a Dynast) is most
evident): And yet by all Writers, are confessed to have ruled over Subjects
naturally Black, being in all likelihood such themselves. And their Kingdoms
supposed by diverse, to have been no other than that very Aethiopia, above
described by our Author; to which, he says, Their own Annals, and most
Historians do agree.

22. So also as to their Incapacitie for Religion, (A thing that never yet fell
under the Cognizance of the Nor yet of either Jews or Christians before we very
luckily contrived and thought upon it.
Gentiles (as the forementioned Quotations out of Lucan and Homer do witness),
tho possibly that may be pretended as occasioned through their want of our
knowledge in the Scriptures:) by virtue of this Curse; the like Events, together
with the many Prophetic Discourses of the Bible, do no less evidently bespeak
the contrary. For David in the Psalms, we find does mention them twice. In the
first of which, viz. Psalm. 68. 31. Junius in his Notes, assures us that the
Prophet there speaks, De amplitudine Regni Christi, of the large extent of
Christ's Kingdom, through their access thereto. And in Psalm. 87. 4. amongst
diverse Names there recited, he supposes that David magnifies the Goodness of
God for his purpose, of bringing all these several sorts of People into the
Church. And then he immediately acknowledges them for, Cives ejusdem
Ecclesiae; Fellow Citizens with the Saints, of the Household of God, and Members
of the same Church with them. And in Psalm. 72. 9* the Eremicolae, there
mentioned, who should come to worship Christ, are said by the Septuagint
Interpreters (who it is possible might best be able to guess at the Nation
pointed at in that Pariphrasis) to be no other than the Aethiopians, as in the
said Translation may be seen. And Acosta, l. 1. c. 4. De not. nov. Orbis,
assures us, that the learned do hold, That the Wise Men who came to worship
Christ, were as well of Aethiopia, as of Arabia and Persia: And for this end,
says the Almighty by Zephania, Chap. 3. 10. will I turn to the Nations a pure
Language; that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with
one consent: Even from beyond the Rivers of Aethiopia (not improbably pointing
at the very South of Africa) shall my suppliants bring mine Offering: There
being no Curse nor Reprobation of that force as to prevent their Conversion,
when heartily endeavored; or to make their Services at God's Altar less
acceptable unto him.

23. Agreeable whereunto in a great measure (tho in a much greater it might be,
did not the God of th^s World rule so mightily in some Men's Hearts) has the
issue of these Prophesies been, since the Publication of the Gospel: They being
admitted into the Church almost as early as the first Notice of it. Both the
Egyptians (amongst whom St. Mark was Bishop), and the Ethiopians, unto whom St.
Matthew and other of the Apostles preached, being in Christ (St. Paul's
Kindreds high Honor, as himself, Romans 16. 7. glories) long before our selves.
And the Holy Ghost especially commanding St. Philip to preach to the Eunuch, a
Nobleman (as is supposed) of the same Country. By whose Zeal and Authority, the
work was doubtless much promoted. For otherwise it would scarce have been there
perfected so soon, as we find it was; and withal so settled, as not to be
unfixed ever since. They even to this Day retaining their Christianity; if at
least the Scripture Aethiopia be the same with that in Africa on the Red Sea,
which themselves do affirm, and some places in the Bible before recited (numb.
17 of this Section) do not obscurely declare. But be they the same or not, it is
certain those are Christians, whom we speak of; and have so been for a long
time; as (besides the former Author) Alvarez (a Portugal also) does in his
Historia Aethiopica, l. 1. P. 171. testify. So also the Author of the Atlas
Major, P. 3. 52. in Aethiopia; and Le-Blanch, a Frenchman; and Sands, one of
our own Nation, in his Journals: Not to omit the Testimony Viva voce, of one of
their own Bishops Zabo-Zago, an Ambassador thence into Europe. To which may be
added the Kingdom of Moni-Congo, in Africa, some two Centuries since Converted
by the Portugals, which our own Histories do mention. And then for those pieces
of Africa, that were either part of, or conterminous upon the Roman Seigniory,
and whose Shores were washed by the Mediterranean Sea; we find in the second
and third Centuries, several hundreds of Bishops governing the Church there: Of
whose number, tho at different seasons, were St. Cyprian Archbishop of
Carthage, and St. Augustine of Hippo, two the most Pious, Learned, and Eminent
Fathers of their Times, or since. And even the Kingdom of Nubia, situated in
the more inland Parts, were once Christians; tho now, through the want of
Preachers, degenerated into their former Heathenism, or else poisoned with
Mahumetan Impostures: Which is a consideration of so sad a nature, that we
ought to make no further use of it, than to curb our own Presumption, and to
bless God that it is not altogether our case, (tho I must confess the distance
from it is not great): Our unthankfulness having long since deserved such
another total Excision. And that as Heresies have ruined Africa and Greece, so
Faction and Atheism, being with us no less prevalent, must needs in a short
time, overgrow grow the true Branches in the natural Tree, so as to consume the
spring of true Christianity, and suck out the juice of right Religion, leaving
to us the Bark and Rine only, to be called Christians. He that spared not them,
will find as little reason to pity us.

24. But to return from this Deviation. If in the last place we look unto the
Gibeonites, the true Posterity of Canaan, and the most certain Issue of Cham:
These (as they are supposed to have been those Nethenims, so often mentioned in
Ezra, and Nehemiah) so it is evident that they pertained to the service of the
Temple: Which, had this Curse, or their persisting in their former Gentilism,
stood in the way, could not have been allowed. And in our Blessed Savior's
time, one of the same Stock, a Woman of Canaan, as St. Matthew terms her; a
Syro-Phoenician, a Greek or Gentile, as St. Mark bespeaks her; both of them, A
dweller upon the Coast of Tire and Sidon, (now Canaan begat Zidon, says Moses,
Genesis 10. 25. and so in the 1 of Chron. 1. 15. and Deuteronomy. 1. 7. the Territory
thereabout is said to have been the Patrimony of his Children) has this
Eulogium given her from his Divine Mouth, that her Faith was great; whereby,
tho thrice rejected for a Dog, yet she still persevering, did by her Faith and
Importunity, so prevail, as to accomplish her desires. To these I might also
add, that this was the Country of the Widow of Serepta, or Zerepha, a Town
belonging to Zidon, 1 Kings 17. 9. (and by Obadiah, ver. 20. expressly declared
to be the Canaanites Possession;) unto which Widow, Elijah was sent; tho there
wanted not Widows in Israel at the same time, as our Savior witnesses, to
sustain the Prophet, or that needed to have been sustained by him. And thus
from the whole, these two things do appear most evident; First, How not only
uncertain, but rather, unlikely it is, that our Negro's should be Canaan's
Offspring. And, secondly, How derogatory it is both to Reason and Religion,
that this Curse should touch either their Souls or Bodies, so as to deprive
them of that natural Right to necessary relief for both, which is born with
them, and can never be separated from them. Religion, especially the Christian,
making no such distinctions, which our Sloth and Avarice have suggested to most
of us. And if the Blessed Jesus did with so little patience, hear his Disciples
urge to him a respect for his earthly Relations, surely much more must he have
been incensed, had they proposed to him either Stature or Countenance, or any
other the like perishing Vanities, to have become the objects of his Favor.
Nor is our Negro's blackness, which gives the pretense for these Impieties, (in
all probability) occasioned by any other means, than the Climate they live
under. The remoter Inhabitants, within either of the more temperate Zones, (as
upon the Cape of good Hope, and about Fez, and Morocco) being of a brown
Complexion, answering to other swarthy People, in our cooler Regions. And
whereas it is objected that here in America under the same Degrees, the like
Blackness is not found in the Natives; It is to be answered, that neither is
there the same heat, by them to be endured; our cooler Breezes (which Africa
wants) being here the constant attendants upon the Sun's motion, and with him
for the most part gradually Rising and Falling throughout the Year, in all the
Regions of America, lying under the Torrid Zone. But to determine the whole
matter in a few words: Since this Argument against the Negro's is drawn from
holy Scripture, (no other Ancient Author mentioning either the Crime or
Punishment, nor for ought we know, so much as the Name of Cham;) there is no
reason why those Persons, who in all other of their Discourses, do scoff and
flout at it, should be allowed even those just and lawful Advantages derivable
from that Scripture, which they in other cases seem no more to believe, than
they do the Alcoran: And which they mention but with the same respect with the
scriblings of our giddy Enthusiasts; but with far less, than they allow most
other, even the prophanest Authors.

. III. 1. And thus having finished the First, I come to the Second Objection,
by which they hope to evacuate the Negro's Right to Religion: which is
pretended to be forfeited, If not by the Curse, yet without doubt by Slavery.
Religion being (forsooth) a kind of Spiritual Gentility, which with them must
be lost or forfeited, by putting on the Iron Chain of Bondage. For certainly no
less can be collected from those customary Replies and Demands, usually
returned upon any Advices for the Christianizing of their Negro's, viz. What,
such as they? What, those black Dogs be made Christians? What, shall they be
like us? With abundance more such like Questions. And here I cannot but
observe, that as this latter is extendible to all Slaves, of what Complexion or
Nation soever, and no less to Englishmen and Christians, than to others; so the
former does entrench upon as considerable a number of Mankind, even a third
part of the World; and that without all respect to their Condition, as in the
other; Both Freemen and Slaves being there equally involved in the same
Calamity, as in this, Christians and Heathens are; thereby as it were damming
at one blow, two thirds of the World; all which, or more, do fall under one of
these Capacities.

2. And so (after taking notice of their Zeal in being thus ready to take the
advantage of such Forfeitures) having examined the first, I come to the second
Objection: Wherein I cannot but see enough at the very first view, to move pity
and commiseration toward these People, the Negro's, and that even more than
when they were represented as Brutes. Their Humanity here standing them in no
further stead, than to make them more Miserable, than as Brutes they could
possibly have been. For whereas a Brute may according to the Scripture (which
is a Book of Reason and of Justice too) in some sense have a Right to diverse
things, the Slave must be divested of all. For by Moses's Law, The Ass sinking
under his burden, had a Right to be relieved by the next Traveller, Exodus 23.
5. Nor was the Ox to be muzzled which did tread out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. his
labor meriting better Usage. And one of the Reasons for the Sabbath rest was,
Exodus 23. 14. That the Ox and Ass might have respite from Toil, as well as
their Owners. (We see here, no working them to death was allowed.) And Solomon
in effect pronounces that Person unjust, who regards not the life of his
Beast, Prove. 12. 10. So that here is a plain Right belonging unto Brutes,
whilst by us it is denied unto Men, whose Flesh is as our own: A thing greatly
deserving to be laid to Heart.

3. For in truth the very Heathen were never so void of Bowels and tenderness
to their Slaves, as to deny them a due Right to necessaries for their
Preservation. To which purpose it is, that we hear Cicero thus pleading in
their behalf, Off. l. 1. Meminerimus autem etiam adversus infimos justitiam
esse servandam. Est autem infima conditio and fortuna servorum; quibus non male
praecipiunt, qui ita uti jubent ut mercenariis, ad operam exigendam and ad
justa praebenda. That is, We must take notice that there is a Right belonging
unto Slaves, That by Servus is meant a Slave, this in Terence, ( Ego postquam
te emi a parvulo, feci e servo, ut esses libertus mihi) does plainly show;
besides, that I find this place so rendered in a Translation made many Years
since.
In which words we are to observe three things: 1. The difference between
Servus and Mercenarius. 2. That there was in Cicero's opinion, a Right
belonging to the first. 3. That, tho unrestrained, he thought it our duty to
treat even those, whom he there esteems of the lowest Rank and Condition of Men
(and that sure must be Slaves) with Mercy.
whom they that advise us to treat as hired Servants, in exacting their Labor,
but allowing them their DVE, do not advise amiss. Nor is Phocilides less kind
and just unto them, if at least we will admit (...) and (...), to signify that
condition; which this Injunction does demonstrate. (...): That is, Defraud not
thy Slave of his DVE, but allow him his full proportion of Diet, and other
Necessaries. Which the ensuing Prohibition does more fully explicate. (...):
Therein giving us to understand, who, and what they were he designed this
Kindness to; such ignominious Stigmatizings, being not to be imposed on any
besides Slaves.

4. And that no other than such (properly so taken) are there by our Poet to be
understood, is I think no hard task to prove. (...), being by Hesychius
explained by (...) and (...): Both importing the same with Verna and Mancipium,
in Latin; The first being, as I have showed (Page 32.) by Siracides, put in
opposition to (...), a Freeman. And the second [(...)], both in the Septuagint,
and New Testament, plainly implying the same condition. For Psalm. 81. 6. the
Israelites condition in Egypt, is called (...): And in Psalm. 105. it is said of
Joseph, That he was sold, (...), for a Bond-servant, as we have it rendered from
the Hebrew. And Heb. 2. 15. we find (...), translated Bondage. And, Apoe. 19.
18. we have (...), Free and Bond. Add to this the Jews tart and quick reply,
St. John 8. 33. (...), to our Blessed Savior, discoursing of making them free;
thereby setting the verbal (...), in opposition to (...); which Saint Paul also
twice does, viz. 1 Cor. 9. 19. and Gal. 2. 4. The last of which is interpreted,
A bringing into Bondage. So (...), 1 Cor. 11. 20. As also that of the Jews
before unto our Blessed Savior, as in the place will further appear.

5. But because it may seem proper, and to some perchance prove more
satisfactory, to confront one Heathen with another, and so to explain the
meaning of each, (although the Greek, both of the Septuagint and New Testament, be
certainly no less Authentic): I shall therefore be bold to summon in one for an
evidence in this behalf, unto whose Testimony they cannot refuse to yield; And
that is the most eloquent Comedian Aristophanes, in his Plutus; At the very
entrance into which, one (stiling himself by those two forementioned
Appellatives) is heard to complain of his Master's sottish and unreasonable
Impositions; which yet, he confesses, he could by no means avoid, because, as
he adds, (...)
(...), etc.
Fortune had deprived him of the happiness of being at his own disposal, by
placing him under the Purchasers power. And certainly, he can be neither
Freeman nor Hireling, that is become the Purchase of another Man.

6. Nor let any one object, that the abovementioned Writers, like envious
People, destitute of Slaves themselves, were more partial in their Rules to
others; few or none in those times being without some, whilst diverse possessed
many. Plutarch writes of Lucullus, that he had forty thousand; and that by
their labor he levelled fifteen Mountains. And the trouble to which the Romans
were often put to suppress their servile Insurrections, (whereby it may be
seen, that Slaves may rebel without Religion, and that Christianity is not
wholly in the fault, if any such thing should happen) does show that that free
People were no strangers to such Domestic Utensils, nor to the Profit accruing
by them to their Owners. Nor could Cicero easily have amassed together so great
Wealth, to the which, he was never born, without the labor of Slaves: It Is
certain, he retained some in his Family, which, his setting one at liberty, for
the News he brought of the Senates Adjournment, (whereby he had a Day more
given to complete his Oration) does manifest: Nor is it to be imagined, that he
then parted with all he had. But the words [Libertus and libertinus,]
signifying a freed Man, and the Son of such a Person, and made to distinguish
[liber and ingenuus] from one that was manumissed; that is, Persons originally
Free, from such as were but lately made so; do enough declare the no want of
Slaves, even amongst those who thus assert their Right, and condemn all their
unmerciful usage of them.

7. But to proceed: Had Slaves no Right at all, all Laws and Injunctions
against oppressing them had been unjust, it is certain very needless; for it had
been no other than to infringe their Owners Right of exercising his, it matters
not whether Gentle or Cruel, Pleasure and Authority over them: which might be
justly practiced even to the utmost extremity, were the Parties divested of all
Right to better usage. Oppression being neither more nor less than an over
rigorous treating of those under our power, beyond what justly the one could
pretend, or the other ought to submit to; which in this case could never
happen. For what can he lay claim to, who has nothing either within or without
him, which he can call his own? Or what wrong is it to bar or deprive him of
that which is not his? Those Laws therefore do confess a Right in the Party, on
whose behalf they were made. Else that in Exodus 21. 27. He shall let his
Servant go free for his Tooths sake, had been impertinent and injurious. And
Job's purgation of himself, Job 31. 13. If I despised the cause of my
Manservant, or of my Maidservant, when they contended with me, etc. had been
idle and ridiculous, and an argument that he understood not his own Privilege
and Right, whilst he stood so nicely upon theirs. And no better had been the
advice of Siracides, Ecclus. 7. 20, 21. and 33. 30, 31. ver. Whereas thy
Servant works truly, entreat him not evilly; nor the Hireling (where note
what the former were) that bestows himself wholly for thee. Let thy Soul love
a good Servant, and defraud him not of Liberty. Again, If thou have a Servant,
let him be unto thee as thy self, because thou have bought him with a Price: So
that the Servant here also is a purchased Bondsman; whom yet we are to treat as
our selves; and, in the next Verse, as a Brother. The like also must St. Paul's
Exhortation (or rather Precept) to his Colossians be, Chap. 6. 1. Masters
[(...)] allow (not give) your Servants (for that agrees not so well with what
follows) that which is just and equal; such things being not to be reckoned
Gifts, which are our due, and to which we have a just Right. So likewise to his
Ephesians, Chap. 6. 9. Where he exhorts both Masters and Servants to Reciprocal
Duties; giving the former to understand, That the Master of them both (so the
Margent tells us some Copies have it) was in Heaven; who (in punishing
Injustice in either Party) would be Impartial. Which, with many the like
places, are to be understood of Slaves purely so taken, as may be proved from 1
Cor. 7. 21, 22. and from 1 Timothy 6. 1. Also from 1 St. Pet. 2. 18. in the first
of which, (omitting that out of Siracides,) they are advised to accept of
Freedom when offered, being therefore at that time, no doubt, under Bondage; as
in the next v. they are plainly declared to be under the Yoke. Not to be
understood of those whom we style Apprentices (that is Learners) such being
certain of Freedom, so soon as it is convenient, or safe for them. And
therefore we have reason to imagine that St. Paul's advice was given to
Servants of an inferior degree, and to whom Liberty might be more safe and
advantageous, even as it was more difficult to be obtained. Besides, he there
charge every Man in general, to abide in the same Calling, wherein they were
called, that is, wherein Christianity found them; unless (which is presently
excepted) they might lawfully obtain their Liberty. And the cruel usage unto
which, St. Peter intimates the Servants he wrote to were subject, does
sufficiently manifest, that their Condition was no better than direct
Servitude, and that even to Heathen Masters. For otherwise the Exhortation in
his 1 Ep. Chapter 2. 18, 19, 20. and afterward, had been improper; such Rigor and
Cruelty of Christian Masters in those early and devout times, being unlikely to
have escaped his Apostolic Censures and severest Menaces, if not to have cost
the Authors a total rejection from the Communion of Christians. From hence also
we may note, (no less than from Saint Paul's words, 1 Timothy 6. 2. As many as
have believing Masters) (which shows that some of them had not); that the very
Gentiles then, were not so ill-natured and malicious against Christianity, as
to hinder their Slaves from embracing it. And throughout the Old Testament,
both Abraham's Servants, and the rest downwards, were no better than Slaves;
unless where we find [Mercenarii, Hirelings,] for distinction, added. The word
[Slave] being no where found in the holy Scripture, except once by a
misinterpretation in the Apocalypse. And the Latin word [Servus] taking its
derivation from [Servatus], and importing one saved in Battle, by his mercy
that took him: In lieu whereof, by Custom, Gratitude and Necessity, he was
obliged to do him Service the remainder of his Life. So also in the Apocrypha,
(besides that of Ecclus.) Raguel's giving half his S^rvants to his Son in Law
Tobias, Tob. 10. 10. And Judith's setting her Maid free, Judith 16. 23. And in
the New Testament, St. Paul's Antithesis, 1 Cor. 9. 19. and Gal. 2. 4. with the
Jews reply to our Savior, St. John 8. 23. (all before mentioned) do plainly
discover the meaning of the word Servant in holy Scripture, not to import a
Mercenary, or Hireling, but a mere Bondsman, or Slave. And so from the whole may
be collected, That Servitude is no such forfeiture of Right, but that a Slave
has as good a plea and just claim to Necessaries, both for his Soul and Body,
as his Master has to his strength and industry in those Works, about which he
is employed.

8. No more does that Maxim in the Civil Law, That whatsoever the Servant
acquires, is properly derivable to his Lord and Master, as the true and sole
Proprietor of his Servants Acquisitions, interfere, or jar with this Right,
than any thing that has been pretended besides: This Right extending only to
necessaries for Life, not to superfluities or abundance, which are the things
aimed at in that Maxim. These only, and not the other being to be reckoned for
Acquisitions, and therefore seizable to the Master. Not but that there are some
that can swallow this Maxim in its fullest Latitude, and even extended to the
Lives and Fortues of Freemen, whom (no less than Slaves) they can without
scruple divest of all Right. These shall assure us, That Men have no stronger
obligations to Justice, than either Fish, or wild Beasts, who prey upon, and
devour each other. And, That God is no more honored by A. N. G. E. L. (wittily
pronouncing the Letters thus severally, with a short pause between each) than
by B. E. A. S. T. And therefore that such tenderness and regard of Equity, is
to be avoided as a great impediment to Profit; The only art or science to be
studied, and applied by Mankind. And no wonder that they who hold and practice
such Principles concerning Freemen, should prove no less fierce sticklers
against the Right of Slaves.

9. But supposing that according to this Maxim, the Slave might without spot of
Injustice, be by his Owner deprived of all Right to Temporal Privileges and
Provisions, yet can it never be admitted as to Spiritual, nor be extended to
those Provisions which do concern the health and happiness of their Souls, that
is, Religion. But must be understood, and only confined to the Goods of this
World: the Possession and Enjoyment whereof may be some prejudice, or abatement
to others, that want them: which I am to show, can never happen in Religion;
and this I shall prove three ways.

10. First, From the consideration of the Nature of Religion, which being the
Result only of a virtuous Mind, and an Act of the Intellect, a thing purely
Immaterial and Spiritual, cannot be subject to the like inconveniences with
Bodies, composed and made up of Matter. Nor is it to be engrossed, or made
over; but, as Free-common, is the true Right and Property of every Man. So that
whilst other Goods may, and for the most part are, possessed by a few; and some
do want, whilst others do enjoy abundance; The goods of the Mind are sufficient
for all; because not limited, nor circumscribed; nor, as the other, falling
within the Measures and Rules of quantity, whereby they become Infinite. And no
Man's Acquisitions of this kind, are any Diminution to his Neighbor. Whence it
comes that there can be no clamor nor outcry of Wrong or Injustice; and no Man
can pretend this Enjoyment to be any lessening to himself by another sharing
with him. And a Man may as well complain of his being robbed of the Light, or
Air, because his Neighbor refuses to close his Eyes, or to retain his Breath;
as any Master can be supposed to feel an abatement of his either Substance, or
Religion, by his Slaves joining with him in the same Divine Exercise. Religion
being the true proprium in Commune, where every Soul is at full Liberty
(without any fear or danger of endammaging the residue of Mankind), to assume
as much, and as great a proportion thereof, as is needful for him, and as he
can desire.

11. Secondly, This may be proved from the object of Religion, GOD; unto whom
it wholly belongs, and whose entire Property it is, as being the Creatures
Tribute due unto him the Creator. Now certainly, God is not the less receptive
of the Master's Devotion, for his being accompanied therein by his Slave, any
more (yea, rather much less) than the North Pole can become less instrumental
to the Mariners safety, and preservation through the multitude of Points, at
one and the same instant, directed to it. And there is space enough in his
Immensness and Infinity, for our safe reposing, and his no less sure acceptance
of the most unlimited affections and praises of innumerable Souls, conspiring
therein at one and the same time.

12. Thirdly, This may be proved from the subject of Religion, the Soul of Man,
which is only in God's disposal, Ezekiel. 18. 4. And therefore cannot become the
purchase of any Mortal, tho the Case, or Body may; but is entirely possessed by
the Party, or Owner, notwithstanding his being reduced under Bondage. There is
no Man (says Solomon, Eccles. 8. 8.) that has power over the spirit, to
restrain the spirit: But the Soul can still exercise all her powers and
faculties, tho in Chains, and in a Dungeon, or even like Jonas in the Belly of
the Whale. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 17. Even in the midst of Bondage our Thoughts are free, and
a Man may think, and wish, and pray, in despite of his worst Enemies: And as
our Blessed Lord advises, we may possess our Souls under the hardest Pressures
and Sufferings. From which Considerations, it will appear that the Soul of the
Slave is no part of the Master's purchase, nor can he by any means make it
subject. And therefore he has no wrong done him (tho we should grant the
aforesaid Maxim, to strike at the whole Temporal Rights and Enjoyments (which
are but few) that a Bondsman can pretend to) by his Slaves practice and exercise
of Religion.

V. 1. These Objections being washed off, I come now positively to declare in
the Affirmative, that a Slave both may be, and naturally is invested with a
Right to the Exercise and Benefits accruing to the soul by Religion; and that
upon a threefold account, viz. Of Creation, Divine Precept, and of the good and
evil of Eternity; to which last, the Slave is no less subject, and accordingly
has equal hopes with his Master to the other. Nor can any Master pretend to it
upon other Reasons than these that are here laid down.

2. Now for the first of these, viz. Creation; this the Bondsman has in common
with his Lord. That is, he is alike the Offspring of Humane Seed; was alike
sustained in his Mother's Womb; was born, and drew in the common Air, even as
others do: Nor is there any King that had other beginning or birth, says the
Wise Man. The like also is acknowledged by Job, Did not he that made him in the
Womb make me, and did not one fashion us both in the Womb? Job 31. 15. And as
all Men have but one entrance into Life, so they have the like going forth of
it, says the same Wise Man, Wisd. 7. And as the Slave was created free, so
Death sets him at Liberty, and restores him to the like freedom again. In the
Grave both the small and great rest quietly together; For there the Wicked
cease from troubling, the Prisoners hear not the voice of the Oppressor; and
even the Servant is free from his Master, Job 3. Now Creation, from which Job
infers a Right due unto Slaves, is a tie of the strictest Nature, and strongest
Obligation of all other; because unto it we are indebted for whatsoever we
either have, or can pretend to. Conquest and Purchase (which do confer on the
Lord his whole pretense of Right or Power over his Slave*) being not possible
to have been, had not this preceded. And even our Parents Right of Dominion
over us, is infinitely short of this; who in all that they contributed toward
our being, were but Agents subservient unto him, without whose Blessing no
perfection could have followed. So that whatsoever we enjoy, primarily is from
God, our true Father, and Creator. They being but Procreators, or Deputies unto
this great Author of Life, and all things. Now this being equally true, both of
Slave and Lord; and God Almighty having this original Right and property in
every Man, which sovereign Right of his cannot by any after act of his
Creatures be forfeited, so as to cause an Alienation thereof from him (for be
the Possession where it will, his first Right can suffer no prejudice): The
Slaves Obligation and Right (I so call it, it being a real Privilege) to serve
God, continues firm and inviolable, and no less unalterable than his Lords. Nor
can it be swallowed up, or lost in any new pretended claim, whilst that first
Obligation continues the same, which originally it was. No prescription of time
being of force against so sovereign a Power as that of Gods.

3. But secondly, Slaves have a Right to serve God, by virtue of his
determinate Precept and Command for their so doing: None of his Laws being
limited to any certain Order, or Degree of Men; but were given to every Man
alike, whether Bond, or Free. For he that said, Thou shall not Swear, Kill,
Steal, Lie, Covet, nor commit Adultery, made no difference nor distinction in
the direction of these Laws, either of Lords or Peasants, Free or Bondmen. But
the Imposition being equally laid on all, must exact an equal tribute of Duty,
from all. No Dispensation any where appearing for the omission of the Duties,
either of Morality, or Religion to Potentates, any more than the tenuity or
meanness of an inferior Person, was ever in holy Scripture admitted as a
tolerable excuse upon the like occasion. And this Impartiality, is more
especially the Credit and Ornament of Christianity: which for that Reason is
styled the Common Faith, and the Common Salvation; St. Jude 3. and St. Tit. 3.
Which as the Baptist preached, St. Luke 3. All flesh should see; that is, enjoy
and partake of, if they had any liking thereto. And in pursuance hereof S. Paul
at Athens, declares, That God had now commanded all Men every where to repent:
(words comprehensive and large; and, methinks very appositely pointing to these
so late discovered Regions: But to go on). For that as he writes to Titus, The
Grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men: Such an
Universality making it an Act of Grace indeed. And the same Apostle in his
Preaching, warns all alike of the Wrath of God, revealed against all (...),
Irreligion and Injustice of Men. Both he and the rest in their practice,
proving their Sense to be as unlimited and unrestrained, as their words were
general; showing themselves in their Epistles, no less exact and punctual in
setting forth the Duty of Servants, and as careful for the saving of their
souls, as for their Masters. And being never so beset with Business, (tho
doubtless they had enough, as having the good of, not one single Diocese or
Parish, but of the Universal, or Catholic Church, 2 Cor. 11. 28. in their
thoughts and care:) so as to neglect the Soul of the meanest Bond-slave. Whom
for their encouragement, he assures, that God himself did take especial
cognizance of their faithful services done unto Men; who would not fail to
recompense whatsoever good thing any Man does, whether he be, Bond or Free,
Ephesians. 6. 8. And it is remarkable, that the preceding words to St. Titus, do in
place immediately succeed an Exhortation to Servants, thereby as it were
pointing out the very Persons to whom that Grace had been manifested, no less
than to the residue of Mankind.

4. And to this agrees the necessity thereof: For Virtue, which is made most
effectual and operative by Religion, is alike requisite and commendable in all
Men: At least if there be any difference, the Credit of it will redound most to
them, from it was least expected; that is, from Servants. But it is manifest,
how necessary Virtue is, in that all Men do abhor to be unjustly dealt with.
And they that regard not Virtue themselves, do yet expect it in their Vassals.
Whence some are so apt to applaud Integrity, and other good Qualities in their
Negro's, and to blame and punish the contrary. Nor can it be doubted but that
good Qualities are as requisite in a Servant, as Conjugal loyalty is in a
Married Person, or obedience in a Child. Now Religion is the strongest exciter
and spur to these Virtues, fixing and engraving them upon the Heart of Man, and
making such deep impressions thereof upon the Soul, that the Party shall even
prefer Death to the foregoing of his Duty; which heretofore has been evidenced
by innumerable Instances; some examples thereof have in this Age been produced.
And then can any Man believe other, than that Religion is necessary for People
of this, or of any other condition whatsoever? Or that it is not the Master's
great Interest to have his Servants minds possessed, with principles of true
Piety? The benefit whereof is least to the Slave, tho he gain Heaven thereby;
whilst his Master (besides that, of which he is no less assured, by being
instrumental thereto) does in this World also reap the desired fruit of his
Servant's FIDELITY: Which whosoever hinders, must therein be an enemy to that
his own great Interest. In a word, God having sworn, Isa. 45. 23. (again
repeated, Romans 14. 11.) That every Knee should how to him, and every Tongue
give him thanks, and glorify him; (unto which Service he has furnished Slaves
with Abilities and Parts suitable;) and having withal by his express Commands,
imposed on them alike necessity thereof, (unto which doubtless they are obliged
to conform, every Man being bound to be as Good and Virtuous, as God does
require of him: I say, these Reasons considered,) the prohibiting and disabling
them for this Service, is certainly a most palpable deprivation of their Right,
which is the worst I shall say of it here, and at this time.

5. But then in the third place, this Right I am speaking of, is no less
evident from the good and evil of Eternity; which the Master and Slave are,
according to their Merits, each of them to enjoy, or suffer alike. For as the
Precepts are general, so also are the Threats and Promises. As for instance:
He, says our Blessed Lord, that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved;
but he that believes not, shall be damned, St. Mat. 16. And the great Apostle
St. Paul indefinitly pronounces Sin to be the Wages of Death to all alike,
Romans 6. And in Romans 2. he denounces tribulation and anguish to every soul of
Man that does evil. So also the Prophet, Ezekiel. 10. 20. resolves the matter,
that the soul that sins, it shall die. But on the contrary, He that
believes on the Son of Man, has eternal Life, and shall not come into
Condemnation, says St. John 15. 24. And says St. Paul, Whatsoever good thing
any Man does, (speaking of Servants) the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be Bond or Free, Ephesians. 6. 8. Further adding, For with God there is
no respect of Persons. Now the Slave's Soul being as precious, and his danger
and hopes equal with his Master's, a Right to the due and necessary means,
either to prevent the one, or to obtain the other, cannot be denied him: Unless
we will suppose, That God should Damn so great a number of Men, for the
abominable Lucre of a few greedy Epicures and Mammonists. It being not to be
denied, but that it is a thing highly unreasonable to tie any Man to an end,
and at the same instance to bar him of the means requisite thereto; and withal,
to condemn him to a perpetual Death, for omitting those Duties (if at least we
may so term them), when he had no Right nor Liberty to perform them. Wherefore
since that the Ways of God are all equal, it is to be concluded, that whatsoever
Penalties he has decreed for the breach of his Laws, must be because there
first was a Liberty, at least, if not an Ability, given for the observance of
them; with sufficient means allowed both to obtain the good, and to avoid the
evil, consequent to the keeping or neglect thereof.

6. I shall conclude my whole Proposition with a few Lines, to this purpose,
borrowed from a Sermon delivered on a Christmas Day in this Island; For which I
am sure the Preacher (who, tho his Discourse was to White People, did yet
design it for the benefit of the Blacks and Tawneys, of which our fierce
Quakers Spirit (see P. 4.) was quite Ignorant;) will not be displeased. The
Text being taken out of St. Luke 2. the latter part of the 10th ver. his
Discourse thereupon was to this effect. And that we may not too proudly insult
upon these People [the Negro's,] and with the Poet, resolve against them, --
Quod nulla sub illa cura Jovis Terra est: -- That they are wholly without the
care of Heaven, and of God's Protection and Providence: That like the Mountains
of Gilboa, no Dews nor Showers of Grace were to fall upon those parched Fields;
or like the barren Fig Tree, they were smitten with a perpetual Curse; we find
them admitted into the Church upon the first dawning of the Gospel. And Acts 8.
We read the holy Spirit of God, to be no less than thrice, particularly
concerned, and acting for the Salvation of the Ethiopian Treasurer; a
condescension so extraordinary and rare, that few, either Men or Nations, can
boast of the like. Wherefore if St. Peter could from one single Example, infer
the Salvation of all the Heathen, Acts 15. what should hinder, but from this
Eunuch's ready submission and hearty acceptance of the Heavenly Doctrine, we
also may infer the Calling and Conversion of all the Negro's. And since that
God, who knows the Hearts, bare him witness, and did put no difference
between him and other Gentiles; but purified his Heart by Faith: Why tempt we
God, in detaining them in Bondage to Hell (no less than to our selves) for whom
Christ died, and redeemed them from thence? -- And then proceeding to that
Example of Ebedmelech, Jer. 38. 39. he thus concludes; -- Both which being
considered, it is most evident (to use St. Peter's words in his Discourse to
Cornelius;) That to them also, has God granted repentance unto Life; that they
have Souls to be saved no less than other People; and an equal Right even with
us, to the Merits of Christ. Of which, if through our Neglect or Avarice, they
be deprived, that Judgment which was denounced against wicked Ahab, must befall
us, Our life shall go for theirs: The loss of their Souls will be required at
our Hands, to whom God has given so blessed an opportunity of being
instrumental to their Salvation.

. VI. 1. My two former Propositions being finished, I proceed now to the third;
wherein, as a most natural Inference, the Injustice of withholding this Right
from our Negro's, was no less positively declared. A thing so clear, that had I
not heard and seen the contrary, more than a thousand times over, I should have
thought it impossible once to be questioned, or denied. For what can be more
unjust, than to deny any Man an apparent Right? Especially a Right of that
consequence even absolutely necessary, and whereon Eternity depends. If it be
injurious to deprive a Man of his House, or Goods, the enjoyment whereof is
confined to the duration of but a few Years, (and yet such an Injury it is, as
but few can bear); It must certainly be no less, (rather a great deal more)
oppressive to thrust him out of those Eternal Mansions, and from his Heavenly
Father's House; to supplant him of his Patrimony in the Celestial Canaan; and,
as much as in the Oppressor lies, to rob him of the Grace of God? An Injury of
an endless permanency, and for which, no place for amends nor reparation can be
found! Again, if the restraining of ordinary Necessaries, as Food, etc. be an
unmerciful Cruelty and Injustice to the Parties, to whose Preservation they are
necessary and due; How much more Barbarous and Inhumane must it be to withhold
from them the exercise of Religion, and the knowledge of God, equally needful
for the preservation of their Souls? And if Slaves have a Right to so much of
their Labor as may furnish them with the first, (which, it is proved, they
have) certainly it will follow, that their Right is as great to the latter. If
the Negro's Master be in his Sickness obliged to afford him such Succor and
Relief as may, if possible, prevent the Anticipation of his Dissolution (for
otherwise he is a Murderer, and amongst more virtuous Christians, would
certainly be Arraigned for one) doubtless he is equally bound to prevent his
Damnation. It being, as the Orator testifies, against common Equity and
Morality, to post-pone a lesser evil to a greater; to destroy a Man to save a
Horse; or in a Man to throw away the Noblest and most Precious, to save the
more Dunghill and basest part of him; especially when obliged with equal care to
preserve the whole; or if to bestow any more on either, to prefer the best, and
that Eternity be allowed the pre-eminence. And this care, which carries its
reward always with it, is but a moderate Retribution of the Servant's Labor,
tho to him of infinite value.

2. And here may it not be demanded, Why the Master who thinks this care as to
Religion, needless for his Slave, does (as some would have it believed of them)
hold it needful for himself? Since the meanest Slave has a Soul of no less
value, and to be preserved by the same means, with his. Or how comes his Soul,
being of but one and the same substance, to have a better title to Happiness,
and the means of attaining it, than the others, since that the holy Scripture,
the Charter of happiness to Mankind, informs us of no such difference? Where
the Servant that believes, is by St. Paul dignified with this Privilege of
being the Lords (...). See the Margent, 1 Cor. 7. 22.
Freedman, and thereby qualified with a full Liberty and Freedom, to partake of
the Immunities of Religion, and to the exercise of whatsoever Actions shall be
conducive to promote his interest in Eternity, and to attain to the Blessings
and Joys of Heaven. And this, being so plainly there asserted; and the most
certain and Catholic Faith of all Christians; no Man that professes an Assent
to these, can, without contradicting himself, gainsay it: Yea, a very Infidel,
may, from this owned and avowed Principle of Christianity, pass sentence
against him, acting so contrary thereto.

3. And questionless from our Negro's being Slaves to argue their no Right to
Religion, is more Oppressive and Injurious, than that Force which first made
them so: Because striking at their Souls, and subjecting them to Hell, as much
(only for a longer time) as to their Tormenters here on Earth: And to have
avoided which, it might have been wished, either that their Creation had
failed, or not exceeded this fancied state and degree of Brutes. And this
Injustice must upon all respects, be heightened by the consideration of those
great Ends unto which all Momentany advantages ought to give way. Nor is it to
be understood as terminating only in the Sufferings of the wronged Party, but
directed and glancing at Him also, whose the Soul of each Man is; whether in a
Bond, or Freeman: And who cannot be thought to resent a Fact, so at once
Sacrilegious and Oppressive, less than an Earthly Prince does the Murdering of
a Subject, the Author whereof is deservedly made with his own, to wash out and
silence the loud cry of his Neighbors, or Fellow-subject's Blood. And as a
Crime of this nature marks the Oppressor with the blackest Guilt, so it cannot
but render him Obnoxious to the severest Vengeance, that a provoked and just
God can inflict upon him, both Body and Soul; and probably, no less in this
Life, than certainly in the other.

4. I confess, as to the Provision for their Bodies, they deny it not to be
expedient, or fit to be allowed them: But this, not as their Right, or Due, but
as conducive to the Masters Convenience and Profit, The most operative and
universally owned Principle of this Place, and indeed of the whole Plantations.
They consider it only in order to the enabling their People to undergo their
Labor, without which themselves cannot get Riches, and great Estates; but
nothing (so far as I could ever learn) for the Wretches Health and
Preservation. And their both Discourse and most current Practice, do declare no
less; in neither of which does appear much Tenderness. Pity to Humanity being
here reputed a pusillanimous weakness, and a very back friend to Interest.
Whence their Houses are so plentifully stored with tormenting Engines, and
Devices to execute their Cruelty. So that the Satyrist's Poetic Description of
those famous Tyrannies then practiced in Rome, the true resemblances of what
were of old practiced in Sicily, comes short of the reality of this. For in the
very letter of his words,

Praefectura Domus Sicula non mitior Aula,
Juv. S. 6. They here outdoing those precedents of Cruelty, tho the most
Notorious, that History has delivered to Posterity; as being persuaded; That a
Slave can claim nothing as his Right, besides Stripes and Labor.

5. And as they exceed those ancient Severities, so the immodesty of the
Executioners, it is to be presumed, did come short of what has here been the
wonder of the new and less-seasoned Adventurers, to hear related. It being
sufficient in those times to chastize a Bondwoman, -- Nudam humeros, nudisque
mamillis: Bare to her shoulders and breasts only: Whereas here, those who before
were quite Naked, all but a little of their middle part, have this also
uncovered: The Mistress, to the shame of her Sex, (as from an Eyewitness and
present Spectator, has been attested to me) not blushing to be present (an
effect, it is possible, of their believing Negro's to be but Brutes) amongst a
crowd of Boys and Men, to witness the Execution, no less than to prevent
Compassion. The Tormenter (always of the sex Masculine) to keep even pace with
our Satyrists words, no less then with her Immanity, (Et caedit, donec lassis
caedentibus --:) Seldom giving over before quite tired; which if too soon, does
argue Sloth, and is apt to be interpreted a Connivance; a Crime big enough to
endanger his Place, and to deprive him of the honor and happiness of being
Archi-Mastix of the Negro's for ever after. Which certainly are Inhumanities of
the wrankest kind, and no less needing to be restrained by some wholesome and
good Law, then were the like formerly exercised by the Spaniards upon the poor
Americans. But from which by a Bull of Charles the Fifth, then King of Spain,
and Emperor, they were most graciously released. For which these also do seem
to cry with their utmost earnestness unto the Government at Home; not doubting
but that in time they shall be heard.

6. Nor are they very constant to that first and so very agreeable Principle,
of preserving these poor Wretches for Labor (their only end in purchasing of
them,) by a due provision of Food (not likely to put them to any extraordinary
expenses, whilst little better than what the Hogs do feed on, and is, to save
time, generally planted by themselves upon Sundays): And of Clothing, for
which a Canvass Shirt and Drawers, during the two or three rainy Months (which
is all the Winter we have here) will suffice: And lastly, by allowing them time
of Rest, and of respite from Labor for their tired Bodies. I say, they are
very far from a constant acting according to that Principle; unless where the
benefit of preserving, shall exceed the damage they are like to sustain, by
suffering some few of them to be Starved, or otherwise to Perish. That is, If
three or four Hundred may be more advantageously maintained (for it being
uncertain which of them will outlive the other, they must be at like Charges
with each, if they would save them all) then fifteen, or twenty new ones be
purchased, to fill up the dead rooms, (for so many, or more, are like to be
wanting at the Years end, without such Provision:) I say, then it is possible
that they may fall to consult their God, INTEREST, and endeavor their
Preservation. Which kind of Considerations are not so frequent among the
Mightier, as with the Middle and Meaner sort; who do usually find it less
convenient to buy new, than (having but a few) to preserve their old Negro's.
Whereby both their and the White Servants (the general name for Europeans)
condition, is less miserable under these, than under the richer sort; with whom
the death of a good Horse, and of a Negro, is of equal moment, and does usually
extort from them the same expressions of Grief and Sorrow; unless where the
Horse does happen to be of the greater Value.

7. To this also I might add, as an effect of their scant allowance of Food to
their Slaves, the many Robberies and Thefts committed by these starved People
upon the poorer English. Of which, if I should affirm their owners to be the
occasion, by thus starving of them, I think I should not hit much either
beside, or beyond the Mark. That they are not displeased at it, if dexterously
performed, is the general belief and sense of the Sufferers: And this is said
to be the true meaning of that customary reply, Tush, they can shift, to the
Stewards and Overseers requests for a supply of the Negro's want of Provision.
Which suspicion of their Connivance, is further augmented by the small Redress
that is given, or made to the injured parties, upon their just Complaints;
unless taking them in the Act, they there shoot them dead; which is all the
remedy they can get: Whereby the Island is daily deserted by its Inhabitants.
And this also is one of the chief Reasons, why Provisions are so dear; no live
Creature being to be raised, or kept secure, but under Lock and Key.

8. I might here also add, that the Pickaninnies, or young Negro-Children,
except only the hardiest, wanting a due attendance and care of them, do most of
them perish in their Infancy. Their Mothers continual labor in the Field, not
admiting a necessary care or regard of them.

9. Nor are these Miseries the Fate only of the Blacks, but, in a
proportionable measure, of the English and White People also, who generally are
better wrought than either fed or taught. And for their charity to the Sick,
tho brought even to Death's door, yet can they hardly obtain the least
amendment in their Diet, tho never so earnestly importuned; their Condition and
Countenances no less pleading for them. I confess, I would not here be supposed
to charge all alike, where (possibly) diverse are to be excepted, tho to me
unknown. And these things have, beyond all dispute, wasted more Englishmen,
(not to mention Negro's, and other Nations) than are at this Day to be found in
all America. Who with better usage, might have been of great use to the
Peopling of those vast desolate Regions: And at the same time, contributed no
small Reputation and Strength to their Mother Country.

10. And to give one Instance for all, of this Unmercifulness; it was
concerning one of these, and even a Natural Subject of one of his Majesty's
Kingdoms, tho not of England; and for an Accident wherein another deserved the
whole blame, (were any at all due, which is questionable) that that execrable
Speech mentioned before, Page 69. was uttered. But for which, right or wrong,
the poor Man sustained an hundred Lashes, or more. Seven Rods, each bearing
five Sprigs (which occasions their name) nothing inferior to our Willow, being
spent upon him: Whereby he was, to the astonishment of the Beholders, (some
whereof (no less than the party himself) are to me very well known) many days
after, seen, as it were but one general Scab, all over. The barbarous Author of
it, in contempt of their Exstacy and Affrightment, then venting that
blasphemous Expression: And withal adding, That it was no less lawful for Men,
than for the Fish, or wild Beasts, the greater and more powerful to worry and
destroy the rest. A Speech better becoming an Outlaw, than a Judge. But from
hence may be argued, that if their Servants Bodies, in the sustaining whereof
their Interest so much consists, do meet with no more mercy, their Souls must
expect much less; from such who believe Religion an impediment to their Profit;
and with our King John, do think, That a Stag may grow very fat, without ever
hearing of Mass. And that if these be so much neglected, it cannot be imagined
that the other should once fall under their consideration. Nor is this the
effect of Sloth only, or a thing accidental; but by design, and from a
principle (next to their supposed Brutality) springing from the imaginary
inexpedience thereof: The ground and foundation of those foul Positions, which
have ministered but too just* occasion for this Discourse. Which fancied
Inexpedience is the thing that falls in my way, next to be considered and
treated of.

Ezekiel. 8. 13. And he said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shall see
greater Abominations, that they do.
CHAP. II.
That the Profession of Christianity absolutely obliging to the promoting of
it, no Difficulties nor Inconveniences, how great soever, can excuse the
Neglect, much less the Hindering, or Opposing of it; which is in effect no
better than a Renunciation of that Profession.

. I. n. 1. NOthing then having hitherto appeared of sufficient force, to
invalidate our Negro's natural Right to the Privileges of Religion, nor to
acquit their Injustice, who hitherto have withheld them from, at least not
acquaint them with it; I come now to enquire whether certain great personal
Inconveniences thereupon, as is pretended, necessarily ensuing to their
Owners; the many insuperable Difficulties, or lastly, the numerous Mischiefs
thereby threatened to the Public, (if found true,) may not prove a sufficient
Bar, and even justify their Masters refusal, at least forbearance,
notwithstanding this Right, to admit them thereunto.

2. Before I reply unto which, I shall crave leave to demand of them, What
Nation, or Sect of Men, did ever till now hold it Inexpedient, or not fit to
perform what was Just and Right? Certainly, none besides Thieves and
Cutthroats, (or the late pretended Saints), such whose whole subsistence was
by Violence and Rapine, and therefore have been proclaimed Outlaws, and
reputed as common Enemies to Mankind: Fit Tutors for those that profess
themselves Disciples and Scholars of Christ! And yet even these, as Cicero
observes, l. 2. Off. are forced to constitute Laws, unto which they conform
themselves. And by an Instance of two notorious Banditi, who by an even sharing
of their Purchase, arrived to great Wealth, he further confirms his Argument,
for the necessity of Justice: Which, he says, does consist in Equity, by
supporting the Weak against Oppressors, and observing an even indifferency, in
the administration thereof, both to high and low. And therefore he tells us,
that for this end, Leges sunt inventae, quae cum omnibus una atque eadem voce
loquerentur: Laws were enacted, which should indifferently speak the same sense
and language to all conditions and degrees alike.

3. And doubtless it is a thing agreeable to Nature, to maintain Right. A
principle plainly legible in the Practice, because first planted and riveted in
the Hearts, of the most barbarous Nations. None of these owning other, but that
what was Just and Right, was alike due to, and from all Men; and then certainly
to Slaves from their Superiors, so far as that Right should extend. And this
without any byassing Considerations by particular Interests, but guided by
Equity, the most exact Rule of Right and Justice. These being not empty Names,
but importing real Duties; of which we are not to take our Measures by the
vastness of our Ambition, or our unbounded Avarice, but by the truest Reason,
void of all disturbance by Passion and Corruption from by-Ends.

4. To prove which, I might amass together whole Pages of Quotations, out of
the forementioned little Volumn of Moral Duties, but shall at present content
my self with Gleaning only a few out of that full Stack, or Sheaff. As, That
the foundations of Justice are to hurt no Body, but to consult the Good of all.
That we are born to Honesty, and that Justice only can confer on Men the Title
of [Good.] That whatsoever is True, Simple, and Sincere, is most agreeable to
Man's Nature. That nothing Cruel is profitable. That the endeavoring after
Wealth and Estates by just ways, is commendable; but the contrary base and
detestable. That they do pervert the foundations of Nature, who do separate
Profit and Honesty; It being horrid to imagine, that any profit can be made by
Injustice; yea, even at that very time when we obtain the thing reputed thus
profitable, it being impossible that these should conduce to any Man's benefit.
That Socrates was wont to curse those Men, who first separated Profit and
Honesty: Nothing being profitable or expedient, but so far as it is void of
Baseness. And most fully to manifest and evice this Position, is the whole work
and design of that excellent Treatise.

5. And now let those Christians who pretend a Necessity, for that which
Heathens have in their several Ages and Times, so siercely declaimed against,
As misbecoming Men, and Unnatural; and do pretend a necessity for that which no
temptation of Profit could induce them to accept, or assent to; and further do
hold it convenient, and even commendable, (as being the first step to Honor
and Authority;) to compass Estates by the most Sordid ways, which either the
Examples of a Corrupt Age, or their own fruitful Inventions can suggest. And
for this false end do deny their Slaves the exercise and benefit of Religion,
upon the pretended Inconveniences and imaginary Inexpedience of it; I say, let
them coolly weigh this virtuous Heathens resolutions concerning the necessity
of Justice, and the turpitude of the contrary Vice; and having so done, let
them bethink themselves how little Right they have to that noblest Appellative
of Christians (if they at all care for it), who do thus professedly turn their
Backs to common Equity and Justice. And then to consider whether of the two,
Themselves, or their Slaves, by them kept in ignorance of their Duty, be the
blackest and wrankest Heathens.

. II. 1. And thus having from the consent of Nature and Reason made it evident,
that Right and Equity are in despite of all Inconveniences to be complied
with, I shall without further delay, betake my self to my Assertion, before
laid down, viz. That the Profession of Christianity, etc. Which will best be
proved by looking into, and displaying to each view, the true Nature and Notion
of Christianity, which I understand to be, A devoting of our selves to the
Service of Christ, and a strict Obligation in defiance of the whole World, to
promote his Interest and Honor, even with the loss of whatsoever is precious
or dear unto us. Which Vow is to be sincerely and truly made and kept; the
whole Action being otherwise but mere Pageantry, and Hypocrisy.

2. And that this is the true Notion and sense of Christianity, not only the
express words of that solemn Covenant, made betwixt God and our Souls, at our
initiation into it by Baptism, does show; but also our Blessed Lord's so often
reiterated, and no less plain Declaration, in Answer to this very Question, do
most fully prove. As, when he forewarns his Apostles, that Self-denial, and a
renouncing of Worldly Affections, with a firm resolution to undergo the Cross,
that is, All Losses and Sufferings, are Qualifications highly necessary for all
his Followers. He further also acquaints us, that Houses and Lands, Kindred and
nearest Relations, and even Life it self, are all to be slighted as base and
vile, in respect of our Duty to himself; The very substance of our Vow in
Baptism.

3. And to place my Assertion beyond all Dispute, I shall here further note,
That this in all Ages of Christianity has been so understood, even till this
very Day. Hence St. Peter's Profession, to lay down his Life for his Master,
was accepted by him; which he afterward performed, as also did the rest of the
Apostles. And the holy Scripture instances in St. Stephen, and St. James, both
early Martyrs and Witnesses of this Truth. And had this been otherwise the
Churches Kalander, had not so long since been furnished with so complete and
numerous an Army of those Noble Martyrs, as to Muster up five thousand for each
day throughout the Year. Who all of them, doubtless, might have saved their
Lives, had it not been more for their Lord's Honor, and the Interest of his
Religion (which they were thereby to promore), thus to suffer the effusion of
their Blood for him, who by his own Example of pouring out his Soul unto Death,
did first lead them the way thereto. And in the Hebrews we have the examples of
the Jewish Martyrs, who were sawn asunder, etc. set before us for our
imitation, by St. Paul: whose Afflictions also, mustered up in his latter
Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 11. with his frequent Exhortations to the like,
and a resistance even unto Blood, that is, in contempt of Death; and of
following Christ's Example, of suffering for the Truth; assuring us that there
is no other Way, or Gate, by which we should obtain an entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but through much Tribulation, Acts 14. do sufficiently
evidence, that this Doctrine was not to expire with its great Author, but always
to remain a necessary condition of Admittance into his Service and Fellowship,
so long as he was to have a Church upon Earth; that is, till the Consummation
of the World. Now, doubtless none of these were so much in love with Death, but
that willingly they would have redeemed their Lives, at the loss only of their
Estates, or at least, the whole with some part; could it have been done without
offending their Duty. So that here were inconveniences with a witness; yet
there was no avoiding them, so long as they knew themselves under this
Obligation to their Savior and Master Christ.

4. Now here some (I do not say all), will grant that they are indeed tied, not
to deny Christ: But, say they again, are they therefore bound to proclaim him,
or to persuade others, who think themselves much better (or as well) already,
to become his Servants and Followers?

5. To which, I answer, That, I suppose, they are: And that, First, as being
absolntely bound thereto, by their very Profession; that is, by their owning
themselves for Christians. The contrary being no less than a renouncing of it:
Because it proceeds from a neglect and even contempt thereof, than which
nothing can be more contrary thereto. And which when not occasioned through
Fear, or by Accident, but arising from Choice and Election; and withal attended
with a persistance in and defense of it, is such a clear indication of our
disaffection and no esteem thereof, as to amount to a plain denial; which every
single Sin, tho of the grossest kind, abstracted from those, does not. And
therefore no Christian can ever justify his omiting any possible-lawful means
for the advancement of his Religion; much less that which is indeed the
Principal. Besides, Christianity is of its self a profession of doing Good, and
of asserting (not concealing) the Truth; which was the very end of our Blessed
Lord's coming into the World; as himself, St. John 18. 37. witnesses, namely,
to bear witness to the Truth; and to seek and to save that which was perishing,
or quite lost. And therefore he was perpetually either employing himself in
preaching and working of Miracles, or going from Place to Place, and fetching
many tedious and weary Circuits, to find out Patients to exercise his Power and
Virtue upon, and to Heal their Distempers: Removing Men's Diseases from their
Bodies, thereby to work greater Cures upon their Souls: And, without partiality
or distinction, curing Servants and Beggars of their Infirmities, restoring the
Blind, Lame, Deaf, and Dumb, without any respect to the quality, but to the
need of the Parties; and no less out of pure humanity and pity to the
Distressed, than for the satisfaction of doing Good. And from this Example and
Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus, the first Christians did not grudge to sell
their Houses and Lands for the Relief of others. Nor were they to confine and
determine their Charity to the bounds of their own Profession (tho the Household
of Faith was in the first place to be supplied) but were obliged to do good
unto all Men, not forgetting their very Enemies; much less their Domestics and
Slaves, by whose Labor they had their whole Subsistence. Now if they thought
themselves obliged to relieve Men's Bodies, the worser part, much more were
their Souls to have a share in this Charity: By their extraordinary Care for
which last, and their contempt of the Miseries and Sufferings of the other,
when called to it, it was evident what value they did put upon each. As knowing
that if they gained the whole World, with the loss of their Souls, they should
have had but little left to be boasted of. And if they held it their Duty to
leave themselves destitute even of an House for shelter, and to part with their
Treasures (the getting whereof did cost them so much Sweat and Care) for the
good of the Church, and the increase of Religion; themselves in the mean while
depending only upon Providence; there is no doubt but they presumed it much
more their Duty to bestow their Breath and Words, which could cost them no
Labor, besides that of uttering them; nor any Expenses more than of the time
therein laid out and employed.

6. And conformable hereto, has been the Practice and Consent of Christianity
in all Ages since. For first of all St. Peter, being, Acts 4. forbidden to
speak any more in the Name of Christ, remembering his Commission and Calling,
and knowing what a prejudice to the Souls of Men his silence would prove, He,
encouraged from Heaven, with the hazard of his Life, persists and goes on;
boldly in the most public place (even in the Temple) like a true Minister and
Apostle, speaking all the words pertaining to this Life, that is, to
Christianity. And those Christians that were scattered abroad upon the
Persecution which arose about Stephen, traveled into remoter Regions; but
there preached the Word; some to the Jews only, whilst others preached to the
Gentiles also: Both concurring in this Sentence, That they understood it to be
their Duty to promote the Doctrine of their Lord, in whatsoever Territory they
should happen to be cast. This was the cause of St. Paul's toylsome Journeys
into Syria, Greece, Spain, Rome, etc. Others of the Apostles piercing into
India, and in a few Years subduing more Kingdoms to Christ, than the Roman
Eagles had conquered in many Ages. Nor did Religious Christians think it any
Disparagement to employ their utmost Skill to advance this Service. Besides,
the Charity and Love of Souls, did beighten their Zeal to the effectual
destroying the works of the Devil, and to rescue out of his Snares, those that
were taken Captive at his will. Nor could they be at rest till they had
established him, their most Natural Lord, in his Hereditary Dominions over the
Heathen, and extended his Authority even to the utmost parts of the Earth: Such
was the deep sense they had of this Duty. And therefore Tradition has
delivered* that the Apostles by Lot, like so many great Generals going to take
in Cities, and conquer Provinces; sorted themselves to travel into the most
distant Regions, for the effectual carrying on of this great Work:
Notwithstanding that they knew there were no Dignities nor Preferments to be
any where expected, besides Affliction and Martyrdom. Whereof St. Bartholomew
is said to have betook himself to India; St. Thomas to Parthia; St. Andrew to
Scythia; St. Matthew to Aethiopia; and St. Matthias is said to have adventured
amongst the Canibals. So that no People, how Barbarous, or Remote soever; nor
any Clime, tho portending nothing but Destruction and Calamity to them, nor
even the most apparent and affrighting Dangers, could by any means divert them
(as by an Instance we have, Acts 21. 13. of St. Paul's resolution, is manifest)
from prosecuting this so glorious a Design, so much by us slighted: Who instead
of taking such difficult Voyages, do (even the best of us) scarcely wish well
to them; and do think it enough to propagate the Gospel in Fable only, and as
at the Isle of Pines. Never taking care to teach the Natives, where we come,
any Good; but to learn them in all the Evil, which we practice our selves.

7. Nor did this Zeal die with the Apostles, and their immediate Successors,
but did shine most brightly in the Christians of the following Ages: Neither
Sex (according to its Capacity) believing it self exempted from this Service.
For as Women are said to have been Apostles to the Apostles, so the Iberians,
as Socrates delivers, l. 1. c. 15, 16. do own their first knowledge of the
Gospel to a poor She-Captive. Which no doubt was by her at first undertaken and
acted, out of a sense of her Duty, (such an opportunity being providentially
administered to her); and the common Principles of all Christians directing her
thereto.

8. After the like manner we read, that the middle India was converted by two
Strangers, their Names Frumentius, and Aedesius. And Eusebius, in his l. 5. c.
20. of Eccl. History, writes of St. Panten us, (whom he styles a most famous
Man, for) that he showed so much, and such Divine Zeal for the Word of God,
that he went to preach it to the Indians: Either to subdue some new Province,
or to perfect what another had begun.

9. And it was very early that St. Peter, or St. Paul, or St. Simon Zelotes, or
St. Joseph of Arimathea, or St. Aristobulus, or some other of the Apostolic Age
(whosoever they were) came into Britain, to give it the Honor of having the
first Christian King. And the Britains when invaded by the Saxons, did not,
some of them (as St. Kentigern, and others) cease to follow those Examples;
they thinking it their Duty to do this Service to their very Enemies, and to
preach to them, for their Salvation, who sought their Lives, and their
Countries Destruction. Tho this, being not so heartily carried on and pursued
by them as was necessary, did afterward give Gildas their Countryman, great
occasion of complaint against them.

10. For a supply whereof, St. Gregory, Bishop of Rome, moved (as V. Bid
piously discourses) by Inspiration from God, sent Augustine with other
Religious Men to preach to the English. Who, being converted to the Faith, did
themselves become no less zealous Propagators thereof, both at home and abroad:
Having been the happy Converters of the Hassians, Franconians, Turingians, the
Saxons of Westphalia, the Frisians, the Hollanders, Norwegians, and
Lithuanians. For not to reckon up Felix, Berinus, and Agilbertus, St. Aidanus
and Columbanus; all Foraigners, yet instrumental to the Saxons Conversion: Nor
yet that Religious King St. Oswald, who himself out of his great Zeal to
promote the Faith of Christ in his own Kingdom, did not think scorn to become
Interpreter to Aidanus as he preached, and to give the sense of the Sermon to
his Attendants, as Aidanus, who understood not English, delivered it. I say,
not much to insist upon these, we read of St. Willibrood, Boniface, and Pope
Adrian the Fourth, with diverse other Englishmen, the Converters of these
Nations; And our V. Bid tells us of the two Henwalds, suffering Martyrdom by
adventuring into Saxony, upon the like Errand.

11. And so far were our Ancestors persuaded of the necessity of this Duty,
that if any thing happened amiss to them, they concluded it to arise from this
Neglect. Hence Kenwalchus, King of the West Saxons, observing his Affairs not
to succeed very prosperously; he resolves to amend that Fault: Of which
Reformation he soon found the effects, in the Prosperity which thereupon
ensued. But all such Considerations are ridiculous amongst Atheists. And
therefore when one Mr. A. B. in Virginia, offered his Service in order thereto,
he was laughed to Scorn by the etc. They, at least some of them, with a Scoff
replying, That those who go upon that Work, are to provide neither Purse nor
Scrip; because he had made some Proposal also concerning Maintenance.

12. It Is true indeed, our Church upon the last review of the Liturgy, does
seem to have had an Eye thereto, when in Her Preface she declared, That the
Office for Baptizing those of riper Years, may be also useful for the baptizing
of Natives in the Plantations, and others Converted to the Faith. Such was her
tender care for the Souls of the Heathen, in that most wholesome Provision.
But, alas! the Enemies of Goodness have frustrated and defeated our hopes, so
far, that for any use the said Office has been put to here, it might almost as
well have been left out. However, from these few Instances which I have taken
out of Church History, as Water out of a common River, (whereof every Man may
take enough, without Offense or Injury to any other), may be seen how zealous
former Ages were for the Conversion of Heathens* which they looked upon as a
Duty consequent to their Baptism, and without which they could not challenge
the Name of Christians. And so much for my first Reason.

13. But secondly, If this be not the Duty of Christians, then must
Christianity fall short of the Piety of Gentilism, whose Philosophers and
Learned Men, as they aimed at nothing so much as the knowledge and disquisition
of the Truth; so next of all was their desire of converting and winning others,
with them to embrace the same. Who yet knew nothing of any Reward thereof,
beyond the satisfaction of doing Good, and of being instrumental to advance
Society. Which Considerations ought to be more prevalent with Christians, as
having promises of Rewards for whatsoever good thing is done by them, not only
in this Life, but in that which is to come. And the Heathens Notion of a Good
Man, was from hence derived, viz. From doing all the good he could: Whilst they
held a self-ended Person in the greatest detestation. Now Christianity is but
Morality, strained to the highest pin: And therefore our Lord prescribes to his
Disciples, the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (that is, of the
strictest Jews) not only for our bare Imitation, but to be outdone by us. One
of whose principal Virtues, we read, it was that they compassed Sea and Land
to make Proselytes. And certainly then a Christian is much more obliged thereto.

14. Thirdly, We are hereunto tied by our Covenant in Baptism; wherein we
promise to fight manfully against Sin, which no man can fully answer, that does
not first fight against Infidelity. Hereby also we engage to be faithful
Servants to Christ, during the Term of our whole Lives: Which work of
Converting Sinners, is the most grateful service that we can perform. For
certainly it had otherwise never been so often pressed and recommended with such
promises in holy Scripture; As, He that wins Souls is wise, Prove. 11. 30.
And they that be Wise, shall shine as the Firmament, and they that turn many
unto Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. And the reducing
one fallen from (and surely it is the same if he never knew) the Truth, is in
some sense made Meritorious, St. James 5. 20. Nay further, it is so much our
Duty, that it is Heathenish to neglect it, as (besides what I have before in
this Sect. said) may be inferred from those general words of the 4th Chap. and
the last Ver. of the same Epistle. And if by the Husbands causless Repudiating
of his Wife, he in that Act causes her to commit (and so is guilty of her)
Adultery; by the like parity of Reason, He that hinders his Servant from
believing, must be guilty of his Infidelity. And in a word, so natural it is
for Men to promote the Faith which themselves do believe, that with the
Barbarians of Japan, we may safely conclude them for no Christians, that do
neglect it. And not only as in our subjection to Earthly Masters, to whom our
Strength and Labor is due; but in this Covenant of Baptism, we bind and make
over our Souls and Affections to Christ, no less than our Bodies. Now let these
be but Cordially employed by us, and it is not possible but they must reflect
some improvement to this Service. Especially where the Agent is fully armed
with absolute Authority, and those on whom he is to lay out his endeavors
being his Slaves; and so, tho disaffected thereto (which they are not) yet
might soon be brought over, by one having Power to make them submit and bend
their Inclinations to his own. Tho at first perchance less cordially (that is,
where there is any dislike, which I must avow that here there is not;) yet in
an outward Compliance at least; And even this disaffection, custom and long use
would in time wear out, and make the contrary become Natural.

15. And this does seem to come down to our Case, wherein we have a perfect
concurrence in all the parts, except only in the Principal. The Masters
professing themselves Christians, their Slaves being indeed Infidels, but
giving no proof of any Malice, or disaffection to Religion. The Masters armed
with full power over them; and having themselves vowed to employ that whole
Power, and all that is theirs besides, in the Service of Christ. Yet for a
petty inconsiderable Interest, to be certainly recompensed with much greater
Advantages (as will soon be showed), refusing to promote that Faith (which they
themselves do own) among those of their own Families. Now if this be to comply
with such Obligations, then may it be concluded, that a Christian has a mighty
Advantage above other Men; and that he may, without the least guilt or stain to
his Soul, both swear and forswear whatsoever his Interest shall persuade him to.

16. I confess, I do not hold it to be alike every Man's Duty to labor herein;
but do yet dare to affirm it every Christians Duty to concern himself about it,
so far as his condition of Subsistence and living, and his knowledge shall
enable him. For as Mr. Glanvil in his Dialogue concerning Preaching, P. 57.
tells us, Every private Christian may, and ought to preach in this Sense. Every
such is a Priest to his own Family; that is, it is his Duty to teach them the
great things of Religion, according to the best of his Skill and Knowledge. This
is one way to provide for our Families, and it is the most necessary. Men had
better neglect the getting their Children and Servants Bread and Clothes, then
to omit their care about this greater and more needful Provision. It Is true,
it is not perchance every Man's Duty to traverse the World from one Quarter to
the other, to preach the Gospel, and to Convert Heathens. But if they happen to
be brought Home to us, and made members of our Families, we are, beyond
dispute, each Soul of us obliged, as we tender our own Salvation, to endeavor
theirs. That Interrogatory, 1 Cor. 7. 16. How know thou, etc? carrying in it
an Argument greatly enforcing the like charitable care and endeavors for the
saving of others, tho lodged at a remoter distance from us, than our Bosoms:
For he whose whole business it is to do good, must never be idle, whilst there
are any objects of his Charity, especially under his Roof: For he fails of his
Duty so much, as he falls short in any particular Office within his power,
though of an inferior nature to this. And if unmercifulness be the only Crime
observable from our Savior's Charge at the Day of Judgment, represented, St.
Mat. 25. Doubtless, they that have thus cruelly treated their Slaves; and, what
in them lies, destroyed their Souls, shall then find an Hell hotter than
ordinary, and like Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, heated seven times more; and a
Devil, proportionably merciless, provided for them: Where they shall come (too
late) to know, that God does above all things detest Hypocrites, and that he
will by no means endure to be yoaked with Mammon.

. IIII. 1. But here forgetting the absolute necessity of this Duty, our People
to acquit themselves, do offer some things by way of Excuse: As, 1. The
Difficulty, and, as they pretend, even Impossibility of effecting any thing
upon them. 2. Their want of English. 3. Their Stupidity, and utter incapacity
for Instruction. Lastly, Their irreconcilable averseness and hatred to all
Religion. All which are certainly false of the major part of them, at least of
diverse, as my self, upon my particular knowledge and experience can truly
affirm. But as to the second, there are, 1. Many who have lived a considerable
time in the Island. 2. Others that were born in it. A 3d sort that have been
brought up and baptized in England; who can all of them speak English, no worse
than the natural born Subjects of that Kingdom. These I presume will make more
than one moity of the whole. And for the rest, even the very Novices of them, I
do not see why they should not be as capable of Religion as of Business. But it
is notoriously known, that even those of the third sort (when Trapand hither)
are as little regarded as the rawest Barbarian in the whole herd: And so of
those whom themselves have caused to be Baptized in England, whereof I have
spoken, P. 37. in the former Chapter. And it is no less certain, that their
very Domestics, that attend them in their Chambers, and at their Tables (the
rest living in sheds, and separated places without Doors, purposely allotted
for them) are taught to avoid the room (which also has been observed of them
in England) as often as Prayers do happen to be said or read: As if there were
some secret Charm, or power of doing mischief in Prayers. Nor are they forced
thence out of any scruple, or (superstitious) fear of having their Services
polluted, by the intermixture of Unbelievers (a Nicety never here heard of);
but only upon this Supposition, of the no necessity thereof, nor benefit to
Negro's, or other Slaves.

2. And as for their Averseness, a charge most proper to be returned upon the
Objecters own Heads; I have always found them rather fond and desirous of being
made Christians, than any way averse thereto; which a certain passage in Mr.
Ligon's Description of this Island, will further evince: Tho, as in that case
(and here I will suggest the worst), this desire might possibly first arise
only from an Ambition of being like the English: Which should be no wonder,
especially in People, who have never so much as heard whether there were any
Salvation, or Heaven for them, but rather the contrary. But our People being
extraordinary Wise, have to prevent further Trouble, always taken it for
granted that their Negro's have an Antipathy against Christianity. Nor are they
upon a due trial and experiment desirous to understand other.

3. And here, if it might not occasion too great an expense of Time, (for which
reason I shall be brief) I should crave leave to rehearse a Portion more, of
the above mentioned Christmas Discourse, wherein I have an Apology for them
upon this Account, ready formed to my hand, in these words: -- But are their
Inclinations so much altered from what they were? Surely, the sacred Text does
furnish us with too notable Examples of Piety and Goodness, in these People.
The first is that of Ebedmeleck, Jer. 28. whose compassion to that Prophet in
interceding for him, and thereby delivering him out of the Dungeon, was so
highly pleasing unto God, that in the next Chapter we find this high
commendation and Eulogium given him, That he had put his trust in the Lord; and
therefore had a promise of preservation from those fatal Calamities, which
suddenly befell that stubborn People, amongst who he then lived.

4. The second is that of Queen Candace's Treasurer, Acts 8. who though a
Dynast, of great Authority with his Prince, traveled so long a Journey, only
to worship God at Jerusalem. Judge all the World, whether this African,
notwithstanding the blackness of his Face, had not a whiter Soul, than most of
our European refined Christians! But this is not all; behold him sparing no
time from his Devotions, but, As he sat in his Chariot, he read the Prophet
Isaiah. And then see him attentively listening to the Heavenly Doctrine of St.
Philip, earnestly thirsting after the Baptismal Waters; Which having obtained,
he goes on rejoicing, and hasting to make known the glad tidings of his Savior
to his Countrymen. It was this Noble-man's commendation, that he did not think
himself too great to be God's Servant, and that amidst his Pomp, he could
attend Religion: And to give him his due praise, I do not see but that this
black Prince may be a Copy for the best of us to write after; a Pattern worthy
the brightest Professor's Imitation; and of whom, to use our Savior's words, I
may say, Verily, I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel, etc. By
which words of this Sermon, the Preacher does evidently confute this malicious
suggestion, touching the Negro's pretended natural aversion to Religion. And in
truth, some of our People do in part confess no less, when in England, to
prevent Obloquy (not regarded by others of them) for the Credit of their
Island, (and no less to make a fair show) they procure, at least give way to,
the Baptizing of their Attendants, as I have before mentioned. (Like those in
England, who to save their Places and Credits at once, do dare to be guilty of
that superstition at twenty miles distance, which they will not adventure upon
nearer Home). It were to be wished upon their return, that, laying aside that
suspicion of Averseness, (which they thereby grant to be but a Fiction), they
would remember to complete here, what they there began. It being to be presumed
that the many thousands remaining, have the like precious Souls, tho not
blessed with setting foot upon English Soil. But this would go near too much to
affront the Principle here, (of which, Mr. Ligon, whom I but now mentioned,
gives an Account in the Reply that one made to him, upon a Motion of the like
nature) and scandalize their weak Brethren: Who might be apt to suspect them
for Christians indeed, and Apostates to the Cause; should they openly persist
to commit a thing so contradictory to their long continued Irreligion.

5. Howbeit notwithstanding these so pregnant Instances, and their own knowledge
and experience to the contrary, to make out this Averseness, they relate a
story of a thing called a Chapel belonging to a private Family, wherein a
Preachment (for Sermon I shall not call it, the Speaker wanting his Orders,
together with diverse other very requisite Qualifications) was made each Sunday
in the Afternoon; the Holder-forth (notwithstanding his said Infirmity as to
Orders, etc.) being usually taken up in a Parochial charge in the Morning. With
this Person it was customary for him to Baptize in the Neighboring Parishes;
and that at under-rates (which was enough to spoil the Trade.) He would also
join Couples in Marriage, and do any Offices where Money was to be got; the
Ministers being not able to prevent nor hinder him; The Vesteries (who are our
Supreme Church Governors) not favoring their Complaints, as being themselves
not willing to be confined: Nor have the Ministers, even those in Orders, much
cause to be displeased, themselves (especially the more popular) usually taking
the liberty of their Neighbors Parishes and Pulpits upon all occasions, both
without and against the Proprietors consent.
Now unto this our stupid Africans, being admitted, (for which Supererrogation,
the good Man the Master was heartily laughed at, tho without cause, as I shall
show;) were not in the least edified. Nor did they at all seek after Baptism,
the necessity and benefit whereof they were never taught. Nor could they so
much as repeat the Lord's Prayer, Creed, or Decalogue, because the Speaker,
attending higher Doctrines and Speculations (tho I take him for no Fanatic) did
never acquaint them therewith: This and Catechizing, being with the generality
(whom he was to please, or all was gone) quite out of Fashion. Nor did these
silly Negro's, so much as understand wherefore they were brought thither, it
being never told them. The profound Doctor, believing his Reputation might be
diminished, if in his Zeal (of which he was not at all suspected) he had
condescended to apply any part of his Discourse to them, so much as in private,
but much more in public; which indeed is the mighty dread of some others
besides him. Whereby under these great means, the Negro's, who were quartered
in the most distant part of their Meeting Place, remained still as brutish as
even the more learned English, unto whose wiser Capacities the lofty Harang was
solely fitted and directed, without the least application to the other. Who
poor Wretches, apprehended (and, I believe, truly enough) their being brought
thither to be no other than a specious pretense, only to cheat them of their
Dance and Music, and to abridg their Liberty, their other work being over;
(like those who by their zeal for the Sabbath, do reap this great spiritual
advantage of having their Servants thereby always in their eye:) They in the
mean time esteeming the Church for their Prison. Which is no wonder, our whiter
People (as we distinguish) being much of the same Faith, touching going to
Church, and Religion: For otherwise our few and narrow Churches could not upon
Sundays even in the Mornings (for in the Afternoons we seldom Assemble, as
contrary to the more laudable custom of our Colonies) amongst such multitudes
of People, be so thin and empty. But notwithstanding from this single Instance
(not to be paralleled in all the Plantations, except in New England) decrepit
and simple as it is, they very roundly infer this general conclusion, viz. of
the strange Antipathy of Negro's to Christianity. Which, (admitting it in any
part for true) cannot certainly be greater, than to Work and Labor; and yet
their Taskmasters have (notwithstanding) a Faculty to make them willing: And
might no question bring about the other with equal facility, would they apply
themselves to it, with but half the industry and affection they show toward
these. Nor is it likely that their prejudices to Religion (not, as I have often
said, in the least discernable in any of them) should make them unwilling to
part with an hour from the heat of the Field, to be spent in no harder Service,
than learning their Prayers, with other necessary parts of Religion, at rest
and under the cool shade. A privilege never like to be obtained for them,
whilst the World is so rivetted in our Peoples Hearts; who, would they but be
less good natured to themselves, might find as great Instances (it may be much
greater) of untractableness and stupidity even at Home, and amongst Englishmen;
who yet must not therefore (and here I pray mark our great Christian
partiality) be straightways reputed unmeet to be called Christians; much less
denied to be Men. But, even admitting the whole Charge, yet they might have
fetched this alleged Averseness, from a more probable and nearer Cause, viz.
the derision with which themselves do usually entertain all Discourses about
Religion, and their disrespect and barbarous treating of the Ministers of it;
whereof these Negro's cannot be ignorant. Tho possibly no less also from the
same reason, for which the Americans are said to have disaffected Heaven,
namely, the Cruelties exercised by the Spaniards over them.

. IV. 1. But yet further to acquit themselves of all Injustice in this Point
(tho at no less rate than Blasphemy), they are not ashamed some of them to
affirm, that the Negro's belief in the Deity is more simple, pure, and sincere
than the Christians: Others of them do flatter themselves with a like wicked
Principle of the no necessity of Christianity, in order to attain Salvation;
whilst by a false Key of Imagination, they open Heaven Gates, and do very
frankly bestow Salvation upon Turks and Heathens; Accounting the contrary
Opinion to proceed from the ill nature and peevishness of Melancholy
Religionists and Churchmen: So also that the Jews believe sufficiently of
Christ, by their expectation of the Messiah to come. And this I have heard
maintained, not by our Dunghill Wits, but by the Virtuosi of the place. All
which impious Conceits, do but bespeak their Malice against Religion, and at
the best do seem to affirm no less than that Christ's coming into the World, My
indignation against these Blasphemies, forbids me to conceal them; the Authors
whereof are Persons considerable for Place and withal the grand enemies of
Religion, no less than of the Ministry.
was either a Fiction, (which he that openly proclaimed his -- to be as honest
a Woman as the most glorious and blessed VIRGIN, no doubt believed) or to no
purpose. Thereby rendering the Preaching of the Apostles, and the Faith of all
Christians (their own also, if they have any), to be but vain, if Salvation may
be had as well, or better without it.

2. For certainly, were this true, it had not been needless for St. Peter to
have advised the Zealous Jews, Acts 2. 23. to Repent, and be Baptized every one
of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, thereby to obtain Remission of
Sins, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost. And our Lord's appearing to St. Paul
before his Conversion, and then ordering him to address himself to Ananias
(supposed to be the then Bishop of Damascus) to be told by him, (...), what he
must do, Acts 9. 6. had been no less idle, than the same Apostles preaching
afterward to others must also have been. And so His words uttered, St. John
15. 5. He that abides in me, etc. For without me ye can do nothing. And St.
Peter to the Jewish Sanhedrim, had declared a very gross and palpable untruth,
when to their Faces he positively declared, that there was no Salvation [to be
obtained] but by Christ, if the same were no less attainable, not only by
Moses, but by Mahomet also, or any other prosperous Impostor in Religion. And
so likewise the Angel directing Cornelius to send for St. Peter, who when he
was come, should tell him, what he MVST DO, (the very same that was by our
Blessed Lord said to St. Paul; I say, that this) had been an evident Delusion,
seeing there was no such Necessity of Christianity, as that impersonal [Must]
does import. And this of Cornelius, is a most pregnant Argument (and in truth
unanswerable) both for the necessity of Christianity, and, I think also, of the
Ministry. Who, if ever any Person could, might certainly no less have been
saved without either. He being one that feared God with all his House, holding
it in vain to be Pious himself, if he suffered his Family to be wicked. He was,
as his Character declares, (...), a Religious and devout Worshipper: One that
gave much Alms, and prayed to God always; and at the 30th verse, we find him
addicted to Fasting, a duty practiced only by devout Persons: And for the
certainty thereof, this we find all of it attested from the Mouth of the Holy
Ghost, and by the Message and Confession of an holy Angel. But notwithstanding
that his Prayers were heard, and his Alms had in remembrance in the sight of
God; yet the main thing, the Knowledge of Christ being wanting, St. Peter (our
Lord resolving to have his Work performed by its proper Ministers) must be sent
for (the Angel having no further Commission) to instruct him in that most
important Knowledge of Christ. And for the Negro's belief of the Deity, St.
Philip's Preaching to the Eunuch by the like especial Mandate, shows that his
former belief was of it self, and without this, insufficient, tho otherwise
never so Pure, Simple, and Sincere. Nor had there been any need thereof, if
Reprobated and Incapable, or naturally destitute of any Right thereto. But that
neither the Negro's simple Faith, nor other Men's abundant Charity, nor yet the
Jews Dreams of their Messiah to come, can save any Man tho living never so
uprightly therein; our Blessed Lord's Answer to the Samaritan Woman, St. John
4. Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship; for Salvation is of
the [true Church and Believers only, which are the] Jews, does to me fully
prove. Wherefore I shall be bold to conclude this Point, in the words of the
18th Article of our Church, in which we find it declared; That they are to be
had Accursed, that presume to say, that every Man shall be saved by the Law, or
Sect, which he professes: For that holy Scripture does set forth unto us only
the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved.

. V. 1. Well, but if this will not do, they are sure that the next shall;
wherein it is pretended, first, That their Slaves are not hindered, for that they
may be Christians if they will: Secondly, That granting they were hindered, yet
that it would be no Wrong nor Injustice to them, for that at the worst, they
could thereby be but in the same condition here, in which they should have
otherwise remained in their Native Country: And lastly, That they neither seek
nor desire it.

2. To which I answer, First, That if it be true, that they indeed do not
hinder them from embracing Christianity, they have then the less guilt upon
them, and they are not to answer for so vile a Crime. Yet will not this excuse
them, it being without doubt their strictest Duty, not only, not to hinder
them, but to persuade and win them to become Christians; as I shall more fully
show, when I come to answer their third Allegation.

3. But secondly, As this Answer can no way excuse them, so neither indeed is
it ture: For to be plain, I must positively affirm, that they are hindered, and
that more or less, these four ways.

4. First, By depriving them of Time, and denying them Persons to instruct
them, and even imposing upon them a necessity of planting Provision for their
Sustenance, even upon Sundays.

5. Secondly, By discouragements and scoffs, instilling into them a slight
esteem, with an opinion of the no necessity of Religion, as to Slaves and
Negro's. Which, next a desire of being Idle, (a Vice incident to our own
People) is the cause of their avoiding the Room at Prayers (of which see P.
9.). Now Scoffing is termed a Persecution, Gal. 4. 29. compared with Genesis 21.
9. Things in their proper Nature honorable, being apt hereby to be rendered
base and ridiculous. And such a Persecution it is, as the most crafty Enemies
of Religion, did hold it for the most effectual way to destroy Christianity;
and as such was formerly no less dreaded by Christians. Nor can we blame the
Negro's, if they contemn the Religion of the English, which they hourly both
hear and see trampled upon, and undervalued by themselves.

6. Thirdly, By direct force and punishment of the Innocent Offenders therein,
thereby to deter all others. Which in truth has struck such a dread into them,
that few have since had the Courage to make the least offer at it. And some,
whilst privately learning their Prayers, dictated to them, have given such
manifest Indications of their Fears, that, as if attempting some Villainy, upon
the least noise or stir, their Spirits have failed them, and they have wanted
Power to proceed, but were forced to give off, till the Coast were clear, and
they found that they might attend with more Security. And hereof it is easy to
produce diverse Instances, if required.

7. But there has been a Force known to have been used, beyond ill Looks,
Frowns, or bare Words; which it is certain was once (and for ought I know
oftener) without any great discredit to the Author, eminently, and in the face
of the Sun, executed upon a poor Wretch, offending in this kind. His Crime
being neither more nor less, than receiving Baptism upon a Sunday-Morning at
his Parish Church, from the Hands of the Minister thereof; Who was said
afterward to excuse himself thus, That he could not deny it, being demanded of
him. But the Negro at his return, did not escape so easily: The brutish
Overseer instantly taking him to task, and giving him to understand, that that
was no Sunday-work for those of his Complexion; that he had other business for
him, the neglect whereof should cost him an Afternoons baptism in Blood (those
I heard were his very words) as in the Morning he had received a baptism with
Water; which he accordingly made good. Of which the Negro afterward complaining
to the same Minister, and he to the then Governor, the miserable Wretch was for
ever after so unmercifully treated by that inhumane Devil, that to avoid his
Cruelty, betaking himself to the Woods, he there perished. An act exceeding all
the Examples of Turkish Barbarity, and scarce to be paralleled amongst the
Immanities of the most savage Creatures; who rarely (if ever) are known
(unprovoked) to fall foul of, and to worry and destroy those of their own kind;
but contrarily, to defend them against the violence of otherlike, but
different, Beasts of Prey. The villainous Author whereof deserved, beyond the
Vengeance inflicted on the perfidious Pedant of Falerii, mentioned by Livie,
lib. 5. to have been whipped to Death by the residue of his Slaves. Which
notwithstanding he has escaped, yet let him know, that Divine Vengeance, tho it
be slow, is sure; and that without a sincere Repentance, attended with strong
endeavors to repair this Injury by him done to God and to Religion, there is a
fearful Punishment reserved for him; A Baptism also, not of Water, (or Blood
only), but in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Nor here let any one
by reason of the horridness of this Fact, straightway therefore discredit the
Relation, as impossible to be acted amongst Christians; the Story being rise in
all Men's Knowledge and Discourse, that care to remember, or take notice of it;
and those that do not, being [here] unable to deny it.

8. Fourthly, They are hindered by muzzling Their Mouths, who should acquaint
them therewith, and by rendering the Work very unsafe, even to the Guides of
Souls, and Ministers of Religion, which that Quaker's Harangue, recited in the
Introduction to this Discourse, as also the Minister's crude Apology and
Excuse, (who Baptized that persecuted and even Martyred Negro, I but now spoke
of,) do enough imply. Who had he not been an Estated Person (a happiness now
not attainable) and no less strongly fortified with great Friends and
Relations, and withal an Ancient Stander (tho since fallen), he had for this
been undoubtedly Ruined. And I am verily persuaded, that none here besides
durst to have done the same: Nor, I am confident, would he himself have had the
Courage to have committed the like Act again upon any other; as by an Instance,
wherein he was since concerned, I shall immediately show. So that if our
Negro's, who never understood either the Benefit or Necessity thereof (these
being things carefully kept from their knowledge), in contempt of Scoffs and
Discouragements, their want of Leisure and Instruction, and in despite of the
Overseers Rods, shall notwithstanding all these have a stomach to be
Christians, (without thanks to us) they may be so when soever they will; all
these being reputed no Impediments thereto.

9. To this I shall add the Barbarous Usage of the Preacher before mentioned,
together with the Calumnies and spiteful Reproaches, wherewith they persued him
even to those places whither he retired to avoid their Insolences; of which
it is certain, his Sermon (a part whereof, partly for his Vindication, and
partly to let the World see what kind of Doctrine it is they here much
Nauseate, I have here Transcribed) was the chief, if not the sole occasion. Nor
shall I omit that when another had in discourse proposed something tending
hereto; his Proposal was so maliciously represented amongst the Rabble, that he
told me, he was endangered thereby.

10. The sense whereof did so much work upon one, whom also for his character I
Pity, that he durst not give Christian Burial to a Mulatto Child born in his
House, and by himself privately (tho not without importunity) Baptized: The
Father being of the Scottish Nation, and the Mother his Domestic Slave. For
which reason she must be unmarried (tho Baptiz^d); lest the Husband should
thereby be invested with a propriety in her, and she should become no longer
his; who was therefore compelled to live in Fornication.

11. For which cause also, when a certain good natured wealthy Person (and this
is the Instance I promised) did upon his deathbed, make a Testamentary
Alotment of some Weekly exceedings for Diet to six Negro's, during their Lives,
in requital of their Fidelity and good Services to him; two Ministers (who
successively came to visit him, and for whom he professed a particular
kindness) being (in my hearing) pressed severally as they came, to make use of
the opportunity, and to try whether in that good Humor he might not be further
wrought upon, so as to perfect and complete his Charity, by a more necessary
provision for their Souls, and persuading him to give order likewise for the
instructing and baptizing of those six Negro's; It was strange to observe how
they were startled at this so unexpected motion; each of them giving manifest
Indications of his inward Grief, but replying, That as such Proposals were
altegether new and without precedent (O turpem notam temporum!) so they thought
it neither seasonable nor safe at that time quieta movere, nor to cause
disturbance by such an Innovation. Neither did they judge it prudence thereby
to disoblige their Friends, whereof they had not many in the Island, and to
exasperate their Enemies. And being withal sensible what it was to perish
unpitied and unregarded; and no less certain (even at the best, and supposing
they should have the luck to escape a grave and insignificant Rebuke for their
indiscreet Zeal) to be upon their greatest Sufferings, referred for their
reward to another World, but never to hope for either pity or compassion from
any in this. And here we may read the evil consequence of making Ministers
Annual Stipendiaries, and of subjecting them to the Arbitrary Talons of
Vesteries, made up for the most part of sordid Plebeians, the very Dregs of the
English Nation, with whom to be truly Conscientious, is the height of madness
and folly; and whose displeasure, even of any one of them, tho in the most
Righteous Cause, does portend the parties most certain Ruin.

12. AND so much for their first Allegation: Now to the second I answer: First,
That they are not sure but that by other ways, their Negro's Christianity might
have been brought about, even in their own Native Country; where on the one
hand there is a freedom and liberty of persuading, and of attending thereto on
the other; Advantages hardly to be met with, or to be expected here.

13. For, first, It is not impossible but that some of those, whom we here do
usually reproach for Madmen, ('it is happy for St Paul that he is dead; for his
very Christians would now not stick to affirm him besides himself:) might in
imitation of the first Disciples, be (like them) possessed with ardent desires
to enlarge the Territories of Christianity, and charitably to undertake Voyages
thither for the good of Souls. Or that some of those more sober and wiser Men,
who travel for Preferment, and Wealth, might by some chance or other be invited
thither as diverse are: Where it is possible, remembering the WOE to the
unprofitable Servant, and observing so much occasion and need in those parts
for the employment of their Talents, (with which God had entrusted them); they
might in time bethink themselves, and laying aside (in some measure) the study
of the World, might more carefully addict themselves to that true Labor for
which they were appointed and called* Or, which one would think less unlikely;
our zealous Nonconformists, struck with those Terrors which they give out, for
the reason of their thwarting the Law at Home (where there is no want of their
Labors) considering the much greater Harvest in those parts, might have
resorted thither, thereby to have convinced the World, that their pretenses
were real: and that the gaining of Souls to Christ, not the draining of their
Proselytes Purses, and living in ease and delicate in the Wealthier Places
only, was indeed their great and mighty Aim, both in their Preaching, and other
Actions of their Life: And there being in those Countries both Liberty, (void
of Persecuting Laws and Magistrates, and free from the Impositions of Bishops
and Ceremonies) and Occasion enough for even thousands of them. Besides, they
should, like the Sons of the Prophets, consider that their place where they
dwell, is too straight for them; and replenished with others more suitable to
the Genius of the Government, whereas elsewhere there is no Confinement to such
Inconveniences. And this also would be a noble imitation of those first
Christians, who when Persecuted in Judea, fled into other parts, and there
preached the Gospel. Or fourthly, Some Roman Votaries, (they being of those
that sow besides all Waters) might out of their Annual Missions, be allotted
for those Quarters, and for ought we know are now preaching to their Relations;
whose condition as to Religion cannot be worse; something bettered it certainly
may be, tho perchance not comparable to what it ought. And in all these cases,
'twere hard if after so much Toil, their Nets should still be returned emptied.
Especially where those irresistible impediments to the growth of Religion, the
scoffs and flirts of our Witty Brutes and Atheists, do not interpose to afright
the more timorous and wary Frye, and to hinder their Draught. Lastly, Some poor
Captive, like the Woman carried into Iberia, or as Frumentius and Aedesius,
strangers accidentally arriving there, might happily, by Divine Providence,
have been the Authors of their conversion to Christ; Nothing in all this being
impossible. And therefore they seem to Discourse at random, and without aim,
who affirm that our Negro's, tho here continued in their first state of
Gentilism, are yet in no worse condition, than they should have been in Africa;
and that therefore no wrong is done them. Indeed, had they been Transported
hither, and here made Christians, tho they had paid no less than their Liberty
and Quiet, for the kindness, (to which they are forced without it,) I am
persuaded they had spoken nearer to the purpose.

14. NOR will their third Allegation, that they neither desire nor seek after
it, (to which, should they go about it, they should be sure to receive that
reply, which Pharaoh made to the Israelites, upon the like suit, Exodus 5. 17.
Ye are idle, etc.) any more excuse them, than the two former. It being a
Christians strictest duty, by his being such, to persuade and invite
unbelievers and wicked Men, tho of a more distant and remote Relation to us,
than our Slaves are, to serve God, and to embrace that Faith and Religion, by
which himself does hope to be saved, and without which he knows the other
cannot. But if the parties be such, as over whom he has a just Authority, I
there conceive it his Duty, if possible to compel them to it; I mean by all
fair and laudable means: As both the Parable of the Supper, St. Luke 14. and
Josias's compelling Judah and Israel to serve the Lord, do manifestly prove.
And therefore the Patriarchs in the Bible, tho their Servants sought it not
(possibly) any more than these, yet by their own Authority they initiated them
into Religion. Hence Abraham whose honor it was, That he would command (and
that certainly is Compulsion) his Children and his Household, after him to keep
the Way of the Lord, (and in the steps of whose Faith each Christian ought to
walk, Romans 4. 12.) is intimated to have Instructed and Catechized those three
hundred and eighteen, whom he led forth to rescue his Cousin Lot: As may be
seen by comparing Genesis 14. 14. with Prove. 22. 6. and their several Margents.
And what he began, his Posterity continued, whose Slaves were not only
Circumcised, but also admitted to the Passover* which last were both by special
Command, whilst the other were purely voluntary; yet commended, as being also
their Duty even by the Law of Nature, and that Principle of doing good, so far
as we are able, implanted in our Hearts. So also Joshua resolved, That his
Household should serve the Lord, as well as himself. And David, Psalm. 101.
purposed to retain none but faithful Persons to dwell in his House. And
Cornelius, even before his conversion, or knowledge of Christ, is said to fear
God with all his House. Without which, I fear, he had missed the character of
being a devout Man. And it is no less evident, that in the Gospel, the Faithful
held it their Duty, even by virtue of their Calling and Profession* to
Christianize their Servants. Every such (even as Children and Subjects, are to
Parents and Magistrates) being as it were so many Limbs and Members of their
Masters and Owners, and in some sort the same to them as their Children, and no
less accountable both to God and Man for them. From whence it may seem* That
the same word in the three learned Languages, is frequently used to express
both a Servant and a Son* to Intimate that strict care which each Father and
Master had, and ought still to use for the preservation, and due provision for
them, both as to Soul and Body, and for their Spiritual as well as Temporal
Food. And for all others it is Charity, if not Duty, to keep Men out of Misery
and Ruin, even against their Wills. And tho they be insensible of it, should
they therefore be allowed to perish, our selves beholding it, and not advising
them of the danger? Should a Physician permit his Patient to starve himself,
because he has lost his Appetite through the viciousness of his Stomach, or
overlong Fasting and Abstinence, and not be accounted (tho he escape being
indicted) for a Murderer? It Is true, if after due provision made and tendered,
he rejects it, and perishes in that obstinate refusal, after all due Means and
Arguments used to convince him, then we may say to him, Perditio ex te ipso,
and the whole guilt of his destruction will lie at his own door. And therefore
admitting it to be no wrong to the Negro's in not making them Christians, and
that, what is before affirmed, they were of no probability of attaining to the
knowledge of Christ in Guinea, which also is conjectural, and but a mean
commendation of the Traders thither, (who, I have heard, are by Bond always
obliged to the contrary); yet certainly we herein wrong our selves, by
neglecting our Duty in so high a measure, whilst instead of performing faithful
service to Christ, to whom we have vowed our whole Man, we in the mean time are
found to serve the Devil and Mammon only. For, as the Orator testifies, that
Person may justly be reputed an accessory to a Mischief, which he might, but
did not prevent: Agreeable to that of St. James 4. and the last ver. To him that
knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin. And if Sins of Omission
be by some accounted greater than those that are acted or done, there is no
doubt but that he who wounds his Soul by omitting his Duty, injures and hurts
himself equally with him that commits a Villainy. Nor shall I be afraid to
affirm, that if this I am speaking of, touching our Negro's Christianity being
hindered (or at least neglected) be no Sin, then neither is Perjury, Murder,
nor Adultery. And they, who, being concerned herein, do hold themselves
innocent, may as safely presume that that our Savior Christ, to promote their
Gain, will dispense with the most palpable violation of all his Laws. For
Christianity is a Religion of Charity, which teaches us to be Eyes to the
Blind, Ears to the Deaf, Feet to the Lame, and calls upon us to open our Mouths
for the Dumb, and which cannot Speak in their own cause. And it was Christ's
advice to sell all and give to the Poor, for the furtherance of Christianity.
And if the Primitive Christians did from thence conceive themselves obliged to
dispose of their whole Estates for the support of poor Believers, and the
increase of the Church, doubtless they were far from any deduction either from
that, or from any other Text, for the obstructing it for their private Gain.
Now it is all one to forego our Profit for the same good End, as thus to dispose
of it when acquired. And that Piety is no less acceptable, which is the means
of introducing new Believers, than of preserving the old. Nor is its worth at
all lessened by the quality of the Parties won and brought over to the Faith;
one Soul being as precious and dear to God as another, and a Slaves, being in
his sight not inferior to his Masters. And where the consideration of the End,
namely, the good of Souls, is the same, the excellency of the Duty cannot be
abated, by any less worthy intervening Circumstances. And this is to be
understood as relating to the care we ought to use for the Salvation of
Strangers, living at the remotest distance, and without relation to us. But
here is no such plea or pretense; tho it would be but of small force. The
parties we speak of being their Servants, and even branches of each Family, by
whom they in a manner wholly subsist; (some, and those not a few, having by
their Negro's labor arrived to vast Riches) and for whose Souls they are as
certainly accountable to God, as for their own. Who therefore cannot but claim
a share equal with themselves, in all things absolutely necessary for their
life and being, and the enabling them to perform whatsoever is by God or Man
required of them. The de^aining whereof, as St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. 8. determins
it, is no less than a rejecting of the Faith, and makes the Oppressor become
WORSE than an INFIDEL. Whose calling himself a Christian, whilst (indeed) he is
none, does call to mind St. John's Censure, Apoc. 2. 9. of the like sort of
People in his time, and gives us no less occasion to apply it here; I know the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan.

Ezekiel. 8. 15. Then said he unto me, Have thou seen this, O Son of Man? Turn
thee yet again, and thou shall see greater Abominations than these.
CHAP. III.
That the Inconveniences here pretended for this Neglect being examined, will
be found nothing such, but rather the contrary.

. I. n. 1. THe absolute necessity of a Christian's promoting Christianity, even
in despite of the greatest Difficulties and Inconveniences being showed, I
come now in the last place to examine those very Inconveniences, and to try
whether they are indeed such, as they are pretended; or whether the continuance
of those practices for whose Justification this Plea was invented, will not
upon a due trial be found more inconvenient and prejudicial to our Interest: At
least whether Christianity, notwithstanding these pretenses (whether true or
false) may not, upon the score of its innocent deportment, and unquestionable
blamelessness in all Ages, without the least hazard to any Man's just Right and
Interest, be afforded a free course, and find entertainment amongst all
Conditions and Degrees without prejudice, or offense to any.

2. And here I shall not conceal, what I have often within my own Breast
considered and wondered at; how, and with what Front these Persons who proclaim
to the World, the inconveniences and dangers threatened by Christianity to
their Estates and Lives, (for no less are the things in controversy) can utter
things which I am certain themselves neither do, nor can, believe: It being
impossible but that Men endued with common sense must know (and that with the
highest certainty that they can have), that nothing of prejudice can really
accrue to any Man by the Christian Religion. But much less can they be imagined
ever to have entertained any thoughts touching a future Account to be given for
such blasphemous suggestions, which to the dishonor of their blessed Redeemer,
and his Eternal Truth, they continually belch forth without the least shame or
blush. For otherwise Christianity might doubtless have found more candid and
civil usage from them, than to have thus put upon her such an hideous and
frightful Dress, as these have taken the boldness to represent her in, unto the
more ignorant and besotted Herd of Mankind, in these remote Quarters of the
World.

3. For it cannot but appear evident, even to the dimmest and most bleared
sight, that no such extraordinary danger can possibly attend the Work* I am
here suing for, on our Slaves Behalf; there being no persecuting Magistrates
carrying in their Breasts an hostile Enmity against either the Professors, or
Promoters of it; nor yet breathing out slaughter and destruction to them. There
are no Confiscations of Estates or Goods; no loss of Liberty threatened; nor is
it a Crime now to be a Christian; the Civil Powers being such themselves, and
Kings and Queens being long since become Patrons and Nurses of the Church.

4 Yet notwithstanding this, they are not ashamed to infer ('it is true, not
always in express words, as I have said) even as great Mischiefs from their
Negro-Slaves becoming Christians (but not otherwise) as the Faithful in the
Primitive Times sustained from the most persecuting Heathens. It being their
common Affirmation, That the Baptizing of their Negro's, is the ready way to
have all their Throats cut, etc. which my self, and I believe thousands of
others have heard declared and insisted upon by them, with much vehemenoy and
indignation; tho without any great show of Reason to make it out. For being at
any time demanded, from whence those fears could arise, they should never fail
most pertinaciously to persist in the Affirmative, So Turtullian says of the
Gentiles, Nolentes audire, quod auditum damnare non possint. Apol. c. 1.
That it was so. Which, with the addition of a few angry words, and uncivil
rude speeches, in reply to those demands, thereby to testify their displeasure
thereat, as well as the danger of enquiring further into their secrets, was
what was usual to be gotten from them.

5. But that which I have casually learned from certain False-Brothers of the
Society, has in their more retired Cabals, been alleged by them (and which
indeed was no other than what I before suspected) was principally these three
things.

6. First, They object the Knowledge wherewith their Slaves would be thereby
furnished; which they are sure will make them less governable, and like the
Galileans of old, or our seditious Reformers in 1642. to mutiny and rebel, to
free themselves from Tyranny and Oppression: Possess them with the Quakers, (of
whom here are great numbers) and other Phanatic's spirit of Obstinacy, against
all Laws and Government, and dispose them rather to suffer Death than to be*
subject, and at last out of pure Conscience, to murder their Masters.

7. Secondly, They object the charge and loss of Time, viz. from their
Sunday-work, etc. with diverse other the like sore Inconveniences, which in the
end will (forsooth) strike deep at their Profit, and quite ruin their Estates.
And therefore they often repeat this saying, If the Negro's get to be Baptized,
they must then e'ne take the Island to themselves.

8. Thirdly, They complain that the Terms of Christianity are in some things
too large, but in some other too narrow for them; both ways inconsistent with
the condition of Bondage: And therefore that their Negro's are not to be
admitted to, nor entrusted therewith. In which three we have a brief Account of
both the Principles and Men, that are such fierce Enemies to this way of
propagating Christianity: Their Religion and Interest are of one and the same
piece, nor are they ashamed to own it to the World. Doubtless, these do
conclude the Merchant in the Gospel, who judged it worth his while to sell all
that he had besides, to purchase that Pearl, to have had but a very shallow
Pate, for setting such a high value upon nothing, or at most, but Toys and
Fooleries, whose worth they believe lies only in the fancy and opinion of the
Wearer, not in any intrinsic excellency of their own.

9. But to undeceive the more well disposed, and to defeat their Malice by
unfolding this Mystery of Anti-Religionism: I shall in answer to their first
Objection, here demand of them, of what kind that Knowledge is they stand so
much in fear of? Is it the knowledge of Virtue and Goodness? Certainly it cannot
be other which Christianity instructs Men in. And how can there arise any
danger from such knowledge should they receive in never so great a proportiou?
Can the Decalogue, Creed, and Lords Prayer, with some few Catechistical and
general Points of the more necessary parts of Christianity from thence deduced,
prove so poisonous to the minds of Men, as to make them deserve a Character due
only to the vilest Blood-suckers, and cruel Assassins? Or can these be a means
to render them suspected, or dangerous to the World, when it is known that
nothing but the non-observance of them, is the sole occasion of all, as well
the greatest as the least evils? And therefore the Slaves Right understanding
and instruction in these Doctrines, can no more be a motive to him to slacken
his Duty* or prejudice his Master, than an Artizan's known skill in his Trade
can unqualifie him for being employed therein, or his tried Honesty, from being
either trusted or dealt with. This knowledge therefore must in common Reason, he
concluded to be the Master's chiefest Interest, being indeed a worthy
inducement to the highest trust and confidence in his Servant, thus endued
therewith, and no less ought to be his first care; That is, to make him Just,
True, and Honest to himself. At least, none can reasonably be the more
suspected for addicting themselves to such a Study, which only directs to
Integrity and Virtue. Where though they may be thought to begin but in Jest,
yet it is probable, they may end in Earnest: Their Reason may be overcome by the
force of its Arguments, or else their sight may be captivated: For, Vidit hanc,
visamque cupit, does here very often follow; the through understanding of Virtue
(as Plato observed) being apt to create most ardent affections to it. Not can
any genuine, or true principle of Christianity, give the least occasion for
either Fears or Jealousies, because in their own proper nature the most
innocent and opposite to all Frauds, guileful Practices, and worldly Policies;
of any Religion ever yet professed or taught. Those Crafts and Circumventions,
which the generality of Men do not once scruple, being most loathsome to the
Mind of a true Christian. And therefore it is most evident, that no Master can
be endangered by his Slaves instruction therein, which these Blasphemers, who
affirm the contrary, cannot but know; unless we will suppose them like Owls and
Bats, to be stark blind in the clearest Meridion light; and that amidst all the
Books and Sermons, with which this latter Age has been so abundantly stored,
any Man can possibly still remain so ignorant, (tho subtle enough as to other
less commendable and excellent things) as to be utterly unacquainted, with the
first and greatest points of his Religion.

9. But here withal, I must confess, that I am not of their mind, who hold none
fit to be admitted for Christians and Members of the Church, but Gifted, Wise
People only. Such as are able to Extemporize an hour or two, and speak to a
Text, as they call it. This possibly, as being of that kind of Knowledge or
Science which may be apt to puff them up, might in its consequence prove fatal:
It being not to be wondered at, if their swelling Tympany of fancied Abilities
do make them presume, since we read that when Hagar, (a Bondwoman too) had
conceived, she soon began to behave her self impudently toward her Mistress.
The knowledge therefore which I here plead for, is such as tends to their
Edification only, being of things absolutely necessary, as of God, our Blessed
Savior, and of the Holy Spirit; of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and of
Repentance, of living uprightly, and of a conscientious discharge of their Duty
both to God and Man. And if these can be hurtful, then I shall not be ashamed
even with the Adversaries to confess, that the knowledge of Christ's Religion,
is a thing Repugnant, and Inconsistent with the most honest and just Interest,
and wholly tending to disturb the good Order and Peace of the World. And yet
here I would not be misconstrued, as if intending to abridg any Masters
kindness to his Slave, who has a desire to furnish him with greater knowledge:
Only my request is, That he would not damn him for the want of this; which as I
am sure it is sufficient to save him, so neither is it considerable enough, for
his Masters fears. And so much touching this first Point, viz. The danger
arising from the Negro's knowledge.

10. The second is an Implication of the foulest charge against Christianity,
which the worst Enemies of it did ever suggest, but could never prove, viz.
That it instigates Men to Mutiny and Rebellion: Which cannot possibly be true
of it, but by Principles directing thereunto, therein contained and taught.
Which if so, then 'twere impossible for a Christian not to be a Rebel; and the
better Christian the more Rebellious. But unto such Practices nothing is more
diametrically opposite, than the genuine Doctrines of Christianity.

11. For first, It presses absolute and entire Obedience to Rulers and
Superiors, as may be collected from almost innumerable places of Scripture;
but more especially from the 13th to the Romans, and from St. Peter's and St.
Judes Epistles. And our Lord's answer to the Herodians, is sufficient to
silence all Cavillation touching this Duty. It gives the Title of Gods to Kings
and Magistrates, forbidding so much as to surmise evil of them. And this is so
plainly and evidently true, that amongst Atheists and Commonwealths-Men, (two
Names for one and the same thing) it is the only Crime known to be by them
charged with, viz. That it invests Governors and Monarchs with so independent
and absolute a Power. And thereupon have for diverse Years past, wisely
endeavored the suppression of it, to prevent (what they are pleased to term)
Tyranny and Slavery, and in order to the advancing the liberty of the Subject.

12. Secondly, It establishes the Authority of Masters, over their Servants
and Slaves, in as high a measure, as even themselves could have prescribed; in
a a due proportion placing them in a no less absolute degree of Power, than the
former. Exacting the strictest Fidelity; and that without any respect to their
Quality and Condition, but of their natural and true Right of Authority over
them. Requiring service with singleness of heart, as unto the Lord, and not
unto Men, Ephesians. 6. 5, 7. And so far it is from encouraging Resistance, that it
allows them not the liberty of Gainsaying, or making undutiful replys to their
Masters. And referring them to future recompense in Heaven, for their faithful
services done to them upon Earth, Ephesians. 6. 8. Of which Ties and Promises,
Gentile Slaves being destitute, no such Fidelity can be from them hoped for, or
expected. And so far is this Religion from a tendencie to Anarchy, or any
Levelling Tenets (as being founded not in a Parity, but a Superiority, not in a
Domocracy, but in an Aristocracie) that a conformity to that Axiom, Aequalitate
nihil iniquius; Nothing is more dangerous than Equality; has been her most
professed and constant Practice from her first appearance until this very day.

13. Thirdly, It enjoins to all in general an abhorrencie of evil, tho such
only in appearance. But much more prohibiting those things which are plainly
such, and even of the grossest and wrankest kind. It further puts a restraint
upon the Thoughts and Desires, which no other Religion does; forbids us to be
revengeful, or to return evil. And therefore far out-doeth the Heathen
Divinity, which permitted Revenge in case of Injury, allowed in no case amongst
Christians. So that whosoever can pick Rebellion, or cutting of Throats out of
these Principles, may as easily prove Adultery lawful from the Seventh
Commandment, or Slandering from the Ninth, reconcile Contradictions, and bring
Contraries to concur and agree in all Points at one and the same time.

14. And therefore the Delusions of those Atheists, and Impostors in 1642, and
afterward, (since declared, viz. by the Parl. in 1660, to be no Protestants,
and as certainly no Christians) to whom Christ will one day return but small
thanks for occasioning his Doctrine thus to be blasphemed; can be no such
convincing Argument, that their Murders and Depredations, tho falsely
pretending Scripture and Inspiration for them, were the genuine result of
Christian Principles; until better Proof and Reasons for it be produced, than
their own bare Affirmations. And for the Galileans action, it was (like other
of the seditious attempts of that Nation, both before and after to assert
Liberty) but a Jewish Dream, which Christ himself did to their no small
indignation plainly disown, and in that his answer to the Herodians, St. Mat.
16. utterly condemn. And for the Quakers obstinacy (whom yet they here support
and encourage against the Ministers) I know no further nor better use can be
made of it, than from thence to infer the necessity of Church Government, and
of suppressing false Opinions in Religion, from whence this Obstinacy is
occasioned and derived, But not therefore to stifle and hinder Men from the
knowledge of that Profession and Truth, which teaches the contrary. But our
People, who in truth have as little stomach to submit to others, as they
believe their Slaves have to submit to them, will scarcely be brought to
approve of this Use, or Inference. Tho these Quakers refusal to bear Arms, and
to defend their Island, (no not in case of an Invasion) together with their
Commission dormant of New Light and Revelation, reserved against some fit time
and opportunity of Action (whereby no Man is secure) do often put them upon
thoughts of using Violence to that their own dear principle of Libertinism, no
less than to the others tender Consciences.

15. Lastly, For Insurrections and Revolts, nothing can be imagined a greater
Security against them, than a sincere inward persuasion of the truth of
Christianity, with a through knowledge of its Principles. Of which the effects
have been lately seen in New England, where their Christian-Indians Fidelity
was tried to the uttermost; encountered on the one hand by the jealous surmises
of their Friends, and on the other by the both invitations and threatenings of
their Enemies, if at least we may so term their unconverted Countrymen: Yet in
despite of all, they remained firm to the English. Who, after that they durst
trust them, became very serviceable to our People there, as has been attested
by more than one of their Writers. So powerful are the Bonds of Religion to
unite the minds of Men, tho of most different and even contrary Interests: And
when sincere and hearty proving indissolvable, tho under the darkest Eclipse
and trial of Adversity. Making Men to forget their own People, and their
Fathers House, and joining them in affection to the most distant Strangers. For
these having so fair an opportunity of Revolting, and all the invitements and
arguments for it, which Men upon such occasions could wish for; as, the ridding
their Country of Foraigners, and the enriching themselves with the Spoils of
their well built and better furnished Houses; their Lands manured and stored
with Cattle, and abounding with many other conveniences, which themselves
never were blessed with: And lastly, the Royetlets and several Tribes of that
spacious Continent, all in a manner up in Arms, and unanimous for the rooting
them out of it. Yet none of all these considerations could prevail with those
Indians, whose minds were thus seasoned with Religion, to falsify their Faith
once plighted to the English. With whom doubtless things might have gone much
harder, had they been deserted by them. And they might perchance (all things
considered) have been glad to leave their more Inland Stations, and forced to
retire and betake themselves to their greater Strengths on the Seacoast; there
to have remained pent up, and despairing ever to recover their lost Territory,
but by the aid of extrinsic force, which would (probably) have cost them more,
than they are willing to part with. And to come a little nearer, even to our
own Island, where it is possible that the late Plot had not been so near taking
effect, had the greater, or indeed any considerable, number of the Negro's here
been Christians. One thing more I shall add, that the Spanish Indians in
America, are not recorded once to have rebelled since their first Reduction
under the Spanish Power; nor have the Conquerers themselves been disturbed with
any Intestine Broyls, that have been considerable; which is more then we can
boast of in our Colonies; tho seated (I speak even of the Eldest of them) not
above one third part of the time, that the other have enjoyed theirs. Which
effect I can ascribe to nothing more, then to the force and power of Religion.

16. But there is one Instance worth all that can be produced, or said upon
this Subject, and that is the Example of the Theban Legion; which I shall
present in the words of a Modern Author Mr. Dudley Diggs, of the unlawfulness
of Subjects taking up Arms against their Prince, etc.
. It is, says he, one of the noblest passages in all the Ecclesiastical
History, wherein Christianity did shine forth in its full Luster, and it
affords plentiful Light for our instruction. This band consisted of almost 7000
Men, all Christians. The Emperor Maximian commands the whole Army to offer
Sacrifice to false Gods; they remove their Quarters, that they might avoid, if
it were possible, this occasion of discontenting him. He summons them to
perform their part in this devilish Worship. They are forced to return an
humble denial, and their resolution not to disobey God, for whose sake they had
ever been, and would continue faithful Servants unto him. The Emperor
unsatisfied with this Answer, puts them to a Decimation. They submit with much
Cheerfulness, and die, praying for their Murderers. After this sad Spectacle,
his Commands are renewed; but prevail nothing upon the Remainder; wherefore
they are all Butchered without the least resistance. There was no delay in
their Death, except from the weariness of the Executioners. This was truly to
confess him, who was led as a Sheep to the slaughter, and like a Lamb opened
not his Mouth; and they a Flock of his Fold, are quietly devoured by ravening
Wolves. The Commander of this Regiment Mauritius could not contain his joy,
when he had seen the first Decimation gallantly suffered. How fearful was I,
said he, to his Fellow Soldiers (for armed Men may be tempted to defend
themselves), lest any of them upon color of just resistance for
self-preservation in an innocent Cause, should have struggled against this
blessed Slaughter, I was watchful, and had Christ's Example in readiness, who
commanded his Disciple to put his Sword into the Scabbard. Salus vestra non
periclitatur, nisi armis vestris; If you use not your Weapons, I have God's own
Warrant for your safety.

17. Despair it self could not conquer one single Patience, which yet creates
valor in Cowards, and makes them more courageous in Extremities, because they
are Fearful; since they are likely to endeavor most to preserve Life, who are
most terrified with Death.

18. But it may be objected, Vires deerant, they were not able to go through
with the Rebellion. This very Objection, says he, was made by the Ancients,
and answered by themselves to our Hands. Their Speeches witness sufficient
strength, if Religion had not tied their Hands. Which had they been other than
truth, must have armed their so potent Adversaries with sufficient Arguments
against them.

19. The same learned Author goes on, and tells us that, St. Cyprian says
expressly, Quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit populus; Tho we have
competent Forces enough, yet we wrestle not with our Oppressors. The Theban
Legion was in a posture of resistance, but they durst not lift up those hands,
into which the Emperor had put Weapons, against his Personal Commands, tho
unjust and bloody. Six thousand six hundred sixty six Men, of such
extraordinary Valor, as did not entertain the least fear of Death, might
probably have conquered, (and this Cruelty might have increased their Party, by
the defection of Malcontents) at least they must certainly have made some
sport for their Lives: They could not have wanted that Comfort, which to some
tastes is beyond the pleasure of Life, to die revenged. Besides, had not the
Emperor and his Council known them true Christians, and been acquainted with
the tameness of that Profession toward the Higher Powers, he would never have
hazarded a Rebellion, by making so considerable an Army desperate.

20. And Tertullian, Cui bello idonei non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares
copiis, qui tam libentur trucidamur; How could they possibly receive a Foil,
tho short in number, who so quietly do suffer our Throats to be cut? Numeri
damnum virtus pensaret, tho we wanted the advantage of number, which you
perceive we do not, Courage would supply that defect; And tho fewer, since we
contemn our own Lives, we might be Masters of yours. We could undo you, not if
we should Rebel, but if we would be Idle; we were lost, if we did not Fight for
you. Vestra omnia implevimus, castra ipsa, etc. We fill all places in the
Empire, and even your Camp would be empty without us Christians. The same
Father makes a bold Challenge, and desires them to produce, if they can, but
one example of any Christian taking part with Rebels. Their unanimous
Confession was, We kiss the Hands that wound us, and the Example of Christ is
made our Law. Inde est quod nemo nostrum, quando apprehenditur, reluctatur, nec
se adversus injustam violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit
populus, ulciscitur. For this cause none of us makes resistance, when
apprehended, nor revengeth your unjust Violence; for God is able to reward our
Patience, and to requite all our Sufferings. Si injuriam, etc. If you depend
upon God, he will undertake your Quarrel, and revenge your Wrongs; your Wounds
shall save you: and if you fall a Martyr, you shall rise a Saint. What cannot
our Sufferings do? They make even God our Debtor; He owes us Heaven for our
selves, and Hell for our Enemies, but we breath out our Souls in Prayer, that
he may be entreated not to pay this. Here is the Patience and Faith of the
Saints; they believed, therefore they suffered such things, etc. Thus far that
loyal and ingenious Person, in whom is legible the genuine temper and spirit of
a Christian; Unless it can be supposed that the whole multitude of them, as
well their more learned Guides, as the ignorant and simple, were wholly
unacquainted with their Profession. And from hence, with what elsewhere has
been said, I may safely presume to conclude, that Christianity which obliges
Men to the strictest Virtue, and that upon such weighty Motives, as no
Profession did ever pretend to, is so far from working Mischief to Superiors
and Governors, that it rather appears of absolute necessity for the security
both of Themselves and their Affairs, that their Subjects be thoroughly
acquainted with it; As, er'e I come to close up my Discourse, I hope, I shall
yet further show.

. II. 1. The first and great danger which concerns their Lives being escaped, I
come to examine the two last Objections, which for their near affinity and
resemblance, I shall twist together, and dispatch under one. These do concern
their Estates and worldly Interests, things no less dear unto them; but both
dearer than Religion; for otherwise such Objections had not been to be
answered. Now in the first they affirm, Their Estates will be threatened no less
than four several ways; of each of which I shall give this short, but true
Account; viz. That, the first is Idle and Ridiculous; the second Sordid and
Unchristian: The third a mixture of Gentile and Mahumetan Superstition and
Irreligion: The fourth Inhumane and Monstrous, a reproach to Mankind, and a
dishonor to the English Government and Nation.

2. For the first, They affirm their Estates will suffer by the Charges from
hence ensuing: As by Baptizing, Marrying, Churching, and Burying their Slaves.
All now either totally omitted, or else performed by the Overseers, (in a kind
of profane Merriment, and derision as it were of the Ordinances), or (as in
Marririage) by mutual agreement amongst themselves; and (as is used jestingly
here to be said, when speaking of the Quakers (like) Marriages) after the Negro
fashion. As for Visitation of the Sick, I shall not insert it in the List,
because here laid aside in a manner by all, besides the richer English. The
other (like those poor desperate Souls in Limbo, that for wont of Money, have
no Body to pray them out) being by the remoteness of their Habitations, the
frequent badness of the Weather and the Ways, the scarcity of Ministers, an
evil, but little felt, tho much fewer, (notwithstanding there are not above
five;) and the numerousness of the Inhabitants (supposed not fewer than one
hundred and odd thousands) not possibly to be thought on, unless we should
suppose the Ministers always on Horseback for that very work: And then who
should preach (without Book) upon Sundays?

3. A County in England of the same extent with this Island, has commonly 100
or more Parishes and Ministers* all, one with an other, not worse provided for
Maintenance, tho not a quarter so Populous nor Rich as these here.
Secondly, They apprehend that this would produce a necessity of enlarging
their Churches, and increasing the number of Parishes and Ministers, of both
which there are but too many already, half of the Churches being destitute of
Ministers, tho but Eleven in all. And in those Churches that are better
supplied, it is known that the Prayers and Sermons are usually delivered to
little more than the bare Walls only, notwithstanding the multitude of People
belonging to each; of whom not a fifth part (I speak only of the English) could
be admitted into most of them, should they all appear.

4. Thirdly, They add the time to be spent in this (needless) work of Religion,
which amongst so many laboring Hands must be considerable. Besides their
Sunday-work, would be quite lost, as also their increase by the Negro's
Polygamy.

5. Fourthly, They have a strange apprehension and foresight, that their Slaves
when admitted Christians, would be apt to expect better usage (which even
Heathens will tell them they ought to have without it) for Food, Clothes, and
Rest, and more merciful Correction, moderated according to some Law, (and not
left to each Tyrants pleasure) which perchance, may be but reasonable. These,
as indeed the former, they sparingly mention, being ashamed to own, and it were
to be wished they would also to practice, them. Of all which I shall leave
others to judge, whether they do not fully answer my short Character and
Description of them.

6. But as bad as these are, the following are worse; wherein like downright
Atheists, Luc. l. 9. Olim vera fides -- obit, nunc and ficta perit. They
declare their Sin as Sodom, Isa. 39.
they stand up for Libertinism, and object directly against Christianity,
blaming the equability and justice of its Terms, the thing that chiefly renders
it commendable. These they complain of, as on the one hand too large, but on
the other too straight and narrow, in neither able to content them, being both,
they say, inconsistent with Bondage. These Terms are, 1. Privileges. 2.
Prohibitions.

6. The Privileges are chiefly these three: First, Their Slaves admittance to
an Oath, which, being at present Heathens, are scarce current in a Christian
Court; as some of them have been made to understand in England from a certain
Judg's reprehending and menacing of them for their brutish neglect herein; tho
they were not ignorant of it before. Secondly, Their equality as to the
Communion and Church-Administrations; which, to all are, or ought to be, the
same. Thirdly, The inconvenience that may ensue upon their acquaintance with
this Precept of our Blessed Savior; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.
It may perchance be expected that I should add a fourth, viz. A supposed Right
to Freedom, and of being set at Liberty immediately upon their Baptism; which
is by some apprehended to be in it self a release from Servitude. To which
last, (tho it be needless, they having secured that Interest, as I have
understood, by a Law of their own, whose Validity they do not question,) I
shall speak something also, after having first replied to the three former.

7. The first whereof is their admission to an Oath, wherein they seem again to
have forgotten, the thing I am interceding and suing for on their behalf, viz.
That they may be made Christians; which, as is before showed, is certainly of
it self a sufficient remedy and security against all temptations to Perjury. A
Crime, which according to the true Principles thereof, is next to irremissible:
And for which the Ancient Canons did enjoin Penance to the Offender during his
Life.

8. And yet should we suppose the worst, I cannot imagine the danger to be
greater than it was in former Ages, when both Slaves and Villains were freely
admitted, without this scruple, to give Evidence; even as in Poland, and
elsewhere, it is not to be doubted, but they still are. Nor do I conceive that
St. Paul thought his Christian Slaves Oath more to be suspected than other
Men's, whilst they no less stuck to the Principles of Christianity. And in
truth, at the same rate, all the World may be no less suspected: it being
possible that all Men may prove deceitful and wicked, tho not in the least
probable.

9. That their Oath may be useful, we even now find, where their bare word or
testimony given without it, is often found very serviceable, tho not admitted
for a sufficient proof. The want whereof is many times no small impediment to
the course of Justice. And for Subornations, the thing chiefly objected; for my
part, as I see not but they might (especially being made Christians) be as well
trusted as most others; so should any such thing happen, it will be presumed
that the wise Judges will be no less Eagle-sighted, and able to descry such
practices in these, than in the English.

10. As for the second, it is hard to find out what they intend by it, unless
it should be that the Negro's would thereby be apt to think more proudly of
themselves, and less worthily of their Masters; which yet cannot be gathered
from Christianity, nor indeed can ever happen, if St. Paul's rule be well
applied; And they that have believing Masters, let them not despise them,
because they are Brethren, but rather do them [the better] service, because
they are Believers, 1 Timothy 6. So that this Authority of the Master is so far
from being hereby diminished, that it is rather confirmed, and a stricter
observance for that cause charged upon the Servants Conscience. Nor do we find
that Abraham, Job, etc. were the less esteemed by their Bondmen, for their
being initiated into Religion, by the same Ceremonies with themselves; neither
do we find or suspect this in our English Servants, or Dependents. That Woman
also whose Negro (P. 38.) I baptized, had not more cause to complain that he
thereafter failed in his Duty and Fidelity, tho she quarreled at it. Nor yet
two others in Virginia (the former being in Carolina) whom I likewise Baptized,
were ever taxed by their Masters, as less diligent after Baptism, than they
were before. Nor lastly, did the Hebrew or Christian Masters, nor I believe
hardly any other Sect, ever ascribe to Religion the disorders of their Servants
as the cause thereof, if at any time they found themselves disrespected by
them. Except only the Romans Saturnalia, wherein the Slaves were permitted to
retaliate their Masters cruelties; which extravagancy Christianity does not in
the least allow of. And for the third, they may remember, that if Christ has
taught, That we should love our Neighbors as our selves, his Apostle has from
his Mouth also, no less enjoined Servants obedience to their Masters; which two
Precepts do no more thwart either the other, than that of the fame Apostle,
commanding, To render to every Man his due, and Masters to allow their Servants
that which is just and equal, does destroy their just Right and Authority over
them. And this, if we were to deal with Men that had any sense of Christianity,
or Religion, (which the Objection does most evidently show that they have not)
might prove satisfactory to them; but as the case stands, it is not to be hoped
will much avail to their Conviction.

12. And as to that which some would in the fourth place object, touching their
release from servitude upon Baptism, tho I do not see that they here do retain
any apprehensions thereof, their Law (of which I have only heard mention here,
but do know that there is such both in Virginia and Maryland) having carefully
barred all such Pleas; yet were there no such Law enacted, I cannot understand
that a necessity for such a release does arise from any Principles of
Christinity, nor of Religion in general. For if we look into the Old Testament,
we find that Circumcision (to the Faithful then the same with Baptism now) did
not release Abraham's three hundred and eighteen Slaves, nor those afterward
belonging to his Posterity, any more than their partaking of the Passover,
Exodus 12. did; of which yet no hired Servant was to eat. And the Gibeonites
were perpetual Bondmen and Vassals, notwithstanding their admittance to the
Temple, and to Religion. And then to come to Christianity and the New
Testament, Onesimus, who is styled [(...), a Slave] (to Philemon) as (that word
importing no less) is generally agreed, was not made a Freeman by his being
Baptized; which S. Paul's returning him to his Master, a Christian also, and
his interceeding for him, does manifest. Whom tho he bespeaks as a Convert, yet
lets him know that his Obligation to his Master was still the same. And tho he
professes that he might be much bold in Christ to enjoin Philemon that which
was convenient, yet that he chose rather to entreat him by Love: And what was
that? Not that he might be set at liberty, as being now a Christian, and even a
Brother; but that, forgetting wherein he had offended, being now a Penitent and
a Convert, he would receive him again. Nor against this do we find Onesimus
urging his Privilege, nor refusing to carry the Letter with his own hand. A
manifest sign that there was then no such understood, or heard of. And in 1
Cor. 7. 21, 22. where the same St. Paul asserts the privilege of Christian
Servants, he withal tells them their Duty, giving them to know, that they were
to abide in the same Calling, wherein they were when first converted, or
called; not but that if they could procure their liberty, they should rather
use it. And if any shall demand what then is that liberty of a Christian, which
St. Paul elsewhere asserts and urges? I answer, That I know no more by it,
than a liberty from the yoke of Judaism, from Sabbaths, Circumcision, and such
like Ordinances and Levitical Ceremonies. As also a release from our former
slavery to our Lusts, which is the greatest liberty and happiness, if
considered and understood. And lastly, An admission to serve Christ, our most
perfect Freedom, and to partake of the Privileges and Promises of the Gospel,
and thereby to obtain an Adoption to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God in
Heaven. Which certainly are far greater Immunities, than a bare release from
temporal Servitude can possibly amount to. For Christ's Kingdom being not of
this World, his Religion was never designed to deprive any Man of his civil
Rights, but rather did confirm them all to us. And to show that Bondage is not
inconsistent with Christianity, we see it practiced by other Christian Nations
in these parts without the least prejudice to them: Even as not one hundred
Years since in England, Villanage, a kind of Slavery, was in force, and still
is in other Countries, and some do say, in our own too.

13. And whereas it is further Objected, That certain Canons and Imperial Edicts
(neither of them admitted here), and the Municipal Laws of some Countries ('it is
possible of England it self) heretofore enacted or decreed for the honor of
Christianity, or to strengthen its Party against the Heathen, do oppose this
continuation of our Slaves in Bondage. I answer, First, That these Laws being
designed for the good of Servants, and the promoting of Christianity, there is
now no reason they should be continued, when experimentally found, through the
hardness of Men's Heats, so great impediments thereto; and even to be turned
against them, for the benefit of whose Bodies and Souls they were intended.
But, Secondly, I add, that this (tho true) does not trouble my Assertion,
because we do not find that these Laws do flow from any necessity thereof,
concluded in the Principles of Christianity; as being merely voluntary, and the
effects only of the good Nature and Piety of their first Christian Contrivers;
and to which a Christian (as such) is no more bound, than to sell all his
Goods, and give them to the Poor: Which yet may be a good work, and very
commendable, in those that shall aspire after such perfection.

14. But yet further, if any shall make it a matter of Conscience to continue
Christians in Servitude; it would concern those that entertain that scruple
(which I fear few do) to remember how much more against a good Conscience it
is, either through Sloth, or for a petty Profit, to keep Men, that have Souls
to be saved, destitute of the means thereto, and consequently to occasion their
Damnation; than simply to retain them under Servitude, abstracted from that
other Irreligion. Which tho perhaps less commendable in Christians, is far
short of the Impiety of keeping them Slaves to Hell, and to our selves too. And
here also, supposing the worst, it ought by Christians to be considered how
much the loss of a Servant is less than of a Soul, (yea of many) for whom
Christ died, no less than for their Masters; and who cannot expect to be saved,
if the other, through their occasion, perishes. But letting this scruple pass,
(to salve which there never will be here any occasion), I think it clear enough
that Christianity does not lessen any obligations of Servants to their lawful
Masters: And therefore that if any positive Laws to the contrary do as yet
stand in their way, I should be apt to recommend the Bermudian caution of
Indentures for 99 years Service, to our Peoples imitation, in the interim till
those Laws (I say, if any such there be) might by Authority be fairly removed.

. III. 1. And thus our dangers from the Privileges being cleared, I proceed to
do the like by the Prohibitions, viz. Of their Polygamy, their Sunday-Labour,
frequent repudiating and changing their Wives, usual amongst most Heathens. As
also their Idolatrous Dances and Revels, permitted and practiced by them (so
often as they can steal any time from their Work) even upon that Day, whose
Morality (to the danger of straining it to the height of a Jewish Sabbath) has
been so much, for these many Years, insisted on amongst the English; with other
such Recreations and Customs, by them brought out of Africa, and here connived
at, because either gainful to their Owners, (such as the first) or grateful to
the poor Slave (such as the latter) without prejudice to their Masters
Business. None of which yet are heard of amongst the Virginia Negro's, tho
alike Gentiles with these: And there not laid aside or forbidden, but forgotten
by disuse.

2. Now might not this cause one to stand still and to admire, how such things
should come to be, I do not say, justified, but even permitted, or endured by
Christians: Who, as before they were not ashamed to begrudge the poor Wretches
thus spending their strength and days in their Service, even a miserable
Subsistence, for they expect no more: So here they allege things palpably
wicked, as a pretense for a worse and more dangerous Frugality, if I may so
call it, viz. The starving of their Souls. Contenting themselves to give a free
course to Turkish and Heathenish Licentiousness, and even to all Irreligion and
Atheism, for a wretched false Gain; but in the mean time blindly overlooking
the many greater Advantages, which are the undoubted fruit of true Christianity.

3. For can it be believed that the small trouble of Christenings, to be had
without Fees; as also of Catechizing, Marrying, Churching and Burying of them
(the consenting to which will one Day, like Nehemiah's good deeds for
Jerusalem, or Tobit's charity for the Dead, be our greatest comfort;) can
equal, Think upon me, O my God, for good according to all that I have done for
this People, Neh. 5.
or any way be compared with the solid benefit and satisfaction arising from
the unquestionable Fidelity and Integrity of a virtuous Servant? Can a few
hours Sunday-Work (for I plead not for the other Holy Days) be alike beneficial
to us, as the same spent in learning them their Duty, or as the blessing of God
upon us for it in the ensuing Week? Can starving, or working them to Death,
(for it cannot be denied but that these are too frequent) be equally profitable
with keeping them alive for our future Service? Or can we believe it alike
expedient, or conducive to our Interest, to be put each Year to purchase and
train up Raw, Ignorant, and unhandy Barbarians, with preserving for our
occasions, the tried and more experienced, by good usage of them? It Is true,
you may alledg the temptation and certainty of the present Profit, with the
uncertainty of future Contingencies, the possibility of their out-living those
hardships, and of their dying also under better usage; yet surely this is but a
brutish Plea, and at best not a little savouring of their Providence, who
devour all at one Meal, as uncertain whether ever they should live to enjoy
another.

18. As for the charge of Instructing them, if they think it too much to
undertake themselves, (which the holy Patriarchs did not) they cannot but know
the same Person who attends this work upon Sundays, or Saturdays Afternoon,
(which last was formerly allowed to both Slaves and Servants, when this Island
was less Wealthy and Populous, than now it is) may be further useful in the
rest of the Week; particularly in teaching their own, and the neighboring
Youth, (or possibly in keeping their Accounts, etc.) which would prevent a
greater Charge, together with the hazard of transporting them to Europe for
Education: Not omitting that so much (beyond the dangers of the Sea, and of
different Climes) worse mischief of their being betimes Debauched; scarce to be
avoided at so great a distance from their Parents care and inspection, as in
many Instances is too apparent. And this also might be a means in some measure
to put a stop to that Barbarism, which through the want of Schools, do threaten
the irrecoverable Ruin of all our Hopes in them.

19. As for the danger of our Slaves release from Servitude thereby, to what I
have said before, I shall only add, That if they suspect the Validity of their
own Laws, the contrary to which I have always found; no doubt but his Majesty,
and the Honorable Houses of Parliament, will have their Ears open to their
just Fears and Complaints, thus arising from a pious sense of their Duty, and
the safety of their Peoples Souls, no less than of their own; so as to fortify
their Interest with as good Laws and Fences, as themselves shall in Reason
propose, or their Omnipotency (pardon the expression, Rulers can do much
within their proper Spheres) can create, or give life to. Nor let that
over-proud fear of thereby acknowledging (what they cannot possibly avoid,)
their dependence upon England, nor that of rendering the rest of their Laws,
with their Legislative Power (which, I confess, some would fain extend beyond
its due bounds) questionable, be any impediment thereto; since neither the one
nor the other are more secured without it: And these two being known to be
different things in Law, viz. To corroborate an old, and create a new Title.

6. And for the charge of dividing and lessning the Parishes, (very necessary
if but the for English alone) and the increasing the number both of Churches
and Ministers (tho this does not absolutely follow; the foregoing Expedient
being admitted, nor perhaps without it;) All the danger which from thence is
like to arise, is, that thereby we are like to be made better Christians, and
by such a convenience enabled more duly to serve God; a benefit well worth the
purchasing at so small an Expense. Tho Christians in such a case should first
reflect upon the Prophets reply to King Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. The Lord is
able to give thee mucb more than this. And the old Jewish Aphorism, Decima ut
dives fias, answering to our English Adage, that Meat and Mass, (others have
rendered it, Prayer and Provender) do never hinder Work, do confirm that in the
Sum total, Nothing is lost by our attending upon God's Service and Religion.

7. Hereby also, besides the Integrity and Long-livedness of their Slaves
(which would abundantly recompense the loss of other less commendable Profits
and Advantages), their gettings would not be so clogged with those troublesome
gripes, and stings of Conscience, which first or last are the certain
Appendices of unlawful and bloody Gain; nor with that Curse denounced by the
Prophet, Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8. for such Unmercifulness and Impiety. Nor would their
Estates be so subject to that Moth and Canker, which some observing Persons
(nor over addicted to Priests, nor to Religion, it is well known, but) even from
amongst themselves, have (so forcible are Right words, Job 6. 25.) been brought
to confess, as being most Notorious: Who at the same time could not find out
any cause whereto to ascribe those apparent effects, besides that of oppressing
these People. For as an Achan, or a Saul may trouble Israel, so even very
Gibeonites may bless the Inheritance of the Lord. And so all would be enjoyed
with greater Security: And that which now is as unstable as Water, and a Curse
rather than a Blessing, would be a durable and firm Passession; not as now for
the most part to the immediate Heirs only, but even to the succession of many
Generations: For as one very well observes, Interest is best preserved by
Justice and Equity, which will entitle it to that blessing from God, which he
has promised in his Word, and which are naturally apt to be instrumental to
Providence in producing that good, which he has promised.

8. And as each private Man, so also the public will be made more happy.
Religion, says one, causes good Orders, and good Orders do create Peace and
Concord, which is a Peoples greatest strength. A Fool, if he tread in the ways
of Holiness and Religion cannot err, according to the Prophet Isaiah 35. 8.
There shall be an Highway and a Way, and it shall be called the Way of
HOLINESS; the wayfering Men, tho Fools, shall not err therein. And on the other
side, Baalam hired to procure the ruin of Israel, could not devise a more
pernicious Counsel, than to make Israel sin. Livie in his fifth Book,
rehearses a speech of Camillus, to the Romans, wherein he appeals to their own
Experience, whether ever they had better Luck, than when they carefully served
God, or worse than when they neglected it. So Horace also in his l. 3. Ode 6.
And Cicero ascribes all the good fortune of the same People (and no less does
St. Augustine in his Book, De Civitate Dei:) to their Piety and Devotion. Nec
numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Poenos, nec artibus.
Graecos; nec denique hoc ipso hujus gentis and terrae domestico nativoque sensu
Italos ipsos and Latinos; sed Pietate ac Religione, atque hac una sapientia
quod deorum immortalium Numine omnia regi gubernarique prospeximus, omnes
gentes Nationesque superavimus; That is, We [Romans] neither outnumbred the
Spaniards, nor were stronger than the Gauls, nor outwitted the Carthaginians,
nor were more learned than the Greeks, nor surpassed the Italians and Latins,
our predecessors in their natural Capacities: But by our Religion, Piety, and
by this one only point of WISDOM, that we believed all things to be directed by
the appointment of Heaven, we have been able to worst all other Nations.
Xenophon tells us, That the great Cyrus laid not the foundation of his Persian
Monarchy so much by his Valor and Wisdom, as a Religious Worship of Heaven,
and a liberality even to profuseness in the service thereof. This also was that
which did aggrandize Alexander the founder of the Macedonian Empire. And hence
it was, says one, That the Romans made not an unworthy choice of a Commander,
or Officer, for many Years; the way there to be preferred, being by Religion.
Therefore this became the grand Emulation of the People, Soldiers, Captains,
and Senators. And Comines was persuaded, that hereof did spring the greatness
of the Venetian Seigniory. From thence Matchiavel admonishes those Princes and
Republic's, that would keep themselves from Ruin, above all things to preserve
the Rights of their Religion incorrupt, and to maintain it always venerable.
And he further adds, That there is no surer sign of a Countries destruction,
than to see in it a contempt of Divine Worship.

9. Before I can conclude this part, I must crave leave to recite another
memorable passage out of Livie's first Book of his Roman History, as conceiving
it pertinent to the Point I am upon: It being touching the effects of Religion
upon Rome's first Planters, for that also was a Colonie. Whom in the first
place, he bespeaks to have been a People rude and savage: But to abate whose
fierceness, and to render them more tame and mansuete; Numa their second King,
endeavors by good Laws and Orders, to reduce them to Civility, thereby as it
were to reedifie that City, whose Foundation had before been laid by Force and
Arms. Howbeit this being too little to accomplish his purpose, (a thing worthy
to be taken Notice of;) He in the next place, devises to bring them to some
sense of Religion, and the fear of God; Rem omnium primam ad multitudinem
efficacissimam ratus; judging this above all most operative upon the generality
of Men. Whereby, as it follows, their Minds possessed with an awe of Religion;
A solemn promise and the respect of an Oath, did, without further Laws or
Penalties, govern the City. Nor was the blessing from abroad attending their
Devotion, less remarkable. For, says our Author, This Piety observed in them,
did so affect their Neighbors: Vt civitatem totam in cultum versam Deorum
violari ducerent nefas: That they judged it Sacrilegious to vex or molest a
People, so addicted to the Service of God. I shall leave our People to make the
Application, without adding any thing more thereto, than what our Lord Christ
replied to the Inquisitive Lawyer, St. Luke 10. 37. Vade and tu fac similiter,
Go and do thou likewise.

Ezekiel. 8. 17. Then said he unto me, -- Is it a light thing -- that they commit
the Abominations, which they commit here? For they have filled the Land with
Violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: And lo they are [(...)]
like them that make Sport or Mock.
CHAP. IV.
Wherein certain little Shifts and Pretenses from England are examined, and
found weightless. Also some few Proposals preparatory to this Work are laid
down; with Exhortations to both Ministers and People, to a cheerful and speedy
betaking themselves thereto.

. I. n. 1. MY three General Assertions being finished, I should with them here
draw to a full Conclusion, did not an Objection or two from the further Shore
oblige me to the contrary. Where (as I have heard, it was not long since
threatened from another place, and is since fallen out, tho not upon the
occasion which they desired, as a pretense for it;) it is feared that the
enforcing hereof (as if nothing less could be used) would go near to endanger a
Rebellion, and is therefore believed less safe to be attempted, especially in
case it should not succeed. Secondly, They suppose The time to be unseasonable;
the Jews pretense, Hag. 1. Thirdly, That since they cannot yet compass to
settle Religion at Home, how should they hope to accomplish any settlement in
those remote parts? So that here are no less than three terrible Lions in our
way to this work: Of all which yet, if well looked into, David's words, Psalm.
53. will be undoubtedly verified, There were they in great fear, where no fear
was.

2. For, First, It is to be considered that the disproportion between these
two, is as wide as between the setting up of a Cottage and a Palace, or the
building of St. Paul's and of a Country Church: Where he that wants sufficient
Strength and Materials for the one, may yet be amply furnished for the other.
And here also is the same difference as between a Being and a Well-being; which
those that shall be apt to envy the last, will blush to deny the first; this
being by all granted necessary, which is the utmost of our wishes here.
Besides, there the Dissenting Parties are at enmity with, and do oppose that
settlement, who yet, I doubt not, would all of them put their helping hand to
this: None besides direct Atheists (and I hope our good People here will pardon
me for this) daring to object against it. And, for the Time, the Prophet Haggai
has answered it to my hand, in the Chapter before mentioned. And so much shall
suffice for the two last Objections.

3. Now to the former, I shall answer, That as I hold our Planters and
Merchants Interests too great in England, ever to betray them into such a folly
as a Rebellion; so I presume the ill success of it elsewhere, and the less
probability of better here, where most of their subsistence is imported from
Foraign parts, would be enough to prevent all such Attempts.

4. But were our security against such fears greater and the danger less; yet,
I must confess I am not for forcing, but persuading our People thereto, by good
Sermons and Pious Books, preached and wrote upon that Subject: And no less by
encouragements from the Government (where it ought to begin) to both Ministers
and People, who should be most forward and industrious therein. It Is I know out
of Fashion with the English, to prefer Men for Religion, but only for Craft and
Wealth, which is the cause that things do so happily succeed with us. Whereas
the holy Scripture (as also the practice of the wiser Heathen) will teach us,
that the Magistrates properest qualifications are Piety and Temperance; such
only as feared God, Men of Truth, and that hated Covetousness, being to be
advanced to that Dignity. Now if this course were taken, besides that it would
cut off all pretenses for Stirs and Commotions, this design could not fail of
making a considerable progress in a very short time. Especial, knowing how
grateful a thing Power and Honor is to our thriving Planters, and how
Ambitious they are to catch at every shadow of Title or Preferment.

5. But next thereto will be the procuring that this Impiety be taken notice of
and decried at Home, especially in London; where they have an extraordinary
Ambition to be thought well of. This, alone, if well understood, and for some
time carefully kept up and managed, would operate and strike deeper into them,
than even St. Paul's 14 Epistles, together with the Sermons and Comments
thereupon, of a thousand Years past and to come.

6. Yet since that this last must in all likelihood be difficult to be brought
about to any great purpose, our old English Zeal being so much abated; I shall
go a nearer way to work, and propose some few things, which shall concern, 1.
The Ministers. 2. The People.

7. Concerning the Ministers, (and here my Brethren will, I hope, take no
offense, their Infirmity and Failure herein being so long since proclaimed by
the Pen of that Quaker;) I shall propose first, That each Minister invested
with the cure of Souls, be in his particular Station strictly obliged, once at
least each Month, to press this Duty from a suitable Text unto his charge; not
omitting the same at other times. But, Secondly, That above all things they be
especially Exemplary therein in their own Families, by Instructing and
Catechizing their Slaves, and in due time admitting them to the Sacrament of
Baptism.

8. Concerning the People, I shall propose only, That each Owner possessed of a
baptized Slave, be obliged to allow him the free and full Exercise of Religion,
without compelling or suffering him to practice his former Gentilism. And that
to hinder a Slave from being Baptized, or to molest any Minister for doing that
charitable Office; or, after this, to deny him the Exercise of Religion, should
be a present and absolute release to the said Slave for ever.

9. But then in order hereto, it would be convenient, and even highly
necessary, that the Ministers (I speak not this for my self, as having no such
Charge, and being resolved so to continue, till they) be freed from their
Vestry dependences, by a sufficient Maintenance (for which the alone
restitution of their Glebes would in some places suffice,) and settled in their
Benefices for Life: For otherwise they shall pass their time in perpetual fear
of offending, and to be afterward Checked and Starved for conscienciously
discharging their Duty. For what Encouragement is it for Men to put themselves
into the Public Service, and venture their Lives and endure Misery, when they
shall but thereby deprive themselves of those Opportunities (which others at
Home shall seize) of which perchance they were certain, had they been present:
And after this to be looked upon but as Vagabonds at their return?
And that there be some Regard had and provision made for them of (at least) a
Subsistence upon their return, after some convenient time, into England. (The
Missionaries into Maryland being, as I have heard, always sent for after 4
Years continuance there; their Superiors thinking it too unreasonable to
oblige them to a longer abode.) There being not the simplest Curate there,
whose hopes (without any hazard) are not greater, than they can possibly be
supposed here. And it being against reason that any innocent Man should, as if
for some great Villainy, be condemned to perpetual Exile amongst a People utter
Enemies to his Profession, and even worse than Strangers. And lastly, That some
one Person or more, be constituted as Agents for each Colony, to represent the
grievances of the Church and Ministers to the Government in England, it having
been hitherto found to very little purpose to make Complaints here. I speak not
this as reflecting so much on the Place, as the usage: For, as the Poet wished,
-- Neque enim miser esse recuso:
Sed precor ut possim tutius esse miser.

Witness that Scoff of some Members of the, etc. in reply to the Ministers
Petition, bidding them for shame to put it up in their Pockets, least the
Quakers (whose abuses they complained of) should see it and laugh at them;
which was all the Redress they then did, or are since like to get. Besides all
this it would be but just, that all Scoffs at Religion, should be prohibited
upon severest Penalties. That our Slaves Polygamy, with their Sunday-work, be
restrained, no less to those that remain Heathens, than to such as shall become
Christians. That so that filthy Lucre, (which is indeed the same with Theft, or
Sacriledg,) may be no longer a temptation for continuing them Heathens; nor
their being Heathens be made a pretense for that Irreligion. Which preparations
being once made (and without them all will be nothing), the work afterward
will go on smooth and easy, and even in a short time prosper into a
Perfection: As ere this it might have done, had not the opposition of such who
believe that Labor may well enough be performed without Religion, stood in the
way.

10. Nor will the generality of the People be disatisfied therewith, when they
shall understand it to be not more their Duty than their Interest: Some few of
them having been discoursed already into this acknowledgment, That in regard
Religion would be apt to create a Conscience in their Slaves, it might be
convenient, in order to make them the truer Servants. If this were frequently
inculcated unto the many, with the hopes of other advantages together inspired
into them, no doubt the Majority would soon be wrought into a Compliance, and
even the rest observing the blessed Fruits thereof, would become less sturdy in
their Opposition. Nor can the Government be other than pleased thereat;
considering the great security, it will above all other Interest assuredly reap
thereby.

II. n. 1. Wherefore, Be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong, O
Joshua, the Son of Jozedeck, the High Priest, and be strong all the People of
the Land, and Work; for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts; as the Prophet
Haggai, Chap. 2. 4. speaks. And let both Ministers and People encourage and
provoke each other to Love and to good Works. Let the Ministers set before them
the Religious Profession of holy Job, declaring his esteem for the word of
God's Mouth, viz. the work of Religion, to be more than for his necessary Food.
But especially the Example of their B. Master, whose Meat it was to do the Will
of him that sent him, and to finish his Work. And with the great St. Paul, let
us be evermore pressed in Spirit, and straightned in our Bowels, at the
thoughts of these Peoples deplorable Estate; Not only the poor Barbarians, from
whom the Key of Knowledge is kept, and who are hindered from entering in, but the
English, who are the Authors thereof. And as Miltiades Victories did so inflame
the emulous mind of Themistocles, that he could not rest for them; so let the
Memory of others more glorious Achievements in this kind, provoke in us the
like pious Emulation, not suffering us to give sleep to our Eyes, nor slumber
to our Eyelids, until we have arrived within a prospect of its accomplishment.
Let us consider, that we have no more Dispensation for our silence than the
Apostles, with other succeeding holy Bishops and Priests, had, who first
planted and watered the Church with their Blood; and went about, and preached
every where, when it was death to be a Christian. That Faith is an active and
prolific Grace; and cannot remain in Idleness, but must operate and employ that
Heavenly Heat which it receives from above, for the use of others. That there
is no Neutrality in this War, and that whoever is not actually in Arms prepared
to fight against Sin and Infidelity, is to be reputed a Conspirator with them.
That there is the same Heaven and Salvation proposed for the conversion of
Slaves, as of more illustrious Grandees; the whole being but the saving of
Souls; the effecting of which upon but a very few, is worth the Labor of many,
all their lives. Even we, no less than St. Paul, are debtors to the Greeks and
Barbarians, to the Wise and to the Unwise. And God has by an extraordinary
Providence, brought these People to our very Doors, to try our Justice, and to
see whether we will pay his Debt, unto which, if ever any did, each Soul of us
do stand most firmly obliged. Look upon them, and you cannot but see in their
Countenances the lively Effigies of St. Paul's Macedonian, imploring your help:
And, O! let not the blood of Souls cry from the Earth for Vengeance against us.
Reflect but upon the sad Doom denounced against the fearful and unbelieving,
Rev. 21. and remember that the first great Founders of our Faith were no
Cowards. Think what a shame it is, that we have given such just occasion to the
enemies of Religion, to reproach and triumph over our Timiditie, or, which is
worse, our temporizing for filthy Lucre. And since, -- Fas est and ab host
doceri, and that the bitterest Reproaches may have a salubrious Energie, when
prudently applied; let us view the Charge (drawn out of our own Liturgy
against us) and from thence learn to prevent a second; and by wise endeavors
for the redeeming of our past Errors, give undeniable proofs of the deep sense
we have of this Duty. Nor are we to slight those puny Adversaries, but to
reform our selves; remembering that of Solomon, Prove. And that of Cicero,
Negligere be se quid quisque dicat non solum arrogantis est, sed prorsus
dissoluti. l. 2. Off.
29. 1. and also 12. 1. which I shall not repeat. And if it can be possible for
an Heathenish indifferency to harbor in so much as but one single Breast of any
devoted to a nearer and more peculiar Service of Christ in the Ministry; yet
let his Prudence teach him to throw his Garment over that part of his
Nakedness, and to try at least to conceal it from the World. And, Si non re
ipsa dolet, If he cannot be passionately concerned, dissimulare certe est
Hominis, it would be his Wisdom not to betray himself, nor disgrace his
company. Especially in this day of Rebuke, when the Mouth of the Slanderer is
opened, thus bidding us defiance. Nor let the opposition and peevishness of
unreasonable Men dishearten us; as knowing that our true portion is to be sent
forth as Sheep amongst Wolves; and that success is for the most part the
companion of a restless Industry. Nothing, as the Wise Man says, Prove. 27. 4.
(see the As also 2 Kings 18. 31. and Isa. 37. 32.
Original and Greek) being of force to withstand ZEAL. The Stars, they say,
cannot exercise their Influence upon the sphere of Fire: And certainly the
Heavens do rarely look with a malign Aspect upon Industry; nor is it often seen
that God does interpose his Power to thwart an honest Diligence, even in common
and Worldly Designs; or if He does, He seldom confounds it: How much more then
may we be confident of his favor in those Heavenly Enterprises, which himself
has commanded and promised his Assistance to the undertakers. And since that
the most glorious Designs do often prove abortive for want of Resolution, a
repulse or two ought not to blunt, but whet our Desires. Remembering that
Difficulties are the common pretenses and Mormo's of inglorious Sloth, but
spurs and encouragements to a resolved Diligence. Nor ought any to be
discouraged from letting down their Nets, because some perchance have already
toiled to no purpose: since by the Divine Benediction, attending our patience
and perseverance, it is possible we may yet obtain such a lucky Draught, as that
our Nets being ready to break through the multitude of Fishes, we may be forced
to becken to our Friends and Partners on the British Shore, to come in to our
assistance. Saint Bede l. Hist. Eccl. Angl. relates, that in the Infancy of our
Church, such a disappointment happened in an unconverted part of our Nation; at
which yet, he tells us that others, nothing discouraged, in a second attempt
perfected what the former had left for desperate. Even so we overlooking all
Difficulties, and pressing still forward to the Mark, if we faint not, may
obtain that that Prize for which we set forth, and accomplish a Work greatly
tending to the Glory of God, and to the happiness of these poor Peoples Souls,
no less than of our own. But, O were our Duty, (as St. Chrysostom. sweetly
exhorts, l. 6. de Sacerd. c. 40.) of Piety and a virtuous Life faithfully
complied with, we might soon, and even without Miracles, convert the World!
Wherefore, Lift up the Hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees, as says the
Apostle. Let us be instant in season and out of season, and keep back nothing
of the whole Council of God, that is necessary for the Souls of Men. That so
when our Lord shall come to require his Sheep, calling unto us, as Augustus is
said to have done to Varus, to restore the Souls committed to our Charge; We
may give our Account with Joy and not with Grief. And that we now feeding the
Flock of God, and taking the oversight thereof (not by constraint but
willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind) may, when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, receive a Crown of Glory, which fades not away.

2. And for the People, I shall propose unto them three general Rules in this
Affair to be guided by. Whereof the first is, To make the Negro's case our own,
as being the best way, to judge what is fit for others. And then to remember how
unjust it would seem to one of us, that our different White should deprive us
of the least Advantage; much more of the greatest, which Religion is. That
Injunction of our Blessed Lord, of dealing so with all Men, as we should upon
the like change of our Fortunes expect from them, being a Principle highly
Moral, and Natural; and sufficient to make us wave those proud distinctions,
which only avarice, and a too worthy conceit of our selves, have taught us.

3. And to this I shall, under the same Head, add some few other Considerations
of the same kind, which may greatly add to our Security. As, 1. To reflect how
dangerous Extremities are, and that as nothing violent is lasting, so nothing
is more permanent than Moderation. 2. To think how inconvenient this Distance
and Difference between Man and Man, Indians and Negro's, English and both, may
in time prove. The Poets advice, Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur:
being much more conducive to our Happiness and Security. 3. To meditate what
fit Instruments for any State Revolution, such miserable People are; who being
very numerous, should not be too much Exasperated, nor driven into Desperation.
4. To reflect what a reproach and dishonor to the English Nation, and
Government, our unchristian treating of these People is. 5. Wisely to look
rather to the most lasting, then to the present Gain; And in consequence
thereof, Not to labor (so much) for the Meat that perishes, etc. St. John 6.
Lastly, To remember at whose Hands their Blood will be required, if they
perish; and not think with Cain to shift the Guilt off, by demanding, Am I my
Slaves keeper, which certainly each of you are. And therefore to be merciful to
your own Souls, if not to your Slaves. He that takes warning shall deliver his
Soul, Ezekiel. 33. But otherwise his Blood shall be upon his own Head.

4. Secondly, I shall beseech you to look unto the Generation of God's
Children; and to see what is done by others, whether at Home or Abroad, by our
own Countrymen, or by Strangers, both in Europe, and in their remoter Colonies,
and from thence to collect and imitate the best Examples. As for our own
Nation, if we look into New England, they scruple not to admit either Negro's
or Indians, when capacitated and fit for it, to their very Sacraments, which
very many of the English cannot obtain. The Infants also of such are allowed
Baptism: And of the Bermudians I have (Page 143) before spoken.

5. Again, if we appeal to our Mother Country, the respect there to them is
notorious, and even become the Scoff of this place. It Is true, their Zeal is
said of late to be much abated. But this, as it is the Crime of some few, whose
great Wisdom consists only in getting of Money (the grand Antichrist of our
English Nation, which, in the very letter of the Text, they exalt, (...), above
God and Religion:) So I doubt not but their Impiety will in time be better
looked into, and a stop be put to its further growth, at least there: And those
Mammonists be obliged to a more Christian deportment and compliance with the
universal practice of all Believers, especially of our English Nation, till now.

6. And as to Foraign Nations it is certain, that they treat their Negro's and
others, both here and in Europe, as Men capacitated for the like hopes with
themselves. And in consequence of that belief, do not only permit, but compel
them to partake with themselves in Religion. Of whom some are daily promoted to
the Priesthood, and other Offices in the Church. And I have here seen and
discoursed with diverse, who were brought from those parts; which, besides some
Reports of that nature which I had otherwise met with, has ascertained me of
the truth thereof. Now all these, were they not better principled, might urge
the like Objections against their being made Christians, which our selves do
here. But they are not yet arrived to that wisdom and foresight as to
apprehend the Dangers and Inconveniences of Religion.

7. Thirdly, I shall recommend unto them, 1. A frequent view of the Terms, by
which only they can pretend a Right to God's Temporal Blessings. He gave them
the Lands of the Heathen, says David, that they might observe his Statutes,
and keep his Laws. So that obedience to God's Laws can only entitle Men to the
good things that they here enjoy: Which if referred to Christianity, does, no
question, amongst other, infer this Duty also. 2. And then after a serious view
of the Terms, to see how others have fared upon the forfeiture. St. Paul
speaking of the Jews, Romans 9. has these words, Because of unbelief they were
broken off, and thou stand by Faith. And in the Acts, he bespeaks the same
Jews to have thrust from them the Word of Eternal Life. And in another place
not only so, but they are also charged with forbidding the Preaching of it to
the Gentiles, that they might be saved: The crying Sin of these Colonies! From
which impudent despite done to Religion, he ominates their speedy destruction,
and that Wrath which should (and not long after did) come upon them even to
their utter Extermination, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. And, 3ly. After all, to apply this
unto our selves, If God spared not the Natural Branches, how much less will he
spare thee? Be not therefore high-minded, but fear; for otherwise thou also
shall be broken off. Nor is this the utmost of the danger; but there is
mentioned something further, 2 Thessalonians. 1. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking vengeance of them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his Power; when he shall come to be admired in his Saints, and to
be glorified in all them that believe.

8. But if none of all these Considerations will prevail, the last thing I
shall propose, is, That you will now at length remove that Vizard, and
undeceive the World, who have been apt hitherto, because going by that Name, to
believe you Christians: Which Name with what face Men can thus usurp, whose
practices do prove them not so much as tolerable Heathens, is in truth my
great wonder and astonishment; and whilst they retain, Istam in figura hominis
feritatem and immanitatem belluae; Such a brutish ferity under humane
appearance. Since the Orator (as before P. 87, 88.) informs us, That it is more
against Nature, for one Man to wrong another, for his private Gain, than Death,
Poverty, Pain, or any other Calamity. That they who do hold the contrary, do
separate Man from himself. That he is mistaken that thinks any discommodity
either of Body or Estate, to be sorer than the Vices of the Mind. That no Man's
Life can be more profitable, than such a disposition of mind, not to violate
any, even the most despicable Wretch, for his Profits sake. Which being true,
where will your pretended Christianity be found, who against all Conscience and
Reason, are so unjust and cruel to your Slaves? Wherefore till you can afford
to comport your selves more agreeable thereto, be but so just to your selves
and us, as to decline the Name: That so your Inhumanity, Avarice, and
Irreligion, may no longer be a Stain and Reproach to that Profession; unto
which otherwise the Generality will be apt to ascribe them. Nor let any one
think strange of this Proposal, which is but Just and Reasonable: It being a
most undoubted Truth, and for which, I think, I should not be afraid to become
a Martyr, That they who do industriously oppose the propagation of
Christianity, especially in their own Families, can be themselves (at most) but
Heathens.

9. Nor let any here go about to take Sanctuary under that Turkish Tenet, That
God accepts not the Services of Slaves. This, like the rest, being but a poor
shift, and will hardly stand them in stead, when the rust of their ill-gotten
Treasure, for which they have sinned against their own Souls, shall be a
witness against them; it being certain, that whatever is perfect in its kind,
is equally grateful to an impartial Goodness. And should any Act of theirs
prove less perfect, yet where out of their power to remedy, it cannot be less
accepted by Him, who requires no more than he gives, and judges by the intent,
and respects not how great, but how good our Offerings are; and has moreover
by his Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. declared, That if there be first a willing Mind, it
is accepted according to what a Man has, not according to what he has not. No
act of the Soul being to be reputed faulty, for the infirmities of the Body,
any more than a Prisoner can be accountable for his Keepers cruelty, or a Slave
for his Masters.

10. Let not then the Negro too much despond, or sink under these
Discouragements; but rather assure himself, That since God cannot but have a
desire to the work of his Hands; nothing but his own neglect can prevent his
Happiness: And that since He sent his Son to Redeem all, there is Mercy in
store for him also. For (to apply the words of the Evangelical Prophet to this
case) the Son of the Stranger, that has joined himself to the Lord, is not to
speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated me from his People; neither let
the Eunuch say, I am a dead Tree. For thus says the Lord, even unto them that
choose the things that please me, and that take hold of my Covenant, will I give
in mine House, and within my Walls, a Place and a Name, better than of Sons and
Daughters, and I will give them an everlasting Name, that shall not be cut off.
Also the Sons of the Stranger that join themselves to the Lord to serve him,
and to love the Name of the Lord, and to be his Servants; even them will I
bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of Prayer: Their
Burnt-offerings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar; for
mine House shall be called an House of Prayer for all People, Isa. 56. Now
these Evangelical Promises of Admittance and Acceptance being so general, and
without any respect of Persons, it cannot be doubted but these are comprehended
in them. Wherefore, to determine all in the words of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 26,
28, 29. and 4. 7. If thou, O black Ethiopian, art become Christ's Disciple and
Servant, and do by Faith truly embrace and lay hold of him, then art thou, as
to thy Soul, and all the ends and purposes of the Gospel, no longer a Slave but
a Son, and even Abraham's Seed: And if a Son, then an Heir of God through
Christ according to the Promise: For we are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus. Unto which, neither Condition, Country, Complexion nor Descent,
can be any Impediment. There being in him neither Jew nor Greek, Bond nor Free,
Male nor Female: For we are all one in Christ Jesus.

11. I shall close up my Discourse with that advice of Jeremiah, Chap. 13. 16.
Give Glory to the Lord your God before he cause Darkness, and before your Feet
stumble upon the dark Mountains, and while ye look for Light, he turn it into
the shadow of Death and make it gross Darkness: Adding only that Religious
Expostulation of the Philistine Priests and Sages, (1 Samuel 6.) to their Princes
and Optimates, touching the dimission of the Captivated Ark: Wherefore do ye
harden your Hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their Hearts? When he
had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the People go and they
departed? That is, they found it requisite and necessary to do them that Right
and Justice: And it will be our Wisdom to do so too.

12. And thus have I finished this Discourse, wherein as I have not forborne to
take notice of the least Objections, so neither, I think, have I inserted any
thing that may, especially to those who understand the temper of this place,
seem in the least superfluous. So that nothing being hereby left unanswered,
nor any color or shadow of Argument remaining, The Question must, I presume,
be placed beyond dispute; nor can there be any pretense or cloak left for the
Impieties here condemned. And unless the Opposers will defy the clearest
Truth, they cannot but confess the Obligation upon their Souls for complying
with this Duty, herein urged and asserted. Of which yet what may be the Issue,
I shall not enquire, but rest satisfied that I have done what I could, and
delivered my Soul; which I must declare that otherwise I could not. And no less
shall comfort my self, that whatever shall be the success, either through any
neglect at Home, or opposition here; and that, tho it should happen, which I
trust it cannot; (Truth being most powerful and must prevail,) that I should
labor in vain, and spend my strength for naught and in vain, yet surely my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. Amen.

-- Nunquam successu crescat honestum,

Luc. l. 9.
The State of Religion in Virginia, as it was some time before the late
Rebellion, represented in a Letter to Sir W. B. then Governor thereof.
THat I have made bold to present unto your Excellency this Then intended to be
made public, but for other reasons here omitted.
mean Discourse (exposed to public view more of Necessity, and to vindicate my
self, than of choice) is because it may no less need your Patronage, than the
Author himself did, during his abode in that your Province of Virginia. A
Colony that may be said wholly to owe it self to your Excellency, made happy by
your Prudent Government, as being the Prime, if not the only Raiser of her to
her present Greatness; having first rescued her from most imminent and apparent
Destruction; whilst by your noble and wise Conduct, you not only broke the
force of the Common Enemy, but so utterly subdued, as to extinguish in them all
hopes, and to destroy the very Seeds of any future Disturbance, which might
arise through their Occasion.

And having like a tender Father nourished and preserved that Colony in her
Infancy and Nonage, you carefully guarded her ever since, having scarce set
Foot off that Soil for well near these forty Years. Under whose Tutelage she is
now almost grown Adult, needing no assistance from, but rather able to afford
some to her Mother Country. So that we may without Assentation affirm, that
your Excellency has been no less a Sanctuary to Virginia in her distress, than
Virginia has been unto others. Which tho she has happily since outgrown, yet
your Excellency does not cease still to make evident proof of your Innate
Affection to her, yearly expending your proper Income and Revenue for the good
of her; paying her much more Credit and Support than you receive; thereby
demonstrating that the only reward you desire and wish, is that she may thrive
and prosper.

But as our Blessed Savior once said to the young Man in the Gospel, Yet
lackest thou one thing to be perfect; so may we, and I fear too truly, say of
Virginia, that there is one thing, the Propagation and Establishing of Relig^^n
in her, wanting; which if by your Excellencies Piety added, would make your
Name great, and your Memory glorious; no less than that place, which has so
long been the Seat of your Government, Happy. For there is no pious Eye nor
Heart can consider the great (Neglect shall I say? or rather) contempt of
Religion there, without resolving it self into Sighs and Tears. It is most
certain that there are many Families, who have never been present at any public
Exercise of Religion since their Importation into that Colony. The Ministers
also are most miserably handled by their Plebeian Junto's, the Vesteries; To
whom the Hiring (that is the usual word there) and Admission of Ministers is
solely left. And there being no Law obliging them to any more than to procure a
Lay-Reader (to be obtained at a very moderate rate): They either resolve to
have none at all, or reduce them to their own Terms; that is, to use them how
they please, pay them what they list, and to discard them whenever they have
a mind to it. And this is the recompense of their leaving their hopes in
England (far more considerable to the meanest Curate, than whatever can
possibly be apprehended there) together with their Friends and Relations, and
their Native Soil, to venture their Lives into those parts amongst Strangers
and Enemies to their Profession, who look upon them as a Burden; as being with
their Families (where they have any) to be supported out of their Labor. So
that I dare boldly aver, that our Discouragements there are much greater, than
ever they were here in England, under the Usurpers. I shall, to avoid
tediousness and multiplicity of Examples, Instance only in their being hired
from Year to Year, and made to accept of Parishes at under Rates, which I think
was never practiced in those Times, especially upon such as were approved by
their own Laws and conformable to their Government, which those Ministers now
in Virginia in all things are to the Government there.

Sir, I would not be thought to speak this out of any design to disparage the
Place; It being a Country so Fruitful, and withal so Pleasant, especially
toward the Southern parts, as Carolina, etc. that I do prefer it before
England in many things; but may justly equal it thereto in all; Those only
excepted, which Time and multitudes of People must produce. Only I cannot but
think it great pity, that a Region so richly furnished with Blessings of the
Left, should so much want those more necessary ones of the Right Hand.

Much less would I herein be thought to reflect upon your Excellency, who have
always professed a great tenderness for Churchmen. For alas, these things are
kept from your Ears; nor dare the Ministers, had they opportunity, acquaint you
with them, for fear of being used worse. And there being no Superior
Clergyman, neither in Council nor in any place of Authority, for them to
address their Complaints to, and by his means have their Grievances brought to
your Excellencie's knowledge, they are left without Remedy. Besides, their
Adversaries have that usual craft of underhand blasting their Fame, and
charging them with Litigiousness, (which is nothing else but a suing for their
own,) or prepossessing your Excellency with forged Stories, either by
themselves invented, or known to be as False, as the best Evidence can make
them. But yet when thereby a secret Prejudice is conceived against them, and
the cause unknown, they find it impossible to redeem their Reputations with
your Excellency. But, Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas: For where any
thing is truly Chargeable, as is frequent amongst their leaden Lay-Priests of
the Vesteries ordination ( How true this is, may be gathered from the Story of
a certain Writing-Master who came into Virginia, first as Bishop thereof; but
that not taking, he professed himself Doctor of Divinity, and wore a Scarlet
Hood in the Pulpit, going by the name of Dr. Dacres, and showing Orders under
that Name. But, being discovered, has since changed that Name to Acworth; yet
to this hour continues his Preaching and Doctorship, if alive, which lately he
was.
which make up near two thirds of the Preachers), and is both the shame and
grief of the rightly Ordained Clergy there; Nothing of this ever reaches your
Excellencie's Ear: Those hungry Patrons knowing better how to make benefit by
their Vices, than by the Virtues of the other.

The Laws also which are transmitted hither to invite the Subjects into those
Parts, are many of them so intricate and obscure, (not to say contradictory and
^^llacious) that they seem rather to be Traps and Pit-fals, than Laws: I shall
instance in two. The first is, That wherein Servitude for four Years is made
the penalty of accepting of another Kindness (if I may so term it); that is,
for permitting ones self to be Transported gratis, when with much seeming
Courtesy and Importunity offered unto them: For thereby the Party (whether
Minister or other, without exception) does, by virtue of that Law, put himself
into the Transporters power, and is made to become his Servant, or to Ransom
himself from that Thraldom and Misery at a very great rate, perhaps four or
five times so much as their Passage should have cost them. A deceit which no
Englishman, not versed in those American Arts and Frauds, can provide against;
and is indeed the great stay and support of the Kidnappers Trade and Mystery. A
Trade that, it is thought, carries off and consumes not so little as ten
thousand People out of this Kingdom yearly; which might have been a defense to
their Mother Country, but now are many of them miserably destroyed, without any
advantage to it.

The second is that Act, wherein, (contradictory to it self, no less than to
our Act of Uniformity, and to another of their own), it is declared, That to
the intent that Servants Marriages may not be made in secret, they are
forbidden to be published (before hand by Banns, the usual and only way of
preventing that Secrecy, and that under no less penalty than 10000 pounds of
Tobacco; a Sum almost (if not quite) double to diverse Ministers Incom and
Allowance. And this for a thing unto which they are bound under as great
Penalties by the said Act of Uniformity, and other Laws enjoining the said
Publications. Which being once by most of the Ministers of that Colony, in an
humble Address and Petition to your Excellency represented, as both
unreasonable and unpossible to be complied with, (at the same time giving in
their reasons for that Allegation); they were so far from finding Redress from
the Assembly then sitting, unto whom it was referred, that the Ministers found
their condition much more uneasy afterward, than it was before. Besides the
present Punishing of the Promoters thereof, tho not under that, but another
Guise. I might here also insert the danger which does usually ensue to the
Minister upon his demanding the benefit of those Laws which concern their
Maintenance: This being a Crime, which no Grandee of any Vestry, throughout the
Country, shall ever forgive.

To this may be added the profound Silence as to things given to Pious Uses;
the not only permitting but commissioning Laymen to preach, and to enjoy four
or five Parishes (but at under Rates): Deacons to undermine and thrust out
Presbyters, to Administer the Sacraments, read the Absolution, and enjoy
Pluralities. Their suffering Parishes to extend to sixty or seventy Miles in
length, or letting them lie void for many Years together to save Charges, (as
the Metropolis, your Honor's Parish, did (as it is said) for near twenty Years,
some little Intervals only excepted): And in a word, the permitting of all
things that concern the Church and Religion, to the Mercy of the People.

One thing I had almost forgotten, and that is, besides the establishing of
Religion amongst the English, the propagating of it amongst the Heathen, both
Natives and Slaves also brought from other parts. Which tho, as must be piously
supposed, it were the only end of God's discovering those Countries to us, yet
is there looked upon, by our new Race of Christians, as so idle and Ridiculous,
so utterly needless and unnecessary, that no Man can forfeit his Judgment more,
than by any proposal looking or tending that way.

I presume I need not acquaint your Excellency how useful Religion, where it
has not lost its Force, (and there it ought by all means to be revived) is to
the ease and support of Government, and may prove, to the securing of the
King's Interest in those Plantations. Nor what an excellent Heathen Writer
tells us, That Religion is the Cement of all Communities, and the chief Basis
of Legislative Power: That it is much more easy to build a Castle (we may also
add, To plant a Colony) in the open Air, without any ground to found it upon,
than to establish a Government without Religion. Much less that the despising
of the Ephod, was the Rot of Saul's Kingdom and Government: And that the cause
why Jeroboam is made to carry that infamous Train and Brand, Jeroboam the Son
of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, nineteen times after him in sacred Scripture,
was only for the contempt of Religion, and his committing the sacred Oracles to
unclean and unholy Hands. Your Excellency knows all these things already, and
needs no information; who doubtless are possessed with a deep inward veneration
and sense of Religion upon a much higher Account, and that is the salvation of
Souls.

However, let me be bold to be your Remembrancer, and to mind your Excellency
how needful it is, that those good Laws which are made for the suppression of
Vice, and for reducing the People from this affected Gentilism, to a more
diligent and conscientious discharge of their Duty to God, (the only sure means
to retain them in their due Allegiance to their Sovereign) be by the Inferior
Magistrates more duly executed; The Ministers encouraged, and all Invaders of
that sacred Calling, cashired and punished for their bold and profane
Usurpations.

But I begin ^o exceed my Limits, in thus presuming to prescribe unto your
Excellency, who are wise enough to effect whatsoever is necessary as to this
most Important Affair, so soon as you shall find it expedient so to do.
Wherefore beseeching your Excellency to excuse this Presumption, and to accept
these my weak Performances, which I humbly submit unto your Censure, I am

Your Excellencies Servant, and Orator, M. G.

Psalm. 119. 12. It is time for the Lord to Work, for they have made void thy
Law.
Ezekiel. 8. 12. For they say, The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the
Earth.


FINIS.

