God's Mavelous Wonders In ENGLAND: Containing diverse strange and wonderful
RELATIONS that have happened since the beginning of June, this present Year
1694.

I. A strange and wonderful Shower of Wheat that fell in Wiltshire, on the
27th, of June, 1694. of which People gathered considerable Quantities in the
Fields and Roads, etc. II. The Kentish Wonder; or, An Account of sundry Grass
Fields sprouting up with Corn, where none has been known to be sown for 4 Years
past, near Maidstone in Kent in the Grounds of an honest Farmer, who who was
very Charitable to the Poor in these hard Times. III. An Account of a Terrible
Storm of Hail, near Darlington, in the Bishopric of Durham, on the 2d. of
July, 1694. by which diverse Persons and Cattle were hurt, and Birds in their
flight beat down dead; with the Hailstones of 6 Inches in Circumference, in
diverse Fo^ms, as Swords, Coronets; diverse sorts of Fruits, etc. IV. An Account
of a mighty monstrous Whale appearing off the Mouth of the River Humber, of 40
Foot in length on the 27th. of June last; and the dreadful Encounter that
happened between it and some Fishermen, etc. V. An Account of the Discovery of
the Murder and Robbery committed on the Body of one Mrs. Grand, the old
miserable rich French woman, of Spittle-Fields, on the 9th. of June: For which
John Jewster, and one Butler were since Hanged. VI. A wonderful Discovery of a
Murder committed on 2 Women in Short's-Gardens in St. Giles's in the Fields,
which being acted about 3 Years since, was discovered the 20th. of June, 1694.
by one Dee or Day, a Bailiff's Follower, on his dying sick Bed, owning himself
to be the Murderer, and that he could not dye without revealing it.
Licensed according to Order.

Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Pye-^orner.

TO THE READER.
WE have not only heard from former Ages, but have ou^selves been Witnesses of
God's Wonder^ that he has brought forth amongst us visibly declaring his Power
and Goodness to the Sons of Men, in so sensible a manner, as to make all
reasonable and thinking People admire and adore h^^ Mercy, and of various
Kinds, (...) which we shall herein give many Instances, as they occur in their
sundry Methods.

God's Mavelous Wonders In ENGLAND: Containing diverse strange and wonderful
RELATIONS that have happened since the beginning of June this present Year,
1694.
CHAP. I. A strange and wonderful Account of the raining of Wheat out of the
Skies in Wiltshire.
WE have an Account from diverse Persons of Credit, in the County of Wilts, That
some People being early abroad on the 27th. of June ^ast, to get in their Hay,
and about their other necessary Occasions, observed Grains of Wheat to drop on
them, and on the Ground round about them; some very ^ong, some more round than
usually our Wheat is, and some as it were Triangle or Three-corner'd: At first
they supposed ^t might be blown from the neighboring Ricks or Barns, the Wind
being pretty high, and the Weather very hot, which might make the Husk give
way, and loosen the Grain; or that some Birds flying over their Heads, might
drop it out of their Beaks: But upon a more stricter Observation it happened
from none of these; for in some Places it fell so thick, that some of them
picked up a Pint in a little space and found it along the Road, near Wodden
Basset. And here it so happened in diver^ other Parts of that County to their
great Admiration and Astonishment; so that upon some Showers of Rain that fell,
(...) soon after sprung up in the Roads and other Places, where no other Wheat
ha^ been known to be scattered in many Years Some Letters that brought this
Relation to Town, had several of the Grains (...) Wheat enclosed in them,
looking of (...) yellowish Color, and somewhat small^^ than our usual Wheat.

We have an Account of the like th^^ since has happened in Yorkshire, near
(...) Market Town, called Wigton.

This is the Lord's Doings, and is m^^vellous in our Eyes. Therefore, since G^^
provides for us as he did for the Children of Israel, when he showred Quails
and Manna on them, let us be thankful; let those he has blessed with Riches and
Plenty remember their poor Brethren in these hard Times, that so God may
continue his Blessing on us and our Heritage.

Give Alms of thy Goods, and never turn thy Face from any poor Man, and then
the Face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee, Tobit 4.7.
CHAP. II. An Account of the Kentish Wonder, or Grass-Fields sprouting up with
Wheat, unsown, some of them Six Ears on a Root, near Maidstone, etc.
ANother wonderful Providence, much to the same purpose, we have from (...)
Place near Maidstone, in the County of Kent; which take in the following man^er:

Near to this Town lived an honest Farmer, who by his Industry had raised
himself pretty well in the World, and gained a very good Repute among his
Neighbors, especially the poorer sort, for his Charitable Inclination to
relieve their Wants and Necessities, in dear and hard Times. When, in the last
scarce Winter, some other Farmers sharply reproved him for under-selling his
Corn, he replied, Seeing God had given him all he had, it was but Reason the
Poor, as God had commanded, should have the benefit of it, seeing the oftener he
had relieved their Necessities, the more Blessings followed him.

He had this Year diverse Pasture-Gounds, that had been laid down from any
Ploughing, for the space of Four Years past, and through which no Corn had been
carried, that it might by carelessness or otherway^ scatter, when to the great
Wonder and Amazement of himself and others, in the Spring, expecting Grass to
spring up Blades of Corn, instead of it, sprouted up innumerable, so that
Cattle was put in t^ eat it down, as supposing it would grow up to nothing but
Straw, and hinder the Gra^^ from putting out; but in a little while perceiving
it grew amain, notwithstanding the feeding, he drove out the Cattle, resolvin^
to try what it would come to: When in the Season, it put forth Ears very large;
and it is said, upon some, or a great many of the Stalks, were diverse Ears, as
3, 4, and some 6; and that it is now growing flourishing, to the Admiration of
all that behold it, especially in one large Field behind his House, he giving
any that come to see it, leave to pluck the Ears, and carry them away, as
Tokens of God's wonderful Work of Providence.

From this, Let us remember to do Good, and forget not; for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

He that has Pity on the Poor, lends to the Lord, and look what he lays
out, it shall be paid him again, Prove. 19.17.
CHAP. III. A wonderful Relation of a dreadful Storm of Hail, that happened at
Darlington, in the Bishopric of Durham, on the 2d. of July, 1694.
STrange are the Wonders and Products of the Airy Region, in forming several
Shapes, as well as airy Phantoms of Men and Horses, Castles, Ships, and the
like, and many times representing Fights and Battles, with great Lightnings and
Thunders, as well Curtains of fiery and dusky Clouds, to draw over the seeming
Tragic Scene. As also the formation of Vapors congealed or condensed into a
solid Ice or Hail in the Sky, in such Forms and Fashions, as has outdone Man's
Art to invent.

This has happened at sundry times in small Quantities; but for largeness and
strange Forms, scarce any have paralelled what we are about to describe.

At Darlington, in the Bishopric of Durham, on the 2d. of July, 1694. about 3
of the Clock in the Afternoon, a great dark Cloud arising from West, and by
North, spread it self very wide over the compass of a great quantity of Ground,
when immediately a Clap or Two of Thunder breaking from it, with some Flashes
of Lightning, e're the Travelers, and such as were getting in their Hay, and
about other rural Affairs, could get shelter, to which they hasted, as fearing
only a terrible Wetting, great Hailstones fell down to the bigness of Pigeons
Eggs in great abundance, insomuch that diverse People were sore hurt, as also the
smaller sort of Cattle who stood piteously crying and blating in the Fields,
and on the Plains; the Shepherds by the sudden surprise being forced to fly to
shelter and leave them. The Tiles and Windows in some Villages thereabouts,
were miserably shattered and broken, and diverse Starks, Crows, and Daws then
upon the wing, were beaten down, some dead and some wounded.

The main force of this terrible Storm continued scarce a quarter of an Hour;
but the oldest People declare they never saw any so fierce and violent in all
their Times.

The Storm being over, and the Peoples Fears a little dissipated, diverse of the
Stones were taken up and found to be 4, 5, and 6 Inches in circumference, and
many in various Forms, as Swords, Coronets, Pears, Peaches, Plumbs, bearded
Ears of Corn, Roots, and Flowers, and diverse others, which they really
resembl'd, or Peoples Fancy inclined them to: But the Weather hereupon growing
extreme hot, they vanished in a dissolution of Water. We do not hear it has any
ways much endamag'd the Corn in these Places; first, by reason of the short
continuance of the one, and the not being full grown up of the other.

Thus we see how terribly God can arm the Elements, when he pleases, to scare
us from the dull security of our Sins to a timely and lively Repentance: For as
David says,

He made Darkness his secret Place, his Pavilion round about him with dark
Water, and thick Clouds to cover him. The Lord also thundered out of Heaven, and
the Highest uttered his Voice, Hailstones and Fire, Ps. 8.11.13.
CHAP. IV. An Account of a terrible and monstrous Whale, discov^red off the
River Humber, and the Encounter that happened between it and some Fishermen,
etc.
SOme small Vessels, the 27th. of June, being a little beyond the Mouth of the
River Humber, the Wind at South-West and by West, blowing a fresh gale, one of
the Men going up to order the Sail, espied, about a Furlong from them, the
Water to spout up and fly in the Air, which made them conceit, at first, it
might be a Watergall fallen into the Sea; but coming nearer, they perceived the
Head of a mighty Fish tossing up, and still as that ducked down, her Tail
appeared, and found it to be a Whale of a vast bigness, computed between 40 and
50 Foot long, and about 3 parts of that measure in Circumference; wherefore
putting before it, and firing a Musket twice or thrice, with a hasping Iron,
which stuck in her Back, they thought to have turned her, that she might have
taken the River, but could not: For upon her being wounded, which was very
lightly, by reason they were not prepared for such an unexpected Encounter, she
sunk about 4 Minutes; and then coming up without the Iron, which it is supposed
she had rubbed off, she made away to the N. E. and got clear of them.

CHAP. V. An Account of the Discovery of the bloody Murder and Robbery
committed on Mrs. Le Grand in Spittle Fields, etc.
STrange and wonderful is God's Providence in discovering the Wickedness and
Barbarity of Mankind, in shedding his Fellow Creatures Blood, and defacing, by
that impious Violence, the Image of his Creator, as has been evidently
demonstrated by the strange ways Murders have been brought to light, though
committed never so secretly; sometimes by Men's restless and guilty
Consciences, and sometimes by Ghosts and Spirits, of which Examples History and
Authors treating of such Subjects, are very full, and give such Instances, so
well testified and confirmed by credible Persons, that they are beyond
Contradiction.

But among others, we shall present you with a very late Discovery of a
barbarous and bloody Murder, no less remarkable in the Circumstances, and Hand
of Providence that brought it to light, than any of the former.

In a Place called Spittle-Fields, near the Artil'ery Ground, by
Bishopsgate-street, London, lived one Mrs. Le Grand, by Birth a Walloon
French-woman, but had a long time been in England, married to a Master-Weaver;
who having a very considerable Trade, got Money apace, and dying, left his
Wife, the Party abovementioned, very rich, but withal, so niggardly and
pining, that to Strangers especially, she seemed to be the poorest Woman in the
Place, and stuck not to receive the Charity of well disposed People, in
private, though, at the same time, she was better able to give them. She
continued privately to lend out Money upon the Tally, and by other Methods, so
that she had hoarded up more Riches then can easily be believed, some say 10000
Pounds, and the least 2000. But notwithstanding all her cunning, some of her
Kindred got an inkling of it, and especially one John Jewster, who kept an
Alehouse in Bishops-gate-street, and said to marry one of her Kinswomen; and
she, it seems, living longer than he expected, he undertook to rid her by a
more speedy way: For confederating with one Butler, a Person of a notorious
Life, and Others, they on the 8th. of June, laid a Plot to Rob her; and the
next Day they proceeded, between 9 and 10 in the Evening, to put it in
practice: When as Jewster, Butler, and another, came to her House, and sinding
none but her, and an old Woman within, they, under pretense of coming about
Business, got entrance; and having close shut the Door, without any other
Ceremony, Butler siez'd Mrs. Le Grand, and barbarously Murdered her by
strangling, etc. and then girt a Handkerchief so fast about the Neck of the
other old Woman, that leaving her for Dead, they fell to breaking open the
Chests, Boxes, and Trunks, where they found such large quantities of Money,
that they were not able to carry off a half part of it; yet loaded themselves
so hard, that a 200 Pound Bag was found dropped in the Street, though they were
not pursued.

Soon after their Departure, the Linner about the last old Woman's Neck
slackning, by a Hand of Providence, as it were to bring this Wickedness to
light, she groaned so hard, that a next Neighbor heard her; and coming to see
what the Matter was, found the Door open, and one murdered Body in the House.
Whereupon calling for other Neighbors, they entered and found what had
happened. Three Days after, the murdered Woman was buried; and though strict
Enquiry was made, and many Houses searched, yet no discovery, in some time, was
made; nor were the Parties that really did it, any ways suspected, till such
time as Providence brought it to light: For one Francis Jewster, Brother to the
aforementioned Party of that Name, having been made acquainted with the
Business, and desired to be there, (though it does not appear he was with them)
he grew so restless, for fear of being brought ^n for a snack, or rather the
Hand of Heaven compelling him to it, that he could not ^est till he had
discovered it by Words he ^et drop; which caused him to be brought upon
Examination before a Magistrate, and there he declared as much as they had made
him privy to. Upon this, He, his Brother, and Butler, were committed to Gaol;
and the Sessions coming on, they ^ook their Trials at the Sessions House, in
^he Old Bailey, on the 13th. of July; where ^t appearing Butler, and Others,
killed Mrs. Le Grand, John Jewster being there at that ^ime, they were found
guilty of the Murder and Felony, and received Sentence of Death, and were
since executed. But Francis Jewster, though he was knowing; of the Business, yet
it not appearing he was with them at the time of the commitment o^ the Fact,
was acquitted.

CHAP. VI. The Discovery of a barbarous and bloody Murder committed in
Shorts-Gardens, i^ St. Giles's in the Fields, etc.
ABout 3 Years since, a Woman and her Kinswoman, keeping a Coffee-House i^
Shorts-Gardens in St. Giles's in the Fields, ha^ in the Nightime their House
broken open and both barbarously murdered, as havin^ their Throats cut. This
Murder, though gre^^ search was made after the Murderers, was no^ found out
till Providence had discovered i^ For one Charles Dey, or Day, a Bailiff's
Fo^lower, falling sick about the end of June last of a languishing Disease,
appeared from t^^ beginning of his Sickness much troubled (...) Mind, till
finding he must die, as given ov^^ a dead Man, he called some People to him and
declared he could not die quiet, till (...) had revealed a Secret, which
happened (...) be these 2 Murders; and soon after h^ gave up the Ghost, to
answer for it before the Righteous Judge of all the Earth.

FINIS.

