THE DEMEANOR OF A Good Subject, IN ORDER To the Acquiring and Establishing
PEACE.

God. Son of Man, hear what I say unto thee,
Be not thou Rebellious.

Priest. Give Peace in our time,O Lord.

People. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

London, Printed by William Downing, for the Author, 1681.

To the Sacred, and Most Excellent Majesty of KING CHARLES the Second.
Dread Sovereign,
THat your MAJESTY'S great and Princely Endowments of Nature, have Arrived to
an admired Accomplishment in the Sublimest Art of Government, is doubtless the
advantage your Wisdom has made of Afflictions: The Sufferings of the same
Times, have also enabled your Subjects to a more exact and fearless Obedience.
The very knowledge of their Enemies, makes even those otherwise liable to
Temptation, to abhor Sedition; and they are become more circumspect for
Prevention, and by Suffering more sufficient for Toleration. Having before me
two Royal Patterns, with so many Ilustrious and Pious Attendants, (together
with a Fathers Example, and daily admonitory Care the Calamities of the late
Times could not but prove my Benefit. Being in my Childhood inured to them,
Persecutions for the same Cause (even in these better Times) are borne with a
kind of natural Fortitude. To be sharply exercised above Eighteen Years at all
Weapons, which Fanatical Fury could administer to the Assailants, and that
above these last six Years, they notoriously boast of Victory, by procuring my
Damages and frequent Confinements, is so little discouragement, that by these
I seem chiefly to Rise and Triumph over them. The narrowness of an Estate or
Corporal distress, cannot bate my delight in an entire Obedience to your
Majesty and the Church of England, but are the enlargement of my affections;
and I am still high enough to look down upon mine Enemies with Pity, and thence
afford them these directions (such as I am furnished with) to Safety.
Nevertheless, when persuasions and Arguments are rejected, I hope your
Majesty's discovering and coercive Felicity will always disarme their Rage, and
so convince and protect them. If in the forwardness of my Zeal, I have by any
Imbecility injured a Cause so great, I cast my self by Supplication for Pardon
at your Royal Feet: Which, that the Almighty be graciously pleased to keep and
confirm, to walk on prosperously to length of days in this World, and Eternity
of Glory in the next, is and shall be the constant Prayer of,

Your Majesty's most Humble, most Obedient, and devoted Subject, Godwyn.

The Contents of the following Discourse.
Chap. 2. Who may be said to be a Good Subject?

Chap. 2. What Peace it is that a Good Subject would labor to obtain and
settle?

Chap. 3. The distinct Offices of the Prince and Subject in the concerns of
Acquisition and Settlement.

Chap. 4. The Disturbances of the Princes Peace, is the same of the Subjects.

Chap. 5. A Good Subject cannot but grievously Mourn and be Afflicted by his
Princes Adversities.

Chap. 6. A Good Subject is so studiously careful and mindful of his Princes
Welfare, that in his Princes Danger, he becomes unmindful of many of his own
nearest and private concerns.

Chap. 7. The Princes Peace, and thereby the Kingdoms settled, can truly
Influence with Joy none but Good Subjects.

Chap. 8. No considerations of past or ensuing damages, which have or may
accrue to him, do hinder this Joy in a Good Subject.

THE DEMEANOR OF A Good Subject, etc.
CHAP. I.
Who may be said to be a Good Subject?
IN these very confused times, I find, no Title more generally assumed by all
sorts of Men in these Dominions of Great Britain and Ireland, then that of a
Good Subject; Insomuch that if the Neighboring Princes would be as easily
Cheated with the noise thereof, as many of our Fellow Subjects would persuade
themselves able thereby to impose upon their Own, we should be secured from
Foreign attempts, by the Veneration of our Kings Majesty, and Fear of his
Strength, supposed to be in the Peoples affections. But our too too apparent
disorders are sufficient evidence of Notorious Fraud in many Men's Pretentions,
and that this great Name, which includes Religion and Prudence, is by more Men
injuriously Usurped, then honestly desired to be appropriate. Now although this
Title be such, that the Community thereof lesseneth none, but rather disposes
each particular Man to better Fortunes and Enjoyments, yet this is only so,
when it is the due Character of what it is affixed to, the consequences of
separating Duties and Names, being always very unhappy, especially the more
eminent the concerns of any Duty are. When therefore so many Men of contrary
Tempers and Practices, do even with clamor and fury, arrogate to themselves
the credit of being Good Subjects, and as violently complain of wrong, if so
much as suspicion seem to assail it; and yet the vastly different inclinations
and passions of the Challengers hurry them on to as different Actions, it being
impossible that all, who lay hold of it, can merit it, yet that none can enjoy
it except he merit it, the right of possession is the more strictly to be
enquired into.

A Good Subject I conclude him who submits to the Higher Powers, under the
Regiment whereof he is placed, as to the Ordinance of God for Conscience sake.
And in this, be their ways and Opinions never so discrepant, they all agree
with me, at least I have not met with any denying it. Now the Higher Power,
this Ordinance of God among us is the Regal Authority, which the Authors of
Reformation whether Church or Statesmen, have justly cammanded all Persons
within these Dominions to own as Supreme in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, under God. Accordingly the Church of England, by so Praying, does
Teach as that the Obedience we pay unto the King, is in God, and for God. And
indeed all the Prescriptions of Government how Subtle soever, find no Bonds so
firm as those of Subjection for Gods sake, which Unite Men to their Governors
by a delivery of their Hearts into Custody; So long as they believe God, they
will obey their King. If any obey for other reasons then for God and
Conscience, they are not by this Obedience good Subjects, because their
Subjection not being Founded upon Religion, but Interest and Fancy, must be as
the Foundation is, mutable. But such as are Loyal and Obedient for his sake, by
whom Kings Reign, are in their Obedience constant and indefatigable as the
Cause is. There are good Men, Stable and preserving in their Duty; The others
are either cunning Men, Timeservers, or Foolish Man, led about as Asses with a
Bridle, which way soever those cunning Timeservers manage them: They are either
Tame Beasts for the Public Service, or unruly and rapacious to the General
Annoyance, as their Guides use the Word of Command. Now, nothing is properly to
be Termed Good, but what is well directed to a good End, and to benefit all
that are therein concerned. The Public Actions of Inferiors then, that they
may be well directed to a Public Good, have their certain Rules, whereby the
design of them cannot Fail; But if they are done according to those Rules, are
certainly of General advantage. So that a Good Subject is one that is Regular
and constant, that knows his Place and Duty prescribed, and persisteth in
maintaining his Station, and so becomes useful abroad, happy at home. His good
Acts are not a Distemper, which after extremity of chilness, Fly out into a
High Fever, and relapse again into the former Shivering condition; But are
promoted by a considerate Vigor of mind, which compelling him to be dutiful
for Gods sake, shows him withal the Divine Wisdom, which has mixed
Obedience and Profit most inseperably. While his Ingenious Subjection is of
concern to others, it is chiefly so to himself. For as his strict observance of
Duty conduces to his Princes peace, and is his Neighbors Example and
Tranquillity, so is it of much more advantage to the Author then others, who
as a Member of the Body, shares in the Public Good; and moreover (besides the
satisfaction and joy thereof) has from the Treasures of Divine Bounty an
unconceivable reward. In fine, he is justly to be Termed Good, because his Sole
aim is to please God, and imitate his communicative Property of Goodness, he
readily Executing the Good which he desires or commends, either by himself
or his Vicegerents; And this he does so joyfully, that he accounts Submission
and Obedience no Yoke or Burden, but the most August assertion of his Liberty
and Propriety.

CHAP. II.
What Peace it is, which a Good Subject would Obtain and Settle.
WE commonly observe that nothing is so Universally desired and despised, as
Peace, earnestly longed for upon the least absence, and welcomed frequently
with full Testimonies of gratitude and admiration, but scarce enjoying the
entertainment so usual to things of least consequence and easier Purchase, a
nine days wonder. The want of her, is wont even to Murmuring to be Lamented,
the return Admired, Magnified, and (the short Solemnities thereof over) a
sudden forgetfulness overwhelmeth her Favors. But this is no other then the
common course of Mankind, to prize what is Courted, and Villifie the same grown
Familliar; as if we longed chiefly for disatisfaction, or Loved a short
enjoyment only in order to long abstinence. But that an ill Trouble of any
thing wanting in Substance or Value possesses us, is certainly an affliction
proceeding from our selves, and is the want of discretion and Piety, which
makes the most desirable Goods, first uneasy to us, and quickly intollerably.
Our continually Whirling fancies make us suppose Changes in what continues
most the same, and when we will not see our own Folly, we must be Sensible of
Misery. And truly dissatisfaction is a weighty one; But it is in our own
Pleasure to Lighten or Aggravate it, no Mischief being more easily Contracted
or Removed. For if we set our selves Industriously to look into the Causes of
things, beginning first with our selves, we shall Seldom see any reason to
search any farther. The wanton undervaluing the Blessings of Peace, is always
the first breach of Peace, ingratitude being the Root of disorder, distempering
the Mind with Groundless Jealousies, and the Brain with extravagancies. But
this Mischief befalls no discreet or good Man, who by putting a true estimate
upon things, is inoffensive to himself and others. The way to preserve Peace is
for each Man Seriously to enquire whether himself has been constantly just in
his esteem of her, and by Rectifying the apprehended Injustice every Man in
himself, lost Peace is restored. And thus we remove disatisfaction without that
Tumult and amusing Agitation, wherein our Pollititians are at this day so much
concerned. By being considerate we are either in it, or soon reduced to a true
State of happiness, and need no Laborious Care or desperate Councels to keep or
repair that which is so much in our own Power, which cannot be wanting nor
rendered infirm without our being Foolishly unthankful. By keeping his
thoughts quiet, every Man contributeth to the Public Peace; and the Private
perfecteth the Common Security.

But the diversity of Dispositions, causes a diverse construction of Peace,
which too too frequently is not given according to what it self is, but what
the Speaker would have it thought. As was before observed, the desire of being
accounted Good Subjects, is great even in those, who run Courses contrary to
the Rules of Obedience; so is the name of Peace Coveted as a Reconciling
Ornament by those, whose affections are Monstrously inform and Brutish, whose
Sanguinary perverseness makes them the Scandal of Mankind. For so Numerous, so
Delicious, Rich and Weighty are the benefits, which Peace brings, so Amiable
and Divine those minds, wherein she resideth, and such a Flourishing Beauty
encompassing her Habitations, that he who is her Professed Enemy, must by
reason of the general hatred abandon humane Society. Thence it is that the very
affronts and Injuries, which compel her to seek Heaven for Refuge, walk under
the Disguises of Peaceable designs, and Peaces Vindication and promotion. And
because there is Visibly a breach of Concord, the Authors thereof not able to
bear the blame with a mischeivous industry Shift it upon such as are most
jealous of attempts against Peace. So that upon cautious Virtue, which by
prudent Love and Innocence seeks to retain her, are thrown the imputations of
Treachery and Discord. And in the mean time between those, who on one Side
aloud plead her Cause, and on the other hand Act according to her Discipline,
Peace is lost and Union dissolved. Now the Cause is in the credulity of unwary
Men, (who are the most of any Age) who by Turbulent Men imposed upon, think
many things wanting to them, and most of what they enjoy Deficient; that
Supplies and Stores would abound were not the Care of them committed to heavy
and unseeing Men; Moreover, they are affrighted with a Puppetry of dangers
represented as Real and Gigantine, which the Drowsiness of their Protectors
suffers to invade them without endeavor of prevention. At the beginning of
Conspiracies and Disorder the wisest desires of Peace are only called Neglect
and Stupidity, and the People intoxicated with Plenty, are persuaded to believe
themselves Poor, Wretched, and in danger, and by Mutinous Clamours, to awake
their careless Governors, and animate them to diligence. But if their insolent
behavior be repressed, and Fortitude (the blessed Guardian of Peace) appears
to check the contrivances of Sedition, presently this is Termed War,
Oppression, and Tyranny, and the Peoples condition becomes Lamented, as if
they were immediately to be Subjected to Slaughter, because required to be
Quiet and Prosperous. And here nothing can be allowed to be Peace; but what an
impracticable Lenity shall permit to the impudent requests or (rather) demands
of Men destitute of Sobriety. But such requests being a Manifest Violation of
Peace, the consenting and yielding to them is no other then an invitation of
disorder; and every Subject, which appears pleased either with the gravity of
pretentions or the way of promoting them, recedeth from the Office of a Good
Subject by assenting to what establishes no safety. And the excuse of being
ensnared by the specious assurances of Public good is not to be admitted; For
misunderstanding freeth him not from guilt, who ought to know certainly what he
does, before he moves out of the Rules and Ways appointed to him, and
Anciently observed by Men of Eminent and Fortunate Obedience. Neither is it the
proper design of Peace, which some so much extol and call Moderation, whilst
they comply with all (...) actions, and think their cold indifferency
interposed between the diverse extremities of heat, will in time reduce all to
a convenient Temper. For this is either a Cowardly Submission to the Practisers
against the General good given under a Fairer Title only, or a Foolish
presumption concluding Success in the Union, it would form before acquaintance
had of the Nature of the Subjects of the work proposed. The first of these has
always proved an unfortunate and Fatal endeavor of prevention, which the
Authors of mischief so easily discern, that nothing more encourages them, and
is commonly the sharpest Spur of their Galloping Fury. And the latter advances
it also by believing it self Prosperous when most deluded. For unquiet Men
together with Viperous affections, have a creeping and soft way of Guile,
whereby they insinuate hopes of Submitting to reconciling Proposals, when they
least Harbor such intentions. And the easiness of these Indulgent Pacifiers;
they use to carry on with more Security and less observance whatsoever their
devices and conspiracies. But besides this Evil of being Instrumental and
assistant to the Contrivers against Peace, he is himself a breaker of it, who
without License obtained, shall upon any pretense, recede from the Station, to
which he is ordered. Let what Prudentials or Fancied Polliticks soever possess
him, they are no Warrant, for his indifferent Demeanor in respect to Obedience;
but whosoever is not Strictly Obedient, is partly Factious, and so far
Strengthens the ill Designer as he has withdrawn himself from his exactness of
performance of Duty. For this takes some Liberty, the other does but take
more, not to do what he ought; but the latter has as Lawful a permission as
the former. In any part to move toward or show a compliance with unruly Men,
is not a promoting Peace; for although it may seem for the present to abate
their Madness, it is always found in the main more violently to excite it.

A Peace therefore, which being obtained, has no firm hopes of establishment,
is not that, which so strongly engages the thoughts and care of a Good
Subject. A Peace patched up and composed of uncertainties, and dawbed over with
the fallacious promises of Men by experience known to be insincere, makes Wise
Men fear, and Good Men mourn, being rather then a Peace to be accounted a time
of respite for wickedness to gather Strength, which should be crushed in the
infancy. But a Good Subject, is Studious of the same, he Prays for, that the
Peace obtained may be such an one, as is without danger of Leading into
Captivity, and when there is no complaining in the Streets; when there is
Security from Foreign incursions, and enjoyment each Man of his own, a general
Satisfaction at home. That force from without may not Allarm the People, Duty
and reason directs the Subject by Prayers and ready aids both Pecuniary and
Military to give his Prince strength and Reputation. Duty enjoyneth this; and
the reason of Self preservation advises it, because neither Money nor Arms
afford the owners defense whilst altogether retained in Private Hands, but are
their best Guard and most their own when cheerfully resigned to their Princes
disposal. The Splendour of his Sceptor rendereth his Sword formidable and most
useful; and we best keep and enlarge our own Fortunes, by a Generous
contribution of Jewels to the Beautifying of it, the Glory and Benefit being
certainly more the Subjects then the Kings. But there must be a farther Care of
being every Man Religiously just at home, the great ones not oppressing the
lesser, nor the lesser joining into Parties and conspiring again the greater,
if they begin to think him for his Neighbourly behavior and meekness meet only
to be cullied and undermined. These things done on either hand occasion
complaining in the Streets, which a Good Subject industriously Labors to
prevent and cure as opportunity and the place he stands in permit him.
Injuries stir Men up either to mutual Revenge or Public Clamours for
satisfaction, which if Craft or Power hinder, the Innocent Government is
Caluminiated, and Private abuses frequently grow into open disorder. And by
these means pernicious Examples are Multiplied, Men loose their Liberty and
have no free enjoyment of Property. For Liberty is not (as some in our days
would have it esteemed) a sufferance, such as the Holy Text mentions of
Israelites, when for want of Government, Every Man did that, which was right in
his own Eyes; but is an Exemption from a Foreign Yoke, and a privilege of
Subjection to our own Natural and Lawful King. Neither does the enjoyment of
Property consist in using our own at any rate after our own will, but in using
our own according to the prescriptions of Religion and Justice. So that to be
able, every Man according to his quality and in his proper place of Subjection,
freely to Act that, which is good and praiseworthy, and to Reap the benefits
of so acting, is to enjoy Liberty and Property. To endeavor as he may his own
and his Neighbors good, is Religious and Just; but to go beyond these, is not
what we usually Term to take Liberty, but is usurping upon Liberty, and
becoming Licentious. And to repress all Licentionsness is the part of a Subject
Practicing Peace; notwithstanding he must warily keep within the Lines of his
Office or Power allowed, because even the repression of Evil by other means and
Persons then those duly appointed, is a breach of Peace. All Irregularities, as
they are greater or less, do more or less tend to her Annoyance both in
consequence and Example; therefore by good and Wise Men are carefully avoided,
that She may be the more entire and indissoluble. So that by advancing their
Princes Power and Glory, and promoting by piety and Integrity the Common
Interest, they endeavor both to obtain and Settle Peace; which is then only
firm, when our Defender is Glorious abroad and Honored at home, and we all
detest to do to each other the things that is Evil. Good Subjects are not for
Innovation, nor can they bear with such as Clamor for Peace, and pretend to
Settle it by Faction and Seditious Tumults. They very well know the vast
Latitude of their expositions of Peace, and the narrowness of their intentions
to her, whose obtended Zeal is so Loud and Fiery; and in short, that the People
have no other Rules for happiness but those of Obedience to their King, and a
discreet Government of themselves.

CHAP. III.
The distinct Offices of the Prince and Subject, in the concerns of Acquisition
and Settlement.
TO Speak a Man to be a true Lover of Peace, is to affirm him a good Christian
and very Wise. A Fool neither knows its Value, nor how to compose himself to
the Study thereof. Even those in diverse Ages so much Famed for Policy and the
Ruin of Crowns, did at the best but Act that Incendiary, who not capable of
otherwise attaining a Name, procured it by the destruction of a magnificent
Temple, whereas his unfurnished Brain could have contributed nothing toward the
Erecting of a meaner Fabric. At the same rate do I Judge of the exalted Men of
our times, who so cunningly Scatter Discords with an undiscerned Artifice. To
this Malice Leads them as a ready Guide, inspiring them with Counsels
suiting with their proposed ends, but the way of Peace have they not known, nor
are they capable of Instructions how to find them or Demean themselves in them.
But as the Arts of Government do excel all others; (the rest being only
attendants to them) so of all Regal Excellencies; a thorough conversation and
intimacy with the Arts of Peace is undoubtedly the Sublimest. And those
Subjects, who in their Trusts and Stations, sedulously apply themselves to the
Execution of Kingly Dictates, and to be fit Ministers of Injunctions of this
sort, are questionless the most nobly aspiring; and the more nearly and
immediately they are concerned in discharge of this Office, the more delicately
fine and polite their frame and temper ought to be. All men indeed have their
executive parts to act and account for, but they are for the most part
different, and the most accomplished (because Subjects) are but subordinate. In
which condition to do well, is their true Glory, but to attempt their own
Promotion, to set themselves forward out of Self-confidence, is the greatest
forfeiture, and most manifest discovery of Infirmity of judgment. For although
the Love of Peace is an admired Virtue in both Prince and People, yet the
Offices are not the same; The Prince is as the Head directive, the Subjects
partly executive, partly passive. Even those whom the King from his
observations of them, receives into the recesses of Consultation are, if not
altogether, yet in this very point, for the most part Executive, their advises
being Insignificative, until they have his approbation, and are by his Will
formed into a Law, to which even they are to yield a ready obedience. Now the
Counsels of Peace are Kings peculiar Skill, a Mysterious and God-like Faculty,
into which Subjects are not to pry any farther then the admissions of Royal
Grace. To attempt upon them is a Sacrilegious breach of their Peace, and a
great interruption of the Subjects own, which nothing destroys like
Suspicion, that emboldeneth this saucy scrutiny, and overthrows in order to
outward disturbances our best Peace, even that of our Minds. What therefore the
Prophet spoke in Gods cause, I may to the People inoffensively speak in the
Kings, In rest shall ye be Saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your
Strength. This is the Subjects safest course, although they are sometimes
taught the contrary, that Question being reiterated with ostentation of
judgment in the Speakers, at what time this duty and counsel is pressed upon
them; What, shall we all lie still, seeing such approaching dangers, and suffer
our throats to be cut like fools and cowards? And here, alas! how quick-sighted
we would needs be, when the Dreamers of Dreams have somewhat awakened, and told
us their dreadful Visions? Whereas, were we thoroughly awakened, we could not
but see more clearly, and above all, plainly discern, that our watchful Pilot,
who sits at Helm, does naturally (as bred up to Speculations) and
judiciously (as having all the accumulative advantages of knowledge) foresee
any tempest, which being like to arise, may endanger the Ship of State. We that
lie below too much fear sinking by every high Blast, and hearken foolishly to
envious destractors Sailing in the same bottom, to whom our Masters wisdom and
greatness are a grief and Eyesore. Thence, when there is really a time of
need, help is mutinously (I had almost said, Rebelliously) denied, because our
Commander does not to the certain ruin of all, direct his course by common
advice in an extraordinary case. At the beginning of a Storm they will not be
under his Command, because they are told, that they know not what perilous
Rocks lie hidden in such a Tract. Insomuch that in the want of due assistance,
if all be prosperous beyond expectation, the success is miraculous, and to be
ascribed only to Gods immense goodness, and our excellent Conductors judgment
and experience. But all this while, what probability can we have, that our
Prince either does not, cannot, or will not see mischief drawing on, nor
protect us, and by so doing, preserve himself? Of the eminence of his
abilities, has been enough, if not here spoken, yet every where known; What
reason then that his own safety should be so cheap in his own estimate? Does he
it out of hatred to himself? Or are his Subjects so odious to him, that he
becomes contented to ruin himself, that we may all certainly Perish? Having no
reason to conclude the first, we Answer the second with an Enquiry; What have
we done? How have we behaved our selves toward him, to excite in him an
Indignation so Prodigious, that takes away all care and respect for himself?
And such an Indignation there must be by our undutiful demeanor, or else it is
manifest, that our Consciences accuse us of Evil in the height designed and
endeavored, which meriteth such an one, although he harbor it not in his
Sacred Bosom; For we cannot fear that which is not, or which has not been
deserved. But innocence is free from suspicion, especially where the concerns
are vastly more his, then any particular Subjects, and at least equal to all.
But the fears are raised, and the suspicions somented by men, who
(notwithstanding their Professions, and the peoples opinion of them) hate their
King, and have no desires of their Countries tranquillity. And where ever such
appear, the King in his Rules of Peace cannot but see a necessity of taking
them off by violence, (if other means procure not a speedy Remedy) because the
Public Peace is preserved, when disorder is prevented; and such Victims are
very satisfactory to her. Nay, so far are they from being in the least
offensive to Peace, that those Princes who have too long Tampered with other
Medicines before they set upon this way of Cure, have offended against her Laws
by too much delay. For when Busy Men have been permitted to go on too far in
dispersing their Malice under specious pretenses, rather then they would
strike off the Cancred Member to the general preservation, although this
forbearance proceed merely from compassion, the Authors have been (unwillingly
indeed, but) Accessaries to the Calamities which followed. It is (I know) a
much applauded discourse; That for the King to please his Subjects, to Rely
upon their Love, and cast himself wholly upon their affections, are the only
means for him to establish Peace, and attain to the height of Formidable
Grandeur: No Prince being so powerful and Rich as he, that wins and so
Rules in the Hearts of his People. But while they urge this to him, what in
the mean time do they make their King, whom they would suppose not to know
this, and how far it is true? For if the constant exercise and practice of
Religion, Justice and Clemency, be not Princely Obligations sufficiently
commanding all dutiful and grateful returns from reasonable and good Men,
Subjects who are not these, will never nor ought by any endeavors to be
otherwise won; because the Prince, who would gratify unreasonable Men, in so
doing knows himself to offend against the Rules of Peace: God is thereby made
angry and good Men to mourn, and innumerable must the mischiefs be, which will
of necessity follow. If those Acts of Magnanimity do not Influence them, a
descent from his Majesty, which will render him less Honored, will not
purchase him more Love. Those bold Men from whose ill representations the most
Heroic Virtues are Traduced, need not much use of Art to bring compliances
under contempt. For they must either be assented to through want of Judgment or
Tumultuarily Forced: And in either Case new Breaches will be made, and former
made wider. Subjects, who shall find the advantage they have gotten over their
Prince, cannot (as I said) Love him the more because they will less Reverence
him; neither can they think themselves safe, who must always expect Revenge
either of the Blemish left upon reputation (then which nothing has a deeper
impression) when discovered, or the undutiful carriage, which has presumed to
take his Throne lower then his Ancestors.

But still the thoughts of Religion seem to urge an extraordinary care, by
reason of the manifest dangers said to threaten it. And indeed, the concerns
thereof are so transcendently high, that they justly demand all our skill and
utmost vigilance to be employed for its preservation, Peace with present, and
the hopes of our future welfare, being all enjoyments, which are Religions
Blessings. Neither can any man truly love his Prince, his Neighbor, or
himself, who lives indifferent, and carelessly contented with any thing that
bears that Name, whether true or false; because such an one has somewhat,
which he prizeth at an higher rate, in the enjoyment whereof, if disturbed, or
in danger of disturbance, he will not scruple as he shall be able to act to the
violation of Union. Nothing certainly more conduces to Peace, then an earnest
Zeal for Religion, which sees the State enervated by every Faction that makes
Eruptions in the Church, and dares object all its powers to its exclusion.
Nevertheless, this Zeal must be according to knowledge, and the power it uses
must be lawful, otherwise when it is erroneous and blind, it is also
headstrong and outrageous, and so is an adversary to Peace; and when it
transgresses the limits of the power the Law prescribes, it undertaketh to
defend Religion by Impiety. And how acceptable that persons services are, who
brings to the Altar Offerings of Abominations, is easy to judge. Now the
most undoubted powers of contending against Faction and Innovation, which every
man is allowed and enjoined equally to use, are devout Prayers and Innocence of
life. Which if duly practiced by the professed Children of the Church, would
alone make her Victorious, and prevent all solicitous Counsels of disappointing
her Adversaries. And it is to be feared, that the greatest difficulty is in
daring to use and confide in the successes of these best defensive Arms; yet
if these be not chiefly relied upon, other means afford little or no help. When
therefore I hear so much daily said of Religion and its Preservation, and see
these most necessary coercives of attempts upon it so altogether slighted by
them, who seem most Zealous, I cannot sufficiently admire why they undertake so
great a work, who are most ignorant how to effect it. Especially, strange it is
to observe so much action and fury, both condemnable, the first for want of
Commission, the later as contradictory to the Principles of Christianity. And
to all that are serious, the event is foretold when these Agents for Truth are
considered; for they are either men destitute of Piety, having not so much as
the Form, or else such as proceed to exalt her in the very methods, which they
condemn in others as tending to her depression. By the joint assistance of most
Atheistical Debauches and notorious Hypocrites, we are great with expectation
of a glorious Church. I confess I do not so much wonder at the impudence of the
principal Conductors, as that many pretending to be and fortunately esteemed
Men of Sobriety, should be led aside with an opinion and hope of these Men's
counsels, notwithstanding apparently pernicious. For neither Peace nor Religion
can stand upon these frames made up of materials unlawfully and unskilfully
cast together and disagreeing from what they are to support, Religion is not to
be modelled by every man, who fancieth himself a Workman for that purpose; nor
if that established by Law happen at any time to be erroneous or deficient in
some parts, may Subjects without especial Commission for that very end attempt
alteration or amendment. Every man is bound to be well satisfied of the Truth
of what himself professes; but must abstein from what is the Office of Supreme
Authority only, unless that be pleased to empower him to inquire into and
correct what shall merit a rectifying inspection. Otherwise, although they
should be never so urgent, Religion tolerateth not a relief of her necessities,
by private men's invading the Kingly Power and Prerogative; It is Disobedience,
from which she will not own assistance. Subjects may desire and pray, and some
few of the wisest and most remarkably Loyal, may modestly and privately
Petition their King, that he would graciously remedy and prevent such evils as
the Church susteineth or fears. But in either case they ought evidently to
show the complaints to be of inconveniences really incumbent, and their
jealousies to be just and weighty, otherwise they give him just suspicion of
their either Wisdom or Integrity, that they are themselves ensnared by ill
designing men, or would ensnare him. No Assembly of men, although met together
in Council by his Majesty's especial Command, are to meddle with matters of
Religion (more then concerns Piety in the practice) any farther then their
Master recommendeth it to their care to consider of it, and report to him the
results of their Consultations. To Act, Vote, or Resolve herein, without his
leave and direction, is to disown his Authority in matters Ecclesiastical, and
make themselves a Supreme Constitutive Power. If some very meek Addresses be
(as I said before) modestly and privately made of their apprehensions of His
and the public Danger, by mischiefs threatening the Church, and some humble
overtures of Prevention submitted to his Princely Judgment, they have gone as
far as Good Subjects dare. But if their Prince see more sharply into his own
affairs, while they will needs suppose him to oversee, it is utterly incoherent
with the Office of Religious and good Subjects, to use any violence or ill Arts
to compel him, forasmuch as they can but barely justify their most humble
Entreaties. Some have exceeded their Commission, and extended their Privileges
from Just and Honorable, to Unwarrantable and Rebellious, under pretense that
their Prince did not see, neither would be advised how imminent his danger was.
Instead of Faithful and Loyal Subjects assembled, to offer him their Lives and
Fortunes, against Foreign or Domestic Enemies, they have first fallen to
other Debates, and more trifled out time about Eye-sores and harmless Wens in
the Body Politic, then to apply themselves to the cure of the Distempers so
much complained of, to endanger the Vitals. And then to pare the Nails of his
Power, and shave the Excrescencies (as they call them) of his Prorogatives, at
the time of greatest need (as themselves confessed) when supplies should have
been freest, were the only means they found to restore health to these
Kingdoms, and exalt above his Neigbours their Princes Scepter. At length when
his acute Judgment saw, and great Spirit disdained their Counsels, they
resolved as Guardians of a foolish or mad Pupil by Fetters to persuade, and
most horrid indignities to lash him into compliance, and (had not Divine
Providence, as his Shield, diverted their aims) would no doubt have
accomplished their promised Glory and Grandeur, by the before practiced course
of rendering their King Immortal.

How rationally these and the like actions conclude the Peace of Church and
State designed, and the Authors meriting the Name of Good Subjects, is so unfit
to be enquired into, that I wonder even Fools and Madmen, who take almost any
thing upon credit of the Deliverers, have no Stones to hurl at these grossest
of Pretenders. But the Lovers of Peace are excessively ashamed, and our
incomparably Reformed Church scandalized, to hear and observe the most
reproachfully distracting studies of men, who seem to envy all others the Fame
of Religious and Loyal, all their expressions proclaiming their restless care
of Gods and the Kings Honor. But we see that smooth words tend most to the
breach of Peace, when there is War in the Heart, and that no Crimes are so
odious as those over which the Name of Holiness is superintended. To prevent
the excess of which Debauchery of the Mind, and the Calamities which
inseparably attend it, we must warily avoid the creeping Folly at the
beginning, which admitted, opens the passage for what is most monstrous and
prodigious. To that end we must reserve no patience of the ear for them, who by
the magnitude of danger (whether fictitious or real) persuade men that they may
divert themselves somewhat from the exactness of duty. This once received,
presently confineth and enlarges Obedience at will, allowing it no proper
bounds or assigned station, nor indeed any thing more then a bare Name to serve
the basest ends. The strictness of Duty toward our Prince well observed, is
the greatest assurance of Peace, because the firmest Bond of Religion, being in
God, and for God performed. This calmeth all thoughts in us, by begetting a due
and seasonable Confidence in our King, trusting him with our selves and
fortunes, which he cannot injure so long as we Love and Honor him. And
suspicion removed, we shall be generously executive Ministers of Peace, either
in our common Employments, or the particular charges, with which he vouchsafes
to honor us, leaving the grand care thereof upon him, with whom God has
entrusted it. This is virtuous, noble, and consentaneous to Religion, being the
Ornament of that Profession. While we know our Duty distinguished from our
Superiors, and act Christianity more than discourse it, we need not fear our
tranquillity to be overwhelmed by force, or undermined by Subtilty. For our
care of Peace and Religion, will make us watchful over our selves to continue
Innocent, and over Pretenders to keep them from Sacrificing to their Malice and
Ambition our most glorious and dearest fruitions: And by dutiful returns of
seasonable provisions, in token of gratitude to our King, and the better to
enable his Love and Care of us, reciprocal affections will always abound, and
Gods Blessing will manifest his approbation, that this is the only right
course of obteining, that Glory may dwell in our Land.

The Disturbance of the Princes Peace, is the same of the Subjects.
OF this, much needs not to be said to such as are apprehensive what is the
Duty of Good Subjects in the acquiring and establishing Peace; their griefs
show them also sensibly knowing how much what ever is matter of vexation to
their King, is perplexity to them, and their laboring thoughts are restless,
until relieved by assurances that he has overcome the difficulty. Others less
sensible of the reason, are not by their ignorance the more exempted from
Sufferings; although they too too frequently impute them to contrary causes,
and so render them heavier and sharper to themselves and others. Under Pagan
Kings and Magistrates, without their Peace and Prosperity, a quiet and
peaceable life in Godliness could not be presumed to be obtained by the
Primitive Christians; therefore was it enjoined as the first work of Piety,
that Intercessions and giving of thanks should to that end be made for them.
Certainly the Case is not now altered, nor will disorders of Christians
greiving a most Christian and Gracious Prince, promote Peace and Religion. But
now the King is become the Churches Defender, his Troubles are the Subjects
more direct wounds, and his Griefs more generally afflicting. Sometimes men are
troubled and augment their troubles, by causlesly accusing their Prince of
mistakes, when it was their own perverseness first disturbed him, and that
continuing, is his farther vexation, and much more both theirs and every Man's.
It happens to them as to a reasty Jade, which without cause is sullen, and
winceth against its Rider, discomposing him, but Galling its own Back, and
Bruising its own Heels; and being severely Spured and Whip't is the more angry,
but alters not its Quallities; Nevertheless can have no Remedy but
alteration. The weakness of many Men's Judgments frequently proceeds to
Insolence, and if their Governor go not the way, which they prescribe, Kick,
Murmur and Rebel, and by disquieting him, Gall and Torment themselves; Whereas
his only desire is that with them he may be quiet and Prosperous. The Vexations
are great and Spreading until they are reduced to good Discipline, but his
compliance is most Fatal to all. We have an instance in Sacred Writ, which will
sufficiently evidence the Calamities befalling Prince and People, when the
Prince is overuled by a Clamourous Multitude. Saul being possessed of the
Israelitish Diadem, was sent by God with an especial Commission to lead an Army
against the Amalekites and utterly destroy all that they had, Man and Woman,
Infant and Suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass. But after Victory obtained,
the People Murmur that so chargeable an Expedition of two Hundred and ten
Thousand Men should have no Recompense; That the Spoils of a Rich Eastern
Country, and such Plenty of Fat Sheep and Oxen, Younger Fatlings and Lambs,
should all (while they had neglected their Farms, Flocks and Herds at Home)
Perish to no Man's benefit; That at their return there must be Public
Thanksgivings, Sacrifices and Feastings, with their Wives, Children and
Relations at Home; which they judged would prove a Lean and Barren joy, if the
Sacrifices and Beasts to be Slaughtered, must be fetched from their own Folds
and Stalls: These or the like, were the Voices of the Multitude, and were
specious Arguments used by the Nobles, Rulers and Chief-Captains to persuade
the King to neglect his Duty toward God for the good of the People. They all
concluded that the present Interest was the best Religion, and that the show
and noise of Sacrifice would Silence Heavens Decree pronounced for the Contempt
of its Laws. Neither was this easily obtained of the King, who, although a
Valiant Man, was forced to yield, for the Murmurs and Mutiny had proceeded so
High, that he was put into a great fear, such as Subjected him in the meanest
sort to the Raving Populacy; for (as he says of himself) he Feared the People
and Obeyed their Voice. But thus the King pleased the People to his own and
their Ruin. For God immediately commanded the Kingdom to be Rent from him.
And although some Years Intervened between the Sentence and Execution, yet the
rest of his Reign was but improsperous, and at length upon Mount Gilboa, the
King, his Sons and People fell down grievously Slaughtered by a Foreign Enemy
and Invasion, and the Victory over them was used most Savagely and Insolently.
Such are the usual Harvest which Subjects. Reap from their undutiful behavior,
wherein the more Successful they are, the more inevitable is their destruction.
Miscarriages in any such attempts are most happy, which instruct them what
should have been forborne, what practiced, and convince them of a necessity of
renouncing all Rude and Irreverent thoughts of their King, in order to the
establishment of Happiness. But that so powerful an Example set down by the
Holy Penman must needs be prevalent with Men so much professing Religion, I
should not have gone farther for one, then the so fresh and Sadly memorable of
our late times. Then were seen the Tides of Popular Fury to Swell to such an
excess, that they Swallowed up all Government both in Church and State, our
Kings, Princes, and most eminently Pious and Loyal Churchmen were either
Murdered, Banished, or driven into Corners; and in short, after the
discontented Rabble had taken the matter into their own hand (to which frequent
Royal Condescentions did but the more embolden them) to Repair, Reform, Cure
and Settle all, their miseries and dissatisfactions did even infinitely abound.
And then to find what they sought for, they were compelled to retreat, to
acknowledge their folly and distress, supplicating him whom they most
rebelliously and ignominiously dispossessed of his Crown and Dignities, Return
thou and all thy Servants. Until his Peace was restored, theirs was in
excilement; none other with their Boasted Sciences of Government could after a
long and wretched experience give any hopes of effecting the public safety,
but the same they had rejected. Whom with accumulative Honors they Petitioning
to return acknowledged that nothing but want of confidence in their lawful
Monarchs virtue and judgment, had so miserably enslaved them under Anarchical
Tyranny, nothing but that confidence could revive the Sinking Kingdoms Glory.

So great a Calamity and unexpected Redemption successively furnishing us with
infalliable Rules for prosperous enjoyments, our sudden forgetfulness or
careless observance of them makes us appear the most despicably Sottish of
Mankind. We are uneasy and thoughtful by listening to the Authors of our newly
vanquished afflictions, who with an ill natured, but most genuine Offspring
instill Poisonous Opinions into the minds of their Fellow Subjects in
detraction of the present Government. I should rationally think their very
Persons caution enough against any their insinuations, much more when they
repeat Rebellion in the same methods, and rush on with more impudenoe then
their former beginnings knew. Nevertheless we have seen diverse of them promoted
to be of the Grand Council of the Nation, and there Principals of such
ungrateful and undecent Orations, that while they pretended to represent
Greivances, ought themselves to have been proceeded against as the most
intolerable of all Grievances. We hope that Members of a Sound constitution may
by Gods Blessing succeed them to repair in Truth those breaches which the
former vitiated ones, have opened to Scandal, Confusion, and the Terror of our
Prince and all Religious People. Otherwise we ought to intercede with God and
the King that such Prodigies of State may no more appear among us to Subvert
our Peace and Religion with novel and unheard devices of Government and Union.
What considerate Man sees not the Foundations now stricken at, when by the
same courses, and many of the same Hands, they were before Subverted? and when
the Nation Sins again its old Crimes, after such a Miraculous Restoration,
what can hinder the worse thing from befalling it? Or where shall we look for a
second Redemption, who have so Idly undervalued the First? In former Ages the
Great Assemblies did indeed what they undertook, support the Nation by
Strengthening their respective Kings; but of late they have been so far from
treading in the Steps of their Ancestors (as that Blessed Prince delivers
it, who afterward more sharply felt the mischief of such Parliamentary
digressions) by dutiful expressions in that kind, that contrarily they have
introduced a way of bargaining and contracting with their King, as if nothing
ought to he given him by them, but what he should buy and purchase of them,
either by the quitting somewhat of his Royal Prerogative, or diminishing and
lessening his Revenues. This was spoken of Disrespects and Demeanours,
inconsiderable in comparison of what himself became afterward Sensible of, and
his Royal Son has lately found too much cause to mention and reprove. And each
of these disloyal Practices increase the consternation, which has Seized us,
and is general, though diversely afflicting Men according to their diversity of
Humors. Some are entangled in Labyrinths of Conceits that their Prince is ill
advised, and has no good Council, as if he wanted their judgment in Choosing,
and all of their Choice and Representatives were endued with Infallibillity:
some are so fearful of disorder in the State, and so jealous of Religion least
Superstition should enter in and corrupt it, that they presently break the
Peace, which they only fear may be broken, and most Superstitiously Idolize
those Oracles of Satan, which against Scripture, Primitive Example and Human
Reason, lead and persuade them: Others Piously Lament their Princes Vexations,
and the Churches Reproach and danger in the midst of so many partly Maliciously
contriving, partly inconsiderate and Zeal Blind Adversaries; whose infatuations
they Pray may cease, and the Smiles only of Fraternal Union in our dearest
Mothers Bosom and Embraces may be Foreign Enemies Envy, and the Worlds
Discourse and Amazement.

CHAP. V.
A Good Subject cannot but grievously Mourn, and be Afflicted by his Princes
Adversities.
THat one, who fears God and his Ordinance, who desires and endeavors the
public Welfare, and sees how inseperably God has joined the Good of the
Higher Power and the Subjects, (for says St. Paul, He is the Minister of God
to thee for good) cannot but grievously mourn and be afflicted by his Princes
Adversities, is nothing to be admired by them, that revere Conscience, or truly
mind Heaven. For when he, who is the Minister of God to us for good, shall by
the Devil, or any of his Agents, have the Channel of his Power, through which
our good must flow, stopped or disturbed, this will be every Wise man's grief.
Fullness and Wantonness may at present make many in observant; Pride having made
diverse to contemn those Blessings, which came not answering their own mode and
prescription, may make them merry to observe it and help to promote it; the
Rapacity of such as are not contented with what the usual course of the stream
brought them, will assuredly by variety of Arts corrupt and trouble the Waters,
in hope of more plentiful Fishing and Prey. But wise and good men lament these
disorderly either hopes or joys, seeing apparent mischief reigning under the
smiles of men of unstable minds. The business of Kings is not to satisfy
fluctuating humors, but to give Contentment to their Subjects, which cannot be
otherwise administered, then by Religion and Justice, and practicing the blessed
Rules of Peace. The concerns of Religion and Justice, are for the most part
within the public view: But I have shown that the Mystery of Peace is their
peculiar Skill, not to be pryed into any further than they are pleased to
permit, but that the Subjects Acquiescence is their best Strength and Safety.
And although this be true, yet there are too commonly men Dissatisfied,
Ambitious and Malicious, who will not be Happy, who will be peeping, meddling
with, and Speaking evil of the things they understand not. And sometimes it
happens that these pernicious wretches go on with a Fatal Prosperity,
insomuch that (as the Wise man speaks) The City (by which he means the
Kingdom or Commonwealth) is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. Sometimes
the commotions only threaten, and having begun the works of ruin, are not able
to finish them, God being pleased to put an hook into the Noses of the
Insolent, and to curb the madness of the people. But in any of these Cases, the
calamity begins at the Head; all the vicious Members blows and reproaches
are at that: Although they are pretensively aimed at something else, yet there
they are designed to fall. But then, alas! how sensible is every sound Member
of all the Affronts Indignities and Sufferings, which it sustaineth? If it Ache
and Grieve, how they languish? If it smart, how speedily do they feel the pain?
And its Agonies put all on Trembling? Every injury they feel, each deprivation
is their loss, every reproach their shame. Then they mourn and cry out as
lamenting Jeremy, For this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are
dim. Ordinary troubles observed in equals, create commiseration in those who
have not put off Humanity; but Christians have a fellow feeling of their
Brethrens afflictions by the greatness of their compassion, bearing one
another burdens; as if suffering in the same Body, and under the same
Calamities. If such be the Affection of common Neighborhood, which the general
rules of Christian Charity, and peradventure some, peradventure no particular
Obligations of dependence or communion have enlivened; how boundless must those
Passions and Griefs be, which proceed from Charity, enflamed by all that the
free exercise of Religion, Temporal Hopes and Dependencies, and the enjoyments
of a pleasant Fraternal Communion can administer? By the Injuries and
Disturbances of the Kings Peace, the Public Exercise of Religion is also
interrupted; for then when the wicked arise, a man is hidden, then what they
celebrated before with open Joy and Thanksgiving, Gods Children being scattered
by the Persecutions of the Ungodly, are forced mournfully to perform in
Corners. They that will not allow their Nursing Father quiet, will afford the
Pious Sons as little Tranquillity. And although no other molestation ensue from
the impious Authors of the Kings Grief, yet the remembrance by whom God has
hitherto conveyed those most Heavenly pleasures to his Servants upon Earth,
mingleth even those sweets with Gall, when God's most Sacred Substitute is
forced to drink of the Cup of Bitterness. Each good man is desirous to undergo
in his own person what he sustaineth, and would gladly give his Life in
exchange for the Afflictions of the King, who is worth ten thousand of us.
David although a King, was so concerned at the death of Abner a reconciled
Enemy, that all the People could not persuade him to eat, because there was a
Prince, and a Great Man then fallen in Israel; much more Good Subjects, when
they see Mischief designed against their Sovereign, and carried on with Fury
and Insolence, do Fast and Mourn, and when they do Eat, it is the Bread of
Afflictions and Tears. And in the next place (although they do not move Pious
men with equal affection, yet) our Temporal Dependencies and Enjoyments
considered, help to add weight to our Grief, when the Almighty's great Almoner,
by and under whom our Table was prepared, our Head anointed, and our Cup did
run over, shall be reduced to streights and anxieties. When he also whose love
and care of his People labors to secure to each man (as far as humane
scrutiny can give judgment) his just rights and fruitions redeeming the Souls
of the Poor from Deceit and Violence, and breaking in pieces the Oppressor,
when he shall be under distress, or in any danger, by the Conspiracies of Cruel
and Blood-thirsty men, so great is the Horror that surprizeth them, that in
the possession of what has been preserved by past care, there is no comfort,
no enjoyment. Love cannot be ungrateful, and Gratitude cannot be forgetful, but
the memory of each delight causes a melting of hearts, and as it were a
dissolution of nature, when the Principal Cause is threatened to be taken away
or removed out of sight. Neither is this Grief but in the least part proceeding
from any fear of Sequestrations and losses of Estates and Fortunes by the
violence offered to our Princes Peace. Although there is little need of
Remembrancers to mind us how Religious and Loyal men were treated, when Slaves
were mounted and Princes depressed, and that so just a fear is cause enough for
trouble of mind, and that trouble no way discommendable, yet this least
afflicts any good Subjects thoughts. For should such as move toward our
Sovereign's Disquiet never so plausibly and largely promise the same freedom in
Spirituals and as full enjoyment of our Liberties and Properties as we either
do or can desire to obtain, nay could they give us caution and security
sufficient to prevent all fears of nonperformance of thse promises, when it
should be in the power of their hands to perform or change; yet could none of
these promises or offered securities remove a good Subjects sorrow. For in the
first place Usurpers account all that they leave in the possession of those,
over whom they have assumed Authority, to be matter of Courtesy, not of Right
and Justice, And the subversion of the fundamental Right, the alteration of
Property, although the thing be retained, does so much abate the pleasures of
fruition, that it rather appears a gently protracted misery. But then by a
nearer inspection into things, good and wise Men see an impossibility of
performing these promises, although the Promisers would be, what Rebels never
are, exact in these their Covenants. For not to be disquieted in gathering in
and eating our own Bread and of our own Flocks and Herds, or sitting and
drinking our own Labors under our own Vine, is not Peace nor a Blessing, but a
Curse. Every morsel we swallow goes down with dread and menaces, and our drink
chilleth our very Spirits as at Death's approach. For in the midst of all
plenty looking up in stead of that glorious and auspicious Star, which God has
always graciously appointed to influence and be the blessing of our Fortunes, we
see black and prodigious Clouds and wandering Stars with flaming denunnciations
of Wrath, which cause to vanish whatsoever pretends to joy. God will have his
Work done his own way, and his Blessings administered by Sacred Hands. Men of
impudence, riots and lusts, who are incapable of well using a private Fortune
although too large for them, yet rapaciously extend their desires to the State,
which is above subjection, cannot at the same time be the Public Scourges and
Blessings. They never appear but for humane punishment; the sight of them
admonish us repentance and sorrow, which when we religiously abound with, they
are designed for the Fire.

CHAP. VI.
A Good Subject is so studiously careful and mindful of his Princes Welfare,
that in his Princes Danger he becomes unmindful of many of his own nearest
private Concerns.
OUr Nation at this time abounds with men who please themselves with
Religious Discourses; and this inviteth me to head this part of my Discourse
with a Scripture Example. Mephibosheth being the Son of Jonathan, David's
admired Friend, was after David's Coronation called to Court, made to eat daily
at the King's Table, and all the Lands of King Saul restored unto him. After a
long prosperous Reign King David's Son Absalom conspired against him; the
Conspiracy was so strong and sudden that the King had no time to prepare
himself for Defense, scarce enough to fly. But among all the true-hearted
Subjects which lamented the Kings distress, that of Mephibosheth is most
remarkable, who being lame in his Feet, yet had not dressed his Feet, nor
trimmed his Beard, nor washed his Clothes, from the day the King departed,
until the day he came again in peace. There was a rare Divine Soul in a weak
and inform body; and the grief of the mind was exceedingly the greater,
because disabled of corporal assistance in his Princes necessity. But he would
not be deficient wherein he was able; therefore he produces a powerful supply
of prayers and tears instead of Arms and Sinews of War. Neither was he afraid
in dangerous times to show his dislike of the public joy at Jerusalem, or to
be a mourner amidst Absalom's Triumphs. To show fear had been to cast out love,
and was beneath his large Gratitude, and incomparable Loyalty. These rendered
him fearless and regardless of all other misfortunes after the King's
departure. He so much saw his Master's danger, that he saw not his own; beyond
him he had no hopes, without him no pleasure. Which is easily discerned seeing
his lameness being from his infancy, and needing a continual care, yet his
sorrow and cares for his exiled King afforded no time for cure or refreshment.
He could not mind ease and decency, when the Kingdom was in disorder, nor let
his thoughts that were high in consultation and suspense for the sick Head and
faint Heart descend so low as to be employed about his Feet. Self preservation
would have been the first of most men's thoughts, but it was none of his at all,
the weightiest concerns taking deepest impression in his great and capacious
mind. Mean Spirits would have thought of nothing else, but how to preserve
themselves and their Fortunes; let David or Absalom or whosoever could get the
Throne much alike to them; so long as they could find ways to Ingratiate and
Fawn, no matter by what hand they were fed. But Generous and Divine Souls
reject those despicable politics, which certainly ruin Conscience and Fame,
and run greater hazards of Temporals then they, who firmly adhere to their
Loyalty and Integrity. For Rebellions are seldom prosperous, or not long so:
And although constant Fidelity does willingly adventure all, yet it never has
need to Apologize for Desertion, or supplicate a returning Princes Mercy and
Pardon. His Peaceable Restoration is the Faithful Subjects Prayer and Fortune;
this he chiefly desires and aims at; and if other Fortunes sink in the
acquiring, he esteems the purchase cheap enough. Those other men of mean
Spirits, like Ratts and such contemptible Vermin, if the Building wherein they
are threaten a downfall, presently shift for themselves, not caring what
becomes of any thing, provided they are far enough from the danger, whether it
stand or fall: But Good Men put their Shoulders as props to Sustain the Fabric
of the State, and never move from their undertaken Charge, so long as they have
any Hopes of benefiting it by their Endeavors: And rather had they be oppressed
in the ruin, then not to have endeavored the utmost, when need so required.
And this is certainly the greatest Policy to them, who make any Professions of
Religion, or think justly of God. I add this last, Or think justly of God,
because it is too well known, that they who in Later times, and in these days,
make loudest Professions of Religion, are the first in Seditious and Rebellious
practices. But this shows their Professions insincere, and that in Truth they
do but make a mock of the name of Conscience, and think of God, (as that Royal
Prophet expresses it) that he is altogether such an ox as themselves, or
rather, Do say in their hearts, there is no God. The better sort of Moralists
have in all times outdone these Christians, believing their Allegiance to their
Prince to exceed all private Interests, whether Personal or Relative; and
exhibiting incorrupt Loyalty under the greatest Temptations and durance. Nay
even the better sort of Dogs have shown grateful Fidelity to their Masters to
the extremity of Breath. So far have those other pretenders to the great Titles
of Piety, put off even Morality and Nature. But such as truly fear God, and
revere Conscience upon each neglect, or injurious act, declare to themselves
what David proclaimed to Abner and the People, who sleeping left the King to
David and Abishai's mercy; As the Lord lives we are worthy to die, because we
have not kept the Lords Anointed. And wise men, who know the danger, will be as
careful not to incurr the Divine Displeasure by sleeping when it is time of
Action; but rather they hate the Act of Negligence more then the desert, and
are so in love with their duty, that no violence can separate Affections, or
hinder their diligence in Preserving or Rescuing from danger the Lords
Anointed, the Breath of our Nostrils. And this (although good men in the
performance of their duty, least think of a Temporal reward, yet) they know to
be the highest part of Prudence too, or Rational Subtilty. They know the Divine
Power to be no Fiction, or Dream, but recollect and treasure up in their
Memories the Omnipotent Acts of revenge of its dishonor upon the unthinking
Contrivers of Treason, and the most frequent Temporal manifestations of his
Love and Honor to the Faithful. They see it to be but a Trial, and being
confirmed for their Duty, are sure of being approved, and that when God sees
his time to Turn again the Captivity of his people, for their present Grief,
they shall obtain the chief places in the Theaters of Joy. It being Gods
promise, That the King shall joy in Gods strength, and that he will prevent him
with the Blessings of Goodness, They know, that as the Kings Sorrow was theirs,
so shall his Joy be. So that their Trouble, although excessive, has yet much
Consolation; because they Hope always, and their Hope is Rational depending on
God, who besides Scriptural most delicious Promises and Examples, has further
amply furnished us with incomparable modern Patterns and Observations. In the
midst of their Griefs, Sufferings and Endeavors, they seem to hear directed to
each of them, as well as lamenting Rachel, Refrain thy Voice from Weeping, and
thine Eyes from Tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, and they shall come
again from the Land of the Enemy. They are as a Faithful Wife, whose Husband
being either in the field ready to engage in a desperate Battle, or at Sea in
stormy weather, and a road Infested by Pirates; Anxity and Fear make her
continually Mournful, she is viduated and neglectful of Ornaments and Food,
using but little, enjoying nothing. Yet Hope takes its vicissitudes of
administering Comfort, minding her of the prevalency of Prayer and Patience,
repeating the successes with which God has hitherto blessed either him or
others, who Industriously relied upon the excellency of their Cause, and which
he has to such promised. This gives Intermissions of Grief, and often gains
victory, although subject to frequent relapses. At length his return banisheth
Hope and Fear, but both serve to make great the joy, which without them must
have remained among the small and disregarded ones. The King is the Soul of his
Countries Joy and Felicity, whose Dangers or Absence cause Convulsions of
Spirits in his Faithful Subjects, who are Espoused to him, and sharers in all
his Fortunes. And it is impossible while men are under greatly distracting
cares for the Public, but that private Affairs and Pleasures must cease to be
respected. But before these Thoughts swell the heart to despair, Divine Comfort
appears encouraging Fidelity, with Promises of a Blessed Conclusion. For by
the Generations past they are taught, that Adversities may fall upon Kings for
their Kingdoms Wickedness, God designing them as Punishments and Trials for the
Peoples Amendment; but in his appointed time is wont to Turn him to the Prayer
of the poor destitute, and not to despise their desire. And although God does
sometimes afflict, yet he patronizeth the Cause of Kings, and calls it his
own. And the very success of the wicked is an assurance of their approaching
fall; for it is always by them tyrannically and savagely used, and accompanied
with such prodigious haughtiness, that the expectation must be inevitable ruin.

These interchangeable sorrows and hopes did once long contend for victory in
the minds of the Loyal party of these Kingdoms. The delays and improbabilities
of our most Gracious Kings Restoration (after we had seen His Blessed Father
exalted to a more glorious Crown) gave grief the longer possession. But our
reason (when grief well nigh spent would permit us the use of it) showed us the
impossibility of such sanguinary Pride long continuing, or that those men's
insatiable desires, which by receiving were the more extended, till at length
they were enlarged as Hell, should wanting supplies abroad not fall to feed
upon their own Instruments first, afterward one upon another, and in the end
ravingly exspire. This reason was strengthened by a firm belief that God would
not suffer such and so much blood to cry unrevenged, that the patient abiding
of the Meek should not always be forgotten, but that our God would be pleased to
show a token upon us for good, that they who hated us, might be ashamed. Our
fears were more durable, but our hopes by these dependencies and encouragements
were more quick and powerful, and in the end vanquishing our fears were
themselves lost in the following pleasant and celestial enjoyments. The
benefits whereof, I humbly beseech God, we may by our virtues and pious
thankfulness make truly our own, and by such patterns leave the possession of
Posterities.

But the foul interruption, which ill men have by indirect counsels made,
puts us again upon the rack, and gives even the name of Joy but an unwelcom
reception, until judicious Hope relieveth us with assurances that their
expectation is but short, and shows us the Achitophels politickly contriving
the frame and as cunningly erecting the Ladder, from the top of which they may
boast their success and give perpetuity to their memories. Each dutiful Subject
in the mean time with a lamenting care beholds his Princes troubles and the
fate of those, who so occasion them. And (such is the usual course of Divine
Rewards descending upon prudent Obedience) although he is least in his own
thoughts, yet by all his faculties endeavoring it, he begins his own
prosperity at his Sovereigns. Being careless of all even life it self, that
is, being resolutely willing to expose all that is dearest to him as the
purchase of the Kings peace, he best keeps and secureth his All. By this
means his adversity is shortened, his joy rendered more durable and copious.

CHAP. VII.
The Princes Peace and thereby the Kingdoms settled can truly influence with
joy none but Good Subjects.
WHat good men ask of God according to his Will, and Industriously labor for,
in this being obtained they truly rejoice; but others have not the like joy,
although partakers of the same Blessings, having been deficient in the means.
For although (as it is in general Blessings) multitudes have had joy by His
Majesty's Happy Restoration, yet all those could not truly rejoice in it, that
being both the purchase and work of Piety. It was the fruit of incessant
Prayer, whereby the Faithful prevailed with God for this Return to His
Afflicted People, according to the wonted course of his Favors, as Elias did
after so many years of Drought to the Thirsty Israelites, who all knew the
misery they lay under, but not the Cause or Remedy. As it was with them, so
with us; the very Authors of the dismal Judgment groaned under it, and
lamented the Pressure, not the Provocation. We had men esteemed Crafty, who had
wit enough to bring mischief upon others, to derive much upon themselves and
put all into disorder, but were unseen in the ways of Feace and Composure. But,
Alas! they who are endued with this wit only, are but each puny Devils Fools.
Could they judiciously have betaken themselves to the Art of Reconciliation,
they had been to be admired. Nothing more common then for a Fool, in one minute
to destroy the curious Contrivance and labor of many Months; and without
difficulty a Mad man can quickly Fire a most magnificent Edifice, not modelled
and raised without vast Expense of Council, Riches, Labor and Time: And out of
his fit this Incendiary may happen to lament the Desolation, and weep into the
Ashes, especially if sensible that before its Funeral, that House was wont to
be his Hospitable shelter from necessity. All his wishes, either that he had
not done it, or that it were rebuilt, ar insignificant without Materials,
Judgment and Money; the Resurrection must not owe it self to one possessed with a
Brainsick Fury. They who kindled the late terrible Flames, which laid three
Kingdoms Wast, claim an equal Interest at least, with Subjects of the most
Untainted Loyalty in the Restoration and Joy thereof of as principally their
Work and Benifit, (and I would to God it were their due, that the Happiness
might be the more complete) but the Immodesty of the claim, accompanied with
Indignation toward such as find it their duty to mind them of a necessity of
Repentance for past Delinquencies, and an undutiful demeanor toward their
Master ever since His Return, plead against them, and vacate their pretensions.
They who repent not what Injuries they committed against the Father, could not
sincerely Pray for the Sons Peaceable Return, as to His Just and undoubted
Rights; and what they could not Pray for, they could not cheerfully rejoice in:
And they who use all Scurrilous ways of showing a dislike to that Church,
whereof he, is pleased to declare Himself a Resolute Defender, cannot love Him,
who Defends what they hate: For certainly they, who Threaten and spare not to
speak their Hopes of our Churches downfall, must ruin the Defender, before they
can fix any fatal Weapon in her. As I confine Joy to Religion, so Joy and
Religion to the love of Unity: It was for Vnity's sake (as knowing none but a
King, Gods Ordinance could restore it, and that an Usurper could not be Gods
Ordinance, neither Unity consist with his Interest) that the Faithful were in
such trouble, and Prayed day and night with such fervency. When by our Lords
gracious respects to their Petitions, the Grand Artificer, Instrument and Means
were given, they could not be partners either in the Petitions or Joy, who
would not be wrought upon to contribute to the Unity, but like so many
Sanballats and Ammonites, were rather exceedingly grieved that there was come a
Man to seek the Welfare of Gods people; as not withstanding their first
Pretenses, their after Scoffs and Oppositions, and their late practices have
manifested. Now these men by His Majesty's mild Reign and manisold Indulgentes
are Rich, living in Ease and Plenty, wanting nothing that conduces to Joy,
which is within the Immense Power of a King to give: Yet want of Gratitude and
Piety makes Contentment wanting; so that in fine, they have, but rejoice not in
the Blessings, which make glad the Hearts of others. If (as they have
over-boasted) they were of those, who desired and prepared the way for the
Kings Return; yet to offer this with Propositions and upon Terms, (which was
Disloyalty, as tending to His Dishonor) or upon such Hopes as the granting
them was inconsistent with the Splendour and Safety of His Crown, or upon
Revenge to an Inferior Faction, which ungratefully Usurped Authority over
those, who Tutored and Nursed it up, had none of the respects and zeal of Good
Subjects, nor could they entertain true Joy, who were blindly transported with
diverse Lusts and Intemperate Desires. The Joy for the King and Kingdoms Peace
restored as the greatest of Divine Mercies, requires a Serene mind, free from
all mists and vapors of Passions, all dreggs of Lust, Envy and Malice, and all
whifling clouds of Irresolute Fancy, a mind satisfied with the discharge of its
duty, and which by present perceptions has a fair prospect of greater
Benefits, which these beautiful ones only usher in to strengthen Faith and
cherish holy Expectation.

But while my Restrictions are of this sort, they may seem to exclude from this
Joy all Subjects, none having minds so clear and innocent, as never to admit
any thing contrary to those prescribed Qualifications. And indeed every
admission is a diminution, or weakening of it, indisposing men's Appetites to the
relishing those admirably pleasant Fruits, which Providence has set so
plentifully before them. And with unconstant minds, nothing sooner prevails
to a dislike than the Plenty, Wantonness making them snuff upon these
unvaluable Delights, whose nourishment is too high for their unrefined
Constitutions. But as to what is incident to Humanity, the best of men have
suffered under some surprizals of infirmity, and do rather sometimes forget,
than commit against the strictness of Duty, so that by the abatement of their
Sacred pleasures they are quickened to it again. Now such as by their Vigilance
overcome evil passions and condemnable motions, I speak Innocent and pure from
them accounting love and desire of perfection to be the fullness of the virtues
required. For it is but reason that as God accepts them, man should esteem
them; and he indeed puts the full value upon Faithful endeavors. And (as to
the present Discourse) the desires of being Loyally obedient is a through
Obedience, which will not be misguided by Passions, improper expectations,
bottomless conceits and suspicions, or revengeful hopes, but rejoices in the
performance of its duty making it self its chief reward. An obedient man
desires and endeavors Peace, and being obtained imbraceth and keeps it as
studiously as he labored for it, Praying for its Blessed continuance, loving
all that join with him in the same Affections, and hating none but as they are
its Enemies. Peace is his desire, his delight and glory, the end of all his
Actions, the emblem of his Eternal recompense, his Heaven upon Earth. And this
no corrupt minds can truly rejoice in; they may peradventure be pleased with it
for a time, but are soon glutted with its pleasures and stores, grow insolent
and kick at her Blessings. But good men cannot surseit upon her favors, though
abundantly satisfied with them. For in sound minds the same plenty be gets
desire, which in depraved, grows to an abhorrency. Neither can Peace be
obtained by evil or unstable men, any more then continue by them, when it is in
their power to disturb it: For the Sacred Oracle declaring, that there is no
peace to the wicked, they certainly can never give that to others, which they
cannot procure for themselves, or brook in others. So that to be able to
rejoice in Peace, every man must conform to a Virtuous Life, and be wife with
Sobriety. For vicious living enclineth men to anger, suspicions and all sorts
of unruly courses, and generally begets in them an overvalue of their own
Judgments and Abilities; which has been sadly experienced in some of the great
Debauches of our times.

Some men again well deserving, and who have been long known to govern
themselves in the proper rules of this Joy, have at length become too
apprehensive of being useful, and thereby have ceased to become Good Subjects,
a proud confidence destroying that Loyalty, which had been admirably excellent,
had it continued among the works and labors of Love. Because they hear that
well doing deserves a reward, they wrong their judgments in reaching at an
immature one, and too much discover a long concealed malignity in their minds,
which has disturbed their Joy although without public observation. For where
there are illegitimate hopes, there must be sometimes great fears, which (as we
see) break out into disorders, and are ever disturbing the contentment of the
Soul, which by well doing only should be kept in tranquillity. The Pious
satisfaction of Gods great favor in hearing the cries of his afflicted people,
and restoring to us our Dread Sovereign in Peace, and the virtuous care of
continuing this mercy certainly mind nothing but God and the Kings'
approbation. If these performances observed produce any further Grace, it is
venerably received, not as a recompense, but a Princely condescension and
Bounty. Good Mephibosheths Loyalty is an incomparable pattern, who was so truly
glad of his Princes Return, that the Joy was to him a Possession; for other
things he cares not, but says Calumniating Ziba, Yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in Peace.

But some of the great pretender to Loyalty have stained the glorious repute,
which they had gotten, at a most foolish rate. For where the King has been
pleased to accept the Services of some Subjects, and to signalize them with
grants of eminent Indulgences; they who were profitable Servants, became
foolish Favorites, and what they have industriously managed to their Princes
advantage in an Inferior Station, their Pride has ruined in advancement. For
wanting continence in elated Fortunes, they though their Deeds merit, not Duty;
and judging themselves such men of excellence, that the Scepter could not be
weilded without their council, they have presumed to act above the condition
of Subjects, forgetting their Original and the Humility which gave their Honor
a Being. And these were so far from following Mephibosheth's example of leaving
all for Joy, that they have thought nothing sufficient reward, which
accumulative liberality has laid upon them. And indeed herein the strength of
their judgments met with the severest trial. For they, who could laudably
sustain and overcome the sharpest adversities, have been drawn into a snare by
the blandishments of Fortune, and their Fortitude being eneruated by her
leniments, she has led them about as the most ridiculous Captives. So easily
are heedless men divested of their Joy, in the midst of their Triumphs, by
yielding to the beginning of temptations of making reward the chief inducement
to Loyalty.

CHAP. VIII.
No Considerations of past or ensuing damages, which have or may accrue to him,
do hinder this Joy in a Good Subject.
TRue Loyalty is so little swayed by interest, that it is its own contentment,
and rejoices in the King's Peace for God, his Church and Peoples sake, looking
for no reward beyond self satisfaction. The excellency of the Example bids
me again repeat it, and make Remarques upon the sacred History or Mephibosheth.
He was the Son of Saul, (as the Holy Text speaks it in the relation of that
action more observably) yet came down with an unparalled Joy to meet King
David returning from Exilement. This Mephibosheth was Heir Apparent to the
Crown of Israel, as it respects the House of Saul, being the Son of Jonathan,
Readiness eldest Son. Neither the reflections upon his disinherison not
withstanding his Title by a most direct descent, nor David's preceipitate
dispossessing him of his Lands, upon the false accusations of Ziba his servant
before he had liberty to answer for himself, did any thing prevail with him to
lessen his affections to the King, or his gladness that he was returned in
Peace. The King indeed had sent for him to eat at his own Table, and restored
unto him all his Patrimony. But the respect to his succession could soon have
fitted him with replies; That the specious Kindness of calling him to Court
might be both pride, and policy; pride, to render his own Majesty the more
awful by so great a Princes attendance; And policy, to keep him near him
always in view, that so he might not be able to cause Sedition or Innovation.
And then what did an Inheritance (which, his Title to the Crown considered, was
but part of his right) in a corner of one of the Tribes signify to a man
thoughtful of the loss of a Kingdom? What was it but an occasion for his
Brethren the Benjamites to upbraid him with want of courage and judgment, who
should so tamely acquiesce in this as a favor, and content himself with a
private Fortune, who was born unto so glorious a Scepter? But piety quasht all
these suggestions (so apt to swell and puff up a young Princes mind) and gave
him a most sacred Judgment to discern God's Work and Decree, and taught him by
meekness to enjoy himself, and all that the King bestowed upon him as truly
Royal favors. The same Almighty power, which exalted his Grandfather Saul to
be King, had for disobedience to his commands denounced by the same Prophet,
who anointed him, the renting away of his Kingdom and giving it to his
Neighbor, and soon after the denunciation caused David by the same Prophet to
be anointed. That he was ordained King by God, Saul knew and envied him for it,
and often endeavored to frustrate the Divine Decree by killing him; This
Jonathan knew and loved him; this Mephibosheth knew, and thence gave him the
Honor, which true Majesty demanded and Conscience enjoined should be given by
all Subjects. This being a well weighed ground for him to despise his own
Title, he saw as little cause to be angry at the disposing his estate to
treacherous Ziba. He considered it to be the King's mere bounty at first, and
was thankful for so long a time of enjoyment. And his Joy at the King's Return
was only lessened by pity, that the Crown, which takes away all personal
defects, did not as well remove the defects of the mind, and make the King less
humane by being infallible. With all wise men a large and ponderous good
begets oblivion of a small inconvenience or evil, (none but fools bemoaning
the loss of trifles, and pursuing them in their thoughts to the contempt of
solid pleasures) and with all good men the public good is the greatest. That
vulgar expression, That every man is nearest to himself, is only true in
respect to Neighborhood and private commerce, but never (that I know or have
heard) owned by men of any understanding to extend to the Public. For those
very men, who seek themselves only by the ruin of others placed above them,
hypocritically move under the shadow of the General Welfare, because Mankind
universally abhors any such Position, That Private Injuries are to be
revenged by a public mischief. Therefore discontented Persons we see shunned
as pestiferous, there is no coming near them without danger, nor letting them
abroad with safety, until they are thoroughly purged and cured. If once a real
wrong done by his Prince (as such may happen to be sustained) shall justify a
Subjects disorders, innumerable fained or supposed ones will continually appear
to the destruction of Peace and Government. Now a wise man considers, that if
by any misresentation of him to his Prince (as was Mephibosheth's case) he has
undergone some damages, by his diligent continuing in his duty and Allegiance
he may become observed, and probably repaid with advantage; but if not, that
injuries of this nature are more discreetly dissembled than reparation
prosecuted, which is both difficult, unjust and ill natured. For such is the
power of a King, that he that provokes him is generally seen to sin against
his own Soul; his hopes are stronger than his Arms, Wit, or Religion. And
withal they are as ill grounded as his Religion, which requires the Subject in
this case above all others (if there should in a King appear manifest
intentions of wrong doing) to leave Vengeance to God. By endeavoring to do
himself justice he sacrilegiously robs God of his Prerogative. But if his
Power be supposed to equal his Sovereigns, yet how barbarously illnatur'd is
he, who by the destruction of multitudes of Innocents aims to arrive at
satisfaction, uncertain whether he shall recover, or add his guilty Soul to his
other losses? Religion (wherein is contained prudence and Mercy) directs a
Subject better, and silenceth him from so much as complaining out of Joy, that
his case is singular, that it is no worse with him, and that the rest of his
fellow Subjects are pleasant and happy. Nothing with him savoureth more of
disingenuity than to deface the bliss of a general Festivity with Tears, or mix
with laments the Peoples acclamations. If by bad Offices his good be
maliciously or fraudulently evil spoken of and any thing unworthy his Virtue
and Loyalty does thereby happen unto him, he looks upon his Prince as chiefly
injured by the approach of Sycophants to his Sacred Person, and only wondering
at the Impudence with Indignation has a short diversion from his Joy by
considering that God gives in his tlife no pleasures without mixture of
somewhat sharp, because he will have perfect Felicity another Worlds Glory, the
Fruition of man translated to the state of Incorruption. Immediately from these
thoughts he is restored to his usual liberty and improveth his Joy by these
accidents. For when the craft of the Devil, and cunning devices of men would
put him out of his proper station, and tempt him to resign his internal Peace,
he glories that it is not in the power of enmity to disturb that without a
voluntary surrender, and that God blesses his sincerity, with resolutions to
retain his own, to adhere firmly to his Obedience, and to rejoice with his
fellow Subjects for the common Safety. To do the Will of God is his Felicity,
and it is no less to bear it. And although like Mordecai that spoke good for
the King, he bears Haman's indignation, yet he continues unaltered; he
cheefully waits the time of being made known, although not extremely
Solicitious, whether in this Life or another. Neither again will he justify a
malignant Detracter by acting, or so much as Speaking to the least Dishonor of
his Master, but still pleasantly and obediently intends his Peace and Welfare
to the utmost of his power, and so puts te silence the Calumnies of foolish
men. He at first prayed for the public Peace; and God answering his Petitions,
he is resolved not to break it. He prayed for the Prosperity of the Church, to
which the public Peace chiefly conduces; his peculiar outward losses are no
hindrance to it; therefore his Religion being secure, so is he; the Church
flourishing, he is happy; the King in the defense thereof graciously
encouraging and promoting the Faithful, and curbing the insolence of
Gainsayers, he has the desire of his Soul; Gods Servants Religiously assembled
to thank him for the general Redemption of mankind by the blood of his Son, for
the particular Redemption of these parts of his Church among us, and all other
his mercies exhibited to us, and to Pray for a continuance and increase of his
loving kindness to us, and to all men; upon the wings of these Devotions is he
wrapped up into Paradise. His virtue is extremely reproached by thoughts that he,
who has such blissful preceptions, can descend from them to the considerations
of some Temporal disadvantages. His and the common way to Heaven being rendered
more open and passable, he joyfully ascends, walking vigorously on in the
footsteps of the General Assembly, and multitudes of Holy men gone before,
showing by his daily practice that their works do follow them.

The Conclusion.
THe consideration of our advancement as Men and Christians, imposes on us a
necessity to be Good and Just, and Subjection being our natural condition,
cannot be any way uneasy or improsperous, without our either imprudent or
wanton renunciation of it: By aiming at what is set above us, we usually fall
beneath those inferioritis, which we before viewed with contempt; for the
injustce of our discountented Pride has not a more proper recompense.
Inviolate Prerogatives are the Subjects Safety and Honor, and the surest
Charter of their Freedom, which protect them from injury, who have never
practiced to their diminution or weakening. Let Reason or Interest be consulted,
the resolve will be, that the least invasion of them is unjust, and not to be
attempted by any, that are good and wise, because certainly prejudicing the
general Welfare. Men of unsettled but self-confident Councels, think themselves
great and able for the most eminent Achievements, and sufficient for the
highest flight, if but bedeckt withsome of the Ealges Plumes; but being too
feeble for the work and consequent weight of envy do shame their undertakings
and followers, whom some Name of reproach signifying their folly and crime
distinguishes from the rest of mankind. Additions to them, or at least
fortifications of such as impairing time has in any part enfeebled, are looked
upon by all that judiciously mind their own preservation to be continually
necessary. For the Prerogative of the Crown rendered infirm do inevitably cause
to halt the Privileges of the Members, which may peradventure swell high, but
then speak their Sickliness and Fate, and that they then incline most to
Dissolution. Without doubt that Kingdom is most Happy, where Discourses of this
nature are least heard: But on the other hand it much more conduces to the
public Good, that the Prince be rigourous, even to the brink of Tyranny, then
addicted to Lenity and easy Concessions of Popular demands. The errors of the
first sort are little felt, and scarce discernible; those of the latter are
universally and apparently pernicious. But in no part are the Prerogatives more
dangerously entrenched upon then in those, which concern Religion, wherein the
People by seeking, and the Prince by yiedling, do the same as when Fond Parents
to their crying Children allow the handling of R-zours and Lances. In this case
a sharp reprehension conserveth the peace, and hinders a certain effusion of
Blood. For Protestations, Leagues and Covenants, and projectures of impossible
Unions have no tendency to what they speak, but to what is most contrary; these
terms being taken up premeditatly to the Dissolution of the most inviolable and
Sacred Obligations, without the Religious observance of which Union has no
consistence. Where are the wise Contrivers of them? Or, what Bonds can unite
those to the Church, whom Rebellion, Blood and Devastation has separated from
her? Such Vnitings are the Debauches of Religion, and the directest courses to
the Subverting Monarchy and Hierarchy. What Fury did before Act, is now
required to have a legal Introduction: And although we abhor the Murderers of
Kings and Prince, and give Sacrilegious men their merited Epithites, yet that
these be by opinion admitted into the great Employes of State and Bosom of the
Church, no Contrition or desires of Reconciliation preceding, is the best
prescribed Rule of Preservation and Canon of Ecclesiastical Communion. In fine,
the much applauded Projectors of our Constitutions of Peace, do no otherwise
then tell us, that to prevent the Potency of such as are feared will spare
neither King nor Church; our only course is to promote and Empower those, whose
hatred to both is known and implacable. It is not to be doubted but that the
Indulgences and Connivances of these times, have raised to this height of
Insolence (as their accustomed gratitude) the Spirits of these Zealots; and
thence is to be conjectured their future deportment upon a Toleration fortified
with Legality. Reason not assisted by the sadest Domestic Experiences, shows
any Toleration of diversities of Religions to be of ill consequence; but that
inevitably destructive to Monarchy, which cease to be a favor, and standing
guarded with one Law, is enabled to command more, and at length what it will.
All these mischiefs (which the humourous Multitude, led by some Pestilent
Counselors, esteem their Happiness, till the pungent sting of their enjoyments
sharpen them to an apprehension of their folly) Good Subjects resolutely
oppose, yet behold with pity, to see Religious Assemblies void of Piety,
Kingdoms, whose Administrator of Justice has his hands bound, and Obedience
Charity, Humility, and all other Virtues dwindle into names only, stir up their
magnanimous Souls by commiseration to cares of Relief: And this they discern no
way to be effected, but by restoring and confirming their King to and in His
Royal Prerogatives, by promoting his Peace, that by it all may live a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And as they are herein zealous, so
constant, not apt to be diverted by the gaudy hopes of Change, nor
disencouraged either by suspicion of disrespected merit, or apparentcy of good
services ill repaid. They Act knowingly and so are above Change; and their
generous minds admit not the torments of Suspicion, unless of deficiency in
themselves. And this same temper inclines them to an assurance, that besides
his Princly inclinations the Kings Interest diverseth him from remunerating
Loyally with injuries; which, if at any time thy befall a Good Subject, he
considers, and finds them to proceed from the ill representation of envious
Detractours, a sort of State Moths, which cannot without great difficulty be
kept out of the Linings of the Crown. Reward is least in their desires, (except
that great one, the innocent Glory of well performing) and nothing but omission
of duty can afflict them; thence they are steadfast and unmovable, knowing that
their labor is not in vain, but that their recompense and inheritance shall be
for ever.

And now that Peace and Love may unite us under our Head, by the virtuous
government of our selves let us work His Security. By vicious living all
mischief is propagated; that introduces ruin of Subjects, and brings
contempt upon Princes, who become not Governors of Men, but Kings of Beasts,
and God angry that his inesteemable Pearls are cast before Swine, surrendereth
them to the possession of the Legion. That insuperable Goodness, which
magnifieth its power most chiefly in showing mercy and pity, is wearied and
made deficient by ingratitude; nay more, is converted into fury by our
misguided and corrupted affections. It is from this cause that the clamours and
murmurings, too much heard in our Land, do proceed. Vices abounding, increase
Suspicions, prepare men for strifes, and multiply disorders: then these make
men's minds like the troubled Sea, to cast up mire and dirt. And indeed God
seems to have abandoned a great part of this wretched Nation to the Curse of
their own follies and imaginations, to delight in Seduction, and to believe
Lies, because they would not retain the discipline and order of holy Peace and
Joy. Continually leading Lives contrary to Divine Obligations and their own
Professions; they were brought first to suspect what they knew, afterward to
believe what they suspected. They have lost their Reason, by becoming enemies
to Virtue its illustrious Guardian; so that the reclaiming them is an
impossibility to all but a miraculous Compassion. This happening to many, ought
to be the more exemplary to others. All of us who see their miscarriges, and
the cause, should be as quicksighted into the ways of duty, and keep our selves
happy by loving and esteeming Peace, that is, by an holy care of continning
affectionatly zealous of Gods Honor, obeying his Ordinance with true Love and
a pure Conscience. Let us therefore duly offer up our Thanksgivings for what
we enjoy, and perfect them by Obedience, by the humility and sincerity of
which, let us aspire each man to an Immortal Crown, magnanimously raising our
Subjection to Heaven, by imitating the Lowliness and Meekness of the King of
Kings. Amen.

FINIS.
London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Ben. Harris at the
Stationers Arms under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange, 1681.


