Trade preferred before Religion, AND Christ made to give place to Mammon:
Represented in a SERMON Relating to the PLANTATIONS. First Preached at
WESTMINSTER-ABBY, And afterward in diverse Churches in London.

By MORGAN GODWYN, sometime Student of Christ-Church in Oxford.

St. JOH. 4. 35. Say not ye, There are yet four Months, and then comes
Harvest? Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your Eyes, and look on the Fields, for
they are white already to Harvest. Equidem nescio utrum potius faciam, querarne
nostrorum temporum calamitatem, and charitatem refrigescentem, fidemque raro in
quoquam inventam juxta Domini Verbum, tot animarum millia ut Christo
lucrifiant, non satis merces videri quae nostrorum animos excitent, auri
argentique cupiditatem long plus valere apud nos, ut ista si desint animarum
salus pro nihilo fiat. Acosta de procur. Ind. Sal. l. 3. c. 18. London, Printed
for B. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and for Isaac Cleave at the
Star in Chancery Lane, 1685.

Taken out of one of the Homilies for Whitsunday.
Christ's Spirit it is, that engendereth a burning zeal toward God's Word, and
gives all Men a Tongue, yea a fiery Tongue, so that they may boldly and
cheerfully profess the Truth in the Face of the whole World. -- The Mystery of
the Tongues betokens the preaching of the Gospel, and the open Confession of
the Christian Faith, in all those that are possessed with the Holy Ghost. So
that if any Man be a dumb Christian, not professing his Faith openly, but
cloaking and Coloring himself for fear of danger, he gives Men occasion,
justly and with good conscience to doubt, lest he have not the Grace of the
Holy Ghost within him, because he is Tongue-tyed and does not speak.

To the King.
May it please Your Majesty,
THIS Discourse, which first came to life in Your Royal Brother's, his late
Majesty's Reign, (of most happy memory to these Nations) being now of Age to
appear abroad, does humbly prostrate it self at Your Majesty's Feet; not
doubting Your most gracious Acceptance, if but for the End and Design it
proposes and carries with it: Which is no other, than to stir up and provoke
Your Majesty's Subjects Abroad, (and even at Home also) to use at least some
endeavors for the propagation of Christianity among their domestic Slaves and
Vassals; (together with the other numerous Heathen in Your Majesty's Colonies)
who for the general are most ambitious thereof, were their Desires seconded by
suitable Inclinations in their Owners, so as to afford it to them. A Duty most
certainly so indispensibly necessary, and absolutely incumbent upon all, but
especially the most reformed and refined Christians, that it may justly seem a
Matter of greatest admiration and astonishment, to but observe that it has
hitherto been so much neglected; yea, and not only neglected, but (I cannot
express it without shame and horror!) even scoff at and opposed by them. An
impiety, which tho before not wholly unknown to Your Majesty, (as having been,
by a very reverend and worthy Person, of near Relation to Your Majesty, some
time since represented to Your Majesty) is yet but newly arrived within Your
Power to remedy. But for the which we have the greatest assurance, to wit, Your
Majesty's Royal Word then passed upon that Your first notice thereof. Your
Majesty being thereupon pleased, not only to testify Your highest resentment
and abhorrence of so profane an Abuse, but withal giving most manifest
Indications of Your Desires for its reformation and redress. And like a most
religious Assertor, and zealous Patron of the Faith once delivered to the
Saints; Your Majesty declaring it most reasonable, that all Men should be made
to partake of the Grace of God, so freely in Christ tendered unto them; and that
none should be debarred of the common Salvation, especially such who do so much
hunger and thirst after it. And at the same instant, no less admiring, that any
pretense of Reason should by Christians (and those too of the best sort) be
offered to the contrary; much less so resolutely, and with so much pertinacy be
defended and persisted in. And when in refutation of that no less impudent than
most impious Assertion, of the Impracticableness thereof, at least in those
Parts; it was answered and urged, that it could not possibly be less
practicable to us, than to other Nations; particularly to the French, who in
the Island of St. Christophers, (half whereof is peopled by that Nation, but
the rest possessed by your Majesty's Subjects) without finding any either
mischief or inconvenience consequent thereupon, are known to confer Baptism
upon all that sort of People: Whilst the English upon the same Spot, do most
sacrilegiously reject and give it up for impossible: Upon the hearing whereof,
Your Majesty being fully convinced and satisfied, was pleased to allow the
Argument for unanswerable; and withal to add, That if ever it should happen to
fall in Your way, Your Majesty would further it all you could. The due
performance whereof, no one that understands Your Veracity and Zeal, will in
the least suspect.

As for this so absurd an Impiety, their pretense is, the advance of Trade and
Commerce, which they are not ashamed to set up in opposition to Christ and
Religion. But Your Majesty cannot but know how unworthy (even at the best) this
Plea is of a Christian Nation: and withal, how incongruous and mean it is that
for Trade (even allowing the Pretense for good) the Work of God should be
destroyed; Romans 14. 15, 20.
and those Myriads of Souls be made to perish, for whom Christ died, no less
than for the residue of Mankind.

It would be also considered, as we doubt not but Your Majesty will, what
returns, after so long possession, we have made, or rather, what despite to the
Spirit of Grace we have done, in hindering those poor Heathens Salvation, which
we ought with our utmost Zeal and Industry, to have promoted; The very end, as
must be piously supposed, for which it at first pleased Almighty God to
discover to us, and to possess us of those many large and fruitful Countries:
Whilst we prefer our Trade and our Mammon before it, as of the greater value.
And when all other Religions, even to the very Turks and New-England-men, do
compass Sea and Land to create Proselites; we only do seem to fetch the same
compass to continue them Heathens. An abomination which both threatens and
calls aloud for Vengeance from Heaven upon the most wicked Authors: Unless Your
Majesty's extraordinary Piety and Goodness shall suddenly interpose, and so at
once put a stop to the Sin and to the Judgment. And who knows whether Your
Majesty be not come to the Kingdom for such a Time as this? Esther 4. 14.


I shall only be bold to detain Your Majesty with a short but pious Speech of a
certain great Prince, one of the late Kings of Spain, uttered to Your Majesty's
blessed Father, of most glorious memory, whilst residing in that Kingdom; Who
indiscourse, taking occasion to magnify that King's spacious Dominions; He, in
answer thereto, was pleased to reply, That 'twas true, Howell's Fam. Letters
Vol. 1.. 3. Let. 33.
God had entrusted him with diverse Nations and Countries; but that his
Advantage thereby was, to have opportunity to propagate Christian Religion. It
is to be presumed, that as Your Majesty's Dominions, in the Parts we speak of,
are in extent not much short of, perhaps a great deal larger, than that
Princes: So your Majesty's Piety will not suffer You to be wanting to Your Self
and People, in reaping the like blessed and glorious Advantage thereby. So
prays,

The most unworthy and meanest of Your Majesty's Subjects, MORGAN GODWYN.

The PREFACE.
I Cannot but foresee, that I shall fall under no small danger of Censure, as
well for my first preaching, as now publishing this Discourse.

For besides the sinister Surmises of diverse here at home, (such, who like the
Curr in the Manger, will neither eat Oats themselves, nor suffer those that
would); I must also look to undergo, as far as is possible, the utmost Effects
of the Rage and Malice of those incensed MAMMONISTS from abroad; who, I am to
expect, will not fail, by their Agents and Partisans, to dispense to me the
sharpest Revenge and Mischief, that such Enemies of Christianity can contrive
against a Promoter of it. And, when they thus see me upon taking away their
Gods, it will be but a very senseless and unreasonable Question to demand, What
aileth them?

But as there was no temptation from the thing it self, as being likely to
prove so invidious and costly an Undertaking, what I have but too much already
felt; and it being on the behalf of such who are never like to make me any
amends, and I am sure that no body else will: So I hope that others better
disposed, will in charity, which thinks not the worst, rather believe, that
what I have herein attempted, does proceed from no worse Motive, than from a
sense of my Duty; as not knowing otherwise, what I yet knew was most necessary,
how to reprove the Acts 13. 6, 7, etc. Bar-Jesus, or Elymas, did oppose
Christianity, as not believing it; but these whilst they profess it, do yet
oppose it.
BARJESVITISM and base Mammonism so openly practiced in our Plantations, and
even at Home too; of which I shall presently give some Instances. At least
certainly I can deserve no blame for thus opening my Mouth for the Dumb, Prove.
31. 8.
and becoming their Advocate, who are appointed to Eternal Destruction: For
that I have, as it were, put my Life in my hand, to oppose those Elymas's, who
do not cease to pervert the right Ways of the Lord, and to obstruct
Christianity, when no body else either durst or would. And since the more
Learned and Prudent, who never use to lay out themselves but to some purpose
(and this, it is too well known known, is but a barren Theme), had hitherto been
silent therein, that I thought it no disparagement to become a Fool for
Christ's sake, and conceived that it might better be done by me, than not at
all.

These in truth were my Reasons in general for this Undertaking; but there was
withal a more particular. And that was, hereby, if possible, to put some stop
to, and to abate the arrogant and proud vauntings of that new Sect of American
Anti-Religionists, the Barjesuits and Elymases before mentioned, for their
Victory over Christianity, by LVCYfer and his fellow Agents, here sometime
since obtained; which very triumphantly, like pure uncircumcised Pagans,
Alienus ab ira, alienus a justitia.
(pardon the Expression, for in this Case, Difficile est Satyram non scribere,
and not to be angry had been to sin) they have not forborne to publish in the
Houses of their Idols, if I may so speak; and by insulting Letters, to set
forth in their Assemblies; therein proclaiming how they have worsted
Christianity, and for ever quashed all future hopes of advancing its Crest, and
of further entrance into those Parts. A most glorious Victory doubtless it was!
and which none besides the Devil and themselves, but would have been ashamed to
have boasted of. A Victory where there was no* Adversary to contend with; and
of which, as the case stood, if they could but talk considently, and affirm
lustily without blushing, they could not easily fail.

Upon this I could no longer be silent, but as the Holy Psalmist expresses
himself, Psalm. 39. 3.
My heart grew hot within me, and the fire was kindled; and at the last I spoke
with my Tongue; declaring from the Pulpit, as often as I had opportunity, what I
have now delivered from the Press.

I considered the thing as a Duty indispensible; and having before put my hand
to the Plow, I determined not to look back: Yet I must confess, I attended a
while to see whether any abler Advocate would appear in the Cause, and happily
have saved me both the trouble and the envy of it. But when I had thus waited,
and could see no appearance of any, no not at the greatest distance, (for they
were all amazed, they answered no more, they left off speaking; or rather, we
may say, did never begin); it was not in my power to refrain, but I resolved
that I would answer for my part, Job 13. 13.
I would speak on God's behalf, I would open my mouth and answer, let come on
it what would.

But he that ploweth, should plow in hope, as says the Apostle. Now to what
purpose is it to speak further hereof, since so slender Advances have been
hitherto made therein, by what has been before spoken, will some be apt to
demand? And indeed it was the Advice of one, when I first adventured upon this
Work, never to trouble my self about it; for, said he, Tho your Design be never
so Christian and good, yet the least grain of Interest lying in the way, shall
quite ruin and overthrow it. And I wish his words had proved less true.

But truly I am full of power, Mic. 3. 8.
by the Spirit of the Lord, to tell Jacob of his Transgression, and Israel of
his Sin, as says the Prophet Micah. And Isaiah tells us, Isa. 62. 6, 7.
That the Watchmen upon the Walls of Jerusalem, were not to hold their peace,
notwithstanding the greatest discouragements, day nor night; nor to give even
the Almighty himself any rest, until he had established and made Jerusalem a
praise in the whole Earth. Rather, the deafer Men are, St. Mat. 21. 28.
the louder we are to cry. For, Truth however oppressed, will have some
Followers. The sturdy Youth in the Gospel, St. Luke 18. 5.
that at first did so peremptorily refuse to go and work in his Father's
Vineyard, afterward repented, and went. And even the unjust Judge, by much
importunity, and for his own quiet, was, we read, at length wrought upon to
hearken to the Widow's complaint, and to do her right. And tho these we speak
of, have had this untoward Character, viz. of being such, who will do no right,
nor take any wrong, fixed upon them; yet who knows how far our Assiduity may in
like manner prevail? At least, it is certain, we have no Dispensation for our
silence.

For truly, unto this most unchristian Silence, must in a great measure be
ascribed the large spreading of this Leprosy of Barjesuitism and Irreligion,
not only in America, (where, as I have Viz. In the Negro's and Indian's
Advocate, p. 111.
elsewhere mentioned, a poor Slave was in effect whipped to death for being
baptized); but of its crossing the Seas into Europe, and from thence passing to
the Eastern Indies: As by a most dreadful Story (related to me by one that had
spent some time in those Parts) of the behavior of some of our Factors toward
the Natives of a certain place there called Jackatra upon Java, will appear;
who desirous to be instructed in Christianity by the English, were most
unchristianly denied the favor: they, forsooth, dreading lest their apt
Scholars should thereby come to improve their Faculty in the Mystery of Buying
and Selling, (as if that also were a Mystery of the Gospel), which in time
might lessen their Gain, and so spoil all. However, what these refused, certain
See Mr. Ricaut's Maxims of the Turkish Policy, wherein he often mentions the
Turks Zeal to promote their Faith. Also Pet. Daniel, in his History of Barbary,
tells us, That the Turks will show you kindness, to make you embrace their
Religion. Page 308, 309, 310. 311.
Mahumetans, (see here how much their Zeal for their Superstition surpasses
ours for the Truth); who soon after arrived at the same place, did more
generously offer them; and of their own accord, without any of our Men's
Scruples upon the score of their Mammon, freely communicated to them their
Religion; which that People then embracing, are said to retain to this very day.

But to leave these remote Parts, where Men may perhaps be supposed to act what
they please, without control, let us come nearer Home, to our own most
Protestant Island, and even to England it self, and there see how much better
the case is, to is in time like to prove amongst our selves; where we shall
find this superlative Wickedness to have spread amain, even from Sea to Sea;
infected both the East and West, and gotten possession of the very heart of
this Kingdom. I have been told, that when this Sermon was first preached in
London, the Parish Clark, after all was done, fell to wondering that I should
thus trouble my self to preach against Negro's and Indians, for that he said,
there were none of that Religion in this Nation. But how much this poor Clark
was mistaken, I shall from some four or five Instances, out of a great many
which I have heard, soon discover.

Whereof the first that I shall mention, is of a Gentlewoman, who commending a
certain Negro Wench that she had, for her towardliness and other good
qualities, in the hearing of a Minister; he demanded of her, why she made her
not a Christian? Whereat, casting her eyes strangely on him, and greatly
wondering, she replied, That she had thought he would have given her better
Counsel.

The next shall be of a poor Wretch of the like sort, belonging to a certain
Lady, at that time residing in a place some seventy miles distant from London:
With this Negro, a certain religious Gentlewoman condescended to discourse, and
to persuade to Christianity, unto which she found him very inclinable; but was
interrupted by the Lady, who overhearing the Discourse, thereupon ran in; and,
as in a most hideous affrightment, cried out, O, for God's (she might better
have said the Devil's) sake, say no more to him of that. And so the Discourse
ended.

The third Instance shall be of a Negro, whose Owner lived nearer London, viz.
within some four or five miles distance of it. This Negro presented himself to
the Minister, I think not of his own, but of a neighboring Parish, desiring
Baptism at his hands; For which the Minister finding him not unqualified, did
not absolutely refuse it, nor yet at present grant it him; it is possible, as
being of another Parish. But however, the Master coming to the knowledge
thereof, forthwith sends a peremptory Message to the Minister, charging him
upon his peril not to proceed.

The fourth is of a Negro, whose Owner resided somewhere near Bristol, (the
places name I have forgotten); This Negro also addressed himself to the
Minister, beseeching Baptism; For the which the Minister finding him not
incompetently fitted, did not deny it him; only deferred it for the present.
All which soon after arriving to the Master's jealous ear, he, with the like
terrible Menaces, dehorted the Minister; adding withal, this insolent enquiry,
Whether he would baptize his Horse? But perceiving that the Minister little
regarded his Menaces or Arguments, he goes home, and instantly chains the Negro
under the Table among his Dogs, and there continues him in that double bondage
for some time; till finding him thereby to become unserviceable, which is all
they regard; he at length releaseth him of his Chain, but with this strict
charge, not to go any more to the Minister. Which the Negro not observing, the
Minister, like one that understood his Office, and that believed himself
obliged to pay a greater respect to Christ's Commands, of baptizing all
Nations, than to that Infidel American's forbidding it, publicly admits him
into the Church by the Sacrament of Baptism; After having purged him, by
demanding of him, whether his Desires herein did proceed from any hopes of
temporal advantage, Quest. By what Authority or Law, he could do this to that
or any other Person?
as for the obtaining of liberty, or the like? Which the Negro utterly
renounced, declaring that he desired it only for the Salvation of his Soul.
This again coming to his* Masters knowledge, as it could not well be kept from
him, the Negro upon his return, was welcomed with his former Chain, wherein he
was soon after conveyed on Shipboard, and so to America: Where it is to be
presumed, that according to the general custom there, he shall never more hear
of Christianity. Three of these Passages I had from the Ministers themselves,
even as the other was told me by the Gentlewoman, an eminent Clergy-man's Wife
in those Parts.

I have heard also of a parcel of Negro's brought into England, concerning whom
an especial charge was in the first place given to the Servants, not to mention
any thing of Religion to them: Together with an intimation, (which was no
other, than to invite some lewd fellow to the Villainy) how acceptable a piece
of service it would be, to have a certain young Negro Wench of the Company got
with Child. It seems they take this* Fornication to be no sin, no not so much
as Venial.

To these I may add, what I have heard, and do believe to be too true, viz.
That the Grandees of one of these Colonies, were not long since so hardy, and
withal so impious, as to produce* Articles against their Governor Sir J. H. for
his intended kindness to these People upon this account; How far their
Complaint was admitted, I cannot tell. It was certainly an Innovation, and for
which he could produce no President in those* Parts. So that Mr. In his Temple.
Herbert seems to have been directed by a fallible Spirit, when in certain
prophetic Lines, foretelling the large and speedy progress of Religion in
America, he thus sung, Religion stands a tiptoe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand.
And a little further; Then shall Religion to America flee,
They have their Gospel Times as well as we.
The contrary being here most visible; for instead of our carrying Christianity
thither, they are upon bringing over the blackest Irreligion and Gentilism
hither.

Now if the cause of this their so great spite against Christianity, and
cruelty to the Souls of Men, even of their own Slaves, who wear out their days
in perpetual toil and labor for them, If the Negro knew his Privilege, he need
not to desire Baptism for the obtaining of his freedom.
should be enquired into, it would not be easy to give a sudden Resolution.
Some indeed here at home, have been ready to form Excuses for them, and to urge
the danger of loosing their Slave by his admittance to Baptism. But this
certainly cannot be the true Cause, at least as to those parts. I my self was
accidentally present at the signing of an Act of Assembly by the Governor of
Virginia, for the Security of this Interest. The like Laws I have been assured
were enacted in the rest of the Plantations. And Sir Robert Southwell, upon
some discourse about this very thing, some five Years since, was pleased to
inform me, That he had heard the late Lord Chancellor Finch declare, that he
did not know of any Law now in force in England, (or words to that effect)
whereby a Slave was released from Servitude by Baptism. And certainly he, if
any Man, must have known it. Others will tell us, that Christianity will make
them more crafty and cunning, and withal, more tumultuous and rebellious. But
this Argument equally fights against Christianity in all other places, and
renders it intolerable to all Conditions and Degrees alike, as well to Freemen
as Slaves, and at Home as well as Abroad; and at this rate it must be banished
out of the World. Others again are ready to suggest the Factors of Jackatra's
Reason: But what have Slaves to do with buying and selling, who have nothing of
their own to dispose of? So that if the Reason were good, and of force against
other freer Gentiles, (not to mention that Christians ought not, upon any
account whatsoever, to put themselves into a condition or course of Life, which
carries with it an inevitable necessity of perpetual sinning against God); yet
it makes nothing against our* Negro-Slaves admittance to Christianity. So that
for my part I can deduce this cursed aversion in our Planters, from no other
cause, than from their brutish and Atheistical Impii impie agent, nec
intelligent. Dan. 12.
temper, which they are willing to shift off and to excuse with such Pretenses,
as knowing how easily they will be here swallowed.

To this I might add that filthy Principle, which I think is almost universally
received, and current amongst them, That whatever conduces to the getting of
Money, and carrying on of Trade, must certainly be lawful. As to instance in
their trapanning and spiriting Men out of England, with sugar Promises of large
kindness to be exhibited to them at their arrival in those Parts: whilst at the
very instant they intend nothing else but to expose them to sale, and to make
Slaves of them, at least for some term of Years. Phil. 2. 21. All seek their
own, etc.
This, with other the like practices, I have heard justified and defended, and
that by Persons who appeared very honest Men for those Places, and that withal
would seem to have at least some little sense of Religion above their
Neighbors, (for a great deal would quite undo them); who yet because they
never hear them contradicted, may possibly be persuaded of their lawfulness.
And by the same Principle I suspect it may be, that even those do permit
Polygamy to their Slaves, and also put them upon a necessity of laboring upon
Sundays, to prevent their starving all the Week after.

Now all this, must in a very great measure be ascribed, to their want of being
at first better instructed, and their not having the contrary Doctrines often
inculcated to them, as well from the Pulpit as elsewhere. These Tares were sown
whilst the Watchmen slept, or possibly when there were none at all; Then they
grew up and got strength, and took deep root, and now it is thought too late to
weed them up. Which notwithstanding I must affirm to be beyond all peradventure
their strickest Duty. And the total omission whereof, for I never heard it
mentioned, will one day prove a sharper Thorn in their Sides, than that
innocent Paper, which some have by Letters to England so fiercely complained
of. Thereby, as it were, strengthening the hands of those wicked Men, as the
Prophet speaks, and hardening them in their evil way. Who instead of
encouraging, do talk of nothing but the difficulty Plerique rei difficultates
causantur, socordiam ignaviamque suam cum accusare potius, ac dolere deberent.
Acost. de proc. Ind. Sal. l. 3. c. 22.
of the thing; when not one has, as I could ever hear of, so much as tried or
endeavored it, no, not in their own Families. For this had been to invite a
heavy Persecution, not of Fire and Faggot, but which is much worse, of being
slighted and neglected in their ordinary Treats and Invitations: To have been
looked upon askew by their Patrons and Grandees of the Vestries; to have had
some Affronts put upon them; and to be a little wondered at by the World. All
of them very worthy Pretenses, for those should glory in such Sufferings, and
rejoice that they were accounted worthy thereof; that by their exemplary
patience, under the greatest Pressures, should instill Resolution and Courage
into others, and not only be contented to suffer, but to die for the Cause of
Christ: Which this certainly is, if ever there were any such. It is indeed
difficult, as some have made it; but surely not so difficult as it was, when
Christianity was every where spoken against, Acts 28. 22.
and the whole World was set to oppose it; being not befriended by Authority,
nor having so much as one single Person to countenance or stand by the
Promoters of it. It is indeed more difficult than could be wished, at least to
be gone through with at present: But yet methinks something might be
endeavored, if but for the good it has done, and to show our good will toward
it: And something also might as certainly be effected, were it but set about,
and suitable means used for its carrying on. They say, and do not, Mat. 23. 3.
Si non reipsa tibi dolet, at dissimulare certe est hominis. Ter. Isa. 63. 5.
Nothing of which, besides the besprinkling of it with a few good Words, the
precious holy Water of the Times, that I know of, was ever yet attempted or
offered at. Some indeed have bespoke it as a very Apostolic Work, and a worthy
Design; Whom I should believe to have been serious and in earnest, could they
but have kept their Countenances whilst they spoke. So that, to use the
Prophet's Language, I may say, When I looked, there was none to help; and I
wondered that there was none to uphold. And whilst diverse do, in plain
downright terms, determine it to be wholly needless; or if at all needful, yet
no way to concern us; those Elimases in the mean time are not wanting, with
their utmost industry, to oppose it as a most wicked Work. 2 Timothy 4. 16.
But it was St. Paul's case, at whose first Answer he complains, that no Man
stood with him, but that all forsook him: for whom yet he prays God, that
that Sin might not be laid to their charge.

What Advantages our Adversaries do reap hereby, and how they make this
Neglect, as a Shoeing-horn to draw on their Proselytes, is not, I suppose,
unknown. And I have some cause to believe, that it has lately proved an
Argument of no small validity, to draw one of our Church into their Toils. The
Party little less than acknowledging as much in my hearing, at least that it
went a great way toward it. And even their Women have gotten it by the end,
and can make use of it as dexterously as their ablest Men. It being not long
since, that a very smart Dialogue happened between two of that Sex; the one a
strict Protestant, and the other a zealous Romanist: Who demanding of her, When
any of her Church had attempted any thing for the conversion of Infidels, in
Foreign Parts, or even in our own Plantations; And the Protestant thereupon
producing a small Treatise to that purpose, she replied, That, that truly was
the first she had either seen or heard of of that kind among us: But withal
further added, What has been since done therein, or what encouragement given
for others to tread in that Author's steps? At which demand our poor Protestant
Respondent was upon a sudden quite struck speechless.

I confess I should be no good Christian, if I did not desire a better Subject
to write upon, than the Reproaches of the Protestant Religion, such as all
these foregoing Passages are: But, Si natura negat, sacit indignatio scriptum.
And yet, if by turning away mine Eyes, I could better suppress the Irreligion,
which this supine Carelessness and Neglect has occasioned and introduced; I
should have wholly abstained from troubling the World with any thing of this
Discourse. But the danger and miserable condition of those People (if at least
it be thought to be such) calls for Action to all those who had not rather see
Christianity lie wast, and so many Souls to perish irrecoverably; than to
hazard their petty Interests, or disturb their Rest for the redress thereof.

But to this some will object, that the Times are not seasonable: Neither have
they ever yet been so, that I could hear of. Others again will demand, 'What
have they to do with those Abroad? let them look to their own at Home, where
the state of Religion is so visibly declining; Reply to his Reflections on the
Rector of Sutton, p. ult.
Atheism, Ignorance, Error, Profaneness, Popery, and Superstition, increasing,
and getting up so fast* as may deserve our whole care to put a stop to, and
will suffice for Conversions, without looking Abroad, etc. As I find it
especially urged in opposition to this Work, by a N. C. as I suppose, in a
certain Reply made to the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's. Now, does not this too
strongly favor of Cain's surly reply to God Almighty, demanding, Whether he
were his Brothers Keeper? Had it not been much more proper for them to have
asked, What have we to do with their Land and Labor, or thus to captivate and
oppress them? And for our Home Conversions, methinks it looks like the
Welch-man's putting off his Trial till the Day of Judgment; for so long, it may
be feared, it will be, before most of those will be converted. But did not the
Apostles (most of them at least) leave* Judea to preach to the Gentiles; when
in all probability not one tenth Person there could be converted; leaving
others to build upon that. Foundation which they had before laid? And at this
rate, the rest of the World must have remained Infidels till this day: There
being no Place nor People ever yet so perfectly converted, but that abundance
of Chaff did always remain amongst the Wheat, even after the finest winnowing.
And then, why may not these Conversions also be carried on both together? And
whilst our Reverend Brethren are in their several stations here, persuading
those home-different Parties, would it be all incongruous and impossible, that
some few, out of our many supernumeraries, should be appointed to preach to the
Gentiles abroad, both English and others, (for neither the Blacks nor Tawnies
only are the Heathens there) at the same time. Certainly, if the one ought to
be done, the other ought not to be left undone. Besides, we should employ our
Talent to the greatest advantage for our Lord's Honor, and this unquestionably
is amongst the unprejudiced Heathen. Acts 13. 46. and 28. 28.
And therefore St. Paul refused to trifle away his time amongst his perverse
and blasphemous Countrymen, when he saw no good could be wrought upon them,
(who had already judged themselves unworthy of Everlasting Life,) but turned to
the Gentiles, unto whom he tells them, That the Salvation of God was sent.
There being, Prove. 26. 12. Chap. 3. 6.
as Solomon says, more hopes of Fools, than of those that are conceitedly
wise. And says Almighty God to Ezekiel, Thou art not sent to a People of a
strange Speech, and of a hard Language; For, surely had I sent thee unto them,
they would have hrarkned unto thee. Acts 28.
But the House of Israel will not hearken. And St. Paul likewise had the same
assurance touching his Gentiles, viz. That they would hear him. I know nothing
to oppose this, besides provision for their Maintenance, who shall be employed
upon this Errand: Which, if the common way will not suffice, yet, God be
blessed, we are not so utterly destitute and spoiled, but that of that little
which remains, something might be allotted and bestowed as a grateful
Acknowledgment upon the Service of that Faith by which we received it. I shall
not mention from whence this is to arise, because it may possibly give offense.
Tho certainly the choicest of our Stores cannot be too good to be laid out upon
that which at first brought us whatsoever we have. And our cheerful and ready
compliance, will be an infallible Argument of our affection to it. But if we
spend much time in resolving, (as too much has been already!) questioning and
disliking this and that Proposal and Method, perchance the Season may be over,
and it may never more come into our power to do any thing in it at all. Mart.
Ep.
Dum quid sis dubitat, iam potei esse nihil. And here I should judge, that our
Charity in this Case, ought most properly to begin at home; I mean, amongst the
Subjects and Tributaries of our Plantations; and not rather (as some I have
heard have projected) in such Viz. In the East Indies.
remoter Places where we are less related.

Others again will suppose this Work not to be effected, but by the Countenance
and Encouragement of a Parliament. But, God be thanked, the Laws in force, are
all in favor of Christianity, (...), The Hypocrite will always find an Excuse.
nor is there any want of such Laws. So that the true Servant of Christ may,
without hazard, either of Life or Liberty, preach pursuant to any Text in the
whole Bible, without any need of new Laws for his justification. But if a
Parliament be of such absolute necessity for the carrying on thereof, blessed
be God we have one at hand; who doubtless, upon a due Application, will not be
wanting to contribute their utmost assistance to so religious and good a Work.
However, at the worst, Eccl. 32. 15, 17
we are in no worse condition than the Apostles, and first preachers of
Christianity were. And should it happen, which God forbid, that even the whole
Civil Power should neglect, or even prohibit this preaching, yet I cannot
believe that to be a sufficient Plea for our Silence. And I must no less
declare my self of a different Judgment from those who hold the contrary, tho
unfurnished with Miracles; as presuming the Service of Christ, and Salvation of
Souls, to be of much greater consequence than any worldly Concern can possibly
be; and being no less persuaded that neither Secular Interest, Reason of State,
nor any prudential Consideration whatsoever, can in the least justify such a
Neglect, or Silence.

But there are no less than four potent Objections against this Work still
remaining to be considered. As,

First, That this kindness, especially to Slaves, will make them Hypocrites
only, and not Christians. They will be apt, notwithstanding the Laws
beforementioned, to run to Baptism in hopes of Liberty, having hitherto
flattered and hugged themselves with such thoughts.

Secondly, It will displease the Merchants.

Thirdly, This is only some petty Design, which I am hereby managing for my
self.

Fourthly, What I have both formerly and now said herein, is all Lies; The
Planters, Men of extraordinary Credit, having so declared. A Man would judge
that Christianity were grown extraordinary cheap, and of low esteem with those
Objecters, when such groundless Slanders, and blind Shifts, shall be admitted
to its prejudice; and its Cause quite given up by them upon such empty
Suggestions.

But, to begin with the last. What? is all but Lies? Is not that true, touching
the Negro's not being admitted to Christianity? Why then did those very
Planters themselves, at least by their Agents, both own and defend it, some
time since, before the Council; And even then giving in their Reasons, such as
they were, for the contrary? Admit but this one piece of monstrous Absurdity,
this so impudent Impiety, which is too evident to be denied, and the rest may,
without any great difficulty, be supposed; at least, it will not be for their
credit to put me to prove even the worst of them.

The next to it is of the like force and nature, wherein the Argument thus
runs, That to defeat and spite me, Christianity is not to be promoted, nor the
Souls of Men saved. Very Christianly both spoken and concluded! See here of
what different Tempers these Objectors are, Phil. 1. 15, 18.
from that of St. Paul; Some, says he, do indeed preach Christ for Envy and
Strife; and some also of good Will: What then? notwithstanding every Way,
whether in Pretense or Truth, Christ is preached; and therein do I rejoice,
yea, and I will rejoice. It seems, so that the Work were done, which he so
passionately pursued and labored for, he did not so much regard the undue
Motives by which Men were induced and persuaded to it; which these here do
wholly seem to do.

For the next; I would fain know what kind of Merchants these are, who will be
displeased upon this occasion? Either we must please, or displease them. But
St. Paul assures us, Gal. 1. 10.
(and I suppose in this very sense) that if we please Men, we cannot be the
Servants of Christ. At this rate, Elijah was not to have displeased Ahab; nor
St. John the Baptist, Be not ye the Servants of Men.
Herod; In the Collect for whose day, we are yet taught-to pray, That after his
Example we may constantly speak the Truth, boldly rebuke Vice, and patiently
suffer for the Truth's sake. So that it is evident, we must, as the case
stands, either displease them or act contrary to our Prayers, and disobey
Christ. We are not to please our Neighbor, Romans 15. 2.
but for his good to edification, says St. Paul.

Lastly, Why should these be any more Hypocrites than themselves? since that
God's Grace is free, St. Mat. 3.
and may be bestowed upon whom he pleases. He can raise out of those Stones,
St. John 3.
Children unto Abraham: And his Spirit blows where it lists. Besides, a
very short space would confute that foolish Opinion of their Freedom, when they
had seen some of their Fellows continued in their former State, even after
Baptism. One would think, that Men were ashamed and weary of their Religion,
that can admit of such Flams against it.

But now after that, all their pitiful Reasonings are vanquished, and their
Arguments put to flight, yet nevertheless it cannot still be other with them,
than impracticable; nor are there wanting some that, to save trouble, from
amongst our selves are inclined to believe as much. Good God! that
Christianity, after its continuance in the World for near two thousand Years,
should now at last be excluded for its impracticableness. A Position which
every Man, endued but with common sense, may at once see as well the wickedness
as the folly of it. The Disputer that denied Motion, and was not to be confuted
but by practice, (which these also must) was not half so ridiculous.

But perchance they will say, it is only impracticable to Slaves. If so, why are
the Native Indians upon the Continent, who are only Tributaries, and whose
Habitations are many of them environed by the English, equally neglected, and
their reduction to Christianity as much scofft at as the other? And why were
not those poor Barbarians of Jackatra (before mentioned) admitted thereto, when
so earnestly importuned and besought by them? But to answer the Objection.

If Christianity be impracticable as to the condition of Slavery, why then did
the Apostles both preach and write, to and concerning For by our Spirit we are
all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond
or Free: and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, says St. Paul, 1
Cor. 12. 13. See also Chap. 7. 20, 21, 22, and 24. See also Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. and
Col. 3. 22. and 1 Timothy 6. 1. 1 St. Pet. 2. 18, etc.
Slaves, either for their Conversion, or Confirmation in Christianity? For
either they therein did well, or ill: If well, then ought we to imitate them
therein: But that they did ill, was never, that we find, once suggested, no not
by the Heathen Masters themselves. For those still remaining as much their
Slaves as before, of what wrong could they complain, unless of their being made
better and more faithful Servants by Christianity, than they were? But if by
Baptism they were set at liberty, (which the Example of Onesimus, and the
express words of their several Epistles, do prove that they were not) then it
is evident that the Apostles did not suppose the Master's Interest in his Slave
to be of greater account than the Slave's Salvation: Nor that they ought to
value his Displeasure or Profit, thus standing in competition with their Duty;
which is exactly our Case. Again, if those of other Religions do, See A. B.
Abbot's History of the New World, where he makes often mention of the Jesuits
and Friars labors in this kind in America; A Prelat that was never suspected
for any friend to them.
with great Industry and Zeal, both endeavor and effect, (as it is plain that
they do, whilst ours do not only neglect, but forbid it); then it is clear that
therein those do act more agreeably to the Apostles and Scripture-Rule, than
our selves; whom yet we so frequently charge in other things of less moment,
with deviating from it; And so forgetting how we condemn our selves whilst we
blame them. However since these do it, where is then the impracticableness
thereof? or how comes it to be less practicuble to us, than to them? If they do
it less perfectly, as is suggested, yet still they do it. Si tibi displiceant,
fac meliora, precor. Mart. Ep.
If amiss, let us do it better: Only let us not under that pretense be said
never to do it at all.

If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
he is none of his, says the Apostle: Now Christ's Spirit was to promote the
Salvation of Mankind. But of what Spirit must those then be that do neglect and
hinder it? 1 Cor. 16. 22.
And if any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema; that is,
utterly accursed from him: But what love can there be in endeavoring to rob
him of that which he so dearly purchased with his Blood? 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3.
All Knowledge, all understanding of Mysteries, and all Faith, without this
Charity is nothing; Yea, the bestowing of all our Goods to the relieving of the
Poor, and even the giving our Bodies to be burnt, withoat it, will profit us
nothing. This is a thing which all Sects and Parties do most generally agree
in: No Scruples to tender Consciences will from hence arise; it being
impossible that any should oppose it, but such only who have lost all
Conscience.

And certainly, if Christianity and the Souls of Men be worth our care, it
cannot be but that something in order thereto will speedily be endeavored; the
thing in its self being most easy, and there wanting nothing, but some resolute
and wise Agent to push it forward. As for the impotent railing of those
Barjesuses and Elymases, (for God be thanked that is the worst they can do) it
is to be pitied and contemned, rather than dreaded or regarded by us. Or at the
worst, a vigorous pursuit would in a short time both disarm and silence them.
There being no Strumpet so impudent and void of shame, as to assert and
practice her lewdness in the presence of more virtuous People. Nor has it been
heard that any Thief has been so confident, as to defend his Rapines and
Slaughters before an upright Judge. And it being a thing so utterly incongruous
and contradictory in it self, for Men to call themselves Christians, yea, and
of the most refined sort too, and yet at the same time to oppose Christianity,
that it is impossible but at the first manful onset, they must needs be baffled
and shamed out of it. Wisd. 17. 11.
For, Wickedness, as the wise Man says, condemned by her own Witness, is very
timorous, and being pressed with Conscience, always forecasteth grievous
things. So that there seems nothing more to be needful, but the Watchword
from our vigilant and prudent Leaders, to the faithful Soldiers of Christ,
boldly to fall on, and to attaque them: The Victory cannot but be easy over
those that fight against God. And pity, yea infinite pity it would be, that
so Holy and Righteous a Cause, should be so slightly lost; and that a Matter of
such Eternal Consequence, so much tending to our Redeemer's Honor, and to the
good of those many Myriads of Souls, viz. of our Negro's and Indians, Slaves
and Tributaries, all of them the Subjects of this Kingdom (and should be also
of our care) should be suffered to miscarry, only through the want of a few
words speaking, a little endeavor, and of so much courage, as but to look the
Enemies of Christ in the face; and where the Act it self does carry its
Recompense, Job 29. 11, 12, 13, etc.
and makes us full Amends. For, whilst we become Eyes to the Blind, as holy Job
speaks, and Feet to the Lame; delivering the Poor that cries, and those that
have none to help them: Whilst we put on Righteousness, and it clothes us; and
Judgment as a Robe and a Diadem: Whilst we break the Jaws of the Wicked, and do
search out the Cause that we know not: Whilst we become valiant for the Truth,
and do rebuke these Blasphemers to the face: Then the Ear that hears us, shall
bless us; and the Eye that sees us, shall give witness to us; our Glory shall
be fresh in us, and our Root shall spread out by the Waters: Chapter 5. v. 22, etc.
The blessing of those that are ready to perish shall fall upon us, neither
shall we be afraid of destruction when it comes: For we shall be in league
with the Stones of the Field; and the very Beasts of the Field shall be at
peace with us. In Famine we shall be redeemed from Death, and in this REBELLION
from the Power of the Sword. All which will be consummated and made up in that
Repute, Honor, and Stability to our Church and Nation, which will hereby be
undoubtedly procured. Amen.

1 St. John 3. 18. Let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and
in Truth.
ERRATA.
IN the Title Page, line 4. read reprehended. P. 3. l. 7. for assert, r. set
off. l. 8. r. Arguments. P. 9. l. 17. f. Disciples, r. Apostles. l. 37. r. in*
bef. snob. P. 27. l. 20. r. extant. P. 29. l. 11. f. its, r. his. P. 31. l. 2.
dele be, l. 9. dele the. P. 32. l. 15. r. Industry. P. 33. l. 19. r. Hypocrisy.
Add, P. 28. ad finem, Wickedness burns as the Fire; it shall devour the
Briars and Thorns, etc. Isa. 9. 18.

Errata in the Margent.
P. 4. insert Acts 18. 6. bef. Acts 20. Likewise the same again p. 6. P. 16. r.
Cupiunt. P. 24. after Miracles, add c. 6. n. 1. P. 25. f. answer, r. refute;
also insert, p. 573. disc. 3. c. 19. P. 26. r. (...). Likewise add this of E.
W's, Protestants that never did, nor shall hereafter do good, to either
Christian or Heathen.

Trade preferred before Religion, AND Christ made to give place to Mammon:
Represented in a SERMON, relating to the PLANTATIONS.
JER. Chap. 2. Part of the 34th Verse. Also in thy Skirts is found the Blood of
Souls; etc.
The whole Verse runs thus; Also in thy Skirts is found the Blood of the Souls
of the poor Innocents; I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.

THis Particle [Also] standing at our first entrance into the Text, requires us
to raise our Eye to the foregoing Words, both of this, and of the former
Chapter. In the first of which we find our Prophet, as it were opening his
Commission, asserting his Authority as derived to him from God himself. Before
I formed thee in the Belly, Chap. 1 ver. 5, 7.
I knew thee; and before thou came forth out of the Womb, I sanctified thee,
and ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations: Therefore thou shall go unto all
that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee, thou shall speak. And
the better to qualify and enable him for this great Work, Verse. 9.
it is added, Behold, I have put my words into thy Mouth. And then to create a
Resolution and Courage in him suitable thereto, and that he might go on with a
steady boldness and assurance in this so hazardous and thankless an Employment,
Verse. 18.
it is promised that he should be an Iron Pillar, and a brazen Wall, yea, a
defenced City against them; And that therefore he was not to be afraid or
dismayed at their Looks, (that being the worst they should be able to do
against him,) Verse. 19.
for that God himself would most certainly be with him, to preserve and deliver
him.

In confidence whereof, Chap. 2. 4.
we find him in the next Chapter betaking himself to his Function; and in
charity to his own ungodly Nation, beginning with them first, unto whom indeed
he was especially sent: Where after a brief rehearsal of the many benefits
conferred upon them by God himself, Verse. 7, 20.
as that he had broken their Yoke, and burst their Bonds, had brought them into
a plentiful Country, which he had designed for them, to eat the fruits
thereof, and the goodness thereof. That he had there planted them a noble Vine,
Verse. 21.
wholly a right Seed, instructed them in the best and purest Religion; with
abundance of the like Privileges and Immunities, which by his especial Favor
and Munificence, they enjoyed above all other People; I say, after this, the
Prophet at last bespeaks the Almighty as falling thus to expostulate with them:
Verse. 5.
What Iniquity have your Fathers found in Me, that they are gone away far from
me? Verse. 11.
And, Has a Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? but my People
have changed their glory, for that which does not profit: Charging them that
they had turned their Backs to him, had spoken and done evil things with their
utmost might, and as far as they could* Adding, Hac tua impudentia qua omnes
superas, etiam improbissimos doces improbitatem.
that they were become cruel, and unthankful, and (which was worst of all)
incorrigible; and in a word, worse than the very Heathen. That by their
customary and long Practice in that cursed Trade of Sinning, they had attained
a notable aptness and dexterity therein, even beyond the proficiency of the
most wicked, Jun.
whom, it seems, they were able to teach. Verse. 33.
In fine, they are told that they were wholly turned into a degenerate Plant of
a strange Vine; Verse. 7.
had defiled the Land which he had brought them into, and made God's Heritage
an Abomination.

And now after this so large and foul a Catalogue of their Impieties, one would
have thought that the Prophet must have been at a stand, and could have
proceeded no further; when to complete the charge, and to render them for ever
both inexcusable and infamous, he adds to it a certain new, and before
unheard of Villainy, viz. of exercising those their Hellish Cruelties, Verse. 23,
35.
not only upon the Bodies, but extending them to the very Souls, and that of
poor Innocent Men: Which, as bad as it is, is yet exceedingly aggravated by
their Impudence in the perpetration, showing that it was grown into a Fashion,
and become costomary amongst them; Non sun^t cla^m peccata tua ut
pervestigatione sit opus, palam sunt, omnium oculis exposita. Idem.
not committed in private, or in the dark, as if ashamed of it; nor yet
detected by any laborious Search, or Scrutiny, but acted openly, and in the
Face of the Sun, like Absalom upon the House top; and even owned and justified
by them to the whole World: They did, as the Prophet speaks, TRIMM, that is, by
false reasonings and Sophistry, and probably sometimes by the loudest Lies
defend and assert their Impiety; Quid bonam praedicas viam tuam? Vulg. Ed.
nor could by any Argument be persuaded to acknowledge it to be so: But on the
contrary, boasted themselves Innocent, proclaimed that they were not polluted,
Quid niteris bonam ostendere viam tuam? Jun. Why TRIMMEST thou thy way? verse.
33.
and that they had not sinned, notwithstanding that their way in the Valley, as
the Prophet speaks, was so notorious. They might perchance have an Eye unto
their MAMMON, and belike, deemed that the necessity and benefit arising to them
from their Trade and Commerce with Foreign Nations, would not barely excuse,
but even consecrate the Villainy.

This then, in short, was their case; God had most mercifully and wonderfully
delivered them out of Egypt, and not only so, but had likewise brought them
into a Land, which, as the Prophet Ezekiel expresses it, Chap. 10. 6.
he had espied for them, and which was indeed the Glory of all Lands; the
entire and full possession whereof was given them upon this sole Consideration,
and these only Terms, viz. That they should cast away all their Abominations,
and become Trumpets of God's Praise, and declare his Glory among the Heathen,
Psalm. 69. no doubt for the Salvation of their precious Souls. But instead
thereof, even from the very time of their first entrance into that Land, they
practiced all their former Abominations, and that with both Hands earnestly;
and instead of declaring, 1 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 15. 16.
they stifled and concealed his Eternal Counsel, forbidding the preaching of it
to the Heathen, that they might [not] be saved; and so they pleased not God,
and became the murderers of Souls.

Which very thing in this Charge does seem to have been their singular and
grand Crime, viz. Their acting in and connivance at the most open and profane
effusion of the Blood of Men's Souls, and that too in that very Land which God
had given them to a contrary end and purpose: And the not decrying nor
discountenancing of which Wickedness, by such other of them who possibly might
be less active in the perpetration, bringing them also in as Associates and
Partisans with the rest, and rendering them thereof equally guilty.

But here methinks I perceive my self ready to be interrupted, and told, that
this is a forced Interpretation, and cannot be the proper meaning of the Text,
which, say they, was intended only to reprove those bloody Immolations of
Children, offered without the Gates in the Valley of Hinnom (and so as it were
in the Skirts or Suburbs of Jerusalem) unto Moloch; the Words, Innocents, and
Poor, manifestly implying no less. (...) etc. Hom. Il. ^.
Further adding that there can be no such Sin as shedding the Blood of Souls,
properly so taken; They being, as the Poet speaks, (...), destitute of Blood,
and Immortal.

Unto the first of which, I answer, That the Words in the Hebrew here rendered
by Poor, and Innocents, do not necessarily import the same signification with
the English, where Time and Custom have made Innocents, and Infants (or little
Children) to be almost synonimous and convertible; and the Adjunct, Poor, to
represent one afflicted in Mind or Body, as well as Estate or Fortune; one that
groans under Oppression or Sickness, or some other such like Calamity, and not
under bare Poverty only, which is the most natural import of that Adjunct, and
under which Children or Infants cannot so well be said to fall; who, as they
are not capable either to gather or use Riches, so neither can they properly be
said to be either rich or poor. These Sufferers therefore were not Children,
but Men; possibly, as poor in Fortune, as miserable in Condition. They were
Pauperes and Egentes, as the Vulgar Latin and Tremelius do render the Word,
which is wholly omitted in the Greek; where they are only called (...),
(without any mention of their other condition;) signifying insontes, Indemnes,
damni expertes, plagis intactas, as well as Innocents. All which can hardly be
understood of little Children: And therefore I cannot so readily assent that
our Prophet here intended these.

And then to the second part of the Objection, I likewise answer, That this
expression of Blood, with relation to the Soul, is diverse times used in Holy
Scripture; particularly by Solomon, Prove. 28. 17. if we consult the Original;
In several places also of Ezekiel. chap. 3. 18. and 33.
Ezekiel; and in the Act. 20. 26. See also Wisd. 1. 11. And Ecclus. 21. 2. In
both which we read of the Souls being slain. (...) from (...) signifying anima,
animus, etc. Pagn. Th. ling. sanct.
Acts by St. Paul, which I shall have further occasion to mention. And for the
Translation of this Text, it exactly agrees with the Letter of the Hebrew; and
that, I doubt not in its most primitive signification; both the (...), Sept.
Interp.
Septuagint and Sanguis animarum egentium [sanguis] innocentium. Trem. Sanguis
animarum pauperum and innotentium, Vulg. Ed.
Latin Versions (as in the former) answering thereunto. And therefore should
our Prophet's intention herein happen to be other, (which there is no
convincing Argument or reason to prove) yet I shall not in the least scruple to
follow the Letter both of the Original, and the rest of the Translations,
especially our own. But from the Words, as I here find them, shall conclude,
that there may be and is, at least in some sense or other, such a Sin as this
reprehended in the Text, viz. of shedding the Blood, and murdering of Souls.

And upon this Foundation it is that I intend to raise my ensuing Discourse;
and therein shall observe this Method, and show,

I. What this Sin is, and wherein it consists.

II. The several ways by which it is committed.

III. What are the common Inducements thereto.

IV. The most horrid Nature thereof, and how infinitely displeasing to Almighty
God.

V. The Place and Persons here especially charged.

VI. I shall enquire what Relation this Text may have unto us, and how far this
Church and Nation may be chargeable with this Sin.

VII. Which being dispatched, and having discovered some, and those no small
spots and stains of this Blood upon our own, no less than upon Jerusalems
Skirts and Garments, viz. by our neglecting the Souls of the poor Heathen in
our Plantations, (and even here at home.) I shall from the hainousness of the
Sin, and from the Prophet's severe reprehension of it in Jerusalem, in the
seventh and last place, infer the most indispensible and absolute necessity of
our speedy redressing this abuse and neglect of our duty to God, and to our
own, no less than to our Peoples Souls.

I. FOR the first of these. I have before showed, that in Scripture Language,
there is a Blood of Souls; but then what that Blood is, and wherein the Crime
of shedding it does consist, will need some further Explication. As for the
Phrase, it must be supposed to be an Hebrew Idiotism, or a Metaphor taken from
the Function and Employment which the Blood sustains and exercises in the
Body, which Moses says, Genesis 9 4.
is the Life thereof. So that to shed the Blood, the Crime here charged, is to
take away the Life, whether of Soul or Body.

Now God Almighty being the sole Life of Man's Soul, the very Fountain of
living Waters, Psalm. 36. 9.
and in whose light only she can see Light; the miserable deprivation of his
Favor can be no less than the shedding of her Blood, and the taking away the
Life thereof. It is to subject her to God's Eternal Wrath and Curse, the true
second Death, spoken of by St. John in the Revelations; Chap. 20. 6, 14.
the same also which St. Paul terms to be accursed from Christ, Romans 9. 3.
and even to be blotted out of God's Book, which Moses, Exodus 32. in that
mighty Zeal for his Nation, sued for. In short, verse. 32.
it is the sum total of whatsoever is deplorable and wretched, and to be
deprecated and avoided by all Mankind.

Which loss of God's Favor, with the dismal Consequences thereof, is solely
occasioned by an ungodly course of Life, and by Infidelity: Piety and Virtue,
being the same to the Soul, which good Blood is to the Body; and what the
mischievous effusion thereof is to the latter, the same must the profusion of
evil manners be to the former: So that this shedding of the Soul's Blood, is
nothing else but a spiteful captivation and detaining of Men under God's Wrath
and Displeasure, a permitting or forcibly compelling them to persist in
Infidelity, and a wicked Life, the most natural effect thereof, and which is
therefore the first Root or Spring of Misery and Death to the Soul of Man. From
whence it is that when Almighty God in the 3d, 18th, and 33d Chapters of
Ezekiel, threatens to require the witless Offender's Blood at the Watchman's
Hand, it is plain that thereby was meant, such Sins and Enormities, which he,
through the want of timely notice from the Watchman, had run into. And when Job
(Chap. 16.) forbad the Earth to cover, Verse. 18.
or conceal his Blood; it is understood that he then made his Purgation, as to
the foul suggestions of his Enemies; wishing therein that his most secret and
concealed Sins, there styled his Blood, might be laid open to the view of the
whole World: so plainly would his innocence then appear, at least as to the
Crimes, by his back-Friends, so unjustly charged upon him. So also St. Paul's
attestation of himself, Acts 20. 26.
as to his being pure from the Blood of all Men, is to be understood of his
being no way chargeable with their Ignorance and Infidelity, nor with the
Consequences thereof, viz. their other grosser Impieties; Verse 31.
as having even day and night with Tears warned them thereof, Verse. 20, 27.
at no time shunning to declare unto them the whole Counsel of God, nor keeping
back any thing that was profitable for them. And so much for the Nature of this
Sin, and wherein it consists. I proceed unto the next Particular;

II. WHICH is to show the several ways by which this Sin is committed; and this
I intend for a Light or Sea-Mark, by the help whereof Men may avoid the danger
of running upon it: And they are especially two. Whereof

The first is by publishing of false Doctrine, which by debauching of Men's
Minds and Judgments with evil Principles, does necessarily lead them into
Immorality, and a wicked Life, which, as I have showed, is the most certain
ruin of the Soul. For if, as our blessed Savior testifies, St. Joh. 8. 32.
the Truth does make Men free, then must Falsehood be the occasion of their
Bondage; and if right Principles be the only sure Guides and Conducters to
Happiness, the contrary must needs lead us to Misery and Ruin. For he that
believes amiss, will consequently act so; it being most natural for Men to act
according as they are inwardly persuaded. False Doctrine then must be confessed
to be the Bane and Poison of the Soul. The Publishers and Promoters whereof,
can therefore be no other than its most perfect Betrayers and Murderers. For
which reason doubtless it was, that our Lord Christ in his Gospel commands us
to take heed, St. Mark 4. 24.
both how, and what we hear: confirming Solomon's advice, St. Luke 8. 18.
thus warning us, Cease, my Son, to hear the Iustruction that causes to err
from the words of Knowledge, Prove 19. 17.
as being so destructive to the Soul.

And no less, in the second place, may this guilt be contracted by prohibiting
and concealing the Truth; this being a sacrilegious robbing the Soul of her
necessary Sustenance, and is not so much a stabbing or a poisoning, as a
starving of her; The knowledge and practice of the Truth being that alone which
can reconcile her unto God, and entitle her to his Favor, which is the Life
thereof. For, as Syracides says, The Bread of the Needy (as well the Spiritual
as the Temporal) is their Life, Ecclus. 34. 21.
and he that defraudeth him of it, is a Man of Blood: And he that takes away
his Neighbors Living, slays him; and he that defraudeth him of his Hire,
Prove. 15. 2.
is a Blood-shedder: So likewise, That the Soul should be without Knowledge, it
is not good, says the wise Solomon. Indeed it is no other but to murder her.
And therefore he says again, That the Lips of the Wise disperse Knowledge,
Chap. 15. 7.
the most proper and necessary Food for Men's Souls.

This was it which Almighty God complained of by his Prophet Hosea, Chap. 4. 6.
That his People were destroyed for lack of Knowledge; Instruction, the means
thereof, being withholden from them: And likewise in Isaiah, Chap. 5. 13.
where it is lamented, That they were gone into Captivity, and their honorable
Men were famished, and their Multitude dried up with Thirst, because they had
no Knowledge. This also was the sad condition of the poor Flock in Zechariah;
Chap. 10. and 11.
They fell into distress, because there was no Shepherd, or such only as did
not regard nor pity them; no not when they were sold and slain. For those that
were cut off, they did not visit, they neither sought out the young, nor healed
the broken, nor fed that which was still; But that that dies, let it die, was
all they cared, so they might but eat the flesh of the fat; retain the
Oppressors Favor, and so thrive and grow rich. Wherefore, to obviate this sore
evil for the future, Chap. 3. 15.
Almighty God in the Chapter ensuing the Text, promises to give them Pastors
after his own Heart, which should feed them with Knowledge and Understanding,
the only sure Preservatives of the Soul.

Nor let any one here think to shift off this Guilt, by lessening this Sin into
an Omission only (even where it so happens, which is seldom;) It being our very
great Crime to but omit what is our strictest duty to perform; as most
certainly it is to persuade others to both believe and practice whatsoever we
hold our selves obliged to. The forbearance whereof was, in Moses's Esteem, no
less than a hating of our Brother, who therefore thus directs us; Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, Lev. 19. 17.
and not suffer Sin [to rest] upon him; or (as it is in the Margent) that thou
bear not Sin for him; intimating therein the danger of that Omission. Qui non
prepulsat inj^ ^iamicum potest insert. Tul.
That all connivance at Wickedness, is an encouragement to it, especially in
such who both can, and ought to prevent it, was the opinion of a virtuous
Heathen. Agreeable to that of St. James, To him that knows to do good, and
does it not, to him it in Sin. Chap. 4. 17.
Solomon did not hold him excused who had [only] forborne to deliver those that
were drawn unto Death, Prove. 24. 11.
and that were ready to be slain; no not tho he pleaded Ignorance, and should
say, that he knew it not: For, as it follows, Does not be that pondereth the
Heart, consider it, and he that keeps the Soul, does not he know it? And
shall not he render to every Man according to his works? The Piety of the great
Artaxcrxes, would not allow that any should remain ignorant of the Laws of the
God of Heaven: And therefore in his Commission to Ezra, he gives an especial
charge for the careful instruction of those who knew them not. Chap 7. v. 25.
It was not enough in our blessed Savior's esteem, for St. Peter to be
converted himself, but that being accomplished, he was to employ the like
charitable endeavors for his Brethren also. And upon that so prevalent motive
of Charity, our Blessed Lord urges to all in general a seasonable Reproof and
Admonition of our Brother; St. Luke 22. 32.
For, St. Mat. 18. 15.
if he hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother, and thereby saved his Soul.
This is that perfect love of God and of our Brother (or Neighbor) which cannot
be separated; and which whosoever wants, is at once an Enemy both to God and
to his Brother: 1 John chap. 2, 3, 4.
For, he is a Liar and a Murderer, says St. John; He walks in Darkness and
not in Light; See Chap. 3.
He abides in Death, and can have no hopes of Eternal Life; Verse. 10. and chap.
4. ver. 20
withal adding, that such a Person is not of God, and cannot love him, that
hates (or does not love) his Brother; confirming his Assertion with a most
substantial Reason, demanding, How he can love God whom he has not seen, Chap.
3 10, 17
who hates his Brother whom he has seen? For whom he ought to lay down his
Life, but much more to extend his Charity, and to open his bowels of Compassion
to him, being in need, whether of Spiritual or Temporal Assistance. So that
this Omission, as they term it, which, of a charitable pious Christian, renders
a Man a Liar, a Murderer, and an Apostate, etc. is but a bad Plea, and very
far from an extenuation of our Crime.

But then if this love of our Brother by admonishing and reproving him be thus
every Man's duty, much more must it be of such, who are peculiarly ordained and
appointed to that work; as we read the Watchman in Ezekiel was, against whom it
was determined, That he should surely die, Chap. 33. 8.
if he did not speak to warn the wicked from his way. Wherein it is observable,
that nothing of any Crime actually committed by the Watchman is therein
mentioned, but only an Omission of his Duty; nor was this Penalty to be
inflicted for any treacherous correspondence with the Enemy, or for betraying
his Cause or Party, but only for holding his peace in a time of danger. From
hence alone could St. Paul acquit his Innocence, Acts 20.
as to the Blood of all Men, because he had not omitted to declare to the Souls
under his charge the whole counsel of God, nor any thing that was profitable
unto them; Of which yet his partiality or silence must have impleaded him
deeply Guilty: For it had been a concealing of the Truth, and therefore
confessedly a shedding of their Blood, and a murdering of them. This was that
Fruit which our Lord Christ acquaints his Disciples, St. Joh. 15. 16.
that they were to go and bring forth, Verse. 14.
and that their Fruit might remain; and which alone could qualify them for that
honorable Title of his Friends, viz. by an industrious and active conformity
to all his Commands; of which, this we are speaking of, was none of the least.
And how far those shifts and excuses, which upon this occasion are usually
produced, will avail us at the last day, St. Mat. 25.
the sad doom both of the slothful Servant, and of the sleepy Virgins may serve
to inform us. And so much for my second Observable. I proceed now unto

III. THE Third, which is to represent the most usual and common Inducements to
this Sin; And they are four: Whereof

The first is that root of Bitterness, or spirit of Unbelief, attended with a
most violent Spite or Enmity to Religion inwardly lodged in the Heart; such as
is generally observable in Atheists and Anti-Religionists, especially where
Religion does happen to suit less with their Secular Interests and Designs.
Amos 7. 12.
Or else, such as was visible in Amaziah, Acts 13.
the Idolatrous High Priest of Bethel, or in Elymas the Sorcerer, 2 Timothy 3. 8.
in Jannes and Jambers, and diverse others; Acts 18. 17.
who possibly might resist the true, only for the sake of their false
Religions. Or, lastly, such as are possessed with a Spirit of Gallionism and
Indifferency which or what Religion shall prevail; whether Jesus or Mammon,
Barabbas or Christ, so that they may be at ease, it is the same with them. But
against whom our blessed Lord has positively declared, saying, He that is not
with me, St. Mat. 12. 30.
is against me; and he that gathers not with me, scatters. Now the
foundation and root of this, is nothing else but Infidelity; They act against,
or neglect Religion, because they believe it not. For, as the Prophet Micah
observes, All people will walk every man in the name of his God, Chap. 4. 5.
and of that Religion which they are persuaded of. As for instance; a Jew will
make his boast of the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. 4.
and stand up for his antiquated Ceremonies; A Turk will assert his Alcoran,
and rather than fail will buy over Proselytes to his Superstition. And some
Christians there are too, who (to the shame of others who do oppose or neglect
it) will do the same for theirs. The Ephesian Craftsmen would adventure upon an
Uproar, Acts. 19.
rather than suffer their Diana to be blasphemed. Yea, the silly Worshippers of
Baal could cry aloud from morning till noon, 1 King. 18. 23.
not sparing their flesh from Knives and Launcers for the honor of their
paultry Deity; Nor would the Gentiles change their Gods, of whose Divinity they
were before persuaded, as our Prophet observes. But these, as says the same
Prophet Micah, Chap. 4. 12.
know not the ways of the Lord, nor understand his Counsels: Yea, they vilify
and cast Dirt upon that Religion, they would be thought to profess. A most
evident sign that they believe it not.

Secondly; Pride and Ambition are too frequently the occasions of this Sin. As
when in the Church, some fanciful Humourists, or stiffnecked Enthusiasts shall
turn Reformers; and, upon their own Heads endeavor to make Alterations in
things settled and agreed upon by the best Authority, and after the maturest
Deliberation. Or when some little Dwarfs or Pygmies in worth and abilities,
shall set up for themselves, and by dispersing Heterodox Opinions in Religion,
shall aspire after fame and greatness amongst their Party and Followers. Or in
the State, when any dissatisfied Achitophel shall plot revenge against it: And
to that vile end shall side with, and encourage the idle Dreams and Dotages of
those empty Votaries, as hoping to compass that by the new Religion, (...) 1 Timothy 6. 3.
which he could never effect by the old. It Is Pride, says an ancient Greek
Proverb, that is the Parent of Superstition; the very same with that of St.
Paul, If any Man teach otherwise, and consents not to wholesome words, he is
proud, knowing nothing.

The third Inducement is Avarice, and a never satisfied Thirst after filthy
Lucre: Wisd. 15. 12.
When wicked Mammonists, (such who do account their Life here to be but a
Market for gain, and that resolve they must be getting, tho it be with the
ruin of their own, and their Peoples Souls) shall begrutch the time and
expenses laid out upon the Service of God, and the Work of Religion. Who
finding their Trade and Religion to be inconsistent, and having purposed in
despite thereof to carry on their ungodly Interests, will not scruple to turn
their Backs to the one, for the advantage of the other, and so as much as in
them lies shall make their God to truckle under Mammon. Or when Cheats and
Impostors to furnish themselves of a livelihood, and finding Preaching to be
the only Trade they can set up for, without serving an Apprenticeship, shall
subvert Order, draw Disciples after them, and preach a Nation into Desolation.
28. Pet. 2. 3.
Such, as St. Peter describing, warns us against, Romans 16. 17, 18.
who through Covetousness, with fained words, should make Merchandise of us:
And whom S. Paul bids us to mark and avoid; for that they did not serve our
Lord Jesus Christ, as they falsely pretended, but their own Belly; and by good
Words and fair Speeches did deceive the Hearts of the simple: But for which,
(as St. Peter in the forementioned place, to their small comfort, assures them)
their Judgment did not linger, nor their Damnation slumber. This is that
Covetousness which St. Paul terms Idolatry. Col. 3. 5.
For whatsoever a Man magnifies and admires most, that certainly must be his
God; And in Christianity, wheresoever practiced, it is no doubt a renouncing of
it: It being no less true, than Truth it self, St. Mat. 6. 14.
That no Servant can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one, St.
Luke 16. 13.
and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other.
Now to despise and hate, what is it but inwardly to renounce? And therefore, a
little to invert our Savior's Words, I must in this case declare, That we
cannot serve Christ and Trade.

The last Inducement I shall mention is Sloth, and a supine carelessness and
neglect of Religion, and of the Souls of Men: When to avoid Clamor and
Obloquie, or being willing to shift off Business, or to flatter a few
Atheistical Apostates; Gal. 6. 12.
(Such I fear, to make a fair show in the Flesh, would, with St. Paul's prudent
and moderate Galatians, scarce stick at Circumcision, if thereby they might
escape suffering persecution for the Cross of Christ;) Or because it is a
barren Theme, and nothing is to be got by the preaching or promoting of it, but
may rather prove some impediment to their Profit: Or lastly, because there is
some labor or trouble in it; I say, when for these doughty reasons, Men shall
suffer Religion to lie waste, and poor Innocent Souls to perish, without any
pity or regard; and then to excuse this their Sloth, or whatever worse Name it
deserves, shall declare it a needless Service: And so strike Hands with the
Adversary, to the great discouragement and weakening of those who are more
hearty therein; whom they ought in Duty to both strengthen and assist. And so I
proceed to

IV. THE Fourth Observable, which is to show the horrid and almost most
unpardonable Nature of this Sin, and how infinitely displeasing to Almighty
God. Which will be made appear from these five following Circumstances, whereof,

The first is its evil and lewd Society, and that foul herd of Sins, which it
is mustered and mated with, in this and the foregoing Chapter. For even Words
and Sins, as well as Men, may be judged of by the company they go in.

Secondly, It will appear from the Site and Order in which it is placed, as
being made to close up this grand Charge, brought in in the last place, which
in such cases is usually the Principal, as being apt more thoroughly to affect
the Judgment, and infuse a Sense and Tincture of the like hainousness into the
whole Accusation.

Thirdly, By considering the Vehemence here used by our Prophet, or rather by
the Holy Ghost, both in and preparatory to this grand Charge; Whereas at the
12th Verse, he breaks forth into this mighty Exclamation; Verse. 12.
Be astonished, O Heavens, and be horribly afraid, yea, be very desolate, as it
were at the consideration of this new and strange Impiety: Verse. 22.
And at the 22d Verse it is resolved, that tho they should wash themselves with
Nitre, and take to them much Soap, yet that it should not avail them, as to any
expiation; For that their Iniquity was marked before the Lord. The Conjunctive,
Also, carrying with it a fearful Aggravation.

Fourthly, from the clamorous and revengeful nature of Blood above all other
things, and from the high detestation wherewith the Holy-Spirit of God in
Scripture has declared against that Sin, when committed simply against the
Body alone, without any respect or relation to the Soul. Deuteronomy. 21.
As when in the Levitical Law we read of an especial Service and Sacrifice
appointed for the expiation of but an uncertain murder: Genesis 4.
And of Abel's Blood crying from the Earth for vengeance against Cain; Rev. 6.
10.
and so of the Souls under the Altar crying aloud unto God to judge and avenge
their Blood upon those that dwelt upon the Earth. 2 Samuel 21.
And of the Gibeonites, 1 Kings 21.
and Naboth's Blood, 2 King. 9.
pursuing Readiness and Ahab's Families, when themselves were extinguished, even
to the utter extermination of the latter. And, lastly, of God's determining to
avenge even that Blood, viz. The Blood of Jezreel, upon the House of Jehu, tho
commanded to do it. Hos. 1. 4.
From all which Instances we may easily conclude the horridness of this Sin; Of
which nevertheless I shall yet say something more in another place. But,

The fifth Circumstance will yet more abundantly make appear the horridness of
this Sin above all other, from the consideration of the nature and excellency
of the Soul of Man, which as much exceeds his Body, as a living Creature is
preferrable to so much inanimate Clay. Eccles. 9. 4.
The vast distance between which, Solomon, the ablest Judge, will best inform
us, when he pronounces, A living Dog to be better than a dead Lion. And surely
then a living and immortal Soul, capable of Eternal things, and destined to the
highest Happiness, must be allowed a proportionable share of preeminence, above
a perishing and dying Carcass. Hence it is that our Blessed Savior does so
much postpone the danger of the Body to that of the Soul, St. Mark 8. 36.
preferring this last above the World. Now Offenses do usually receive much of
their aggravation from the worth and quality of the parties injured; as our
Laws for Treason, and defaming of Noblemen do manifestly prove. I conclude
therefore, that all Injuries and Wrongs done against the Soul must from the
supereminent and transcendent excellency of her Nature, take their truest
estimate and value, as to the Actors both Guilt and Punishment for the same,
whether inflicted in this, or in the Life to come. And as upon a just
ballancing of the merits of each, such Offenses will be found infinitely to
outweigh all other, so they do seem to require an equal proportion of Evil for
them. And, to speak in the Scripture Language, if the one deserves to be
avenged sevenfold truly the other not so little as seventy and seven fold.
Genesis 4.


V. NOW for the Place and Persons here charged, which is the fifth particular
to be considered; the Place is Jerusalem, and the Persons her Elders and
Rulers, or else together with them the Body of her People also. These by their
Ignorance and grosser Stupidity, or by wicked Principles instilled into them;
and the other by their Connivance and Example, or by their Precepts to the
contrary; such as we read were afterward decreed by Antiochus and other Heathen
Princes. But be the fault where it will, whether in Jerusalem's Rulers and
Elders, or in her People, or in both; it is certain from our Prophet's Charge,
that this at this time was most eminently the Sin of Jerusalem. A place where
Knowledge did so abound, that was so thoroughly acquainted with the Will of God,
at least in this particular; that had had so many Prophets to instruct her, and
for a long time had lived under so much excellent Preaching; Isa. 28. 10.
had had Precept upon Precept, and Line upon Line; were God's peculiar People,
and did glory so much in her alone profession of the Truth, and her being
(which was but true) the best Reformed Church in the whole World: And lastly,
that had been gratified and obliged by so many Blessings, such a Train of
Deliverances, and no less admonished by as many severe Judgments from Heaven:
That she should become guilty of the stifling and suppression of Religion, at
least by her connivance and permission, and thereby of the murdering of Souls;
and that with that daring Impudence, till her Sins, this especially, became so
conspicuous, that there was no need of search; and yet at the same time, with
such a stiff Forehead, could so boldly affirm that she was Innocent, and had
not sinned: These, I say, were Sins of such a Sanguine Complexion, and such a
Scarlet Dye, that the Almighty begins to look upon himself as concerned to
vindicate his Honor by a severe castigation of her, lest otherwise the very
Heathen should assume the boldness to demand, Where was now their God, Psalm.
42. 3.
and the Reformation they so much boasted of? And hereupon he resolves to be
unto them as a Lion, Hos. 13 7, 8.
and to observe them as a Leopard in the Way: Amos 9 8. and 6. 8. and 5. 16.
and 7. 9. and 6. 9, 11.
To meet them as a Bear bereaved, and to rent the very Caul of their Heart, and
to devour them. And he purposes to destroy the sinful Kingdom, and to deliver
up the City, and to cause wailing to be in every Street; and they shall go into
Captivity with the first that go Captive; and he determines to lay waste the
Sanctuaries of Israel, and to make desolate the high places of Isaac. To smite
the greater Houses with Breaches, and the little with Clefts, so that if ten
Men should remain in them, they should die. This was the Place, and these the
Persons upon whom this Blood was charged; and these the Plagues allotted for
it, as to their cost they afterward felt.

VI. BUT here in the sixth place, methinks, I espy some one ready to stand up
and to demand of me, To what purpose is all this stir, this fierce declaiming
against the Murderers of Souls? Where are the guilty Parties amongst us? If
the Jews in Jeremiah's time or since, have defiled their Skirts with this
precious Blood, what is that to us, who never were concerned with them therein?
Let them look to it, Nihil est in te, aut circa te, non commaculatem sanguine;
omnia testificantur adversus te, etc. Jun. An.
we for our Parts are clear. But, Nos utinam vani! would to God my complaint
were groundless, and that this Guilt had for ever stuck to those first Skirts
only of the Jewish Church and Nation! For whether we take these [Skirts] as a
Metonymie of a part for the whole (which some do seem to favor,) and so to
imply them allover, and even throughout polluted: Or if with the Septuagint,
(...), we refer them to the Hands, which amounts to almost the same with the
former: Or if, in the third place, we take them in a more restrained Sense, and
thereby shall understand the out-borders only, and Confines of their
Government, (the Skirts being the utmost and extremest parts of a Garment:) In
all these Senses the Text will be applicable, and the Crime chargeable upon us
also, no less than upon Jerusalem.

For to understand the Word in the first Sense, it were easy to expatiate into
too many Instances, which will make good that Sense against us. As in the many
large Parishes, and the slender (or no) provision found in the greatest part;
The small care that is taken for the instructing of Youth, and the more
ignorant both at home and abroad: The grand License allowed to the dispersers
of whatsoever false doctrines the Enemy of Goodness shall inspire his Apostles
and Disciples with. And lastly, in the open venting and defending of Blasphemy
and Atheism, without any hazard to the Blasphemer's Person or Reputation: All
which, as they are in some sort near universal, so they have a most direct and
immediate tendency to the murdering of Souls.

And yet not so much to insist upon these, I shall instance in another, more
suitable to my purpose, and to the Subject in hand; and which, the wholly
unknown to the former Ages of Christianity, is now become frequent in this City
and Kingdom: And that is, the compelling of Persons imported out of Africa, and
other remoter Heathen Regions, but residing in our Families, and Vassals to us,
to remain in their native Gentilism; without any regard to the honor of our
Religion and Nation, any more than to the good of their, or our own Souls. An
Impiety that even here some fifty or sixty years since (and at this day in
other Countries) would render the Authors obnoxious, not only to the public
Censure, but to the Peoples Fury. But with us, even amidst this mighty Zeal,
and stir for Religion (an evident sign that we indeed have none) is suffered
to pass on without contradiction. No one once daring to open his Mouth against
it, or so much as to look the Impiety in the Face: Jer. 9. 3.
They are not so valiant for the truth. Whilst its Enemies have the confidence
and courage openly to bid desiance to it, by this their hindering and opposing
of it.

But I rather choose to take the Word in the more contracted Sense, and so to
understand by these Skirts, the remoter parts only, some out-Provinces of the
Hebrew Government. And then this Text will seem not only an History or
Narrative of this Jewish Impiety, but also a Prophecy of our times, too plainly
and eminently by our People acted and fulfilled in our Plantations. Where you
shall see this Blood of poor Innocent Souls wasted and poured out like so much
Water spilt upon the Ground; and that Sin, which at home seems to be as it were
locked up under the darkest Ciphers, and here attains only the notice of a few,
is there legible in Capital Letters, made evident to the most incurious
Observer, and entered into their very Laws and Records. Thereby striving to
outdo the Jewish Impudence, I have not found it by secret search, as being so
public and notorious to the whole World. Jer. 6. 15.
They are not ashamed at the committing these Abominations; nay, they are not
ashamed, neither can they blush.

Again, there you shall see Myriads of poor hungry Souls imploring the Bread of
Life, but no compassionate Christian affording it to them; Whole Multitudes of
St. Paul's Macedonians calling for our help, Acts 16.
but finding none: Not so much as that Hypocritical Charity of, Be ye warmed
and filled, St. Jam. 2. 16.
being once extended to their distressed and starved Souls. It falls not within
the compass of their thoughts or wishes, the very naming of it being grievous
to their cruel Ears. S. Luke 10. 20.
And thus whilst like the Man in the Gospel, fallen amongst Thieves, they there
lie weltering in their Blood, they meet with no tenderhearted Samaritan to
bind up their Wounds, and to relieve them: No compassionate Angel inviting them
to live; No Messenger nor Interpreter, not even one of a thousand (yea, I may
say, not of ten thousands,) as Elihu in Job speaks, to show unto them his
uprightness, nor to direct them in the way, Chap. 33. 23.
to deliver their Souls from going down into the Pit, nor to make known unto
them, that God has accepted a ransom for them; and this, even whilst they are
drawing nigh unto Hell, and their Life unto the Destroyers. Jer. 5. 27, 28.
For, as our Prophet laments of hi^ People, They are all grievous Revolters
(Apostates) and Corrupters: Ch 6. 13, 28
From the least of them to the greatest of them, Mal. 3 17.
every one is given to Covetousness: Barbaris pro agris and liberate crepta,
fidem Jesu Christi, and vitam hominibus dignam, reddamus. A^ Infideles nullo
modo Christi Baptismum adversantur, quam and capiunt and petunt. Barbaris
revera^si Christus annuntiem: ut opus est, obsequen es and ad credendum faciles
sese exh^bent. Idem.
They overpass the deeds of the most wicked, of other Sects and Religions: They
judge not the cause of the Fatherless, and the right of these needy Souls do
they not judge. Yet they are become great, and waxen rich; they are waxen fat,
they shine and prosper: And, O, where is the God of Judgment!

Nor is this the case of the remoter Natives of those places, such as with whom
they have little intercourse; nor yet of their Borderers and Tributaries only,
(both which might justly claim a share in our Spirituals, whilst we enjoy so
much of their Temporals,) but of their very Domestics and Vassals, those poor
captive Slaves, out of whose Labors they live, and do thrive into vast
Estates. Nor may this be said to be occasioned through any want of Language, at
least in some thousands of them; nor any Stupidity, greater than is found
amongst our own People: Nor any irreconcilable aversion to Christianity, as is
most falsely alleged (the contrary thereof being most true;) but through their
Owners enmity and disaffection thereto. Thereby testifying themselves as
wretched Christians, as they are unconscionable and unjust Masters. St. Joh.
14. 6.
And tho our Blessed Lord has positively declared, Acts 4. 12.
that No man comes to the Father, but by himself; and his Apostle also has
renounced all other ways or means of Salvation, but by Christ only; yet as if
in Contempt and Defiance thereof, they purposely conceal from them this so
absolutely necessary Knowledge of Christ, and, for the general, do even forbid
the mention thereof amongst them, that so they might [not] be saved. And thus
in one and the same Act, they contrive their own, and their Slaves Damnation.
Who, so that their Portion may be fat, Hab. 1. 16.
and their Meat plenteous, and that Trading may flourish, (the advancement
whereof does, it seems, justify the grossest Villainies), they are not ashamed
to debase Men, made in the Image of God (no less than themselves,) and whose
Flesh is as their own; Verse. 14.
even to the Fishes of the Sea, and to the creeping things which have no Ruler
over them. Being frequently heard to confess and to glory, that they came not
thither to promote Religion, nor to save Souls, but to get Money and Estates;
That is, like to the Beasts of the Field, only to devour; Isa. 56. 9.
and, as the Prophet speaks, Looking every Man for his gain from his quarter.
(...) Hes.
And yet, whilst like Sodom, they stick not to declare their Sin, nor do dread
to triumph and boast of their so detestible Abominations; shall neverthelss
presume themselves Innocent, and not doubt to affirm that therein they have not
sinned; nor will be persuaded that they are at all (therefore) to be reputed
the worse Christians. And here, to omit all enquiry into the Equity and Right
of the first purchase, where Parents do sell their Children, Husbands their
Wives, Brothers their Sisters, and so on the contrary: (A most blessed Trade
for the best Reformed Christians to be conversant and employed in!) and in a
Word, Wisd. 2. 11.
where every Man's strength is the Law of Justice: I say, to omit all this,
they hold all their other Cruelties and Oppressions, for nothing; unless to the
enslaving of their Bodies, and wasting them with unmerciful Labor and wretched
Usage, they bring into final Destruction and Bondage their very Souls also. And
here, before I can proceed a step further, I must be so bold as to demand of
whomsever shall please to resolve me, whether the Jews offering up a few
Children to Moloch (which some will have this Text to reprove) the Papists
Superstitions, (against which so many Volumns have been wrote;) the old
Gentiles Idolatry, or even the Turks worshipping Mahomet (all Circumstances
considered;) be comparable to this Sin, among us, viz. of continually
sacrificing so many Bodies to Mammon, and Souls to the Devil; against which no
one has hardly ever yet opened his Mouth.

And thus I think it does but too plainly appear, that these Skirts are not so
much spotted or stained only, as thoroughly wrenched and dyed in this precious
Blood of Souls. And those our out-Provinces are most evidently chargeable with
this most foul and horrid Guilt; far, I dare affirm, beyond whatever has by
Fame been storied to have been practiced, or but permitted by any, besides (yea
hardly by) the most openly avowed Enemies of Christianity. And, which is yet
more astonishing, All this and much more, we find to be tolerated and acted
under Magistrates, and by persons outwardly professors of it, and that in the
most refined and purest way. So strange a mockery and abuse, as by no Hypocrisy
to be paralleled, but by the Jews crying, Hail King unto Christ, S. Mat. 27. 29.
when they were going to crucify him; or by those who murdered their Sovereign
to make him more glorious and renowned! They might doubtless more innocently,
give license and freedom for the erecting public Stews, and Brothel Houses, or
make Proclamation against Justice and common Honesty, than thus to encourage,
or but permit, such Sacriledg and Profaneness to pass without Control.

And whilst those abroad are thus acting and carrying on their Butcheries upon
the Souls of Men there, how quietly and unconcernedly in the mean time do we
sit down here, and take our ease, not once in our thoughts reflecting upon this
Calamity; Perinde quasi, cum membra nostra putrescant, S. Chrysostom.
nihil grave acciderat as a certain Father speaks: As tho, like Cain, we
esteemed all regard of our Brethren to be needless; or like the vile Oppressors
in Nathan's Parable, we had no Bowels nor Compassion; 2 Samuel 12. 6.
or that we believed the rotting and perishing of our Fellow Members, to be a
most desirable and pleasant Object. Yea, we act as tho the Prophet had mistook,
and talked impertinently, when he demanded, Mal. 2. 10.
Have we not all one father, and did not one God create us? Job 31. 15.
And also Job, when he asked, Did not he that made me in the Womb make them,
and did not one fashion us both in the Womb? And even Solomon too, as wise as
he was, (or whoever was the Author of that Book,) Wis. 7. 5, 6.
declaring that no King had other beginning of Birth, than what these have, all
Men having but one entrance into Life, and the like going out. And lastly, as
if St. Paul had uttered an untruth, when he bespeaks us all, Romans 12. 5.
as Members one of another.

And tho in the Captives of Algier's case, as in the late Brief it is
represented, this cruelty to the Souls of Men, is But above all that accursed
Tyranny used toward the Souls of these miserable Wretches, can never
sufficiently be bewailed, who are daily assaulted by these professed Enemies of
Christ to turn Apostates to the Christian Faith, and to deny to at only Name
given under Heaven by which they can be saved: whereby they lie under a
continual Temptation to abandon their Religion, to obtain their liberty. Br.
for Capt. of Algeir.
termed Tyranny and accursed, and made to exceed all other the most Turkish
Barbarities, and is therein declared a Calamity never sufficiently to be
bewailed; yet the very same, or worse, is allowed in our own People; that is,
by Protestants and Englishmen: Our profound Silence being no better than a
constructive approbation; and our Connivance a consenting thereunto. As if such
Tyranny over the Souls of Men were Accursed and never sufficiently to be
bewailed, only in Turks and professed Infidels; or that the same Action were
Virtue in us, but accursed Tyranny in the other. Notwithstanding that those do
therein act most agreeable to their Belief, and for the promoting of their
Faith; which if true, as they suppose it is, is a pious deed, and but what they
were bound to do. And they are therefore beyond all peradventure more
justifiable before God, than such, who whilst owning (I dare not say believing)
the Truth, do yet upon pretense of Interest (which those do therein renounce)
not only conceal, but most industriously decry and oppose the advancement of
it: Yea, and than such other too, who, tho they do not oppose it, yet have
never entered their Protests against those that do. And of both which I cannot
so much as doubt, notwithstanding our accursing the other, S. Mat. 23 14.
but that these shall receive the greater Damnation. And certainly, (all being
impartially weighed) these Mahumetans, as bad as they are, for any thing we can
find, do (herein at least) appear more virtuous than our selves, and must in
the last day rise in judgment and condemn us; and that from no other than our
own Mouths. Chap. 12. 41.
For, if they be accursed for promoting what they think is the Truth, what must
those be that do oppose, (or at best neglect,) what most undoubtedly is so, as
themselves confess? For tho they live in an unpardonable Error, yet because
they do it Ignorantly through unbelief, not knowing it to be either Sin or Error,
but persuaded of the contrary, they are certainly the more excusable. And it
were an unreasonable incongruity to imagine that the God of Mercy and Justice,
should be more ready to punish Errors of Understanding, than wilful Impieties:
But that, if those that have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law;
much more those that have sinned in the Law, (that is, against their
Profession,) shall be judged by it; as St. Paul argues. And as the Wiseman
speaks, that the most mighty Sinners should be mightily tormented; Wis. 6. 6.
whilst Mercy may sooner acquit the other. For, (as St. Paul go's on,) When the
Gentiles which have not the Law, Romans 2. 14.
do by Nature the things contained in the Law; These having not the Law, are a
Law unto themselves, which show the works of the Law written in their Hearts;
their Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts between themselves,
accusing or excusing one another. And now this being considered, what right can
we have thus fiercely to declaim against these Mahometans? concerning whom,
were St. Paul alive to determine the matter; (if but for their Zeal for their
Religion, even false as it is,) in respect of our selves, he, no doubt would
pronounce them Saints.

So that to bring down this Text to Christianity and our own times, we are the
Jerusalem therein charged, and in our Skirts also is this Blood most eminently
discernable. Psalm. 9. 12.
And when God shall arise to make Inquisition for it, as most certainly he
will, at our Hands it must be required. For we are the Watchmen, which should
have warned those wicked Men from their evil ways; Ezekiel. 33.
the Sword came, and we have not blown the Trumpet, nor warned the People, and
therefore their Blood must be upon our Heads. And then it must needs go hard
with us, and that chiefly upon the score of that abundant Light and Knowledge,
and that Purity of Religion we so much boast in. Salv. de gub. Dei.
For, Atrocius sub sanctinomine peccamus, says one; and that Servant which
knew his Masters will, S. Luke 12. 47.
but did it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes, says our Blessed Lord.
Amos 3. 2.
And, you only have I known of all the Families of the Earth: therefore will I
punish you for all your Iniquities, says God by his Prophet. And who knows,
but that our profane Silence, and unchristian connivance thus long together,
at those Spiritual Murders and Soul-depredations, Josh. 7. 11.
are the very accursed thing, which has caused us hitherto not to prosper? And
that for this our supine and shameful neglect of Religion, Acts 13.
and that when those Elymas's abroad, and their wicked Agents here; Those
Enemies, I say, of Righteousness, that do not cease to pervert the right ways
of the Lord; those Soul-Merchants, that in the very Letter of the Text, do
tread under Foot the Son of God, and (as it were) crucify him afresh, Heb. 6.
6. and 10. 29.
and put him to an open shame, and that account his Blood an unholy thing, 1 Samuel 3. 13.
and do each hour do dispite unto the Spirit of Grace. I say, when these, like
Eli's lewd Sons, have made themselves vile, by the Blood of so many Innocent
Souls, and we restrained them not, (no not by Word or Writing, and (so far at
least) to have vindicated God's Honor and Truth against them;) Who, I say,
knows, but for this, Our God has hitherto put us to Silence, and given us
Water of Gaul to drink, and that when we looked for Peace, no good came; Jer.
8. 14, 15, 17.
and for a time of Health, and behold Trouble. And that he has sent those
Serpents and Cockatrices among us, which will not be charmed; and that he has
hedged up our way with Thorns, and caused all our Mirth to cease: Hos. 2. 6, 11.
That he has set us against each other, Isa. 19. 2, 3.
every one against his Brother, and against his Neighbor; yea, City against
City, and even these against themselves: And that our Spirit does fail in the
midst of us. That God has destroyed our Counsels, and mingled a perverse
Spirit in the midst of us, and has caused us to err in every work, and that we
are afraid even in our selves. And then, might it not to be demanded of us, as
our Prophet here does of Jerusalem, Verse. 19.
Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the
Lord, when he led thee by the way, and had done such great things for thee? I
shall not here stand to enquire how agreeable to Christianity, which commands
us, First to seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, St. Mat. 6. 33.
and then afterward to look after other less necessary things, (a Precept very
idle and ridiculous amongst this sort of Christians:) Nor how suitable the
pretense of Trade and Commerce is to that undergoing of the Cross and
self-denial, S. Luke 9. 23.
and to that condition of forsaking all, S. Mat. 10. 37.
by our Lord prescribed to all his Followers: but shall only observe, that if
St. Peter was by the same meekest Lord termed a Devil, S. Mark. 8. 33.
for his too carnal respecting, not his own, but the same blessed Masters
outward Ease and Tranquillity, to the prejudice of the World's Salvation; he
will certainly for ever disclaim those Mammonists, who prefer their Trade and
their Merchandise before him, as unworthy of him. And if Job's Inference be
good, Job 31. 24, 28.
that to make Gold our Hope, is to deny the God that is above; doubtless their
Christianity must be very desperate, who do the same by their Trade: S. Mar. 8.
38.
Christ will one day deny all such denyers of him before his Father, and the
Holy Angels.

Wherefore, Genesis 9. 5, etc. comp. with Heb. 6. 13, 14, 17.
since God has signed this eternal Precept of Blood for Blood, and has as it
were sworn, That he will require the Blood of our Lives, at the Hand of every
Man's Brother; yea, and of the very Beasts too; Number. 35. 31, 33.
and has also in several places no less positively declared, That no
satisfaction shall be accepted for the Life of a Murderer; and that a Land
defiled with Blood, cannot be cleansed of it, but by the Blood of him that did
shed it; all which is to be referred only to the Body: What Punishment can we
suppose answerable to this so much more horrid Crime of murdering of Souls? If
Blood for Blood, and Life for Life must go for the one, certainly then Soul for
Soul here, is the least that can be required. Rev. 6. 10.
How long Lord God, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood upon
them that dwell upon the Earth, was the incessant cry of the Souls under the
Altar. Jos. Ant. Jud.
And Abel's Blood is said to have pursued Cain to his very Grave; it is certain
it cried for vengeance against him. Genesis 4.
And yet 'twas but Abel's Body, Verse. 23,
not his Soul, that was murdered. Had Cain been guilty of this, Lamech's
revengeful hand had made but a very defective and sorry expiation: The
Brimstone-lake must then have been his Portion; as undoubtedly it will be, of
all impenitent Murderers of Souls. And then, How will those Mammonists remain
in the gaul of Bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity? And our Apostats and
Hypocrites be confounded and tremble, when they shall most sensibly feel
themselves perishing together with their impious Money, Acts 8.
which was the price of Souls? And then they shall be admirably convinced that
they were but Fools indeed for thus determining their Hopes, and fixing their
whole expectation upon the things of this Life, for the getting whereof, they
sinned against their own, and murdered their Peoples Souls. And finally, they
shall be pronounced Children of the Devil, Acts 13.
because Enemies of Righteousness, that is, of the Gospel: And Christ himself,
whom they thereby have so Impudently affronted and denied (not ignorantly, S.
Luke 23. 34.
and as the Jews, who knew not what they did;) shall speak them into an Hell as
black as that dark Mist, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
which fell upon Elymas's Eyes, only for an infinite longer continuance. Where
they shall know and see, to use our Prophet's Expression, Verse. 19.
That it was an evil thing and a bitter, that they forsook the Lord, and that
his fear was not in them: And they shall too late come to understand that it
is, Heb. 10 31.
A fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God; and that no
condition is more insupportable, than To dwell in everlasting Burnings, Isa.
33. 14.
with Hypocrites and Unbelievers; where there is no rest for them Night nor
Day, Rev. 18. 9, 18, and Chapter 19. 20.
and the smoke of their Torments ascends for ever and ever: And from whence
they shall enviously behold many of those poor Lazars, those oppressed innocent
Souls, who by God's especial Providence may have escaped their merciless and
bloody Talons, S. Luke 16.
resting and rejoicing in Abraham's Bosom; and singing the song of Moses and of
the Lamb for their wonderful Deliverance, whilst themselves are tormented in
that Flame. Rev. 15. 3.
It must needs be, said our Blessed Savior, S. Mat. 18. 7.
that Offenses (that is, whereby Men are made or induced to Sin) do come; S.
Luke 17. 1.
but woe unto that Man by whom the Offense comes; It were better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea. And thus I have made good my first six Points, and here in this last
have showed, the Relation that this Text has unto us, and how far our selves
are chargeable with this Guilt of shedding the Blood of Souls: Whereby I am at
liberty to proceed unto

VII. THE seventh and last part of my Discourse, wherein I am to prove from our
Prophet's severe Reprehension of Jerusalem, (no less than from the
reasonableness of the thing) the absolute and most indispensible necessity of
our speedy Reformation, and redressing of this Abuse (this being the true end
of all Reprehensions:) and that especially upon these three following
Considerations:

First, In respect of the great Impiety thereof.

Secondly, In respect of the Dishonor from thence redounding to this Church
and Nation, and to the whole Reformation.

Thirdly, In respect of God's Judgments, which most undoubtedly must be the
inevitable Consequences of our longer persisting in this so profane and
scandalous practice, and permission of such an horrid Impiety, and open
contempt of Christianity. I shall begin with

The First, Wis. 11. 26.
which is the Impiety thereof: It being an Injury against God himself, who is a
lover of Souls, and that to that degree, that he above all things desires their
Happiness and Salvation: But whose gracious design of bringing those Souls unto
that state of Bliss and Happiness by Christ, we, as much as in us lies, do
hereby make void and frustrate, and do even defeat that his blessed purpose,
for which, as must be piously supposed, he was pleased to discover unto us, and
possess us of those many rich and fruitful Countries, viz. This was once the
Sense of most of our English Writers.
The publishing and spreading abroad of the Gospel amongst the first
Inhabitants and Natives there, with other like Gentiles, who might arrive
thither from other parts.

It is a most vile Affront to Christianity, as implying the no esteem we have
for it, as if not worth the troubling the World therewith; which disesteem must
first arise from a Principle of Infidelity and Atheism first lodged in the
Heart, as is before showed. It was the Barbarians of Japan's Argument, in
behalf of our trading Neighbors (whose Zeal also to Religion does not much
outstrip ours) that, according to their Word, they took them to be no
Christians, because they perceived not in them any endeavors for the promoting
of that Faith. An Indifferency, they observed, not usual with other sorts of
Christians; and it being no way probable, they thought, that Men should so much
neglect and slight a Religion, which themselves believed. It makes Christianity
inferior to all other Sects, whose Zealots (especially) are known, even to
compass Sea and Land to make Proselites to their Opinions. It makes it a
Religion only for Trade and Commerce, and even Heaven and Salvation to be of
less moment than the getting of Money: It makes it a Patroness of the grossest
Immanities, for filthy Lucre; and no less implies an Imposture in the first
publishers of it, (or at best some mistake of their Errand,) if whilst they
persuaded Men to forsake the World for the attaining of Heaven, they only
designed the heaping up of Riches, 1 S. Joh. 4.
as of the greater Importance. It also destroys Charity, which is the true mark
of a Child of God, and the badge of a Christian, whose proper nature and
quality is, tho to begin at home, yet to enlarge it self to others, even our
very Enemies. And in a word, it is no other than an absolute deposing and
rejecting of Christ, for the Exaltation of Mammon.

Lastly, It is a reproach to Humanity it self, and a Sin of the blackest
quality against our Neighbor; whom we herein are so far from loving as our
selves, that it rather seems the utmost effort of our Malice against him, and
which no Revenge could satisfy, but such only as should terminate in the
destruction of his Soul. And so much for the first. But then,

Secondly, This ought to be reformed in respect of the Dishonor from thence
redounding to our Church and Nation, and even to the whole Reformation. First,
to the Church: For it occasions her Enenemies to blaspheme. E. W. in his
Discourse of Miracles.
Hence a certain Romanist demands of us, Where are the indefatigable
Missioners, sent by you to the remotest parts of the World, for the conversion
of Heathens? A noble Function, wherein the Catholic (that is their Roman)
Church only, and most justly glories; whilst you like lazy Drones, sit at home
not daring to wet a Foot, etc. And by another it is objected against both our
selves, and our equally zealous Neighbors, That never any thing for the
propagation of Christianity in foreign parts, has by either Nation been at any
time attempted. And from thence, a third Person very roundly infers the Nullity
of our Church and Religion, viz. Because we have no Zeal, therefore no Faith,
and therefore no Church nor Religion among us.

Again, when the great Industry of our People in New England shall be
rehearsed, their converting of Nations, turning the whole Bible into the Indian
Tongue; their College built and endowed, for the Education of Indian Youth:
Their Missioners sent forth, and Lands purchased for their Maintenance; and all
this out of a barren Soil, some sixty years since no better than a rocky
Wilderness; whilst ours out of better Conveniences, and more happy
Opportunities (such are our grateful returns!) have not produced the least
Grain of Harvest to God's Glory in those Parts. But upon all occasions shifting
it off with the unfitness of the Season, Hag. 1. 2.
and pretending that the time is not come; proclaiming it unpracticable and
impossible, tho effected by others of smaller Abilities: Prove. 22. 13.
Or, like Solomon's Sluggard, setting up Lions and Tigres in the way; raising
Obstructions and creating Difficulties; when upon experience there are no such
to be found. Now when these mighty Works shall be hereafter rehearsed, how will
that glorious Name of the Church of England, stand as it were in disgrace, not
only among those Primitive Worthies, who at first so cheerfully entered upon
this Work, and afterward endured the heat of the Day; but when compared even
with these Moderns, whom we bespeak as Schismatics and Idolaters; yet do each
of them give those Testimonies of their Zeal and Charity, which are equally
requisite, and would be no less commendable in us also. But the want whereof
does furnish them with such Advantages and Arguments against us, as would
become our Wisdom, no less than our Piety, to remove. Who whilst themselves do
thus labor, and are at charge and trouble to advance [their] Christianity,
beholding our COLDNESS and INDIFFERENCY (not to say Aversion to the work,) do
publish their own Acts, but at the same time first at our (too much!) secular
Affections, as applying our care more to the promoting of Interest, than to the
advancement of God's Glory, or the good of Souls: The Poverty of the Cause,
that is, say they, the want of Dignities and Preferments (tho it be the way to
make them), occasioning it hitherto to lie fallow. And they are too apt often
to throw out something like that of Acosta, in reproof of his alike rapacious
and hungry Spaniards, De procur. Ind. Salut. l. 3.
thus speaking; At si metalla curari desierint, -- Actum est Indorum negotium,
and respublica interiit. Neque alios fructus Hispani quaerunt, neque alia ex
causa vel mercatores negotiantur, vel judices praesident, vel ipsi quoque
plerunque SACERDOTES Evangelizant, etc. Which I shall not English. And this
has been publicly objected by those of the lowest from and order of
Sectaries, as I have in Who made you Ministers of the Gospel to the White
People only, and not to the Tawneys and Blacks? Fox the Quaker to the Ministers
of Barbados. See p. 4. of the Negro's Advocate. Lam. 4. 3.
another Discourse upon this occasion, before remembered. And not only these
extremes in Christianity, but the quite different behavior and respect of the
very Mahumetans to their Religion, may justly stir up shame in us: Whose
assaulting their Slaves, with tenders of Liberty, thereby to induce them to
espouse their Superstition, is by us complained of; perhaps for the example,
and because the like Generosity and Zeal for Religion is not found among our
selves; nor are we capable of being provoked to the least Emulation. Thus even
the Sea Monsters draw out, (that is, do willingly offer) the Breast, and give
suck to their young Ones, said Almighty God by our Prophet, But the Daughter of
my People is become cruel, like the Ostriches in the Wilderness.

Nor does the Dishonor hereof reflect upon this Church only, but upon the
whole Reformation. Hence the forementioned Roman Author thus triumphantly
insults, E. W. in an answer to the D. of S. P.
If you cast your thoughts upon all Sectaries, past and present, since
Christianity began, you shall find no conversion of Nations wrought by any:
Which he elsewhere further explains, saying, That never any Protestants did any
thing like them, for the conversion of Infidels, either in the nearer or
farther parts of the large Universe. Hence also they stick not to affirm our
Reformation monstrous, and from this so apparent Sterility, do very confidently
determine of its short-livedness; because that things by God and Nature
designed to perpetuity, are always endued with a Faculty of Generation, and of
creating their like. So that our Protestant Churches do from all Hands lie
under most heavy Censures and Reproaches, for this neglect, and (as it is
represented) unfaithfulness to Christ; at least for not endeavoring, not what
should, but what might be done. And yet, to our honor be it spoken, we undergo
them with as much Patience and Vnconcernedness as if the Enemy only were
chargeable therewith, and our selves were Innocent. Although, to use our Prophets
Words, should we pass over to the Isles of Chittim, Verse. 10.
and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently; that is, should we consult the
most Pagan and Barbarous Regions, and even ransack thewide Universe, searching
into all the different Sects and Factions in Religion for a Precedent, we
should hardly find the like Instances of Impiety and Contempt of the Religion
they profess, practiced and persisted in by the very worst and loosest of them.
And this possibly among other things has rendered our Religion (as reformed)
less esteemed by Strangers: unto whom, especially herein, we seem rather
Apostates than Christians; Zealous of Trade and Gain, but not of good Works.
Which doubtless has been no small Impediment and Hinderance to many in their
coming over to our Church, even as (probably) it may have scandalized not a few
to an Apostasy from it.

Lastly, Rev. 18. 13.
It is a dishonor and that in an especial manner to our English Nation. Nah.
3. 16.
It both was and will be the Eternal Reproach, no less than the unpardonable
Sin of those Styes of Filthiness, Babylon and Nineveh, that the first, among
her variety of Merchandises, had (...); not only Bodies, but Souls of Men; and
that the other (for it seems they were both great trading places) did postpone
God's Glory to her Traffic; (...) from (...) signifying multus, magnus,
honorabilis, inclytus ob multiplices quibus pollet dignitates. Pagn. See also
Job. 32. 9 Psalm. 48. 2. Isa. 19. 20. and 53. 10, etc.
magnifying, or preferring, her Traders (or Merchants) above the Stars of
Heaven. And certainly it will be no great Credit for us to have thus exactly
written after those beastly Copies; that we have as it were conspired with
Satan, and entered into a confederacy with Hell it self, upon the same account:
That we have exceeded the worst of Infidels, by our first enslaving, and then
murdering of Men's Souls. For, how can it be endured that a Nation once so
famous for Zeal and Piety, should now at last become infamous for Irreligion?
That she should prostrate her self to that foul Idol Mammon, and worship Trade?
So that for the sake thereof Christianity should be stifled and rejected? That
being so much indebted to those poor Barbarians, for the Riches, Trade and
Commerce, both by, and from them acquired, we should be so far destitute of
common Justice, as not to be ready, as much as in us lies (and certainly very
much does lie in us, Romans 1.
notwithstanding all our vain pretenses) in lieu thereof, to impart some
spiritual Gift, as St. Paul speaks, and to make known the Gospel unto them? Who
can believe that a People formerly so mighty in Conversions, as if, on a sudden
struck with Barrenness and a Curse, should become so utterly fruitless, as not
to be able to produce the least Access of Souls unto Christ, out of such
Multitudes and Myriads, who do even invite, and offer themselves to his
Service? That we should be so much outdone who formerly did so infinitely
out-doe all others? These, if true, are I fear, but too evident Symptoms of a
strange degeneracy, of a declining old Age and Decrepitness in us; and which
cannot be far removed from our last fatal Period, and final Dissolution; and
that God is determining of us, S. Luke 13. 7.
as he once did of the Barren Fig Tree, Cut it down, why cumbers it the Ground.
And this leads me to

The third and last Motive to this Reformation, viz. The dread of those Plagues
and Judgments, which this Impiety, if longer persisted in, must necessarily
draw down upon us. In the first Queen Elizabeth Act for Uniformity, there is
extent a certain Clause containing an Adjuration, in God's Name earnestly
requiring the due and true execution thereof, as they should answer to Almighty
God for such Evils and Plagues wherewith he might justly punish the neglect of
it. So that it seems in those Days, there was some apprehension of Plagues and
Judgments to follow Impiety and the neglect of Religion. Nay, long before that,
the Persian Monarch Artaxerxes, was not wholly insensible of the same, when he
issued forth that strict Decree for the speedy re-edifying of the Temple,
fortified with this Reason, For why should there be wrath upon the Realm of the
King, Ezr. 7 23.
and of his Sons? It Is true, some Apostate Israelites, before their Captivity,
(to save themselves the labor of reforming their Lives), we read, had fallen
into a most abominable practice of scoffing at, and denying Providence,
affirming, Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 9. 9.
That the Lord had forsaken the Earth; or, tho he had not, yet that he did
neither good nor evil. Zeph. 1. 12.
But these, it seems, by a hard Journey they afterward made to Babylon, Chap.
1. 6.
became in a short time better instructed: For upon an Appeal, which the
Prophet Zechariah made to the Children of these profane Scoffers, whether
God's Words and his Statutes, which he had commanded by his Servants the former
Prophets, had not overtaken their stubborn Fathers; They, in despite of their
proud Hearts, were forced to confess, That like as the Lord had purposed to do
unto them, according to their ways, and according to their doings, even so had
he dealt with them. And, Have thou not procured this unto thy self, Verse. 17.
says our Prophet here in the Text, in that thou have forsaken the Lord, when
he led thee by the way? And hereupon the Prophet Hosea does not doubt to
declare God's Judgments for Sin, Chap. 6. 5.
to be as clear as the Light that goes forth.

There are then Judgments for Sin: Zech. 5. 1.
There is a flying Roll which brings a Curse along with it: Lev. 14. 37, 44, 45.
There is a Leprosy in the Wall, which rotts and consumes the Timber, and eats
out the stone-work thereof. And why then must this above all other escape, this
so black a Sin of Irreligion? which strikes directly at God himself; and
therefore as good old Eli reproving his wicked Sons, says, is the hardest to
be entreated for; And of which God had bound it with a most solemn Oath, 1 Samuel
3. 14.
that it should not be purged with Sacrifice nor burnt-Offering for ever:
(...). S. Gr. Naz. loqu. de Herod. and Pilato.
And rather than let it go unpunished, (...), as St. Gregory speaks, God does
often cause even Contrarys to unite and agree together, for to effect it. This
was it which at first brought the Deluge upon the Earth, and reduced the whole
World to but one small Family. For before the Flood, says Berosus, the Giants
were, Contemptores Religionis and Deorum: Genesis 6.
Agreeable to that of Moses, God saw that the wickedness of man was great;
whereupon ensued that severe Determination, I will destroy Man, whom I have
created, from off the Face of the Earth. And (to bring one Instance for all of
our own Country), To this very Sin, viz. of neglecting to preach the Gospel to
the Saxons and Englishmen, Ven. Bed. Hist.
it is, that Gildas ascribes his Britains overthrow. Eccl. Angl.


And can we then persist in the same (tho clogged with abundance of aggravating
Circumstances,) and not live under a fearful expectation of God's Judgments due
for it? Exodus 32.
How can we read of Aaron's Calf, Josh. 7^
of Achan's Wedg, 2 Samuel 21.
of Saul s massacring the Gibeonites, Israel's Apostasy, 1 King. 12.
and Judah's Abominations, with the various Calamities and Mischiefs pursuant
thereupon; 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, etc.
And, if we believe them, not at the same time dread the like or worse, for
this so much more horrible Irreligion, and equally Universal? And since these
did prove such fatal pull-backs to them, can any less be the Issue of this more
inexcusable Wickedness; this so palpable Elymasm, if I may so call it? And if
God has been pleased to chastise mere Heathens for their Enmity to his
Religion, Zech. 14.
with which, it is possible, they were wholly unacquainted, and has threatened to
smite with most grievous Plagues, Job 31.
those Infidel Regions and Kingdoms, who have not called upon his Name, of
which happily they had not heard? what portion of God from above, or Mercy can be
extended to those, who as it were in a profane mockery of profesing his Name,
(and that too in the most refined and purest manner) have been actual Enemies
thereto; And that, under the disguise of the greatest Zeal for it even in this
its Purity, have been the Stiflers and Betrayers of it, only in favor of their
accursed Mammon? Certainly if ever Judgments do fall, it must be upon such; and
of all Judgments, none beneath the most calamitous and the most lasting.

And tho other Punishments (a thing next to impossible) should fail, yet the
divine Vengeance may stir up these very (Soul-oppressed People, as it did the
Arabians and the Philistines against wicked Joram, and make them the Rods of his
Anger to chastise this Sin: 2 Chro. 21. 16.
That so their own wickedness may correct them, and their own backslidings
reprove them: Verse. 19.
and that they may know and see, that it was an evil thing and a bitter that
they have thus forsaken the Lord their God, and that his Fear was not in them,
as our Prophet speaks. And that by such a severe Discipline (nothing less being
like to be of force so as to work upon them) they may be brought to understand
(as the Holy Scripture speaks of Rehoboam's Invasion by Shishack) the
difference between God's Service, 2 Chronicles. 12. 8.
and the Service of the Kingdoms of the Countries, that is, of the wild and
barbarous Heathen. And that what they do so frequently most blasphemously give
out, as the mischievous effect of Christianity, may through the want of it, be
brought upon them; and that, by the same Sin wherewith they have sinned, Wisd.
they may be punished: And so in the end, they may with that inhuman Tyrant
Adonibezeck, be compelled to acknowledge God's Justice in requiting them, Judge.
1. 7.
even as they have done unto others.

And then for such at home, who have so patiently over-looked the Sufferings
and Miseries of Religion in those parts, and have been at least unconcerned
Spectators, tho perhaps not actual Partakers in those bloody Tragedies, Mich.
3. 11.
and therefore may lean upon the Lord, and presume, Ezekiel. 13.
that no evil shall happen unto them; those soft Pillows which they thus plant
under their seared Consciences, will but deceive them; and the untempered
Mortar with which they plaster over their Impiety, will be in like danger of
being washed away by the overflowing Shower. For, Jupiter being offended, does
punish all, said the Poet; and in common Judgments and Calamities, it is not
only the most guilty that are seized, as in the several Captivities of Tobit
and of Daniel are to be seen. By whose means the Name of God came to be
discovered to the Heathen, who might otherwise have never heard of it. Even as,
Acts 11. 19.
long afterward, the Persecution which attended S. Stephen's Martyrdom, was an
occasion (for by nothing less will Men be persuaded to adventure abroad, tho
upon never so important an account) of dispersing the Disciples, and thereby a
happy means of introducing the knowledge of Christ into remoter Countries. Even
such a Fatality may this unconcernedness draw upon these: An unexpected Storm
may force them into the parts we are speaking of, (and where these Impieties
are so eminently practiced) as unto a Sanctuary and Refuge; there, as our
Apochryphal Esdras relates of his Captive Israelites, to keep those Statutes,
(I shall also add) and to promote that Faith, 2 Esdr. 13. 42.
which they neither kept, nor thought needful, whilst remaining in their own
Land.

Wherefore, (to use the Prophet Daniel's Advice to King Nebuchadnezzar), Chap.
4. 27.
Let my Council be acceptable unto you, O my Fathers, and Contrymen, and let
us break off our Sins by Righteousness, and our Iniquities by showing Mercy
unto the Souls of these poor innocent oppressed people, if it may be a
lengthning of our Tranquillity, as undoubtedly it will. And in order thereunto,
let us lay before us these things, and consider within our own Breasts, whether
this dishonor to our Religion, and infamy to our Church and Nation, this
canker to our Estates, calamity to our People, and destruction to our Country,
hereby threatened; these plagues to our Bodies, and Damnation to our Souls, be
things so worthy our standing out against God, and our contending for. Rather
let us endeavor a speedy composure and reconciliation: At once striving to
make (at least) some kind of reparation for what is past, and no less joining
in all laudable Proposals and ways for effecting these poor Peoples
Christianity, without any further delays; still remembering that things of this
Consequence are not to be made light of, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
(as was very piously discoursed to the great, and no less zealous S.
Athanasius, upon the like occasion;) and considering that as many Souls as
shall perish through our neglect, must be charged to our Account. And first let us
search into the Cause, that so we may the easier arrive at the method and means
of the Cure. If it be Interest, let it be satisfied, as far as reasonably it
may be; if Ignorance, let it be corrected by better advice; if Sloth or
Irreligion, let it be checked and disgraced; not let any Obstinacy or
Perverseness be endured. If Without which nothing ^herein can ever be expected
ENCOVRAGEMENTS be needful, let them be no longer wanting; if Persuasions, let
them be discreetly applied; but above all, let us show our selves hearty and
sincere therein: armed with most intense resolutions of persistance and
persevering, until arrived to its Accomplishment. That so we may silence the
Slanderer and the Blasphemer, Neh. 2. 10. and 6. 1.
stop the Mouths of both Papists and Schismatics, and take away the reproach
from our Church and Nation. That those Sanballats and Elymas's, the restless
Obstructers of this work, despairing of their wonted Success, may be wearied
out of, and be made to desist from their profane Opposition; even as the old
Heathens were of their Persecutions. Juxta Septuag. v. 4.
For, nothing is able to withstand Zeal, says Solomon, Chap. 6. 34.
Prove. 27. For, Zelus est aestus viri, Zeal is the heat and ardency of a Man to
the thing undertaken, as the same Wiseman has it in another place. And, Cant.
8. 6. (...), Zeal is as invincible as the Grave, or even Death it self; and as
it goes on, The Coals thereof are the Coals of Fire, Cant. 8. 6.
which has a most vehement Flame, such a Flame as many Waters cannot quench,
nor can the Floods drown it; that is, nothing can be too hard for. And here let
us call to mind that the Gospel has once overcome the World, armed with its
full strength and force to withstand it: And what a shame would it be now,
after so long possession, to suffer it to be baffled and worsted, by a few
handfuls of scattered Inerm Outlaws.

Nor let any noise or pretense arising from the supposed difficulty of this
work, (which Men fuller of Mischief, than of Reason or Religion, do create)
affright us; nor any excuse from the remoteness of the places, nor the
condition of the parties, be at all mentioned; Our God being a God of the
Valleys, 1 King. 20. 23.
no less than of the Mountains; and afar off, as well as near at hand; Jer. 23.
23.
and it being not to be doubted, but that a most plentiful Harvest might be
thence obtained from suitable endeavors, edged and heartened with due
ENCOVRAGEMENTS. Nor of the time, no time being unseasonable to serve God, and
to do good in. Nor from the present posture of Affairs, which this very neglect
may have but too much influenced, and given occasion to; And then the cause
being removed, the effect must presently cease. For Piety and Holiness, Tull.
Off.
says the Orator, do appease God's Wrath; and says Solomon, Prove. 16. 7.
When a Man's way do please the Lord, he makes his Enemies to be at peace with
him: Isa. 32. 17.
And likewise Isaiah, The work of Righteousness is Peace, and the effect of
Righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever: And says devout Ezra, Ezr.
8. 22.
The Hand of our God is upon all them for good, that seek him. Nay, even
Heathen Rome went not without her Blessing for her Piety; For,

Diis te minorem quod geris, Imperas, L. 3. Ode. 6.
Was Horace's Divinity; Live. l. 1.
and no less an Article of Levie's Faith, when he tell us, that during King
Numa's long reign, this very thing, viz. their Piety struck their (before
troublesome) Neighbors into a dread of molesting them; for fear, lest at the
same time they should be injurious to God, unto whose Worship and Service they
saw them so intensely addicted. Now if their Piety was thus rewarded; why
should not we expect the same? our Religion and Service being so much purer,
and infinitely more agreeable to God's Will, than theirs, in probability, could
possibly be. The Prophet David assures us, That when all the People should
praise God, Psalm. 67. 5, 6.
then should the Earth bring forth her increase. The Jews were to date Their
Blessing from the very day of the laying of the Foundation of the Temple: Hag.
2. 18, 19.
And may not we much more hope for the like Prosperity and Happiness to our
Church and Nation, 2 Samuel 6. 12.
for our laying a Foundation, and setting about this so much greater and more
glorious Work? Genesis 30. 27.
He doubtless that blessed Obed Edom for his Ark's resting in his House, and
Laban the Syrian for Jacob's sake, will send his Blessing upon us also; Job 33.
22.
whilst by our charitable and pious Labors, and our unwearied and faithful
Idustry in this his sacred Vineyard, 2 S. Tim. 2. 26.
we do become Instruments in God's Hand to save Men's Souls from Hell, and
their Lives from the Destroyers; and do deliver such from the Snares of the
Devil, who are taken Captive at his Will. And no less also for his Churches
establishment in those parts, and for the many faithful Israelites, with which
it will be replenished, S. Joh. 4.
through the numerous and large access unto it from these Nations. Heb. 6. 10.
The happy fruit and benefit whereof will redound, as well to the Sower as to
the Reaper. For God is not unrighteous, that he should forget our Work and
Labor that proceeds of Love, which we have or shall show for his Name and
his Gospel's Sake. Nor can any one lay out his Endeavors to greater
Advantages, either of the increase of God's Kingdom, the glory of Christianity,
De proc. Ind.
or the good of Men's Souls; If we consider the vast multitudes of these
Nations, Sal. l. 6. c. ult.
the greatness of their danger, and their both aptness, and readiness to
embrace Christianity, if duly applied to them. For as Acosta has proclaimed it
to the World long since, Indorum [and Aethiopum] certe copiosissimam and
paratissimam segetem cernimus, neque aliud quam falcem Evangelicam expectantem;
-- Alacritate admirabili sese Coelorum regno aptissimam proclamantem, invidorum
and segnium calumnias facile propulsantem, operarios ipsos laetissime
allicientem, and multitudine and ubertate oculos omnium ad sese atque animos
convertentem, etc. Which is no less true of them in every particular, even at
this very day, could we be persuaded to use the means, and to set about it. But
Oh! as the same Author does most passionately lament, (tho with infinite less
cause than we have here,) 1 Samuel 7.
When will it come to pass that Men will cease to be Men? Number. 21. 9.
When, etc.

This will be the true removal of the Accursed thing; the putting away those
Baalims and Ashtaroths, the false Gods and the false Religions that are amongst
us; The dismission of the captivated Ark; The true Brazen Serpent to our
Israel, deriving Health to our Bodies, and Prosperity to our Nation, and the
alone means both to secure and promote our Interest in those parts. 1 Samuel 6.
This will be the means to rid our Country of those Vermin and Diseases, Prove.
51.
the Mice and Emerods, that do so vex our Persons, and mar our Land: This the
repairing of the Breaches, and the rebuilding the shattered Walls of our
Jerusalem. And we no longer deferring to give to the God of Israel the Glory
due unto his Name, he will lighten his hands from off us, and from off our
Gods, and from off our Land.

Lastly, Orat. Dom^ Coll. for all Cond. of Men. Coll for Good Friday.
This will be to comply with our daily Prayers, viz. That God's Name may be
hallowed, and his ways made known unto all Nations and Conditions of Men
therein, and that all Jews, Turks, Heretics, and Infidels may be converted to
the Faith, and saved among the remnant of the true Israelites. And without
which our Prayers are but a very Mockery, S. Mat. 15 8.
and an Affront to the Diety, unto whom they are presented. Which whosoever
utters, cannot but at the same time be inwardly convinced of that Pharisaical
Hypocricy, S. Luke 19. 20.
which our blessed Lord so severely rebuked, of drawing nigh unto God with his
Mouth, and honoring him with his Lips, whilst his Heart is far from him; and
for which, Exore tuo, will be his Judgment and Condemnation, Out of thine
ownmouth will I judge thee, thou wicked and slothful Servant.

To conclude, It is the nature of God to do the good, as says St. Dionysius
the Areopagite; Every one then that will be like unto him, must first fall to
the Imitation of him. One of the Fathers has this Note, That the Salvation of
Man, Tertul.
was, Opus dignum Deo, an Employment not unbecoming God himself; It cannot then
be beneath even the best of us. And there is a saying of S. Chrysostom to this
purpose, That for a Man to know the Art of Alms, was more than to be crowned
with the Diadem of Kings: but to convert one Soul unto God, was more than to
pour out ten thousand Talents into the Baskets of the poor. And if the
Conversion of a very few unto Christ be worth the labor of many all their
days; Prove. 11. 30.
what must it then be to be the Instruments and Means of converting so many?
Dan. 12.
Solomon ascribes the Epithet of Wise, to those that win Souls: And says the
Prophet Daniel, They that be wise, ('it is Teachers in the Margent) shall shine
as the brightness of the Firmament, Chap. 5. ult.
and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever: And
S. James makes it almost meritorious, Let him know, says he, that he that
converteth a Sinner from the Error of his way* shall save a Soul from Death,
and shall hide a multitude of Sins.

I shall end all with that devout Prayer of Syracides for the Conversion of the
Heathen: Ecclus. 36. 1, etc.

Have Mercy upon us, O Lord God of all, and behold us:

And send thy fear upon all the Nations that seek not after thee.

Lift up thy hand against the strange Nations, and let them see thy power.

As thou wasty sanctified in us before them: so be thou magnified among them
before us.

And let them know thee, as we have known thee, that there is no God, but only
thou, O Lord.

Show new Signs, and make other strange Wonders: glorify thy Hand and thy right
Arm, that they may set forth thy wondrous Works.

Raise up Indignation, and pour out Wrath: take away the Adversary, and destroy
the Enemies of thy Truth.

Make the time short, remember the Covenant, and let them declare thy wondrous
Works.

Smite in sunder the Heads of those that say, There is none other but we, and
let them perish that oppress thy People.

O be merciful to Jerusalem thy holy City, the place of thy Rest.

Fill Sion, that it magnify thine Oracles, and thy People, that they may set
forth thy Glory.

Give Testimony to those whom thou have possessed from the beginning: and raise
up Prophets that may speak in thy Name: and let thy Prophets be found faithful.

O Lord hear the Prayer of thy Servants, according to the Blessing of Aaron
over thy People, that all they which dwell upon the Earth may know that thou
art the Lord, the Eternal God. Amen.

FINIS.

