A SERMON Preached at St. Olave Southwark, September the 8th, 1700. Occasioned
by the Recantation of Dr. Joh. Spire, lately a Quaker; Which said Recantation
is added at the end.

By JOHN HASLEWOOD, D. D. Rector of St. Olave Southwark.

Published at the Request of the Persons concerned, and several others of that
Parish.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Black Boy in Fleet Street over against
St. Dunstans-Church, 1700.

TO THE READER.
IT is not a trifling desire of appearing in Print (to which possibly I have as
great an averseness as any one can conclude from what he shall here read, I
ought to have) that has prevailed upon me to publish this following Discourse,
which labors under a double disadvantage of being composed in have, and upon a
Text chosen for me, by him at whose Request it was Preached, but a sincere
endeavor to inform some mistaken honest People of the dangerousness of those
Principles, which are here laid open, that they may leave them; and to
establish others who have already left them; to both which purposes, some who
heard it, have been so favorable as to think it may be useful. But whether it
will or no, I must leave to your judgments. However such as it is, I offer it
up to you, hoping that if it fall short of other Peoples expectations, it may
reach my own design, which was to be as helpful as I could to any that should
need such assistance. And if by that means I can contribute in the least to the
advancement of God's Glory, it is no matter for my own.

Isaiah 55.3. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your Soul shall
live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David.


THis Chapter is made up of Precepts and Promises, for in it God not only makes
his will known, and declares after what manner he will have Men to address
themselves to him; but encourages them to Obedience by the assurance of a
Reward, which though in the Letter it be carnal, yet in its true meaning is
spiritual; for though God promises his People, that upon the forsaking of
Idols, he would bring them out of Babylon, and make them as successful as they
had been unfortunate; that there should be such a change in the face of their
Affairs, as should affect even Nature her self, and make an alteration in her;
for in the two last Verses it is said, Ye shall go out with joy, and be lead
forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into
singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands, instead of the
thorn shall come up the firr-tree, and instead of the briar shall come up the
myrtle-tree. Notwithstanding these expressions, which relish only of temporal
satisfactions, we are to conceive that such Blessings are signified by them, as
are too high to stoop to sense; and a Redemption from Babylonian Bondage did
intimate a much more glorious deliverance from the captivity of Sin, and the
power of Hell. So by the Waters in the first Verse, we are to understand the
Grace of God, and the thirsty are those who have a lively sense of the want of
it, and an eager desire of a supply; who have all the violent cravings after
God and Goodness, which that appetite is wont to produce toward its proper
object; and when they that have no Money are called upon to buy and eat, the
meaning is that they who could not gain this good of themselves, might have it
gratis; for it would be no chargeable thing to them to learn true Doctrine,
which is oftentimes compared to Meat and Drink, because it feeds and nourishes
the Soul; so Jer. 15.16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word
was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart; and Prove. 9.5. Come eat of my
bread, says Wisdom, and drink of the Wine, which I have mingled; and in my
Text God inculcates the same thing, which he had urged in the first Verse, and
exhorts poor Sinners to embrace Christ by a true and lively Faith, together
with those unspeakable precious Benefits which are tendered in him; and for the
exciting them to a diligent attention and careful obedience to his heavenly
Instruction, he promises to make with them an everlasting Covenant, not like
that which he had made with the Jews, which was to endure for a while, and then
be abrogated, but such an one as should out-last time it self, even the sure
mercies of David, i.e. that Mercy which God had promised to David, that he
would give him a Son, who should Reign over his Church and People for ever;
which Promise was to be fully completed in Christ, who, though he were
crucified, yet should he be raised again, never to dye any more; for of his
Life and Dorninion there should be no end; and for this Exposition I have St.
Paul's Authority, who quotes this very Passage for a Proof of Christ's
Resurrection, at Acts 13.34. And as concerning that be raised him up from the
dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give
you the sure mercies of David. And if Christ, who is the Head of the Body, the
Church, be the firstborn from the dead; we also, who are his Members, if we
walk in newness of life, shall rise after him to a glorious and immutable
State. But every Man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, and after they
that are Christ at his coming. The Words thus explained contain in them these
two parts.

1. A Precept, or if you please you may call it a gracious Invitation to Mercy,
Incline your ear, and come unto me. 2. An Encouragement to observe the Precept,
or to accept of the Invitation, in these words, and your Soul shall live, and I
will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, i.
e. Those who served God faithfully, should be made partakers of a joyful
Resurrection. And,
1. Of the Precept, or Invitation, Come unto me, and here there will be nothing
else needful then to inquire how we are to come to God, which we must do two
ways.

1. By Faith. 2. By Repentance.
1. We must come to God by Faith, i. e. We must believe all those Truths which
he has revealed in Scripture, more especially that grant fundamental point of
belief which is a Crucified Savior. And this was that Article upon which St.
Paul rested, as he told the Church of Corinth, I determined not to know any
thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and upon this Confession
did our Savior build his Church, viz. upon St. Peter's Creed, which was no
more than this, We are sure that thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.
And for the sake of this Article, were the four Gospels given us. For all these
things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God. And if the Evangelists be found to be false Witnesses, it will be as
impossible to support the veracity and credit of the other Writers of the New
Testament, as it is to keep up a Superstructure, after the Foundation is taken
away. And the Scripture not only bears Testimony to the Article it self, but to
all them that acknowledge it. For every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God, says St. John; and whosoever
confesses that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in
God, 1 John, 4.2, 15. And then, as for them, who set their faces against him,
who is declared to be the power and wisdom of God, and tell us only of a Christ
within; we may very well allow them to have the Spirit, but it is only that of
lying. But I would demand of these Men, whether or no the Christ within was
crucified, dead and buried at Jerusalem, and rose again the third day? Whether
he was afterward seen by hundreds of People, and did eat with the Apostles,
and convinced them that what they saw was a real Body by showing them his Hands
and Feet? All which are expressly affirmed of our Savior; and therefore nothing
but an infinite clemency could make him still endure such contradiction of
Sinners against himself. And yet it is the most common practice imaginable of
Quakers to contemn and revile all those who speak to them of the coming of that
just one, of whom the Jews were the betrayers and the murderers, Acts, 7.52.
Nay some of them have been so prodigiously audacious, as to bespatter him with
such foul and contemptuous expressions, as I am afraid to utter, and cannot
think of, without extreme horror and amazement. What I here allude to, may be
seen in the Snake in the Grass, Vol. 1. Page 78. The Author of which Book 1
know to be a Person of too great sincerity, to affirm any thing positively,
which he is not sure of. But if he has accused them wrongfully, it is somewhat
strange that they should not call him to account for it: I suppose their
fondness of him is no inducement to conceal such a failing.
And then wherewithal shall they be cleansed, who thus despise that Blood,
which alone can purify them from their Sins? What Laver will be sufficient to
wash away this deep stain of Infidelity? But Lord! Though they thus blaspheme
the Name of thy Dear Son, grant that we may earnestly beg, and effectually
obtain the Benefits of his Passion, and turn that Curse of the Jews upon
themselves into a Blessing upon us, and let his Blood be upon us, and our
Children, for our good. But can Faith alone save us? Will it be enough to fix
our eye upon God? No my Text requires us to Incline our ear to him, to fulfill
his holy Will and Commandments, or with a truly humble and contrite Heart to
implore his Mercy for our manifold Sins and Trangsressions. We must therefore
in the next place come to him by Repentance.

2. And this, I suppose all, but Quakers, will grant to be necessary to
Salvation, that every one must either lead a good life, or repent of a bad one.
But with them indeed it is a toil as insignificant as tedious; there being no
need of their contrition, who cannot offend; for why should they afflict their
Souls, who are arrived to a sinless Perfection? Which is an happiness that
these mortified and humble Creatures lay claim to: And therefore a great
Preacher among them, represents a Quaker, as meeker than Moses, stronger than
Samson, wiser than Solomon, and more patient than Job. Nay farther, harmless
and innocent as Christ himself. W. Shewen's Treatise concerning Thoughts and
Imaginations, P. 25.
Whatever instances there may be of humane infirmities, it is beneath a Quaker
to increase the number; for he boasts of as great a security from Sin, as the
Psalmist promised himself from bodily evilds: Though a thousand should fall
beside him, and ten thousand at his right hand, yet should not wickedness. come
nigh him; for amidst all the Spoils of Sin and Corruption he is resolved to
remain untouched, and in this sense to be free among the dead. I grant indeed
that Scripture seems to favor this Principle, and to allow of a state of
unsinning Obedience, when it affirms some to be so innocent, as to need no
Repentance; but I conceive the meaning of that place to be no more than this,
that though they are within the state of Grace, and so need not Repentance, as
it is a conversion of the whole, yet they do need contrition for their single
acts of Sin; for how else could the Holy Spirit say, That in many things we
offend all? And why did our Savior in that absolute form of Prayer, which he
has appointed, bid us pray to Our Father which is in Heaven, to forgive us our
trespasses? And let any one but consult the frailty of his own Nature, and he
will find the Diseases of his Soul to be at the least as numerous as those of
his Body; that betwixt his strayings and backslidings the burden of his Sins
must needs be intolerable. And then what way is there for him to obtain any
ease, but by casting that weight of his Sins from him? By sweeping and
garnishing his Soul, not that those evil Spirits, which had been ejected, might
return again, or that other more unclean ones might be admitted in their stead;
but that the Holy Dove, which loves not dark Houses, might make his abode with
him, when he was become a Child of Light. And to this consideration of our own
weakness, add we that other no less weighty one of the subtlety and
watchfulness of our Enemy; who has been long practiced in the arts of
treachery and insinuation, and knows too well when, and how to seize upon our
affections with the least difficulty and greatest success. Now if we live thus
in perpetual dangers, both within and without, how is it possible for us to be
sure that we shall always escape them? that we shall neither wilfully betray
our selves, nor fall into our Enemy's hand unawares? That we shall neither run,
nor be lead into captivity? He therefore that thinks himself above Repentance,
needs it most of all; and that very Pride of heart calls for plenty of Tears
and Ashes, for the deepest sighing, and the humblest prostration. I conclude
then, that since in God's sight no Man living can be justified, the most
righteous Person must necessarily stand in need of Pardon; and the way for him
to obtain it, is to plead guilty, that so he may avert that Wrath which he had
deserved, and regain that Mercy which he had forfeited. And this brings me to
my next Head, viz. The encouragement that God has given to all People to
incline their ear, and come unto him, that he will give them the sure Mercies
of David, make them partakers of a joyful Resurrection.

2. But if this be the certain reward of true Faith and Repentance, how then
say the Quakers, that there is no Resurrection? And yet a Ringleader among
them has no less proudly then ignorantly given out, That if the complete
happiness of the Soul rests in a reunion to a carnal Body, for such it is
sown, then must we never cry out upon the Turks Alcoran; for such a Heaven and
the joys of it suit admirably well with such a Resurrection. Penn's Reason
against Railing, Page 138.
But this is evidently neither more nor less than to set up a piece of foppery
of his own, that he may have the pleasure and credit of beating it down; for
certainly never any Christian affirmed, that the Body should be raised to a
life of sensuality, that revelling and junketting were the joys of Heaven. But
this all that pretend to any love and honor for the Gospel, have unanimously
agreed upon, that at the Resurrection the Body shall be the same as to its
substance, but very different as to its qualities; it is sown in corruption, it
is raised in incorruption; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body. But it is unconceivable by this profound Logician, how a thing should be
the same, and yet notwithstanding that be changed; as if there were any the
least absurdity in saying, that a Man might be the same and not the same in
diverse respects; may he not be changed from weak to strong, from proud to
humble, from sickly to healthful, and yet be still the same Person? When the
Jews saw the Man, out of whom the Devils were cast, sitting at Jesus Feet,
clothed, and in his right mind, they made no doubt, notwithstanding this
wonderful change that had been wrought in him, but that he was the same Man
that was possessed before. I have not insisted so long upon this Objection, for
any strength that I perceived in it, but for the sake of the Article itself,
which is the powerfullest motive to a good life, as all People must own, that
will not take upon them to be wiser than God: So that to deny the Resurrection,
is to cut the very Sinews of Piety, and cast a worser shade than that of Death
upon the Primitive Martyrs; who, doubtless would never have endured their sharp
afflictions with that unimitable courage and constancy; if it had not been for
the joy that was set before them, nor born those marks of the Lord Jesus in
their Bodies, if they had not looked upon the scars of their stripes and hurts,
as so many signs that they belonged to Christ, and that in due time he would
seize upon them as his own peculiar. So the Author to the Hebrews says
expressly, that some were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better Resurrection. But nothing but the certainty that this Article
has been denied, could make one think it possible that it should, since it is
so directly repugnant to several Passages in Scripture, particularly to the
second Verse of the Twelfth Chapter of Daniel, Many of them that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt; and so likewise to that Passage in St. John's Gospel,
Chap. 5. The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear
his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection
of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. Now
certainly when the Prophet speaks of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth,
and the Evangelist of them that are in the Graves, neither of them thought of
the Souls being in that condition; and therefore if any thing be waked out of
sleep, or come forth of the Grave, it must be the Body; which is so clear, that
I defye these Sectaries with all their little shifts, and base arts of
corrupting Scripture, to evade the force of these Texts, and use them as they
have done several others, i. e. make them vanish into the Clouds and thick
darkness of unintelligible allegories. Whosoever he be that professes any
reverence for the Scripture, and yet doubts of the Resurrection, all that I
would desire of him is to peruse the Fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, with seriousness and impartiality, and then let him speak his
mind. It is most certain at Christ's second Advent, when he shall judge the
World in righteousness, and minister true judgment unto all People, there will
be a reunion of Soul and Body; and then fiery indignation shall be poured out
upon the Adversaries, but Mercy and Lovingkindness upon all those that have
kept the commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, Rev. 14.12. St. John
tells us, that he heard a voice from Heaven, saying, write from henceforth,
blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors;
are unmolested with the impertinence and malice, the folly and hypocrisy, the
rage and perfidiousness of busy, false, and vexatious Mortals; but this is by
far the least part of their felicity; for after a short sleep in their Graves,
they shall awake up to Glory, and always have such a transcendently delightful
object in their view, as shall never suffer them to shut their Eyes against it;
be as the Angels in Heaven, not only ready to execute God's Commands, but
enjoying them too. But as for the unbelieving and impenitent Wretch, I have no
glad tidings to tell him; for all his false hopes were built upon the Sands.
And he, who would have been the rock of his Salvation, shall then put on only
the deafness and hardness of the rock; not be moved to the least pity by the
most hideous and dismal outcries; but for ever remain inflexible to all
complaints and entreaties. We are told indeed in Scripture, that God justifies
the Ungodly; but that Passage must be understood, in sensu diviso, of such as
were Ungodly, and not of such as continue in ill-doing; for God cannot declare
him to be just and righteous, who is unjust and unrighteous, without impeaching
his own Justice and Righteousness. It is as certain that grievous Sinners,
without amendment of life, shall never be received into God's favor, as it is
that by their reformation and renewing of their minds, they shall be adopted
into the family of his beloved Children. Would God punish the imputation of Sin
so severely in his innocent and beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, and
will he pardon the unrepented Iniquities of a stubborn Enemy? If he would not
spare him that was in his Bosom, but pour out his most precious Blood,
doubtless he will not spare the refractory after such a dreadful and amazing
Execution. Eternal Life is the gift of God, not to be purchased as a due reward
of the most holy Conversation: But Death is the proper Wages of Sin, that which
of right belongs to it, and without Repentance shall be fully paid. So that to
imagine that God retains an affection to one that will not part with his
Iniquity and his Ruin, is to lay to his charge an unjust Sentence, and, as a
necessary consequent thereto, an undue Execution of it. Let us not therefore
please our selves with the vain delusions of being God's special Favorites,
when our hearts are not right toward him; for doubtless only those that live
to him here, shall live with him hereafter. Give me leave to make some
Application of what has been delivered to the present occasion, and I shall
conclude.

I do not pretend to have given you here a Catalogue of all the false Doctrines
of Quakers, which are as much too numerous to be recited, as they are too foul
to be owned. What I have concerned my self with, have been only such as have
come in my way, and could not fairly be avoided. And those I look upon as
sufficient to vindicate their prudence and honesty, who have forsaken them and
their Errors, and have come out from among them, that they might not be
partakers of their Sins. And I hope that those who have thus deliberately
chosen to walk together with us, in the House of God as Friends, will never
bring any scandal upon our Profession, whilst they own it, nor upon themselves
by forsaking it; will never hearken to any Sophistry, that either the Tempter
himself, or any of his Agents shall make use of for the seducing them back
again, to those Principles and Practices, which they have so wisely and so
solemnly renounced. For it had been better for them not to have known the way
of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment dilivered unto them. For a relapse, as it is more dangerous; so,
when it may be prevented it is more culpable too, then the first beginning of a
disease. But I am persuaded better things of them that hear me now, and things
that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak. And to the end that you and they
may be rooted and grounded in the true faith of our Church, I shall briefly
show you her temper, i. e. draw some of the great lines, by which she may be
known; for I have neither time, nor ability to represent her at large, and give
you a full view of all her excellencies. In the first place then, She Accounts
no Doctrine necessary to Salvation, but what is either expressly founded upon,
or by direct consequence deduced from Scripture, which is the Pillar and ground
of Truth, to which, with all the Saints that are, and have been, upon earth,
and such as excel in Virtue, she pays a most profound Veneration; and takes
it, as David did, for a Lanthern to her feet, and a light unto her Path. So
very different is her treatment of it from that of Quakers, who vilify it as a
thing of naught, and therefore in a style as peculiar to them as their
behavior, dishonor it with the contemptuous Names of, Dust, Death, and
Serpents Meat, G. Fox's News out of the North Pa. 14.
And it is plain they are not conversant in it; For then would they cease to
talk and act so foolishly and so wickedly as they do. It being one of the great
excellencies of sacred Writ, to give wisdom und understanding unto the simple.
She does indeed insist upon the two Sacraments, of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper. And very good reason she has for so doing, because they are of Divine
Institution. The former was established by our Savior, when he gave his
Disciples a Commission to go and baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And when he has enacted it as a law,
That all his followers shall be received into his Church by that laver of
Regeneration, can any one forbid them Water that they should not be baptized?
And as for that other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, certainly it must be a
strange Spirit of opposition that possesses them who gainsay it, for can there
be any thing more endearing than our Lords appointing that perpetual feast,
except it be the love that made him do so? Is his precious Bloodshedding
become so vile in our Eyes, that we cannot bear the remembrance of it? And yet
neither the benefit nor the sacredness of the Institution, could restrain a
Blasphemous Quaker from this unsufferably vile Reflection upon it, Their
Communion Bread and Wine, is the Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils, G. Foxe's
News out of the North, Pa. 14.
And yet some of the inferiors of this wicked Crew, have paid Divine Honors
to this vile Wretch, and W. Pen has since vindicated them: W Pen. Judas and
the Jews Pa. 44.
Surely St. Paul took it for granted, that his Corinthians neither would, nor
should abstain from it, when he only directed them how to prepare themselves
for it, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink
of that Cup, 1. Cor. 11.28. And if this be not a standing Duty, never to be let
fall, certainly the Apostle would not have recommended it to us by such an
engaging account as he has given us, at V. 26. of the forementioned Chapter,
as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show, or show ye, the
Lords Death till he come, till the end of all things, when the whole World
shall be dissolved, and this beautiful Frame of the Universe be first reduced
to Ashes, and then to nothing.

Nor is She more intent upon purity of Doctrine, than that of Life; and
therefore requires Holiness in all her Professors; so that if any of them are
wicked Livers, they are not so by her Indulgence, but their own depraved
inclinations. Their ungodliness therefore can be no just imputation to her, the
strictness of whose rules is a sufficient proof of her love of Virtue, and
hatred of Vice. I own indeed that she requires a conformity to a few innocent
Ceremonies; not that she looks upon them as absolutely necessary, but only as
fit to be observed for the sake of good Order, Decency, and Edification; which
is the sole cause of her injoyning them. And to lay them aside, would be of
more mischievous consequence than some of their oppugners apprehend, or perhaps
would consent to, if they did; for they seem to me to have the same kind of
usefulness that leaves have, which if they be not too numerous, are both an
Ornament to the Tree, and a Fence to the Fruit. And now that I may not be
suspected to have any By-end in what I have delivered, as if I had not spoken
the very Thoughts of my Heart, I do with all imaginable Sincerity make this
Wish, may my Portion in the next World be with those that are true Members of
the Church of England, who walk worthy of that their Profession; may I have the
Reward which God in his Mercy, for his dear Son's Sake, shall bestow upon them,
whose Faith and Practice are agreeable to her Doctrines and Rules. What now
remains, but that we present our humble Supplications at the Throne of Grace,
in behalf of this good-natured, this Orthodox, and Incorrupt Church; that God
would continue to be her Guide and Defense; that he would keep and strengthen
in the true Faith and Holiness of Life, all the Members of her Communion, and
daily add to her such as shall by his Blessing save both themselves and others:
Which God of his infinite mercy grant for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom be
rendered as is most due, all Honor, Glory, Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion,
both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Dr. John Spire's ORATION, AT THE Parish Church of St. OLAVE-SOUTHWARK.
September the 8th. 1700.
It is probable it may seem somewhat strange to many for me to appear after
this manner in this Place; but let it not be accounted either presumption or
rudeness in me so to do, for my undertaking is justifiable in the sight of God
and all good Men.

FOrasmuch as upon the Occasion of my being here the first time, which was on
Trinity-Sunday, the 26th. Day of May, 1700. and that caused a disturbance in
this Place, and for the prevention of the like again, as well as many, and
various false Reports that have been spread up and down, and that I have
frequently met with all for so doing. I think it very proper to signify
something of the Reason of my coming hither, and also to give you a short
account of my Life down to this Day.

I doubt not but many will be asking, why such a Man and his Family or Friends
come to Church, who have so many Years been Dissenters from her; to which
Question I shall return one general answer by acquainting you as follows.

I was born of Honest Christian Parents in the County of Berks, and about 40
Years since Baptized according to the usage of the Established Church of
England, and Educated therein till I was about 13 Years of Age, at which time
my Parents Joined with the People called Quakers; and afterward I was
instructed in their way, in which I continued about 26 Years, and in the Year
1694, when through the good Providence of Almighty God, I began to have some
small glances of the Christian Religion, from which, with many others, I had so
many Years swerved: upon this Discovery I published a small thing in print, to
vindicate my self and my Friends, many of which are here present, from some
erroneous Tenets held by the Quakers, for which I received many and great
Abuses from them, and was excommunicated (or disowned) under the Hands of 24,
from being of their Communion.

And in the Year 1696, finding by many of their Books and Preachments, that
they slighted the Humanity of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: I did
in that Year print a small Piece, asserting the Humanity of Christ from
Scripture Testimony, for which Ialso suffered many Reproaches, and have it now
under a Quaker Preacher's Hand, baring date the 27 of June 1696 what affronts I
then received, who after his long Scribble, thus violently utters himself
against me. He tells me, the Lord will confound me, that God will destroy me;
he calls me a Ravening Wolf, and bids me call in my Book that asserts the
Humanity of Christ, and says withal, that the Lord requires it of me.

In the Year School it pleased God Almighty to let me see that those two great
Ordinances of Christ, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper are thankfully to be
received by all sincere Christians till his coming again at the last and great
Day.

And I do hereby freely acknowledge my former Error, in denying the Benefit and
Necessity of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as well as in slighting the use of
the Holy Scriptures, as also in Denying that great and fundamental Article of
the Resurrection of the Dead, all which with many others of my Friends and
Relations, I have been taught by the Principle Leaders, and Teachers of the
aforesaid People; and do own I was so far seduced as to help to teach and
encourage others in these abominable Errors, which sin I trust the Lord of his
Mercy has pardoned because I did it Ignorantly.

I do also hereby freely declare, that I own for Substance the Doctrine of the
39 Articles of the Church of England, and desire that I may live and dye in
that Faith, into which I was baptized. What I have further to add is, that you
and I may persevere in the Way and Worship of the true God, and that we may be
exemplary one to the other, and Patterns of Humility, as becomes the Christian
Religion, that when Days and time shall be no more to us in this World, we may
have our Dwelling and Habitation Eternally in the Heavens with the Lord Jesus
Christ, To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now
and for ever. Amen.

John Spire, Junior.


