THE DISEASE OF LONDON: OR A NEW DISCOVERY Of the SCORVEY.

Comprizing The Nature, Manifold Differences, various Causes, Signs,
Prognostics, Chronology, and several Methods of Curing the said DISEASE by
Remedies, both Galenical, and Chemical, together with Anatomical Observations,
and Discourses on Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, Rheumatisms, Gouts,
Malignant Fevors, and Small Pox, with their several Methods of Cure and
Remedies. Likewise particular Observations on most of the Forementioned
Diseases.

By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and in the Time
of the Rebellion, Fellow of the College of Physicians at the Hague.

LONDON, Printed by T. James, for W. Thackery, at the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1675.

TO THE MOST MIGHTY, AND MOST INVINCIBLE MONARCH, Charles II. KING of Great
BRITAIN, France, and Ireland.
WHen your People, Great SIR, had for many Years been Afflicted with
Maniacisms, and Fascinated Distempers of their Minds, in a moment You
miraculously Cured them upon Your Blessed Restoration; a good Crisis, whereof
not the Influence of the Stars, but of Divine Providence was the Primar
Efficient. The Diseases of their Estates were no less Great and Dangerous, some
had Lost all, others had Little left, to these likewise your Unparallel Justice
was a Sovereign Remedy, by Restoring to every one what was his just Right.
Moreover that their Lives might be Praeserved from the pernicious Attempts of
Empirics, You have Re-establisht a College of Experienced Physicians, and to
these your Royal Laboratory shows out of what Materials, and in what Manner
the best Remedies are to be Praepared; So, as You are the Greatest KING, You
are the greatest Physician, whence I have praesumed to lay this Treatise at the
Feet of Your most Gracious Majesty, humbly craving Your Protection against the
Scorvey of this Age, and imploring Your Royal Clemency for a Pardon for this
Address, am in all Duty bound to Acknowledge my self,

The most Humble, most Obedient, and Meanest of Your Majesty's Subjects, Harvey.

THE PRAEFACE.
IT is Observable, that the First Solid Foundation of Physic was laid by the
Great Architect of that Art Hippocrates, in an Isle called Coos; and it is no
less Remarkable, that the truest Superstructure was made on it, in this Island,
by the Famed College of Physicians of London; It was a Member of that Society,
Doctor William Harvey, of Immortal Memory, that had laid another Basis, by
Detecting the Circulation of the Blood, for which this Britain may as justly
Merit the Title of Divine, as the other Cous. The Rubbish that was cast about
it by Parisanus, Leighnerus, and others to Obscure it, tended to render it more
firm; notwithstanding, this was so smoothly removed by that Incomparable
Physician, Sir George Ent, the now Praesident of the College, in his Apology,
that all Universities did then adjudge those void of Apprehension, that did not
readily Embrace that Principle, and that it was Impossible, for any man to
Arrive to be a Physician without the knowledge of it.

For many Ages the World was Ignorant, whence the superfluous Moisture
proceeded, which we hourly spit out, until the outlet, viz. The Ductus
Salivales were discovered by the Learned Doctor Wharton, a Fellow of the
College; and though it was generally believed, nothing could be further
declared, touching the structure of the Liver, yet so Elegant a description of
its most Intime parts, and dissemination of its Vessels, Cholidochus, and a
very exact pursuit of the Limphaeducts was made by the most Accomplished Doctor
Glisson (the late Praesident) in his Anatomia Hepatis, that in a manner it
appeared, as if nothing had been solidly Written of it by any before him.

That some Distempers had escaped the Observation of the Grecian and Arabian
Physicians, was evidenced by the eminently Learned Doctor Bates, Doctor
Glisson, and Doctor Regemorter, Colleagues, in that excellent Treatise de
Rachitide. In all my Travels, I had never the good Fortune to be particularly
acquainted with a Person equal in Litterature, Experience and Observation with
Doctor Bates; I must confess, I went ever from him more knowing, than I was
before.

The Pharmacopoea compiled by the whole Body of this Apollinean Society, does
justly Merit the Character of a most Elaborate work, from those, that shall
compare the several compositions in it with their Original, where the
amendments of Omitting of superfluous, incongrous, or Asymmetrous ingredients,
and substituting of necessary and proportionate Correctives, are to every Eye
very Obvious; and their Care, that those Medicines be Neatly, and Artificially
praepared by the Apothecaries of London, has proved so successful, that
Travelers are Obliged to Attest, that Pharmacy is in no Foreign part so much
Improved, as it is here; and therefore why is not the London Theriaca
Andromachi aequal to Venice Treacle, which latter often times consists only of
the two third parts of the Ingredients, and the better half of them Garbles? Or
why should the Confectio Alkermes of Monpelier exceed that of London? I must
confess our Apothecaries set an higher Price upon their Medicines and their
Labor too, than the French, and not without Reason; for you must agree to me,
that an English Apothecary, who puts on three pair of Sleeves a Week; and comes
Neatly about your Posteriora, does better deserve a Shilling for giving you a
Glyster, than a French Apothecary wearing his Half-shirt a Month, Twopence.
That by the way, but still I must say, that Medicines are no where so Neatly,
so Honestly, and so Skilfully praepared as here at London, and in that
particular you may easily believe me a Judge competent enough, since when I was
a Student in Physic, Lodging purposely at an Apothecaries House, I have spent
many a half hour at the ^estil and Mortar, and did arrive to that Proficiency,
that I could praetend to dispense Methridate, or make up a Paracelsus
Emplaster, with any of the Trade.

It is not so much in Pharmacy, as Chyrurgery, the French claim the
Superlative; It is confessed, a Frenchman shall very dexterously take off six
Legs or Arms, to One of an English Surgeon; he shall make an Incision with his
Scissors, as far as he can well reach with his sis^ul ^robe, let it go as far
as it will between the Muscles, or the Cutis and the Membrana Carnosa, when an
English Surgeon shall only clap in a Dorsil into the Orifice: He shall force in
two of his Fingers into a Wound as far as he can possibly reach, though the
Orifice will scarce admit a Probe without great pain; whereas one of our
Surgeons shall gently stroke the coagulated Blood, or lodged Matter toward the
Orifice. This is the Difference, but the Issue is, that of those six Members
Amputated, four or five of the Patients shall retire into the other World,
whereas on the other side probably five among the six shall be praeserved with
their Legs on. Touching those large Incisions, it is observable, that in making
them they often cut a Vein or Artery asunder, and cause Mortal Haemorrhages, or
at least often create incurable Ulcers; whereas the other without putting the
Patient to that Extremity of pain, or danger, shall safely and easily Cure him
in a few days. Of how dangerous a Consequence the forcing of Fingers into
Wounds does often prove, is abundantly Evident to all Experienced Surgeons. It
must be granted, that in some Cases Members cannot be praeserved, likewise
Incisions may be necessary, where Matter is suspected to lodge remote; or a
Finger sometimes may be gently slid into a Wound, to clear it of coagulated
Blood or Matter, that is lodged near the Orifice; but to practice Surgery as I
have seen it in most parts of France (excepting only the Charity Hospital at
Paris, where in my younger Years, for to acquire a competent knowledge in that
part of Physic, I had leave to dress for some Months) is not comparable to the
Practice of English Surgeons; so that considering the French Practice I have
often admired, that in some Countries, you shall scarce see a Person of Quality,
but must have his French Surgeon at his Elbow, as if no Body could Cure a Clap
but a French Surgeon; for I cannot imagine what other Bus^ness they can have
for him, now Duels are grown so much out of Fashion. That I do not Write this
out of a Praejudice, but from a real Truth, you may apprehend from my
particular Humor, which sometimes inclines me, to be extremely pleased with
French Company. I must now return to give you likewise an account of the
Practice of Physic, wherein the Fellows of the College have proved so
wonderfully Successful, that their Methods of Curing the most stubborn of
Diseases, may serve for a fit Pattern to all the World to Practice by, and I
cannot deny, but in many Cases it has proved so to me, which to acknowledge is
the sole occasion of my Introducing this Discourse. But possibly it may appear
strange, that of a Society, whose Fame is spread as far as the Art of Physic
it self, I should not endeavor to be a Member. In relation to that particular,
I am Obliged to give you Satisfaction; it is many Years past, ( viz. In the
time of Rebellion) when I first arrived at London, to Initiate my Practice in
Physic, at which time I ought to have entered into the College, but find^ng,
that the Humor of some was much toward Preaching, Praying, and all the Knacks
of Phanaticism, others driving a way quite contrary; in fine the difference was
such, that I concluded I should scarce make up my account among them, and
therefore judged it more Expedient, to pursue my Advantages abroad; but now
finding the College Re-establisht, and Revested with their Ancient Luster, and
many to have got in, who when I begun to Practice, were not come from the
Grammar School, if I should come in I must give Praecedency to those
Youngsters, which I imagine I shall never do. My next Affair is to praeacquaint
you with the Design of this Treatise; I do assure you, I have Inserted nothing
in it, but what I have found to be true, and have used my utmost Endeavors to
Trac all the Steps of this General Disease; I have Imparted to you some
Secrets, which when you know, and have Tried, you will have Reason to believe,
I had no other Drift in Divulging this Octavo, than sincerely to serve the
Public.

June, 10. 1675. Hatton Garden.
Farewell.
THE DISEASE OF LONDON. CHAP. I. Containing A Praemissory Discourse of the
SCORVEY.
1. The Design of the Treatise. 2. The Synonyma's and Derivation of the
Scorvey. 3. Whether the Scorvey was known to Hippocrates or Galen? that it is
contagious and haereditary. 4. That the Scorvey is of about 200 years standing.

I Will not resume, what by others has so often been chaw'd upon, and that take
for a reason, if I do not tell you a Story out of Eugalen, Solomon Albertus, or
Wierus, a sort of people, that from one another re-collected a most prodigal
number of Scorbutic Symptoms, by the same Rule of Arithmetical Progression,
Galen made use of in mustering his Centuries of Pulses, an impertinent variety,
more imaginary, than perceptible by the subtillest Aranean Tact. By what I here
condemn, you may conjecture, I praetend to divulge something particular, in
such terms, as shall as little tire you in the reading, as me in writing. To
commence my Discourse from the Description of my Subject, seems most
expedient, wherein an exactness ought to be aimed at, exceeding what hitherto
has been heeded, which may oblige such, as when meeting with a distemper, they
are not well acquainted with, are compelled to tell the Patient, it is the
Scorvey.

2. Scorbutus and Scorvey (quasi Scorbey) are words bastardized from Scorbeck,
a Westphalian Primitive, denoting a Hoarse Throat, probably a Symptom, that
anciently attended that Disease, and in these days is now and then observed a
Concomitant, especially among the Danes, where it passed by the name of
Schermund; who moreover being often racked with tearing pains in their legs, gave
them the name of Schorbein, or Tear-leg. By the way, I must here take notice of
a vulgar error, in the Orthography of the word Scurvey, which ought to be
written Scorvey, as being derived from the word Scorbeck. The Low Dutch
discerning; it often exercises its fury on the Guts, by causing insufferable
Gripes, choose to call it Scheurbuyck or Tear-belly; also de Blawe Shuit, from
those blew spots, that haunt Scorbutic Legs. From the stink of Breath and
foulness of the Gums, the Italians name it La Marcia di Bocca, or Scornobocca,
implying a corruption of the mouth. But if it be proper to derive the
denomination of a Disease from its chief Symptoms, the word Gingipedium (crassa
and pingui Minerva) expresses its nature more amply, declaring it most
incommodious ( gingivis and pedibus) to the gums and legs; and it may be
conjectured, this kind of Nomenclature was twisted together out of those two
Antic words latinized (...) and (...), the former denoting a foulness of
mouth, from (...); or a foul mouth, from (...), the latter being expounded a
Disease of the legs, as may be inferred from Pliny Histor. Nature. lib. 35. cap.
3. In Germania trans Rhenum castris a Germanico Caesare promotis, maritimo
tractu fons erat aquae dulcis solus, qua pota intra biennium dentes deciderent,
compagesque in genibus solverentur, stomacacen Medici vocabant, and
Scelotyrben: i. e. The Campaign being removed by Germanicus Caesar to the other
side of the Rhyne in Germany, there was only one Fountain of sweet water, in a
tract near the Sea, whereof drinking, in two years time their teeth would fall
out, and the composure of their knees would be quite relaxed; the Physicians
called it Stomacace and Scelotyrbe.

3. The use of these words seems to be of a far ancienter date, than Pliny's
age, since Strabo a Subject of Augustus Caesar, in the Six'h Book of his
Geography, about the end, relates the Roman Army, that was transported into
Arabia, to be infested with a Disease called Stomacace and Scelotyrbe. Galen
also in that Book de Definitionibus Medicis, makes mention of a Scelotyrbe. But
not only, whether those Maladies implied by these two obsolete words, but
whether those great Spleens described by Hippocrates de Morbis Intern. 2.
Praed. 2. Prognost. the Black Jaundice, the Ileos Haematites, or the Black
Vitiligo (being a deformity of the Skin, haunted with large duskish spots) be
not the same Disease, Modern Physicians term the Scorvey, has been
controverted by most, that have handled this Subject. That each of these have a
resemblance in their Causes and Symptoms to the Scorvey, needs no debate; for
according to Hippocrates in the praecedent Citation, in those great Spleens The
Belly is puffed up, afterward the Spleen does also swell, and is h^rd, and
acute pains happen to the Spleen, the color is also changed and looks black,
pale, and like a Pomegranate shell; and an ill smell comes out of their mouth,
and the gums scent ill and separate from the teeth; and on the legs there break
out Ulcers, also nocturnal Pustuls; and the parts are extenuated, and their
ordure is not evacuated. The Ilios Haematites is also deciphered with features
not unlike the former: The Disease, says Hippocrates, begins about the
Autumn, and therein these things happen: There comes an ill scent out of the
mouth from the teeth, and the gums separate from them; and blood flows out of
the nostrills; and sometines ulcers break out on their legs, and other things
appear, and the color grows black, and the skin thin. The curiosity
praedominating so much among Authors, touching the identity of primaeval and
subsequent Diseases, might be construed very superfluous; for the result,
whether it be so or not, contributeth no more light to the scrutiny of the
Scorvey, than a Candle to the Sun at Noonday; though perchance exercitii
gratia, and for reputation of being versed in Antic Lectures, it may be
permitted to be ventilated. The opinion of the major part of the learned,
infers from the near alliance of Symptoms, the Great Spleens of Hippocrates to
be the Scorvey; and some others by the same reason are convinced, the Black
Jaundice, the Ileos Haematites and Black Vitiligo, are no other. If this
inference be received, Hypochondriack Melancholy, Hysteric Passion, Quartan
Ague, and most other Splenetick Maladies, may be reduced as Species to the
Gender of the Scorvey. But upon a strict survey your aestimate will conclude,
that the distinction of Diseases does not depend so much on common accidents,
as properties; or to speak physically, on Pathognomonics, derived from a
Specific qualification, in their Causes, Parts affected, and Symptoms. Thus
the pro^gumenal cause of the Scorvey, though its vulgarly attributed to
Melancholy, or rather Salt vitiated or degenerated to a praeternatural, and in
that qualification may be a common parent to this, the Great Spleens, Black
Jaundice, and the rest; yet the more nice insinuation of others has detected
the Salts of the Blood so specifically receded from their natural Constitution
in the Scorvey, and to have endued such peregrine qualities, that they are not
capable to give birth to any other Disease than this. Moreover, by most the
part affected and harth of the praealleged distempers, are determined unically
the Spleen; in the Scorvey the Stomach (by some the Pancreas) the Spleen and
Liver; and some do also accuse the brain, though per denteropathiam. Among the
Symptoms the difference is most perspicuous, the exufflation of the Spleen is
not always discovered in the Scorvey, though in great Spleens never absent: In
the Ileos Haematites there is loss of blood by Stool, attended with tearing
Gripes; which in this distemper is not assumed for a Pathognomonic. The
Scorvey: is particularly malignant, because it is contagious, and so radicated,
that for some months, and fraequently years, it does praedominate over the most
potent of Medicines; and Infants often bringing Scorbutic Seminaries with them
into the world, speak it haereditary; insomuch that on some Families the
Scorvey has been intailed with their Estates. These Praedicates certainly are
not convertible with the forementioned Diseases, and therefore ought not so
rashly to be pronounced the Scorvey; which moreover is Endemick, the others
Epidemick and Pandemick. Thus far no sensible error can be incurred, if upon
comprise of the whole, these Diseases are conceded to be Scorbutic, in the
same terms, as one may aptly explain a Pleurisy, an Empyema, an Inveterate
Cough, and many other Pulmonic Diseases, Asthmatic, but not an Asthma; unless
derived from Saline Scorbutic Procatarctic and Proegumenal Causes.

4. The Scorvey, in respect of its primar appearance, seems to bear no
certainty in Chronology, since some describe it a distemper, that for some Ages
has harrassed the crazy inhabitants of the world; others will not allow it a
Disease of longer date, than Authors of the last Century record its first
budding among the Danes, Saxons, and Westphalians; which is within the time of
Two hundred years at most. This latter sentiment is easily supported by this
Argument; viz. No Disease described by any of the Greek, Latin, or Arabian
Physicians, does exactly quadrate in Parts affected, Causes, and Symptoms with
this Northern Scorvey; and therefore may be inferred a new up-start Disease:
especially that sort of Scorvey, which in my Little Venus I term Epidemick.
Probably an objection may be offered, that since those Procatarctic and
Proegumenal Causes, had their being many Ages past, and consequently an
influence on humane Bodies, they must necessarily (according to that trite
Axiom, Posita causa ponitur effectus) have constituted their effect, viz. the
Scorvey. To this is replied, History makes no report of those occasions, that
are empowered to produce this Malady. The Graecians, among whom those great
Spleens of Hippocrates, being nearest of kin to the Scorvey, were so popular,
lived in a benign air, and were constantly employed in Warlick Exercises,
whereby they were diverted from Melancholy, or other dull Passions, from Excess
of Sleep or Sloth, and other inconveniences: so that those External Causes,
that now concur in the production of the Scorvey, had no praevalence on them;
and therefore improbable, our Distemper should have been engendered then, or
any time before. But waving other Causes, and considering only, it is an
Endemick Disease, which has its chief dependence on the Air, and particular
disposition of the Clime, wherein alterations happen by evaporations from Sea
or Earth, and Celestial Irradiations, which being so various and fraequent,
it is no wonder, if the Scorvey be a recent production, or if every month or
year Diseases of new aspects emerge.

CHAP. II. Of the Mouth-Scorvey.
1 The general kinds of the Scorvey, and what the Mouth-Scorvey is; the degrees
of the Mouth-Scorvey. 2. That little hard Swellings of the Mouth and a Ranula,
are Scorbutic. 3. That a vagous recurrent Toothache is Scorbutic. 4. What a
Scorbutic Thrush is. 5. The variation of the color of the Gums in the
Scorvey. 6. That a Stinking Breath is Scorbutic. 7. That small Fistula's in
the Angles of the Mouth and Root of the Gums are Scorbutic.

INto two great branches the Scorvey seems to be divaricated, namely a foul
Scorbutic Mouth, or rather the Mouth-Scorvey, and Scorbutic Legs, or
Leg-Scorvey; to which very aptly a third may be added, to wit the
Joynt-Scorvey. The former consists of Swelled, Laxe, Spungy, Discolored, sore
Gums, loose Teeth, that in process of time do inevitably rot or cariate, and a
stinking Breath; which as they ascend through various degrees to an extremity,
do render the disease very incommodious, having observed the tumefaction of
the Gums in some so luxuriant, as to obstruct the Lips in closing, appearing
more like a Fungus grown to the Jaw, then Gums; on the contrary in others, the
Gums have been entirely corroded away, so as the (...), or juncture of the
Teeth, and Jaw, might have been evidently discerned; and you may receive it for
a truth, that the corrosion was continuated with that rapid violence, in the
Lips of a certain Scorbutic Dutchman, who for cure was admitted into the
Hospital at Leyden, that being quite devoured, the Teeth were left bare, and
exposed to the Air: wherefore note, that the first degree of a foul or putrid
Mouth is a swelling of the Gums, through a thin serous or ichorous blood, soon
after disposed to be pressed out of its bounds, with the least touch of a
Finger, insomuch that it is fraequently observed, that Scorbuticks biting a
piece of bread, the remainder in their hands will appear all bloody about the
edges: Hereupon the Gums fissure or cleave, afterward changing into
phagedaenic ulcers, which not seldom are succeeded by malignant cancerous
ulcers, threatening an extreme deformity and devoration of all the circumjacent
parts.

2. More than once I have given advice for little hard unaequal swellings about
the inside of the Lips, sometimes under the Tongue, of a livid, or not
infraequently of an ash color and dolorous. These by Chyrurgions are termed
Cancers of the Mouth, and indeed are little less than Cancerous, and
consequently Scorbutic. Neither would I have you judge it a Paradox, if I
assert an Endemic Cancer in whatsoever part, to be an extreme degree of a
Scorvey; as hereafter may be more plainly repraesented. Of the nature of the
praemised Cancers in the Mouth, does participate a Ranula, a Tubercle under the
Tongue, so called, because being an impediment to the free motion of the
Tongue, in pronouncing words, that contain the Liquids L or R, it occasions
them to sound frog-like. The Cure hereof is usually attempted by Astringents
and Acids, as Oil of Vitriol and others, whence seldom or never a succes^ being
answered to the intention of the Chyrurgion, converts his hopes to the sharp
Steel, or the Fire. But were it supposed scorbutic, as many other signs
accompanying, do certainly evince it to be, might infallibly perform the Cure
by a Scorbutic Topic.

3. A vagous re-current Toothache, especially in Women, does often act a part
in the Syndrome of a Mouth-Scorvey, which in distinction to the ordinary
Toothache, has concomitant a very grating pain, with a violent salivation of
thin saline Rheum; and as it is that, which for Cure has been an Opprobrium
Medicorum, for their frustraneous applications, so the most facile and
indubious method of solaging this pain by Antiscorbuticks, is an argument,
there has been a Hallucination, in discerning the true cause of it.

4. Grandines, or little whitish hard swellings, of the bigness of a Radish
seed, with a small perforation in the middle, and running about the Tongue,
Gums, Palate, and inside of the Cheeks, is a Scorbutic Thrush, and cured only
by Antiscorbuticks. And those that have been curious Observers in their
practice, can attest, there is a periodical swelling of the Tonsils (or Almonds
under the Ears) and a relaxation of the Uvula and Palate, which must be
accounted amongst the Diagnosticks of a Mouth-Scorvey; and such being rendered
infinitely worse by the use of ordinary astringents, I have cured with a
Gargarism of Betony, Sage and Scorvey-grass, Elder and Rosemary-flowers, and
Nettle-seeds, boiled in white Wine and Water, with a few drops of spirit of
Sal-armoniac, instilled into the decoction; but not without assistance of
internal Medicines.

5. The discoloration of the Gums in a Scorbutic Mouth first appears in a deep
red, afterward in a spotted yellow, then duskish and leadish, and at last a
cadaverous pale, or a cancerous black. The Veins about the Gums, under the
Tongue, and the inside of the Lips, show unaequal, swelled and ill-colour'd.
The soreness of the Gums feels sometimes burning, or as if pricked with
Needles; other times the pain lies deep about the Periostium, or Membrane of
the Jaw, not unlike the Toothache.

6. Among the Pathognomonics of a Mouth-Scorvey, none is more certainly
concomitant than a Stinking Breath; insomuch that it is beyond all
contradiction, where there is a continual stink of Breath, (evident causes, as
Ulcers of the Mouth, Throat and Lungs always excepted) there is a confirmed, or
at least a growing Scorvey: and among all those Scorbuticks I ever was
concerned with in relation to their cure, I never found that symptom absent;
which if by the course of some years it be established in a deep radication, is
refractory to all cure; if recent, all hope is reposed in a strict Scorbutic
method. And for this so ungrateful symptom, the s^le Specific is the Urinous
Spirit of Sal Armoniack. Now upon the Assumption, that the Scorvey is an
Endemick Malady to our Island, you must suppose a stinking Breath very popular,
which indeed will not be disputed by one, that possesses the right use of his
Nose; and those that are exquisitely sensible in that Organ, shall tell you,
that the Cabins of Ships expire a stronger Air of Scorbutic stinking Breaths,
than of Pitch or Tar.

7. This Chapter we will limit with the subnexion of another Scorbutic
Symptom, not much receding from a stinking Breath, viz. Fistuls in the Angles
of the Mouth, and Root of the Gums, which being squeezed three or four times a
day, render a very putrid matter, the spring whereof is ordinarily deprehended
in a Scorbutic small Glandul.

CHAP. III. Of the Leg-Scorvey.
1. A Description of the Leg-Scorvey. 2. A more ample Declaration of its
Symptoms. 3. Of Scorbutic Ulcers. 4. Of Scorbutic Leg-p^ins. 5. Of Varicous
Legs.

1. THe Scorvey particularly exerting its enmity on parts so distant as the
Mouth and Legs, speaks it a Disease, requiring a more distinct Consideration;
and therefore as in the former, so in this latter is designed to give you a
very articulate Description: but observe by the way, that a lassitude and
feebleness of the Knees is common also to a Mouth-Scorvey.

The Leg-Scorvey comprehends a great lassitude and weakness of the Knees and
Ankles, spots and blotches of several figures and colors on the Shins, and
particularly just below the Knee, and also near the Ankles, Pustuls, uneven
Tumors and Tubercles of Purpre Variegated Red. Oedematous Legs, with thick,
hard, callous, livid, or sometimes brown red Skin about the Ancle, ulcers on
the Shin, and near the Ankle, pains of the Knees, likewise deep pains along the
Shinbone, continuing all day, but raging most in the night, are all fraequent
concomitants of the Leg-Scorvey.

2. The feebleness of the Knees and Ankles coming gradually upon you; without
any evident praeceding Disease, or any sudden alteration of looks, or habit of
body; is an Item sufficient to imform you what is at hand: Namely, Spots first
red, and then yellow, livid, and at last of an ash color; upon this expect
blotches along the side of your Legs, appearing first reddish, then yellowish
very like an Erysipelas, but yet different from it, because there is not that
heat and smart in Scorbutic blotches; neither are they so fiery, or
corrodeing, a to be converted immediately into ulcers, but grow rough and peel
off. These generaly are succeeded by pustles, turbercles, or bo^ches and
tumors; at first of an uncertain color, in one part deep red, in another pale;
though upon a small interval of time turn deep red all over, growing exceeding
painful and hot, a sign of their being ready to burst out into Ulcers, or nasty
Scabs.

3. Scorbutic ulcers, especially those on the Shins, and near the Ancle, upon
a short continuance grow callous about the Lips, within painful, as if pricked
with Needles; their flesh appearing torn, uneven, of an ill aspect, the Lips
tumid, the matter undigested thin, and ichorous, at length turns sordid,
phagedaenic, and cancerous; the bone underneath contracts a Caries or Spina
Ventosa.

. 4. Scorbutic Leg-pains, either haunt the Tendons about the Knee and Ancle,
or the Membranes of the Muscles, or the Periostium. A Tendinous pain, is a
shrinking or contracting Soreness; that of the Membranes of the Muscles sharp
and distending, that of the Periostium contunding and grating.

. 5. To these add a Varicous Leg, when the Veins are Tumefied to an
extraordinary Protuberance. The Effect of all these praemised Symptoms does for
the most part Result into Gross, Deformed, Tumefied Legs, some appearing full
of Botches, others Tumefied, so as to pit upon the pressure of a Finger, and
variously Discolored all over, like the Shins of those, that sit too near the
Fire in the Winter; such Monstrously Tumefied Legs are fraequently observed
amongst Dutch Skippers.

CHAP. IV. Of the Joynt-Scorvey.
1. Symptoms of the Joynt-Scorvey. 2. Description of the Joynt-Evil. 3.
External Rheumatisms Scorbutic. 4. Internal Rheumatisms Scorbutic also. 5.
Frangibility and Cracking of the Joints. 6. The Gout is not a Pain in the
Joint. 7. The Seat of the Gout. 8. The kinds of the Gout.

. 1. THat they are incommoded with an Universal Soreness of Limbs, especially
Arms, Shoulders, Neck-bones, and along down their Back, about the Breast, and
round the Middle, with a Lassitude, or Weariness, and no Disposition at all to
stir or move, but inclined to Drowsiness and Heaviness, is the Complaint of
many, upon the least alteration of Weather, who beyond all (peradventure) must
be termed troubled with the Joynt-Scorvey; provided the said Lassitude be not
such, as ordinarily is a praecursor to a Fevor. Neither is this Species, or
sort of Scorvey only circumscribed with the praenumerated Symptoms, but is also
applicable to those, whose Articles or Joints are subject to Crackle upon a
sudden Motion.

. 2. The Scorvey infesting the Joints, does by means of an Af^lux of Virulent
Humors, not seldom produce gross Tumors and Tubercles, of a fiery purple
appearance, and a very painful Sensation, to which is consequent an Immobility
of the Articles, and not long after the Skin being so Cancerously tumefied, as
frequently happens about the Joints of the Fingers, Knuckles, Wrists, Elbows,
Knees, Ancles and Toes, is perforated by an ^horous, Raw, Indigested, Thin,
Serous, Livid, and sometimes yellow Sanies or Matter, which Gleeting through a
small Orifice, that soon grows Callous, and therefore not being totally and
freely Evacuated, occasions the Bone to Cariate, which commonly by Exfoliation,
or rather Corrosion, Nature does expel in little shattered mouldering
splinters. The impure Nutriment the Conception assumeth in the Womb, renders
Children more subject to this kind of Scorvey, than others of Riper years, and
is vulgarly styled the Joynt-Evil, and some will know it by no other Name than
the King's Evil, which properly denotes only Scrophulous and Strumatick Kernels
and Tumors, though beyond all scruple are of the same Production with the
former, and consequently highly Scorbutic. Neither are a Fistula Lachrymalis,
and other malignant Issues near the Angles of the Eyes, or those Epiphora's, or
running of the Eyes, different in Causality and Constitution from either of the
forementioned.

. 3. Another sort of Joynt-Scorvey is specified in Rheumatisms, which generally
declare themselves by pains of the Joints, or rather in some by Tortures of the
extreme Articles, as Wrists, Knuckles, Joints of the Fingers, Elbows,
Shoulders, Hips, Knees, Ancles, Toes, and worst of all, when the impetuous
flood of Salin Rheum streams to the Neck, and Backbone. ( Spina Cervicis and
dorsi.) Pains of this Nature are so Violent, that for Acuteness are not
paralleled by ordinary Gout-pains. In like manner this sort of Rheumatism does
often rudely afflict the sides of the Head, decurring from the Bregma, to the
upper and lower Mandibles, and Roots of the Teeth, shooting like Darts from one
part of the Head to the other, and with so quick a Perculsive motion, that
Lightning and Blasts seem slow to it.

. 4. Practical Observations declare to us a twofold Rheumatism, External and
Internal. The former is just now praemised: The latter is discovered by
Internal, Acute, Fugitive pains, moving Erratically from one Bowel to another,
thence possibly to the Guts, and thence again it may be to the Ambient Skin, or
to some other Bowel, or the Breast; the quality of these Internal pains, is for
sudden and violent Motion, resembling External Rheumatisms; and for Acuteness,
forces the Patient to scriech out, lamenting his pain, now in one place,
praesently after in another, and suddenly again in another, to no small
Amazement of his Visiters; since for a small interval being free from pain,
feeling himself very well, and entertaining his Friends with Discourse, on a
sudden a shooting pain shall take him, and alter the Scene to a contrary
Disposition. Internal Rheumatisms are generally of a taedious continuation,
though the pains are far more brisk at one time than another, and sometimes do
make a Truce with the Patient for a few Days or sometimes Weeks, but in the
interim detain him in a neuter Estate, which can be determined neither well nor
ill, but weak; and thus I have heard of several, whose Recovery was scarce
accomplished in several Years; but that might partly be imputed to the ill
address of the Physician, being unskil'd in managing that Disease.

. 5. Among diverse Joynt-Scorbuticks, it has been Remarked, their Bones have
been very Frangible, that upon very small occasions, they have had the
misfortune of breaking their Legs, Arms, Bones of the Hand, and Fingers; but
before this can arrive, another Symptom does ever praecede, namely, a Cracking
and Noise of the Joints, when they are moved. It argues him much a stranger to
Practice and Experience, that never observed an Arthritick or Gouty-Scorvey,
being such a sort of Counter-natural affection, as besets the parts near the
Joints with Corrosive Salin Ichors, and through them attaques them with very
Lacerative and Terebrating pains, and such as commonly in the Night season
Duplicate their Fury. In this Disease, as it is Genuine distinction from other
Gouts, would certainly very much conduce to the Solacement of the Patient, and
his complete Recovery; so it would no less add to the Reputation of the
Physician, and therefore shall in their places amplify upon it is Description,
Causes, Signs and Cure.

. 6. Two Bones being tied together, that place where they meet is properly
termed the Joint, from being joined together, or Juncture, or Articulation.
Physicians also style it an Article, but improperly, the word Articulus
importing a Diminutive of Artus, Latiniz'd from (...), a Member. Moreover,
Bones that are Diarthrotically joined, are fastened together, besides
particular Ligaments, by a common Ligament or Band growing usually from the
lower part of the Apophyse of one Bone, and inserted into the upper part of the
Apophyse of the other Bone. This common Ligament or Band is in point of
substance tough, thick, dense and extensive, and by reason of its close
Compacture, and immediate Adhaesion and Circumvesture, does refuse passage to
all Arthritick humors, whence may be Deduced, the Gout is not properly to be
termed a Joynt-disease; whereunto this Instance contributes an unquaestionable
Evidence, that the Internal parts of the Joint being Cartilaginous, and the
Ambient parts Ligaments, are both Insensible and Incapable of Sensation: So
that we must conclude the Universal Sentiment upon this particular a vulgar
Error, growing from an Inadvertency and blind Ignorance in Anatomy.

. 7. We are therefore to state the Parts nearest adjacent (above or below) to
the Joint, the Seat of the Gout, which by reason of the Termination of the
Tendons, and Circumvesture of the Periostium, are exquisitely Sensible, and
exposed to the greatest Tortures.

. 8. The Joints that are most commonly haunted by the Gout, are the Hip, where
it is called the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout; the Knees, where it is termed the
Knee-Gout, or Gonagra; the Feet, which comprehends also the Ancles, and here
it is named the Podagra, or Foot-Gout; and the Hands, including also the Wrists,
thence called Chiragra, or Hand-Gout. Besides these, most other Joints, as
Shoulders, Elbow, and Back and Neck-bones, are sometimes also attacqued by
those furious pains. Why these last recited Junctures are not so much exposed
to Gout pains, as the former, is, because being wrapped about with fleshy
Tendons, and Muscles, receive thence a great assistance of heat and warmth,
whereby the temperament of those parts are much comforted, the External cold
resisted, and those Saline Acrimonious Ichors soon dissipated.

The periodical Revolutions of these Arthritick Scorveys, are an Argument to
me, they are subject to a Praedominance of both the Luminaries: For from the
Seasons produced by the Suns Peragration, they are Resuscitated Spring and
Fall; and the Lunar Circuits occasion their appearance, and Return in many
Bodies as ordinarily, as the monthly Maladies of Women, scarce any Sex or Age
under Twelve or Fourteen, being exempted from the forementioned Arthritick
Scorvey; But it is otherwise in the Gout, which ordinarily rather invades the
Crazie Bodies of Super-annuated Persons.

In contra-distinction to an Arthritick Scorvey, that is fixed to a part, viz. To
the Hip, Knee, or Foot, as has been just now Praeliminated; there is also
observed an Arthritis vaga, or Fugitive Arthritick Scorvey; but this being not
different from an External Rheumatism, whereof has been mentioned before,
shall supersede any further Explanation.

It will hardly escape the Animadversion of many Perusers, that I have beyond
the Sentiment of other Physicians, reduced the Praeternatural affections
treated of here in this Chapter, within the Latitude of the Scorvey. Wherefore
that I may not deserve a Sinister Censure, I will offer those Arguments, that
to me were sufficient Motives, which if to others they seem less persuasive, I
need only tell them, I may with as much right range them in the Train of the
Scorvey, as Eugalen, Solomon Albertus, Wierus, and twenty more have given place
to half the known Symtoms of the Diseased Body of Man, in the List of
Scorbutic Attendants.

Touching the Insertion of the Scorbutic Lassitude in the first Article, all
Authors that have Treated on the Scorvey, have granted that Symptom almost so
Universal, as to be a Pathognomonick inseparable.

In relation to that of the second Article, most may find difficulty, to
Identifie it with the Scorvey, since it is not easy to discern one and the same
Disease, to be the same in two or more several Patients; much less a Disease
that is so Various and Multiform, featured with several Shapes and Signatures in
several Subjects: Wherefore I must be obliged to a Recital of certain Marks,
and received Rules, whereby Authors do either Diversify or Identifie Diseases.

Causes of the same Nature and Efficiency, though Univocal, do not always
produce the same Effects, and therefore consequently (though two or more
Diseases are engendered by the same Efficients, and out of the same Matter) they
may be different Diseases, whence may be objected, that those Joynt-Diseases,
though issuing from the same Causes the Scorvey is derived from, it is no
Argument they should be termed the Scorvey. By this Assertion, the Peripatetick
Maxim seems to be suspected, viz. Posita causa, ponitur effectus; ergo posita
causa Scorbutica, ponuntur effectus Scorbutici: And all Diseases that are
produced by a Scorbutic cause, must be the Scorvey.

You must observe the truth of this Theorem does depend upon certain
Limitations, namely, a cause to be qualified to produce the same Effects, must
be Univocal, and a causa per se; for otherwise (though granted Univocal) its
causality may be per accidens. Depravated, and Occasioned to an Aberrancy by
other causes: For instance in the Scorvey, imagine it is Production from a
corrupt Melancholy; that may Stagnate in the Spleen, which being supposed in
two several Bodies; in the one possibly it may constitute Symptoms, that are
commonly Concomitants of the Scorvey; in the other, because there may be a
mixture of Vitiated Choler, or of a Serum affected with an ill Quality, or a
great Infirmity of some Entrail; the aforesaid supposed Scorbutic cause shall
be so Obtused, Altered, or Endued with a different Efficiency, that the
Diseases so produced, shall be no Scorvey, but some other Counter-natural
affection. This may also very properly be exemplified in Celestial Causes,
among which conceive a Planet in such a Sign, and such a Degree, by his
influence to produce certain Effects, upon any supposed Sublunary body; at its
return to the same Sign and Degree, possibly it shall not be a cause of the
same Effects, because through the Radiations of other Firmamentary lights, it is
influence shall be directed and limited to another Effect much different:
Whence having rendered the Ground of the Variation of Symptoms in the Body of
Man obvious, my next affair is to propose a Theorem whereby Diseases are
Identified.

Diseases are computed the same, that are constituted by the same Univocal
Causes, not aberring further per accidens, than that those symptoms that are
effected per se, may in Number and Specification exceed those, that are
produced per accidens. Moreover, Diseases by their Intrinsic signification
imply Parts primarily affected, whereof they are Diseases; and therefore
Diseases cannot be Idenfied, unless the parts affected primarily be the same;
which we must now explain to be the same in the Scorvey, and in the Joynt-Evil,
and Gout-Scorvey. None vary from this Opinion, that the parts Primarily and
Originally affected in the Scorvey, are all the chief parts of the Inferior
Cavity, that appertain to the Natural Faculty, whose office is to Confect the
Chyle, Elaborate and Depurate the Blood, which are the Stomach, Spleen and
Liver.

The Chyle in those, that are afflicted with the Gout and Joynt-Evil, receiving
a Malign Tincture and Impression, from an ill qualified Dissolvent, is a
praegnant Evidence, the Stomach is a part affected; and the aforesaid Chyle
upon its arrival within the Spleen and Liver, induing a quality of a
Malignanter efficacy, expressly proves, both those Entrails aequally parts
affected, and consequently the parts radically or primarily affected are the
same.

Neither can I discern any difference in the Causes of both, residing in a
corrupt Salt, fixed or volatile. It must then be the difference of symptoms, that
creates suspicion of the Diversity between these Joynt-Diseases, and the
Scorvey, which as was intimated before, may be remarked in all Universal
Diseases, varying in two or more Bodies, in several symptoms, and yet are
deemed the same Disease: A continual acute Fever (which I call an Universal
Distemper, because it is symptoms are Universal, and disturb all the parts of
the Body in their several Functions) in one is attended with Vomitings, in the
other with a Looseness, in a third with neither; which nevertheless, are known
and determinated Concomitants of a continual acute Fever in all. In thi^
Labyrinth, the Position stated in the beginning of this Paragraph, conducts me
to an Expedient of surpassing the difficulty, viz. The symptom^ that Identifie
Diseases, do immediately, and per se, emanate from them, in or near the parts
affected: For instance, if the Heart be seized with a Disease, the Pulsation
does generally express it, being a symptom that immediately consecutes the
Distemper in the part affected, which is the Heart; the like may be observed in
all Diseases. These must be such as properly are terms Pathognomonick, and by
Industry, and fraequent Experience, may be discerned in most Distempers, though
symptoms that are occasioned per accidens are Infinite, and common to many
Diseases. Now to our Affair; In the recited Joynt-Diseases, and Gout-Scorvey,
the radical symptoms are an ill Confection of the Chyle, or a vitiated
Elaboration or Depuration of the Chyme; a propagation of Malign Seminaries, in
the Bowels and Blood, that renders Diseases contagious, Haereditary, and most
Obstinate; these being likewise symptoms in the Scorvey, I judge I have justly
Identified them; but that will more amply appear in my subsequent Discourse.
Add hereunto, that in Identified Diseases, the Procatartick causes are the
same, which in these various kinds of the Scorvey, is verified in a Salin Air
and Diet, whence both the Internal, Antecedent and Continent causes afterward
take their Original, which also for a certain space continue the same, until
that by a continuated morbifick Action and Calcination, they pass into a
contrary Nature, from an Acid, to an Alcali, as among Chemical processes,
appears in Acid Tartar, which by Calcination makes a Transition into an
Alcalious Salt of Tartar; nevertheless as the Acid Salt of Tartar, and the
Alcalious Salt of Tartar, though contrary, do both retain the same name of Salt
of Tartar; so an Acid Scorvey, and an Alcalious Scorvey, retain the same
Denomination of a Scorvey, or are Identified in the same Name. Before I limit
this Chapter, I must propose an Argument of a greater Consequence, namely, That
those Joynt-Diseases and Gout-Scorvey, are only to be removed by an
Antiscorbutick course; but not such as is directed by the praescriptions of the
Vulgar, who are as blind in these Distempers, as they commonly are in Fevers
and Smallpox.

CHAP. V. Of the Causes of the Mouth-Scorvey.
1. A scrutiny into some Procatartick and occasional Causes of the
Mouth-Scorvey. 2. The Internal cause of the Mouth-Scorvey proved. 3. The
praeparation of Mercury Sublimate corrosive examined. 4. The Spittle is Imbued
with several sorts of Salts at several Seasons. 5. That it is not every Acid is
the cause of the Sorvey. 6. Of Spirit of Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, and Tartar. 7.
That some Acids are good Remedies against the Scorvey. 8. Chemical Theorems. 9.
Turbith Mineral examined. 10. How a Salivation is Occasioned. 11. Observations
upon the Dissection of the Stomach. 12. Why one is apt to Spit after the taking
of any ungrateful Medicine. 13. Animadversions upon the Ferment of the Stomach.
14. The Succus Pancreaticus Silvii rejected. 15. That the Succus Pancreaticus
does never Secundum Naturam flow to the Stomach; that naturally it is not Acid,
but Sweet. 16. Why Nature has endued the Pancreatick juice, with a lentour and
sweetness. 17. Proof that it is sweet. 18. Why the Stomach is provided with so
great a number of Lymphatick Channels. The manner of the Concoction in the
Stomach. 19. That the Digestive faculty is most potent about the upper Region
of the Ventricle. 20. The manner of separation of the Concocted from the crude
Chyle, with several Remarks upon the Dissolvent, or Mock-ferment of the
Stomach. 21. The manner how Liquors turn Acid.

. 1. BY a Scrutiny into some Procatartick and Occasional Causes, we may
possibly be Conducted into a Path, of discovering the Immediate and Continent
causality of the Mouth-Scorvey; and therefore converting our Observation on the
Effects of Spirit of Vitriol, Nitre, Vinegar, etc. We shall on the aestimate of
the use of any of them, mixed with Powders into Dentifrice, or Instilled into a
Liquor for a Collution of the Mouth, award, they are as offensive as any
Internal cause, by Rotting and Blacking the Teeth, raising Pain and Swelling in
the Gums, and moving a thin Sputation.

. 2. Mercury externally by Confriction forced into the Pores, or Internally
taken in the form of a subdued Sublimate, or Praecipitate, soon Ravages the
Mouth, exactly like, a Scorbutic Cause, since it forces up a Humor from
within, that swells, Fissures, Ulcers, Pains the Gums and the Mouth, Looseneth
and Rots the Teeth, Salivates, and occasions a fowl stink of Breath; all which
symptoms, if we can demonstrate to take their rise from Effluviums issuing from
an Acid Salt, mercurial praeparations have all their dependence on, and which
within their most intime and centrical Particles, do contain a most Subtle
Vibrating and Volatile Salt, will result into a praemiss, whence no Ingenious
Reader, but with me, will conclude a Mouth-Scorvey to be Engendered by a corrupt
Acid Salt rendered fluid, and a Volatile Salt converted into corrosive,
inordinate in motion, and united with a Fuliginous Salt. That you may be
convinced of this Hypothetick proposition, take Inspection into the various
processes of Mercurial Elaborations, where you find Mercury fixed (but very
imperfectly) into Praecipitates, Sublimates, Spirits, and Salts, of diverse
Shapes and Colors, viz. Into White, Red and Yellow Praecipitates, by Aqua
Fortis, Spir. Nitr. Spir. Sal. Ol. Vitr. all which, take notice, are vehemently
Acid; and thence conceive, that the Volatile Salt, or Fugitive Spirits, latent
in Mercury, are only to be tied by an acid Vinculum. If upon this you design to
reduce Mercury (whether Praecipitate, or Sublimate, or any other Praeparation)
to its former shape of Quicksilver, it is easily attained, by freeing it from
that acid Vinculum, in mixing it with a proportion of Calx Viv. Gypsum,
Soap-ashes, Sal Tartari, etc. and driving it through a Retort, whereunto it
readily yields by means of those Alcalized, or fiery fixed Salts, mortifying the
Acid. So that by the Rule of Contraries, if an Alcali reduces Mercury, the
Consequence is, it was detained by an Acid.

. 3. The Sequel is farther illustrated in the praeparation of Sublimate
Corrosive, the Quicksilver being first grinded with Salt Peter, Vitriol, or
Common Salt, wherein being latent a most potent Acid (as appears by their
Reverberatory distillations) does soon invade and penetrate the body of the
Mercury, and thereupon encountering with its most subtle and fugitive Minims,
arrests, and in some degree does fix them, qualifying their Volatile levity with
it is ponderous Acid, and therein it is discernably assisted by affusing a few
drops of distilled Vinegar, or other Acid Spirit, whilst the Salts and Mercury
are grinding together. Upon this Mixture, that Salin Lixivious taste of the
Salts, before their Coalescence with the Mercury, is changed into a pontick
Acid taste. And because There ebenthine is so praegnant of an Acid spirit (as
the Rectified spirit thereof to the Tongue, is a palpable proof) it is therefore
the chief refine, that is capable of subduing Mercury, whereunto it is Lentour
and Glutinous faculty does very much contribute.

. 4. Hence let us make a nearer approach, to what is a Branch of my Subject,
and necessarily conclude, that Spittle ( Saliva) is endued with a Turgency of
Acid Particles, far more potent, than sharp distilled Vinegar, because it is so
effectual in Amortizing or Fixing Quicksilver, which may likewise be performed
by the Acid juice of Limons: But observe likewise, that Spittle is rendered
Acid, only toward the latter end of the Concoction of the Stomach, from the
Acour of the Dissolvent Liquour, and therefore the Morning-fasting-spittle is
recommended for the purpose above mentioned. Moreover, take this Remark with
you, That the Spittle is imbued at several seasons with several Salts;
sometimes with Volatile, other times with Lixivial salts, sometimes with Acid,
and sometimes with mixed salts, according to the contents in the Capacity of the
Stomach, and about it is tunics; so that all sorts of spittle is not proper for
the Amortizing of Mercury.

. 5. Now upon Compute of the whole matter, though your Reason may reap so much
satisfaction, as to believe potent Acids, the sole subduers of Mercury, and
capable of arresting its Fugitive particles; yet we must not be so facil, as to
concede all Acids pernicious in the same Latitude with Mercury coagulated, of
acting upon Liquours of the Body, and rendering them Scorbutic aggressors; for
the greater number of Acids, Administered with rules of Caution and Prudence,
obtaining a virtue of Repelling and Suppressing some kind of Scorbutic
symptoms, bear an evident Testimony of the contrary.

. 6. Spirit of Salt Marin (I mean not the Grecian Impostor's, but) dexterously
praepared, according to the rules of the Spagyrick Art, has acquired a good
Character to some Physicians, for praescribing it to their Scorbutic Patients:
And I were to blame for my silence, should I praetermit the great Effects of
Spirit of Nitre, Philosophically purged from its Arsenical fumes, not a few
Scorbuticks owing their Recovery to this Acid from very obstinate accidents,
that were true issues of that Disease. Neither can the performance of these
praecited inciding deoppilative Acids, be justly called into doubt, since from
the Spirit of Vitriol, and Vinegar, (used in the Condiment of Capers, Samphire,
etc.) though of a styptick Energy, advantage has been received in the Cure of
Scorbuticks and Spleneticks: If then these Corroding and Cerberous Acids merit
a reception so just among the Apollinean Faculty, certainly, those that are
acquainted with the true Process of the Acid spirit of Tartar, being so
Penetrative, Attenuating, Digestive, Ecphractick, and yet of an amicable Acour,
can praetend to a greater secret to Eradicate the Scorvey. By the way, observe,
It is not against an Acid Scorvey they are such excellent Remedies, but against
a Lixivial one, which in the progress of this Discourse will be farther
Explained to you.

. 7. From this Praecurrent Illustration, we may be assured in Opinion, that
Acids by their native Qualification, or Corrosive to some Scorbutic bodies,
and therefore it must be through a praeternatural Affection, they are enforced
to constitute the Principles of the forecited Malady. On this occasion, it
will not be Dissonant, to Analyze Mercury (as it is reduced to a Praecipitate,
or Sublimate, or other Coagulated body, by acid Salts or Spirits) into its most
Intime Syntheticks, whence the Genuine Procreatives of the Scorvey will more
distinctly Emerge.

. 8. In order to the Unravelling of this so close knitted Mineral, I must first
Repraesent to you these by me received Hermetick Theorems.

1. All Alcalies are contrary to Acids, and consequently do extinguish them, or
if encountering in a lesser proportion only praefract them. Affuse the Alcalized
Liquor of Tartar, to the Acid Oil of Vitriol, in their just proportions, the
Production will be a Salt of Tartar, much praefracted in its Alcalized faculty,
and a Salt of Vitriol much obtused in its Acidity; but if the Alcaly of Tartar
be superior in measure to the Acid of Vitriol, then it does reduce the Vitriol
to a Capul Mortuum, and entirely extinguish its Acidity.

2. All Volatile Salts are fixed by Acids. The Volatile salt of Hartshorn, or
Amber, being Irrorated with Spirit of Salt, is soon laid in sleep, and loses
its Wings.

3. There is no Alcali, but in its intime and centrical Particles, contains a
most Acid, Corroding, and Perforating Salt. Likewise, There is no Acid Salt, or
Spirit, but in its centrick Particles is lodged a most Igneous Alcaly. Within
the centrick of the Acid Oil of Vitriol, there is an Igneous and Caustic alt.

4. Volatile Salt is nothing but the fixed Salt of any Body, Volatilized by the
admixture of Sulphurous Particles.

5. The Purgative, or Vomitive, or other active faculty of Bodies, does Emanate
from their Volatile Salts, either by Irradiation, or Atomical Effluviums.

From the Application of these to any particular Praeparation, we are to
expect, what now we Dive into. To this purpose, let our ordinary Turbith
Mineral, as it is in the London Pharmacopoea Transcribed by our Physicians out
of Vnzerus, who Records the Invention of it to Adam Bodenstein, be our Subject,
as best known to my Perusers, both for its Use and Process; though possibly
this remarque may escape their knowledge; that whereas Directions are given in
the Dispensatory, for affusing an Anatick proportion of dephlem'd Oil of
Vitriol to Mercury, purged from its plumbeous Recrements, which Evaporated,
leaves a white residence in the bottom of the Bolt-head, to be sweet washed into
a yellow Powder; the praescription of the forementioned Bodenstein, requires
an addition of Salt of Vitriol, in proportion of half the weight to the Oil of
Vitriol, which renders the Result of the Elaboration less Churlish, and more
effectual.

Your view on this discerns the most compact body of Mercury, dissolved by the
Acid of Vitriol, its Fugitive spirits detained, or Volatile salt partly fixed by
its Pontick Liquor, or Acid Salt, and through their mutual Re-action so
Elaborated, that in this Conjunct state have assumed neuter Faculties, not to
be deprehended in either Singular: For the one is so eminent in the
Adstrictive, that in Haemorrhages both Internal and External it performs, what
other Restringents or Emplasticks fail in. The other, viz. Quicksilver aims at
no other Effects, than its weight or gravity is capable to produce; but upon
their Coalition, they remove most obstinate Diseases by Vomit, Stool, Urine,
Sweat, and Salivation.

From the Inference of the first and second Spagyrick Theorems, you must be
convinced, it is the Volatile Salt of Mercury, and no other Constitutive
principle, is here Coagulated, because performed by its opposite, a fixing
Acid, and thereby somewhat praefracted; for through the abatement of its
Vibrating and Penetrating Faculty, it is experienced not so capable, to
Amalgamate the nobler Metals into a Calx. From the repercussive particles of
the said Mercurial Volatile Salt, the Acid of Vitriol is not only obtused, but
rendered a dissolvent corruptive Acid, whereas naturally it is known a great
Praeserver from putrefaction and dissolution. And if you give credit to the
fifth Axiom, which long Experience has established firm and indubious among
most Practicians; you must assert, not only the Vomitive and Purgative
faculties to be issues of the Mercurial Volatile Salt, but also its Salivative
quality; which explained in manner following, seems to me to be evident enough,
how it exerts its power.

. 10. Turbith Mineral, or other crude Mercurial praeparation, is no sooner
swallowed down into the Stomach, but through its most subtle volatile Salt, does
attaque the Salts, that are floating in the Liquor, the capacity of the Stomach
is ever furnished with more or less, (for an absolute dryness, would certainly
be attended with a most dangerous Hiccoch, or Convulsion of the Stomach) which
in some proportion converting into Particles of its own Nature, does soon
occasion a Turgency in the Liquor of the Stomach, (being an Effect of the
Contrariety and Combat between the Mercurial Volatile Salt, and the Acid.) And
the Lymph contained in the Lymphaticks of the Stomach, which Turgency
continuated to the Ductus Salivales under the Tongue, and the others that
terminate about the Cheeks and Gums, causes an overflowing of the foresaid
Lymph or Serum, where it is called Spittle or Saliva, quasi Sal Liquor, ceu
Salsus Liquor, or Salt Spittle, for such it is. Here we must make a Digression
to a succinct Explanation of the Fabric, and Liquor of the Stomach,
discovering the Nature of it, whence it Sourceth, and through what Creeks and
Inosculations it makes its Irruption, and thence it will prove more facil, by a
further pursuit to render the manner of Salivation Obvious to the meanest
Capacity.

. 11. Experiment in this Case makes the strongest Plea, and therefore I will
offer you my Observation, Upon the Dissection of a Dog, fed with salt Meat
intermixed with Sublimate Corrosive, and thereupon most thirstily Lapping a
great quantity of Water, wherein Pease had been boiled, and immediately
strangled. I was chiefly intentive on a strict view and research of the
Stomach, in whose External Surface or Tunic, being a process of the
Peritonaeum, the Coeliac Arteries appeared very tumid and full, and every where
discernable to the Eye, accompanied with Lymphatick Vessels, that were also no
less Turgid, and supported by a number of small Glanduls, which at other times
remain hidden, because there is not so great a Confluence of Lymphatick matter,
to swell them up. The Crusta carnosa and the Interior Tunic, separable in a Dog
from one another, through this superfluous Irrigation were Fungous, and upon a
pressure the Lympha exstilled at little Pores or Orifices; which probably may
be conjectured the extremities of the Inosculations of the Lymphatick Vessels.
The dispersions of the Branches and Terminations of the foresaid Coeliac
Artery, through the middle and inward Tunic, were extremely distended with
Humors, and the Lymphatics every where throughout both Tunics, no less visibly
burdened with moisture, and upon a diligent observe of their track, were found
to ascend the Oesophagus, and to perforate the great Glanduls, and thence to
the Tonsils, the Ranine, and other Glanduls of the Mouth.

. 12. Before I detected the Expatiation of these Lymphatick Channels, could not
out of any Author supply my self with the Reason, why upon the assuming of any
ungrateful Medicine, Purgative or Alterative, after a small interval, the Mouth
does salivate a thin pellucid Serum; which from the praemised Discourse seems
very evident: For upon the Combat between the Dissolvent Liquor (or that which
is improperly called the Ferment) and the Volatile Particles of the Medicine,
happens a Turgency, which by continuation being likewise Impressed upon the
Lymphaticks of the Tunics of the Ventricle, and Oesophagus, must necessarily
occasion an overflowing at the Termination of the Ductus Salivales, both of
those under the Tongue, and the other on the sides of the Gums.

. 13. By the way, I must make one observe, how unsuccessful Authors have been,
in Imposing the name of Ferment upon the Acid juice of the Stomach, and
describing its Source, or Original. The word Ferment, (as you may read more at
large, in the first part of my Treatise, De Febribus, Cap. V.) is Universally
taken to be that, which Clarifies and Exalts any compound Liquor, that is newly
made by Decoction, Infusion, Expression, or otherwise, to a greater Perfection,
by means of a Simpering (for Fermentum takes its Derivation a Fremendo, and not
Fervendo) or a small Ebullition, whereby the Liquor is Subtiliated or
Attenuated, and the Heterogeneous bodies separated into a Froth and Lees. This
Signification can in no manner be applied to the foresaid Acid juice,
performing only the Office of Dissolving the Victuals received in the Stomach,
and Coaequating it into a Cream, or Chyle; a word Originated from (...) to
Dissolve: Wherefore there being only a Dissolution of what is Ingested, o^ a
Production of Chyle attained by means of this Dissolvent Acid, and no
Depuration or Exaltation; it does more properly require the name of a
Dissolvent Liquor, than of a Ferment, and consequently there is no Fermentation
in the Stomach, but only a Dissolution, and Coaequation; whence may be
remarqued, how Truth is often overruled by an impetuous Current of Opiniaters.

. 14. The source whence this Acid juice should stream, was for a long time
asserted the Spleen, effusing through the Vas breve, into the Stomach, which
the Curiosity of Anatomists observing not to be Pervious at its Termination,
concluded there must be some other passage, through which the said Juice was
conveyed; but none durst praesume to assign it, until Sylvius, the late
Physick-Professor of Leyden, did attempt to prove this Acid juice to be
engendered in the Pancreas, and therefore named it Succus Pancreaticus, whence
through the Ductus Virsungianus was by Regurgitation forced up into the
Stomach. This Conception of Succus Pancreaticus has so fondly been Nursed by
him, that in his Idea nova Prax. Medic. he does Impeach it, to be the Productor
of most Diseases. Much less than a Demonstration, for scarce a probability of
this Acid Pancreatic Succus has been offered by him, which so much Disgusted
Monsieur le Vasseur, a Physician Regent of the Faculty of Paris, that he
undertook to Demolish that Principle in a small tract written in Latin,
wherein he does fiercely Impugnate his Triumvirate of Morbifick Causes, (as he
styles it in his own Ideom) though without obtaining any Advantage on his
Adversary, the one being no more Auspicious in Refelling the Acid Pancreatic
juice, than the other in asserting it.

. 15. In the first place, I find no Difficulty in maintaining, that the Succus
Pancreaticus is at no time Secundum Naturam propelled into the Stomach; for the
Grand Channel, which is the Ductus Virsungianus, terminating near the Confines
of the Duodenum, and the Ilion, and Disburdening the superfluous Juice into it,
is naturally according to the Peristaltick motion, being performed by the
Contraction of the Circular Fibers, expelled and carried downwards; and if at
any time it is forced into the Stomach, that must needs happen by means of the
Inversion of the Peristaltic motion (namely, the Circular Fibers contracting
from below upwards) which undoubtedly is Convulsive, being occasioned through a
Stimulation of the said Juice, Vitiated or Obstructed, and is absolutely Contra
Naturam. But if according to the Tenor of this Discourse, the Pancreatic Juice
is Regurgitated into the Stomach; is so far from Pleasing or Delighting it,
through that amicable Acour, that is Fictitiously attributed to it, that it
occasions a maukish Nauseousness and Salivation, which Re vera are effects of a
sweetish thick moistening Water, contrary to what flows from the Causality of
an Acid Humor; and nothing is observed, to have a greater share, in dissolving
the Tone of the Stomach, and contributing Matter to those Slimy Ropy Crudities,
plaistered to the sides of the Stomach, than this Incrassated Pancreatic juice.
So that it must be believed, that this kind of Fallacious Doctrine is by those,
that for their seeming parts are placed in the School Chairs, violently Imposed
upon their Scholars, who Imbibing this in their Infant Studies, like Principles
of Religion, aesteem it a great Crime, ever to doubt of what their Masters
infused into them.

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem, Testa diu, etc.. 16. In its
natural Qualification, I am assured, the Pancreatic juice partakes of no
Acidity, proof thereof shall be offered you below. The Pancreas to me, seems to
be the Sinck of the Lymphatick Vessels, whither they Post the superfluous
Lymph, that has done its Task, to be Evacuated as an Excrement. But here the
Wisdom of Nature is very remarkable, in Inserting the Ductus Pancreaticus, or
Virsungianus into the Duodenum, neighboring so near to the Ductu^ Cholidochus;
the one namely the Cholidochus, serving the Gall Bladder, ( Cystis bilis) as a
Conduit to Disgourge the overflowing Choler into the Guts, which otherwise
through its extreme Amaritude, and Lixivious corrosive Salt, being rendered so
Superlatively sharp and detergent, would offer violence to the most sensible
small Guts, and soon gnaw off its Internal Tunic, were it not that meeting with
this Sweetish, Thick, Moistening Water, Extilling from the Ductus Pancreaticus,
it was soon allayed, and qualified with its Lenitive and Dulcifying Lentour. A
further use Nature has Destined it to, is to Moisten, and render the Internal
Tunic of the Guts Glib and Slippery, for to Promote, and Facilitate the descent
of Excrements, being moreover the material Cause of that Pituita, or Fleam,
which is ever found in the small Guts, in the state of Health. Neither do I
give the least Credit to those Capricious Opinions, the forenamed Sylvius has
Superstructed upon so Erroneous a Fundamental, as this Acid Pancreatic juice,
viz.

1. That there daily happens a mild Effervescency between the Bilis and that
Juice, which I am confident a Healthful Person is altogether Insensible of,
unless Indulging his Apetite in a large Rouse of Strong Liquor.

2. That through a Vitiate Acidity of this Juice, are occasioned Dysenteries,
Gripes, Vomitings, and what not; read Chap. V. Lib. Praecitat.

3. That all Diseases depend on the Praeternatural disposition of his
Triumviral Humor: To wit, Fleam, Choler, and this Pancreatic juice; but for
all this, not one syllable of Proof, rather introducing a Thousand Absurdities
on the Neck of another.

. 17. I am now Arrived, where I am to Illustrate to you, the Pancreatic juice
is so far remote from being Acid, that it is perfectly sweet. It Is a Concession
granted by all, That Moisture is more apt to turn Acid in an Extinct Body, than
Living; as appears in Veal, which being kept too long, expires an acid steam.
If so, then,

1. The Pancreatic juice, obtaining an Acidity in a Living Body, must
necessarily assume a greater Acidity in a Body Expired; which is observed
contrary, for the Juice that is expressed out of the Pancreas of a killed Calf,
has a clammy sweet taste, and certainly is endued with a far sweeter savor,
whilst it contains a proportion of Volatile Salt within the Channels of a Living
Body.

2. The Pancreas it self Raw or Boiled, pleases the Palate with a sweet taste,
beyond any other sort of Flesh, which qualification can not be in a Body that
engenders an Acid Juice, or daily is Irrigated with it. Propter quod unum
quodque tale est, illud magis tale est.

3. Lymphatick Vessels about the Stomach, and those of the Pancreas, both
Deriving from the Spleen, and having a Communication and Commerce in the same
Contents, namely Juices or Lymphs, It is not to be doubted, but both Juices of
the Stomachick and the Pancreatick Lymphaeducts, participate of the same
Nature, and Taste, which being deprehended sweet in the Stomach Lymphaeducts,
can be no other in the Pancreatick. Medicines that Create some Labor to the
Stomach, and move a Turgency in the Lymphatics of the Stomach, occasion an
overflowing of the Ductus Salivales, or a Salivation of that very Lymph, or
Juice, that was floating about the Ventricle, which is commonly pronounced by
all, to have a Sweetish or Subdulce taste in the Mouth, and doubless, that of
the Pancreas is not different. The manner how is expressed before.

4. An Argument may be Deduced a causa; The Lymph of the Stomachick and
Pancreatick Vessels is Replenisht, and well Saturated with Volatile Salt, whose
Nature is Experienced, to Expel and Extinguish all Acidity, and so consequently
the foresaid Lymph must prove sweet, and in no wise Acid.

. 18. The Lymphatick Vessels being in great numbers directed from the Spleen to
the Stomach, to Transport thither a proportion of Lymph, that in the
Percolation of the Blood, was attracted and assuged into the said Lymphatick
Vessels, being thoroughly Saturated with Volatile Salt, transported through the
Pores of the Stomachick Nerves, and Coeliac Arteries, is Effused into the
Stomach at such times when it has received Victuals to Digest; for thereupon
the Arterial Blood, and Vital Spirits are moved and attracted, and a heat
Excited, whereby the Lymph being Attenuated, rendered Turgid and the Vessels
Tumefied, is forced into the Stomach in that quantity, as does sufficiently
Relax the said Lymphaeducts. This Lymph by means of the said Volatile Salt, is
so Subtle, Penetrating, Attenuating, and Rarefying, that Uniting with the
Volatile Particles of the Liquor ingested, and that which by Mastication of the
Victuals lies (...) Perfused and Dissolved, does soon disunite and dissolve the
Vinculum of the solid Victuals, and being thoroughly mixed with the Liquid, is
speedily reduced into a Cream or Chyle. Whilst this Attenuation and Solution is
performing, there is a Turgency occasioned in the Capacity of the Stomach,
which streightning the Arteries, that Amplexe the Stomach, do through Renix
duplicate their Pulsation in Fraequency and fortitude, (as appears upon feeling
the Pulse of the Carp after Dinner or Supper) whereby the Heat is much
intended, and Copious Effumations of Vital Spirits or Arterial Volatile Salt,
immitted into the said Capacity, which do most vigorously assist the
Dissolution and Concoction of the Stomach.

. 19. That the Concoctive Faculty is most Active, and Potent in the Fund, or
bottom of the Stomach, has been hitherto the blind Opinion of most Anatomists,
upon Surmisal, that the Acid Ferment, which bears a great part in the
Concoction, through its Gravity and Praecip^tative quality, is chiefly floating
about the lower Region of the Ventricle: But if we suppose, the Digestive
Operation to be performed principally, by virtue of the Volatile Salt contained
in the Pores of the Lymph, being of a Subliming and Ascending Nature; the
Stomach by reason of those greater Nerves of the Sixth pair, and Fibers of the
greatest strength, Circumvesting the upper part of the Stomach to be most
Robust, and the Heat and Dissolvent steems to be Reflected, Collected, and
Augmented there; it must be confessed, that the Digestive Faculty is most
Energic about the upper Region of the Ventricle. The next Particular in order
to be Explained, is, when and how the Juice that is Concocted, is separated
from that, which is not yet perfectly digested, and afterward Transmitted
through the Pylorus, or Inferior Orifice of the Stomach, into the small Guts.
That the whole content of Victuals and Drink is not so long retained in the
Stomach, until the entire Mass be totally Digested, is Experinced by all, that
observe their Stomachs after Meals, to grow gradually Lighter and less
distended, and their Appetites likewise to return Gradually, and so
consequently the upper part of the Chyle being first Concocted, and swiming
a-top like a Cream, is first praepared, and ready to be Effused thence in this
manner: The Chyle being thoroughly perfused with a great proportion of Volatile
Salt, is so Rarefied and Tumid, that it now exceeds its bounds, and by
assistance of that Aculeous quality of the aforesaid Salin Particles,
stimulates the Oblique Fibers to Expulsion, and still as in the same manner the
Stomach is gradually disburdened, so the Fibers gradually Contract and
Corrugate the Tunics into a smaller Comprehension, until the whole be
Transmitted, and the Stomach reduced to a scarce greater Circumscription than a
Fist. Several particulars here are of Remarque.

The first, That the Finer and most Coaequate matter is Extermined first, and
that which is somewhat of a grosser Pulment next, until at last the coursest
and Faeculent part succeeds to be wrought upon, which being Tough, Tenacious
and Glutinous, requires an Acid Dissolvent, by whose force, together with the
Continuation of the heat, Animal and Vital Spirits, or Vivid Volatile Salt
fuming out through the Pores of the Nerves and Arteries, the matter is more
potently Incided, Comminuted and Dissolved, and the said Acid Dissolvent, or
Mock-Ferment, obtaining a Pontique or Amicable astringent Acidity, is qualified
thereby, to praecipitate the gross remainder of the Chyle into the Duodenum,
and afterward to fortify, and Corroborate the distended and defatigated
Fibers of the Stomach by a gentle Astriction.

The Second, That the Ventricle being full, the Pylorus or lower Orifice is
Erected high, to praevent the too sudden Expulsion of the Chyle, and therefore
no part but what is uppermost, and rendered Turgid, by being thoroughly Imbued
with Volatile Salt, can be Transmitted; but as the Chyle Ebbs lower, so the
Pylorus seems likewise to Decline downwards by the Contraction of the Fund of
the Stomach, to give an easier passage to the weighty and drossy remainder of
the fore said Chyle, to which, should the Pylorus continue Mounted, at so great
a distance from the Inferior Region of the Ventricle, the Trajection or
Expulsion would prove extreme difficult.

The third is, That the last remainder in the Stomach, upon every complete
Concoction, is nothing but Dross, among some Physicians called the Scoria,
which being Commixt with the Acid Mock-Ferment, is praecipitated into the
Duodenum, where by reason of the Acrimony of the Commixt Acid, vellicates the
said Gut, at the Terminations of the Cholidochus, and the Ductus Pancreaticus,
Irritating the former to Disburden its Cargo of Choler, and the latter its
Incrassated Glutinous Lymph, of which three only the Excrements of the Guts do
consist, viz. From the Dross or Scoria of the Stomach, they Derive their Matter
and Consistency, from the Pancreatic Lymph their Clamminess and Cohaesion, and
from the Choler their color, from the quantity whereof it is more or less
Yellow, Red, or Luteous, and from the commixture of all their stinck does
Derive.

The fourth Observe is this, That whilst the Body is seated in a Healthful
state, the sweet Cream of the Chyle not being irritative, passes the Duodenum
and the other small Guts, without being Perturbated, Commixt, or Corrupted with
the foresaid Excrementitious Choler, or Pancreatic Lymph, which ever as I said
before, are disburdened at last, separately from the Alimentary Juices.

The fifth Discovers an Error of Opinion of some of the Learned in Physic, who
strive to maintain, that it is the Red Dregs of the Blood, is Evacuated through
the Ductus Pancreaticus, which they name Gloces Sanguinis, not being unlike the
Dregs of Red-Wine, which partly they say consists of thick Melancholy, that
has performed its Task, and partly of the Red of the Blood, that was too long
Retained, and somewhat Adust. Of this Opinion the Learned Professor Vander
Linden, of Famous Memory, was the Author, and also did (among the rest of his
Disciples) Instill it into me many Years past, but having only his (...) for it,
and upon Anatomical search into several Subjects, not finding any Red Dreg or
Lee, or any thing else, except the often forementioned thick Pancreatick Lymph,
have justly deserted that Tenet.

The sixth puts me in mind of the Praeparation, all solid Victuals require^,
namely of being Masticated, Ground small and even by the Teeth, and withal
Perfused with Spittle, which almost consisting of the same Principles and
Volatile Salt, the Dissolvent Lymph of the Stomach does, is a singular assistent
to the Concoctive part. That the Spittle is so praegnant of Volatile Salt, is
clearly Evinced from it is Dissolutive virtue, Softening and Discussing almost
any Pustle in less time, than any Medicine whatsoever; and supposing the
Spittle to be so Turgid of Volatile Salt, much more the Dissolvent Lymph of the
Stomach.

The seventh Annotation is, That during three fourth parts of the time of
Concoction, the Dissolvent Juice is no wise Acid, but on the contrary partakes
of an Igneous Alcalized volatile Nature, abounding with Penetrative, Dissolutive
and Pungitive, or Mordicant Effluviums and Steems, as may be observed by those,
that occasionally Belching at the mid-time of Concoction, or before, or
somewhat after, are so vehemently Stung, Bitten, and Inflamed in their Throat,
and along the Oesophagus, that it is not in the power of Brandy, or other
Ardent Spirits, to imitate those Effects. But the Volatile Salts being together
with the Chyle, passed out of the Stomach into the small Guts, the Dissolvent
Lymph is left Acid, to accomplish the Digestion of the Gross and Faeculent
remainder, which toward the latter part of Digestion, or some six or eight
hours after Meals, in some quicker, in others slower, is upon an Eructation or
Belching perceived in the Mouth, not only Sour, but Acid with an Adstriction,
not unlike the Acid Spirit of Vitriol.

. 21. To those that are knowing in the Analytick part of the Spagyrick Art,
it is very Obvious, that Compound Liquors consist of a Volatile Salt, and an Acid
Tartar, as plainly may be Demonstrated in Wine, whose Volatile Salt or Spirits
being extracted, and dissolved from the Union with the Fixed Particles, through
the attraction of the igneous effluviums of the Ambient Air, the Acid Tartar
does immediately appear in the taste of the remaining Liquor, which then is
called Vinegar, or Sour Wine. In the same manner most other Liquors and
Decoctions being deserted of their Volatile Salt, by Attraction of the Sunbeams
or Ambient Air, do likewise immediately turn sour. Spittle though sweet, when
it is egested out of the Mouth, grows Acid, as soon as its Volatile Salt is
Exhaled. Upon so perspicuous an Illustration, I cannot imagine you expect
further proof, that the Dissolvent Lymph of the Stomach is not at all Acid, but
contrary, as soon as it is effused into the Stomach, it is Subdulce or Sweetish,
and continues so until it is Body is Expanded, Pores opened, and it is Volatile
Salts and Spirits Extracted to the Circumference, and then it is grown Igneous
Colliquative and Mordicant, and at last, the Volatile Salt being partly
Evaporated, and partly Attracted into the Vasa Lactea (like Wine changing into
Vinegar) turns absolutely Acid, Inciding and Astrictive. Arguments in greater
number, and of no less Evidence, I could here offer to your Consideration, but
do praetermit them to avoid the Suspicion of judging my Reader so Obstinate an
Opiniater, as not to be perfectly Convinced of the truth of the Praemises, by
what is already proposed. Neither would I have you conclude, that I have
Steered beyond my Rhomb, in Expatiating into so Ample a Discourse of the first
Concoction or Chylification; for the true Theory of the Office of the Stomach,
and its manner of Operation, is a great Fundamental of the Art of Medicine, the
Ignorance whereof (God mend it) among Physicians, is a great occasion of their
too great Correspondence with the Sexton and Grave-maker. What Principles, or
rather Praenomenon, an Eminent Physician of the City, had assumed in Informing
himself with the manner of Production of the Scorvey, and its Causes, I could
never apprehend from his Receipts; But this is most certain, that a Patient of
this Physician, a Person of Quality, and a very near Relation to a Pear of the
Realm, for the Benefit of Air, living at Woodford in Essex, had the strength of
walking Abroad, made use of Medicine praescribed by him, but within two days
Ghosted. Whether the said Medicines, set the Humors a float, or whether our
Doctor had been upon the Merry-pin before he Praescribed, was much doubted.

CHAP. VI.
1. That the Material Cause of the Mouth-Scorvey is an Acid Lymph of the
Stomach. How a Salivation is Continuated; the Cause of those Anxieties in a
Salivation. 2. The Nature and Kinds of Acids. The Effects of the Acid of
Vinegar, Vitriol, Nitre, Salt Marine, Tartar, Antimony, and Sulphur. 3. That
there is a Difference in Nature in Acids, and likewise in Alcalies between
themselves.

. 1. IN Mercurial Salivations, wherein (as has been hinted before) every
Particular does so exactly resemble the Scorbute, I find the Material Cause is
the Liquor of the Stomach, and the Lymph of the Stomachick Lymphaeducts, which
like a continuated Stream is forced up; but how this Issue of the Mouth is
supplied, ought to be further inquired into.

Although many of these Water Rivulets from the Brain, and other parts of the
Head, do Communicate with those, that are terminative within the Mouth, yet it
must be received for a Truth, that the great Source and Spring is about the
Stomach, and the Pancreatick Lymphaticks, which latter streaming so Impetuously
upwards, are the chief Cause of the Constipation of the Belly, being otherwise
greatly promoted, in its natural Quotidian Evacuation by the wonted descent of
the Pancreatick Juice, Relaxing and Lubricating the passage of the Guts. The
Anxiety attending a Salivation, is a Symptom often very Urgent, and depends on a
straightened passage of the Blood, through the Ventricles of the Heart; for
being deprived of the greatest part of its Volatile Salt, imbiled by the Lymph
or Serum, which is now too much drained from the Blood, the Pulsifick Faculty
for want of the Volatile Salt, must necessarily Languish, and the Blood being
too dry, and Coagulative, must needs pass the Heart with great difficulty.
Neither is this the sole Cause, but being accompanied with a stoppage of the
Salivation, as often happens, the Salivable Matter does Regurgitate to the
Lymphaticks about the Hypochondria, where it does Duplicate the Anguor, which
in some I have observed so extreme, that they owed their narrow Escape to very
Opportune Remedies, and most, if not all, that have the ill Fate, to be Banished
the World in a Salivation (which the Surgeons and Apothecaries of this Town are
so Unsuccessful in) have been stifled by these Angours.

. 2. The Blood floating through its Chanals, naturally is Endued with a
sweetness, but in a Salivation, and the Scorbute, turns Acid; the manner how,
is the great Secret of this Theory. Praemissorily it is requisite, to propose
the Nature and Kinds of Acids, which are various. The Acids of Vinegar,
Vitriol, Nitre, Common Salt, Tartar, Antimony, Allom, Sulphur, etc. all obtain
a Specific difference, as is rendered Obvious by their Properties and
Efficiency. The Acid of Vinegar is particularly observed Potent, in Attracting
the Sulphur of Minerals. The Acid of Vitriol is Diametrically opposite to the
Alcali of Tartar. Nitre by force of it is Acid, does Amortise the Volatile Salt
of any Mineral; Abstract it often from Mercury, and the result will be a
Dulcified Arcanum Corallinum, a Medicine singularly reputed for a mild Vomitory
and Dejectory; upon further repeated Cohobations, the foresaid Arcanum deserts
its Cathartique Faculties, and is limited to a Diaphoretique. The like Effects
it produces on the furious Body of Butyrum Antimonii. The Acid of Salt Marine
is the sole Dissolvent of Gold, especially when united with the Acid of Nitre,
and then constitute the true Aqua Regia, which is in nothing different from the
common Aqua Regis, abstracted from Vitriol, Nitre, and Sal Ammoniac, except
that the former far exceeds the latter in Purity and Force: For though the
common Aq. Regia be made out of Aq. Fort. Cohobated upon Sal Ammoniac, it is
most certain, that the said Aq. Fort. is nothing but the Spirit of Nitre, that
of Vitriol being too ponderous to ascend through the same degree of Heat; and
the Sal Ammoniac, from which this is propel'd, contributes nothing, but its
Acid Spirit of Salt, which constitutes the Body of the said Sal Ammoniac; for
the Volatile Salts of Urine and Soot, which defer to it a Specifique difference
from other Salts, being Alcalies, are Amortised, and Extinguished by the Acid of
Nitre, and consequently in their Extinction, must necessarily by Reaction
obtuse, and hebetate the Acid of Salt, and Nitre, whence it appears this sort
of Aq. Reg. must yield to the other, in point of Efficacy and Virtue. In the
Thirsts of Hydropicks, the said Acid Spirit of Salt, through it is penetrative
Faculty does excel all others, in Allaying and Conquering the Exiccative
Quality of those fiery Salts, that are daily Meteorised to the upper Orifice,
or supreme Region of the Stomach, and there occasion those insatiable Droughts.
There is a Subject of Admiration in the Acid Spirit of Tartar, considering
there is nothing so Remote, or Abstruse in the Body of Man, but it will find
out and Insinuate into; but what is more than this, contrary to the Nature of
most Acids (whose Operation is universally by Urine) it is a great
Diaphoretique, and provokes Sweat potently. Antimony, if like Vitriol it may be
called the third part of an Apothecaries Shop, it is Acid Spirit merits the
chief place in it; for beyond all Peradventure, he that is unacquainted with
this great Acid, is by some thought Ignorant, how to Cure a Malignant Fever e
Fundamento. The Acid Spirit of Sulphur, though usually termed the same with
Spirit of Vitriol, has that difference, that it contains a sixth Principle,
whence it derives a power, to six the most Fugitive of Minerals, which is
denied to Spirit of Vitriol.

. 3. Put to Illustrate this more plain, that some Acids are very different, and
in a manner almost as contrary to each other, as an Alcaly is to them; only
make trial upon the Magistery of Coral or Pearl, which is commonly praepared,
by their Dissolution in Spirit of Vinegar, (whereupon happens an Ebullition)
Exhalation of the said Spirit, and Edulcoration; upon this Magistery affuse
some different Acid, as Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, or any other, there will
arrive another Ebullition, as smart, if not smarter than the former, but of a
shorter continuance, which Evinces, there is a great Contrariety; as appears
further in this particular, that one Acid will praecipitate, what is contained
by Dissolution in the other. There is no less Contrariety between Alcalies, for
Sulphur dissolved by a continuated Ebullition in the Capitel or Lixive of Calx
viv. is praecipitated by Urine. Any of the Aromatique Oils, be it of Cinnamon,
Cloves, etc. is Incrassated, and Coagulated into a thick Balsam, by affusing
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac to it, which is an infallible Character of Contrariety
between them, and (by the way) is looked upon as a great Secret, whereby a
Balsam may be made without the Mixture of Wax, or Oil of Nutmegs. Besides
these, it is to be Remarked, Acids are either Natural, or Corrupt. The former
bears the part of a Constitutive Principle in all Natural Bodies, though being
praedominated by an Alcaly, or balanced to a temperament ad Justitiam, is not
exposed to be discovered by sense; but by a Chemical dissolution into their
Elements, the Acid is ever discovered to Universal view to be one. All Salts,
(not being Alcalious) though the Acid lies dormant and hidden in them, by the
force of Fire through a Retort, do deprome their Acid; all sorts of Wood do
exert the like Acid, being forced in the same manner through a Retort; which
Acid before this Analysis, could not be deprehended in them by Taste or Scent.
A strict Proof will not be required, I imagine, that there are some Acids, that
are corrupt; Apples and Pears when they begin to Rot, smell and taste sour, and
so do Flesh-meats, and most Artificial compound Liquids corrupting, as Beer,
Syrups, Meathe, Broaths, and most sorts of Decoctions, also natural Compound
Liquids, as Milk, Wine, etc. None of these Acids, but by any Naturalist will be
termed Corrupt. But what is more, Bodies that are primarily Acid, are subject
to be Converted into a corrupt Acid, as appears in the Juice of Limons,
Oranges, Pomgranates, and others, which being exposed to the Rays of the Sun,
do decline into a corrupt Acid, far remote from their Natural.

The variety of Acids beyond this last inserted distinction, is great: Acids
are either Pontique and Styptique, as some deep red Wines, Vitriol, and many
Vitriolate Praeparations; Acerbons, as immature Pears, Apples, Plumbs, etc.
Austere, as some sort of Wines, that taste sour and harsh. There is also an
Acre-Acidum; a sharp Acid, without any Stypticity or Austerity, as the Acid of
Spirit of Salt Marine. In Mucilages is also a particular Acid to be observed,
which may be termed Acidum Mucilaginosum. Some use may be made of describing
Acids* by names derived from Acids in Minerals, whereunto the Acids in the Body
bear a proportion and resemblance, as in some it is remarkable, they experience
a sour styptique taste upon their Tongues, not without some likeness to Copper,
which may not improperly be called a Nitri^lat Acid. In the same manner other
Acids may be termed nitrous, aluminous, etc. By the way I am to advertise, that
I am not ignorant, that Natural Philosophers distinguish Tastes into acid,
sharp, austere, etc. which here I do resume as kind^ of Acids; referring the
truth thereof to the arbitrament of any ones sense; but those Naturalists
following the umbrage of reason more than Notion, abstracted from Experimental
Philosophy, no wonder they failed in this particular.

I must here divert my Reader from opinioning me to have deserted my line, in
bringing on the board the nature and distinctions of Acids; which I affirm is
no wise foreign to this matter; for it is from the praemisse^ I am to deduce
and illustrate, there is in the humors of the Body discoverable a natural Acid;
that they are subject to be converted into corrupt Acids; and the manner how.

If to all Physical Bodies there concurs an Acid, a^ a Constitutive Principle,
whereby the Alcala is bound and coagulated into a body, it cannot be denied to
the humors, which for further proof being mixed with Brick dust, the Mass
formed into Cakes, dried, and forced through a Retort, you shall find in the
Recipient an Acid spirit of great Energy and Virtue in Hydropick Maladies. This
is the natural Acid is Latent in Humors, and not to be discerned by Sense,
because it is praedominated by the Volatile Salt being of an Alcalious Nature.
To continue the (...), in the next place it is to be declared, the Humors, and
particularly the Chyme is susceptible of a putrid Acid. The vulgar
Barber-Surgeons and Bleeders, give their Testimony, that the Blood by
Phlebotomy extracted out of several diseased Bodies, to their taste has
appeared Aluminous, Austere, and in some Scorbutiques very sensibly Acid or
Sour; their Breath has also expired a sour steam, and those Tormina or taring
pains of the Guts, which Scorbuticks are so much exposed to, are sometimes
caused by a Pituita Acida, or Acid Phleam, terebrating the Tunics of the Guts.
For brevity I do praetermit many other Arguments, inferring the Blood in
Scorbuticks to be Acid, as the evident Derivation of Symptoms from an Acid,
will in the process of this Discourse more amply Demonstrate; only in
conclusion of this Paragraph, I do say, That if it be granted, that Milk does
often turn sour and curdle in the Breast, it is as probable the Blood in the
Vessels does turn sour and Coagulous, they being in constitutive principles,
but little different from one another. I cannot very well avoid animadverting
on an Objection, that Prima front seems to carry some force, viz. That if the
Blood be supposed Acid in the Scorvey, then all Acid Medicines must render the
Blood more Acid, and the Disease worse, as is implied by that trite Theorem in
Physic, Similia similibus conservantur, and contraria contrariis curantur; and
consequently Alcalies should be furnished with a virtue, to subdue the said
Acid, being their contrary. The praemitted dissertation conta^ns as to this a
very satisfactory Answer, wherein it is very perspicuously Exhibited, that many
Acids are e Diametro contrary to one another, as according to the rule of
contraries ( Contraria sese mutuo pellunt ex eodem subjecto) appears by the
several Ebullitions (a sign of contrariety of two different Acids) in the
abovementioned Praeparation of Magistery of Pearl or Coral: Wherefore most
Acids, especially Spirit of Salt Marine, Juice of Sorrel, Limons, Citrons, etc.
are so deservedly extolled in some Scorbutic Distempers, and seconded with
good success; though I must confess, they are most properly and chiefly useful
in a Lixivial Scorvey.

The field of Acids is large; Therefore which of them this Scorbutic Acid does
most imitate, will be expedient to propose next. Upon pervolving those Authors,
that have treated on this Distemper, I find them so closely adhaering to
Similies abstracted from Wine and Vinegar, that I judge it a matter more facil,
to draw a Drunkard out of a Tavern, than them from their course notions upon
Wine and Vinegar. He that resembled Scorbutic Blood to Wine, that is turned
Ropy, hugs himself in that subtle Invention, and in the ample recompense of
being applauded by the young sucking Physicians. This word Ropy is often intended
for stringy, or streaky, there being long streaks separated from the whole
fluid Body, and floating in the thin liquor, as appears in Milk that is turned
sour and grown Roapy: But such I could never yet observe in Scorbutic Blood,
though I have examined a great number of Porringers. Blood that is tenacious,
obductible and glutinous (which thence may be termed pendulous) I do very
fraequently meet with among Scorbuticks, but that is no other, then what flows
in the Veins of most Cachecticks. The Cause assigned (by my Author) of the
Roapiness of the one and the other, is an over-fretting; wherefore, he says,
the Scorvey is often subsequent to a continual Fever: And why not then to all
Fevers, there being as much an over-fretting in the one as in the other? Whence
this is the consequence, that all Scorveys are produced by Fevers, or
Over-frettings; And what over-fretting of the Blood are Seamen and others
subject to, that derive the Seminary of their Scorvey from the Salin Air of the
Sea? I could never yet understand any. He proceeds, and would persuade you to
believe, that through this over-fretting, the Sulphur and Salts are separated
from the Mass of the Blood, and being abandoned to the Urine, render it Red
like unto Blood; as if the Urin of all Scorbuticks were of that tincture. If
this praetended Roapiness may be attributed to the Blood, it must be that,
which is contained in the Vessels of the Mesentery, whence gross Humors are
purged away in great Streaks and Ropes: But that it should be Streaky within
the Vessels, because it appears so, when by Carthartick Physic its purged
thence, Non valet ratio. For a farther Explanation upon Ropiness, I refer to
Chapter 11.

Others affirm, the Blood in the Scorvey to turn Acid like Vinegar. By the way,
you must not apprehend the Blood to decline to the same Degree of Acidity
Vinegar is of; for that must necessarily Infer a Total extinction of the
Dogmatick Innate and Influent heat; but that it only recedes from its Dulcor
and Sweetness, to a Crude Austerity and some small Acidity. It will not be out
of purpose, to Examine how an Acidity is introduced into Wine, and consequently
becomes Vinegar; whence probably may be Extracted the Cause of Acidity in
Scorbutic Blood. Peripatetique Philosophy asserts Wine to change into Vinegar
by Putrefaction and Corruption. Putrefaction (being by some accounted only a
tendency to Corruption) is Defined by the Stagirite a Corruption of the proper
Natural heat in each moist Body, occasioned by a foreign Heat that is without.
This applied to the Generation of Vinegar, infers that Sourness to proceed from
an Extinction of the Natural heat or Spirit of Wine, by an External Heat. I
cannot but admire here, that a Liquid Body should issue from a praeceding
Liquor by Putrefaction, and that without any Foetor or stinck, which is
asserted to be an inseparable Accident; and what is more, that a Body should be
engendered by Putrefaction, which of all others is the greatest praeserver from
Putrefaction; for such Vinegar is esteemed to be. Wherefore it is more Rational,
and Consentaneous to Experiment, that Wine consists of fixed Salt, Sulphur,
Volatile Salt, and Lymph, or in the Spagyrick phrase, Mercurius. The Fixed Salt
is the Acid Tartar; the Volatile (Incorporated with the Sulphur) being dissolved
into a small proportion of Lymph is the Spirit, which as long as it continues
United with the Fixed Salt, does obtuse the Acidity, and renders the whole
Mixture sweet, as the Wine appears to the Palate, but being separated from it
(as has been hinted before) the Acid Tartar dissolved in the greater
proportion of the Lymph, in effect is the Vinegar; so the way to make Vinegar,
is to Abstract the Spirits or Volatile Salt from the Wine, by suffering it to
Exhale, or by Expoposing it to the Sun, or Heat of a Fire, which Attract the
foresaid Volatile Salt, or by adding a small Measure of sharp Vinegar to a
greater of Wine, which with an united force of the Fixed Salt, do soon
Extinguish and Expel the Volatile, and then the praevailing remainder is
Converted into Vinegar. The Method chiefly in use among the Vinegar-makers in
France is this; They take two Barrels of a long shape, which there they call
Flutes, and being well cleansed, they put into each of them Four, Six, or Eight
Quarts (according to the bigness of the Vessel) of the strongest and sharpest
Vinegar, being made Boiling hot, and thereupon stop the Bung-hole very close,
then they Roll and Move them to and fro for Six Hours together, until the
Vinegar is grown cold, after this they run it out again, until there is not a
Drop left, and then lodge the Barrels in a warm place, and fix them so, that
they may lie fast and not stir; upon this they make two Holes (which they call
the Eyes) in each of them with a Piercer, about a foot from the bottom, and
pour into those Holes through a Funnel, some Eight or Ten Quarts of the best
Vinegar, and a Week after they pour Two Quarts of Decayed Wine to it through
the same Holes, to make Vinegar of, a Week after that they put as much more to
it, and so every Week they add as much more to it, until the Barrels are a
little more than half full, and then they increase them every Four days, until
they are quite filled, which they draw off to two Thirds, for to Sell; and
afterward fill up their Flutes again gradually.

From whence I infer all Wines to be actually Vinegar, and Spirits, that is to
be Physical Compounds, containing actually the Principles of Acidity in them,
and Volatile Salt of an Alcalious Nature; and on the other hand I deny, That in
Vinegar the Acidity is Introduced or wrought into it per se, by the Efficiency
of the Sun or other Extraneous heat, but only per accidens, by separating the
Volatile from the Fixed Salt, or Reducing it into it is Principles.

In the Generation of Vinegar there are several alterations observable, being
Ascents and Degrees, tending to that extreme Acidity Vinegar is of: In the
first place, Wine changes to a Muddy and Turbid Countenance, loosing that
Diaphaneity and aequality of Substance and Color it had, because the
Constitutive Particles have changed their Position and Situation; for in Wine
that is declining toward the Eger, the Volatile Salt, which before had aequally
expanded the Fixed Acid Salt, Exhaling or Receding, the said Fixed Salt does
somewhat Coagulate, and Unites nearer in its Particles, whereby this Obscurity
and Turbation is Introduced. In this degree the Wine has something changed its
Taste, and Drinks flatter, but no kind of Sourness does then appear; for though
the Acid Salt seems to get ground upon the Volatile, it is not yet arrived to any
mark of Acidity, because the aforesaid Acid is Commixt with a slimy dull
Tartar, which Obtuses its Sourness, and is the principle Cause of the Obscurity
and Turbidness in the Wine. It is not long after, that a little Sourness may be
discovered by the Taste, and Turbidness observed to diminish; for as the Wine
gains in Sourness, so it loses in Obscurity, the Acid freeing it self from the
slimy Tartar, praecipitates it to the bottom, or by Inciding and Attenuating
it, dissolves it into Lymph, whereby it is Clarified and grows Pellucid, and
consequently as it grows Sour so it grows Clearer, until it becomes perfect
Vinegar, and then it is likewise grown perfectly Diaphanous.

Now you may easily imagine, it is not my Scope, only to offer my Reader the
Theory of Vinegar, or to Inform him, how to Arrive to be a Vinegar-maker, but
by a way of Comparative (for Notions in Physic fraequently spring from that
Method) to the Blood, to Illustrate its manner of recess from it is Natural
toward a Scorhutick Acidity. Wherefore first you are to apprehend, the Blood
in its Native Constitution is sweet, or of the Qualification of a Pingue Dulce,
it is nitorous or shining, of an aequal Temperament and Mixture, imagine ad
Justitiam, and not Perturbated or Coagulated, but Fluid and Smooth; by reason
of its Volatile Salt is so Penetrative, and Insinuating (though when it is Tapt
out by Ph^ebotomy, appears thick) that Quicksilver the most Insinuating of all
Minerals is Gross to it; for it is Observable, the Blood does daily pierce to
the most Intime and Remote Pores of the most compact parts of the Body, viz.
Bones, Membranes, etc. Lastly, The Blood, though consisting of a Fat and
Unctuous substance, the Taste of it is Smart and Piercing.

It is in all these and more particulars the Blood in Scorbuticks does undergo
an Alteration. I shall begin with a short Comment upon its Acidity, unto which
it gradually recedes from its Natural sweetness; but the kinds of Acids being
many, it is requisite to assign, which of them this Distemper is grounded on.

The Volatile Salt of the Blood suffering any impair by depravation, diminution,
or extinction, the natural Acidity of the said Nutritive Liquor, does acquire a
praedominance, or sometimes an absolute power, in the same manner as was
asserted above, touching the change of Wine into Vinegar. If obtaining a
praevalence, renders the state of health neutral, but if by conquest it has
got an absolute power, denotes the temperature and mixture of the Mass of Blood
dissolved, which only happens in those, that die of old age. But supposing,
that upon the affection of the Volatile Salt, the natural Acid lies exposed to
injuries (read Chap. 11.) which during the entire Vinculum of both, it was
defended from; then the foresaid Acid degenerates from its natural into a
vitiated, putrid, or corrupt Acid, which ipso facto does constitute a disease.
This praemised, I assert, that a recent, or confirmed Scorvey is the adaequate
effect of a putrid Acid; The others, namely austere, or pontique, are causes
only of melancholy, hypochondriac and mesaraie distempers. Proof hereof may
very well be made by arguments, desumed from the effects, that issue from the
causality of a putrid Acid. First we will examine the blood of Scorbuticks,
which upon view I have fraequently remarqued, to be of a dull countenance, and
in no wise nitorous, of color livid, or sometimes cineritious, or in others
resembling the whites of Eggs, interspersed with opaque streaks; in point of
consistency thick, cohaerent, conglobated and tenacious, being also overflown
with a turbid serosity, of gust palpably acid, and here and there a nitrou^
Acid, both in scent and taste, and at no time gratefully acid; in initiated
Scorbuticks the serosity discovers a crude, austere, or sometimes pontique
Acid. The evidence here is strong, being demonstrable to one of the surest
Senses, viz. the Taste, and that desumed from the Serum; which by reason of the
Salts and Tincture it extracts from the humors, affords a most praegnant
discovery of the constitution and complexion of the Blood. But we shall insist
no longer on that sense, but convert our discourse to experiment; instill a few
drops of Spirits consisting of a Volatile Salt (viz. Spirit of Sal Ammoniac,
Cornu Cervi, Soot, etc.) into a small proportion of Blood; their effect will
render it fluid, nitorous, serene, of a most pleasing red, and rescue it from a
dissolution of the Humors: But on the other hand, Acid drops, viz. of Nitre,
Salt, etc. occasion immediately a Coagulation of the said Humors, and a
separation of their serum, leaving those in a turbid commixture, dull, opaque,
cineritious, and of an ill whitish fleam color. Whence we may rationally
praesume, Scorbutic Blood so exactly resembling what is impressed on any other
Blood by these Acids Spirits, to derive its vitiated constitution from an Acid,
which must necessarily be a putrid one, as shall be explained hereafter. In the
next place, let us make Inspection into the Characters of Scorbutic Urin, which
for consistency is uncertain, most times muddy, turbid and thick, sometimes
thin and opaque; for color pale and whitish, though in some few of a raw
bloody color, like water, where raw flesh has been washed in; for contents
various, sometimes a copious sediment of an Ash color, with a scum swimming on
the surface like Tallow, other times a small sediment. By scent is detected a
particular stinck, not like what is expired from other Urin. The causality of
these qualities in the forementioned Urin does lie between an Alcaliou^
Lixivial Salt, and an Acid Salt. The first contributes a muddy deep yellow, and
sometimes a saturated red tincture to the Urin, and therefore relating to some
inveterate Scorvey, does consequently lodge the faculty of engendring a
Scorbutic Urin of a recent Distemper in the latter, viz. an Acid Salt.
Moreover, the same Experiment of Instillation of different drops into Urine,
produces the same evidence it did upon the Blood. That this Scorbutic Acid is
putrid, appears by its production and inseparable adhaerence of a stink, for
which a sufficient testimony may be taken from the breath of Scorbutics, the
steams that evaporate from their Bodies, the ill scent of the Serum of the
Blood and Urine, which all stink abundantly. To make at praesent any further
conviction, that a Putrid Acid is the internal cause of the Scorvey, by
deriving any more Symptoms from its efficiency, will be superfluous, in regard,
that will be singularly explained in the particular mention we shall make of
them. The cause of a Putrid Acid shall be proposed in Chap. 11.

CHAP. VII. Of the Procatarctic or External Causes of the Mouth-Scorvey.
1. That Mercury fraequently used, proves ordinarily an occasional cause of the
Mouth-Scorvey. 2. That a Salin Air and Salt Diet are the principal external
Causes of the Scorvey. 3. Whether a Salin Air or Salt Diet be the more
principal Cause. 4. How Salt Meats cause an Acidity in the Blood. 5. That the
Drink brewed about London is brackish. 6. That Gluttony and Debauchery are two
grand Scorbutique Abettors. 7. How the other Non-naturals contribute to the
engendring the Scorvey.

. 1. A Salivation excited by Mercurials, and accompanied with its usual
attendants, is beyond all peradventure a Mouth-Scorvey; and for that reason
Hartman and other Chemical Authors, affirm Mercurial Medicines pernicious, and
altogether improper in Scorbutique Distempers; and consecutively to this
Assertion, I have fraequently observed, that such as have been obliged to make
use of Mercurial Remedies against their Venereal Maladies, do ordinarily fall
into the Scorvey, which sometimes proves more stubborn than the Distemper,
which the said Mercurials were intended against; So that we must set down
Mercury, to be one among the number of occasional Causes of the Scorvey.

. 2. Gross faeculent and obstructive Diet, especially if overcharged with Salt,
or rendered hard and compact with Smoke, as dried Neats Tongues, Bacon,
Sausiges, Red Herrings, Dried Salmon, Hung Beef, etc. do not only contribute
matter, but obtain also a peculiar faculty of impressing a Scorbutic Idea on
it. Of the same nature are Melancholic Meats, as Beef, Pork, Geese, Ducks, Salt
Fish, and all other Fish, that are bred in standing Waters, as Eels and others;
also Pickled and Marinaded Fish, as Pickled Herrings, Anchovies, etc. The next
of the Non-naturals, that bears a great part in this morbisique production, is
a Salin Air, rendered thick and constipative by Vapors and Damps, Nitrous
Evaporations out of the Earth, filled with putrid steams of Sinks, Gutters,
Ditches, Muddy and Dirty Streets, and Sulphurous Smokes of Chimneys, stagnating
and pent up between narrow lanes and corners, and seldom serenated or purified
by the rays of a clear shining Sun, nor fraequently ventilated with Easterly
briezes; and such is the Clime of London, where the Air is experienced close,
dull, damp, salin and muddy, overspread with dense, dark, salin Clouds
(attracted out of the Sea) for two third parts, if not three fourths of the
year; during which time the wind seldom blows Easterly, or is favored with a
smiling Sun.

. 3. These two are accounted the principal external Causes; the former
aggressing the Body within, the latter without; but to which of these the sole
causality may be imputed, has been controverted between some Modern Authors,
the one party, whose opinion induces them to believe the Scorbut to make its
first assault on the Blood and Animal Liquor, by entering the external pores,
state the Air the chief and original efficient: The other, apprehending the
Stomach and its Ferment, to receive the first efforts, proclaim Diet the
principal Agent. In favor of the former sentiment, these arguments seem
persuasive, 1. The Scorvey being assented by most an Endemick Disease, which
generally derives its production from the Constitution of the Clime, infers a
verdict for the Air: and, 2. This is further confirmed, by being also aesteemed
among the number of Contagious Maladies, which are universally communicated by
Transportation of morbifique Miasms, whereof necessarily the Air must be the
chief Vehicle, and consequently a more principal cause than the other. 3.
Symptoms bearing Characters more obvious to sense, offer an evidence very
plain; wherefore if the Animal Faculty be the first sufferer, as appears by the
Symptoms, viz. Lassitude, Drowsiness, Noise in the Ears, etc. and that the said
Symptoms of Lassitude, etc. be perceived by the Patient, while his Stomach and
its Ferment continue in their vigor, and exempted from any praeternatural
affection, then it is undeniable, but the Air is the primar Agent. Those who
espouse the contrary arbitrament, assert the faculty of the Stomach to be
impaired, and next after the Blood to be vitiated, before the appearance of any
Lassitude, or other Animal Symptom; moreover, that the word Endemic, importing
only a common Disease among people (from (...) and (...)) does not exclude the
generation of a Disease to be from a Vitiated Diet, or any other Non natural.
Touching its contagion, they affirm a Disease may be primarily engendered within
the Entrails, and afterward prove contagious: But lastly, whether the decision
hereof be any whit material, in relation to the Cure, is left to the Reader.

. 4. The next circumstance that is worthy of inquiry, is the manner, how a
Vi^iate Diet, or impure Air, does cause an Acidity in the Humors. We will
suppose, That a Salt Diet i. e. Salt Meat, and Brackish Drink.
is the most common Efficient of the Scorvey, which being ingested into the
Stomach, does chiefly act on the (...) Nervorum, consisting in a great
proportion of Volatile Salt (whose office principally is, by contraction of the
F^bres to corrugate the Stomach) and Spirits of the Arteries. It is then this
extraneous Marin Salt, that attracts and absorbes the foresaid Volatile Salts,
with the liquor they are contained in, in great measures; and hereupon
occasioning a great Drought, forces the Stomach to covet vast quantities of
Small Drink; whereby the Stomach is immoderately cooled and relaxt; the
foresaid Volatile Salts rendered fixed, and Spirits drowned and extinguished;
moreover the said Extraneous Salt having absorbed and attracted the Volatile
Salts into its Centrals, they meet with the Acid, that is latent in its Bowels
(as appears upon driving Salt Marin through a Retort) which through its
contrariety to Alcalies, amortises the forementioned Volatils. The consequence
upon this is, that the digestion is not perfected, and the contents not justly
dissolved and coaequated, but remain crude and imperfect, whence must happen
Crudities and Obstructions, which afterward prove a Basis for all other
Diseases to be established on.

. 5. It is not to Salt, or other unwholsom Meats, we must solely adscribe this
Scorbutic Effect, but lay part of the charge on Drinks, that are used among
us; in particular the Beer and Ale that is brewed about the City; the Water
whereout they are brewed being absolutely brackish, or imbued with a proportion
of Salt, though not so great as to be discovered by the Pallat. That Water
containing a Tincture of Salt, is thereby capacitated to make the stronger
Drink, is most certain, and for that reason, because the Water being somewhat
brackish in England, and therefore making the strongest Liquor, it is thence
English Beer is reputed the best and strongest in other Countries. Consequently
to this Remarque, I find, that Beer or Ale brewed out of Thames Water, is more
vigorous and spirituous, than what is made of other Water, because the former
by having a commerce with the Sea, is more Salin; and thence it is also that
North-down and Hull-Ale exceed Thames-Ale in strength, as being nearer to the
Sea. This may likewise be confirmed by the practice of some Brewers, who to
render their Drink the stronger, do commonly fling some small quantities of
Salt into their Brewing; wherein exceeding sometimes a due proportion, does
impress so great a seasoning on their Beer or Ale, that it is manifestly
perceived brackish by those that drink it. The reason of this sort of process
is grounded on the insinuating and attractive Virtues of Salt, attracting the
entire life and soul out of the Malt. Neither are Chemists ignorant of these
attractive faculties, who when they are to extract a Spirit or Oil out of
Aromatics or Cephalic Herbs, generally dissolve a handful or two of Salt into
the Water, while it is in digestion. Apothecaeries do also experience, that
Roses lying a few days in Salt, yield a water much more odoriferous, than if
Distilled off simple. These Instances are produced to make proof, that the
water of London is Salin, and consequently highly Scorbutic. But probably an
Objection may be started, that though Thames Water from its communication with
the Sea, may be suspected Salin, Why should other Waters whereout Drink is also
Brewed, be aesteemed so? To this I answer, That the Air of the City being
perfused with salt Clouds, attracted out of the Sea, (which is no great
distance thence) does sufficiently imbue it with that Tincture: Moreover, the
Earth over which those Waters stream, contributes to it a Saltness, being
brackish, as may appear to any ones Gust, that will adventure to taste it; now
that Clay Ground, and other sorts of earth, do exude or sweat out a Salsugo, or
Saltness, is abundantly manifested in Salt Pits; and undoubtedly the Pit-water
which Caesar's Army made use of for two Years together, when they were quartered
near the Rhine, sourced from a salt Pit, though not so much Impraegnated, as to
be distinguished by the Palate, or at least the foresaid Water was imbued with
some Mercurial Vapors (but the former is more probable) which afterward gave
them a Disease like the Mouth-Scorvey; they being subject to a Vacillation and
elaps of their teeth, with pains of their Gums. One sort of Water we have not
yet taken notice of, which is of standing Pools, as that is reported, whereout
that Liquor is Brewed, which goes by the name of Shoreditch Ale, for strength
being Superlative to all other. No doubt but Water by stagnating, does contract
a Putrefaction and Saltness, which being thoroughly allayed with the Cream of a
fat brackish Clay, is naturally praepared to Brew thick fat Ale; whence that
Water is vulgarly termed strong bodied, whereas Spring water is accounted thin
weak Water, and not capable to Extract the entire strength of the Malt, as the
other is; which is true enough spoken. This Discourse does also infer sour
Beer, or Ale, to be very pernicious, likewise decayed Wines.

. 6. Among the next relating to both the praeceding Branches, we must impeach
Gluttony and Debauchery, for two grand Scorbutic Abetters. The former by
imposing too great a burden on the Stomach, does so much obtuse the Volatile
Salts, that the Acid thereby gaining a praedominance, and thereupon soon
growing putrid, occasioneth Crudities and Obstructions, and so an Inlet to the
Scorvey. The latter refers to excess of Drinking strong Liquors, particularly
French Wines, through which the Stomach suffering fraequent inundations, their
Spirituous and Volatile particles are attracted Crude, and Undigested into the
Vessels, which in a short interval of time, Obnubilate and Drown the Volatile
Salts of the Nerves and Arteries, as not being sufficiently praepared to be
Assimilated to them; and these Efforts being often repeated, do at last Vitiate,
Evaporate, and Amortize the Spirits. On the other hand, the Liquor that is
remaining in the Stomach, is left Acid and Acrimonious, in the same manner as
was Instanced in the making of Vinegar.

. 7. From what is here Discoursed, relating to the manner of a Salin Diet
occasioning a Scorvey, may easily be Collected, how a Salin Air operates the
same effect, viz. By entering the External Pores, and being inspired down by the
Lungs, does assault the Vital and Animal Spirits and Salts. 2. By contracting
the Pores through its Exiccative and Absorbing quality, and constipating them
by its grossness and crassitude of substance, whereby reverberating and locking
up within the Body the ^uliginous steams, that stifle or smother the Spirits,
and fix the Volatile Salts, in manner, that they assume the Nature and Quality
of a Marine Salt.

Touching the remaining Non-naturals, viz. Motion and Rest, Sleep and
Wakefulness, Excretions and Retentions, and the Passions of the Mind, though
they come not within the notion of Primar sole Efficients, yet do potently
contribute to the production of the Scorvey, by as much as by their inordinate
use, they aggress, vitiate, diminish, and extinguish the Volatils, and give an
increment to the Acid; which how it is effected, may easily be deduced from the
praemises. To these add a Melancholic Complexion and ill Constitution of the
Bowels, especially of the Spleen; also Fevers continual and intermittent,
particularly a Quartan, which does fraequently expatiate into the Scorvey,
caeteris concurrentibus.

Upon this praeliminated Explication a decisive touching the controversy in
Par. vii. may easily be attempted; viz. That both can be admitted principal
Efficients in the Scorvey; for many though observing the exact Rules of Diet,
have notwithstanding by living in a Salin Air, contracted the Scorvey, which as
has been copiously expounded, is sufficiently qualified to produce the
Distempers forementioned. Moreover those that derive the Scorvey from a
Contagion (which has been often observed) do attract the Scorbutic Seminaries
and Miasms through the Air, without the least concurrence of Diet, as having
been regular and wholesome. On the other part, a Salt Diet continued for some
proportionable time, has engendered the Scorvey in such places, where the Air
could not be suspected ill, and of this there are examples numerous enough; but
waving that, I will evidence it in a praesident, that is more fraequent, and of
a shorter production. Drunkenness in such whose Blood is not apt to be kindled
into a Fevor, has in a short interval occasioned an universal lassitude and
weakness in the Knees, Spots and Blotches about the Legs and other parts of the
Body, laxity, discoloration, and soreness of Gums, pain and looseness of the
Teeth, a sour stinck of Breath, etc. which Symptoms do plainly declare it to be
the Scorvey, and that produced without the suspicion of an ill Air. So that
either may be aesteemed a principal efficient, though where both do concur as
principals, there it occasions the Scorvey to be Endemic; but where it is
contracted from either singly, there it is Sporadic.

CHAP. VIII. Of a second different internal Cause, being the cause of some
Leg-Scorveys, and many or most Terminatory Scorveys; namely Saponary Blood.
1. Instance, That there are two sorts of Causes (contrary to each other) of
the Scorvey. 2. The Constitution of the Blood in an Alcalious Scorvey. 3. The
Error of Sennertus and others in asserting the Cause of Roapy Blood. 4. The
true Cause of Roapy Blood. 5. Proof by Experiment of the Lixivial Constitution
of the Blood in the Scorvey; and why the Blood is termed Saponary.

. 1. THe Tenor of the next praeceding Chapter implies a Pu^rid Acid,
praedominating over the Volatile Salt, to be a cause of one sort of Scorvey;
here we intend to propose a Scorvey different from that, wherein the Volatile
Salt being vitiated and augmented in too great a proportion, over-ballanceth
the Natural Acid, and produces a Constitution of Salts and Humors, likewise
Symptoms, that are absolutely Scorbutique, but of a fiercer and more malignant
quality. By the way, I must praevent my Reader from any haesitation, wherein it
may appear strange to him, that Symptoms that bear the same countenance, should
be derived from two contrarily different Causes. As to this, it is an
Observation evident enough in other Diseases; for instance the Colic is
sometimes occasioned by Bilious Lixivious Humors, corroding the internal Tunic
of the Guts, in which case they usually suffer a Contraction in longitudine;
sometimes it is caused by an Acid flatuous phlegmatic Humor, and here the Guts
are affected in latitudine. On the former is imposed the name of an Hot Colic,
and on the latter a Cold Colic; the same may be also observed in Pleurisies
and many other Distempers.

. 2. The Constitution of the Blood in this kind of Scorvey is far different
from what it is in the other; for here the Blood runs into a thick cohaerent
Fluor, like Syrup, does not coagulate or concrease; but continues in the same
form, without the separation of the Serum, that in the other commonly floats on
the top. The difference is likewise in color and taste; here the Blood appears
in a purple, and to the taste its Lixivial and Acrimonious. Touching the
Symptoms; the Acid Scorvey exercises its fury most on the parts above the
Navil, the Alcalious Scorvey, chiefly on the parts below, what farther
distinction is remarkable, you shall read elsewhere.

. 3. Certainly it was a great Hallucination in Sennertus, but far greater in
others, that have wrote since on that Subject, to praetend an Acid the cause of
Pendulous Blood (a term the Recentiors have borrowed from the forenamed
Sennertus, though ill verted into English Roapy, as has been animadverted
before) which rather causes a Coagulation, as appears by Experiment, upon
instilling Acid drops into Blood or Milk; and yet this Acid is so abominably
stretched by a late Author, who obtaining a particular knack of writing a Story
smoothly, does endeavor to adaptate it to Symptoms in general of all sorts of
Scorvey; whence I find, neither he nor those that harbor his Notion do arrive
to a success of curing some Leg-Scorveys, aequal to that of the Mouth-Scorvey,
but are often rendered infinitely worse.

. 4. The cause of this thick incrassated cohaerent Blood, that if poured into a
Porringer, hangs in short ropes or long drops, like Balsom or liquid Soap, when
poured off, I impute to the fixation of the Volatile, which united to the Fixed
Salt of the Blood, does alcalize and calcine it, whence assuming the nature of
other Calcined Salts (as Salt of Tartar and Nitrum fixum) does attract and
absorb the Serum of the Blood, and some moisture out of the Air, whereby that
and the whole mass is turned into a Deliquium, and so becomes thick (the Serum
being absorbed) cohaerent and pendulous; because part of the Blood is naturally
glutinous, which being tied closer together in its particles by the absorption
of the thinner and serous parts, must needs prove pendulous; of a taste
lixivious, because such all Calcined Salts appear to the Palate; and of a purpre
color, because the Blood is adusted from a florid red into blackness.

. 5. That the Blood of these Scorbutics, which are here mentioned, is qualified
in the manner described, will appear to any, that shall give themselves the
trouble of examining Scorbutic Blood, when occasionally extracted by
Phlebotomy; but least such as desire to be satisfied in this point, have not a
ready opportunity of examination, we will endeavor to convince them of this
truth by experiment. Take Blood that is found, and possibly extracted for
praevention or abating a Plethory, instill into it Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, or of
any other Volatile Salt, it shall praeserve it in its fluor, color,
consistency, mixture and other qualities, until it be evaporated, and then the
said Blood by coagulating into a Mass, will separate from its Serum: But if
instead of this, you affuse a small quantity of Calcined Fixed Salt, that is
runned into a Deliquium, it will incrassate the Blood, change it into a deep
purpre, render it pendulous and lixivial to the taste. After all, proving the
particular Symptoms to issue thence as proper immediate effects, will crave an
undeniable conclusion; but that shall be referred to a further inroad into this
Discourse. I must not retire from this Subject, before I give the reason, why I
have named this sort of Scorbutic Blood, Soapy, or Saponary; namely, because
like Soap consisting of Tallow and Lixivial Salt, the Blood in this kind of
Scorvey, is also composed of a deflagrated incrassated Sulphur and a Lixivial
Salt, both commixt and united into one Body; but how and through what causes it
is rendered so Soapy, shall be told you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Of the Procatarctic Causes of Lixivial Alcalized Salt, in
Scorbutique Blood.
1. That Volatile Salt is nothing but Fixed Salt volatilized by the commixture of
Sulphurous Particles is proved by Experiment. The manner how a Volatile Salt is
fixable. 2. The remote Causes of Saponary Blood. 3. That Salt is capable to
produce two contrary effects, viz. an Acid and an Alcali. 4. A farther proof of
the Saponary Synthesis of Scorbutic Blood.

. 1. THe Fixed Salt of the Humors is the Original and Conservative of the
Volatile, for (according to one of the Hermetick Theorems formerly recited) a
Subtle Sulphur penetrating into the pores of the Fixed Salt, closely knits it
self with its particles, and being of a subliming nature, that is derived from
the igneous minims it contains, does levitate, sublime, and volatilize the said
Salt. Experiment does assert this a certain truth; affuse Spirit of Wine on
Calx Vive (which beyond all Objection is praegnant of Fixed Salt) after a short
digestion, abstract it, and some part of the Fixed Salt will be volatilised and
sublimed with the Sulphur of the foresaid Spirit. Possibly here may be
demanded, how does it appear any of the Fixed Salt is volatilived? Hereunto I
answer, 1. By the Taste, the foresaid Spirit proving more igneous, vibrating
and pungitive to the Tongue. 2. Spirit of Wine, by reason of its Sulphur, is
inflamable to the last drop; but being united to this Volatilized Salt, does
very difficultly receive a flame, or when inflamed, will scarce continue. One
Experiment being too scanty, I will offer you another. Volatile Salt of Amber is
fixed by abstracting Spirit of Salt from it; and being so fixed, affuse on it
Spirit of Wine, digest them a while, and then abstract the Spirit of Wine from
it, and you shall find the Fixed Salt volatilized again. Hence I infer, 1. That
the Fixed Salt is not only the original matter, but also the sole conservative
and nourisher of the Volatile, by yielding new sublimable parts. 2. That the
Constituent principles of a Volatile Salt are a Sulphur and a Fixed Salt. This
being allowed or at least praesupposed, does detect the manner, How a Volatile
Salt is fixable, viz. by divelling the Sulphur from it, or stripping it of its
force and efficacy; so that those externals that act against the foresaid
Sulphur, are to be aesteemed the Procatarctic Causes of rendering the Blood
Scorbutic, and of lixiviating its Fixed Salt.

. 2. The same remote Causes, which in one of the praecedent Chapters were
declared Efficients of a Putrid Acid, are also empowered to lixiviate and
alcalize the Fixed Salt of the Blood, though not in the same manner, or
univocally, but per accidens, and aequivocally; so the Sun is virtuated to
produce contrary effects aequivocally, in engendring Cold and Hot Bodies, moist
and dry. A Salin Diet and Salin Air, by virtue of their Salt Marin, do absorb
and concentrate the Sulphurous minims of the Blood, which being inflamed, and
rendered corroding, partly through its own nature, partly by its union and
amplexe of the Saline parts, and being withal thereby Fixed, are both
praecipitated to the Fixed Salt of the Blood, whereunto also uniting, do all
become Soapy and Lixivial. Secondly, The Fuliginous Salts, that are too
copiously occasioned in Saline Scorbutic ebullitions, are a principal cause,
but for a more ample satisfaction I refer you to Chap.. How greatly the
familiar sipping of Brandy and other adust Spirits, do contribute to the
inflaming the Sulphurous particles of the Blood and lixiviating of it, is
sufficiently obvious; likewise that fuming Tobacco, under the notion of
concentrating and fixing the Sulphurous and Volatile particles, does lixiviate
and fix the Blood, needs no farther proof.

. 3. Least I should leave the least scruple, that might induce the Reader, to
supect the contents of this Discourse, I apprehend it expedient, to remove this
Objection, which is offered by way of Quaery, How can a Salt Diet or Air, or
rather Sea Salt, occasion two contrary effects, viz. of rendering the Blood
Acid, and Lixivial or Alcalious. I hinted before, that these effects are
derived in a various manner, to wit, an Acidity is caused, as was explained
formerly, by the separation of the Volatile Salt and Subtle Sulphur, which is an
effect per accidens; an Alcali is impressed on the Salt of the Blood, by an
effect the Marin Salt produces per se; for through its igneous faculty, and
especially when its tumid with the absorbing the Sulphur of the Blood, it
alcalizes the Fixed Salt. 2. The forementioned Marin Salt is not only naturally
fiery, but vigorously augmented in its igneous quality, by its conjunction with
Lixivious Salt, or Excrementitious Choler, that naturally ought to be separated
and evacuated by the Gall Bladder and Cholidochus, whose passages in a
confirmed Leg-Scorvey are commonly for a time constipated, the Excrements of
the Guts through their paleness and livor signifying as much; but withal
observe, that the Cystis Bilis and Ductus Cholidochus continue obserated only
for a certain space; for afterward the foresaid passages are forced open, by
the abundance of gross lixivial Choler, which then impresses a deep red
Tincture on the Excrements of the Guts. Furthermore observe, That commonly the
Mouth-Scorvey praecedes a Leg-Scorvey, and seldom do both invade the Body at
the same time, but one upon the neck of the other; so that if the Mouth-Scorvey
continue any considerable space, the Leg-Scorvey must necessarily follow.

. 4. Observe likewise, That some continual and intermittent Fevors, especially
Quartans, do sometimes exchange into Alcalious, but no Acid Scorveys, as by
their internal Causes and Symptoms, which the deep red Tincture and vehement
stink both in Urine and Ordure, likewise a very saline Sweat and Spittle, do
attest lixivial, is evidently declared; and that which does positively evict
the cause of these kinds of Scorbuts to be Alcalious and Saponary, is their
Cure, which is chiefly to be performed by Acids, as Spirit of Salt, Antimony,
etc. and by Subtle Sulphurs, and Volatile Salts; but in no manner by Fixed
Alcalies, upon which an irreparable detriment has often ensued. Lastly, To prove
the undeniable truth of these Observations, the vulgar management of Seamen
(who are out upon long Voyages) in their Scorveys, which so inevitably they are
incident into, using nothing but Acids, as Spirit of Salt, Juices of Oranges
and Limons, wherewith they are abundantly stored, tells us, it is an Alcalious
Saponary Scorvey they are subject to, against which an Acid is the
diametrically contrary Remedy.

CHAP. X. Comprizing the Examination of Scorbutic Principles proposed by a late
Author.
1. The Summary of the learned Oxonian Authors Treatise on the Scorvey recited,
and proved erroneous. That Scorbutic Blood is neither Rancid nor Roapy in the
sense intended by the Oxonian* 2. A recital of several absurdities necessarily
ensuing on the concession of the Hypothesis offered by the foresaid Author. 3.
That Roapiness in the Blood is not occasioned by the commixture of a lesser
proportion of Sulphur with a greater of Acid Salt.

. 1. AGainst what is asserted in the two last praeceding Chapters, nothing of
moment can be farther objected, than the authority of our Oxonian Author, who
for his learning, concise, smooth and elegant mode of Writing, may justly be
characterized the English Fernelius, aesteeming withal, that he has in some
sense surpassed ^ug^len, Solomon Albertus, Wierus, Sennertus, and the rest,
that have treated on the Subject of the Scorbut; and among those his other
superlative qualifications, I must also take notice of his Modesty, not
peremptorily asserting, but like a Cartesius affirming only a probability of
that, whereon his whole subsequent Discourse is grounded as its Basis; Tract.
2. de Scorbuto, Edit. Amsterd. fol. 230. where the word^ run thus, It Is
probable, that the Blood in the Scorbutic affection is a^tered, in a manner not
unlike Wines, that grow Rancid or Roapy, as often as they are overheated (that is
over-fretted) for this is an Argument, that that Disease does not depend so
much upon Dregs, mixed with the Blood, as on a habitual intemp^rament of the
Blood; because a Radicated Scorvey is so difficultly cured, and sometimes
never. Moreover it may be stated, that the intemperament of the Blood, which is
the parent of the Scorvey, is twofold, as it is in Wine, namely Sulphurous and
Salin, and Salin and Sulphurous. The whole Theory of the Scorvey is by the
Author forementioned briefly summed up in those few lines, which to examine,
is the chief affair of this Chapter. First, He tells us, It Is probable; But why
is it probable? Because probably it seemed so in some inconsiderable little
Analogies and Resemblances: I may as well affirm, that it is probable, his
Horse is a Mare, because viewing him at a distance, he seems like one.
Certainly, he that by too much stretching of the Cloth, endeavors to make all
sorts of Habits and Shapes out of it, must necessarily make a very incongruous
Suit. This our Author has practiced in most of his Tracts, abstracting Notions
from Wine to illustrate his Theory of Diseases; as first in relation to Fevors;
Because Wine is apt to be fretted, it is probable the blood is also subject to a
fret; whence a necessary conclusion is drawn, That the Blood so fretting is
either a Fevor, or rather the cause of a Fevor; but A probabili ad necessar^um
non valet consequentia. Neither does the similitude quadrate, the one being a
derivative from a Vegetable, that naturally is disposed to the foresaid
alteration; the other from a Vive Animal, that when declining into a Fevor, is
praeternaturally affected. Moreover this fretting quality that Wines are
incident into, is only of one kind; but the frets or fevors of the Blood are
various and very different, as Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, etc. Secondly,
In relation to Convulsions, Because the Blood is disposed to fret in all the
Vessels of the Body, it is probable, that in the fretting of the Nervous System,
it does impel heterogeneous Copula's and Explosive Particles into the Liquor
Nervosus, and irritate the Nervous Systeme to an explosive motion, through
which a S^pasmodie affection and a praeternatural Diathesis of the Brain, are
occasioned. A pretty kind of Rhetoric, exchanging the old significant terms,
into those that are obscure and aequivocal; however these Probables might very
well be admitted, especially being garnished with those pretty affected
Phrases; provided the Phenomenon and resemblance were omewhat more parallel,
and conform to Experiment; from which that they are infinitely different, I
shall particularly instance in the comparison of Rancid and Roapy, or rather
Scorbutic Wine (for such he would have it to be) with Scorbutic Acid and
Scorbutic Lixivial, and Saponary Blood. That Wines by over-fretting become
rancid, is agreed on by all Wine-Coopers, which in their usual phrase, they do
not term rancid, but say, It tastes of the fret, that is, Fuliginous,
Empyreumatic, and Piquant, but not Acid; neither when they are over-fretted as
much as they can be, do they immediately taste otherwise than what is set down.
Their Cure is performed, as he sets forth, by being drawn off the Lees; which
in a plainer way is to be understood thus; if it be observed, that Wines are
inclined to fraequent frettings, or over-frettings, as all Wines are in the
Summer season, especially if lying in a warm Cellar, to praevent the former,
they endeavor to cool the place, where they lie, by stopping up all the Lights,
and often dashing cold water over the Floor. The later, viz. Their aptness to
over-fret, is remedied by pouring a proportion of new Milk to the Wine, or
Ison-glass dissolved, or other materials that are empowered to appease, allay
and sweeten the heat and fury of the Sulphurous Spirits; but when Wines are
absolutely over-fretted, then indeed to draw them off the Lee, is the next
remedy. The cause of an over-fret or rancidness, he asserts to be an imbodying
or cogulation of the Sulphurous particles with the Salin, so as the former
exceed the latter in proportion. This Aetiology may easily conduct the Reader
into mistakes, supposing the Constitutive Principles of Wine, viz. The Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury, to be distinctly contained therein, whereas it must be
conceived, they are so intimately caemented together in their minimal
particles, that there is not the least drop, but contains the foresaid
principles in its least individual physical particle, so that you are not to
imagine, that in Wine, that is thus declining, the Sulphur swims in one part,
the Spirits in another, and the Salt in another, but that the Subtiler Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, being united into one, do abscede from the grosser, into
whose room and cavernicles external heterogeneal principles succeeding out of
the ambient air, occasion such various alterations, as render the Wine rancid,
roapy, etc. Those Heterogeneous Corpus^les, if they are sulphurous, as in the
Summer season they generally are, then they alterate the Wine into rancid; if
more gross and salin, a^ at other seasons they are, it becomes roapy. But Wines
being subject to these alterations in all Climes, and Humane Bodies only in
some particular sorts of Air, which therefore (together with a vicious diet)
render the Diseases thereof (...); this alone is an Argument sufficient to
evince the Alterations of the Blood and Wine not to be comparative, and
consequently the Simile to be dissonant. Secondly, Suppose the Simile allowed
in Fevors, that as Wines fretting are endued with an intense heat, through the
exaltation of their Sulphur, so the Blood fretting is attended with a dyscratic
or intemperate heat, which for the praesent shall also be allowed the name of a
Fevor; then consequently the Blood must be deemed Scorbutic, because rancid;
for Wines during their fretting are ever rancid, and taste of the fret; and so
all compounded Liquors, as Beer, Ale, Metheglin, etc. whilst they are working,
are rancid.

. 2. The absurdities that follow the Hypothesis, are, 1. That there is no
moving living Creature, but is troubled with the Scorvey in one part or other;
for whilst the Chyle is fermenting in the Stomach, or the Blood fretting in the
Vessels, which according to the dictates of Fermentators happens at all times,
they become rancid. 2. In France I find Fevors more fraequent, than in any
other Country, which in the sense of my Author are all attended with fretting,
and very probably some with over-fretting; yet I could never observe any there
afflicted with the Scorvey, and if they are, I am certain they have no proper
name for it in French. 3. That all Heats, Spots, Blotches, and Pustles, that
burst out into the Face and ambient skin, upon a fretting of the Humors, are
Scorbutic Symptoms, page 234. l. 3, 4. which many Wine Drinkers are subject to
in many places, where the Disease and name of the Scorvey are as little known,
as the Man in the Moon. 4. That the forementioned Scorbutic Eruptions, are
only safely cured by Remedies, that demulce and ^enifie the incongruous
Ferment (as its styled fol. 340. l. 18. which is expressing an ignotum per
ignotius) such are Starch, Gum Arabic, Gum Dragant, etc. These I am assured,
never yet removed Scorbutic Eruptions, I cannot tell what they might operate at
Oxford, and the Market Towns about it, where Scorveys are not so numerous, as
to abstract observations from them, sufficient to teach the world a new
Doctrine of Scorbutic Dyscrasies, and Copula's. But this I dare declare for a
truth, that real Scorbutic purpre, and yellow, some red Blotches, and Pustles,
I have removed, and known others to do the like, only with Antiscorbutic
Volatils; which manner of Cure does in no wise square with the Notion of Rancid
blood. However it must be assented, that many Eruptions, such as are recited in
page 234. have been extermined by Contemperative Medicines, and Bleedings; but
then they were not of the genuin Scorbutic issue. In summa, admisso absurdo uno
conceduntur mill. Wines that have been disturbed by an Overfret, do seldom
long continue only Rancid, but after a short interval, are incident into a
Putrid Acid, far different from Vinegar, and in that particular, may more
exactly square with Scorbutic Blood; but it is not from Emplastic Lenients
these Wines rethe least Rectification, for through them they are rather rendered
far worse. For the removing this sort of dyscrasy, Coopers experience the
scenting the Cask with Brimstone, to be very effectual in manner following;
They dip a Linnen-rag into melted Brimstone, which being grown cold and
coagulated on the Cloth, is kindled into a flame, and hung through the
Bung-hole into the Cask, until the flame be burnt out, and upon that the
Bung-hole is stopped up close again; for the same purpose Lime, burnt Allom, and
other Materials, that are praegnant of an Alcalious Salt, are commonly used. 5.
Upon the concession of the Authors Rancid Hypothesis, the Blood of Scorbutics
of that degree, ought to appear smoaky, Sooty, Empyreumatic, not easily
Coagulable; on the contrary, it is observed Acid, Coagulable, Ill colored, etc.
I will conclude this Branch with a Caution, That all Innovators ought rather to
Demonstrate their Notions a Posteriori, that is, they ought to Invent and
Illustrate the Cause, by the Effects and Symptoms, and not to invent Notions of
Causes, and by their Virtuality, or by what they probably seem capable to act,
to assign their Effect^; for that is often contradicted by Experiment.

. 3. The other Branch falling under our consideration, is the Roapiness of
Wines, wherein the Coopers generally observe a Gradation of Alteration; for
first they begin to Pall, and grow Flat, next they fall into Clots and Lumps of
Gelly, and then they say, the Wine drinks tender; at last, their Clots running
into one, causes the Wine to become Roapy. This the worthy Author affirms, is
occasioned by the association of a lesser proportion of Sulphur, with a greater
of Acid Salt, or Tartar. It Is an Universal Remarque, that Sulphur and an Acid
Salt, without some other Intermedium, that is amicable to both, are insociable;
for affuse a menstruum purely Acid (as Rain water acuated with Oil of Vitriol,
Salt Nitre, etc.) to Sulphur, and digest it ad Infinitum, no Tincture shall be
Extracted, but upon the least digestion with a Lixive, or any Unctuous Liquor,
the Sulphur yields its whole body, and entirely unites. 2. It Is averred, page
234. l. 31. That Roapy Wines are reduced by fixed Alcalies; which on the
contrary, I know some that arrive to their Mark, by dissolving Roch-allom into
them, that by all is agreed to be an Acid, and consequently does subvert this
Roapy Hypothesis. 3. The blood of those Scorbuticks, that contract their
Distemper on a long Voyage at Sea, must be allowed to be either Rancid or
Roapy. That it is the latter, the Symptoms mentioned Tract. de Scorb. page 234.
l. 21, 22, 23. declare, viz. Cutaneous Eruptions, Sloth of Limbs, Difficulty
of Breathing, etc. with which Scorbutic Seamen are sufficiently infested. The
remedies used successfully by them are Acids, viz. Juice of Limons and Oranges,
Tamarinds, Spirit of Salt, etc. on the contrary, they experience Spirits of
Scorvey-grass, of Sal Ammoniac, and others of that nature Detrimental. The
Argument collected hence a Juvantibus, which are Acids, evinces their Blood to
be Alcalious and Lixivial. So that I may safely conclude, that our Authors
Hypothesis is not only Erroneous, but too scanty, since it only appoints
Contemperatives, and Volatile Alcalies for Remedies; and those being mis-applied
(as too fraequently happens) are unpowered to render the Disease far worse, and
provect it into a Terminative Scorvey. 4. I discover a great Contradiction, in
illustrating some Alcalious and Lixivial Symptoms, to proceed from Acid causes,
viz. Pendulous Blood, which though not agreeable with his supposal, he asserts
that the lixivial parts abscede from the Blood, by being dissolved in the
Serum, having quite forgotten his Pendulous Acid principle. Thus I read, page
256. in Sign. 8. the Aetiology of Lixivial Vrin expounded, which Paraphrase is
no where received, but in the Latitute of 51 ^. 5 ly. To evade all Objections,
and to render Notions more Plausible, his Discourses are observed, to be armed
with a Quinary number of Principles, viz. Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water, and
Earth, by which to Illustrate the Nature of Bodies, will prove as superfluous,
as (in his own phrase, page 3. l. 28. Diatr. de Fermentatione) to say, a House
does consist of Timber, Wood, Stones, Brick and Lime. For a Spirit being a
composite of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, signifies it self to be a
Principiatum, and not a Principium. For proof, I offer the most Alcolized
Spirit of Wine, which in the process of Spiritus Calcis, being often abstracted
from Calx Vive, its Volatile Salt (which formerly I have demonstrated to be Fixed
Salt, rendered Volatile by the admixture of Sulphur) is refixt, and detained by
the Alcali of the Calx, so that at last nothing passes the Alembic, but a pure
Lymph; whence it is evident a Spirit is a Compound, and no Principle, which
ought to be Simple. The next multiplication of Principles is the stating Earth,
and Salt, different Elements, which in effect are realiter the same, though of
distinct Nomination. Earth is an immature Salt, which by Digestion easily
passes into a Salin body. The Terra damnata of Vitriol, affords an indubious
Argument for Evidence: This though very well washed from the Fixed Salt it
contain's yet being exposed to the warm Sun for some long time, and then washed
over again, yields a considerable quantity of Vitriolat Salt, which that it is
not attracted out of the Air, but engendered by Digestion of its Substance,
appears by the diminution of weight of the said Terra damna^^, after it is
washed. So that the difference between Salt and Earth, is no other than between
Stone and Brick, or a Heterogeneous Copula, and an Incongruous Ferment.

CHAP. XI. Containing Practical Observations Praeliminary to most Scorveys.
1. Acute Symptoms praecurring an Acid Scorvey. How it is Originally engendered.
2. Mixed Symptoms, partly Chronical, and partly Acute, praecursors of an Acid
Scorvey. 3. Chronical praevious Symptoms. 4. That those praevious Ebullitions
mentioned in the praecited Observations, do not render the Blood Rancid. The
Notion of Rancid Blood dangerous in Practice.

. 1. THe Practical Observations which I do here propose, will render Obvious to
you, how the Blood declines into a putrid Acidity. It is a remarque I have at
sundry times made, that some Bodies, before they expressed any Sign or
Character of being molested with an Acid Scorbut, undergo a smart Ebullition of
the Liquors in the Vessels, depending upon an accension of the Spirits, and
deflagration of the Bituminous Particles of the Blood, whereunto some Catarrh,
Rheumatism, Lassitude, Pain in the Head or Bowels, or some other Symptoms, are
attending, which render it dubious, whether this sort of Fever be Essential or
Symptomatick; however Antifebril Remedies, as Bleeding, Purging,
Contemperatives, and Sudorificks are praescribed, the success whereof in the
space of three or four days, commonly amounts to the abatement of the Fevor
and other Symptoms, though not to a perfect Restitution of Health, the Patient
for some short time possessing only the condition of a neutral State; hereupon
manifest Scorbutic Symptoms begin to take up their quarters with him, as
Lassitude, Sloth in Mo^ion, Difficulty of Breathing Indigeston of Stomach,
Interrupted ^leeps, and Disturbed with Dreams, Spots, Blotches, and the like.

. 2. The content of the praemised Paragraph I do affirm to be the Morbisique
transaction in some, though in others I likewise observe, that the praeceding
Ebullition, or Tumultuation of the Blood is not so vigorous, as to cause them
to think more, than that they are only a little out of order, and so the Juices
of the Vessels detumefying, leave them in a kind of neutral state; which manner
of Ebullition and Intumescence often returning, increasing and decreasing, does
at last result to the same Effect, as if it had been as smart, as what is above
described. These are certain and true Observations, any Physician may make on
Bodies, before the Scorvey declares. A third Observation I shall subjoyn, after
the Explication of the two former. By these praevious commotions the Blood is
grown extremely Turbid and Disturbed in its parts, mixture, consistency, ntour,
sapour, and other qualities, like Water in a River, that grown Muddy and Thick
upon a Storm, raising those Impurities, that lied on the bottom. Now the
faeculencies and Acid tartarous Humors, that by stagnating in the Vessels of
the Mesentery, and other remote parts, being raised, and commixt with the Mass
of Blood, choke up and extinguish the Spirits and Volatile Salts, damping
withal the flaming of the Bituminous particles, upon which the Ebullition
cease. The cause of these Ebullitions is the saltnes^, induced into the
Humors by a Salin Air and Diet, which obtaining a power of condensing, and
congregating the Spirits or Volatile Salts, and sulphurous or bituminous
particles of the Blood, cause an accension of the foresaid Volatile Salts and
Sulphurs, whereunto by constipating of the Pores the gross Salin Air does also
very much contribute. In this conflagration the Volatile Salts are in a great
part dissipated and consumed, the other part stifled, choakt, or extinguished by
the rising of the Acid salin dregs, whereby the whole Mass is not only turned
Acid (how the dissipation of the Volatile Salts occasion an Acidity, you have
read before) but grows putrid Acid by the commixture of fuliginous acrimonious
Salts, that through the foresaid Ebullition and conflagration are occasioned,
and through the constipation of the Pores repelled into the Blood. The cause of
the latter Observation may easily be collected, from what is here set down
touching the former.

. 3. A third remarque taken from Scorbutics is, that many gradually and
insensibly without any such praevious Ebullitions, as are above mentioned,
undergo an alteration in their Temperament and Faculties; first observing a
sloth in their Limbs, nauseous spitting in the Morning, an ill brass taste in
their Mouth, crudities and imbecility of Digestion; afterward do succeed
Spots, Laxity, and Discoloration of Gums, stink of Breath, and so the rest in
order. The Cause of this sort of Morbifique progress is the blood, gradually
declining to a putrid Acid, in the same manner as has been explained in one of
the foregoing Chapters.

Though the first of these three Observations seem to have some resemblance to
the nature of Rancid Blood, occasioned by Fretting or Fermentation, and the
manner of Cure appointed in the often cited Treatise de Scorbuto, to be performed
by Demulcers of the Blood, as Phlebotomy, and contemperatives; upon a more
deliberate consideration, you will conclude their difference almost contrary to
each other; for, 1. All Ebullitions, especially that expressed in the
Illustration of the foresaid first Observation, are not Fermentations. 2. The
worthy Oxonian Author infers all Rancid Blood Scorbutic, though it be still on
the Fret, which is greatly ^rroneous, the Scorvey being a Chronic or long
taedious Disease; this a praevious distemper, that is soon removed, or at least
altered into a contrary Intemperament, viz. From an Acrimonious hot, to an Acid
cold Disease. 3. The foresaid Notion is highly dangerous, and often proves fatal,
in deriving thence a Method of Cure; for forming Indications, that this being a
hot sulphurous Distemper, lenient and cooling Remedies are indicated, which if
long continued after the Fermentation is quieted, and an Acid disposition
introduced, do render the Disease incurable.

. 4. It is only in some, that this Ebullition is a praecursor to the Scorvey,
whereas the Notion of Rancid Blood does infer all Scorveys, that are not
depending on pendulous blood, effects of an immoderate Fermentation.

CHAP. XII. Declaring a further Illustration of a Saponary Leg-Scorvey.
1. The Symptoms of a Saponary Leg-Scorvey. 2. Proof that the Bituminous parts
of the Blood, do easily unite with the Fixed Salt. Pendulous Blood is not
miscible with Acid Salt.

. 1. I Have formerly observed, that an Acid Scorvey, upon a long continuation,
changes into a Saponary Scorvey, which a^ was hinted before, is the Cause of
some Leg-Scorveys, whose Symptoms, are Inflamed, Tumefied, Corroding,
Phagedaenic, Cancerous Ulcers, Hot burning and pricking Nocturnal Shin-pains,
fraequent glowing of the Calves of the Legs and Plants of the Feet, an
Erysipelas Phlegmonodes of the Legs, salin pungitive Rheumatisms and Defluxions
to the Periostium of both the Fossils; besides a saturated Lixivial Urin, a
fuliginous fowl Stinck of the Body; the Blood when extracted by Phlebotomy
appears of a deep inflamed Subpurpureous aspect, besides many other Symptoms,
all which to any Judicious Physician are sufficient Testimonies of an Alcalious
constitution of Humors. But this is not all; for the Blood in this Case is not
only Alcalious, but Saponary, as now will be made apparent to you. There being
a large proportion of impure Sulphur, or gross Bituminous Particles, mixed with
the Humors in this degree of Scorvey, the Alcalious fiery Salts do easily
attract, Colliquate, and Unite them to their own Particles, which absorbing the
Serum in a great measure, must needs render the Blood thick, cohaering, and a
little obductible.

. 2. That the Bituminous parts of the Blood are so apt to be united to the Fixed
Salt, is evident from the ready commixture of Tallow, Train Oil, or other
unctuous bodies with Potashes in the Composition of Soap, from the resemblance
whereunto (as formerly has been intimated) I have termed the forementioned
constitution of Blood Soapy, or Saponary. The same Promptness of Unition
several other Chemical Praeparations do likewise confirm, as in particular; the
Ebullition of Sulphur with the dissolution of Salt of Tartar, Fixed Nitre, or a
Lixive of Calx vive, in the process of Lac Sulphuris; also in the Praeparation
of Hartman's Sulphur of Antimony, where the Antimony being fused by the
violence of a ventous Furnace, and instilled into the deliquious Oil of Tartar,
its Sulphurous parts are immediately Imbodied with the Alcali of the foresaid
Tartar. Whence we may plainly Collect, that in our Authors Pendulous Diathesis
of the Cruour, which by him is supposed to be Acid, there is no probability of
their ready Coalition. And after all, I must tell you, that the Blood in that
sort of Scorvey, which is not Rancid, as he terms it, is not absolutely Roapy
or Pendulous like Syrup, Barbados Treacle, or Therebinthin, as the Oxonian
Professor intends it, but far different.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Causes of Scorbutic Symptoms.
1. The Cause of a Scorbutic Lassitude and Imbecility of Limbs. That a
Scorbutic Lassitude is not occasioned through a Fermentation of the Nervous
Liquor and the Extravase Blood. That the Nervous Juices are not contrary to
those of the Veins and Arteries. 2. The Cause of a Dyspnoea, or Difficulty of
Breathing. 3. The Cause of a Low, Quick, and Inaequal Pulse. 4. The Cause of a
thick Red Vrin. 5. Of Spots and Blotches. 6. Of the Bleeding of the Teeth, and
Haemorrhages. 7. Of Fainting and Palpitation of the Heart. 8. Of Erratic Fevors.

. 1. IN course I ought next to Adapt these praeceding Causes to their Effects,
viz. Scorbutic Symptoms, in which I judge I shall not find that difficulty, or
be Obliged to strain the former, to square them with the latter, since I
arrived to the Knowledge of them by the Observation of their Effects. I shall
commence with the Explication of the Cause of Lassitude, and Sloth of Limbs,
as ordinarily the first budding in a Scorbutic Body. A Lassitude, Debility, and
Sloth of Limbs, are Affections of the nerves, which originating from the
marrow of the Brain and Back, must necessarily derive their Causes thence,
unless we should conceive them naturally to draw in a^ both ends; but there
being usually concomitant other Symptoms of an affected Brain, as Drowsiness,
Obtusene^^ of the Internal senses, etc. does amply confirm, what is asserted.
Wherefore the Blood according to the first Observation mentioned in Chap. 11.
being affected with a tumultuation, the Spirits and Volatile Salts are inflamed,
and rendered Acrimonious, which being the principal constituents of the Animal
Juices, must necessarily prick the Nerves, through which they pass, and
incommode the Nervous parts, to which they are transmitted. As for the
Imbecility and Sloth of Limbs, also the obtusion of the Animal Faculties,
they depend on the intemperature of the Animal Spirits, not being potent enough
to perform their Offices with alacrity, to which their accustomed just
Temperament is absolutely requisite. By the way you are not to apprehend here,
that the said Lassitude is occasioned through a Fermentation, happening upon the
appulse of the Nervous Liquor (rendered praeternaturally Acid) to the Articles,
and there meeting with Lixivial Blood; for the constitution and temperament of
the Nervous juices are not so extremely different from that of the Blood, as to
be contrary to it, which in this sort of Fermentation or Ebullition is
necessary it should: I can conceive no more difference between them, than
between Spirit of Wine and Wine, which former cannot be endued with any other
qualities, than what it derives from the latter. And here it is, that trite
Maxim is verified, Vitium prim^ coctionis non corrigitur in secunda, nec
secundae in tertia. So that, if the constitution of the Blood in the Arteries
be Acid and not Lixivial, the Animal juices must likewise be Acid and not
Lixivial, as being engendered by a further digestion out of the said Arterial
blood. Hence I argue, that Arthritic pains in the Scorvey do not proceed from a
Fermentation between an Acid Nervous Liquor, and Lixivial blood about the
Joints; moreover as you shall be further satisfied below, the Lixivial Salts,
that are cast forth to the circumference in an Acid Scorbut, do not partake of
an Acrimony, or at least not so intense, as to excruciate the Limbs with those
insufferable pains. But after all, the indication desumed in this case from the
Nervous Liquor, assigns an Alcalious Medicine, and that which is collected from
the Lixivial Blood, indicates an Acid; an absurdity not to be admitted in
Physic, that one and the same Disease should require two Medicines per se
contrary to one another.

Neither can I assent to that opinion Tr. de Sc. p. 250. l. 25. which asserts
the cause of a Spontaneous lassitude and weakness of the knees and legs, to be
an infarction of the pores of the Musculs with Excrementitious humors, through
which the Animal Spirits are obstructed in their passage; for it is not
observed, that there is any Tumor or Tension in the flesh of the said Musculs,
but commonly hangs lank and laxe; on the contrary, where there is a real
Tension and Tumefaction of the Musculs of the Legs, which some gross Bodies are
subject unto, we do not find any other, then a small compression of the Nerves
and Tendons, notwithstanding which, the Animal Spirits have their free influxe
and refluxe, and the Limbs their sense and motion; wherefore if there be no
obstruction or constipation in this case, much less in the other, and
consequently it must be the Animal Faculty and Loco-motive Spirits, being
praeternaturally affected, that are the occasion of these last forementioned
Symptoms.

. 2. The Dyspnoea or difficulty of Breathing, that so often is implicated with
the Scorvey, depends on the stagnating of gross Acid Blood in the Vena
Arteriosa or Arteria Pulmonalis, Arteria Venosa or Vena Pulmonalis, and in the
Pores of the Parenchyma of the Lungs; for every Systole propelling the streams
of Blood into the foresaid Artery faster, than it is received through the Pores
of the Parenchyma into the Lung Vein, the Lungs must necessarily be stuffed,
swelled up, and consequently much oppressed by the weight of this stagnating
Blood. But that I may praevent you from lapsing into the same error my Author
is fallen into, it is convenient I acquaint you here with the meaning of
Dyspnoea or difficulty of Breathing; Respiratio Anhelosa, or short and thick
breathing, or in the common phrase, Short windiness, Asthma, or improperly
Phtysick and Orthopnaea, or the worst and extreme degree of Phtysick and their
difference; for qui been distinguit, been docet. In a Dyspnoea the breathing is
somewhat long and slow, with the sense of an oppression or weight, as if
something kept the Lungs down. A Respiratio Anhelosa is a quick and thick
Breathing, as you may perceive in your self, after any smart Exercise, as
Running, or Carrying a Weight, etc.

An Asthma is a thick and short breathing, accompanied with a wheesing noise,
and commonly also with a Cough. An Orthopnaea is a long and slow expiration,
and a quick catching (as it were) inspiration, attended with such a stifling,
that the Patient is forced to sit upright, thrusting his Mouth up and gaping
for Air.

A Respiratio Anhelosa is also fraequent among Scorbuticks, and is occasioned
by a Putrid Acid Blood, that is (as I have told you before) Fuliginous and
Acrimonious, by means of those sharp sooty steams it irritates, and prompts the
Lungs to a quick breathing, to prevent stifling, and to attract a clearer Air
instead of those sooty Evaporations, which in some I have observed so copious,
that their Tongue was covered with a black scum, not unlike what is fraequently
taken notice of in continual ardent Fevors.

. 3. As the Pulse in respect of quickness and aequality of motion, does
proportionably correspond with the Respiration in a healthful, and likewise in
a morbifique state; so it does in the Scorvey, where in this degree it is quick,
fraequent, and unaequal in motion, which is occasioned by the same cause, viz.
by Acid Fuliginous Blood, stimulating the Vital Faculty of a quick motion, and
imposing a necessity on the Ventricles of the Heart to an expeditious explosion
of the Acrimonious Cruor. The inaequality of Pulsation depends on the unaequal
mixture of the Blood with those Fuliginous steams (or Heterogeneous Copula's)
that do so unaequally vellicate the sides of the Ventricle.

. 4. A ruddy and thick Urin is most commonly an attendant of a Praeliminary
Scorvey, which is comprehended and specified in the two foremost Observations
of Chap. 11. the production whereof is a dissolution of those deflagrated Salts
and Sulphurs in the Serum, which afterward is praecipitated by the Putrid
Acid, that is ever a sequel to the Scorbutique Ebullition, and so abandoned to
the Kidneys and Ureters; but as the said Ebullition does only occasionally
happen now and then, so the forementioned ruddy Urin does only appear on
those occasions. For the greater part the Urin is turbid, and copiously
saturated with a thick sediment, that is apt to furr to the sides and bottom of
the Chamber Pot, being nothing else, but an excretion of crude indigested
Tartar, or Acid Salt, from the Mass of Blood; if at some seasons the Urin
appears thin and aqeous, that may happen either through the potent coagulative
quality of the acidity in the Blood, not separating the superfluous and
excrementitious Tartar; or through some obstruction of the passages, leading to
or from the Kidneys, suffering the thin only to pass, and retaining the thick.
Moreover observe, that in those thick drabby Urins, upon some standing the
gross sediment is apt to sinck to the bottom, leaving the middle clear and
transparent, and a cream swimming on the top, which is nothing but the
mucilaginous part of the Tartar, through its lightness recovering the surface
of the Urin.

. 5. Spots and Blotches of several colors do ordinarily survene a Scorvey, and
are caused by a condensation of the sulphurous parts of the Blood, that are
deflagrated, and Volatile Salts amortized through the Acid, in the pores of the
ambient Skin or Cutis, where they are deposed or deserted by the Acid Blood,
withdrawing it self from them, and through its penetrative faculty insinuating
into the Veins, returns by the circulative motion into the Body; whereas the
others being so much obtused, are rendered incapable of reverting into the
Vessels. These Spots and Blotches are not dolorous, because the acrimony of the
deposed Salts is obtused; their color if red, they derive from the Sulphurous
or Bituminous parts of the Blood, mixed with the Volatile or Amortized Salt; if
yellow, from an admixture of part of the Acid Salt, condensed and obtused by
the reaction of the said Volatile Alcali, which now mentioned obtused Acid, if
left commixt in a greater proportion with the Alcali, and with a lesser
proportion of the Bituminous Particles, render those Blotches of a livid
tincture.

The production of Scorbutic Pustles and Botches differ from Spots and Blotches
in this only, that the Salts in these latter are diluted, or dissolved in some
part of the Serum, which in the former are more condensed and coagulated. Some
of these are without pain, others are painful; the latter hapening, because the
acrimony of the foresaid Salts is not totally obtused by reaction.

. 6. The bleeding of the Teeth, fraequent Haemorrhages of the Nose, and
Haemorrhoids, also immoderate Menstruations, and sometimes a bloody Flux, are
Symptoms of this Disease, occasioned through a serous Acid Blood, rendered
acrimonious and corroding by the Imbibition of fuliginous Salts, corroding the
termination of the Vessels. Note, that in most Scorbutics are two sorts of
Blood, viz. A gross and faeculent Blood, coagulating and praecipitating it self
from the more ferous and fluid parts. The gross Blood floats about the Entrails
and lower parts, and is (...); so the other being more fluid and light, is more
apt to be (...), and to stream upwards. Those intolerable Gripings of the Guts
without a looseness, which Scorbutics here are so miserably tortured with, are
likewise occasioned by the same corrosive Humors, or rather nitrous acid
Juices, infesting the nervous, and consequently most sensible Tunics of the
small Guts. That the cause of these Autumnal Epidemic Gripings of the Guts, the
Inhabitants of this City are so much exposed to, is a Nitrous Acid, appears
partly by the Procatarticks, viz. Liberal Drinking cold sour Small-beer, when
they are heated by the aestuating Rays of the Sun, going cool in their Clothes,
and lying half Naked in Bed, immoderate eating o^ Horary Fruits; and partly by
the Cure ( Argumentum a Juvantibus) Volatile Salts and Aromatics, not only
giving ease, but often removing the Distemper. But that these Acid Juices should
distill from the Brain through the Nerves, or be the Liqour Nervosus rendered
Acid (as our Learned Author asserts in a late Treatise entitled Pharmac.
Irration.) and all this while the Brain continue unaffected with any Symptom,
Non credo.

Whence fraequent Spitting, Laxity, Discoloration, Corrosion, and pain of the
Gums and Teeth do proceed, has been declared formerly.

. 7. The Fainting and Palpitation of the Heart is caused by fuliginous acre
steems, suffocating the Heart in the former, and Vellicating its Ventricles in
the latter.

From what has been already explicated, may easily be Collected the cause of
Vomiting, Nauseousness, Punctorious pains of the sides of the Breast, tearing
pains of the Stomach, Looseness, Headache, etc.

. 8. Those Erratick Fevors, that ordinarily are observed to attend the Scorvey,
are often occasioned by a copious quantity of Fuliginous Salts, that have been
Deflagrated, and by their long continuance have attracted some proportion of
impure Sulphurs, and so take flame again.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Description of the Scorvey.
1. The Description of the Scorvey. 2. Whether it be an Occult Disease, or
Morbus totiu^ substantiae. 3. Whether it be a Similar or Organical Disease. 4.
Which is the part Primarily and Principally affected.

. 1. THe Scorvey being seated in several parts of the Body, occasioned by
various Causes, and attended with a train of all manner of Symptoms, appears as
if it had no certain Essence, and consequently is not capable of a description
so Pathognomonic, as other Distempers, and therefore you must be contented with
such as can be given of it, viz. The Scorvey is an Universal, Multiform,
Variable, Endemic, and Contagious Disease of all the parts of the Body,
particularly of the Stomach, Spleen, and Liver, occasioned by a Salin Blood,
and attended with a Cachexia of all the parts, Spontaneous Lassitude, Pesanture
and Imbecility of the Limbs, but especially of the Knees, difficulty of
Breathing, sore and lax Gums, Spots, Blotches, Pustles, etc. The Universality
of this Distemper consists, 1. In Attaquing all People generally more or les^,
inhabiting a Scorbutic clime. 2. In a Praeternatural disposition of all the
parts. It Is Multiform, because it assumes all shapes of Diseases, there being
scarce any Distemper, which in one Symptom or another, it does not resemble.
Moreover, it is a Cold, Hot, Dry, and Moist Disease, as it is Symptoms do plainly
demonstrate, viz. Inflamed hot Pustles, Erysipelas, cold Oedematous Legs, moist
Rheumatisms, dry Scabs, etc. It Is also variable in all manner of respects, 1.
Variable in the Subjects, there being scarce two in a Hundred, whose Symptoms
are alike. ^. In the parts affected, being commonly chiefly rooted in the
Stomach, sometime, in the Spleen, other times in the Liver; moreover, per (...)
often transferring its head quarters from one part to another, and exchanging the
whole Syndrome of Symptoms into another quite different, and also in progress
of time passing from an Acid into a Lixivial and Saponary Scorvey, or from a
Mouth-Scorvey, into a Leg-Scorvey, and thence into a Joint-scorvey, or
sometimes into a Terminative Scorvey. That this Distemper is endemic ( Tam
ratione aeris quam aquae) has been declared elsewhere; and certainly it is
Contagious, since most Endemic Maladies are so, there being ordinarily Miasms,
or perfect Scorbutic seminaries transported, by means of the Vehicle of the air
from one Body to another, which obtaining a power of producing their like out
of the humors of such Bodies, into which they are transferred, engender an
absolute Scorvey, in a far less space of time, than if it had primarily took
its rise in that manner, I have heretofore explained. All the parts of the Body
and Humors being thoroughly infected with the Scorbutic Seminaries, the
Spermatic parts cannot be free, which must therefore also render this Distemper
(...) and Haereditary. 1. By means of the Semen of the Parent, and its plastic
faculty. 2. Of the Uterin Blood. 3. Of the Milk assuged by the Infant, whence
we may term it (...). 4. Of the Contact ((...)) of the Lips of the Mouth, and
Ambient Skin of the Body, whereby the Scorbutic (...) is transferred to the
Child, by being Kissed or Hugged by the Parents, and lying by them in Bed. But
because you shall not only be satisfied with my Information, give me leave to
acquaint you what Platerus, the Learned Professor of the foregoing Century at
Basil, reports of it, page 355. This Malignant Disease when it first discovered
it self in the Maritime Nothern parts, and proved Contagious, gave me no small
suspicion, That from remote Countries, which these People that cross the Seas
do in our Age discover, almost to the extreme Borders of the Earth, and where
possibly it is familiar; it was Transported first to these places that are near
the Sea by Seamen.

. 2. Definitions or Descriptions are rarely so perfectly made in the Art of
Physic, as to rescind the occasion of all Objections from Cavillers, and
therefore to praevent that Risk, I will be Opponent to my self, in forming
several Doubts and Objections against the Definition by me proposed in this
Chapter. First, I offer thi^ Quaestion, Whether the Scorvey be a Manifest or
Occult Disease, that is as Fernelius does term it, a Morbus totius substantiae?
Some that Argue from Authorities, probably may offer the Sentiments of
Platerus, Sennertus, Steeghius, and others. The first of these asserts the
Scorvey to be an Occult Malignant, and absolutely Venomous disease. The second
gives us a definition (which as I said before, the Scorvey is not capable of,
as having no essential difference) in these terms. The Scorvey is an Evil and
Occult quality, or disposition, impressed on the whole Body, but chiefly on the
Bowels, that are destined for Nutrition, arising from a gross Melancholy
Humor, that is Ichorous or Serous, and corrupted in a peculiar manner, or,
says he, It is a certain Evil Nutrition, or Ill Habit of the Body, etc. The
last expresses it, to be a Moist distemper of the Spleen, occasioned through
the putrefaction of the thick Humor, which the Spleen delights in. The foremost
Opinion may easily be Refelled, since the Symptoms of the Scorvey may be
plainly deduced from Causes, that are obvious and manifest. 2. All Venoms do
immediately assassinate the Heart, dissolve the Vinculum vitae, and have this
Qualification appropriated to them, that they are only to be Expelled by their
Antidotes; but common Observation tells us, that the Scorvey moves gradually,
is more ordinarily seated in the Spleen, or Stomach, than the Heart, and is
Cured by Medicines, that Operate by a Manifest, and not Occult quality, namely
such as are of a subtle igneous and colliquative faculty, as Scorvey-grass,
Watercresses, etc. The second Definition savours much of the first, and renders
it a morbus totius substantiae, which that it is not, appears from the former
Answer. Steeghius will have it a Moist disease, and asserts Melancholy a
Drying humor, the continent cause; which however per accidens may produce a
Moist distemper; but waving that, it is most certain, that in many Scorbutics
the Spleen is not affected, and therefore cannot be described to be a Moist
distemper of the Spleen.

. 3. The next Quaery is, Whether is the Scorvey a Similar, or Dissimilar
Disease? Some that do allow the Scorvey a Disease of very ancient date, adjudge
it a Dissimilar disease, and in particular a Disease of Magnitude, viz. A great
Spleen. Pet. Forestus asserts it a Compounded disease, and not Simple. The
fittest answer to this in short is, That primarily it is a Similar, and
secundarily a Dissimilar Disease.

. 4. The third Quaestion is, Which is the part Principally and Originally
affected in the Scorvey? Horstius states the Spleen the part affected, others
the Stomach only, and many the Stomach, Spleen, and Liver. If in some it be
observable (as it is) they are troubled with luxuriant glowing Gums, and
vacillation of their Teeth, without the concomitance of other Symptoms, in all
probability it is the Stomach is the only part affected, there appearing no Sign
or Symptom of any other entrail, that is affected. On the other hand, if no
other Symptoms Emerge, besides bluish Scorbutic Pustles or Blotches, it may
rationally be concluded, no other part is affected but the Spleen. It has been
also observed by Forestus, and Reusnerus, that the Spleen and other Entrails
have not appeared much affected in some deceased Scorbutics, but the Liver
chiefly, wherein was observed a great discoloration, and dissolved unity of its
substance. Whence we may deduce, that a Scorvey that is contracted by a Salin
Diaet, the Stomach is originally and primarily affected, in that which is
occasioned through a Salin Air the Spleen, but after some continuance they
become all parts aequally affected.

CHAP. XV. Of the Differences of the Scorvey.
1. A distinction taken from the Growth of the Scorvey. 2. From the manner of
its Origination. 3. From the parts primarily affected. 4. From the Internal
Cause. 5. From the Concentration of Symptoms. 6. From Praedominant Symptoms. 7.
From the Occultation of Symptoms. 8. From its manner. 9. From the place, where
it reigns. 10. That these Distinctions are of great Use.

. 1. SUbjects that consist of a mutable Nature require exact distinctions,
which are to be desumed, 1. From its growth, whence the Scorvey is called
either Praeliminary, Liminary, Recent, Inveterate and Terminative. A
Praeliminary Scorvey, I must confess, is very Improperly named a Scorvey; for
being absolutely considered in it self is no Scorvey, but in a Relative and
Subsecutive way I have Imposed that Denomination only Doctrinae gratia, to
express the root whence a commencing Scorvey does spring and bud forth. This
being praemised, I intend those Ebullitions comprehended in the Observations
that are Delineated in Chap. 11. for a Praeliminary Scorvey, because they
praecede, and are generally Praeliminary to a Scorvey. A Liminary Scorvey is
that, which upon the quietation and subsidence of a Praeliminary Ebullition
buds forth. A Recent Scorvey is a confirmed Scorvey, but of no long standing,
and is answerable to the augment of the Distemper. An Inveterate Scorvey is a
Distemper of a long continuance, and alludes to the state of the Disease. A
Terminative Scorvey is that Disease whereinto it does pass, and puts a
termination to the Distemper and Life also; as a Scorbutic Dropsy, or
Consumption, etc. for it is such a sort of Disease the Scorvey does at length
terminate into, and so prove Mortal.

. 2. From the manner of its Origination, in which respect it is either
Haereditary and Connate, when it is derived from the Scorbutic indisposition of
the Parents; or Adventitious, which is engendered some time after one is Born;
and this is twofold, for it is either Contagiously adventitious, when gotten by
Infection, or Non-naturally Adventitious, that is, when contracted through
fault of some of the Non-naturals, as Salt diaet, Salin Air, Melancholy, want
of Stirring, etc.

. 3. From the parts Primarily and Principally affected, this Disease is termed
an Hepatic, Splenetic, or a Stomachic Scorvey.

. 4. From the Internal Cause, it is styled either an Acid, Lixivial, or Saponary
Scorvey.

. 5. From the parts where the Symptoms do concentrate and clot together, it
derives the name of Mouth-Scorvey, Leg-Scorvey, or Joynt-Scorvey; By the way I
must give the Reader this Advertisment, That in a Mouth-Scorvey the Symptoms
are not so limited, or circumscribed, as to extravague no farther than the
Mouth, but that some slight superficial Symptoms of the other kinds are also
attendant, viz. A great weakness or feebleness of the Knees, spots about the
Legs and Arms, Blotches in several parts, especially in or near the Groin,
Ambulative glancing pains about the extreme parts, etc. So likewise in a
Leg-Scorvey some Symptoms of the Mouth and other parts are remaining. So that
this distinction does chiefly take its denomination from the greater number of
urgent and remarkable Symptoms, that haunt the Mouth, Legs, or Joints.

. 6. From some praedominating Symptoms the Scorvey often takes a particular
Nomenclature; from an Asthma it is called an Asthmatick Scorvey; upon the same
account it is styled a Rheumatic Scorvey, a Torminous or Griping Scorvey, a
Diarrhoeous Scorvey, an Emetic or Vomiting Scorvey, a Flatuous Hypochondriac
Scorvey, a Cutaneous Scorvey, viz. of Spots, Pustles, Blotches and Pimples, an
Vlcerous Scorvey, a Dolorous Scorvey, etc.

. 7. From the occultation or hiddenness of the Symptoms within the Body, it may
be called an inward, hidden, or Latent Scorvey, which does not manifest it self
in Symptoms that are external and evident, as Spots, Mouth or Leg Symptoms; but
without the Concomitance of these, there is only observable a Neutrality in
point of Health, a defection of Appetite, some small oppression of the Breast,
a diminution of ones usual inclination to stirring, and some little hebetude or
dullness of the Senses, etc. or a Manifest Scorvey, appearing in external
Symptoms.

. 8. From its manner, it may be termed a Mild or Malignant Scorvey. From the
Country or place where it reigns, its called an English, or Dutch Scorvey;
also a Sea, or Land Scorvey.

. 9. It is not to increase the bulk of this Tract, but the great use that may
be made of these differences and distinctions, as you will in their proper
places observe, has been the occasion of inserting them in this Chapter; the
truth hereof will manifest it self, when you come to understand, that many
patients are frustrated of their hopes of Cure, and some praecipitated to their
Tomb^, through the neglect and error in making a right distinction of their
Disease, its degrees, and its various mutations, which sometimes is to a
contrary distemper; and it is here chiefly, that I praetend to be particular,
whereas the Vulgar Hackney Physician neglecting the Journal of progressions in
Maladies, follows only the common Tract of Method and Remedies, and
therefore fraequently misseth his scope of restitution of health.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Diagnostick Signs of the SCORVEY.
1. The Signs of a Praeliminary Scorvey. 2. Signs of a Liminary Scorvey. 3.
Signs of a Recent Scorvey. 4. Signs of an Inveterate Scorvey. 5. Signs of a
Terminatory Scorvey. 6. Signs of an Hepatic Scorvey. 7. Signs of a Stomachic
Scorvey. 8. Marks of a Splenetic Scorvey. 9. Notes of distinction of an Acid,
Lixivial, and Saponary Scorvey. 10. Directions to discover a Latent Scorvey.
11. The d^fference between an English and Dutch Scorvey.

. 1. A Praeliminary Scorvey is not only discovered by praeceding Scorbutic
Procatarctics, but also by the Pulse and Urin, the former beating not so
unaequal, as in continual putrid Fevors; neither is the heat so pungent, but
glowing only, that is obtuse and fuliginous: the latter is commonly of a higher
color, than in an ordinary continual Fevor it can arrive to in so short a
space of time, and very abounding in a gross ruddy sediment. Moreover the
ebullition of Blood is of no long continuation, but in a few days is apt to
fall and subside, unless provoked by the error of the Physician or Patient.

. 2. A Liminary Scorvey some do decipher by these four Pathognomonic Signs, 1.
A livid and dead^^h Complexion of the Face. 2. An itching deep redness of the
Gums. 3. An Oppression of the Breast and Respiration, also of the Sides about
the Bastard Rib^. 4. A Painful Feebleness of the Knees. These we grant to be
common Signs in an evident commencing Scorvey, but not Pathognomonic, because
they do not always attend every Scorbutique; for I have met with some, that
without those Symptoms beforementioned, have been disfigured with livid
Scorbutique Spots, likewise some whose Mouth and adjacent parts were affected,
without the least sense of feebleness in their Knees, or Oppression of
Respiration; Lastly, Those that are molested with a Latent Scorvey, are
exempted from several of the praenumerated Signs.

To these common Diagnosticks must be added a fifth, A great heaviness of all
the Body, and lumpishness or dullness of the internal and external Senses. 6.
The Appetite in some is obtused, in others it is so much sharpened, that they are
apt to covet more than they can digest. 7. A (...), or the digestion of the
Stomach somewhat impaired of its wonted vigor; as appears by a small heaviness
and drowsiness after Meat, and accompanied with Belchings and Winds murmuring
downwards. 8. The Urin is less transparent, and grown a little turbid and
drabby. 9. All these may be confirmed, by considering the Procatarctic Causes,
viz. Whether they have lived in a Scorbutic Air, or fed upon Salt Diaet, or by
reason of Imprisonment, or other voluntary Confinement, have neglected all
manner of Exercise, or whether they have been under some occasional Melancholy,
or whether some usual evacuation, as the Menstrua, Haemorrhage at the Nose, or
Haemorrhoids, Issues in the Arm, Neck, or Leg, or in any other part, be not
suppressed. Or whether they are not Splenetic or Hypochondriac; or have lately
been troubled with a Quartan Ague: Or whether their Parents were not subjected
to the Scorvey, whence it might be aesteemed Haereditary; or lastly, whether
they do not daily converse with Scorbutiques, whereby it might become
Contagious. Consider also the Juvantia, and Nocentia, what things help them,
and what hurt them.

. 3. The signs of a Recent, or Augmented Scorvey, are, 1. A spongy swelling of
the Gums, which upon the least pressure, or biting a piece of Bread, are apt to
exudate Blood. 2. A great stink of the Mouth. 3. Looseness of the Teeth. 4.
Spots like Fleabites, and Freckles dispersed over the whole Field of the Body,
but thickest about the Mouth, Temples, Arms, Breast, and Knees; some are Red,
others Yellow, Grayish, Duskish, Purpre, or Blackish, easily disappearing in
one place, and emerging again in another. 5. A deeper transmutation of the
Complexion into an ill habit of Body, the looks seeming Yellowish, Greenish,
deep Red, Sallow or Swartish. 6. The Oppression of the Lungs, Breast and Sides
is considerably increased, insomuch that when they stir or rise up, they are
subject to faint and gasp for Breath, which continues so long, until they sit,
or lay themselves down again. 7. Puffing up of the Stomach particularly after
Victuals, and Tension of the Belly. 8. The weakness of their Knees and Ancles,
is likewise much augmented, which renders them far more Impotent in going, or
moving. 9. It Is observed, that in many the whole train of Symptoms is apt to be
intended or increased every fourth day, in some every third day, that is every
other day (for Physicians do reckon inclusive) in others at certain seasons
every day. 10. In this degree they are usually Costive. And 11. troubled with
Pain and Stiches all over. 12. Suppression of the Menstrua in Women, in stead
whereof, they are molested with a sort of painful Whites.

. 4. In an Inveterate Scorvey, these Praecited Symptoms and Signs, as they have
taken deeper Root, so have also assumed a greater Intension and stubbornness;
for in this degree the Patient is deprived of all power of Moving or Stirring;
the Sinews, Tendons, and Muscles, are apt to be stiff and contracted. He is
molested with Vagrant, Ambulative, Distending, Creeping, Vellicating, or
Lancinating Pains of several parts of the Body; bruising Ossifragous ((...))
pains in the midway of a Limb between the Joints, torturing most in the Night;
Red, Yellow, Purpre, or Blackish splotches, especially about the Knees, which
sometimes being concomitated with a Tumor, and extending thence downwards as
far as the Foot, and meeting altogether in one tumefied Splotch render the Leg
to ones view, as it were all over Leprous; a fraequent recurring Melancholy
passion, Hiccoch, choking Coughs, and copious Salivations, violent
Palpitations of the Heart, deep Swoundings strenuous Vomitings, tearing Iliack
pains, which a famous Author names a Dysenteria Incruenta, but how properly,
let others judge. The Pulse variable, inaequal in motion and strength, most
times low and thick, and sometimes vermicular, though at other times strong and
violent, that is Thumping. The Urin is inconstant, often turbid and whitish,
sometimes thick and reddish, seldom thin and pale; deep Red, or purpre Tumor
and Pustles, scattering over the Surface, Redness of Face, Tumors and
Impostumes of all kinds, according to the Temperament of the Grieved. The
foresaid Splotches often do peel off in Scales of several colors and figures, or
exchange into Erysipelas's, these and likewise Botches do pass into Ulcers,
some of which are superficial, profound, simple, inflamed, callous, dry,
sanious, purulent, etc. In some few the Veins under the Tongue, and about the
inside of the lower Lips are varicious; some also they are debilitated by great
Sweats, which they are exposed to. In an Inveterate Scorvey, they are often Loose
and subject to fall into violent Fluxes of the Belly, or Diarrhaea's, and
Lienteries, which if continuing, pass into a Terminatory Distemper. The
tormenting pain in the Back, called Lumbago, and resembling the pain that is
occasioned by the Stone of the Kidneys, is very brisk in this degree, as also
spurious Pleuritick pains.

. 5. The Signatures and Symptoms of a Terminative Scorvey (which is the extreme
degree, whereinto the forgoing passes either per (...), or (...), are, 1. A
Scorbutic Phagedaenic, cancerous or gangraenous Ulcers, and Caries or
Rottenness of the Bones. 2. A Scorbutic Fistul, which may happen to several
parts. 3. A Scorbutic Dropsy, which commonly proves an Ascites, though I have
also remarqued the Scorvey has made its Exit, through an An^sarca, and
Tympanie. 4. A Scorbutic Atrophy and Marasmus. 5. A continual very fluent and
drivelling Salivation, which one in Throgmorton-street has labored under
several years, and will certainly conduct him to his Grave. 6. Scorbutic
Convulsions, and Epilepsies. 7. Fraequent Syncopees. 8. Scorbutic Palsy, and
Tremors. 9. Scorbutic Apoplexy. 10. Scorbutic Quartan, Tertian, Erratic,
Hectic, and continual Malignant Fevers. 11. Scorbutic Orthopnaea, and
Periodical Coughs, and Asthma's. 11. Scorbuticks Phthis^s, or Pulmonique
Ulcerous Consumption. 13. A continual Flux of the Belly, as a Dysentery, or
Lientery.

. 6. The Signs of an Hepatic Scorvey, are, 1. Deep, Red, or Yellowish prurient
sanguinolent Gums. 2. Red, Yellowish, or Cineritious Spots and Splotches about
several parts of the Body, especially about the Breast, Neck, and Face, also
Pustles and Bumps of the like tincture in the same places, that prove somewhat
Incommodious by a Pruriginous itching quality, also Erysipela's, Shingles, and
Ring-worms; some of those Spots and Splotches of an Ash and Citrin color I
have observed to be endued with a faculty so corroding, that their seat has
been deep in the Skin, much below the Surface. 3. The Complexion of the whole
habit of Body, tending to a Cineritious or Subcitrine defoedation, and in some
to a Verdure. 4. A Stich or pricking, and in many a weighty depressing pain in
the right side, under the short Ribs, particularly upon a deep caprisant
Respiration. 5. A soreness, pain and oppression in the right Hypochondre, when
lying on the left side. 6. Difficulty of Respiration, the Urin and Pulse
uncertain, ni^orulent Belchings, besides several other signs common to a
Liminary, and Recent Scorvey.

. 7. A Stomachic Scorvey is discerned, 1. By a pale Tallow habit of Body, white
Spots like Cacatrix's, much lighter than the Skin, pale Pustles and Oedematous
Tubercles, chiefly about the Stomach, Breast, Neck and Groin. 2. Oedematous
Legs. 3. Laxe fungous pale ichorous Gums. 4. Fluent spitting. 5. Inflation of
the Stomach, heavy Digestion, sour Belchings, and discharging of Wind both
ways. 6. Distension of the Belly; whereunto add some of the common signs.

. 8. The marks of a Splenetic Scorvey are, 1. Livid luxuriant Gums, that are
apt to be Fis^ured, Ulcered, grow putrid and stink, and at length through a
Phag^daenic Sanies are apt to be corroded away. 2. Blew livid Spots and
Splotches, which by Deterioration turn black, and oft-times Ulcerate, and
commonly haunt the left side of the Body more than the right. 3. Sour
Belchings, Winds Murmuring and Fluctuating about the Guts between the
Hypochonders, Stitches, Pricking, or Gravitating pains in the left side under
the spurious Ribs, Melancholy passions, Palpitations, sudden Faintnesses,
Vertigo's, Inflations and pains of the Stomach, which sometimes reach as far as
the Back, in manner, imitating those of the Stone in the Kidneys, also
Vomitings, which in some is so continuous and permanent, that they scarce ever
Eat or Drink without returning some part of it immediately, or after a short
interval; and notwithstanding are obliged to Eat and Drink often, to suppress
the gnawing pain of their Stomach, which is occasioned by a putrid Acid Serum,
vellicating the Tunics of the Stomach, lying on the left side proves easiest to
them, a livid blearing up of the under Eyelids; a Haemorrhage of the left
Nostril, and many other Characters expressed in the general Semeiotic.

. 9. An Acid Scorvey not differing from a Stomachic, a Liminary, and Recent
Scorvey; a Lixivial Scorvey being often comprehended under an Hepatic, and a
Saponary under an Inveterate and Terminatory Scorvey (which Identifications are
only to be understood (...)) are easily known by those Notes I have already
praemised, whereunto may be added for confirmation, the most certain sign
desumed a Juvantibus and Nocentibus, viz. an Acid Scorvey yields to Alcalious
Remedies, a Lixivial to a Scorbutic Acid, a Saponary to a mixed Remedy. The
Mouth, Leg, and Joint- Scorvey, needs no further Illustration for discovery,
than what I have set down in their particular Chapters.

. 10. A Latent Scorvey requires Experience and Industry in the Physician, who
must take his Dimensions of Conjecture, 1. From the Air wherein the Patient
Lives. 2. Diaet. 3. From such Symptoms, which cannot so Directly or Relatively
be applied to any particular Disease besides this, as a Recurrent Lassitude,
and sloth of Moving, dullness of the Senses, difficulty of Breath, pesanture of
Body, inflation of the Stomach, heaviness and dullness after Meat, winds about
the Guts, Coughs and Catar^hs fraequently returning, besides several other
Neutral symptoms, which do neither determine a man absolutely Well or Ill.
Lastly, Observe that where two such Non-naturals, as a Salin Air and Diaet,
have so absolute an Influence on Bodies, scarce any Disease can seize on a man,
which does not partake of a Scorbutic Tincture, neither can it be well Cured,
without abstracting a Coindication from the Scorvey.

. 11. A Dutch Scorvey in Symptoms is very different from the English; they
using generally a Diaet more Excrementitious than ours (as gross thick Beer,
Roots, Cabbage, Salats, Milk, Roak-Flesh, Pickle-Herring, and other Fish) are
more Exposed to all the supposed Pathognomonics and Syndrome of a Mouth and
Leg-Scorvey, than we, who feed commonly on Meats of more Nutriture and less
Excrementitious, and therefore are not so much Exposed to that general
Catalogue of Scorbutic Symptoms, but most commonly to those that are Latent,
(and Recited in the praeceding Paragraphs) and some others more evident, as
Spots, Blotches, Pustles, Cutambulous Pains, Griping of the Guts, Vomiting and
Gnawing Pains of the Stomach, Hypochondriac Winds and Vapors, Catarrhs,
Coughs, also to those of the Joint-Scorvey.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Causes of a Terminatory-Scorvey.
1. The Cause of a Scorbutic Dropsy. 2. That the Heart is the part primarily
affected in a Convulsion, Palsy, and Apoplexy.

. 1. THis Chapter I have reserved for the Aetiology of a Terminatory Scorvey,
in whose train the Dropsy being placed in the Front, shall Commence my
Discourse on that. The ill success that attends the Vulgar Cure of an Asc^tes,
or Water-Dropsie, by hot drying and Lixivial Medicines, as Elycampane, Orris
Roots, Cyperus, Calamus Aromaticus, Juniper, Salt of Wormwood, Centaury, and a
Hundred more, is a plain Convictive, that the Cause is most erroneously
assumed, to be a Refrigeration of the Liver, and it is Obstruction through
Phlegmatic Humors. But on the other hand, when we shall take into
Consideration, that a Scorbutic Dropsy is easily, and certainly Cured, if
attempted in time by mixed Remedies, (whereof Spirit of Tartar, of Salt Marine,
single or composite, and such like Acids, are the Basis) besides the Symptoms
attendant signifying a Lixivial Original, is to me a clear Demonstration, that
it proceeds from a Calcination of Choler in the Liver, which thence resulting
into an Alcalious Salt, dissolves per Deliquium, and so becomes Qualified to
Penetrate into the most intime pores of its Parenchyma, where it subverts its
Temperament, and through its Absorbitive Exhausting faculty parches its
substance, and Indues it with a Salin dissolving Quality, whereby the whole
Mass of Chymus is daily dissolved into a Serum. The Universal Current of Blood
deriving hence an Absorbing and Exiccating faculty does about the Stomachic
Vessels so exsuge the Mouth of the Stomach, that Hydropics are continually
obliged to moisten it, by Ingurgitating large measures of Drink, whence the
L^tex seri does so immensurably accresce, that through its intumescence
generally some Vessel or other about the Abdomen, and particularly about the
Mesentery, does burst, or at sometimes through the Acrimonious quality of the
Salin Serum the said Vessel is corroded through, among Physicians termed, a
(...); for it is not possible, so great a quantity of Water, as is sometimes
collected in the capacity of he Abdomen, should sweat through the pores ( per
(...).) But this is certain, that often in a Commencing Dropsy, or one that is
Recent, and of no large Circumscription, the Serum may exstil through the
Osculations of the Vessels ( per (...)) and it is this kind of Dropsy is
capable of an expedite Cure, whereas the other that depends on a (...), is for
the greater part Incurable; for suppose, that the Extravasate Serum is all, or
in a great measure drawn off by Hydragogous Purgatives, still the consolidation
of the corroded Vessels is not only difficult of its own nature, but in a
manner impossible, because of the daily praeferfluxe and appulse of the
corrosive Salin Serum, to the discontinuated Orifices of the said Vessels; add
hereunto the ineptitude of the salin constitution of the Liver and corroding
Alcalious Blood to be sweetened, and reduced to their pristin Temperament. By
the way, let me observe the Error of Hofman in his Institutes, attributing the
causality of a Dropsy, to a Diminuted or Abolisht faculty of the Kidneys, not
attracting the Serum, which is manifest, does happen per accidens; because the
Serum having taken another Channel, is deviated from its usual appulse to the
Emulgents. But since I find my self for the prae^ent Imbarqued on this Subject,
the Affinity of the Matter persuades me to Expatiate into some other sorts of
Dropsies, that are not Scorbutique, namely such, as sometimes do happen to
Women after their lying In, also to some upon a liberal draught of c^ld Water,
and to others upon the continuance of a Skir of the Spleen or Liver, or upon a
taedious harassing of a Tertian or Quartan. In the first case there being a
vast Coacervation of Humors in the Hypogastri^ Vessels, by reason of the
retention of the Menstrua, during the whole time of Childbearing, which upon
the pains of Labor attracting a greater Conflux thither, and the great heat of
the adjacent parts rarefying the said Humors, occasion some of the Lymphatic
Vessels to burst, whereunto being concomitant a copious Haemorrhage of the
Matrix, causes a vast expense of Spirits, whereby the Bowels do all suffer a
subversion of their temperature, that afterward proves an occasion of
engendring crude aqueous Humors; these upon their circulating reversions
distilling out of the foresaid bursted Vessel into the capacity of the Abdomen,
produce a Dropsy. The like may happen upon a draught of cold Water, violently
repelling the Humors to the Vessels of the Abdomen, which partly through the
violence of the Impulse, and partly through their being crowded together,
occasion a Rupture of some of the Lymphaeducts. Here I must Animadvert further,
how ridiculous a c^nceit it is of most Physicians, importing the said Dropsy
to be caused by the sudden extinction of the innate or influent heat of the
Liver, which afterward does engender Aqueous Blood; as if that entrail should
be left so naked, or be so meanly fortified by Nature, as not to be capable, to
resist the quality of cold Water at so great a distance; for certainly the cold
is much broke and obtused by the Stomach, and other parts, before it can arrive
to the Liver; or as if that cold quality, which is impressed upon the Liver,
could not be easily remedied by hot Medicine^: But what do I insist so long
upon these Trisles, since the whole Body of Physic is filled with them? How a
Dropsy is engendered upon a Skir, Tertian, or Quartan, you may be informed from
the Praemises, wherefore I will return to Confirm the cause of a Scorbutic
Dropsy to be an Alcalised Blood, by the Calcination or Reverberation of the
Bilis, which the Liver is always furnished with throughout all its parts, to
subtiliate and depurate the refluent Blood, which being performed, the
superfluous part of the said Bilis is abandoned to the Cystis. The Symptoms
concomitant and supervenient do strongly Corroborate that Sentiment. 1. The
Insatiable-Drought, the Atrophy of the Superior parts, the Lixivial ruddy Urin,
torrid Tawny Complexion of Body, cancerous depascent Ulcers of the Legs, the
salt Lixivial taste of the Serum, when Tapt out Per paracentesin; who but an
insipid Medicaster can derive them from any other than an Alcali, or a
reveherated Bilis?

. 2. A Convulsion, Palsy, and Apoplexy, are the next particulars, that highly
merit a serious deliberation, the more, because they ordinarily prove so
dangerous and terminative. In the concept of their part primarily affected,
seat, and internal Cause, I have for several years with the Generality of my
Prof^ssion, attributing too much to the Dictates of Antiquity, sloathfully
erred, until that by a stricter sc^utiny and observation in practice I had
detected their true Fountain and Original, which I now propose to you. That the
Heart is the chief seat, and part primarily and principally affected of the
forementioned Diseases, appears 1. By the Pulsation of the Arteries, which
before any Convulsion, Palsy, or Apoplexy does seize on the Patient, does very
much vary from its Natural, in respect of Fortitude, Order, Frequency,
Aequality of Motion, and many other specifications; which certainly express the
heart primarily and principally affected; confer further with the 6. Arg. 2. By
the Respiration, whose variation from its ordinary Function in several
respects, praeceding those recited affections, also signify the same to be the
part principally affected. 3. From the consideration of the Office and Function
of the Heart, which, besides the Vivification and Irradiation of the whole, is,
to be the sole and Primum Mobile of Motion of the Animal Spirits; for through
the Pulsation of the Arteries about the Brain, and more especially about the
Plexus Choroides, it causes Efforts, Impetus, and impulsive motions on the
Animal Spirits; so that it is from those Impulses these receive their energy
and vigor, and therefore consequently the Heart being affected, those Impulses
must also be depravated or diminisht. 4. If at any time those Symptoms are
abated or removed, it is by means of Cordials, which here for distinction, and
the scope they are intended for (though improperly) may be termed
Cephalic-Cordials, Cephalico-Cardiaca, as Spirit of Castor, Amber, Rosemary,
Pyony, etc. These undoubtedly are nothing more than Cordials, and rectifying
the Blood, comforting the Vital Balsam and Spirits of the Heart, and reducing
them to Ordination, aequality of Motion and Vigor. From ordinary Cordials they
differ in this only, that consisting of a more durable and compact Sulphur and
Spirits, they continue their Operation longer, in comforting the Heart, and
oppugning the Salts of the Blood, by reason of the Compactness and Crassitude
of their substance, whereas those that are vulgarly termed Cordials, and
intended only to comfort the Spirits by assimilation, consist of a lighter,
fusive, and exhalable substance; as Spirit of Wine, Treacle-water, Aqua
Mirabilis, etc. 5. Observing, that in some Cases the foresaid Symptoms receive
a considerable abatement and benefit from Phlebotomy, it is easily
Demonstrable, that this is performed, by detracting some part of the burden,
that oppressed the Heart, and its Pulsifique and Impulsive motions. 6. Galen,
lib. 2. de cause. pulls. c. 12. seems to intimate what is here asserted, in these
words: Pulsus convulsivus est, in quo ad utrumque terminum arteria tenditur,
quem convuls^o sequi solet. So that a convulsive Pulse (which signifies the
Heart to be affected primarily) does praecede a Convulsion, which following
must be deemed a Symptom of the former. Touching the manner and difference of
those three Symptoms, I conceive, that a Convulsion is occasioned by
Irritation, a Palsy by Relaxation and Obtusion, and an Apoplexy by
Dissolution. But to Illustrate it further; When the Arterial Blood consisting
of an acrimonious pungitive Salt, and appelling to the lower part of the Brain
(which is the most sensible, and near the Principium Nervorum) is agitated
smartly by the vibration of the Arteries or hard and violent pulsations (for in
all Convulsions Pulsus sunt duri and tensi) those subtiler particles of the
Blood are adacted violently into the Pores of the tender parts of the Brain,
which being thereby extremely discomposed, do violently impel the said
pungitive Particles into the Nerves (or in some cases only make a smart
Impression of their Idea on the Animal Spirits contained in the Nerves) and
being protruded to the Tendons of the Muscles, through their stimulating
quality incite them to contract and distend themselves, to be freed or
discharged of those aculeous Particles. Moreover, take notice, that the vulgar
Explicatory of Convulsions, wherein the Nerves are declared to be primarily and
chiefly convelled, which being continuated to the Muscles, do likewise occasion
their being convelled is greatly Erroneous; for only the Tendons are subject to
Convulsions, they being the chief instrument of the Motus Spontaneous, and only
subject to a Motus Depravatus, and Violentus, whereas the Nerves are not
appointed to move or to be moved, but to convey the Spirits. Secondly, When a
Nerve is punctured, or cut asunder (as has often happened by the Indexterity of
Surgeons in Phlebotomy wounding the Nerve in the Arm in stead of the Vein) it is
only apt to be surprised with a very great pain, but never known to be
convelled. Wherefore I would not have my Reader judge the Dictates of the
Ancients to be Infallible, since besides what is forementioned, it is manifest
in many of their Positions, which hitherto by this credulous Age are received
for Truths: I shall only give you this Instance for Proof; The Causes of a
Cephalalgia, or Headache, is by them asserted to be Acrimonious, or distending
Humors and Winds, corroding or distending the Membranes or Meninges of the
Brain. Nothing is more false than this, or savours more of Ignorance in
Anatomy; for neither of the Meninges are in the least sensible, as may be
observed by the Probe, wherewith touching the Dura meninx, though roughly,
(when lying bare upon the use of the Trepan) is not in the least perceived by
the Patient. Secondly, Whence should the sense be derived, there being not any
Nerve, or so much as a Nervous Fiber transmitted to it from the Brain. In
Summa, in the Brain, Stomach, and Liver, though they are daily Dissected and
Examined by Physicians in their expired Patients, many particulars are passed
by, that have not been discovered until very lately, which is to be attributed
to their Negligence and Unskilfulness; for indeed now adays, if a Physician
has but once or twice dissected a Sheeps-head, or a Calves-pluck, he thinks
himself sufficiently qualified to Challenge the Title of an expert Anatomist;
thus we see, that an expert Anatomist of this kind, observing that one of the
jaw Muscles of a Sheeps-head had two Bellies (whence its also called
Digastricus) immediately concluded all Muscles to be Biventres; an able
Headpiece for an Anatomist.

A Palsy is an imperfect Apoplexy, or a Levis Apoplexia, and differ only
gradu, secundum magis and minus, and therefore do easily pass into one another,
according to the Tenor of the Doct. of Hipp.

Galen 3. de loc. affect. 10. further tells you, That where all the Nerves have
at once lost their sense and motion, that affection is called an Apoplexy, but
that which only happens to the right or left side is a Palsy.

The causes in general are twofold, 1. A Material. And, 2. A Formal Cause. The
former is a gross Saponary Blood, which through its thickness is rendered
incapable of being so subtilized by the Brain, as to distill into the Nerves,
and that part that is Insinuated into the Nerves, being too obtuse and gross,
to receive the Impulsive motions and Impetus, prove unable to actuate or
distend the Nerves and Fibers, and therefore move the Members very weakly, or
not at all, whence I term it a Relaxation in opposition to the said distention.
The Formal Cause is the pulsifique faculty of the Heart, which is rendered soft,
slow, and dull, and therefore Incapable to exercise it is Impulsive motions.
Moreover observe, that though the Blood is Salin-Alcalious, it is not
Acrimonious, because it is obtused by a mixture of gross Unctuous and
Bituminous Sulphur, that obtuses its Acrimony; for otherwise were it
Acrimonious, and purely Lixivial, it would prove Vellicating and Dolorous, and
consequently Convulsive. The Aetiology of the other Terminatives may be easily
deduced from the interspersed Discourses.

CHAP. XVIII. Chronology of the Scorvey.
1. In what place, and with what Concomitants the Scorvey first appeared, in
what particulars its Symptoms increased. 2. A recital of several Primitive
Authors that have wrote on the Scorvey.

. 1. TO whatever various Sentiments touching the first Rise and appearance of
this Distemper, every particular Physicians Fancy may lead him, I am certain by
all the Indagation I could make among Physical Records, the name of Scorvey
(what touching Identified Symptoms has been discoursed among the Ancients, let
that rest) is not mentioned in any Author prior to Euritius Cordus, by his
Botanology, and Olaus Magnus, who in his H^st. Gent. Sept. relates, There was a
certain Campane Disease, which did afflict those, that were Besieged and Closed
in, and seemed to grow from eating of Salt Victuals, was increased through a
cold Exhalation out of the Walls, and was called the Scorboch. But Georg.
Fabrit. Lib. 2. Annot. in his History of the year 1486. says, This year was
reigning a new and unheard of Disease in these Countries (which were Silesia,
Bohemia, and the parts adjacent) which the Seamen of Saxony, called Den
Scarbochk. Whence I collect, this Disease had some few years before been Extant
in Saxony, and Denmark, possibly in 1483* or 84. Moreover two things are
observable, 1. That this Scorbutic Evil praesently after its first Origination,
was more fierce, and Malignant, than the ensuing Twenty or Thirty years; for
the said Fabritius in the account he gives of it, tells us, this Distemper
tended immediately to Ulcers; which if not timely remedied, became Gangraenous,
and Mortal. The Second is, That there was an Interval of some years, before it
spreaded into Countries, that were less Northern; for Balduinus Ronsaeus, who
to me appears the first, that wrote on the Scorvey, e Professo, in his Treatise
de Magn^s Hippocratis lienibus, pliniique Stomacace, or Sceletyrbe, seu vulgo
dicto Scorbuto, printted at Antwerp, in the year 1564. does express this
Disease, was but newly arrived among them, and was so strange to them, that
many scarce knew, what to make of it. Guil. Lemnius, a Zelander, wrote a
Treatise on the same Subject a little while after. Forestus in his Observe. Lib.
22. Obs. 20. Writes, that the Scorvey, was not only formerly unknown, but many
that were troubled with it, Died of it; likewise that one Dorpius, a Priest of
Lovain, died of the said Disease many years since, the Lovain Physicians being
extremely surprised at it, who had not yet determined any thing concerning it,
being an Evil, that was yet new and unknown, and so was its Name, Essence, and
much more the manner of Curing it.

Scorbutic Authors tell us, that Westphalia was pestered with it next after
Denmark and Saxony, in the year 1500. the next Frizeland, then Flanders, and
Brabant, in 1556. where it was occasioned by eating of Rye, that was brought
from Prussia, there being at that time a great scarcity of Wheat; afterward
Holland, and Zeland; in a manner, as if this Distemper had by Contagion crept
from Country to Country. Many years it remained on that Coast, before we were
sensible of it here in England; for there are many Physicians yet living, who
in the former part of their Practice, had not so much as heard of the Name of
this Disease, whereas within the last 20 or 30 years past, it is grown very
familiar among us.

The next Author that wrote on the Scorvey after Ronsaeus, was Echtius, whose
Epitome of the Scorvey was Printed a little after the said Ronsaeus, next to
him was Wierus, de Scorb. printed in 1567. next Solomon Albertus, whose History
of the Scorvey, with the addition of a new Symptom then appearing, which was a
contraction of the Cheeks, was published in 1594. Hieron. Reusnerus, his
Exercit. on the Scorvey, in 1600. Severinus Eugalenus his Book of the Scorvey,
in 1604. Langius his two Epistles on the Scorvey, in 1607, or 8. Horstius on
the same Disease, in 1609. Stubendorf upon Eugalen, in 1614. Dreyer, Brunner,
Brucaeus, Albinus, Smid, Sennert, all Authors on the Scorvey, in 1622, 24, and
27. Besides these several others have Obiter and Cursorily touched on this
Disease, as Bauhinus, Dodonaeus, Agricola, Carrichter, Dryander, Mithobius,
Forestus, Rolfink, Barbet, and Twenty more.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Praesages of the several Degrees and Kinds of Scorvey.
1. The Prognostic of a Praeliminary Scorvey. 2. Of a Recent Scorvey: 3. Of an
Haereditary Scorvey. 4. Of a Contagious Scorvey. 5. Of an Endemic Scorvey. 6.
Of a Stomachic, Hepatic, and Splenetic Scorvey. 7. Of an Acid, Lixivial, and
Saponary Scorvey. 8. Of an Asthmatic, Rheumatic, Torminous, Emetic, and
Diarrhaeous Scorvey. 9. Of a Latent Scorvey. 10. Of an English Scorvey. 11. Of
a Mild Scorvey. 12. Of Spots and Blotches. 13. Of Ulcers. 14. Of Spots and
Blotches of an Ash Color. 15. Of a Livid Palate. 16. Of a Scorbutic Pulse. 17.
Of an Epiginomenal Scorvey. 18. A Prognostic applicable to Children. 19. Of a
Reverting Scorvey. 20. Of Terminative Scorveys.

. 1. THe foreknowledge of the Danger, various Mutations, Facility, or
Difficulty of Cure of a Distemper, is so necessary, that a Physician can by no
means be thought accomplished, that is not well instructed in that particular,
for which reason I shall Congest what Observations others and my self have made
upon it, and recommend them to your reading.

A Praeliminary Scorvey, if not well Distinguished, and rightly Cured, may
either be Transitory into a dangerous Malignant continual Fever, or a Liminary
Scorvey, either of which may be praevented by a very facil Cure.

. 2. A Recent Scorvey being neglected for six or eight Months, either by not
making use of any means at all, or at least such as are in effectual, passes
into an Inveterate Scorvey, that generally proves very stubborn to Remedies;
being in some Cured by a long continued Course, in others only palliable, so
that its fraequently return^ble, either every Spring and Fall, or every Moon;
in others it is absolutely Incurable.

. 3. An Haereditary, Connate, or Syntrophous Scorvey, is Mitigable, but not
entirely Curable.

. 4. A Contagious Scorvey being only Liminary, or Recent, yields easier to
Remedies, than one that is Non-naturally adventitious.

. 5. A Distemper contracted by a Salin Air is not so obstinate, as one
engendered by Dyaet, provided the Patient takes the advantage of changing the
Air.

. 6. A Splenetique Scorvey is worse than an Hepatic, and that also is worse
than a Stomachic.

. 7. An Acid Scorvey is more corrigible than a Lixivial, and that more than a
Saponary, which fraequently proves Incurable. The measures of a Mouth, Leg, and
Joint Scorvey in general, are very consonant to the last praeceding distinction.

. 8. An Asthmatic, or Syncopal Scorvey, is attended with danger, and often with a
sudden death; a Rheumatic is taediou^, and often survened by a Fevor; a Torminous
is ordinarily very deplorable, and an Emetic distemper is of aequal danger with
the former, and often proves fatal. Diarrhaeous and Lienteric Scorveys are very
Chronical, and fraequently Mortal. A Fla^uous Hypochondriac, an Vlcerous, and a
Dolorous Scorvey are very difficultly conquered, or if at any time Cured, are
easily returnable.

. 9. A Latent Scorvey is easily or difficultly Cured, according to the length
of time since it has invaded the Body, and according to the quality of the
Symptoms, and parts affected. In general, a Latent Distemper does more easily
admit of Cure in the beginning, than a manifest one; but in the Augment or
State is far more difficult than the other, because there is no discharge of
Scorbutic matter toward the Circumference, as in the other, and consequently
the Spirits must be more oppressed.

. 8. An English Scorvey is universally milder, and less refractory than a Dutch
Scorvey.

. 11. A Mild Scorvey may continue or be protracted to ten, twenty, or thirty
years; a Malignant one does sometimes terminate Life in two, six, or twelve
Months, in some sooner, in others later; some arrive to their periods
gradually, that is by a gradual decay of Spirits, and contabescency of Body;
others die suddenly, and possibly when they least think of it.

. 12. Spots and Blotches, the nearer they come to a black color, the worse
they are, and if they burst out into Ulcers, signify a greater Malignity, and
difficulty of Cure. It is observable, that in some before they Die, those
Blotches do disappear by reverting into the Body, but soon after death appear
again.

. 13. Ulcers of the Legs are not easily chekt, but on the contrary if
irritated, like Cancers indue a fiercer Nature, which fraequently inclines to a
Gangraene, and Mortification.

. 14. Spots and Blotches of an Ash color, especially if Corroding and Itching,
in some are never Cured. Cutaneous Tumors if apt to retrocede and burst out
again, praesage a Palsy. A Palsy though Cured, leaves a contraction of some
of the Tendons, or a subjection to Convulsions behind it.

. 15. In a Mouth-Scorvey, if the Palate and Throat turn Livid, that is Leadish,
or Blackish, prognosticates Death to be at the door.

. 16. A weak Pulse, and debility of Body in this Distemper are not always
dangerous, because that former may be occasioned by vapors and steems, and the
latter by putrid Acid Blood. Neither are Convulsive Motions, that survene
Scorbutique Fevors, of an aequal danger with those, that accompany other
Distempers; for these soon cease, and their cause being Acrimonious steems, are
in a short time dissipated.

. 17. A Scorvey succeding a Quartan Ague, or a continual Malignant Fevor,
proves for the greater part very Malignant, Obstinate, and in some Incurable.

. 18. Children and Boys are most incident to the King's Evil, and Joint-Evil,
young Men to the vagrant Gout, and old Men to the fixed nodous Gout. Boys and
Girls are not so much exposed to the Scorvey as Men or Women; because the
Constitution of the former is not so Salin, as the latter, and therefore when
at any time they are surprised with it, are easier Curable. Old Men if
Scorbutique, carry their Distemper commonly along with them to their Grave. A
Mouth-Scorvey is more familiar among the younger sort, and a Leg-Scorvey among
those that are past thirty.

. 19. A Body that has been once Cured of the Scorvey, if attacked the second,
or third time, shall find the Cure to advance much more slowly than before.

Few Distempers of this kind are remedied without an exact Diaet, though never
so slight, and if they be any thing Inveterate, or Terminatory, the best
Medicines without a Diaet avail nothing.

. 20. Terminative Scorveys, though Curable, require a long continuated strict
course of Medicines; some are absolutely Incurable.

These Prognostics are to be understood absolutely considered, without the help
of Remedies, which being praescribed according to the Rules of Art, dexterously
praepared, and Methodically applied, are sufficiently empowered to frustrate the
most of praedictions, always that excepted, which implies a Period determined
by the Creator, whereunto this Trite Versicle has its Reference: Contra vim
mortis, non est Medicamen in hortis.

CHAP. XX. Of Praeservatives against the Scorvey.
1. Praecepts relating to the Air. 2. Rules of Diaet. 3. Praecepts referring to
the rest of the Non-naturals.
. 1. IT is not in a bare Speculation of the Nature, Causes, and Signs of
Diseases, the Art of Medicines does Acquiess, but like other practical Sciences
and Arts, designs its Theorems for Practice; wherefore since I have
sufficiently laid down whatever appertains to the Theory of Scorbutique
Infirmities, it is requisite I should now declare the Practique, which
comprehends the Prophylactique and Therapeutique. The former being otherwise
called the Conservative, in this case directs the means whereby to praeserve a
Healthy Body from the Scorvey, which consist chiefly in Rules, and praecepts of
making use of the six Non-naturals.

. 1. Make choice of a thin serene perflated Inland Air, and therefore shun the
Seacoasts, Bogs, Waterish, Stinking, and Close places.

. 2. Let your Diaet be chiefly upon fresh Meats, that are Nutritive, of easy
digesture, and not very Excrementitious; so that you must avoid all Victuals
that are stale, stinking, salt, gross, obstructive, Excrementitious, and of
hard digestion. Within the Verge of this Rule are meats, that have been kept
too long, until they had acquired a French Haugou; likewise Pork, Brawn, and
all sorts of Hog-meat, as Black-puddens, Sausiges, Beef, Ducks, Geese, Tripe,
Flower-Puddens; most sorts of fried Victuals, as Pancakes, Stakes, Eggs fried,
Collops of Bacon, etc. Most sorts of Fish, Salats, all Souced, and Pickled
Meats, etc. Which are all Scorbutique. Let your Drink be clear, well fermented,
fresh, sweet, and temperate; not stale, or sour, ill tasted, thick and muddy,
heating, or cooling. Thus much for the quality; for quantity you must be
moderate, in respect both of Eating and Drinking. Let your times of Meals be
seasonable, seven in the morning, twelve at Noon, and seven at Night in the
Summer, and in the Winter one Hour later. Your Breakfast and Supper ought to be
light, and moderate, but your Dinner somewhat more solid and plentiful.
Particularly avoid Coffee, new raw Cider, Brandy, and Tobacco.

. 3. Sleep moderately, use Exercise, but not violently, keep your Body in
order; that is between Loose and Bound; shift your Linen once or twice a Week,
to praevent the stoppage of your Pores by the Condensation of Sweat, and sooty
steems, that stick to your Shirt. What concerns the passions of the Mind, I
will only recommend to you the Old praecept Been age and laetare, Do well and
be cheerful; and so here let us end this Chapter.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Therapeutique in the Scorvey.
1. General Indications. 2. Indications taken from the Air, also from the
quality of the Humors. 3. Indications abstracted from the quanty of the
Humors.
THe Therapeutique or Curative performs its part, by directing Methodically
Remedies, contained in the Pharmaceutique and Chirurgique.

. 1. The Methodical Directions do flow from the Indications, which are taken
from two general Heads, viz. 1. From the Strength of the Body. And, 2. From the
affections against Nature; from both which likewise Coindications and
Counter-indications are desumed. Among the Affections against Nature, the
Causes of a Disease, and in our Case of the Scorvey are the principal
Indicants, next are the urgent Symptoms, and lastly the Disease itself.

. 2. The Salin Air among the Procatarctics being the Ground and Original
efficient, indicates its change into a better, which is such, as has been
described in the first Rule of the praeceding Chapter; whose second Canon does
likewise contain Directions, that answers the Indication, desumed from a
Scorbutique Diaet, another grand Efficient; these two together with the rest of
the Non-naturals being provided against in the same Chapter, we are to apply
our selves to those Indications, which the Internal antecedent Causes do point
at, viz. 1. A Salin putrid, or gross fuliginous coagulated acid Blood,
indicates Remedies, virtuated to dulcify, attenuate, dep^rate the Humors of
those sooty particles, and volatilize the salin parts, that are too much fixed.
2. A Salin lixivial thick chyme r^quires Remedies, that by obtusing the fiery
alc^lious Salts, may reduce it to an unctuous sweetness, or a Ping^e-dulce, and
though their inciding property render it thin and fluid. 3. A Saponary
constitution of the Blood does assign Remedies, that obtain a power not only of
allaying the alcalious qualities of the Salts, but also of depurating and
volatilizing the incrassated Sulphurous Particles, that are fixed and imbodied
with the Alcalious Salts.

. 3. In respect of their too much increased quantity, they seem to direct the
Physician to Diminution or Substraction, which is accomplished by Pharmaceutical
and Chirurgical means. The latter are, 1. Phlebotomy, for disburdening and
depleting some part of the whole, which in Hepatic and Stomachic Scorveys is to
be performed in the right Arm; in a Splenetic in the Left, and in a Pleuritic
Scorvey in the Arm of the same side. After a competent Interval, for derivation
from, and easing of the part affected, a particular substraction of Blood out
of the Hemorrhoide veins by the application of Leeches is of great use in an
Hepatic or Splenetic Scorvey. In Women, especially if there be either a Total
or partial suppression of the Menstrua, the Saphaena ought to be opened. The
measure of what quantity of Blood is requisite to be subducted, is to be taken
from the degree of Plethory, Age, Sex, and other common Circumstances.

2. Fontanels or Issues, than which no means, whether Chirurgical, or
Pharmaceutical, seem more advantageous and necessary, both for a praeservative,
and Curative. Touching the Place, where an Issue is most proper to be made; in
a Splenetic Scorvey is in the inside of the Leg above the Knee, an Inch or two
higher than the Gatering place; but here the Surgeon is to be very cautious,
that in making the Incision, he does not wound some of the Vessels, that pass
just underneath, which is fraequently done if made too deep, and sometimes not
without danger. In an Hepatic Scorvey the Right Leg is most proper, in a
Stomachic either, it matters not. The Mouth-Scorvey indicate; an Issue in the
Left Arm, or in some cases in the Neck, or Right Arm, or in some very few on
the Head, on the place of meeting of the Sagittal and Coronary Suturs. In the
Leg-Scorvey an Issue above the Knee is more rational. In the Joint-Scorvey more
Fontanels than one are necessary, to be made in the Arm or Leg, and sometimes
in the Neck also, according to the circumstances of the Disease.

Children that are Born of Scorbutic Parents, receive a great benefit from
Issues, that are made in the Neck or Arm; but for praevention, that the
Scorbutic stain wherewith some Child bearing Women are contaminated, shall be
communicated to the Child in the Womb, nothing is of aequal force to an Issue
in the Arm. The too much increased quantity of Scorbutic Humors indicating
Pharmaceutical evacuations, is to be diminisht, or abated by Laxatives or
Eccoprotics, and Purgatives or Cathartics. The former are usually praemised
before Bleeding (where required) and Purgatives.

CHAP. XXII. Of Antiscorbutic Laxatives.
1. An excellent Praeparation of Aloes. 2. A description of the Francfurt
Pills. 3. Of Aloes Rosata, and Bontius his Pills of Tartar. 4. Of the Virtue of
Aloetic Pills. 5. Two particulars to be observed in the Praeparation of Aloes.
6. Some other Laxatives proper also in the Scorvey.
. 1. ALoes is the chief Laxative, and indeed the Basis of most Purgative Pills;
but in regard that it is offensive to the Stomach and Liver, and that by reason
of its bitter Acrimonious Lixivial parts, it is of a nature so Colliquative, and
Irritating, that it is apt to force the Blood out of its Vessels, and
particularly to excite a Tenesmus, and Haemorrhoidal pains, necessarily
requires such Correction and Praeparation, as may render it not only less
hurtful, but also particularly appropriated to the Stomach. The praeparation,
which I have fraequently Experienced, to excel all others, is this following.

Aloes Succotr. gros. pull. i. Flor. Ros. rub. i. ss. Spir. Sal. com. gut. xl.
Spir. Vin. non rectif. ad. Supereminent. iiii digit. f. digest. in ciner. per
hor. xii. coletur and evapor. ad extr. consist. cui add Ol. Garyophyl. vel.
Nuc. Muscat. stillat. gut. xx. Dos. a gr. xv. ad lx.
. 2. Tthe Francfurt Pills, otherwise called Pil. Angelicae, Invented by Hartman
Beyer, have not only kept up their Reputation for many years, but to this day
are accounted of great Virtue in Germany and Holland against Scorbutic
Distempers, insomuch, that many Thousand Boxes of them are every Year dispersed
to all Neighboring, and some remote Countries also, so that they are found to
be as stabil a Commodity to the Francfurter Apothecaries, as Treacle to the
Venetians, or Confectio Alkermes to those of Monpelier. The gain that has been
acquired by them, is the occasion their Praeparation has been kept so private,
though at praesent is grown public enough. The description I had of it at
Francfurt is various, some praeparing them one way, some another, though in the
whole it comes much to one. The most received Praeparation is that, which
consists of an incomplete and complete Extract of Aloes. In manner following,

The incomplete Extract is.

. Aloes Succotr. lb s. Aq. Borrag. lb i ss. Diger. per hor. xxiiii. colatura
fort. express. evap. ad consistentiam.
The complete Extract is.

Materiae inspissat. assund. Suc. Card. Ben. vi. aliis viii. Digerant. rursus
per hor. vi. and expressio evaporet. ad spissit. Extract.
. 3. In Italy the praeparation of Fabritius ab Aquapendente was, and is still
of aequal Fame with the former, and is nothing but Aloes Rosata, whereof the
said Fabritius for many years together was wont to take every day a little
before his Supper half a Scruple, for a praeventive of Diseases and a
prolongative of Life. Leonard. Donatus writ an entire Tract upon the
Description, Virtues, and Use of Aloes Rosata, concluding the last Chapter with
this Expression, That as the Romans anciently through Sobriety lived to the Age
of Six Hundred Years, so he hoped to Live no less by the use of Aloes Rosata.

Bontius his P^l. Tartar. are also of excellent use for the same purpose, the
Description whereof you have in Scroders Pharmac.

. 4. It is among the Records of Experience, that Aloetic Pills are a most safe
and effectual Praeservative from the Scorvey, being at convenient times used
once or twice a Week or oftener; they are likewise a great Praeparative, that
may be praemised before a Curative Method of a Recent, and Inveterate Scorvey.
They offer no violence to Nature, which the Vulgar Mountebancks Universal, or
Scorbutic Pills, Elixirs, and praetended purgative Cordials do in so rude a
measure, that many have and daily do purchase them with the loss of their
Lives. Were I obliged to set down the Names of all those bold adventurous
Elixir-purchasers, or Pill-Chapmen, that in one Year only are untimely posted
away to their Graves by those Deleterious Medicines, it is not twice the Bulk
of this Treatise would contain a space large enough for a Register.

How gently those Aloetic Pills cleanse the Stomach, the Guts, and Mesaraics of
their Drossy Mucilaginous and Tartarous Dregs, and that without the least
perturbation of Humors, alteration of Body, change of Countenance, impair of
Strength, or any ill attendance, may be admired. That they gently remove
Obstructions, excite an Appetite, and render the Body vigorous and prompt to
Motion, is a most certain Truth.

. 5. Two particulars are to be observed; The one is in relation to their
Praeparation, viz. That they be praepared singly, without the admixture of
those praetended correctives contained in the Composition of Hiera Picra,
Ruffi, Mastichin, and such like; for all that Farrago or Miscellany of Asarum
spic. croc. etc. in the Hiera; Myrrh, and Saffron in the Ruffi, does not only
so much increase the Mole of a Dose, that in stead of two Pills of simple
Aloetics, you are obliged to swallow down Eight or Nine, but it occasions also
a Tumultuation and Ebullition in the Stomach, and all the Vessels, inflames the
Body, and sets all the Humors afloat.

The second is in relation to their proper Use and Exhibition, where you are to
take notice, that they are only appropriated to an Acid Scorvey, being
otherwise very praejudicial in a Lixivial, and Saponary Scorvey, also to all
hot and dry Temperaments, lean and thin habits of Body, and such as are subject
to Haemorrhages of the Nose or Haemorrhoides, or excessive Menstrua.

. 6. The Laxatives proper in a Lixivial or Saponary Scorvey, are Polypody, Sem.
Cartham. Epithym. Cassia, Manna, Tamarind. Prun. dam. Passul. Tartar. Rhen.
Crud. Crem. Tartar. Sir. Ros. sol. Out of these may be composed Decoctions, or
Bolus's; or in stead of them may be substituted Laxative Glysters.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Scorbutique Purgatives.
1. The great virtues of Senna. 2. Of Agaric, and Mechoacan, also of
Halo-cathartics, and Gum-cathartics. Of composite Medicines. 4. A Caution in
Purging Scorbutic Bodies. 5. A Purgative Apozem. 6. A Cathartic Powder. 7.
Antiscorbutic Pills. 8. A pleasant Purgative Electuary.
. 1. Chemical Practisers cannot with greater Truth affirm, that Antimony is
capable to Cure all Diseases, then in the same sense I may confidently assert,
that Senna before all others is the most noble, safe, and effectual Vegetable
Purgative, whereby most Distempers depending upon a Cacochymy, may be perfectly
removed, and especially those, that are Scorbutique.

. 2. Agaric and Mechoacan, are the next Purgatives, that seem to be
specifically appropriated to Scorbutic Cacochymies. Besides these, all
Hydragogal Cathartics in general are experienced, to contain a peculiar faculty
of Evacuating, and purging abounding vitiated Acid Salts, and among those Sir.
e Rham. Cath. is praefer'd for a mild and safe Halo-Cathartic. Those of a more
rude nature, and consequently more proper for Robust Bodies, and inveterate
Diseases, are Elater. Gut. Gamb. Gialap. Extr. Esul. Suc. iridis nostr.
soldanel.

Gum Cathartics in obstinate Cases are of admirable Virtues, but must be used
in their due season; such are Gum Ammoniac especially, Opopanax, and Sagapenum.

. 3. Thus much for the Simples, the Composits are these following; but before I
proceed upon them, let me recommend one Rule of Caution to you, That the less
Compounded Medicines are, the more certain are their Effects, and less subject
to disturb the Spirits: For a Medicine that consists of manifold Ingredients,
though perchance it may perform the same Operation, will occasion a greater
Perturbation, and with so much uncertainty, that you shall not know, to which
of the Ingredients, the success is to be chiefly ascribed. Moreover, though for
Ornament and the Dubiousness of the Distemper a Polypharmacal praescription may
be allowed, yet in Scorbutique Maladies, where the Blood upon the least
irritation is so apt to be exagitated, and moved into a tumultuous Ebullition
or (...), it is incompatible.

. 4. Secondly, Be mindful of this Remarque, that Scorbutics, because they are
so much exposed to an Oppression, and Depauperation of Vital and Animal
Spirits, as appears by their low inaequal Pulses, the imbecility of their
Joints, and oppressed Respiration, cannot bear much Purging, especially by
violent Cathartics, neither is there that Concoction ((...)) nor Separation
((...)) of Humors, which are necessary before Evacuations; wherefore purge
seldom, and that only with gentle Medicines, unless the Robust Constitution of
the Body, or the Radication or Greatness of the Distemper should require it.

. 5. The forms of Purgative Praescriptions, viz. of an Apozem.

. Rad. Polypod. q. Helen. an. ss. Fol. Agrimon. Asplen. an. M i. ss. Sum.
Absynth. P. i. Passul. m..i Fol. Sen. or m. vi. Agar. albis. i ss Tartar.
Rhenan. i. Zing. ii ss Coq. in Aq. Fon. q. s. in Colat. lb i dissolv. Sir. Ros.
sol. i ss M. f. Apoz. pro iii. dos. matut.
. 6. Of a Powder.

. Crystal. Tartar. ii. Flor. Sal. Armon. chal. ss Scammon. Sulphur. gr. vi. vel
viii M. f. Pull. Capiend. in juscul. cochl. i. vel ii.
. 7. Of Pills.

. Fol. Sen. or. ii. Nitr. Tartar. i. Resin. Scammon. i. Ol. Garyophyl. gut. x.
Sir. e Rham. Cath. q. s. M. f. Mass. Pill. Dos. i.
Others of great Virtue.

. Aloes praep. nost. vel Rosat. ss. Tartar. Vitriolat. i. Resin. Gialap. gr.
iiii. vel. v. Ol. Garyophyl. gut. ii. Sir. ros. Sol. q. s. M. f. Pill. vii.
deaurentur.
. 8. Of an Electuary.

. Mechoacan. ras. i. Gialap. pulv. gr. xv. Ol. Still. Macis. gut. iiii. Man.
Calabr. Pulp. Tamarind. an. ii. Sy. Ros. sol. q. s. M. f. Elect.
This last praeceding I have often in a Lixivial Scorvey praescribed with success
to those, whose Stomach could not bear an ill tasted Medicine.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Antiscorbutic Alteratives.
1. Antiscorbutic Alteratives. 2. Spagyric Antiscorbutics. 3. An Antiscorbutic
Decoction of great Virtue. 4. An Antiscorbutic Liquor. 5. A Liquor by
expression of Juices. 6. A Liquor by Infusion. 7. An Antiscorbutic Spirit. 8. A
different process to abstract Antiscorbutic Spirits. 9. An Antiscorbutic Syrup.
10. A different process of praeparing the Elixir Proprietatis. 11. That Crocus
Martis as it is praepared by the Oxonian Author, is very hurtful in the
Scorvey. 12. That Steel powder in some cases, is poys^nous. 13. That Vitriolum
Martis is Astringent and not Ecphractic. 14. Tunbridg Waters examined, and
their true Principles discovered. How they ought to be used with Benefit. 15.
Barnet and Epsom Waters Examined.
. 1. IN an Acid Scorvey these following are aestimated Specific Antiscorbutics,
viz. Cochlearia Hort. Garden Scorvey-grass, being the chief of all the rest,
the next is Nasturtium aquaticum Watercresses, Becabunga Brooklime, Sedum
minimum Wall-peper, Armoracia Horseradish, Persicaria Arsmart, Arum wakerobin,
Semen sinapi Mustard Seed, Semen Erucae Rocket-seed, Saponaria Soopwort,
Chelidonium majus Selandine, Guaiacum, Cortex Winterani, the Flowers and
Spirits of Sal Ammoniac, Spirit of Soot, and of Hartshorn.

. 2. There are also other Simples, which though they are not Virtuated with so
Specifique and Anticorbutic a faculty, yet by deobstructing and deterging the
Bowels and Mesentery, and attenuating the gross Tartarous Blood, they are often
Experienced singularly to contribute to the Cure of Scorbutics, viz.
Rhaponticum verum, Helenium Elicampane, Iris Florent. Orris Gentiana,
Centaurium minus, Absynth. Wormwood, Betonica Betony, Salvia Sage, Petasitis
Butter-burre, Filix Fern, Chaemaedris Germander, Baccae Juniperi, Sambuci
Elder, Ebuli Dwarf-Elder, Satureia. Hereunto may be added the common Splenetic
Vegetables, as Fumaria, Fumitory, Cort. Rad. Cappar the Bark of Capper-Root,
Cort. Tamarisc. Cort. Fraxini Bark of Ash, Ceterach Spleenwort, Agrimonia, etc.

The Hermetic Art recommends Tinctur. tartari, Tinct. Antimon. tartar. Elix.
Proprietat.

The ordinary Chemical Salts, as Sal Absynth. Cochlear. Card. Centaur. by as
much as they participate of the Nature of Common Salt, are absolutely hurtful.
Among the Common Spices, Pepper is experienced to be of an Ebullititious
nature, and very praejudicial to all Scorbutics, and therefore ought to be
omitted in those Praescriptions the Learned Oxonian has recommended to the
Public.

What concerns the forms of Compositions out of these forementioned Simples, it
is to be remarqued, that Electuaries, Tablets, Powders, and Syrups also, unless
praepared according to that or the like manner I shall propose below, are of
little or no use, and are only interspersed by Authors among their forms for
pomp, or to add to the Bulk of their Tracts; for it is the Volatile Salt is the
sole energic part of these Vegetables, which in the praeparation of Conserves,
and Syrups, and in reducing them into Powders for the use of Tablets, does
Evaporate; wherefore I shall only offer to you some few select Forms of
Decoctions, Infusions, Distilled Waters, Spirits, and Juices.

. 3. The form of a Decoction of little Trouble, and less Charge, but of great
Virtue.

Scob. Lign. Sanct. ii. Lign. Sassafr. i. Sal. Tartar. i. Coq in Aq. font. lb
iiii. ad consumpt. medietat. in Colat. infund. fol. Cochlear. hort. M. iiii.
Becabung. M. ii. Absynth. M. ss. Cort. aurant. ii. Coletur and reservetur in
Ampul. Vitr. Dos. iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis.
In the Winter when Herbs are scarce, I have frequently recommended this
following with good Success.

. Fol. Cochlear M iiii. Chelidon. maj M ii. Bac. Junip. i. Contundantr in mort.
marm. sensim affund. Vin. alb tenuior. lb i. exprimatur Liquor and reponatur in
ampul. vitr. qui residendo clarescat. Dos. iii. vel iiii. bis vel ter per diem.
. 5. Of a Liquor by expression of Juices.

. Fol Cochlear* succulent. q. l. Fol. Becabung. Nasturt. aquat. an. part. med.
Contund. in mort. marm. pist. lign. Liq valide express. lbii. adjiciantur.
Cort. Winteran. ss. Cort. exter. aurant. ii Croc. Anglic ss. in phiola probe
obturata per hor 12. digerantur calore leni, dein liq. coletur and in vitr.
reponatur. Dos. iiii. bis per diem.
. 6. A Liquor by Infusion.

. Rad. Armorac. i. Rad. Gentian. ii. Fol. Nastur. aq. M ii. Fol. chamaed.
Saponar. an. M i. Flor. Centaur. min. P i. Rad. Zedoar. i f. infus. per noct.
in Aq. Sassafr. odorif. Vin. alb. an. lb i. Coletr. de colat. capiat. iii. vel
iiii. pro Dosi.
. 7.. Rad. Helen. rec. ii. Raphan. i ss. Lign. Sassafr..i. Fol. Cochl. Cichor.
an. M x. Fol. Salv. Beton. an. M ii. Sed. min. Persicar. an. M i. Baccar. rec.
Junip. Samb. an. ii. Destillentur per vesic. cum refrigerio suspendendo in
rostro alembic. croc. anglic. in pet. ligat. i ss. capiat iii. pro Dosi.
. 8. Spirits that are drawn by way of Fermentation do, besides the trouble and
length of time required, suffer a considerable loss in their Volatile and
Spirituous particles, which to evade, has given me the occasion to find out a
way, whereby the said Spirits are Extracted in a greater quantity with very
little Trouble or Cost, and much exalted in their virtues. This following I
have often Distilled, which may serve for a form for all the rest of the said
Antiscorbutique Vegetables.

. Rad. Armorac. iii. Lig. Sassafr. Cort. Win. Aur. an. ss. Fol. Salviae M i.
Sum. Absynth. vulg. P i. Sal. Ammoniac. ii. Vin. alb. lb i. contusa and concisa
digerantur per hor. xxiiii. dein destill. per Alemb. vitr. in cujus cucurb.
fuerit calc. Viv. lb ss. Dos. a gut. xx. ad gut. xxxx.
. 9. An Antiscorbutic Syrup.

. Succ. rec. expr. Cochlear. viii. Suc. Anagal. aquat. iii. Suc. Betonic. Card.
Ben. an. i. Sacchar. alb. lb i. depurando ^oq. ad spissit. Sir. crass. cui
frigefact. affund. Spir. Cochlear. and Anagal. Aq. praedicto modo simul destil.
i. M. f. Sir.
. 10. What relates to Elixir Proprietatis, praepared according to the process
of Crollius, it is a Medicine beyond all Objections very proper against the
Scorvey; but two Inconveniences I apprehend in it, 1. By the immediate
affusion of so great a proportion of Spirit of Sulphur, the other Ingredients
are Adusted or Burned, whence the Elixir afterward contracts an Empyreumatique
scent and taste. 2. By reason of the Various Digestions and Distillations is
consumed a great deal of time, attended with some needless Cost and Charge.
Both these the College of Physicians of the Hague endeavored to avoid, by
directing the procedure in their Pharmacopoea, Fol. 106. in this manner,. Aloes
puriss. Myr. Elect. Croc. Anglic. an. i. tritis ac vasi vitreo angust. orisic.
inditis, superaffunde Spir. Vin. rect. lb i ss. Ol. Sulphur. rect. vi. Vase
optime clauso f. digest. in VB. per dies quatuordecim; tinctura abstrahatur,
quae per decant. separata servetur usui.


Although by this praescription they seem to have superated those two
forementioned Inconvenients; there is a third remaining, which renders it very
Incommodious for Exhibition, namely, that upon the Instillation thereof into
any Aqueous Liquor, it is apt to be praecipitated in the form of a Mucilage, all
which to avoid has given me the occasion, to praepare the Elixir Proprietatis
thus:. Aloes Succotr. Myr. Elect. an. i. Sal. M^rin. been exiccat. iiii.
Distill. per retort. vitr. in aren. cleo destill. affund. spir. vin. rect. lb i
ss spir. salis rect. i. addendo Croc. argl^c. i. post digest. 4. dier. in
ciner. d^cant.


Vel.

Adjiciatur Croc. Angl. ss. and diger. per dies 4. dein distill. in cucurbit.
humil. appendendo extremitat. rostri alembic. croc. odoratis. nodul. inclus.
ss. Guttulae oleosae supernatantes separentur per tritor. and saccharo albis.
dissolut. addantur liquori distillato.
. 11. Medicines praepared of Steel have their particular uses, even in this
sort of Scorvey, being designed to sweeten the Blood, by obtusing or alaying,
and imbibing the putrid Acid Salts of the Blood; to this purpose the Learned
Oxonian Author does single out from all other praeparations that fort of Crocus
Martis, which by a long continuated Calcination is elevated into an Acool, and
totally stripped of its Salin and Sulphurous particles, imagining that the
foresaid Crocus through its droughty natury, does Appetere and Absorb all
Acrimonious Salts and Sulphurs of the Humors, as being Consentaneous to those
it is now deprived of. This Mode of Reasoning is most certainly verified in the
Nature and Effects of Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Coral, Pearl, etc. But nothing
is more Erroneous, than the applying it to the Aetiology (as he may term it) of
that kind of Crocus M^rtis; for abstract from it Vinegar, or any other Acid, by
Destillation, and you shall Experience it, to come over every whit as Acid, as
when it was Affused. Wherefore it ought to be abandoned from being used in any
Distemper, excepting in some Loosnesses or Haemorrhages, where and when
Emplastics may be judged serviceable, and in those cases I have observed the
Effects of Terra damnata Vitriol. dulc. far more ample, having often praescribed
it with Success.

. 12. All praeparations of Steel, that consist in the form of Powders, are
attended with an unavoidable inconvenience, being apt through their weight to
descend to the bottom of the Stomach, and sometimes to penetrate through the
Pores of the inward Tunic, and there lodge between the Tunics, occasioning so
great an oppression, that the Patient is rendered subject to almost Incurable
Palpitations and Lipothymies; for the Steel Powder is only with the greatest
difficulty, and sometimes never to be Expelled from between that Tunics;
insomuch that under that notion it may be termed Synonymous with Venoms,
against which the Magnet Stone powdered and exhibited Internally, is the only
Antidote. Not many years since I dissected one that expired of a Dysentery,
against which an Apothecary had for many days given two and three Drams of
Crocus Martis astring. for a Dose; the same praeparation that is so much
Extolled by my Author. Upon the separating of the Tunica Rugosa from the middle
Tunic, I detected a vast quantity of red sand, which upon Examination of what
had been taken, I found was some of the Crocus Martis this skilful Glyster-pipe
Doctor had given.

. 13. Those that consider Salts to be dissoluble, praefer Vitriolum Martis
before Chalybeat Powders, designing thereby to avoid the Permanence of the
latter in the Body; but then are certainly Frustrated in their scope of
reserating oppilations, there being nothing so praevalent in an Obstructive and
Astrictive quality, as the foresaid Vitriol of Steel, which that you may give
the greater credit to, this I do discover to you as a great Medicine for
stenching Haemorrhages, and it is by this sole praeparation I have Cured a
great number of Spitting of Blood, and several Women of immoderate Uterin
Fluors, both Sanguinolent, and White. Wherefore it must be deemed an Error Albo
calculo notandus in those, that praetend to imitate Diuretic Mineral Waters,
such as the Savenier at the Spaw, and the Wells of Tunbridg, by dissolving of
Ch^lybeat Vitriol in Spring Water: But how great a Detriment this must
necessarily import, may be best understood from those, to whom they have been
praescribed. Notwithstanding by mean^ of another Method, Artificial Mineral
Waters may be praepared so effectual and pleasant withal, that they shall in a
great measure excel the Natural. By the advantage of these it is I have freed
several from Lixivial Scorveys, that had proved obstinate to all other Methods.

Touching the use of Purgative Mineral Waters, viz. Barnet, Epsom, Dulledg,
Chigwel, Stretham, Northall, etc. To some Scorbutics they have proved
Auxiliary, to others Hurtful.

. 14. The Virtue of those Diuretique Mineral Waters is derived, from a
permixture of some crude Elements of Iron, imperfectly Coagulated or Compounded
into Particles, with Water sourcing near and washing through the Matrices of
the said Crude imperfect ferruginous Elements; or to be more plain, the said
Mineral Waters do consist of a dissolution of Vitriolat Salt, volatilized by
the Sulphur of Iron. From the Vitriol it is, the Water is disposed to turn
black upon the addition of Galls; from the Volatilizing Sulphur associating to
it some of the Subtilest, Acid, Piercing, and Insinuating Particles of the
Vitriol, it is, that they prove so excellent in driving down the Urin; and from
the Exhalability of the said Volatile Salt or Sulphur, volatilizing the purest
part of the fixed Salt, it is, they upon a very small interval loose their
Diuretic Virtue, especially if violently shaken or moved, by being transported
by Horse or Cart; though notwithstanding that, they will not lessen in their
aptness of turning black by Galls, as long as they continue Impraegnated with
the fixed Vitriolat Salt, which probably may be long enough; but in the Interim
I would have you to escape that Error, many unpolisht Philosophers commit, in
judging the said Water to continue vigorous in its Urinating quality, as long
as it continues alterable by Galls. On the contrary, as soon as it has
suffered the loss of all its Volatile Salt, which is in very few days, it does
assume a binding obstructive quality, and that in so dangerous a manner, that
some have died of it; for the Water remaining in their Bodies, and not being
carried off, had suffocated the Vital flames of the Heart and Arteries.

Those that have made Observation on the number of such, that have been hurried
out of the World both at the season of their drinking the Waters of Tunbridge,
or soon after they had left them off, may very well conclude, either, that the
said Waters were not proper for their Distemper, or that as too frequently
happens, their Bodies were insufficiently praepared; for it is far from a
proportionable praeparative, to Exhibit only a Dose of Stomach Pills, or a
little Pulv. Senae comp. maj. but upon the use of a proper Purge or two some
good Aperitive praeparation of Steel ought likewise to be mixed with a
Cathartique, and then they will Experience their Bodies to have been well
praepared by the safe and successful use of the Waters upon it.

. 15. The Waters of Barnet, Epsom, etc. are rendered Diuretic, Purgative, and
sometimes Vomitive, through an Imbibition of some Immature principles of
Copper, as appears on the trial by Lapis Calaminaris, or Sal Ammoniac. The
Cathartique and Emetique Faculties issue from the Sulphur of Venus.

Among other numerous capricious Chalybeat praeparations, I find no form so
agreeable, and greatly successful, as the Tincture of Steel; but not when
praepared after the usual slovenish Mode. Some sorts of Dulcifying Medicines in
many Cases do wonderfully contribute to the Cure of an Acid Scorvey, by
obtusing the Acrimony of the Blood; such are most Testaceous Simples, as Coral,
Pearl, Crab's-eyes, Crabs-Cl^ws; Oyster, Muscel, and Egg shells; add to these
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Bezoard. Mineral. Bezoard. Jovial. Magister. Jovis,
Chalk. etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Specific Alteratives in a Lixivial and Saponary Scorvey.
1. Antiscorbutic Simples of the first Order. 2. Simples of the second Order.
3. Simples of the third Order. 4. A Narrative of a Scorbutic Case. 5. Some
other Antiscorbutics. 6. An account of another Scorbutic Case. 7. A third
Scorbutic Case. 8. Some other Chemical Antiscorbutics, and a Description of the
Author's Nitrum Tartarisatum. 9. The great Virtues of this Nitrum Tartarisatum.
. 1. THe Simples that are endued either, 1. With a Lentour or Mucilaginous
moisture. 2. With an Acidity^ Or, 3. With a cooling detergent Faculty, are
aesteemed very proper, and useful in an Alcalious Scorbut. Through the first of
these Qualities, they Lenify and Mitigate the Acrimonious Salts of the Humors;
through the second, they Hebetate the corroding Alcali; and through the third,
they move, attenuate and devil the Pendulous parts of the Blood, withal
Clarifying or Depurating it from its Impurities.

1. Of the first Order. Are,

Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, Mallows, Marshmallows, the four greater Cold
Seeds, Jujubees, Sebestens, Corrents, Liquorish; Gum Arabic, Dragant, Milk, and
in some Cases the Milk Diaet.

2. Of the second Qualification. Are,

Acetosa Sorrel, Trifolium Acetosum Wood Sorrel, Oranges, Limons, Citrons,
Cremor and Spiritus Tartari, Spiritus Dianae, Spir. Sulphuris, Vitrioli, Salis
com. nitri, Veneris Ex aerugine, Antimonii, Spir. acid. Guaiac. Juniper, Liquor
Corallorum, Perlarum, Crystalli acidae nitri, etc.

3. Of the third Rank. Are,

Ligustrum Privet, Aparine Clivers, Chelidonium minus Pilewort, Nummularia
Money-wort.

4. These four are by Authors proclaimed Specifics in the Scorvey, the frequent
Experience of their Use in some Scorbutiques confirming them to be such; but
their Ignorance, through what manifest Virtue their Effects are performed
(these being diametrically contrary to the other Igneous Volatile Specifics)
renders them incapable of judging, to what sort of Distemper, in what manner,
and at what time they ought to be applied. A while since, a Patient made her
complaint to me of sharp running pains, flying up and down her Limbs, a
pricking in her Gums, glowing of the Calves of her Legs, and sometimes of the
Shins, a gnawing pain about her Ancles, especially upon much stirring, heats
and pustles in her Face. She had made use of several Physicians, whose Opinion
concluded her Distemper to be the Scorvey, and therefore had praescribed
several Decoctions, and Infusions of Scorvey-grass, Watercresses, etc.
Distilled Waters, and Spirits of the like Ingredients, all which she found, had
rendered her much worse, but some two Years before, confessed she had derived
much benefit from them, but now they extremely aggravated her Symptoms. This
method of Cure I perceived depended on Indications, desumed from those
pestilent principles of Rancid and Pendulous. The Error flowed from
apprehending this an Acid Scorvey, which plainly appeared to be Lixivial. I
praescribed her this Lenitive:. Pulp. Cass. Tamarind. an. ii. Mechoacan. alb.
ras. ss. Pul^. sen. comp. maj. ss. Crem. Tar. i. Sir. ros. sol. ii. M. f. Bol.
ii. Deaurentur. Capiat mane cum custodia.


This Operated very gently and well, upon one days interval it was repeated.
The fourth day she took this following Drink, and continued it three Weeks.

. Rad. Buglos. i ss. Fol. Aparin. Nummular. an. M. iiii. Decoq. in Ser. lact.
q. s. ad lb i ss. In Colat. dissolv. Christ. Tar. i ss. M. f. Apoz. pro 4 dos.
mat. and vesp.
Once a Week she made use of the above written Bole. In the space of her whole
Course of Physic, she was Blooded once in the Right Arm, and once at the
Haemorrhoides. The success of these Means restored her perfectly to her former
Health, in less than a Month, which she has enjoyed ever since. How easily is
a Distemper Cured, whose Cause is rightly understood; whereas had this Woman
adhaered to the praescriptions of her pendulous Physicians, she would certainly
have been among her Ancestors long ere this. Others I Cured of the same kind of
Scorvey (Praemissis Vniversalus) chiefly by this following:. Rad. Sarsaparil.
iii. Rad. Chin. non carios. i. Rasur. Eboris vi. Coq. in aq. font. lb vi. ad
consumpt. unius tertiae, sub fin: coct. add. Rad. Cichor. Scorzon. an. i ss.
Fol. Chelidon. min. M. vi. Colaturae assunde Elix. Antimon. fulv. i. ss. M.
Capiat iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis,


Note, that Sarsa and China are made use of in this Decoction, not for their
Sudorifique faculty, but for a quality they are endued with of sweetning the
Blood, by obtusing its Acrimonious Salts, through the Lentour, which their
farinaceous substance contributes to the said Decoction.

5. To those four principal Antiscorbutic Vegetables may be added these
following, Scorzonera Hisp. Vipers-Grass, Clematis Daphnoides Periwinckle,
Rhaponticum vulgar Great Centaury, Virga Aurea Golden Rod, Rumex acutus
Ditchdock, Hispidula Catsfoot, Auricula muris Mouseare, Aquilegia Columbine,
Rad. Graminis, Geranium Rupertianum Herb Robert, Pyrola Sea-lavender, Cichoreum
Succory, Sempervivum majus Housleek, etc.

6. The difference in qualities of these Simples cannot escape your Advertency
(though all agreeing in the same faculty, of oppugning Lixivial and Saponary
Scorveys) some being temperate, some cold and moist, others cold and dry, and
astringent; for which reason you may praesume, their use is limited to
Diseases, though Lixivial, yet attended with particular Symptoms, so that they
are not promiscuously to be applied. But because Practical Instances may serve
you for a more clear Example, I will give my self that trouble, of setting down
the Case of a Patient, who Repaired to me the last praeceding Year; it was a
great heat in the Epigastrical Region of the Abdomen, that chiefly incommoded
him, which for the most part exercising its fury in a fixed place, that
sometimes was at the bottom of the Stomach, sometimes a little lower (which
must be in the Pancreas) and sometimes on the Left-side, where the Spleen
resides; so that here was a Lixivial Scorbutic Humor, that from the Spleen was
tossed to and fro to the Stomach, or sometimes to the Pancreas through the
Splenic branch and Vas Breve; the other Symptoms were a nidorulent crudity of
the Stomach, a dejected Appetite, thick reddy spumous Urin, low inaequal Pulse,
difficulty of Breathing, and purpre Pustles erupting and retroceding in the
Face. Those several eminent Physicians (that is eminent for a numerous
Practice) subsequent to their Opinion, that it was the Scorvey, had for several
Years treated him, with those common igneous Antiscorbutics, until his daily
Experience of the praescribed Medicines discovered to him, it was to those
unskilful Courses of Physic he must impute a great part of the growth of this
Disease. His Body being very thin and exanguious counter-indicated Bleeding.
The Crudities of his Stomach and Infarctions of the Mesaraiac Vessels by
Lixivial pendulous Blood required Lenitives, mixed with some gentle Cathartics.

. Elect. Linitiv. Man. Calab. Pulp. Tamarind. an. ii ss. Nitr. Tartar. nostr.
gr. xxv. Diss. in decoct. Prunor. dam. and sem. foen. iii. M. f. Pot.
This he used twice a Week; in his interval days took this following Drink for
five Weeks, and was perfectly restored to his former Health; but for
confirmation of his Cure, I ordered him to drink the Waters at Tunbridge for
one and twenty days.

. Rad. Tarax. i. Fol. Chelidon. min. M iii. Semperviv. maj. M i. Glycyr. ras.
ss. Coq. in ser. lact. q. s. ad lb i. Coletur. and instill. Elix. Antiscorb.
nostr. ii. M. f. Apoz. Sine sacchar. vel Sir.
. 7. To another Scorbutique, whose Palpitations and Lypothymies had rendered him
very languid and weak, besides Purgatives and Bleeding at the Haemorrhoides,
praescribed this.

. Rad. Scorzon. Vincetox. an. i. Fol Chelidon. min. Aparin. an. M ii. Virg.
Aur. M i. Hord. Mund. P i. Glycyr. ras. i ss. Coq. in Aq. font. q. s. ad lb i
ss. In Colat dissolv. nitr. Tartar. i. and instill. tinct. mart. gut. xv. M. f.
Apoz. Capiat iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis.
In case a Scorbutique of this kind is afflicted with a Diarrhoea, or
Dysentery, you must make choice of Ligustrum, Auricul. Muris, or Hispidula; if
Dysepulotic Ulcers of the Legs be the praevailing Symptoms, praefer Virg. Aur.
Pyrola, Symphyt. Petr. or Bellis.

It is this sort of Scorvey and its subdivisions (which hitherto has not been
observed by any) that occasions so many ambulative Patients, wandering from one
Physician to another, among whom some are so ingenious to confess, they do not
know what name to give the Distemper, or what to make of it.

. 8. Besides these forementioned I have found a singular Virtue in Steel drops,
praepared after my Mode; likewise in an Elixir Antiscorbuticum, the Basis
whereof is Antimony stripped of its venenous Sulphur, and rendered cooling,
Diuretic, and a very high Mundifier of the Blood. Neither have I ever observed
a Medicine in most Scorbutic Cases, to exceed the powerful faculties of my
Nitrum Tartarisatum, the praeparation whereof is, as follows; but for your
praevious information, you are to take notice, that in praeparing Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, I am used to add a triple proportion of Salt Peter, pulverised
and sifted, to crude Antimony, likewise poudered and sifted; this being mixed
together, I put by little Ladlefuls into a Pipkin made Red hot in a
Reverberating Furnace, covering the Pipkin upon every Injection of the said
mixture; and having Injected all, I cover the Furnace with a great Tile, and
let it Calcine, until the Coals be burned out. The Mass being yet warm I
powder, and put it into a large Basin, on which supposing the Mass to be a
Pound in weight, I pour about a quart of warm Water, and stir it very well
about, afterward let it stand four or five hours, that the Powder may settle
on the bottom, decant the Water into an Evaporating body, affusing to it half a
pint of distilled Vinegar, evaporate it to a Pellicle, and set it in a Cellar
or other cool place, and there let it continue three or four days to
Crystalize; collect the Crystals, and evaporate the remaining Liquor again to a
Pellicle, afterward set it on Crystalizing, and so proceed, until all is
passed into Crystals. Dissolve the Crystals into distilled Spring Water, strain
it, Evaporate, and Crystalize it over again, until it prove very pure and
transparent. What relates to the remaining Calx of Antimony, proceed to your
ablutions, until the Powder be perfectly Edulcorated; it is not here I desist,
but make a farther progress to a maturation, and protrusion of the essential or
centrical Sulphur, and then I find it to be a Medicine, that deserves a
singular Character in many Distempers.

. 9. I ought not to recede from the praeparation of Nitrum Tartarisatum,
without giving a description of its Dose and Virtues; from half a Scruple to
two Scruples, it has performed effects in the Scorvey and some other Chronical
Distempers, which could never be expected from the Arcanum Duplicatum, Tartarum
Vitriolatum, or such Hermaphroditic praeparations, and Neutral Medicines; for
besides its penetrative, incisive, detergent, and deoppilative Qualities, it
does retain a proportion of Antimonial Salt, Centrical Sulphur, and a true Idea
of what ever excellent Faculties Antimony in its best praeparation is enricht
with, so that there is scarce any Impurity (whether Manifest or Latent) in the
Blood or Bowels, that can escape its energy; But when you have made use of as
many Ounces of this Nitrum Tartarisatum as I have, I doubt not but you will
have cause to give the same Character of it I have here Expressed.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Cure of a Stomachic Acid Scorvey.
1. An Observation on the structure of the Stomach. That it is the Tunica
Fungosa is the Seat and Matrix of many Chronical Diseases. 2. The Method of
Curing a commencing Stomachic Scorvey. Antiscorbutic Pills. An Antiscorbutic
Decoction. 3. Emetics and Gum Cathartics are most effectual Remedies in an
inveterate Stomachic Scorvey. Gum-Pills. 4. Corroboratives proper after a
Course of Purgatives. 5. Specifics against an Hepatic Scorvey.
. 1. I Must necessarily praemise one Observation touching the structure of the
Stomach, before I can render the Indications plain and obvious. Its contexture
does consist in four Membranes. The first I call the Tunica Mucosa, or the
slimy Coat, being destined by Nature for a defense of the nervous Tunic from
those Acrimonious moistures, the Stomach upon every digestion does abound with.
This Tunic if at any time it be abraded, occasions great Pains, Vellications,
continual Singultitions, and enormous Vomitings. The second from those various
Sulcations and Wrincklings may aptly be termed the Tunica Rugosa. This Tunic is
very Nervous, and consequently endued with a most exquisite sensibility,
derived from the Ramifications of the External branch of the sixth pair, and
from the Plexus sexti paris mesentericus; the use of it is, to corrugate the
Stomach, and to amplex the ingested Victuals firmly and strictly. Both the
forementioned Tunics late Authors have improperly named the Crusta Carnosa. The
third I call the Tunica Fungosa, consisting of a laxe spongy flesh, serving to
give an ample space and passage for a large proportion of Arterial Blood, from
whose praesence and praeterflux in its Circulation, the Stomach does receive a
sufficient heat to dissolve, concoct, and elaborate its contents into a Chyle.
Another great use is, that it is subservient in the nature of a Concoctory,
where the crude Blood circulating is to be Digested or Concocted into a sweeter
and aequal Mass; so that you must make this Annotation, that it is here the
gross, and phlegmatic crude Blood does so frequently stagnate; whence that
pesanture and load at the Stomach, which the Sick do so commonly make complaint
of in most Distempers, is occasioned, and not from crude viscous Humors in the
capacity of the Stomach, which Physicians, with the Ignorant vulgar, term a
Cake of fleam; for were this a truth, a detergent Aloetic Laxative would at
once scour the Stomach, and disburden it of those weighty Humors, or at least
a Galiard Vomit cannot be supposed to fail in that Indication; but on the
contrary we find, that in many Cases scarce a score of proper Purgers, or half
that number of Emetics will accomplish the design; however this is not to be
apprehended so strictly, but that some crude Humors may float, or through
their tenacity adhaere to the sides of the Stomach, and may be as conveniently
removed thence by a detergent Laxative. It is in this Tunic, where many
Distempers take their root, which generally proves of so difficult an
eradication; but be not so facil, as to err with the gross of Physicians, in
imagining, that it is those thick mucilaginous humors, penetrating through the
Tunica Mucosa and Nervosa, do lodge in the Tunica fungosa, and constitute the
Cause of those durable pesantures of the Stomach; for the said Humors are
nothing near proportioned in subtility to pass through the thick and compact
bodies of the forementioned Membranes. The fourth Tunic is the common Tunic,
derived from the Peritonaeum.

. 2. This suffices to inform you, that in a commencing Stomachic Scorvey
nothing is more properly Indicated, that an Aloetic Eccoprotic praepapared, as
has been proposed before, and repeated once, or twice, and sometimes thrice a
Week, and in the Interval days a Detergent and Antiscorbutic decoction. Thus I
have Cured several with these following praescriptions, being sometimes a
little varied to answer their several Temperaments, Ages, and other
Circumstances.

. Aloes nost. praep. ii. Cort. Winteran. Nitr. Tartarisat. an. ss. Sir. Ros.
sol. q. s. N. f. Mass. Pil. Equavis a. formentur Pil. No. ix. and deaurentur.
capiat Pil. iiii. vesp. sub ingress. in lect. and Pil. v. sequent. aurora,
superbibendo haust. liquor. sequent.. Fol. Cochlear. hort. M iiii. Fol.
Becabung. M ii. Sum. Absynth. vulg. P i. Flor. Centaur. i ss. Cort. Aurant. ii.
Infund. in Aq. Cochl. Vin. alb. an. lb i. Expressio reponatur in ampul. vitr.
sumat iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis.
. 3. From the clogging and burden of the Tunica Fungosa we are to desume this
Indication, that a safe and well praepared Antimonial Vomit is particularly
pointed at, which through its most subtle Sulphur does penetrate in a very
short space through the whole Body and every part of it, dissolve the most
tenacious Humors, and by stimulating the Nervous Tunic of the Stomach does
dislodge, and throw off those obstinate adhaerents; and among those numerous
praeparations, I could never yet find any more safe and effectual, than my
Antimon. Resuscitat. the process whereof is described in my Great Venus. But
where a Vomit is counter indicated by the unaptness and difficulty of
evacuating that way, take your refuge to Gum Cathartics, which used for Eight,
Ten, or Fourteen days, often do wonders. The following Mass of Pills in cases of
this nature I have several times praescribed, with a success suitable to the
Excellency of its Ingredients.

. Aloes succotr. Gum. Ammon. an. ii. Solvantur in tinctur. gentian. q. s.
iustillat. Spir. Vitriol. philos. gut. xx. solutio coletur and evapor. ad
mellagin. addendo deinceps. Spec. Diasen. iii. Sal. Chalyb. nostr. ii. Nitri.
Tartar. i ss. Bezoard. Jovial. ii ss. Ol. Succin. gut. xv. Elix. Proprietat. q.
s. M. f. Mass. Pilul. Dos. a i. ad i.
. 4. Since in Scorbutic Distempers, longer Courses than of a Fortnight or three
Weeks, do not only occasion a Fatigue, but a weakness also to the Stomach, a
confortative Electuary ought to be made use of for six or seven days, and then
return to a repetition of the foregoing Course; for Chronical Diseases,
especially Scorbutics, proving very obstinate, require fraequent reiterations
of Medicines.

A Confortative Stomachic Electuary.

. Conserv. Anth. Salv. Absynth. pont. an. i. Pulv. Stom. ex aron. Quercet. i.
Zedoar. Cort. Winter. an. ss. Elix. Proprietat. gut. xxxx. Sir. cort. citr. q.
s. M. f. Elect. Capiat quotidie ad magnitud. castan. duabus horis ante pastum.
. 3. An Hepatic Scorvey is vigorously oppugned by these two specificks;
Aparine, and Chelidonium minus. Most cooling vulnerary Vegetables do also very
much conduce to the Cure of this Distemper; hereunto add Agrimony and Lapathum
acutum.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the External Cure of the Mouth-Scorvey.
1. The Description of a Mouth-Liquor. 2. A Liniment for the same use. 3. A
Collution for the Mouth against Ulcers of the Gums.
. 1. BY what means to act against the Internal root of an Acid Scorvey, has
been formerly declared; how to rescind this Branch, the Mouth-Scorvey, by
extrinsic Remedies, is the purport of this Paragraph. The correcting and
subduing the putrid acour of the Blood, appelling to the inward parts of the
Mouth, and there occasioning a Vacillation of the Teeth, painful, spongy,
tumefied and discolored Gums, I have more than once proved successful in, by
this following Liquor.

. Fol. Cochlear. M viii. Fol. Salv. P iii. Post contus. in mort. marm.
exprimatur succus, in^q. dissolv. Alum. rup. i. Colcoth. Vitriol. ii. reponatur
in vesio. Suil. quae strict. clausa suspendatur in aq* tepid. donec Alum. and
Vitr. fuerint penitus solut. dein destil. e cucurb. humil in aren. residentia
denuo suspend. in vesic. and repetatur destil. Linteo praescripto Liquore
imbuto confricentur gingivae bis vel ter per diem.
This Liniment in some manner does imitate the Virtues of the former.

. Fol. Salv. sic. pulv. i. Rad. Tormentil. pulv. ii. Flor. sal. armon. chalyb.
ss. Balaust. pulv. i. Mel. Crud. q. s. M. f. Liniment. Quo saepius inung.
gingivae.
. 3. If by reason of a greater Acrimony and Putrefaction of Humors the Gums
grow Ulcerous, nothing seems parallel to this Collution.

. Lixiv. calc. viv. iiii. Tinct. gum. Lac. i. ss. Elix. Proprietat. ss. Alum.
Vst. ii. Colcoth. v^triol. i. Mel. ros. i. M. f. Collut. oris. Qua saepius
gingivae made^iant.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the External Cure of the Leg-Scorvey.
1. Description of the Authors Lapis Salutis. 2. A Liniment against Ulcers of
the Legs. 3. A Cicatrizing Powder.
. 1. DEpascent and Dysepulotic Ulcers are those obstinate Symptoms, that
require a particular regard, against which my Lapis Salutis has been
Experienced to be very praevalent.

. Vitriol. Romans iiii. ^erus. Litharg. Arg. Vitriol. Mart. an. ii. Virid. aeris.
i. Coq. in Acet. acr. ad supereminentiam duorum digit. semper agitando, donec
acquirant consistent. luti, addita Bol. Armen. i. coq. ad duritiem lapidis.
Hujus particula solvatur in Vin. rub. adstring. q. s. quo lotis ulceribus
applicentur iisdem plumaceoli eo madefacti.
. 2. In case the Ulcers be very foul, the following Liniment may serve for an
excellent Deterger.

. Ol. Jovis Mercur. i^ Mel. Rosat. vi. M. f. Liniment.
3. Scorbutic^Vlcers of the Legs, though exquisitely deterged and incarned to
the Surface, nevertheless prove Dysepulotic, or difficult to be acatrized by
common Epu^otics, whose defect is often wonderfully supplied by the amalgamation
of Lead, being subtly pulverized, laevigated, and inspersed pretty thick on
the said Ulcers, and covered with unarmed plegets, or dry Lint.

In conclusion of this Chapter, I shall only insert this Caveat, to forbear
using any kind of Unctuous greasy Medicines, be they Emplasters, Unguents,
Liniments, or Oils, they being all of a putrefactive nature, especially in this
sort of Ulcers.

What concerns Spots, Blotches, or Pustles, they do not require any particular
applications, since they usually vanish with the rest of the internal symptoms,
upon a due course of Medicines.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cordials.
1. Cordial Simples. 2. The form of a Cordial Julep. 3. Analeptics.
1. THe Vital Faculty being commonly very languid in Scorbutic Distempers,
indicates Cordial Refectives, and Analeptic Corroboratives. The former are
chosen out of fragrant and spirituous Vegetables, viz. Flor. Borrag. Buglos,
Ros. Viol. Calendul. Summit. Melis. Ceras. Nigr. Mala Citrea, Serpil. Citrat.
Menth. and Flor. Aurant. which latter in Virtue, Efficacy and Propriety, is a
Specific Cordial in most Hypochondriac Maladies, by far exceeding all the
forementioned; and therefore cannot but wonder, that Physicians have of late
years estranged themselves from the use of it: But in this as in many others I
find some to be very mutable; sometimes Acids, and Coolers are to be
praescribed in Fevors, otherwhiles they aesteem them pernicious, and hot
Volatils are only to be recommended; and so the like instability of Practice
may be observed in several other Distempers; what principle this flows from,
you may easily conjecture. To these may be added the less heating Aromatics, as
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, etc. likewise Wine, some vinous Composites, and some
Alexipharmacs.

. 2. Out of these several Compositions, may be praescribed this following,
which has been experienced not to be unpleasant, nor ineffectual.

. Aq. stillat. ceras. nigr. tot. citr. Serpil. citr. aurant. an. i ss. Aq.
Cinam. tenuior. Vitae Matthew. an. i. Suc. Kerm. i. vel Confect. Alkerm. iiii.
Sir. Melis. i ss. Spir. Menth. i. M. f. Jul. Capiat. cochl ii. vel iii. urgente
languore.
The Citron and Limon Thyme water I suppose to be Distilled upon a praevious
digestion with half water and half small French Wine. Aq. Mirabil. I seldom
make use of, because it is a Water very unpleasant, and consisting of
disproportioned Ingredients. You must manage your Election of the foresaid
Cordials according to their proprieties against an Acid, or Lixivial Scorvey.

. 3. The Analeptic Corroboratives are chiefly Broaths made of a Cock, Chicken,
or Veal, with the addition of Barley, or a Crust of Bread, Cordial Flowers, and
a small proportion of Mace.

CHAP. XXIX. The Cures of a Scorbutic Atrophy, of the Gout, and of Convulsions.
A Scorbutic Atrophy is remedied by reducing the Blood to its natural
temperament, whereby its rendered Nutrititious, and apt to repair the dissipated
parts.

Goats Milk, wherein Antiscorbutics have been boiled, is universally received
for a great Remedy in this Case.

Likewise this following in a Lixivial Atrophy.

. Rad. Consolid. i. Fol. hepat. stellat. M iiii. Fol. Chelidon. min. M ii.
Ligust. M i. Flor* Borrag. P ii. Decoct. limac. vit. and ped. vervec. lb iii.
post digest. quatuor horar. destill. e cucurb. vitr. humil. in cinerib. de quo
capiat iiii. ter per diem scilicet hora 8. 11. and 4. pomeridiana.
. 2. Against Scorbutic arthritic vagous pains, I find nothing aequal to my
Tinctura Chalybis, and Tinctur. Antimonii Fulva, either or both being in proper
Vehicles exhibited for 14, or 21. days.

This Observation I affirm is universal in this Climat, that all or most
Arthritic pains both Vagous and Fixed are either Scorbutic or Venereal, that is
depending on a Venereal impression or Tincture, which some former Malignant
infection (though cured 10 or 20 years past) has left; for all Varolous
diseases leave a stain or impression on the parts, which is as little deleble
as the mark of a Blast, or a Cicatrix of a Malignant Ulcer; for this reason
these sorts of Gouts shall never be Curable, or indeed scarce palliable without
Antiscorbutic or Antivenereal Specifics, or both mixed with Arthritic Medicines.
Scorbutic Arthritic fixed pains I have often removed by my Spir. Arthritic.
extracted from the Sulphur of several Minerals. For an Anodine and Palliative
Topic, against the said Joint torments, I only apply a Cinnaber Emplaster, but
not that recommended in my Great Venus.

. 3. Some Scorbutic Convulsions this following Elixir does vigorously oppugnate.

. Elix. praeon. praep. cum Spir. acid. Succin. ss. Sal. Antimon. nostr. ii. M.
Capiat. gut. xx. vel xxx. ter vel quater per diem in Decoct. antiscorb.
The Antispasmodics contained in the London Dispensatory, are chiefly these;
Vngula alcis, cranium humanum, viscum querc. Aq. Ceras. nigr. Lilior. convall.
Flor. tiliae, paralys. rutae, Aq. Poeoniae compos. Spir. lavendulae compos.
Spir. and tinct. castorei. Spir. Lumbricor. Spir. Angelic. Aq. Petasit. compos.
Sir. infus. Flor. poeon. item Sir. Poeon. compos. Sir* de beton. compos.
likewise Ol. Succin. Spir. C. c. and Ol. Guaiac.

I have known two ounces of Aq. Gentian. compos. to do wonders, in suddenly
removing Convulsion fits in Men and Women.

The most proper form for Exhibition of the forementioned Specifics against
Convulsions is a Julep praescribed in this or the like manner.

. Aq. flor. til. rnt. ceras. nigr. an. i. Aq. Poeon. comp. i ss. Tinct. Castor.
i. Rad. Poeon. p. Castor. p. Vngul. alc. ras. an ss. Sir. Poeon. comp. i. Ol.
Succin. rect. gut. x. M. f. Jul. Capiat part. med. ante paroxysm. Convulsiv.
and alteram post parox.
For a Topic nothing is comparable to Balsamum Succini.

In some Scorbutic Convulsions an Electuary may be proper to praevent the
Paroxysms, because it is not so soon digested, but remains a good while in the
Stomach to disperse its Virtues to the parts affected.

. Conserv. Flor. Poeon. m. herb. paralys. anth. an. i. Rad. acor. condit. Nuc.
Moscat. cond. an. ss. Confect. Mithridat. i ss. Rad. Poeon. pulv. Castor. pulv.
Vngul. alc. ras. an. ss. Sir. de Paeon. comp. q. s. Ol. Succin. rectif gut. xv.
M. f. Elect. Capiat ad magnit. castan. duabus horis ante cibum.
CHAP. XXX. Of Malignant Fevors, and Small Pox.
1. The Cause of Malignant Fevors. 2. The Cause of the Small Pox. 3. The Cure
of the Small Pox.
. 1. THe Malignity that so often is Concomitant and Supervenient to continual
Fevors, constantly almost Reigning in and about London, seems chiefly to derive
its Original from the ill temperature of the Air, which as has been declared,
is Salin and Scorbutic. That this is the principal Procatarctic, is evident
from these two Reasons: 1. Because Persons differing from one another in the
use of all the other Non-naturals, are subject to be surprised by the same
Malignant Fevor, which consequently must then solely be derived from the Air,
that only of all the Non-naturals being the same, and common to all. 2. Because
many of those, that have the misfortune to fall Sick of a Malignant Fevor, have
been most temperate and regular in their Diaet, Motion, and Resting, Sleeping
and Waking, Excretions and Retention^, and Passions of the Mind; so that it
must be the Air only, that lies imputable of this Malignant Effect; add hereto,
that English Bodies when incident into Fevors in some other Climates, are not
afflicted with those Malignant Symptoms. The causality through which a Salin
Air produces such Malignant febril Effects, is by disposing the Body to
engender great measures of gross Fuliginous and very Acrimonious steems, which
by reason of the constipation of the External pores, and of other Internal
obstructions are repelled, and incorporated into the whole current of the
Blood, kindle and inflame its Bituminou^ parts, whose flames are thereby
rendered Malignant and venomous to the Spirits, which then prove the immediate
Cause of those Malignant Symptoms. 3. By this means the Blood soon becomes
Lixivially Salin, Saponary, and runs into a gross deliquious Oil, as plainly
appears, when occasionally tapt out by Phlebotomy. Now the great difficulty of
reducing this unctuous saponary Blood to its former qualification, and freeing
it from that gross Salin and ^crimonious Fuligo, is the Cause, that renders
Malignant Fevors so indomitable, and extremely pernicious. Upon this
Hypothesis, which your strict Scrutiny and Observation in Practice will
abundantly confirm, how Deleterious the ordinary Method of Curing the said
Fevors, and how contrary those hot Cordials exhibited by spoonfuls prove, is
easily discovered; for instead of moving Nature to sweat by an Incisive,
Attenuating, and Volatilizing quality, and by Amortizing the Lixivial Salts,
they render the said Salts more Lixivial and absorbing, and consequently
dispose the Body not toward, but against Sweating. Neither are the Times or
Seasons observed for exhibiting of Medicines, that are accordingly to be varied
in quantity quality and other circumstances; a certain directory of all which
can never be attained by Indications, desumed from that impertinently improved
Notion of Fermentation, which has been the occasion of posting hundreds to the
jaws of Orcus. What measures ought to be taken in point of Management and Cure
of this Distemper, I have already proposed in my Tractatus Theoret. and Pract.
de Febribus; But in short, the necessary praemisses not being omitted, I do
repose a great confidence in an Antifebril Elixir, consisting of Ingredients of
a mixed nature; and in Spir. cornu cervi praepared in a peculiar manner.

. 2. The Small Pox being in some kind not unlike the foregoing Distemper, I
will only give my Sentiment, with Directions relating to the Cure, and then
take leave. I cannot give Credit to the received Opinion, importing, that the
Small is caused by some impurities, the Foetus contracted in the Womb, which
afterward Nature does cast forth into those virulent Pustles: this among the
rest is certainly a Deliramentum Antiquitatis; for considering that in Guinee,
most parts of Africa, and almost throughout whole Asia, the Natives, or indeed
the Strangers are never surprised with the Small Pox, though their Impurities
contracted in the Womb (if any after many years interval) cannot be supposed
less than ours, we must conclude, that it is rather an Endemic Disease,
peculiar to the Northen Climes, or rather a seasoning or alteration of the
Nature of Man, arriving out of the Microcosm of his Mother into the Macrocosm,
impressed by the rudeness and difference of temperature of the Air of Northern
Climes from his primogenial Temperament, which needs no other Confirmation,
than the Instance of those Guineans, Indians, and others, who soon upon their
arrival into those Climes are attaqued by the Small Pox, which I can term
nothing but a Seasoning, in like manner, as Northern Bodies are seasoned with
other Diseases of the Climate that transport themselves to Virginia, Barbados,
or other parts of the West, or East Indies. That some undergo this seasoning of
the Small Pox, soon after they are crept out of the shell, others when they are
grown up to riper years; and some not at all, being praevented by some Mortal
Distemper, is occasioned, through the strength of Nature, some Bodies are
endued with above others (that undergo the forementioned seasoning soon after
their Birth) whereby they are rendered capable to resist the alterative
impressions of the Air.

Since then it is so obvious, that the Air is the principal External efficient,
you must necessarily apprehend, that where the Air is Salin and Scorbutic, the
Small Pox proves much more Malignant, and fraequently mortal, and that, by
reason the Blood becomes Lixivial, Saponary, and Absorbing, which to dispose to
a Diaphoresis, or Breathing, by those hot inflaming Cordials is in some as
impossible, as to force Water out of a Flint; but on the contrary, the Salts of
the Humors being rendered more Lixivial and Absorbing by them, they do not only
through that absorbitive and droughty Faculty exhaust and dry up the Serum of
the Blood, but concentrate and retract, or draw in from the circumference those
vol^til fuliginous Salts, together with the External Salts engendered in the
Air, which otherwise Nature is striving to cast forth; and hence it is, that
Old Women and Nurses by giving only large measures of plain moistening posset
Ale, very small Ale boyld, or thin Fig-drink, prove infinitely more successful,
than many if not most of Physicians: But now I must tell you also, that some of
the ingenious Practicers of the College of London, taking their measures from
the event the management of Old Women does procure, and the ill Exit that
attends the advice of other Physic^ans, do abandon all those hot aduring
Species, and distilled Waters, and praescribe temperate Moistening Diaphoretic
Decoctions, and distilled Waters, whereby they justly deserve the Character of
most Experienced and Learned Physicians, scarce one in a very great Number
stooping to the Conquest of his Distemper, and that by reason of their apt and
exquisite praescriptions. In fine, there are no principles, either those of
Dogmatic putrefaction, or that of Fermentation, which to me do so evidently
expound the causality and reason of all those Symptoms and Changes, that so
ordinarily happen in the Small Pox, and Measels, than the Hypothesis I have
proposed; and what concerns the Practical Indications they are such, that in
Success and happy Event, I am confident exceed all others.

. 3. The Alexiterial simples are Rad. scorzoner. hisp. Vincetox. fol. Galeg.
Scabios. flor. Calend. sem. Aquileg. fruct. caric. (in case of a Looseness or
Vomiting Rad. Bistort. and Tormentil.) aq. Card. Ben. Scabios. Malv. the
Composites are Aq. Scord. compos. Diascord. not that of Fracast. as it is set
down in the London Pharmacopoea with the addition of Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon,
etc. which must necessarily be very pernicious in this Distemper, Spec. e chel.
caner. Diamarg. frig. Cardiac. Magistral. and such like

The Decoct. Lent. though commended almost in every Author, I am certain is not
agreeable to this Distemper in our Climat. Spir. Corn. C^rv. particularly
praepared, and Elix. Antifeb^il. are aequal to any of the forementioned.

This Treatise being swelled beyond my Intention, am Obliged to omit particular
Observations, and Conclude.

FINIS.

