THE Art of Glass. SHOWING How to make all Sorts of GLASS, Crystal and Enamel.
Likewise the Making of Pearls, Precious Stones, China and Looking-Glasses. To
which is added, The Method of Painting on Glass and Enameling. Also how to
Extract the Colors from Minerals, Metals, Herbs and Flowers. A Work containing
many Secrets and Curiosities never before Discovered. Illustrated with Proper
Sculptures.

Written Originally in French, By Mr. H. BLANCOVRT, And now first Translated
into English.

With an APPENDIX, containing Exact Instructions for making GLASS-EYES of all
Colors.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan without Temple Bar; Tho.
Bennet at the Half Moon, D. Midwinter and Tho. Leigh at the Rose and Crown, and
R. Wilkin at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIX.

TO My Lord Marquess OF VILLACERF, Counselor of State, Chief Steward of the
Household to the Late Queen; Superintendant and Surveyor-General of His
Majesty's Buildings and Gardens, Arts and Manufactures.
SIR,
THE Knowledge which I acquired by my Study and Experience in the Art of Glass,
has Retrieved several Important Secrets, which for a long time lay Buried in
Oblivion: Of these I at length resolved to Compose a Treatise; and I here make
bold to Inscribe it to your Illustrious Name, that they may be once more
Restored to this Kingdom. If your Honor pleases to look over the Wonders
herein delivered, you will be satisfied I have found out and added several
Curious Things of my own Invention, as well relating to the Secrets of Nature,
as the most profound Science of the Adepti, or Ancient Philosophers.

Hence it is, Sir, I am to hope You Will Receive this Favorably; that under the
Honor of your Protection, it may meet with Acceptance Abroad: For if You grant
Your Approbation, the World will not deny it Theirs. Permit therefore,
Illustrious Sir, that I may Impart the Secrets of this Noble Art to the
Public, under your Auspicious Patronage: Which is the Most Humble Request of
him who Subscribes himself with all Imaginable Respect,

Your Honor's, Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, H. de Blancourt.

THE PREFACE.
THE Art of Glass, being one of the Most Noble and Curious of all other Arts,
and the Wonderfulness of it, both in the Simplicity of the Matter, whereof it
is made, and in the Formation of it; as also the Various Colors it is capable
of receiving, appearing so Curious and Entertaining, chiefly engaged my
Thoughts in the Study of its Principles, and to penetrate into the most hidden
Secrets of it.

The Knowledge I had acquired in the Secrets of Nature, both by Speculations,
and repeated Experiments, Excited me to a more particular Enquiry of whatever
might be extraordinary in it, that I might Impart it to the Public.

Most People are of Opinion, That the Ancient Manner of Tinging Glass, (with
those fine and rich Colors, whereof there are still some Remains to be seen in
Ancient Churches) is at present quite lost. It is true indeed, it is lost
Publicly, since those who publicly profess the Art of Making Glass, know
nothing of it: But to those who set themselves thoroughly to study the true
Principles of whatever they undertake, it is not difficult to Retrieve lost
Arts, and Revive them in their Ancient Splendor and Perfection.

I shall therefore here endeavor to Revive, and make Public, this supposedly
lost Secret, of giving all those Curious and Rich Colors to Glass, which the
Ancients did, by showing whatever has been performed, that is extraordinary and
curious in this Science, which I have traced and recovered from the obscure
Tracts of Ancient Authors, and confirmed by my own Experiments; and also
augmented what was delivered by them, in Preparations of several rare and
precious Matters, that cannot but appear very extraordinary.

This Age has been very happy for the Restoration of Arts and Sciences, of
which that late Excellent Minister of State, Monsieur Colbert Superintendant,
and Surveyor-General of the Buildings, Arts, and Manufactures of France, has
been an Assiduous Reviver and Encourager: They seem at present to be arrived at
so high a degree of Perfection, that there is not one but has surpassed
whatever was done by the Ancients; and those under his Inspection, particularly
merit on that account a preference to any others. That of Glass, whereof we are
at present to treat, has not been the last that has signalized it self, having
already shown Wonders in the extraordinary largeness of Coach-glasses.

We have divided this Work into Twelve Books, which contain so many different
Heads, though derived from the same Principles. If we were to follow the ordinary
Custom of most Authors, we should Epitomize in the Preface, the Contents of
those Twelve Books: But that seems to us a needless Task, since the Reader may
please to peruse an Index, which we have for that purpose annexed to the End of
this Volume, which will be sufficient for the Reader's Satisfaction therein.

Our Design being not to trouble the Reader with a long Preface, we have
resolved only to touch very lightly of the Matters contained in the Book, and
only to hint of some things that are omitted.

Glass has something in it so beautiful to the Sight, and its Transparency is
so agreeable, that it is no wonder we find it by several, and even in the Holy
Scripture it self, compared not only to Gold, the most perfect of all Metals,
but also to things far more high and Spiritual. They are Mysteries of deeper
Consequences, than at first sight we imagine, since by them we are informed,
that Vitrification gives a better Being, or Nobler Nature. This requires the
attentive Thoughts of Philosophers, not only in the Nature of Metals, where it
is easily seen; but also in other things, where Sense and Experience testify
the Truth of it.

We have asserted in our Book, that Glass is a perfect Metal, since it will
bear the utmost force of Fire as well as Gold: And that there is but one sort
of Fire, more Puissant than the Vulgar, that can consume it: But here we will
take notice, that there are two Ways to make Glass, and that it may be made
more or less fixed. That the more fixed, which is the least beautiful and the
least transparent, resists every thing; no Preparation of Mercury, nor any
Species of Aquafortis, can Dissolve it, nor the most sub^le Poisons, or
highest Corrosives, arrive any further than to break it. The less fixed, on the
contrary, which is the most clear and transparent, as that of Venice, is less
capable of Resistance, being composed of a more purified Salt: Thus it will
Dissolve in the Earth, or in cold and moist Places, if there be more Salt in it
proportionably ^han Sand, by a Separation natural to those two sorts of Matter:
And Poisons Extracted out of Minerals will Dissolve it, by reason of their
great cold.

We shall not repeat here the Virtues Glass is capable of acquiring, (whereof we
make mention in several places) by the Grand Elixir of the Philosophers, (which
makes it Malleable, and Converts Crystal into Precious Stones) as also by
several other ways. We'll only add, That there are several other less and
particular Secrets, by which it may be made soft and fusil like Wax, and
afterward reduced to its former hardness in Water; but these are little
Curiosities that serve to no purpose.

Glass may receive either within or without any sort of Metallic Colors,
which makes it very proper for Painting. Those which we shall teach to Extract
from Metals, and show in this Book for the tinging of Glass, give it a Luster
equal to Precious Stones, and set it off with an unspeakable Beauty.

As we have given you the ordinary Preparations of all sorts of Metals,
Crystal, Glass, Rochetta, Soda, Tartar, Manganese, Salt, Sulphur, Vitriol,
Aquafortis and Regis, Pastes, Enamels, Pearls, and other things contained in
this Work: So we can safely say, we have given you more of them than are
common, and some which have never been public; which we have all along taken
particular care to do, to oblige the Curious in this Art, who will apprehend it
better by reading the Book it self, than we can tell them in the Preface. But
more particularly to show our Ingenuous and Vnprejudiced Impartiality in this
Affair, and how little envy we have to the Students and Practisers of this Art,
we discover to them such extraordinary and precious Receipts in it, as would
have been Industriously concealed by any other Hand, because they point out the
Paths to Persons Conversant and Illuminated in these Studies, even to their
greatest Secrets, and most hidden Recesses.

By what we treat of in this Book upon this Subject, ^ne may perceive that
there is nothing in Nature which Man cannot imitate: And if we believe what
Claudian ^ells us, of that great Sphere of Glass, made by Archinedes, we shall
have reason to be as much surprised, as Claudian's Poem makes the Gods to be.
If the Reader ^ould know the reason why that Sphere was made of Glass, ^e may
see it in Cardan's Book, de Subtilitate, where ^e may see with it, a Quotation
of the Verses we here ^ention.

Besides what relates to the Art of making Glass, we ^lso treat of the Ways of
Painting on Enamel and Glass; and we also show the Way of Extracting Tinctures
of ^everal Colors of Herbs, Flowers, Roots, Grain, Wood, Stones, and other
things, for this sort of Pain^ing and Tinging of Glass.

Although* this. Art of Painting seems different from that ^f Glass, yet they
ought not to be separated, since this Painting is performed with Minerals, and
that they melt ^n Fire like the Enamels.

One of the most Ingenious we have ever had for Pain^ing on Glass, was one
Jaques de Paroy, a Native of ^t. Pourcain sur Allier, who has Writ upon that
Subject. His Genius always leading him that ways, he applied himself to it with
a great Inclination and Industry, and suceeded in it accordingly: Whereupon he
went to Rome to ^erfect himself, as being the greatest and most general ^chool
for Painting and Sculpture; where he studied ^ long time under the Famous
Dominican. After he at^ained to Perfection, he went to Venice, where he did
^everal fine Pieces.

Returning into France, in the Province of Auvergne, where he was Born, he
performed also some extraordinary Pieces in the Castle of the Count de
Calignac, and afterward in the Church of St. Mederick in Paris, where is yet
to be seen of his, the Judgment of Susannah, which is very perfect and
Exquisite, as well as all the other Pieces of the Choir. At length this
Excellent Person^ died at the Age of 102 Years, in the City of Moulin^
Burbonois, where his last Funeral Obsequies were performed in the Church of the
Jacobines.

There are likewise more of those fine Paintings, which justly cause Admiration
in all Learned Beholders, to b^ seen in the Church of St. Gervais at Paris, and
in the Wooden-Chappel at St. Vincent's, in the Great Church o^ the City of
Metz, in that of St. Owen at Roan, in the Castles of Gaillon and Annet; and in
several other places, which would be tedious to relate, where in a^ of them are
to be seen some of those Prodigies o^ Art.

The Way to become perfect in any Art, is wholly to d^ vote and give ones self
up to it; but the most part of thos^ who have so Zealously applied themselves to
it, and be^ come Excellent therein, have left no other Patrimony ^^ their
Heirs, but their own Empty Fame, which they a^^ ways pursued when alive, with
far more Vigor than the Goods of Fortune. Witness Lisippus, that Incomparab^^
Engraver, why Died of mere Poverty, because instea^ of seeking whereby to Live,
he continually employed him self about his Art. And Miron, who seemed to have
^nimated his Statues, cast them so happily in Brass, l^^ so little behind him,
that no one would take the pains to ^ his Executor to look after it.

We might give a Thousand Examples of these Truths, and in what Esteem those
who have excelled in these Arts, have been had by great Princes all over the
World, but the Subject would require a larger Discourse than we have allotted
to this Preface, which obliges us to come to a Conclusion; only further
desiring the Reader not to expect any Quaintness of Expression, or Politeness
of Style, but rather to content himself with the Exactness which we have always
taken care to observe in giving him the Preparations we pretend to show, with
all the Truth and Fidelity possible.

OF THE ART OF GLASS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the Original, Antiquity, and Use of Glass.
IT has not been without Reason, that several Learned Persons have compared Man
to a Microcosm, or Little World, since he contains in himself all the
Excellencies of the Greater; and that God, having created him after his own
Image, has given him an Absolute Dominion over all Creatures in this World: Not
only over Animals and Vegetables, and those other visible mixed Bodies, among
which we are immediately conversant; but also over Metals, Minerals,
Semiminerals, Precious Stones, Pearls, Corals, and whatever Treasures are hid
in the Bowels of the Earth, or Bottom of the Seas; that he might make use of
them for his own Pleasure, and that by the Understanding God has given him, he
might know their Properties, to make them useful for his particular Occasions.

The Power of Nature is limited in all her Effects, and Man alone can augment
and enlarge by Art, the Virtues and Powers which she has produced, by
separating the Pure from the Impure, that which is more Subtle and Spiritual,
from the more Gross and Earthy; which Nature her self cannot do, by reason she
has no Tools nor Instruments proper for such Separations; especially of those
Impurities, which by proceeding from the Corruptions of the Matrixes, where all
her Generations are made, perpetually mix themselves with all her Productions:
Besides that the Universal Seed (or Spirit) of the World, which contains in it
self the three Principles and four Elements, whereof every thing in Nature is
composed and nourished, is it self not free from Impurity; for in making its
Circulations from Heaven to Earth, and from thence again to Heaven, where it is
impregnated with all the Virtues of the Constellations and Planets, it returns
again, and descends even to the Center of the Earth, there to be impregnated
with a Body and Salt, and acquire the utmost Elementary Perfection; whence the
Central Fire forcing it to repass to the Surface, and thence into the Globe of
Water and Air, after having produced, in its passage, in all the Elements, an^
infinite Number of Mixtures, it ascends again into the Heavens, whence it
penetrates and animates the whole Universe. It is by all these Circulations
tha^ this Seed or Soul of the World becomes invested with Impurities, whereof
the general or universal Spirit is tainted, so that the Pure and Impure ascend
and descend together in Confusion; insomuch, that only the Industry of Man can
separate them, by ejecting the unprofitable excrementitious Parts, and
separating and purifying its Principles, and then reuniting them, to make a
Compound of a greater Virtue; so that of that Compound you may make a Species
capable of producing its Without doubt the Author has an eye in this Expression
to the Multiplication of Gold.
like: For the Nature of one Mixed or Compound, cannot produce or be changed
into a Mixed of a different Nature; We must always sow Wheat to have a Crop of
Wheat.

Hence it is that so many great Philosophers have told us, That Man, by the
means of Art, might begin where Nature left off, by purifying its Matters, and
reducing them to their first Principles, and thence raising them to the utmost
degree of Perfection; whether the End be to prolong Man's Life, or curing his
greatest and most inveterate Diseases, as also of other Animals; or for Metals,
Minerals, Precious Stones, Plants, and other Vegetables. Now such Separation
and Purification of Substances is not impossible, as long as you destroy not
entirely the Subjects: But it must be performed by something that specifically
agrees with their own respective Natures; then (by it) you may make a perfect
Reduction of their Substances, wherewith by means of Art, Man may perform all
those things I have now mentioned, as to cure the most inveterate Diseases,
convert what is imperfect into the most perfect; and it is hereby that you have
displayed, that absolute Dominion which God has given him over all the
Creatures.

It is not my present Design to enter into the depth of the Mysteries of this
sublime Science, which I leave to those true Adepti.
Philosophers, who are the only Creatures to whom God has revealed them, and
whereof all other Men, like my self, are unworthy: but only to show by sensible
Demonstration, That Man, in many things, is capable of imitating Nature by the
Assistance of Art; and of performing several things by his Industry, and the
Work of his hands, which look more like Miracles, than the Effects of Art.
Those which make the Subject of the following Discourse, would be no less
surprising, if they were less common; but from the time our Eyes become
accustomed by constant use to any Object, the Esteem of it begins to be
lessened, and fall; Witness Nature her self, whose Annual Renovation, though we
are accustomed to it, ought to be a perpetual Subject of Admiration.

Of all the Works of Art, that of Glass is not the least considerable, whether
it be Natural or Artificial; it melts in the Fire without consuming, and is
therein perfected or made fine like Gold, which is a perfect Metal, and there
leaves behind it its Dross, becoming purified and whitened, which renders it
more proper for making Dishes, Glasses, and other Vessels for Man's use, than
any other Metal, or Matter whatsoever. Nay, I may yet go farther, and say, That
Glass not only purifies it self in the Fire, but also assists to purify and
melt all other Metals, and render them more pliable and malleable, and so more
easy to work upon to the ends they are designed for.

In the Spagyrick Art, in Physic, in Chemistry, it is impossible to be without
Vessels of Glass, whether for Sublimations, Distillations, or Putrefactions,
Digestions, Circulations, or other Operations to which they are necessary for
several Reasons; one whereof is, That all the gradual Alterations, of the
Matter therein contained, and what is done in it on the Fire, are visible to
the eye; and another, That those Matters can neither be imbibed by the Vessel,
nor transpire through its Pores, nor it communicate any ill Scent or Taste, which
might be noxious to the Health, if the Matter be prepared for Medicine:
Moreover the Philosophers make use of no other Vessels for their curious
Operations, whether it be to extract the Philosophic Mercury, or purify it,
or for the Decoction of their Grand Elixir and Panacaea's, which they cannot
perform without Glass; for otherwise they would labor in the dark, and could
never well regulate their Operations: Besides the Volatility of their Spirits,
which they must preserve, is of so subtle and quick Penetration, that no other
Vessels could hold them.

Churches, Palaces, Castles, and Particular Houses, owe their chiefest
Ornaments as well as Conveniences, to Glass; for that transparent Substance
guards them within from too great Heat and Cold, without hindering the
Intromission of the Light. Looking-Glasses, and other great Plates of Glasses
are as so many surprising Objects to our Eyes, representing so distinctly and
naturally all even from the least to the greatest Actions of the Objects before
them; whereby also one may always keep himself in a neat and agreeable dress.
Notwithstanding not one in a Thousand of those who have them, ever reflect on
the Admirableness of the Work, which is beyond doubt, one of the chiefest, and
most perfect Pieces of Art, and than which Man can make nothing more wonderful.

Moreover, China-Ware for adorning Capboards and Tables, Dishes, diverse sorts
of Glasses, and Figures, and a thousand other Curiosities, of all sort; of
Colors, which serve both for Pleasure and Use, and employ the Poor all over
the World; are they not well worthy of Admiration?

But if we consider the Painting and Representations in the Glasses of
Churches, we must at the same time admire, that the Colors which we extract
from Metals for that End, can be so very lively, as to resemble so many
precious Stones. If any of this Glass be cast into a Furnace, you may see what
a vast number of Colors it is susceptible of, even beyond Comparison.

From the Latin Glastum, which is called Vitrum by Caesar in his Comment. lib.
5.
Glass is called by that Name, because it is a transparent Metal, while other
Metals are opaque, there being only Glass that can show what it contains
within. The Name of Glass, which the French, Germans, and English have given
it, seems to be taken from its resembling or approaching somewhat in its Color
to It naturally has a Blueishness.
Azure, or Sky-colour. The Word Glass, also seems to be derived, from its
Resemblance to Ice (from Glacies), while the Fire does much the same thing in
Glass, as the Frost in the Water: Thus all Glass looks like Frozen Water; which
made a modern Author merrily say, That it made Wine smile to see it self
cherished in the bosom of its most Mortal Enemy.

Monzerus tells us; That when Looking-Glass was first invented, they were sold
very dear, as if they had been made of some precious Matter, and also by reason
People took so much Pleasure in seeing themselves so lively pictured. To this
we may add, That it is not above 200 Years since they came first to be in use,
and that the way of making them was found out by a certain Person, who, melting
some Glass in a Crucible, chanced to spill it on the ground, where it running
under a great Square Tile, wherewith the Floor was paved, obliged the Workman
to take it up, where he found it in Form of a Looking-Glass-Plate, (which could
not have been so formed by the ordinary way of blowing), which began to employ
his Thoughts all that Night, and thence he conceived, That Glass might be run
into Plates like Metal, which he began to experiment from that day forward; and
so he found out the way to those Consequences which mere Chance was the first
occasion of; as it had been also before of the very Matter whereof this Metal
is composed, as we shall hereafter show.

The use of Glass is so Ancient, that it is difficult to assign the time of its
first Invention: Pliny pretends, that it was in the City of Sidon that the
first Vessels of Glass were made, as may be seen in the 26 th Chap. of his 36
th Book.

Others affirm its Origin must be as ancient as Bricks, by reason one can
scarce make the one without the other; this is the reason that has made some
assert that this Art was known at the time of the Building of Babel, that being
made of Brick, and that way of Building continued in Egypt, since we read, it
was the sole employ of the Children of Israel in their Captivity to make them.
This might be strengthened by a convincing Proof out of the Bible, whereof
Moses was the first Author, where you read of Glass, which would not have been
mentioned if it had not been in use in those Days.

The Passages we find of St. John in the Apocalypse, seem to put a very high
esteem on Glass; for in speaking of the Throne of God, Chap. 4. ver. 6. he
says, And before the Throne there was a Sea of Glass like unto Crystal. And
speaking of the Heavenly City, whereof he gives the Description Chap. 20^ Ver.
18. he says, And the building of the Wall of it, was (...) Jasper, and the City
was of pure Gold, like unto clear Glass. and at the 21. verse, And the twelve
Gates were twelve Pearls, every Gate was of one Pearl, and the street of the
City was pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass. That is to say, a Glass of
Gold, or more properly, Gold Vitrifi'd, which is that Electrum of Ezechiel,
whereof St. Jerome makes mention. I may strengthen it yet further, by a passage
out of Job, Chap. 28. ver. 17. where speaking of the Wisdom of God, he says,
The Gold and Crystal cannot equal it. Which does not only show us the Antiquity
of Glass, but also in what esteem it was had in those days, being always
equaled to Gold. This last passage is also Cited in a Translation of St.
Jerome, and in several other Authors, among whom, some have changed the word of
Gold and Glass, to that of a Stone more precious than Gold. Others to a
Carbuncle, or some other precious Stone. But, (say they,) all these names are
understood of only one and the same Stone, which the Ancients believed gave
Light by Night, and which is no where to be found. This last Opinion is very
Mysterious, and that one only Stone, according to St. Paul, in the Epistle to
the Romans, ought to be understood of the Divine Union with our Nature, by the
Mystery of the Incarnation of the Word.

The great Hermes, the Father of the Philosophers, called that Stone, the Image
of the Invisible God, which Moses (also) shut up in the Ark of the Covenant,
and which was called the Glory of God, shining in the Night like a burning
Fire, or like a bright and and shining Star which gave light by Day, as you may
see in Numbers. This it was, which these Authors meant and understood, but
which no others can comprehend, unless it be the true Philosophers. We design
to treat more largely thereof in our next Work, Entitled, The Mystical
Characters of Antiquity unveiled and laid open, wherein we will make it appear,
that of those Characters were Composed the Two Tables of the Law, which were
afterward put into the Ark, and which are the two Precious Stones which serve
at present for Guides to the wise among the Philosophers, as they did
heretofore for Figures to the Ancients.

We might fetch the Origin of Glass from Tubal-Cain, the Son of Lamech; for he
being the first Chemist that found out the way of melting Metals, and the uses
of Iron and Brass, whereof he forged Arms for War, as is noted in the 4 th.
Chap. of Genesis it is not improbable, but that he might be the first Inventor of
Glass, because one can scarce avoid reducing Calcined Metals into Glass,
especially when the Fire is more than ordinarily violent, and the Matter
remains longer in it than it ought. It was this which made Ferrandus Imperatus,
say, that the Origin of Glass came from Fire, or from its Reverberation alone
in those Furnaces where Fire was preserved in its full force. We own Fire to be
the first Agent both of Nature and Art; but with this distinction, that that of
Nature vivifies or enlivens, and that of Art resolves and destroys, especially
when it is too vehement: But he who knows how to direct and manage it, may make
good use of it for the Separation and Perfection of the Matters wherein he
works; whence it very often happens that several Persons seek that which they
cannot find, and find that which they did not seek; wherefore we may truly say,
that most part of our best Inventions and Secrets, have been found out by mere
chance, and as it were hazard of Art.

The great Hermes was not ignorant of the Art of making Glass, since he taught
the Knowledge of it to the Egyptian Chemists, but not that of the
Transmutation of Metals, though he possessed it, as Kircher tells in his Oedipus;
That since that time, that People have always professed this Art, in which they
were so Expert, that Flavius Vopiscus speaking of Alexandria, tells us, it was
very Rich, and Fruitful in Corn, and that no one is there idle, one part of the
Poor making Glass, and the other Paper.

We have another Evidence of the Antiquity of Glass, in the 4 th Book of
Lucretius: But the most part of Historians attribute the Invention of it to the
Alchymists, who by endeavoring to counterfeit Precious Stones, found out this
Secret. It is to these great Men, indeed, we are obliged for almost all our
Modern Knowledge of the most curious Secrets of Nature, they having unveiled
her most hidden Mysteries. The Profession of an Alchymist in those Days, was
not Vilifi'd as it is now, it being esteemed very Honorable, Kings themselves
exercising it. We shall discourse thereof in the Work we have promised, and
whence the word Chemistry is derived, where we will prove its Antiquity by
several passages out of the Holy Scripture. But we will here add, that the
Chemists of this present Age are very far removed, both in Knowledge and
Probity from those Ancient ones, who never practiced those base
Sophistications, and a thousand other Tricks of that Nature, which the Modern
do; which is the reason that this Art, so Noble and Sublime in its Principles,
is now adays so much Vilifi'd, that to have the name of a Chemist, (of that
sort,) is enough to render a Man detestable among honest Men. Also most part of
those who set up for that Profession, are nothing but a sort of Quack
Collectors of Recipe's, with which, under the false appearances of Fixation, of
Augmentation of Gold and Silver, which they call Powders of Projection, etc.
and which they pretend to do with common Mercury, the Imperfect Metals,
Minerals, Salts, Powders, and other Ingredients, Heterogeneous to the principal
Matters, with these, I say, they abuse Credulous Persons by their fair words
often to their Ruin. It is not with common gross Matters that Philosophers
work, nor can they bring any thing to Perfection, before they have converted
their Matters into Fluid, Volatile, and Spiritual Substances, such as they were
before their Coagulations; not by the means of Aquae Fortes and Corrosives,
which the Ancients knew nothing of; but by means of the same Liquors that
engendered and nourished them, which is as it were their Parent, Homogeneous to
them, and that Water of Life of the Philosophers, or rather the Key of Nature,
without which, you will always work in vain. That which seems to the Eyes of the
Credulous to be Augmentation, will never undergo the true Proofs of Silver and
Gold; if it should chance to undergo some one trial; you may be sure the second
will make all the hopes of the pretended profit vanish in Smoke, and on the
contrary, make you sensible of considerable loss, both by the waste of the
Matters, and the Charges expended on the way of managing them. Thus those who
have so little Sense as to engage in these Matters, may one Day find themselves
drawn in to their loss.

But let us return to the Origin of Glass; the Author of the Essays of the
Wonders of Nature, tells us, That the Limon of Lac Cendevia, which is found at
the Foot of Mount-Carmel, was the first Matter wherewith Glass was made. That
some Mariners being about to make a Trevet for a Kettle, went ashore in a place
where they found this Lac, that they took some of the Sand, and mixed it with
Nitre, wherewith their Ship was laden, and that making a Fire under the Kettle,
they saw a Noble Stream as it were of running Crystal, or melted Jewels, whence
they learned to make Glass of those two Matters, since which time, (says he,)
they have also mixed Lodestone, seeing that will attract Glass as well as
Iron; thence following they made use of certain fine Stones, and also of Sand,
as the Indians also did of Crystal; but that in his time they made use of a
Glassy Substance, extracted from an Herb, called Soda, wherewith they mixed
Sand to fix it. Pliny tells us something like this, in his 5 th Book, Chap. 19.
where he also asserts, that we were indebted to Chance for the first Invention
of Glass, which was on the Banks of the River Belus in Syria, where certain
Merchants being drove ashore in a Storm, were obliged for sometime to stay and
make Fires and to dress their Provisions; that the place abounding with a
certain Herb called Kali, which, by the great Fires they made, being reduced
into Ashes full of Salt, and joined with Sand and Stones proper for making
Glass, which are Natural and plenty thereabouts, run down into a sort of melted
Glass: Which showed them not only the manner of making Glass; but also Crystal,
and several other ^ine things, which had not been found out without the
Invention of Glass; the use whereof is so necessary to pass away Life with
Pleasure and Satisfaction, that Divine Providence has taken peculiar care that
no place on Earth should want Materials to make it, all being stocked with them
in such abundance, that they seem inexhaustible. Which once made a certain
Artist pleasantly conclude, That the Art of Glass would last throughout all
Ages; for the general Conflagration in reducing the Earth into Ashes, by reason
of the vast quantities of Salts that are mixed with it, would at last vitrifie
the whole Mass into a lasting Monument of the Art. It is true, the end of the
World, according to the Holy Scriptures, is to arrive by Fire, not by that
material Fire we use in our Chimneys; but by that which we call Elementary and
Central, whereof God will only augment the heat, which will so dry up and parch
the Earth, and exhaust all its humidity, that it shall not only be Calcined,
but changed into a better Nature; afterward to be inhabited by a new World of
a Spiritual, Incorruptible and Glorious Nature, no more to be subjected to any
change. What the two Authors we have just cited tell us, concerning the Origin
of Glass, is far better cleared, and more particularized by Josephus, in the 9
th Chap. of his 2 d Book of the Wars of the Jews, wherein he acquaints us with
several surprising things concerning the Sand for making Glass, whereof we have
been speaking. He takes notice that the River Belus arises out of Mount-Carmel,
and passes between Ptolemais and Tyrus; that it is not above 2 Furlongs from
Ptolemais that near this River is the Sepulcher and Statue of Bell or Belus,
Father of Ninus, first King of the Assyrians, whom the Babylonians worshipped
for a long time, and Sacrificed to, by the order of Ninus, who was the first
Author of the Idolatry and Priesthood of the Chaldeans, according to Eusebius,
lib. 1. and Isidore, lib. 8. That that Statue of Belus, whom the Pagans called
Jupiter, was almost 100 Cubits high, (which is very remarkable,) and that in
that place there is a Valley almost round, full of a clear Sand very fit for
making Glass: And if the Ships which come thither for their Lading, chance to
empty the place, it is immediately filled again, by the Winds driving it down
from the Precipices of the Mountains which environ the Valley round; insomuch,
that having for many Ages past, made use of this Sand, it still always remains
in the same abundance. He also tells us in the same Book, Chap. 17. that this
Sand has a strange Nature above any other, which is, that it will change any
Metal into Glass that is thrown in among it; and that which is yet more
strange, that all the pieces of Glass made of this Sand, and cast again upon
it, are immediately converted into Sand again: That there is also found among
this Sand a Precious Stone about the bigness of an Acorn, very fine and
transparent.

Tacitus in the 5 th Book of his Annals, makes also mention of this River
Belus, telling us it enters into the Sea of Judea, at the Mouth whereof, the
Sand that is gathered up, by reason of the great quantity of Nitre contained in
it, is easily changed into Glass in the Furnaces. And although the Shore is but
small, that the Sand is notwithstanding inexhaustible. Strabo tells us the same
thing in his 12 th Book, and Pliny in his 6 th, and also Agricola in his
Treatise of Fossils: And one may say, that generally all Authors, who have
spoke of Glass, have made mention of the place where this Sand is gotten,
whereof Glass is made without any other mixture, wherein the Effects of Nature
are to be admired, in affording us so fine and precious a Metal in so base and
common Matter. This ought to be an example to the Curious, and teach them, that
those who seek for the prime Agent of Nature only in rare and precious Matters,
may be grossly mistaken, seeing it may often be found in the most Simple and
Common; and often even in those things we tread under foot: So true it is, that
Wise Nature, or rather the infinite Goodness of God, has so ordained the
Business, that the Poor as well as the Rich, may partake of the most precious
and valuable Treasures, and as easily arrive to that Sovereign, Universal
Medicine, to cure all Diseases; otherwise God could not be said to have
dispensed his Benefits to all Mankind, and his Word, which is infallible, would
not be true, when he says, That he is no respecter of Persons, but that every
one who loves and fears him, shall be accepted by him. Which shows us, that it
is his Will to be known by all Men, and that all those who live in his Laws,
may hope to be possessed of this hidden Treasure, to employ the fruits of it to
his Honor and Glory, which are the true Sentiments all good Christians ought
to have; otherwise they ought never to hope for that Divine Treasure, which God
only manifests to his Elect.

Several Authors have written, and among the rest Pliny, Cassius, and Isidorus,
That in the time of the Emperor Tiberius, who reigned in the time of our
Savior, a certain Person, but Anonymous, an Architect by his Profession,
having by an admirable Piece of Skill, set upright again in the City of Rome, a
great Portico that leaned to one side, and made the Foundation firm and
immovable: Tiberius paid him, and banished him the City, forbidding him to
return. In the mean time this Person had found out the means to make Glass
malleable, and came again to Rome, and presented one of these Glasses to the
Emperor, who, being angry with him for returning without his Leave, flung the
Glass against the ground, which only bruised: That this Workman taking it up
again, immediately mended it with a Hammer upon a little Anvil he had brought
on purpose, expecting for it the Emperor's Pardon; but it happened quite
contrary; for that Prince asking him, if there were any other that knew the
Secret, he answering no, the Emperor immediately caused his Head to be cut off
on the spot, for fear the Knowledge of this Secret, should come to be
propagated to Posterity, and that Gold on that account should come to be no
more valued than Dirt, and consequently all other Metals lose their Esteem and
Value. In short, Glass would be more valuable than Gold, if it were malleable,
by reason of its Transparency.

Our Age, fruitful in great Men, has had no less Advantage in the Reign of the
late King Lewis the Just, than that of Tiberius; since we are assured, That a
certain Learned Man having found out the same Secret (...) calls it by the Name
of Ferretto, nor makes any mention of it.

CHAP. XX. To make Ferretto of Spain for Tinging Glass.
Although Ferretto be found in Mines, yet it may be artificially made much
better, as I shall show in the following Chapter.

Excellent Ferretto used to be made heretofore in Cyprus, and at Memphis, the
Metropolis of Egypt, but it is no more used in France, whether by reason they
make no more of it there, or that we bring it no more from those Places, I
cannot tell.

Neri and Merret, who have written of the Art of Glass, use only Copper or
Brass to make Ferretto: We will give you their Preparations; but true Ferretto
cannot be made without Iron or Steel, although Iron and Copper are somewhat of a
like Nature; since it is easy to convert the former into the latter: wherein
there is far more Virtue for several Operations than i^ the Natural Copper, and
it is finer, more pure, and redder.

An ordinary way of making Ferretto is this; Take Filings of Iron very clean,
and Sulphur beat to Powder, put them in a Crucible Layer over Layer, or first
one Layer of Sulphur, then one of Filings, and so on, beginning and ending with
the Sulphur; which is called Stratification, or Stratum super Stratum. After
that you must cover the Crucible with another, or with a Tile, and lute it
close, and set it into a Furnace with Coals round it for six hours, increasing
the Fire every two hours, that is, the two first hours let the Fire or Coals be
half a foot from the Crucible; the two second about a quarter of a foot, and
the two last let it be covered all over with Coals. Then, the Matter being
cooled, you must pound it small, and keep it for Use.

CHAP. XXI. Another Extraordinary Way of making Ferretto of Spain, which is a
great Secret.
THis way of making Ferretto is not common, nor much known; wherefore we will
here teach it for Satisfaction of the Curious. It is of a very wonderful use,
not only for Tinging Glass, but for several Chemical Operations, wherein we
know the use of it, which is very surprising, if a second and further
Preparation be made of it, whereof we shall here make no mention, it being
foreign to our Subject; but take that which serves for Tinging Glass as follows.

Take very fine Steel, for in the Perfection of that consists all the
Excellency of the Work; make it into thin Plates, or file it: also do the same*
with Copper or Brass, viz. make that also into thin Plates, or take the Filings
of it, one part to two of the Steel; put them into a Crucible stratum super
stratum, lute them, and put it on a gentle Fire for Eight Hours, then take it
out, and melt the whole in a Wind-Furnace, then cast it in a Lingot, or in
little Plates, and the business is done.

To make use of this in Glass, you must calcine these Plates, then pound them,
and searce them, and keep that Powder in a Pot close shut up for use.

CHAP. XXII. Another Way of making Ferretto of only Copper, for Tinging Glass.
NEri and Merret give the Name of Ferretto of Spain to the following
Preparations, in this and the next Chapter; asserting that it communicates
several very fine Colors to Glass. The different ways of Calcining Metals,
causes different Effects; which is known to the Experienced in this Art.

If the Ferretto we have taught in the precedent Chapters, be of vast use in
Glass, and very serviceable in Pastes, Enamels, and Glass of Lead, by reason of
the great Resemblance it causes to Precious Stones; this and the following are
of no less use.

Take thin Plates of Copper or Brass, cut them into pieces, and put them into a
Crucible, in the Bottom of which you have laid a Bed of Sulphur pulverized,
then a Layer of Copper; then another of Sulphur, and then again of Copper:
which you must thus continue stratum super stratum, till the Crucible is full.
Then cover over the Crucible with another, or with a Tile, and lute it well,
and dry it, and put it into a Furnace among hot Coals in a good brisk Fire for
the space of two hours. Then take out the Crucible, let it cool, and you will
find the Copper or Brass calcined, which will break and crumble between your
fingers like dry earth, of a blackish Color. You must pound it to a fine
Powder, and searce it and keep it in a Vessel well closed for use.

CHAP. XXIII. Another Way of making Ferretto of only Copper for Tinging Glass.
THis second way of making Ferretto is something more troublesome than the
former, but its Effects in Glass are far finer. In this method you must take
Vitriol instead of Sulphur, wherewith you stratifie the thin Plates of Copper
in the Crucible just as in the precedent Chapter, then set this Crucible to
Calcine in the Mouth of a Glass-Furnace, which the Italians call Occhio, and
the French the little Working hole, where it ought to stand for the space of
three days. Then take out the Crucible and add to the Copper new Rows or Layers
of Vitriol, stratifying it as before; then you put the Crucible in a
Reverberatory Fire in the same place as before; which you must continue to do
for six times successively one after another, and then you will have a very
Excellent Ferretto, which you beat to Powder, and it will tinge Glass of
Extraordinary Beautiful Colors.

CHAP. XXIV. To make Crocus Ferri, commonly called Crocus Martis, to color
Glass.
WE will show several ways of preparing Crocus Martis, some more Simple, others
more Extraordinary and Curious, both with and without Liqours or Menstruums,
whereof the effects are different both in tinging Glass, and other uses, to
which it is put. Crocus Martis, which is made without Menstruums, depends on a
very fine Calcination of the Iron, by means of which the Tincture that is
Extracted, gives a very fine red to Glass, and so communicates it self to it,
that it not only manifests it self, but makes all other Metalline Colors
(which Ordinarily are hidden and dead in Glass) appear fair and resplendent.

As to the way of Menstruums, we may say that all Acid and Corrosive juices
which Operate on Copper, will also do the same on Iron, so that you will always
have a red Color, more or less bright, and which may be mixed with Tinctures
of other Metals to cause other different Colors.

We don't in this place understand by our two methods of dry and wet (or with
and without Menstruums) for the preparation of Crocus Martis, those two ways
which the Philosophers speak of, in the same Terms, their dry way or method
being only a certain Vitrified matter, and their wet or Menstruous one, a sort
of sweet Such as Van Helmont's Alkabest.
Liquor without any Corrosive, wherein Metals will dissolve like Ice in warm
Water, and which afterward cannot be reduced again into Metals by any way
whatsoever.

The first way of making Crocus Martis take as follows; Take very fine filings
of Iron, or those of Steel are better, mix them in a Crucible with three parts
of Powdered Brimstone, Stratum super Stratum (Commonly noted thus S S S.)
Calcine them four hours at a very strong Fire, till the Sulphur be Consumed:
then take the Crucible out of the Fire, and let the matter Cool, then grind it
to very small Powder, and searce it through a very fine Sieve, then put that
Powder into a Crucible, and lute it well, and put it into the Mouth of a
Reverberatory Furnace for the space of Fifteen Days or more; and of the Reddish
Color it was before it will become a very deep red almost like Purple: keep it
in a close Vessel for the use of Glass Colors; it will work many wonderful
Effects.

CHAP. XXV. Another way of making Crocus Martis for Coloring of Glass.
THOUGH this second way of making Crocus Martis be very Easy, yet it ought to be
Esteemed; since it tinges Glass of the true red Color of Blood; it is prepared
thus. Take filings of Iron, or, which is better, of Steel; mix them well in
Earthen Pans with strong Vinegar, only sprinkling them so much that they may be
thoroughly wet, spread them in Pans and set them in the Sun till they be dry, or
if the Sun be hid by the Clouds set them in the open Air; then Powder them, and
sprinkle them again with Vinegar, and dry them as before, then Powder them
again, and repeat this Process Eight times; at last grind and searce them well,
and you will have a very fine Powder of the Color of beaten brick, which keep
in close Vessels for use.

This Crocus Martis thus made with Vinegar complies very much with Greens, and
the Emerauld Color of Glass of Lead. It is used also in Pastes for the same
Color with Verdigrease, and in Blacks.

CHAP. XXVI. Another way of making Crocus Martis with Aqua Fortis.
CRocus Martis may be prepared a third way, with Aqua Fortis, by which the red
Color of Iron is made yet more manifest in Glass; wherein it is so very
resplendent and bright, that it seems almost incredible, if experience did not
show it.

Put fine filings of Iron or Steel into glazed Earthen Pans, sprinkle them with
Aqua Fortis, and set them to dry in the Sun, and then reduce them again into
Powder, and repeat this process several times, as you have done with the
Vinegar, in the precedent, Chap. and having obtained a good red Color as
before, Powder it and searce it, and keep it for use.

CHAP. XXVII. Another way of making Crocus Martis with Aqua Regalis.
THis is a fourth way of making Crocus Martis, and perhaps the best of all,
because in them you cannot find such Diversities of Colors as in this.

Dissolve, silings of Iron or Steel, in a Glass Body well Covered, in Aqua
Regalis, that is in Aqua Fortis made Aqua Regalis with sal Ammoniac, as we
shall show in the second Book. Keep them so three days, stirring them every day
well, during which you may add fresh filings little by little, wherein you must
be very Cautious: for it rises so much by Fermentation in the Aqu. Reg. that
it will endanger breaking the Glass or running over. After three days set your
Cucurbite on a gentle Fire, that all the Water may Evaporate till it leaves the
Crocus behind dry, which is admirable for Tinging Glass, which keep for use.

CHAP. XXVIII. Another way to make Crocus Martis.
THis way though it be easy makes a Crocus of no less Virtue and Beauty than the
precedent. To make it take fine filings of Iron or Steel without any rust, let
them stand in a Reverberatory Furnace with a very strong Fire, the heat being
at least to the fourth degree, till it becomes of the Color of Purple. Then
take it out of the Fire, and when it is Cool, put it into a Vessel full of
Water, and stir it briskly about, and then presently pour off the Water into
another Vessel, which you may reiterate. Thus there will remain in the first
Vessel the Iron that is not yet Calcined, which if you please you may put again
into a Reverberatory Furnace; In the second Vessel there will be the Crocus
which set over a gentle Fire to evaporate the Water. But you must not decant
off the Water though it appears clear after it has settled: for though the Crocus
may seem to be precipitated to the bottom, yet the Water Contains the most
subtle parts of it imperceptibly suspended in it. Having well Evaporated the
Water you will have a very red Powder, very fine and Extraordinary, which keep
for use.

CHAP. XXIX. The last way of making Crocus Martis.
THis last way will be of some use to those who shall desire to have the Iron
or Steel Granulated, or in little drops, the Metal whereof is difficult to
Melt. Take a bar of one or the other Metal, of the weight of five or six
pounds, which heat as hot as you can in a Smith's Forge, so that it may Sparkle
when it comes out of the Fire: At the same time another Person must have ready
a long stick of Brimstone and large which is the best for this Operation, and
the Metal coming out of the Fire in the condition we have shown, you must
thrust them one against another over a great Earthen Pan full of warm Water,
into which the Metal will drop in little drops, or granuli, melting like Wax,
when touched by the Sulphur; then you must take those little grains, and
Stratifie them in a Crucible with Powdered Brimstone, and afterward set them
in a Reverberatory-Fire, where they will be reduced to a red Powder, which
grind and searce and keep for your use.

CHAP. XXX. The way to Calcine little Plates of Copper, to tinge Glass of a
blue Color.
WE have shown the way to make Crocus Martis for Coloring Glass, and now we
will show that of Copper, which is very near in nature to the other as we have
remarked; And which dissolves in the same Acids and Corrosives. Venus as well
as Mars (or Copper as well as Iron) gives us different Colors, which proceed
from different ways of preparing them, as we shall see in the following
Chapters.

Merret pretends that Brass gives us a finer blue than Copper, by reason of the
Lapis Calaminaris which is mixed with it, and partly causes the Color.

Of all Metals Copper is only used (as Allay) to give malleability to Gold and
Silver in Coin: It melts easily in an indifferent heat, but it is calcined into
powder with difficulty. There are several ways of Calcining Copper, here follow
five of them by help of fire. The first is of Copper alone without any
addition; the second by the addition of Sulphur; the third by Vitriol; the
fourth of Brass alone diverse ways; the fifth by a preparation of the Vitriol of
Venus. These preparations are the best, and of more value than those prepared
by Spirits and Corrosives. All these different ways of Calcinations and
Preparations of Venus, shall be explained in several Chapters of this Treatise,
whither the curious Reader may have recourse.

The little Plates or Leaves, whereof we are now to show the preparation, are a
sort of Copper or Brass exceeding thin, approaching the Color of Gold, called
Festoons. These Plates are made of this Color by Lapis Calaminaris, which does
not only Color the Copper, but augments its weight; this Brass being well
calcined tinges Glass of a Blue, and Seagreen. The way to calcine it is this.

To avoid the expense of buying new, you may make use of those leaves that have
been already used and worked, they being good, and cut them with Scissers into
little pieces, and put them into a Crucible covered and luted, in the mouth of
a Furnace to Calcine, and let them stand there for four days, at a Coal fire,
so that the leaves may not melt: For then they would be unfit for this use. The
four days being expired, the whole will be calcined, beat them on a Porphury
Stone, and Searce them through a fine Sieve; and you will have a blackish powder,
which you must spread on Tiles, and put it into the same Furnace for four days
longer; then take it out and blow off the ashes that may be fallen on it; then
reduce it again into Powder, searceing it through a fine Sieve as before, and
keep it for use.

You may know when it is well Calcined, if the Glass rises and swells when you
put it upon it, if it does not you must calcine other leaves, those being not
Serviceable by reason they are burnt in the Calcination.

CHAP. XXXI. Another way of Calcining these leaves of Copper to make a very
transparent Red, Yellow, and Chalcedony.
TAke the same leaves as in the precedent Chap. Cut them into small pieces and
Stratifie them with Sulphur pulverized, in a Crucible covered and luted. Then
set them on burning coals at the Mouth of the Oven to Calcine for Twenty Four
hours; then take it out and grind it small; then put it in an Earthen Vessel in
a Reverberatory Furnace, where leaving it 10 hours, take it out and powder it,
then keep it for use.

CHAP. XXXII. To calcine Copper to a Red Powder, which serves in several
Processes for coloring Glass.
Although Copper be of the same nature as Brass, which serves to Color Glass
blue, yet there is some difference between them, for the latter will tinge it
of several Colors, which proceeds from the Lapis Calaminaris, and some other
mixtures in the preparation.

To make this powder, Take what quantity you please of Copper in thin plates,
put it into a great Crucible into the Furnace, till it be calcined, without
melting; then being cooled, reduce it into powder which will be very red, and
searce it; whereof you may make diverse uses as we shall show hereafter.

CHAP. XXXIII. To make Copper thrice calcined for coloring Glass.
THE same red Powder in the preceding Chapter serves here. Take of that Powder
and put it on Tiles, and calcine it again in the Furnace four days; it will
become black, and coagulated into one Mass: Powder it and searce it, calcine it
again 5 or 6 days in the same Furnace, and it will become gray without
coagulating any more, or running into Lumps, and will be in a condition fit to
be dissolved. Of this Powder which the Italians call Ramina di Trecotte, is
made Sky-colour'd blue, the color of Turcois, the green of Emerald, and
several other colors. It must not be calcined above thrice, for it would no
longer Color Glass. You may know if it be calcined well, by casting some of it
in a Pot of boiling Glass; if it swells as we have said before, if not, you
must set it yet Twenty Four hours longer in the Furnace, or rather begin a new
Process.

CHAP. XXXIV. Another way of making thrice calcined Copper with less charge and
more ease.
WOrkmen who seek ways to spare their pains, will find this way of Calcination
less Expensive than the others, and almost of equal beauty: Take the Scales
which the Brasiers make when they hammer Pans, Kettles, or other works of
Brass, as being much cheaper than new Copper. To calcine these Scales there is
no need of Stratification as we have shown before in other Copper, which is
troublesome; they need only be well washed from all foulness; and being well
dried, put them into one or more Crucibles, and set them just into the Mouth of
the Reverberatory-Furnace for the space of four days: Being at length cooled,
pound or grind them and fearce them. Then set that powder a second time in the
same Furnace to reverberate during four days longer; and you will have little
Balls of a black Color, which you must pound and searce again, and then put
them the third time into the Reverberatory; and after four other days reduce
them to powder as before; thus it will be prepared with less Expense, and as
good to color Glass, which will be easy to see by making trial on melted
Glass: For if it makes it rise when you cast it on, it is right.

CHAP. XXXV. Another Calcination of Copper called Aes ustum.
THe best and finest Aes ustum we have in France is brought from Holland; but
several curious persons make it themselves far finer. That which makes the
Beauty of the Dutch is the Sea Salt, that they add to the Sulphur, and which
they mix together in Powder to stratifie the Copper in a Crucible covered and
luted as we have shown; they take of Sulphur and one third of Seawater Salt;
then they put the crucible on a hot fire of Coals, where they leave it till the
Sulphur be wholly consumed* After that they take it out and it is of an
Iron-gray, and reddish within: the Tincture it gives Glass is very fine, and it
is also serviceable for other Uses.

CHAP. XXXVI. Another better way of making Aes ustum.
CUrious Gentlemen who employ themselves sometimes in Chemistry, and do not
grudge their time and charge as the Workmen do who get thereby their
livelihood; have far finer and more Ingenious preparations of aes ustum, which
render it of greater virtue, and more Power to tinge, We will only give the
reader one of them.

Take thin Plates of the Reddest Copper which is the hardest sort, make it
red-hot in a Crucible or otherwise, then extinguish it in a Lee of Urine,
wherein common Salt has been dissolved; and reiterate this process till the
Copper become of the color of Gold both within and without. After that you
must cement those Plates with two parts of Sulphur, two parts of Saltpeter,
and one part of Vitriol calcined ad rubedinem, the whole reduced to powder,
wherewith you must stratifie those Plates in a Crucible, pressing close each
Layer or Row; then you must cover it with another Crucible mouth to mouth, the
upper having a hole bored at bottom, then lute them well together. The Lute
being dry put the Crucible in a Wheel-Fire.
Round Fire during six hours, and hot ashes underneath. The first two hours the
fire must be one foot distant from the Crucible the two second hours one half
foot nearer; and the two last hours quite close covering the Crucible; You must
take special care that the matter does not melt, and that the fire be not too
great, for that would spoil all. The Crucible being cold, you must take it out,
and emptying the matter pound it well; this is what we call Aes ustum. To make
it fit for use you must wash it, to take away the Sulphur, and then dry it and
keep it in a close Vessel.

There are other curious Persons who make an Aes ustum yet finer than this, and
more penetrating in Colors; but the preparation is more costly and requires
more time; for instead of Brimstone and Saltpeter they make use of a purified
Sulphur and fixed with Sal Ammoniac; and instead of ordinary red Vitriol they
use Roman Vitriol which they prepare with Lee of Urine, and a fusil Salt, which
afterward they put in a reverberatory. But since the others serve well enough
for coloring Glass, and are easier to make, we shall not here give you the
preparation of this last which would be too long, and being more serviceable to
several other purposes which Experience testifies.

CHAP. XXXVII. The way to make Crocus Veneris.
SInce we have shown the way to make Crocus Martis, it is but reasonable we
should now show you how to make Crocus Veneris. We cannot pass by in silence
the Crocus which may be made of the Aes ustum, we have taught in the Precedent
Chap. though we are certain the Glass-Makers will not make use of it, by reason
of the length of time required for preparing it: But the curious who are
Ignorant of it will be glad to know it, wherefore we here show it to oblige
them. Take as much aes ustum of the Precedent Chap. as you please, add to it
its weight of good Verdigrease, and as much Sal Ammoniac fixed and fusil; pound
the whole together well, and dry them over the fire in an Iron Fire-shovel:
Then pour into the shovel Lee of Urine, and make the whole boil till the Lee be
entirely consumed; Then put on more of the same Lee; boil it till the Lee be
consumed as before, and reiterate it a third time. Then pound or grind the
Matter and put it in a Reverberatory to Calcine well, then pound it again into
an impalpable Powder, and put it into an Earthen glazed Pot; pour upon the same
Lee of Urine, wherein you dissolve it, viz. to each pound of Lee, four ounces
of Sal Armoniack fixed and fusil. Then boil the whole over a little fire in
ashes for a quarter of an hour, then decant off that Lee into some fit Vessel,
for that will contain the Tincture of the aes ustum, and of the Green which it
has Extracted. Put more Lee upon the Matter, and boil it yet a quarter of an
hour over the same Fire, then decant off that Lee to the former; thus continue
to water it with fresh Lee and decant it off to the former as long as it will
extract any Tincture from the matter. Then take all these tinctured Lees, and
filter them through whited brown paper, then Evaporate three quarters over a
gentle Fire. And put the remainder into an Alembick, with the Helm (or head)
on, and the Receiver, and distill it till it be dry: Then you will find at
bottom of the Alembick a Crocus Veneris, of a very wonderful Virtue for
coloring Glass and other Chemical Operations, and some Medicinal Uses.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Another way more easy to make Crocus Veneris.
AS those who apply themselves to this Art, are not all equally curious in
their Work, and good husbandry being in fashion in this Age; we will show some
more easy ways, and more ready to make Crocus Veneris, whereof this is one.

Take very thin Plates of Copper, put them into an earthen Pot with common
Salt, S. S. S. and put this pot on the Furnace, where let it stand till the
matter be very red: Then put the Plates with the Salt into cold Water, and wash
them well to take away all Blackness. Reiterate the stratification of these
plates with common Salt, calcining them at the fire, and washing them as
before, as often as you please. After the last time pour warm water on that
where the Plates have been extinguished, and then let it stand still some time,
then empty it, and you will find at the bottom of the vessel a Crocus Veneris
red as blood. You must wash it well several times to cleanse it, then dry it
well with a linen cloth, and keep it for use to color Glass.

There are some who content themselves to take Aes ustum, prepared with Sulphur
and common Salt, as we have shown heretofore, and to heat it red-hot in the
Fire nine times, and quench it as often in Linseed Oil; then dry it and powder
it.

CHAP. XXXIX. Another easy way of making Crocus Veneris.
WE now give another easy way of making Crocus Veneris. Take of Copper simply
calcined one part, of Sulphur vivum eight parts well powdered; mix them
together in a large Crucible, which then set on a Coal-fire in a little
Furnace, stirring the Matter continually with an Iron Rod, till the Sulphur be
consumed; and reiterate this Process five or six times, then cast it thus
refined into an Earthen Pan of boiling Water, stir it often with a Stick while
the Calx descends to the bottom, then the Water being settled and clear,
evaporate to extract the Crystals, or rather evaporate the whole, and you will
find at bottom of the Vessel a Crocus Veneris very fine and red.

CHAP. XL. The first Color of Seagreen for a Tincture of Glass.
THE Color of Seagreen is given by the Italians to Beryl, which is a Precious
Stone found at the Foot of Mount Taurus, by the River Euphrates, which has the
Green-blue of the Sea. It is found in the Indies of a Color somewhat paler,
which makes it be called by different Names, and when the Color is deeper,
they commonly pass for other Precious Stones: It is therefore the Water
expresses its Color. We will treat more largely of it in our fifth Book,
wherein we shall show the way of imitating Precious Stones.

This Color, which is one of the finest Sky-Colours, ought to be made in fine
and well purified Crystal, which the Italians call Bollito, for if you make it
in common Glass it is not so fair: You must likewise put no Manganese in this
Color. To make it therefore very fine and beautiful, Take Crystal-Fritt, put
it in a Pot in the Furnace, where being well melted and clear, you must skim
off the Salt, which will swim on the top like Oil, with an iron Ladle: for if
you should not take it off, the Color would be foul and oily. The Matter being
well purified, you must add to it, to every 20 pounds or thereabouts, 6 Ounces
of the Powder of Copper calcined, as we have taught in Chapt^^ XXX. with a
fourth part of Zaffer prepared, also in Powder, and well mixed both together;
in p^^ting both these Powders into the Pot on the Cr^stalline Metal, you must
do it little by little, for fear the Crystal rising and swelling should run
over, whereof care must be taken, stirring it well all the while. This being
done, let the Metal stand still and settle for the space of three hours, that
the Color may incorporate, then stir it again: then the Workman may make a
proof of the Color. Twenty four hours after the mixing of the Powders it may
be wrought, for by that time it will be well colored; but the Workman must
first well mix the whole, for fear the Color should not be precipitated to the
Bottom. Which must always be well observed in all Vessels wherein there are
Colors, and the Doses of the Tinctures rightly proportioned to the Crystalline
Metal in the Pots, according to the quantities we have set done.

CHAP. XLI. Another Sky-Colour, or Seagreen.
YOU must use, for this Color, which is a little close, the same Crystal-Frit
as in the precedent, made with Rochetta or Polverine of the Levant; and having
filled a Pot of it, let it be well purified, and take off the Salt that swims
on the top; then put to it 20 Pound of Metal, six Ounces of the Powder of
calcined Copper little by little, stirring it, well, observing the same Rules
we gave for Seagreen before. Then you will have a very admirable Color, which
you may make lighter or deeper as you please. Two hours after stir it again
well, and you will see if the Color pleases you; in which case let it stand
still 24 hours without any stirring, and then it may be wrought as before.

CHAP. XLII. Another Seagreen color in Artificial Crystal, which the Italians
call Bollito.
THese colors are not to be made without a great deal of Precaution, which
this needs as much as any. To succeed well, you must have in the Furnace a Pot
filled with 40 pound of good Crystall^Fritt, carefully skimm'd, boiled, and
purified, without any Manganese: having arrived thus far, you must take 12
Ounces of the Powder of Small leaves of Copper thrice calcined, as we have
shown chap. XXX. And half an ounce of Zaffer in Powder, prepared as in chap.
XVII. Mix these Powders together, then put them at four times into the Pot,
that they may the better mix with the Glass, stirring them at each time well,
as you put them in, for fear it should swell too much, and run over. Two hours
after the whole is incorporated, well mixed, and pretty well settled, try if
your color is deep enough then let it rest, though the Seagreen or sky color
seems at first Greenish you need not be concerned at that: For the Salt in the
Glass will consume all that Greenness, and change it into Blue.

After your Metal has stood at rest 24 hours, it may be wrought, and you will
have the color deeper or lighter, according to the quantity of Powder you have
used in it. There is no other Rule in that, but the Fancy of the Workman,
which is the reason it cannot be ascertained; besides the Matter we use to
tinge Glass, makes it have some more color, some less, which proceeds from the
Preparation of it.

CHAP. XLIII. A fine Sky-Colour or Seagreen in Crystal.
THis fine Color requires a Crystal Fritt well purified from its Salt, as we
have noted before; and which has not been put into Water. Put 60 Pounds in a
Pot, and having well prepared it, put in one Pound and half of Scales of Copper
in Powder, the Preparation whereof we have shown in Chapter XXXIV. with four
Ounces of Zaffer prepared and mixed together; and stir the whole well with the
Glass for the space of two hours. Then see whether you like the Color, then
let it stand at rest 24 hours; then stir the whole again, as before, that it be
well mixed with the Glass and the Color incorporated with it; then it may be
wrought. It will give a very fine Blue, as has been often experimented. The
Color may be heightened as you please; but take care you do not make it too
high. If you mix with Fritt of Rochetta, as much Crystal Fritt, you will have as
fine a Blue as can be wished.

CHAP. XLIV. Another Sky-Colour or Seagreen, made with less charge, to color
Glass.
THough, this Color be inferior to the last, yet it has its Beauties
sufficient to satisfy both the Sight, and pay the Pains of the Workman. He
must take the same Preparation of Scales of Copper, we have mentioned in the
precedent Chapter, and the same Dose of Zaffer, with as much Crystal made of
Rochetta of the Levant, and Barillia of Spain, without any Manganese either in
the one or other, and which has not been cast into Water, but well purified
from its Salt; observing in this place all we have noted to be done in the
other Preparations of Crystal and Seagreen in the preceding Chapters, and
you will have a fine Sky-Colour or Seagreen, fit for any Use.

CHAP. XLV. Another Seagreen far finer than the rest.
NEri seems to be the Inventor of this new Seagreen, and to have first
Experimented it. It is made with Caput Mortuum of Neri says of the Spirit of
V.V.
Vitriol of Venus without any Corrosive, which is a very curious preparation,
we will show it at the End of the 7th Book. This Caput Mortuum ought to be
exposed to the Air for some days, in a place where the Sun cannot come, where
(by a Magnetical Virtue) it will attract the Universal Spirit; which will
restore to it again Part of that it has lost by Extraction it has Suffered, and
will become of a whitish green Color. Then pound it with the same dose of
Zaffer prepared as in Chap. 43. put the whole into a Pot filled with Crystal
Metal, very fine and well purified from its Salt, observing all we have noted
on this Subject; and it will make an extraordinary fine Seagreen.

CHAP. XLVI. To make a green Emerald-Colour in Glass.
WE will pass from Blue to Green, and from Venus to Mars, which enters into the
preparation of this. For making this Emerald Color, take common Glass well
purified from its Salt, without Manganese, as we have shown in Chap. 12. Put it
in a Pot in the Furnace, and when it is well melted and purified, add to it
(for Example) to 100 Pounds of Glass, 3 ounces of Crocus Martis Calcined with
Vinegar as in Chap. 25. mix well the Glass at the same time to make it
Incorporate with the Crocus, then let it rest an hour, that it may thoroughly
take the Color. This way nothing will come out Yellowish, and it will lose
that Foulness and Blueness which the common Metal always has, and it will
become Green. Then add to the same dose of 100 Pounds of Glass 2 Pound of the
Scales of Copper thrice calcined as in Chap. 34. And put it in at Six diverse
times, Mixing it well each time with the Glass, then let it stand 2 hours to
imbibe the Tincture. After 2 hours stir it again, and see if it be as you would
have it; if the Color be too Blue you must add to it some Crocus Martis
prepared as before and you will have a very fine Emerald Color. Twenty four
hours after, mix it as before; and then you may work it as you Please.

CHAP. XLVII. Another Emerald green more fair than the preceding.
THe more pure the matter is, the finer the work will be that is made with it:
Thus to make a more fair Emerald green than the preceding, take Crystal Fritt
without Manganese, which has been twice washed in water to take out all the
Salt; and put it in a Pot in the Furnace: Then add to it half of common White
Metal also without Manganese. These two matters being well melted, mixed, and
purified, put to 100 pound of metal 2 pound and a half of powder of Copper
Plates thrice calcined, prepared as in Chap. 33. with 2 ounces of Crocus Martis
Calcined and Reverberated with Sulphur as in Chap. 24. After having mixed them
well together: You must put in those Powders at six different times, stiring
well the matter each time, and Moreover observe all we have said in the Preced.
Chap. You may make the Color Lighter on Deeper, as you please, adding Crocus
Martis if it be too Blue, and Calcined Powder of Venus if it be not enough so;
you will have from this a surprising Burnet Green.

CHAP. XLVIII. Another wonderful Green.
Although this Color is very admirable, yet we only make use of it in common
Glass, made with Polverine and without Manganese. Being well melted and
purified, you must put in equal parts of Powder of Scales of Copper thrice
calcined, and Scales of Iron which fall from the Smith's Forge, without any
other preparation than well washing them, to cleanse them from Ashes and Coals
that mingle with them; afterward well dry them, and Pound them as fine as you
can and searce them: These Scales serve in room of Crocus Martis. You must
observe the doses and way of Proceeding as we have heretofore noted, in Emerald
Colors: These Scales of Iron will give an admirable Green; and they will drive
out all the dull natural Green which is in common Glass, and make it become
Yellowish, or will give it a yellow Green, very Bright and Fair.

CHAP. XLIX. Another Oriental Emerald Green finer than the rest.
TO make this fine Emerald color; put into a Pot 4 pounds of common Fritt of
Polverine, 5 pound of common white Glass Pulverized, 5 pound of Crystal Fritt
well washed; add to this Composition 3 pound of Minium or Red-Lead, mix them
all together, and in a little time they will be pretty well purified. After
that, cast all that metal into water to Purify it more, taking care that no
part of the Lead sink to the bottom of the Pot wherein it is cast, for it will
break it, if Speedy care be not taken to take up again what is Precipitated.
This Glass thus washed, and after dried ought to be put in the Pot again, to be
melted and Purified during the space of one day; then you must add a little of
the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol of Venus without Corrosive, whereof we have spoken
Chap. 45. with a little Crocus Martis: stirring the metal, and moreover
proceeding as we have shown in the Preceding Chapter. Then you will have an
admirable Oriental Emerald Green, which may be wrought as you please. The
Minium or Red-Lead, we speak of may be had at any Drugsters; yet you may make
it with common mineral Lead, which is better in this Operation than that in
Pigs, and cheaper. Pound it well, then calcine it at a good Fire, and it will
be reduced to a Red Powder.

CHAP. L. The way of making Turcois blue, a particular Color in this Art.
WE ought to have put this Color of Turcois after the Blue, and before the
Green, but because it is a particular and principal Color, we thought it would
not be amiss to conclude this book with it. For this color take a pot full of
Crystal Fritt tinged of an Aqua-Marina Color or Blue, whereof we have given
several preparations; which color must be fair and full, for all depends on
that. It being well melted put into it little by little sea salt decrepitated,
white and reduced to Powder, mixing it well and softly as we have noted in
speaking of other Metalline Colors; and the Blue from clear and transparent
will become thick, for the Salt penetrating the Glass takes away its
Transparency, and causes a Paleness; hence alone comes the Turcois Color used
in Glass. When the Color is right to the Workman's Fancy, it must be presently
wrought, for the Salt will evaporate, and make the Glass transparent and
disagreeable. If in working this Metal the Color fades or goes off, you must
add a little more of the same decrepitated Salt as before, and the Color will
return.

We will here advertise the Workman, that he must take care that his Salt be
well decrepitated, otherwise it will always crackle, and be apt to fly in his
Eyes, and endanger his Sight. You must (as I have said) put in the Salt by
Intervals, till the Color Pleases you.

It will suffice for this use, that the Fritt tinged Aqua-Marina or Blue, be
made of one half Crystal Metal, and the other of Rochetta, and the Color will
be very fair and good.

The End of the First BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK II.
CHAP. LI. Wherein is shown the art of making Chalcedony of the Color of Agats
and Oriental Jasper; with the way to prepare all Colors for this purpose. To
make Aquafortis and Regalis, necessary in this business. The way of preparing
and calcining Tartar, and uniting it with the Red Color of its own kind called
by the Italians Rosichiero, which produces Glass of many Colors with
undulations in them very pleasant to behold, and gives it an Opacity like
Oriental Stones.
BEfore I proceed to the Explication of these preparations, it will be
necessary to show those of some Minerals used for such Compositions. And
although one may buy several of them Publicly, ready made, yet our design
being to make this work as perfect as we can, it will be necessary that we show
the Chemical way of preparing them after the best manner, by which the curious
in this Art may do it themselves for less charge than they can buy them. There
is no doubt, but that the Metalline matters made use of to tinge Glass, may
give it several colors more lively and brighter than any it receives in the
ordinary Furnaces, when these matters are artfully prepared, and their
Metalline Colors are choicely picked out and Collected, and well purified from
Heterogeneous matters which hinder the communication of their Tincture to the
Glass. The color of Chalcedony, or rather the matter whereof it is made, is
nothing but an Amassement of Several Colors which may be made in Glass, and
which many are not acquainted with. We will show the whole process and the way
of well succeeding in it. It is most certain that all the Colors we can
extract will never give that Beauty and Splendour to Glass which is desired, if
they be not well prepared. You must therefore for this purpose well calcine and
dissolve the metals with Aqua Fortis. You must open the Copper, Sulphur,
Vitriol and Sal Ammoniac and other minerals with a great deal of patience, and
prepare them at a gentle Fire, the violence of the fire being very noxious in
this affair as well as in others, which very often renders Operations
defective, which otherwise would succeed well, among those who are impatient or
ignorant. You must observe Regularity in all those Cases we shall treat of, and
exact proportions of the Doses, and put them in, in fit and due time, otherwise
the Process will miscarry; especially in the Red Color whereof we treat in the
8th Book, and in the Tartar that it may be perfectly Calcined. You must yet
further observe that the Metal be well Boiled, well Purified, and made fit for
Working; then proceed in it as diligent Workmen ought to do. Thus you may
perfectly imitate Agat, oriental Chalcedony, with the Fairest and most
Beautiful Colors, and wavings, so lively and full, that it will seem as if
nature her self could not arrive to the like perfection, or art imitate it. Yet
experience shows us that in several things, and in particular in this Art of
Coloring Glass, that Art cannot only imitate nature, but also far surpass her.
The Eye and Fancy shall be judge, in the three ways which we will show, where
every thing shall appear so distinctly, that the curious shall easily
understand it, and all that will apply themselves to it may succeed therein, if
they do not deviate from these precepts. If they are well put in practice,
you will find more than we can tell you.

CHAP. LII. The way to prepare Aquafortis, which dissolves Silver and
Quicksilver.
THERE are several sorts of Aqua-Fortis's, prepared after different manners,
appropriated to the different Uses they are designed for; but all of them
always with Saltpeter or Nitre, which is the principal ingredient in
Aquafortis. That we shall here Treat of being not an Ordinary one, may pass
for one of those that have a peculiar Composition. For this Water, take 1 pound
of Nitre or Saltpeter refined, three Pound of Roch-Allom calcined on the
Fire-Shovel; and four Ounces of Crystalline Arsenick, the whole reduced into
Powder, to which add seven Ounces of Neri says Lime.
fine Sand; and having well mixed the whole Composition, put it into a Glass
Cucurbit, always leaving part of it Empty, being filled, lute the Cucurbit well
with a strong lute, whereof we will give you the preparation at the end of this
Chapter. But before you put the Cucurbite or Body on, you must lay Sand four
Inches deep, and thick Iron-Bars to bear the weight, then fit a head, and lute
the joints well, with a lute made of fine Flour and Lime powdered, and mixed
with whites of Eggs: then put on the Joints roulers of fineLinen, then lute it
again and then put on Linen roulers again, three or four times, each time
letting it dry before you put on the next rouler. And then this will bear the
Violence of the Fire, and the penetrating force of the Spirits of the
Aquafortis.

After that, you must put this Body of the Alembick in a deep Earthen-Pan, made
of the same Earth as Crucibles, filled with Sand, so that it be buried in the
Sand to within two Inches of the joints; then set it in a Wind Furnace fit, and
capable to maintain an equal Fire. We here give you the figure of it, this
Furnace may serve for several uses, as we will hereafter Explain.

Your Alembic being thus fitted, you must put to the head a Glass Receiver very
capacious, the better to resist the force of the Spirits, otherwise all may
break. Lute it well to the Mouth of the Alembic, as you did the joints before,
and with the same precaution of letting it dry each time in the Air, taking
care not to kindle the Fire in the Furnace, till the lute of all the joints be
dry, for that is very necessary.

The whole being thus in right order, kindle a small coal Fire for the space of
three hours, during which time the windy humor that is in the Materials, and
which would break them will be drawn of into the Receiver. So continue a
moderate Fire for six hours, then increase it little by little, putting on at
last billets of dry Oaken-Wood to the coals, for six hours more, till the
Alembic or head begin to be tinged yellow, and the Spirits begin to rise.
Observe to continue this Regimen or degree of Fire, till the head and receiver
begin to grow red; then augment it till the Alembic become of a deep red;
continue this degree of the Fire as long as that Color lasts, till all the
Spirits are drawn of, and the Head and Receiver begin by degrees to grow clear,
and reassume their common Color in cooling; which sometimes will be two days
first. Notwithstanding you must continue the Fire some time afterward; then let
the Furnace cool of its self; taking care, that whilst the Alembic and Receiver
are still red, and the Fire in force, that you admit no cool Air into the
place, and that nothing cold touch them, which would break them. When all is
cold, cover the head and receiver with wet Linen clothes, that the Spirits
(which are about the Head and Receiver) may the better sink to the bottom of
the Receiver, and let it stand so twelve hours. Then bath the joints and the
luting with warm Water, that you may the better loosen the bandage, and so take
off the head from the Receiver, otherwise it would be difficult to do it; then
you may break the body which will be good for nothing, and take out the Faeces
which reduce again into Powder: add to each Pound of that Powder, four Ounces
of refined Nitre, and put the whole into a Cucurbit (or Body) whereon pour all
the Aquafortis before distilled; then put on the Head and Receiver, and lute
it and dry it well as you did before; having put it on the same Sand Furnace,
during the first four hours make a gentle Fire, which afterward may be
increased little by little, till the Head and Receiver begin to grow clear and
all the Spirit is drawn over. After which let all cool, covering the Head and
Receiver with wet Clothes; then let it stand twelve hours as before. Then
unlute the joints again with warm Water, and put the Aquafortis into Glass
Vessels well stopped, that the Spirits may not exhale, and keep it so for uses
hereafter to be mentioned. This is the Aquafortis which is commonly called
Water of separation, and the best that can be made. There are some that instead
of Roch-allom take the best Roman Vitriol, or the like. You may know whether
the Vitriol be proper for this use or not by rubbing it on a piece of well
polished Iron; if it be it will leave a Copper Color on it; Then this Vitriol,
the purification whereof we will give in the next Chapter, will make an
Aquafortis far more penetrating than the former.

Now we come to show how to make the lute which we promised, which though common
is very useful in this Case. You must take one Part of Lome (a fat Earth)
which is found in Rivers, 3 Parts of Sand, of common Wood Ashes well sifted,
and of the Shearings of woollen Cloth each one half; mix the whole well
together, and putting water to them make a soft past, to which add one third
part of common Salt Powdered, and work them all well together, then use them in
luting your vessels.

Here follows the description of a useful Furnace, which may serve instead of
several others, the Number whereof would be troublesome, it being proper for
several Operations. To render this Furnace more Intelligible to those who are
not acquainted with it, we have here given a Cut of it, whereon we have marked
A. B. C. the places made use of, with their Names, that they may by the same
Letters here set down again be the better understood. A. is the Ash-hole, into
which all the Ashes, on the Iron Grates which go cross it, fall down, and which
are taken out with a little Iron shovel, or a sort of Iron Peel.

B. is the space or whole room of the Ash-hole.

C. Is the Fire-Grate which ought to be of square Iron Bars lying with the
Edges upwards that the Ashes may not lie thereon, which they would do if the
flats were upwards.

D. is the place where the Fire is made of Coal or Wood.

E. is the Door of it.

F. is several holes wherein are put Iron Bars which go cross from one side to
the other, to keep up the vessels wherein the matters to be worked are
contained, stopping up the other holes that are not used with Lute.

G. is the Work hole, or little Laboratory of the Furnace.

H. is a semicircular opening with the like hole in the Cover to put the neck
of the Retort through, when you distill in a Reverberatory, or otherwise.

I. is the inner part of the Work-hole of the Furnace.

K. is two Registers.

L. is the Cover of the Furnace for 8 Registers.

M. is a round hole which serves for a Register to Reverberate, and to pass the
neck of the Matrasses through which are in Balneo, whether in digestion or
otherwise.

N. is the Registers which are to be opened or shut to augment or diminish the
heat of the Fire of the Reverberatory.

This Furnace, very useful in a little Laboratory, may serve for most part of
our works. First of all for a wind Furnace for several operations if the vessel
containing the matter be so accommodated in the work-hole, that the fire may
touch it immediately. It may be also serviceable for Fusion of several
Metalline matters which we Employ for Tinctures, to calcine them, vitrifie
them, make Enamels, etc. If it be open at the bottom where the Ash-hole is, and
placed upon an Iron Trevet; and besides that, covering the top with two Cases
the better to keep in the heat.

2. For a Reverberatory Furnace, if you cover the work-hole with its cover, or
door, and shut the Registers, the vessel containing the Materials being exposed
to the naked flame.

3. For a Balneum Mariae, if you put into the hole a Copper Vessel of the same
Diameter, in shape of a Copper, the bottom whereof must be strong and flat, and
fill it with hot water, wherein you may put the Vessel that contains your
matter: Which if it be a Mattress or Bolt-head, you may let the Neck out at the
hole at the middle of the Cover, which covers the Balneum (or vessel full of
water.)

4. For a Balneum Vaporosum, by putting in the same hole, a vessel full of
water that shall rise in vapors: And in that vessel, another which shall
contain the materials two Inches above the water, shutting this vessel with a
fit cover least the vapors Exhale.

5. For a Balneum Aereum, or dry bath, by putting in the same hole a vessel
filled with hot Air shut close, and therein also another vessel with the
Materials.

6. For a Sand or Ash Furnace, and with filings of Iron, if the vessel put in
the hole, and which is exposed to the naked Fire be filled with Sand, Ashes, or
Filings of Steel, and that you pu^ in the one or the other, the vessel that
contains the matter you are to work on.

7. For a Lamp Furnace, if in place of the Bars below you put a Porringer full
of Ashes, to contain the Vessel wherein your matter is; provided you put also a
Glass Bell on that Vessel to cover it that must stand on the Brim or Ledges of
the Porringer, well sitted to it, to preserve the heat that arises: and then
put under that Porringer the Lamp on a little Trevet.

In short, this Furnace may serve for almost all Chemical Operations
whatsoever, which would be too long here to mention.

CHAP. LIII. The way of purifying Vitriol to make Aquafortis stronger and more
penetrative.
WE have promised in the preceding Chapter, to show the way of purifying
Vitriol, which consists in taking away its Yellowness, which alone hinders the
good effects it is capable of producing.

Take Roman Vitriol, the best you can get; dissolve it in common warm Water,
then let it stand three days; then filter it, and fling away the yellow Faeces;
then evaporate in Glass Bodies two thirds of the Water, and put the Remainder
into Earthen glazed Pans, and set it in a cool place for the Crystals of it to
shoot, which in 12 hours time they will do, about the Brims of the Pans in
little transparent pieces, like natural Crystal of an EmeraldColour; and at
bottom there will remain a sulphurous Sediment, which must be carefully
separated, and cast away.

Then you must take all those little green Crystals, and dissolve them again in
warm Water, as before, and then filter and evaporate them in the same Glass
Bodies: And set them again to crystallize, as before, in a cool place, taking
care to separate all the yellow Faeces you find. Reiterate this Process of
disolving, and filtering, evaporating, and crystallizing the third time; then
you will have a well purified and refined Vitriol.

We will here add for the sake of the curious, that those who make use of
Vitriol instead of Roach-Allum, to make Aquafortis, the Preparation whereof we
have shown in the precedent Chap. ought to take a special care in the
Distillation, that as soon as the Red Fumes are passed, all the Spirits of Nitre
are raised, and that then the Fire must be extinguished; for that which follows
after, is only Spirit of Vitriol, which hinders the Operation of the Spirit of
Nitre in the Solution of Metals.

You may also draw a parting Water in 12 hours time, (as some Refiners do)
during which time, but little Spirit of Vitriol can arise with their fires.

CHAP. LIVE. The way to make Aqua Regalis for the solution of Gold and other
Metals, except Silver.
AQua Regalis, is nothing but a common AquaFortis, wherein you dissolve of its
weight of Sal-Armoniac. But to have a good and strong Aqua-Regalis you must
take one pound of Aquafortis prepared as in Chap. 52. put it in a Glass
Mattress, and add to it only 2 Ounces of Sal Ammoniac, then put the Mattress into
a warm Bath or Pan, of warm Water, and stir it often, that the Sal ammoniac may
be well dissolved in the Aquafortis, which will be tinged of a yellow Color.
Then you must add as much Sal-Armoniac to it as the AquaFortis can dissolve,
then let it settle a little; and the Sal-Armoniac will leave at the bottom all
its Terrestreity. After that decant it gently off into another Vessel, so that
you don't trouble the settling at bottom, or rather filter it through
whited-brown Paper. This Water will dissolve Gold and other Metals, far better
than the common Aqua Regalis, except Silver, which it touches not at all, for
reasons which Chemists are acquainted with.

CHAP. LV. Another way of making Aqua-Regalis far stronger than the former.
OUr Design being not only to show Operations and Processes proper for Glass,
but also for the sake of Gentlemen chymically inclined, whose Curiosities are
not contented with what is common, or with ordinary Preparations; those which we
here give of Aqua-Regalis are among the number of those, whose Virtues are far
above the common Preparations, they more intimately penetrating and dissolving
Gold and other Metals than others, rendering them more volatile, and
consequently more proper to be drawn over in Distillations.

The first is that which some Philosophers call the Water of the two Champions,
which is made with two parts of purified Sulphur, two parts of purified
Sal-Armoniac, and one part of calcined Flints, all reduced to powder, and mixed
well together. Then take an earthen Retort, which must have a little hole on
the back (or Curvature) on the upper side, through which you may put in the
Ingredients. For the more safety sake, you may lute the Body of the Retort over
well, and let it dry; then put it in the Furnace we have described chap. LII.
and fit to it a great Glass Recipient (by reason of the violence of the
Spirits) wherein you may put a little common Water to attract them; lute the
Joints of them as you do for Aquafortis, and let them be well dried before you
kindle the fire, for Reasons we have elsewhere assigned.

The Lute being dry, and all in right Order, you must begin by a gentle fire,
that the Retort may grow warm by degrees, and afterward gradually increase it
till it grow red-hot. Then put in at the Hole of the Retort four Ounces at a
time of the Ingredients you have prepared, and stop it again presently. Doing
thus you will see in a little time* great quantities of cloudy Vapors arise,
and pass into the Receiver, and fill it, which will dissolve little by little,
mixing themselves with the common Water, and the Receiver will grow clear.
As Soon as you perceive this, you must put four Ounces more of your Ingredients
into the Retort, and give time for the Vapors (arising again) to dissolve as
before; then reiterate this Process till all your Ingredients are distilled
off. Then unlute your Receiver, and pour the Liquor into an Alembick, and draw
off the Phlegm in Balneo Mariae, and rectify it in an Ash-Fire: Then your
Water will be made, and fit to dissolve any Metal but Silver.

CHAP. LVI. Another way of making Aq. Reg. more easy, and with less precaution.
THIS second way of making Aq. Reg. will be more easy than the former, and the
Water of as much force. Take 1 pound of good Saltpeter, powder it, and mix it
with 3 Pound of Potters Clay, or Flints calcined to Powder; put the whole into
a Glass Retort well luted, and sit to it a great Receiver, lute the Joints
well, then put it in a reverberatory Furnace, and distill it according to Art in
a gradual Fire. When all the red Spirits are passed over, as we have explained
in speaking of Aq. fortis in the 52 Chapter. Then draw off the Phlegm in Balneo
Mariae (which the Chemists and we hereafter will note by the two Letters B. M.)
then rectify it in an Ash Furnace, and keep it for use.

Then take a Pound of Sal Ammoniac, well powdered, and mix it with four Pound
of Wood-Ashes, (out of which you have before extracted all the Salt with warm
Water) then put the whole into a Retort, sit a Receiver to it, and distill it in
a Sand-Furnace, and the Spirit of the Sal Ammoniac will pass over into the
Receiver.

Then unlute your Receiver, and take off that Phlegm of the Spirit in B. M. and
rectify it in Ashes. This done, take equal parts of each of these Spirits;
then mix them together and distill them in an AshFurnace. Then you will have a
strong Menstruum for dissolving Gold.

I cannot here omit, that the Spirit of Seawater Salt distilled as Saltpeter,
has the same effects as the Water of the 2 Champions whereof we have given the
Preparation in the preced. Chap. and as that we have just now treated of; and
in the mean while is not so sharp nor corrosive. You must, to make it
succesfully, take 3 parts of Spirits of Seawater Salt, and add to it one part
of Saltpeter, then distill it together in an Ash-Furnace, the better to unite
them. Then you will have an Aqua Regalis, which will dissolve Gold sooner than
the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, and which will make it rise and pass over in the
Receiver; thus you may this easy way make it more fit for the use you design
it for.

But notwithstanding this, you must not imagine that this Solution of Gold is a
radical and total one, because it will pass over in an Alembic, and that so it
is reduced into a Species of Aurum potabile: For there is nothing but the one
Sovereign Menstruum of the Philosophers, which has that virtue, as being
homogeneous to it, and formed of it. That is the only Liquor in which it can
putrisie and be totally resolved, and regenerated again after the manner of the
Phoenix, to become a Spiritual and Glorious Body, capable of performing all
those wonderful Effects ascribed to it.

CHAP. LVII. The way to Calcine Tartar.
WE have already given one Preparation of Tartar in Chap. 15. both for the
Calcination of it, and to extract the Salt; and we have largely shown in Chap.
5. of what importance it is to dry it thoroughly: For that reason we will not
repeat it here, but refer the Reader thither.

To make this Calcination, which is easy, Take Tartar in great lumps, the
thickest and most shining you can get, blow away all the Powder, then put it in
new Earthen Pots upon live Coals, or in a little Furnace, where you must leave
it till it smoaks no more, and all its humidity be exhaled, and it be reduced
into Lumps of a black purplish color; then it is calcined and well prepared.

Tartar may also be calcined by wrapping it in pieces of brown Paper; then lay
a Bed of live Coals, and lay a bundle of it upon them, then another Layer or
Bed of Coals, and on them another parcel of Tartar; continue thus to do S. S.
S. till all your parcels of Tartar are laid on, observing that the upper Layer
be always of Coals; and leave the whole in that State till the Tartar be well
calcined and leaves off smoking; then take it off and blow away the Ashes.

CHAP. LVIII. A way to make a fair Chalcedony in Glass.
Although Chalcedony is not so dear as it has been heretofore, since it is found
in Europe; yet People have not left off counterfeiting it by help of Art, to
make several Works of it no less beautiful than the true, and much cheaper.

We will show three different ways to prepare this Chalcedony, which will make
three different Species of it, all of them very fair, but whose Beauty may be
also augmented by the number of Ingredients we compose them of, and which cause
those Diversities of Colors, which that Stone ought to have.

Among the rest of the Ingredients we employ in this Subject, there are some
that give no color to Glass, as Tartar, Soot, Sal-Armoniac and Mercury. Those
that are of an unctuous Nature, as Lead, Soot, Tartar, the Azure-stone often
hinder the Union of the Ingredients, by reason of the Separation which may
happen by the cooling the Metal; which does not happen to those who know how to
observe the degree of heat, wherein the principal knowledge of this Art
consists.

To make the first sort of Chalcedony: Put two Pound of Aqua fortis (whereof we
have given the Preparation in Chap. 52.) into a Glass Body with a long Neck,
four Ounces of fine Silver in small and thin Plates, or granulated, put the
Body in an Ash Furnace over a soft Fire, or in warm Water, and the Silver will
be presently dissolved. At the same time take another Body and dissolve in it 6
Ounces of Quicksilver in a Pound and half of the same Aqua fortis. After that
pour both the Solutions together into a greater Body, which put in the same
Bath, or warm Water, or Ash-Furnace: then add to it six Ounces of SalArmoniac,
which dissolve over a gentle Fire; then put to it one Ounce of Zaffer, and half
an Ounce of Manganese prepared, little by little, with as much Ferretto of
Spain also little by little, for fear the Matter coming to swell too much
should break the Vessel. Add to all these Ingredients one Ounce of Crocus
Martis calcined with Sulphur; as much Scales of Copper thrice calcined, which
ought to boil like Manganese; as much blue Lake that the Painters use; and the
same quantity of Red Lead, the whole reduced into Powder. In putting in these
Powders you must gently stir the Glass Body, that they may the better
incorporate with the Aqua fortis, nevertheless take care there be not too much
heat; then you must well stop the Matras (or Glass Body) stirring it well every
Day for ten Days, that the Powders may well incorporate, and that they may
always appear as separated from the Water. After that put the great Glass Body
in a Sand-Furnace in a temperate heat, or rather empty it into a GlassCucurbit,
after having luted it at the bottom, and put it over the same Fire, so that the
Aqua fortis may evaporate in 24 Hours, and at bottom of the Vessel you will
have a yellow Powder, which keep safely in Glasses for use. When you are to
make Chalcedony, take white Crystal in Glass, well purified, and that has been
often melted; for Crystal new made is not fit for that Operation, because the
Colors will not stick to it, but are consumed by the Frit. Put about twenty
Pound of this sort of Crystalline Glass into a Pot; and being well melted, put
in about three Ounces of your Yellow Powder at three different times, mix the
Glass well with it each time, that the Powder may incorporate with it, the
Glass being thus well mixed, let it stand an Hour, then mix it once more and
let it stand during 24 Hours: Then mix it again for the last time, and make an
Essay of it, it will give a yellowish Azure color. Having made your Essay, and
found your Matter right, you may take your Pot out of the Furnace, and when it
is cold you will have colors which shall represent Wavings of the Sea, and other
fine things. But to have a very fair Chalcedony, you must make a second
Operation to join to the first, by taking eight Ounces of Tartar calcined, as
we have shown Chap. 41. Two Ounces of Soot of the Chimney well purified, half
an Ounce of Crocus Martis calcined with Sulphur: Mix the whole well together,
then put it into the melted Metal at five or six different times; otherwise the
Impetuous Swelling of the Materials would break the Pot, and the whole would be
lost; which may be avoided by putting it in little by little, stirring it each
time well, that the Matters may incorporate: Make the Pot also boil, then let
it stand twenty four Hours. After which you may work it into what you please,
which put in the Furnace to whiten, and see if the Glass please you; if it be
green without, and blue, white, red, yellow and of other Colors like Jasper
and Oriental Agat. If looking on it obliquely it be red like Fire, and held to
the Sun it show the Colors of the Rainbow by reflection of the Rays; if so,
then it is fit to make all sorts of Vessels which may be polished at the Wheel.
If it be pale and clear, you must add to it more calcined Tartar and Soot as
before, stirring it well to make it incorporate; then let the Glass stand and
purify several Hours, and afterward work it as you please.

Chalcedony is much used for the Effigies of Kings and Princes, for Heads,
Cups, and many other Vessels; principally for making Seals, because it may be
graved easily, and the Wax will not stick to it.

CHAP. LIX. A second Species of Chalcedony.
THE second sort of Chalcedony ought to be finer than the former: The
Preparations are as follow.

Put into a Glass Body a Pound of Aqua fortis, and three Ounces of coppel'd
Silver granulated, the better to dissolve.

In another Glass Body put also a Pound of Aqua fortis, with five Ounces of
Mercury well purified and passed through the Glove, and close it well.

Take likewise another Glass Vessel, and put into it also a Pound of Aqua
fortis, with two Ounces of Sal-Armoniac to dissolve in it.

After it is dissolved add to it Crocus Martis prepared, as in Chap. 27.
Feretto of Spain, of Chap. 22. Copper calcined as in Chap. 32. Leaves of Copper
calcined by means of Sulphur, as in Chap. 31. of each half an Ounce, the whole
reduced into Powder; taking care to put them in one after another, and little
by little, for fear the Vessel should break.

Then put in another Earthen Body, one Pound of Aqua fortis, with two Ounces of
Sal-Armoniac; and the whole being dissolved, add successively as before of good
crude Antimony, of blue Enamel which the Painters use; of red Lead, and of
Vitriol well purified of each one half Ounce; the whole well powdered, and put
in little by little, as we have said, for fear of breaking the Vessel, then
close it well.

Take also another Glass Body, wherein put one Pound of Aqua fortis, and two
Ounces of Sal-Armoniac; being dissolved, add to it two Ounces of prepared
Zaffer, as we have shown in Chap. 17. a quarter of an Ounce of Manganese of
Piedmont also prepared, as in Chap. 18. half an Ounce of thrice calcined
Copper, as in Chap. 33. with an Ounce of Cinnabar; the whole being well
pounded, put it by little and little into the Vessel; taking care (as we have
said) that the Powders don't by too much swelling break the Vessel; then close
it well.

You must have a sixth Vessel of the same bigness with the rest, wherein
likewise put a Pound of Aqua fortis, and two Ounces of Sal-Armoniac; as soon as
it is dissolved, cast in two Ounces of Ceruse little by little, for that will
cause a great fermentation. Then add the like weight of Painters red Lake, and
as much of Iron Scales from the Anvil, putting it in little by little, as we
have heretofore admonished, and for the same Reasons; and lastly proceed very
slowly in all these Operations; then stop your Vessel well.

All your six Vessels being on a gentle fire of Ashes, or in a warm Bath, to
hasten the Solution of your Materials, you must stir them at least six times a
Day, during the twelve in which you leave them in that heat, that the Aqua
fortis may the better penetrate the Powders, and they communicate their
Tinctures the better to the Glass. The twelve Days being past, take a great
Glass Crucible that will hold the whole, and lute it well for fear of breaking;
let the lute dry, then pour in gently your Materials in the six Matras's one
after the other, after having well stirred each of them beforehand; then put
your Cucurbite on a gentle Ash Fire, and fit to it a Head and Receiver, and
lute well the Joints; then distill gently all the Aqua fortis for the space of
Twenty four Hours, that is in the Body, making a very gentle Fire toward the
end, otherwise the Powders may be spoiled by too much heat, and the Spirits
which ought to remain in the Powder would pass into the Receiver. Then they
will remain at the bottom of the Vessel of a yellowish red color, which keep
in a Glass well stopped, for tinging Glass, or Crystal, which is yet better, as
I have shown in the preceding Chapter.

CHAP. LX. The third and last way of Chalcedony.
THIS third way surpasses the other two in Beauty; it is something tedious, but
the Learned know that what is most perfect, requires most time.

To make this Preparation, you must use the Aqua fortis of Chap. 52. putting
one Pound in a Glass Mattress, with four Ounces of Leaf-Silver to dissolve, and
stop the Matras.

Take another Matras, wherein put a Pound of the same Aqua fortis, with five
Ounces of Mercury purified with Salt and Vinegar after this manner. Take common
Salt, sprinkle it with Vinegar in a Wooden-dish, where add to it a little
common fair Water to make it dissolve, put in your Mercury, and stir it well
with a Wooden-Pestle to draw out the Blackness; repeat washing them often with
fresh Salt and Vinegar, till there be no more Blackness; then dry them with
warm Linen or Cotton, and pass it through the Glove, then it will be purified,
and fit to put in your Aqua fortis. When it is dissolved, stop the Matras and
keep it.

Take another Glass Body, wherein put a Pound of Aqua fortis with three Ounces
of fine Silver calcined. Amalgamate the Silver with the Mercury, as the
Goldsmiths usually do, and put it into a Crucible, with its weight of common
Salt purified, as we have heretofore shown: Then put the Crucible on hot Coals,
that the Mercury may evaporate, and that only the Silver remain at bottom,
which will be purified and calcined. Then add to that calcined Silver, an equal
weight of common Salt purified as before, mix them well together, and put them
over the Fire in a Crucible to calcine them afresh; then wash them well with
warm Water to take out the Salt; then put this Silver into a Glass Vial filled
with common Water, which boil till one fourth part be consumed, then let it
cool and settle to the bottom, then decant off the Water, and put more upon it:
Reiterate this Process with fresh Water three times, and at the fourth dry the
Silver, and put it into your Aqua fortis, and stir it well, and stop the Matras.

We have promised to give the way of purifying common Salt, which is this. Take
what quantity you will of Sea Salt, dissolve it in a convenient quantity of
common Water, boiling it for the space of two Hours, then let the Water rest,
that the earthy part of the Salt may settle to the bottom: Then filter the
Water, and evaporate it in an Earthen Vessel, or rather in a Glass Cucurbit,
till the Salt remain dry at the bottom. Dissolve this Salt again, making the
Water boil, then let it stand for the Dregs to settle, after which filter it
and evaporate it as before; which you must continue to do, till it leave no
more Faeces or Dregs, and it will be well purified and prepared.

To continue our Preparation of the Materials, you must put into a Glass Matras
a Pound of Aqua fortis, with three Ounces of purified Sal-Armoniac; that is to
say, filtered and whitened till it leave no Faeces or Dregs, as we have shown
in common Salt: Then dissolve in that Water a quarter of an Ounce of Silver,
and stop the Vessel well.

Take another Glass Matras, and put into it also a Pound of Aqua fortis, with
two Ounces of Sal-Armoniac; being dissolved, put into that Water, of Cinnabar,
of Crocus Martis calcined with Sulphur as above; of Vltramarine, and of
Ferretto of Spain, prepared as in Chap. 22. of each half an Ounce, the whole
well pounded into Powder; you must do this little by little as we have
heretofore hinted for fear of breaking the Vessel, by the fermentation which
they make with the Aqua fortis; then stop the Matras.

Put into another Matras a Pound of Aqua fortis, and dissolve in it two Ounces
of Sal-Armoniac as before; add to it of Crocus Martis calcined, as in Chap. 25,
with calcined Tin, known among the Glass-Men, of Zaffer described in Chap. 17.
and of Cinnabar, of each half an Ounce, the whole well powdered, and cast
little by little into your Matras, for the Reasons before assigned, which
require that great precaution; then stop the Matras.

Take another Glass Body, wherein put one Pound of Aqua fortis, and dissolve in
it two Ounces of Sal-Armoniac; then add one Ounce of small Leaves of Copper
calcined, as in Chap. 31, half an Ounce of Scales of Copper thrice calcined, as
described in Chap. 34, half an Ounce of Manganese of Piedmont prepared, as in
Chap. 18, and half an Ounce of Scales of Iron which fall from the Smiths Anvil,
the whole well pounded, which cast little by little into your Matras for fear
of breaking it, then stop it well.

Put into another Glass Body one Pound of Aqua fortis, and two Ounces of
Sal-Armoniac: The dissolution being made, put to it little by little half an
Ounce of red Lead, one Ounce of Scales of Copper of Chap. 34, half an Ounce of
crude Antimony, and as much Caput Mortuum of Vitriol purified, the whole well
pulverized; then stop the Matras.

Take another Glass Matras, put into it one Pound of Aqua fortis with two
Ounces of Sal-Armoniac; add to that Water of Orpiment, of white Arsnick, of
Painters Lake, half an Ounce of each; the whole being well powdered, and put
into a Matras with the same precaution as before, stop it well.

We have not repeated at each Operation, that you must put your Matras on an
Ash Furnace over a gentle heat, or in a warm Bath to hasten the Solution of the
Materials; because we have told you it must be always done in Chap. 58, in
speaking of the Preparation of those things which serve to tinge the first
Species of Chalcedony; which may suffice for the instruction of those who
employ themselves in this Art. We will add, that all the nine Matrasses
mentioned in this Chapter, must remain fifteen Days in the same heat, stirring
them often every Day, that the Water may the better operate on the Materials
subtilizing them, and well opening their Tinctures. Then put all these
Materials, with the Aqua fortis, into a great Glass Body, little by little,
that they may unite well together. Close the Body and set it in the same heat,
stirring it well for six Days. After that, take a great Glass Cucurbit well
luted half way up the Body of it, put it on an Ash Furnace, put into it all the
Materials out of your Body, fit to it a Head and Receiver, lute well all the
Joints, then distill it during the space of twenty four Hours, over a very
gentle Fire, for fear the Colors should be spoiled, that the Water pass gently
over, and the Spirits remain in the Powder, which of green will become yellow.

Thus putting that Powder in the requisite Dose (as we have taught in the first
Species of Chalcedony) into purified Glass Metal, made of broken pieces of
Crystal, and not of Fritt; and adding to it in its due time, calcined Tartar,
Soot of Chimney, Crocus Martis made with Vinegar, observing all we have on this
Subject remarked, these Materials will give an opacity to Glass, which may be
worked twenty four Hours afterward, managing it well with proper Tools, and
often heating it; and you will have things made of an extraordinary Beauty,
greater then can be imagined.

The End of the Second BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK III.
CHAP. LXI. The Way of making Glass of the color of Gold Yellow, of Granat,
Amethist, Saphir, Velvet Black, Milk White, Marble, Peach Flower, and deep Red:
Also to make Fritt with Natural Crystal, to color Glass of a Pearl Color,
Viper, Ruby, Topaz, Opal, Sun-flower and others, with several other particulars
in this Art.
THERE are several Ways of giving Glass the Color of Gold, of Amethist, of
Saphir and others; which are not unknown to the Curious in this Art; and as
there is generally some one way more particular and finer than the rest,
several may be ignorant of that; for that reason this Third Book is destined to
that end, viz. to show the best, and also to make Fritt of Natural (or Rock)
Crystal, the way and Process whereof we will lay down so distinctly, that it
shall be impossible for any one to miss his aim in doing it, that observes
these Rules: To that end we caution those who employ themselves in making them,
that they must be very punctual in the Dose, Time, and Circumstances, and
Materials: For if you err in any one, the whole will be spoiled and come to
nothing, for you will have quite different Colors from what you proposed to
your self. We will endeavor to make our Descriptions in the following
Chapters, so clear and plain, that we hope they will prove to the Reader's
Satisfaction.

CHAP. LXII. To make a Gold-Yellow in Glass.
GOld-colour being one of the most noble and finest we can make, by reason of
its imitating the most perfect Metal in Nature, as we have said in Chap. 8.
must be made with the purest Materials, and great precaution.

Take two parts of Crystal Fritt, made with Tarso, and not with Sand, which is
not so good; and one part of Fritt composed of two thirds of Tarso, and one
third of fine Salt of Polverine, prepared as in Chap. 7, pound and mix them
well, and to each hundred Pound of this Composition, add one Pound of Tartar
purified, pounded and searced fine; and one Pound of Manganese of Piedmont,
prepared as in Chap. 18, mixing well these Powders with the two Fritts, because
you must not cast them on the melted Glass as in other Colors: Then put the
whole little by little into a Pot, and put them into a Furnace, wherein let
them stand at an ordinary Fire four Days, for fear the Glass rising, should run
over. When that Matter is well purified, you may use it for making Vessels, and
what other Works you please, which will be of a fair color. If you would have
the Color yet clearer, you must add more Powder, and you will have a very fine
Golden-colour. If you would have it yet finer, take fine Crystal Fritt made of
Polverine of Rochetta, and the Golden-colour will be yet more fair.

CHAP. LXIII. Granat-Colour in Glass.
THE beauty of this Color is to express the Yellowish-red of Fire, when it is
exposed to the Sun: We will treat more largely of it in the fifth Book, in
showing the way to counterfeit this Stone, as also several others.

To give Granat-colour to Glass: Take of Crystal Frit, of Fritt of Rochetta,
each an equal quantity, mix them well, and to an hundred Pound of these
Materials, add one Pound of Manganese of Piedmont, prepared as in Chap. 18, one
Ounce of Zaffer, prepared as in Chap. 17, mix them well with the Fritts, then
put them little by little into an Earthen Pot made red-hot in the Furnace,
because the Glass is apt to rise and run over. After four Days the Glass being
well tinged and purified, you may work it; you may increase or diminish the
Color as much as you please, that depends on the Discretion of the Workman who
puts in the Powders, which ought to be orderly put in, that the Matter be not
spoiled.

CHAP. LXIV. To make an Amethist-Colour in Glass.
AMethist being of a Violet Color, proceeding from Red and Blue, must be well
imitated to look beautiful. For this Color, take Crystal Fritt well made, with
Tarso and not Sand, this Color requiring no other; to which add to each Pound
one Ounce of the following Powder, which mix well together before they be put
into the Pot. After that you must set the Pot to the Fire in the Furnace little
by little, otherwise the violence of the Powder would cause it to break. When
this Glass has been well purified for the space of four Days, and it has the
color of Amethist, you may work it. This Color may be augmented or diminished
by means of the Fritt, or Powder, according to the Discretion of the Workman.

This is the Powder which produces the Amethist Color in Glass. Take one Pound
of Manganese of Piedmont, prepared as in Chap. 18, and an Ounce and half of
Zaffer, prepared as in Chap. 17; mix them well together, and put the Dose we
have shown to each Pound of Fritt, to have a true Amethist-Colour.

Porta in his sixth Book, Chap. 5. only allows one Dram of Manganese to each
Pound of Metal, to make the Glass of an Amethist Color; but that Dose is too
weak, and you must follow that we have shown.

CHAP. LXV. To make Glass of a Saphir-Colour.
TO imitate the Color of Saphir in Glass, which is of a clear and transparent
Blue; you must put to each hundred Pound of Fritt of Rochetta, one Pound of
Zaffer prepared, with an Ounce of Manganese of Piedmont, also prepared as we
have shown. Well mix these Powders with the Fritt, then put the whole into a
Pot in a Furnace, letting the Glass be well melted and purified: For the longer
it remains on the Fire it becomes so much the siner, if you take care to take
it out from time to time. Then mix it very well, and make an Essay of the
Color, and if it be not full enough, augment or diminish it as much as you
think fit; then the Glass may be wrought, and you will have a Saphir of the
Color of the Double Violet of Constantinople, which the small Dose of
Manganese produces.

CHAP. LXVI. Another way of giving Glass a finer Saphir-Colour.
GLASS will have a far fairer Saphir-Colour, if in room of Fritt of Rochetta,
you take good Crystal Fritt, and add to it the same Dose of Powder, as in the
preceding Chapter. Of this Glass thus tinged you may make what Works you
please. You must not put the Powder of Manganese and Zaffer on the melted
Glass, but mix it with the Fritt as we have noted: For the Color the melted
Glass takes, is not so fine as when the Materials are first mixed.

CHAP. LXVII. To give Glass a Velvet Black.
ALTHOUGH this Black Color look mournful, yet it is not without its Beauty: To
make it, take pieces of Glass of several Colors, to which add a little less
than half the quantity of Manganese as Zaffer, and put the whole into a Pot in
the Furnace. This Glass being well purified may be wrought, and it will give a
Black like Velvet, fit for many things.

CHAP. LXVIII. Another Way of giving Glass a much fairer Velvet Black.
ANOTHER Way of giving a Black Velvet Color to Glass, much fairer than the
former, is to take twenty Pound of Crystal Fritt in Powder, with four Pound of
Calx of Lead and Tin, of each an equal quantity; mix the whole well together,
and put them into a Pot heated in the Furnace; and when this Glass is well
melted and purified, you must cast in three Ounces of Steel calcined and
powdered, and three Ounces of Scales of Iron from the Smiths Forge, powdered
and mixed with the Steel; mix the whole well as you cast them in, that the
Glass may not rise, and the better to incorporate them. Then let all rest
twelve Hours, during which time, stir them sometimes; then you may work it: And
you will have a Velvet Black Color very fair, wherewith you may work as you
please.

CHAP. LXIX. Another Velvet Black fairer than the precedent.
THIS last Way of making a Black, surpasses in Beauty the preceding. Take one
hundred Pound of Rochetta Fritt, two Pound of Tartar, six Ounces of Manganese
prepared, reduce all to Powder, mix them together, put them into a Pot, which
you must put into the Furnace leisurely, that the Matter don't rise too much.
Then let it melt and purify during the space of four Days or thereabouts; mix
the Materials well, cast them into Water the better to purify, and then melt
them again; and you will have a Black of an extraordinary Beauty, which may be
wrought as you please.

CHAP. LXX. To make a Milk White Color in Glass.
THE Milk White to be done well, requires no less exactness than the Blue. To
succeed in it, take twelve Pound of good Crystal Fritt, two Pound of Calx of
Lead and Tin, one of each, and half an Ounce of Manganese of Piedmont prepared,
as we have shown: The whole pulverized and mixed together, and put them into a
Pot heated in the Furnace, where let them stand twelve Hours, then mix the
whole well, and make an Essay of it. If the Color don't please you, add to it
some Calx of the two Metals before mentioned, which incorporate with the Glass,
well mixing it. Eight Hours after the Glass will be fit to work, and white as
Milk.

CHAP. LXXI. Another Fairer and Whiter Color.
THIS second way of giving Milk White to Glass, is much better than the
precedent, and the Working more exquisite. We only make use of the Calx of Tin,
without mixing any Lead; and we put sixty Pound of that Calx, to four hundred
Pound of pure Crystal Fritt, with two Pounds and an half of Manganese of
Piedmont prepared; the whole being well pulverized and mixed, must be put in a
Pot heated in the Furnace, there to purify during eight Days: Then cast the
Matter into the Water the better to purify it, then put it to melt again in
the same Pot, after having dried it. If it be transparent, you must add to it
fifteen Pound of the same Calx of Tin as before, mixing it well with the melted
Metal, to make it the better incorporate; twenty four Hours afterward, it will
be finer and whiter than Snow, and ready to work.

CHAP. LXXII. The Way to give Glass the Color of Lapis Lazuli.
LAPIS LAZVLI, which is a fine Blue, and full of Veins of Gold, will not be
easy to imitate, without a great deal of Care and Industry in its Preparation.

To make this fine Color, we must make use of the same Matter of the fine
White in the preceding Chapter, and when it is in fusion in the Pot, you must
add to it little by little the Blue Enamel in Powder, that the Painters make
use of, mixing well the whole together each time, and that as often as there is
occasion to make this Color. Then try if it please you, and when it is to your
Mind, let it stand two full Hours, then stir it well and make a second Essay of
it. If the Color be perfect, let it stand ten Hours and then mix it again. If
it keeps in the same State without changing color, you may employ it in making
what Vessels you please, which will be of the true color of Lapis Lazuli. If
in working this Glass it chances to rise, you may cast in a little Leaf-Gold,
which will make the Glass approach yet nearer to Lapis Lazuli, and which will
in a moment stop the rising of the Metal, as Sugar will do in boiling Oil.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Way to make a Marble-Colour in Glass.
WHITE Marble being very simple, it is easy to imitate, the way of doing it
only requires Crystal Fritt, which must be worked as soon as it is melted,
before it be purified, for so it will give a very fair Marble Color.

CHAP. LXXIV. The Way of making a Peach-Colour in Glass.
TO make this Color, which is a very agreeable one, take Glass prepared, and
tinged of a Milk White, whereof we have spoken in the precedent Chapters; and
when it is in good fusion, put in some Manganese of Piedmont, prepared as in
Chap. 18, and that little by little, stirring the Matter well at each time,
till the Color become as fine and perfect as you desire it; but you must work
the Glass in time, otherwise the Color will be lost; and you will have a very
fair Peach Color.

CHAP. LXXV. The Way of tinging Glass of a deep Red.
OPAQUE Colors have a Body, but the Transparent ones none; wherefore this deep
Red must be mixed with Matters that give it one, as we will show.

You must take twenty Pound of Crystal Fritt, one Pound of pieces of White
Glass, and two Pounds of calcined Tin; mix the whole well together, and put it
in a Pot in a Furnace that it may purify. That being well melted, cast in an
Ounce of calcined Steel well pounded; and an Ounce of Skales of Iron from the
Anvil, well pulverized and mixed together, stirring well the Glass with an Iron
Stirrer, when you are putting in the Powder, to hinder it from rising too much.
You must take care not to put in too much of the Powder, for that would make
the Glass black, whereas it ought to be clear, shining, and of an obscure
yellow Color. Then take about six Drachms of calcined Copper, prepared as in
Chap. 32, cast it upon the melted Glass, often mixing it, to three or four
times, and the Glass will be as red as Blood. If the Workman like the Color,
he must presently work it, for fear it should become black, and the Color be
lost, wherein you must take great care. If notwithstanding this the Color
comes to be lost, you must add more Scales of Iron in Powder, and it will
return. This Work seems somewhat wearisom, but you must not think of that, but
prepare and finish the business carefully, otherwise you will not succeed.

CHAP. LXXVI. The Way of Calcining Natural (or Rock) Crystal, to make an
Extraordinary Fritt.
ALTHOUGH we may imitate Natural Crystal by help of Art, and make as fine with
the Materials we have shown how to prepare; yet the way we are going now to
describe, of making a Fritt of Natural Crystal, will make one so extraordinary,
that it will surpass in beauty all we have yet shown the Preparations of.

Make Natural Crystal red hot in a Crucible covered close, then extinguish it
in Water, and reiterate the same eight times. Then dry it well, and grind it on
a Porphyry Stone to an impalpable Powder. Often purify this Powder of Crystal,
after the same way we have shown to purify Polverine of Rochetta, in Chap. 7,
observing all we have said on that Subject. Then mix that Crystalline Matter,
with about one third part of Salt extracted from Polverine of Rochetta,
prepared as in Chap. 7, make a Fritt of it, then put it into a Pot well heated
in the Furnace, and when it is in good fusion add to it a proportionable Dose
of prepared Manganese of Chap. 17. After that often cast it into the Water to
purify, as we have noted in ordinary Crystal, and purify it very well at the
Fire before you work it, as we have elsewhere hinted. Then you will have a
Crystal more beautiful and shining, than you have otherwise ever seen.

CHAP. LXXVII. To make Pearl Color in Crystal.
TRUE Pearl Color is so fine and shining, that it might seem difficult to give
it to Crystal; yet it is so easy that Tartar alone does it.

Those who have a mind to perform this Process, must calcine their Tartar till
it become White, as we have shown at the end of Chap. 5, then having well
purified the Fritt of the Natural Crystal, whereof we have spoke in the
preceding Chapter, and being in a good fusion in the Furnace, you must cast
into it this white Tartar at several times, mixing the whole well each time,
which must be continued to be done till the Glass becomes of a Pearl Color;
for there is no other Rule in this Case than Experience to guide your self by.

When the Color is come to perfection, and the Workman likes it, he must
presently work it, because it will be soon lost, as Experience testifies; and
you may make of it Works of an extraordinary Beauty.

CHAP. LXXVIII. The Way to tinge Natural Crystal of a Viper color.
THE Green Viper Color is not disagreeable, but it is very dangerous to make,
by reason of the Materials whereof it is composed, if you are not very careful
in making it. Take two Ounces of Rock Crystal of a good Water, two Ounces of
crude Antimony, and as much Orpiment, with one Ounce of Sal-Armoniack; reduce
these three last into Powder: Stratifie with these Powders the Pieces of
Crystal, in a good Crucible; cover it with another that is bored through the
bottom, lute them well together, and when the Lute is dry, put them in the
middle of the Coals in a Furnace, let them be gently lighted that the Crucible
may grow hot by degrees. It will smoke very much when it first grows hot,
wherefore this Operation must be made in a large Chimney, that the Smoke may
fly away, and you must go out of the Laboratory, because it is very dangerous
and may prove Mortal. Let the Fire kindle of it self, and the Crucible grow
cold; then take out the Pieces of Crystal which lie on the top of the Crucible,
which will have the Color of Rubies, and be marked with fine Spots; and those
which are at the bottom will for the most part have the Color of Vipers.
Separate the other pieces from them, which will be of other Colors, and polish
the whole at the Wheel like other Stones, then with Foils you may set them in
Gold. These Stones will be of a very agreeable color. You might tinge a great
number together, but that would be more chargeable.

CHAP. LXXIX. To make in Natural Crystal the Color of Rubies, Topaz, Opal,
Gyrasol and others.
IT seems something strange that Crystals mixed with Matters that tinge it,
should in the same Vessel receive so many different Colors. But if you
consider that the Spirits of these Matters, have Virtues different from those
of their Bodies, you will not so much wonder at such Diversities. The Pieces
which lie highest, are the most penetrated by these tinging Spirits which
always ascend, and so give them more vivacity and color; and so to the others
in proportion to your Orders.

For this Operation, take two Ounces of Orpiment of a yellow Color approaching
Gold or Saffron, and as much White Arsenick; one Ounce of crude Antimony, and
the same weight of Sal-Armoniac; the whole reduced to Powder and mixed
together. With this Powder stratifie pieces of Natural Crystal in a great
Crucible, putting the least pieces to the bottom, and the greatest at the top
which ought to be fine and without Spots. The Crucible being filled with the
Powder and Crystal, cover it with another bored at the bottom, lute them well
and let the lute dry. This last Crucible must (as we have said) be bored at
bottom, that the smoke of the Materials ascending through the Hole, may better
tinge the Crystals in passing, which it would not do so well if it passed out
of the sides. When the Lute is dry, put it in the Furnace, and cover it with
Coals up to the middle of the Crucible on the top, then put some live Coals to
them, that they may kindle ^y themselves little by little, they ought to be
great Coals, and made of Oak. You must take care of the Smoke, it being very
dangerous, as we said before; and order it so that they kindle well, that the
Business may succeed, and that the Fire may go out of it self, taking care that
no Air can get in at the Mouths of the Crucibles, for that would make the
Crystals break, and then they are good for nothing.

The Crucibles being cold unlute them, and take the Crystals out, the greatest
parts of which will be tinged with the colors we have mentioned: Polish the
best colored at the Wheel, which will also brighten their Colors, and make
them look like Oriental Stones, and they will be fair and hard as they are.

All the Success of this Secret consists in the Orpiment, which must be of the
color of Gold; and if you don't succeed the first time, you must try a second;
and observing well what we have said, you may be assured to succeed.

The End of the Third Book.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. LXXX. The Way of making Glass of Lead, commonly called Vitrum Saturni:
To calcine Lead, and extract from it the Colors of Emerald, Topaz, Seagreen
or Azure, Granate, Sapphire, Gold, and other Colors.
GLASS of Lead, known to few Artists in this way, because they make no use of
it by reason of its brittleness, is beyond doubt, the fairest and noblest Glass
of any other. In this Glass you may imitate all the Colors of Oriental
precious Stones; and if this Glass were as tough as Crystal, it would far
surpass it in beauty. It is true, if you don't work it with great care, no Pots
nor Crucibles will hold it, for it will crack them and run out. I will here
give all the Methods of preparing it, and that so distinctly, that the
unexperienced may succeed in it. The Business principally consists in knowing
well how to calcine the Lead, and recalcine it again, which is commonly known,
notwithstanding in the next Chapter we will show how to do it for the sake of
those that do not know it. The better the Lead is calcined, the less apt it is
to turn into Lead again, and break the Pots in this Operation. We will also
show, that you must always drop the Glass into Water when it is melted, for the
least Lead remaining in it, breaks out the bottoms of the Vessels, and s^ you
lose your Matter, which may be avoided by carefully minding what we have said,
and which we shall note again in the following Chapters.

It is our Opinion, and that not without reason, that that subtilty whereby the
Lead so easily in this case pierces the Pots when it is not wholly calcined,
comes from a certain unctuous yellow Matter like Oil, that is seen to swim on
the top sometimes in a violent fusion. For we have often observed, That if that
unctuous Matter be not taken off as soon as it appears on the top, it will
pierce the Pot, and so all run out among the Coals.

This unctuous Matter has strange and infinite Virtues known to the Adepti,
both in curing Diseases, and other Operations. He who knows how to make it
Transparent, and give it the Jacynth Color in Ezekiel, which is that Electrum
spoken of in the first Chapter, may boast he has a Material, from which may be
extracted a lac Virginis, in great esteem among the Philosophers. But let this
suffice, we are not here to instruct the ignorant in those Arcana, but remit
them to the Writings of the Adepti.

Kircher assures us, that if Mercury congealed with the Vapor of Lead, be
heated in a Brass-Spoon over live Coals, it will exhibit a strange variety of
Colors, that you cannot imagine the like. And Zibav. speaking of Lead in his
seventh Book, C. 20. de Transmut. Metal. That the Melters and Tryers of Metals
daily turn Lead into Glass, and that this Glass is Black, Red, Yellow, Green,
or otherwise colored, according as the Lead is differently calcined.

CHAP. LXXXI. To Calcine Lead.
LEAD is easy to be calcined, because it is so to melt; for this purpose you
may make use of the Furnace described in Chap. 52, or in a Kiln: You must put
in a good quantity of Lead at a time; for in two or three Days may be calcined
several Hundred Weight. The Fire ought to be hot enough to melt Glass, and not
hotter; for if it be hotter it will not calcine the Lead. As soon as the Lead
is melted, and it yields on top a yellowish Matter; begin to draw forward the
calcined part with an Iron fit for the purpose, always spreading it in the
internal Extremity of the Furnaces or Kilns bottom. This Lead being well
calcined for the first time, ought to be put again into the Furnace moderately
hot to reverberate. You must spread it with the Iron, and stir it continually
for several Hours, and at this second calcination it will become Yellow; then
searce it through a fine Sieve, and that which does not go through, must be put
with other Lead to calcine afresh; always taking care, that the Furnace have
just a moderate heat, and be not too hot.

There are several other ways of calcining Lead which we will not mention here,
because this we have shown is the best and most easy, and will dispatch a
great quantity in a short time. All the Potters know how to calcine it, because
they make use of it in their Glasing.

CHAP. LXXXII. The Way to make Glass of Lead.
WE have told you the Beauty of this Glass, in Chap. 77, which may be tinged of
several Colors, as Black, White, Green, and Red, which are natural to it, the
degrees of the Fire only making it take those different Colors.

This Glass being well made, besides the Beauty it has, which it communicates
to Glass, and to Tinctures of precious Stones wherein it is employed, it has
other great Virtues in Metallic Operations, which are not known to all the
World, whereof we could largely treat, if it were not besides our Subject.

To make Vitrum Saturni: Take fifteen Pound of calcined Lead, as we have shown
in the preceding Chapter, and twelve Pound of Crystal or Rochetta Fritt,
according to what color you would have; mix them well together, and put them
in a Pot in the Furnace, where ten Hours after it will be in good fusion; then
cast the whole into Water, and take out speedily the remaining Lead at bottom
of the Vessel, for fear it should break; then take it out of the Water and dry
it, and put it into the same Pot to melt again: Take care not to put in the
Grains of Lead (if there by any) which were in the Water, and which will be
loosened from the Matter. After your Matter has been again in fusion six Hours,
you may work it.

You may also make a Glass of Lead, by taking three parts of Lead, one of fine
Sand, and change them into Glass in the Furnace: As also of three parts of
calcined Litharge, and one part of calcined Flint, melted and vitrified in the
Furnace together.

CHAP. LXXXIII. The Way how to Work Glass of Lead.
IT is not enough to show how to make Glass of Lead, if we don't show how to
work it too. If any one would make Vessels of it for use of any Figure; he must
take a Glass Workman's Iron they use to take the Metal out of the Pots with,
and take what quantity of Glass of Lead with it he pleases, when it is in
fusion, and let it a little cool, then work it after the manner we have shown
Chap. 3. You must clean well the Marble you make use of, and while the Glass is
cooling, you must wet the Marble with cold Water; for otherwise the Glass would
scale it, and part of the Marble would stick to it. If the Marble be hard, you
have so much the less to fear, for it will not break so easily, nor stick to
the Glass.

CHAP. LXXXIV. To make Glass of Lead of a fair Emerald Color.
THE easiness of tinging Glass of Lead of any color, is the reason, you may be
sure, of giving it an excellent Emerald-Green, especially because Green is also
Natural to it.

Take twenty Pound of Crystal Fritt powdered and searced, and sixteen Pound of
Galx of Lead also sifted; mix them well together, then put them little by
little into a Pot heated in a Furnace, and eight or ten Hours afterward it
will be melted; then cast the melted Matter into Water, and carefully take the
remaining Lead from it; then put the Matter after it is dried into the same Pot
again, and seven or eight Hours after it will be again melted. Reiterate this
process of casting the melted Matter into the Water, and separating the Lead
that sticks to the Pot, as before; then this Glass will be cleansed and
purified from all the foulness and unctuosity the Calx and Powder would leave
in it and be very resplendent. You must put it again in the Pot, where it will
melt and purify in a little time. When it is melted, put to it six Ounces of
Scales of Copper thrice calcined in Powder, as in Chap. 34, with twenty four
Grains of Crocus Martis, made with Vinegar, as in Chap. 25, also in Powder, and
mix them together.

This Powder must be cast in at six times, always mixing well the Glass, and
taking at each time the interval of saying the Creed: Let it rest one Hour, and
then stir it again, and see if the Color pleases you: If it be as you would
have it, let it stand eight Hours, that the whole may well incorporate. Then
stir it well, and let it rest a little, that the Faeces may precipitate to the
bottom of the Pot; then it may be wrought, and the color can scarce be
distinguished from true Emerald.

CHAP. LXXXV. Another Way of making Glass of Lead of a fairer Emerald than the
former.
FOR this color, which will be far fairer than the precedent, you must change
one Ingredient of the other Chapter, and instead of Scales of Copper thrice
calcined, put the same Dose of Caput Mortuum, of Vitriolum Veneris, prepared as
at the end of the seventh Book; then proceed exactly as in the former Chapter,
and you will have a very exquisite Green.

CHAP. LXXXVI. To make a Glass of Lead, of the Color of Topaz.
TOPAZ is a lighter color than Emerald, and casts Rays the color of Gold,
wherefore the color cannot be well imitated except this way.

Take fifteen Pound of Crystal Fritt in Powder, and ten Pound of Calx of Lead
also in Powder, mix them well, and searce them very fine, then put them in a
Pot heated at the Furnace, where leave it eight Hours, that it may be melted.
Then cast the Matter into Water, and take out of the Pot all the Lead (if there
be any) that remains. Put the Matter again into the Pot to be melted, and cast
it by intervals into the Water. Add to that Matter half its weight of Glass
tinged of a Golden color, as in Chap. 62. incorporate and purify well the
whole together, and you will have a Glass of the true color of Oriental Topaz,
fit to be wrought.

CHAP. LXXXVII. To make a Sky, or Seagreen, in Glass of Lead.
WE have shown several Ways in the first Book to tinge Glass of a Sky-colour,
or Seagreen, which would be needless to repeat here.

That we now show which is made in Glass of Lead, has no less Beauty. Take
sixteen Pound of Crystal Fritt, ten Pound of Calx of Lead, mix them together,
and put them gently into a Pot heated in the Furnace, where they will be in
good fusion in twelve Hours time. Then cast that Matter into Water, as I have
shown before, and take the remaining Lead out of the Pot, and put yout Matter
in again to melt. Eight Hours after cast it again into Water, taking the
remaining Lead out of the Pot, then it will be well purified. Put it in again
to melt in the same Pot, and when it is in good fusion, cast in at four
different times, four Ounces of small Copper Leaves, prepared as in Chap. 30,
with a quarter of an Ounce of Zaffer, prepared as in Chap. 17. After having
mixed these Powders well together, and the Matter at each casting of it in: Two
Hours after stir the Matter well in the Pot with an Iron Rod, and make an Essay
to see if the Color be full enough, then let it stand ten Hours to purify,
and to give the Color time to incorporate with the Glass: Then it may be
wrought to the Uses you design it, stirring it well, and letting it rest a
little to settle, before you Work it.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. To make a Granat Color in Glass of Lead.
THE Vivacity of this Color appears no less in Glass of Lead than in Crystal,
if it be made carefully. To make it, take twenty Pound of Crystal Frit, with
sixteen Pound of Calx of Lead; and after having added three Ounces of Manganese
of Piedmont to it, and half an Ounce of Zaffer, both prepared as we have shown;
put the whole into a Pot heated in the Furnace: Twelve Hours after, cast that
melted Matter into the Water, and take out the Lead that remains behind in the
Pot. Then put the Matter again in the same Pot, where it will be purified ten
Hours after. You must mix it well with the Iron, and let the Faeces
precipitate; then see if the Color pleases you; then work it to what Uses you
please, and you will have a Glass of Lead of a fine Granat-colour.

CHAP. LXXXIX. To make a Sapphire-Colour in Glass of Lead.
THE Beauty of Sapphire is no less imitable in Glass of Lead, than the Colors
of other Precious Stones; and its clear Blue Transparent Color will have as
much Splendor. To make it, mix together fifteen Pound of Crystal Frit in
Powder, and twelve Pound of Calx of Lead, then searce it, pounding again what
does not pass through the Sieve. Add to that two Ounces of prepared Zaffer,
twenty four Grains of Manganese of Piedmont also well prepared, mix the whole
well together, put it in a Pot heated in the Furnace, and let it stand to melt
during the space of twelve Hours. Then cast the vitrified Matter into Water,
and carefully take away the Lead that remains in the Pot; then put the Matter
again into the same Pot, and let it stand to be re-purified Twelve Hours. Then
see if the Color pleases you, and you may Work it. You Will have a Color like
the true Oriental Sapphire.

CHAP. XC. The Way to make a Golden-colour in Glass of Lead.
THIS Color is as fine in Glass of Lead, as in Crystal: It takes that Color
both from the Lead, and the Ingredients mixed with it.

Take sixteen Pound of good Crystal Fritt in Powder, to which add the same
weight of Calx of Lead also in Powder, and well searced; then add six Ounces of
Copper Scales thrice calcined, as in Chap. 34, and forty eight Grains of Crocus
Martis, made with Vinegar, as in Chap. 25, the whole mixed well together, put
it in a Pot heated in the Furnace: Twelve Hours after cast the Glass in Water,
and take the remaining Lead out of the Pot, and then put the Matter again into
the same Pot, to be well purified during Twelve other Hours.

After that, stir it well, and see if the Color pleases you; if it chance to
be greenish, add to it some Crocus Martis, and the Greenness will vanish; then
you will have a Golden-colour very fine, which may be Wrought.

These are all the Colors we can give to Glass of Lead alone. We shall augment
the Number in a Past of Lead, whereof we shall show the Preparation in the
following Book, because it is useful for imitating Precious Stones, as we shall
show in the same Book; which is the Reason we have not done it in this.

The End of the Fourth BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK V.
CHAP. XCI. Showing the Way to prepare Natural Crystal, and to make a very fine
Salt of Tartar, and several sorts of Pasts, for Emerald, Topaz, Chrysolite,
Iacinth, Granat, Sapphire, Beryl or Egmarine, Carbuncles, Rubies, and several
other Colors, of so great Beauty that they surpass the Natural Stones
themselves in every thing but Hardness.
WITHOUT doubt it will seem surprising to several, that Art should be capable
of imitating the Natural Color of Precious Stones in so great Perfection, as
that the Beauty of the Artificial should surpass that of the Natural Oriental
ones, in every thing excepting their hardness, which they have been many ages
in acquiring: and I doubt not but several Ingenious Men are this day searching
after means to give them that too. The Curious will find in this Book all that
is necessary to attain this Art, nay, and to do something more than I mention.
For since Art can easy imitate Nature, it is not to be doubted but that
Ingenious Men may some time or other arrive to give the same perfection to
Crystals that precious Stones have acquired in the Bowels of the Earth.

The Natural, or Rock Crystal, which we make use of, as the Basis of our
Artificial Gems, is the only Stone that does not proceed from any Metal, being
the first substratum of others, only made of a congealed Water, with a subtle
Earth, as other precious Stones. Its Virtue proceeds from Mercury, and the
Spirit of Raphael, having also a great Sympathy with Saturn and Jupiter, whence
it is proper for healing several Diseases. All the diversities of Gems proceed
only from a sulphur or an unctuous Substance, which insinuates its self in
their Composition, which fixes them more or less and also tinges them. This
Sulphur is an Exhalation of Metalline and Mineral Spirits, forced up by the
Central Fire, which virtually contains diverse Colors, and which are determined
and brought into act by proper Subjects.

Thus Granat and other precious Stones agree with Crystal, as Mercury does with
Saturn, their harmony in the Heavens assures us of these reasons and
proportions here on Earth.

Precious Stones derive their Origin from the Stars and the Primum Mobile, as
do the Metals both perfect and imperfect, of the color of Sulphur, and the
qualities whereof they partake, and wherein they agree with the Stars. Great
and wonderful Operations might be performed with these Precious Stones, if they
were separated from the Impurity of their terra damnata, and reduced by the
universal Menstruum into their first principles. It is only by this Menstruum,
or mundane Spirit, that Metals and Minerals can also be so dissolved, that
being full of their Attractive Virtues.

We can boldly assert that this universal Spirit contains in it self all the
secrets of Alchymy; and that without it, it is impossible to have the Tincture,
Water, and Salt of Precious Stones, or to make use of the admirable Virtues God
has imparted to them. Yet I don't dispute but that there is a certain Acid
Water Extracted from a Simple, wherein a dissolution of Gems may be made, and
an admirable Magisterium, and a Precious Treasure for the Health, being
prepared secundum Artem. That Water will also extract the Tincture of Gold, the
Virtue of which is not less for preservation of Life, and curing several
Malignant Fevers.

As to Artificial Gems, which are the Subject of this Book; all the Art
consists in rightly imitating the Tinctures of those that are fine, which must
be extracted from Subjects that resist the Fire. The Tinctures we give them are
fixed in the Crystals though volatile, without altering their Color. As for
example Verdigrease being put on the Fire, becomes of another Color, but being
in fusion with the Crystal it fixes and changes not its Color; for natural
Colors always return to their principle, and the great quantity of fixed,
always retains some of the volatile. You must therefore for this end take
permanent Colors which change not, being mixed one with another. For example
Blue and Yellow make Green, you must therefore take a Blue that cannot be
altered by the Yellow you mix with it; and a Yellow that cannot be altered by
the Blue* and so of others.

Isaac Hollandus, who has writ much on the Art of making Gems, shows us a very
fine way, by which he has performed things almost incredible. We will give you
some of his Preparations, among those we de^^gn to treat of, and add several
curious Matters to wha^ he has said of them, both for Pasts, Tinctures, and t^
Fabric of Gems, to Encourage the Lovers of this Art to set their Hands to work
at it. It is true the way is troublesome and tedious, but any one that will
diligently apply himself to it, will find himself sufficiently rewarded for his
pains, both by the Pleasure of seeing so fine Productions, and the Profit he
may get by a thing of so small charge.

CHAP. XCII. The Way of preparing Natural Crystal.
WE have already given a very fine Preparation of Natural Crystal in the second
Book, Chap. 76, yet we will give you here the principal one, which is its
Calcination, and which we will explain at large.

To perform this Calcination well, Take Natural Crystal the fairest you can
get, since that is the Basis for Artificial Gems, it is no matter whether it be
in great or small pieces. Fill with these Pieces of Crystal a large Crucible,
cover it with a Cover made of the ^ame Earth, which must be somewhat broader
than the Mouth of the Crucible, for fear Ashes or Coals tumble in, which you
must take particular care of. Then set your Crucible in burning Coals in a
little Furnace, and when your Crystal is well heated, cast it into a Vessel of
cold Water, the more Water there is, so much the better will the Calcination be
performed, because the cold of it is so much the greater. Then take it out of
the Water, and dry it in an Earthen Ladle, then put it into the same Crucible
to be heated again, taking care to cover it well: Then cast it again unto fresh
cold Water, and repeat heating it and quenching it thus twelve times, changing
each time the Water. You may know if your Crystal be well calcined, for it will
easily break and crumble: If there appear in it any black Veins, you must take
care to take them all clean out, by breaking them, and do this till only the
White remains behind; then it is well prepared.

After you have well dried your Crystals thus calcined, grind them to an
impalpable Powder on a Marble or Porphyry Stone, by putting a little on at a
time, and fearce it well through a fine Silken Sieve.

And since we use this Powder of Crystal for all Artificial Gems whereof we are
going to treat, your best way will be to keep a good quantity by you, which you
may always have recourse to in Working.

If you design to succeed in this Art very well you must not use ordinary Fritt
of Crystal, how good and fair soever it be, nor Chalcedony, nor Tarso, nor any
other Stones; for the Glass made of them is far less fair and resplendent than
that made of Natural Crystal, which has the most luster, and approaches nearest
precious Stones, as we have already remarked in the preceding Chapter.

CHAP. XCIII. The Way of making a very sine and pure Salt of Tartar.
NERI makes use of no Salt of Tartar, in all his Preparations of Artificial
Gems; notwithstanding this Salt being prepared after a certain manner, we shall
here relate, for the sake of the Curious. It serves in a great measure to work
the Crystal, being a true Vehicle, for the better introducing the Colors that
are to be given, and which is of use for the Tinctures several ways.

Those, who in their Operations of Artificial Gems, have made no use of Salt of
Tartar, have without doubt been ignorant of this fine Preparation of it; for if
you use ordinary Salt of Tartar, there is a Sulphur and Foulness in it, which
renders Crystal obscure, and consequently would be hurtful in these Operations.

To make this Salt, you must first calcine your Tartar, till it become Gray,
and not to perfect Whiteness; and then dissolve it in warm Water to extract the
Salt, filter that Water, and then evaporate it over the Fire; then you will have
remaining at the bottom of the Vessel, a White Salt. To take away all Foulness
from this Salt, dissolve it again in warm Water, then evaporate it again over a
gentle Fire; take it off the Fire, and cast it into cold Water, and you will find
it will leave on the surface of the Water a thick Froth, which you must skim
off with a Skimmer that has little Holes no bigger than a small Pins Head: Put
the Vessel again on the Fire, and evaporate the Water as before, then take it
off the Fire, and cast upon it fresh cold Water, and skim it well as before.
Reiterate this Process till you find no more Froth; then Evaporate the whole
over a gentle Fire till it be dry, and you will have a Salt of Tartar well
purified, which is not so fusil as the other, because it is free from all that
Unctuosity which causes the Fusion. Keep this Salt of Tartar in a Vessel well
stopped, and use of it in Crystal with your Colors when you set them to melt.

Although this Salt of Tartar be very fine and pure, yet it is not that of the
Philosophers, which has far more Virtue, and opens more powerfully the Metals
and Minerals where it is employed, though it be of the same Nature as this, and
extracted from the same Principle.

The Philosophers have moreover another Salt of Tartar extracted from Metalline
Matters; and this last is far more Excellent than any others.

We will treat thereof at large in the Treatise we have promised, where we will
explain the Virtues both of the one and the other, as well in Medicine as in
the Business of Metals, and show several very Curious Effects performed by
their means.

CHAP. XCIV. To make a Past for Oriental Emerald.
WE have already shown the way of tinging Crystal and Glass of Lead, of a very
fair Emerald-colour, but not to make a Stone that shall imitate a true Natural
Gem, which may be used in Rings, or otherwise, which now we come to do. There
are diverse sorts of Emeralds, but at present, they are all distinguished into
either oriental or Occidental, the Orientals are more hard, and the others
less. We will show several ways of Imitating the Emerald more or less full,
which will be all Beautyful. This is the first.

Take two Ounces of natural Crystal prepared, as we have shown in Chap. 92. and
4 Ounces of common Minium or Read-Lead, powdered and Searced, add 48 Grains of
Verdigrease well pounded and of a good Color, with 8 Grains of Crocus Martis
prepared with Vinegar as we have shown Chap. 25. Mix the whole well together,
and put it into a good Crucible that will resist the fire, in it you must leave
an Inch empty. Then cover the the Crucible with an Earthen Cover, lute it well,
and dry it, then put it in the hottest place of a Potters Furnace where they
make their Earthen Vessels, and let it stand as long as their Pots. Being cold
break the Crucible and you will find within a matter of the Color of a very fine
Emerald. If you afterward set it in Gold, it will surpass in Beauty the true
Oriental Emerald.

If it happens that your Matter is not enough resin'd and purified, you must
put it in again a second time in the same Furnace, where it will be purified as
much as needs be; which you may know by lifting up the Cover, if the Matter
appears shining.

If it is not so, lute the Cover on again, and put the whole in the Furnace.
You may take notice once for all, that you must not break the Crucible, before
the Matter be thoroughly baked and purified, for if you do, and so are obliged
to put the Matter into another Crucible, the Past will be painted and full of
Blisters.

If you cannot easily come to a Potter's Furnace, you may make one your self
with little Charge, wherein you may put twenty Crucibles at once, each of
different Colors, so one Baking may serve for a great deal of Matter.

You must make use of dry and hard Wood to heat the Furnace, as we have said
before in baking Glass, and continue the Fire twenty four Hours, in which time
your Matters ought to be baked and purified enough, but for more Surety you may
continue the Fire six Hours longer, and they will be certainly baked enough.

Your Matter being thus rig^tly baked, you may polish it at the Wheel, as we
have said; and set it with a Foil in Gold, as is done with true Gems, and
you will have a brighter Emerald than the Oriental.

CHAP. XCV. Another deeper Emerald-Colour.
THAT which makes Emerald deeper than the precedent, proceeds from the smaller
quantity of Crystal employed in it, with more of the other Materials, which
make it more fair, but also more brittle. You must Bake it at least six Hours
longer than the precedent, to take away that Imperfection which Lead usually
gives. The Dose of this Past, is one Ounce of Natural Crystal prepared, as we
have shown, six Ounces and an half of Red-Lead, seventy five Grains of
Verdigrease, ten Grains of Crocus Martis made with Vinegar, the whole
pulverized and well mixed together; then follow the Method we have shown, in
the preceding Chapter, which would be too tedious to repeat here, and on every
occasion, so we will avoid it; only observing to let your Matter stand longer
in the Fire, as we have said, and you will have an admirable Oriental
Emeraldcolour, which being set in Gold with a Foil of the same Metal
underneath, will be inexpressibly fair.

CHAP. XCVI. Another Way to make a fairer Paste for Emeralds.
THIS Paste will be as brittle as the precedent, for the Reasons we have said;
for you must take seven Ounces of Minium, to two Ounces of Natural Crystal
prepared: To which add full eighteen Grains of Verdigrease, ten Grains of
Crocus Martis, the whole pulverized and well mixed. Then proceed as we have
shown in Chap. 94, and you will have an Emerald fit for all small Works, but not
so hard as the former, by reason of the great quantity of Lead in it. Wherefore
you ought to keep it longer in the Fire, that the pale' Color of the Lead may
vanish.

CHAP. XCVII. Another fairer Paste for Emeralds.
THE Color of this Paste will surpass the others in Beauty, if the Workman
takes care. Take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, six Ounces of Minium
in Powder, and eight Grains of Verdigrease also in Powder, mix the whole well
together, then put them into a large Crucible covered and well luted, in the
same Furnace as before. Moreover do all as in Chap. 94, and you will have an
extraordinary fair Emerald-colour.

CHAP. XCVIII. Another very fair Emerald-Colour.
THIS Stone will be far harder and finer than the precedent, because it
contains less Lead. To make it, take four Ounces of Natural Crystal, prepared
as in Chap. 92, the fourth part of an Ounce of Red-Lead, and the same quantity
of Verdigrease, the whole pulverized and sifted fine, which put together in a
Crucible well closed and luted, in the same Furnace as before, proceeding as in
Chap. 94, leaving the Crucible in the Fire thirty six Hours. After which, if
you will you may cast your melted Matter into a Marble Mould heated, putting it
near the Fire to cool gently, and you will have a very fine Emerald.

CHAP. XCIX. To make a Paste for an Oriental Topaz.
THE Topaz of the Ancients, is the same which the Moderns call a Chrysolite,
whereof we shall treat in Chap. 101, and their Chrysolite, that which Modern
Jewellers call a Topaz, which is a Stone of a Golden-colour. Such are the
Oriental Topaz's which are the most hard of all Stones next the Diamond. Their
Color is like Water tinged with Saffron or Rhubarb, but shining and pure.
There are some found in Europe, but as soft as Crystal, and approach somewhat
on Black with a Golden-colour; if there is any one found of the Color of pure
Gold, it is extraordinary, and not distinguishable from the Oriental ones, but
in hardness.

To imitate the Oriental ones, take two Ounces of Natural Crystal of Chap. 92,
seven Ounces of Red-Lead in ^ine Powder and searced; mix the whole well
together, put them into a good Crucible, wherein you leave an empty space of
about an Inch deep, for fear the Matter should run over in Baking, or stick to
the Cover of the Crucible in rising, and spoil the Work. Then proceed as in
Chap. 94, observing the same Circumstances of Time and Fire, and you will have an
admirable Topaz-colour.

CHAP. C. Another fine Topaz-Colour.
TAKE two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, as we have shown; two Ounces of
Native Cinnabar, two Ounces of Aes^ustum, the whole powdered, four times as
much calcined Tin also pulverized, put the whole in a Crucible well covered and
luted, into a Furnace as before, wherein let them stand twenty four or thirty
Hours at a Fire not too violent, and which shall always retain the same degree
of heat, for this Powder will easily melt. Then you will have a fine
Topaz-colour'd Paste.

A very fine Topaz-colour may be made by putting to four Ounces of the same
Natural Crystal half a Dram of Crocus Martis, and a very little Minium,
observing the same Circumstances for Baking it as before.

CHAP. CI. To make a Paste for an Oriental Chrysolite.
WE have told you that the Modern Jewellers call that a Chrysolite which the
Ancients called a Topaz, or Chrysopas, which is a Precious Stone, Green and
Diaphanous, some whereof cast a Luster of Gold: This Stone is so hard, that it
will easily endure the File, and sometimes there are pieces of them found big
enough to make Statues of; witness that related by Iuba King of Mauritania,
which was made in Honor of the Queen Arsinoe, Wife of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus,
of the height of four Cubits.

To imitate this Stone, take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, eight
Ounces of Minium in small Powder, add to it 12 Grains of Crocus Martis made
with Vinegar, as in Chap. 25. mixing the whole well together. Then put the
whole into a Crucible in the same Furnace as before, leaving it there a little
longer than the others, that it may have time to purify from the Lead. Then
you will have a Paste for the Oriental Chrysolite, which will appear very
admirable set with a Foil in Gold.

CHAP. CII. To make a Paste for Sky-colour, to imitate the Beryl, called also
Aqua-Marina.
WE have already treated of this Color in Chap. 40, wherein we have taken
notice how this Name of Beryl came to be given it by the Italians, because it
has the Blewish-green of the Sea, and also whence this Stone is gotten.

To imitate this Stone, take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, five
Ounces of Minium, twenty one Grains of Zaffer, prepared as in Chap. 17, the
whole reduced to a fine Powder, put it in a Crucible covered and luted, proceed
as in Chap. 94, and you will have a delicate Sky-colour.

This Color may be also imitated by taking half a Dram of Aes ustum to eight
Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, and putting the whole in a Crucible to bake
in the Furnace as before.

CHAP. CIII. To make a Paste for Sapphire-Colour.
THE Sapphire is very much esteemed for its Beauty, which is a very clear
Sky-colour, and pleasant to behold. There are some that are whitish like
Diamonds, others very Blue, and some Violet-colour; the Stone is soft, but
easy to harden.

To make this Paste, take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, four Ounces
and an half of Minium, twenty six Grains of the Blue Smalts the Painters use;
the whole being well pulverized, put them in a Crucible, and cover and lute
them well, then put them in the Furnace to Bake as long time as before
prescribed; and you will have a fine Violet-colour approaching blue.

CHAP. CIV. Another Oriental Sapphire.
THE Past for this Sapphire will be nearer the Oriental Color than the former.
Take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, six Ounces of Minium; to which add
two Scruples of Zaffer, prepared as in Chap. 17, and six Grains of Manganese
also prepared as by Chap. 18, the whole reduced to fine Powder; mix them well
together, and put them in a Crucible, and cover and lute it well; then put them
in the Furnace to bake the same space of time as before shown, and you will have
an Oriental Sapphire of a very fine Violet-colour.

CHAP. CV. Another deeper Oriental Sapphire.
THIS Past for Sapphire, will be of a deeper Color than the former, you must
put to two Ounces of Natural Crystal, prepared as in Chap. 92, five Ounces of
Minium, forty two Grains of prepared Zaffer, and eight Grains of Manganese of
Piedmont also prepared; the whole reduced to an impalpable Powder, and mixed
well together.

Moreover, proceed as in Chap. 94, observing well all Circumstances, and you will
have a Sapphire deeper than the preceding, somewhat tending to a VioletColour,
which you may Work, and Polish, and Set.

CHAP. CVI. To make a Paste for an Oriental Granat.
THE Granat is very like the Carbuncle, for both being exposed to the Sun, they
exhibit the Color of live burning Coals, being between Red and Yellow, which
is the true Color of Fire.

There are several sorts of Granats, both Oriental and Occidental, some deeper,
others less so; but the Jewellers know how to make them appear, by setting them
on Silver Foils.

We will not trouble the Reader with all that might be said concerning them,
several Authors having largely treated thereof, we shall content our selves
with showing here the way how to imitate them by our Art.

Take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, and six Ounces of Minium, with
sixteen Grains of Manganese of Piedmont, and two Grains of Zaffer, prepared as
we have shown in the first Book, the whole pulverized, and well mixed together,
and put in a Crucible into the Furnace, with it is Cover well luted, there to
Bake, with the same Precaution we heretofore have given; and you will have a very
fine Granat, ^as resplendent as the Oriental.

CHAP. CVII. A deeper Oriental Granat.
THIS Color will be not only deeper, but also far fairer than the precedent.
To make it, take two Ounces of Natural Crystal prepared, five Ounces and an
half of Minium; to which add fifteen Grains of Manganese of Piedmont prepared,
having pulverized it, mix the whole well together: Moreover proceed as in Chap.
94. for Baking this Paste, only take notice you must here leave more empty
space in the Crucible, because this Matter rises more than the others, wherein
care must be taken. Then you will have a deeper Oriental Granat than the former,
which you may polish, etc.

CHAP. CVIII. Another fairer Granat.
THE Paste for Granat will be yet much fairer than the Precedents, if you take
to two Ounces of Natural Crystal calcined and prepared as in Chap. 92, 6 Ounces
of Vermillion or Minium, in fine Powder, thirty five Grains of Manganese of
Piedmont prepared, and four Grains of prepared Zaffer, as in Book I. which
being well pulverized mix together in a Crucible, leaving a greater empty space
than in the others, by reason the Matter rises more; then lute the Cover well,
let it dry, and put it in the Furnace to Bake, as we have shown Chap. 94,
observing the same Circumstances we have noted on that Subject, and you will have
a very fine Granat fairer than the rest.

CHAP. CIX. Observations for Pasts and their Colors.
WE might have inserted this Discourse in Chap. 91, as being the first of this
Book; but we thought it better to place it here, where we will show diverse ways
of making Pasts, no less fair than curious, and where it will be necessary to
give some little Instruction to those who undertake to make them, as also
concerning the degrees of the Colors that may be therein imitated.

The making of these Pasts is the essential point of the Business; because on
it depends the beauty of our artificial Gems: But the baking also is not of
less Consequence, forasmuch as without that you cannot Succeed. It is not
Enough to well Regulate the Fire during the time we have Noted in Chap. 92.
whilst the matter is to stand in the Furnace, but you must also take care that
the Crucibles don't break before the matter is well baked and purified: For if
the Crucible breaks and you are forced to pour out the matter into another
Crucible, the whole Work will be spoiled and the matter full of Pustles and
Blisters. You had much better let the Crucible Cool, if it be not quite broken;
then Lute it well, and put it in the Furnace again to make an end of baking.
You must also take Notice not to break the Crucible to take out the matter
before it be perfectly baked.

The curious may avoid these inconveniences, if in room of ordinary Crucibles
they make them of the same Earth that the Pots for making Glass are made of,
which will resist the Fire longer than we have occasion here for baking, and
bear a more violent Fire than we have occasion for.

Those of Germany also will do very well for this business because they endure
the Fire better than the ordinary ones. But I will yet abridge all these
precautions, by showing an easy way to prepare the common Crucibles, which I
have seen tried, and resist the Fire a long time. Take an ordinary Crucible or
rather one of Germany: Heat it a little in the Fire, then dip it into Olive
Oil, and let it soak a little of it in. Then take Glass reduced to an
impalpable Powder, and strew it all over the Crucible, both without and within,
as thick as you can, then put it into a Furnace in a small heat, and then
increase the Fire to a melting Heat; then the Glass will Melt and Vitrifie so
well with the Crucible, that it will endure the Fire far longer than is
required for our Business.

We will also further remark that the Colors we here show for Pasts are
proportional to the Doses we give them; but those who would have them deeper or
lighter, must regulate themselves accordingly: If they make small Stones for
Rings, the Color must be deeper by reason of their smallness: If they make
greater, the Color must be lighter, but deeper for Pendants than any other.
The whole depends much on the Fancy of the Workman, who is to proportion the
Doses of the Coloring to the Work he designs.

In speaking of these Colors in this Chapter, our design is only to show more
easy ways to those who exercise themselves herein, for otherwise we have
sufficiently discoursed of them in the precedent Chapter, as we shall continue
to do in the following.

We shall say nothing further here of calcined Copper, or Verdigrease, or
Zaffer, or Manganese, having sufficiently done it before; but only advertise
the Curious, that there may be extracted from Gold a very fine Red, and one a
little more obscure from Iron; an excellent Green from Copper; a Golden Color
from Lead; Blue from Silver, but a much fairer from Granats of Bohemia; which
are low prized by reason of their smallness, but give a very fine Color.

The same may be done with Rubies, Sapphire, and other precious Stones, as
Chemists well know. If I should treat of all those Colors in this Tract, it
would make it half as big again as I design it, and would be too prolix for our
present Purpose; what we have shown already, is sufficient to make very fine
Works.

CHAP. CX. To make Sulphur Saturni, to be used in Pasts for all Artificial Gems.
ISAAC HOLLANDVS has so well shown us the way to imitate the Color of all
Precious Stones, that I cannot pass by in silence this following Method of his
extracted from his Works. As it is not common, nor his Book seen by every one,
and that there may be some that cannot understand him, we thought the Reader
might be glad to have it, since it is the most curious way that can be made use
of for this Work.

The way to make his Sulphur for it is this. Take Ceruss, or White-Lead, ground
very small, put it into a great Glass Body, and pour thereon as much distilled
Vinegar as will rise a Palm above it; and as the Vinegar will rise and swell
very much at first pouring on, you must take care to pour it on gently, till
all the fury and noise be gone. Then set this Body on a hot Furnace in Sand,
there to evaporate the eighth part of it away. Then let it cool and decant off
the remainder of the Vinegar, which will be well colored and full of Salt,
which keep in another Glass Vessel. Then pour fresh distilled Vinegar on the
remainder of the Ceruss; set it again on the Furnace to evaporate as before,
and decant off that Vinegar as the former. Reiterate this Process of putting
fresh Vinegar on your Matter, and evaporating it, and decanting it off till it
have no further Color nor Sweetness, which commonly happens about the sixth
time. Take all your colored Vinegars, and carefully filter them off, then take
one or more Glass Cucurbits, and evaporate all the Vinegars over a gentle Fire,
and you will find remaining at bottom a Salt of Saturn of Lead, very White.

Then take a Glass Matras, lute it well down to the middle of the Body, and put
your Salt of Lead in it, and put it on a Sand Furnace over a gentle Fire, for
the Space of twenty four Hours, covering it with Sand up to the Neck. Then take
out your Salt, which ought to be as red as Cinnabar, and grind it fine on a
Marble; if it be Yellow, you must put it on the Fire again for twenty four
Hours longer, and take care it don't melt, for then all is spoiled.

When your Salt of Lead is perfect, as we have shown, you must put it again
into a Glass Cucurbit, and pour distilled Vinegar on it as before, and decant
it off when it is enough colored, and put fresh Vinegar on the remaining Salt,
and continue this process till all the Salt be dissolved, and the Faeces or
Dregs all separated. After that, put all these colored Vinegars into Glass
Vessels, and let them stand six Days to settle, then filter them carefully and
separate all the Faeces. Then put all these filtered Vinegars into a great
Glass Body to evaporate as before, and you will find at the bottom a very white
Salt of Lead, sweet as Sugar.

This Salt being well dried, dissolve it afresh in common Water, and let it
stand six Days, that all the Faeces may precipitate to the bottom. Then filter
that Water, and evaporate it in a Glass Cucurbite over a gentle Fire, as we
have said, and you will have at bottom a Salt more white than Snow, and as sweet
as Sugar. Reiterate this Method of dissolving in fair Water ^iltering, and
evaporating till three times; then take your Saccharum Saturni, and put it in a
Glass Body in a Sand Furnace over a temperate heat, where leave it for several
Days without augmenting the Fire; then it will become redder than Cinnabar, and
give a Calx finer than Wheaten Flour.

It is this Calx thus purified from all its Terrestreity, which is called
Sulphur of Saturn. Now in making Pasts for Emerald, Sapphire, Granat, Topaz,
Chrysolite, Blue and other Colors; you must employ it instead of Minium, in
the same Doses we have shown in the precedent Chapter of this fifth Book.
Observing all we have noted in the Subject of Baking, and proceeding as in
Chap. 94. Then you will have Stones of different Colors, far fairer than the
Natural ones, and which can scarcely be distinguished from them.

The Pasts made with this Sulphur, will not have that Grease and Yellowness
which others have, and will not be so apt to spot by the Breath: Upon this
account the Curious will have no cause to repent of the trouble of making this
Sulphur, though the Work be very laborious. They also know that all fine Works
require very pure Matters, and that they cannot have that purity without the
great time and care of those who undertake them.

I may also here say, that this Work well carried on, is more precious than it
seems to be, except to those who are acquainted with it. For the sweetness this
Lead has acquired, by the Preparation we have shown, is a true sign of its
Purity, that it is fit to make a Medicine very homogeneous to Nature. I don't
say that this Preparation alone, we have here shown, is sufficient for so
elevated a Mystery as that whereof we speak; but I cannot also conceal that it
is the chief part of the Work, especially if you observe some little
Circumstances which Isaac Hollandus has omitted to mention, whether he was
ignorant of them, or thought them not necessary to his Preparation, I cannot
tell. The Learned will easily penetrate into this Mystery, and others that have
a true desire to know it, will find Subject to exercise their Wits on, in
embracing so serious a Study to penetrate into the depths of it.

CHAP. CXI. The Way to make very hard Pasts with Sulphur of Saturn, and to give
them all the Colors of Precious Stones.
THIS Paste is a Consequent of the precedent Operation, because we employ
therein the same Sulphur of Saturn, we just now mentioned; and that which
chiefly causes its Beauty, is that all the Ingredients we use in it are
perfectly purified.

To do this, take ten Pound of Natural Crystal prepared, with six Pound of Salt
extracted from Polverine of Rochetta, purified, pounded, and well searced, as
we have shown in Chap. 7, whereunto add two Pound of Sulphur of Saturn
chymically prepared, as in the preceding Chapter; then mix these three Powders
well together, and put them into an Earthen glazed Pan, and cast on them a
little common fair Water to reduce these Powders into a Lump something hard.
Afterward divide them into several Parcels of about three Ounces each, making
a hole in the middle the better to dry them at the Sun; being well dried, put
them into an Earthen Pot well luted, then calcine them in a Potters Furnace,
then pound and grind them well on a Marble, and searce them through a fine
Sieve. This being done, put this Powder into a Glass Furnace, there to melt and
purify for three Days; then cast the Matter into the Water, as we have
elsewhere shown; and after you have dried it, put it again into the Pot in the
same Oven, there to melt and repurifie for fifteen Days, that it may be without
spot, and that it becomes of the color of Precious Stones.

This Crystalline Matter may be tinged of several Colors, viz. Emerald by
means of Copper thrice calcined; Topaz by means of prepared Zaffer; and so of
others whereof we shall not treat here, having largely done it elsewhere. To
succeed, you must put into the Furnace as many Pots as you design to make
different Colors, add to each as much Chrystalline Matter as you please, and
regulate according to the weight of the tinging Materials which you add to
them, and proportionate them to those we have described in the precedent
Chapters of this Book. This Paste will have finer Colors than the true Natural
Stones, and approach near to their hardness; particularly that of the Emerald,
which the Curious will find by Experience.

CHAP. CXII. The Way to make Saturnus (called) Glorificatus.
THIS is a Preparation we hold in no less esteem for Pasts for Gems, than that
of Isaac Hollandus, and whereof we have spoken in Chap. 110, they have some
likeness, yet this last is more easy to make, and more short, and has no less
Virtue.

Take a good Litharge, or rather good Ceruss of Venice, what quantity you
please. That which you choose, grind into a subtle Powder, in a great Glass
Cucurbite, whereunto pour good distilled Vinegar, as much as shall swim on the
top of the Matter a Hand high* Then put this Vessel on a soft Ash-Fire, and
when the Vinegar is well colored and impregnated with Salt of Saturn, decant
it off into another Vessel; then continue to put new Vinegar on your Matter,
which stir well with a Stick, to facilitate the Solution of the Salt; and do it
so often, that your Vinegar shall have extracted all the Tincture from the
Salt, and that color it no more.

Then take all your colored Vinegar, rectify it four times on Tartar calcined
to Whiteness, then filter it carefully, and put it in a Glass Cucurbite, on a
Sand or Ash-Fire, where gently evaporate it till it be just skinned over. Then
put the Vessel into a cold place, having taken care to cover it, for fear of
any foulness tumbling into it; and in a little time you will find your Matter in
little Stones, Pure, Chrystalline, and Fusible, which you must take out of your
Vessel with a Skimmer full of Holes. Then put your Vessel on the same Fire to
evaporate the remaining Vinegar till it be just skinned over, and then set it in
a cold place to Crystallize as before. When you have taken out all the
Crystals, dry them well, and reduce them into a subtle Powder, and keep them
in a Vessel well stopped, taking care to make at least ten Pounds. Thus you
have Saturnus Glorificatus.

CHAP. CXIII. Another Way of making Paste for Precious Stones, with Saturnus
Glorificatus.
THERE are some who use transparent Flints calcined, to add to Saturnus
Glorificatus, and make Paste for Artificial Gems; but as we esteem Natural
Crystal prepared much more proper for that Work, we should employ it before
calcined Flints.

Take therefore of Natural Crystal prepared ten Pounds, of Saturnus
Glorificatus ten Pounds, the whole reduced to fine Powder, which mix well
together; then put it in a Pot in a Glass-house Furnace, there to be melted and
purified three Days: Then cast it into a great Wooden Vessel full of cold
Water, then dry it, and put it in the Furnace in the same Pot, the better to
purify. When this Chrystalline Matter is well melted, and clear, take out the
Pot; and when it is cool, pound it to an impalpable Powder on a Marble, then
keep it in a Glass Vessel well stopped, for fear of Dust falling in; and that
Matter will serve for a Basis or Stuff to make all sorts of Artificial Gems of.

We need not here repeat the Way of making them of this Past, because we have
shown it before in several others; but for sake of the Curious who are never
weary of Learning, we will do it; besides that there are some who may take
pleasure in reading it, as we do in writing it; particularly we will treat of
some Species of Stones we have, as yet, not at all mentioned.

CHAP. CXIV. To make a very fair Carbuncle.
THE Carbuncle is a very Precious Stone, whereof several Authors have written,
but I don't know one that says he has seen it. They attribute to this Stone the
Property of giving Light in the Dark, like a burning Coal, or a kindled Lamp.
Ludovicus Verromannus reports that the King of Pegu, carried one about him of
such a bigness, and so much Splendour, that those who saw that Prince when it
was Dark, saw him shining as if encircled with the Sun; but this Author, as
well as the rest, says he never saw one.

Pliny pretends there are several sorts of Carbuncles, some Male ones more hard
and brighter, and other Females more languid. But this Author is so confused,
and so little assured of it, that we cannot take his Testimony as Authentic.
Yet among all those Species which he describes, those seem to approach nearest
Carbuncles, which he calls Lithizontes and Sandastri. The first discovers
strongly its splendor at the Fire or Sun; being in the Shade it appears of a
Purplish Color; being exposed in the open and clear Day, it sparkles as it
were at the Sunbeams, and hides as it were bright Stars within it. The second
is curious by reason of Golden Sparkles appearing and glittering within like
Stars, which are always seen across it within side, but never near the Surface,
imitating the Hyades by their number and Disposition and Order. This Author
says lastly, that the Chaldaeans held this last Stone in great Veneration, and
used it in all their Ceremonies. As for me I am apt to think that the
Carbuncle, is that Stone the Ancients have related to give Light by Night like
a flaming Fire, and by Day like a twinkling Star, which is now no more to be
found as we have hinted in the first Chapter, and that their Carbuncle is the
Stone only known to the Adepti, the Matter whereof is so pure and Spiritual,
that Evil Spirits dare not look on it, much less come near it.

Whether the Carbuncle be a precious Stone found in the Bowels of the Earth or
not, we can imitate the Properties these Authors give it by help of our Art.
And we will show you two Ways of doing it in this Chapter.

For the first take ten Ounces of Matter prepared with Saturnus Glorificatus,
and Natural Crystal, reduced to impalpable Powder, as we have shown in the
preceding Chapter, whereunto add half an Ounce of Crocus Martis, in fine Powder
prepared as in Cha^. 27. After having well mixed these Powders together, put
them into a good Crucible, which cover and lute well, then put it into a
Glass-house Fire for three Days, by putting it nearer and nearer the strength
of the Fire by degrees. Then take out your Crucible, and put the Matter into a
Marble Mortar, then pound and grind it very small, with its weight of Sa^
Gemmae, and put it into another Crucible, which cover and lute as before. Being
dry, put it into the same Glass-house Furnace, approaching it to the Fire
little by little, and letting it stand twenty Hours in good Fusion. Then take
it out, and put it again into the Furnace to bake again, as you do Glass, where
leave it twelve Hours, that it may cool gently.

Your Crucible being cold, take it out of the Furnace to bake again, then break
it, and you will find in it the Matter tinged of a very fine Carbuncle Color,
which you may cut of what Form and Greatness you please, and then cut and
polish them at the Wheel, and they will be perfect.

There is a certain Slight, which I shall not mention here, which several
Artists may know, whereby these Carbuncles may be made to undergo all Trials.
It is a Point which will deserve the Study of all those who are ignorant of it;
to discover it to every one, would be a Profanation of the Secrets of Art, and
would make the Ignorant as knowing in one Moment, as those who have employed
all their Lives in Searches after the profoundest Knowledge.

CHAP. CXV. Another Carbuncle more noble and fairer, called, Carbunculus nocte
illuminans.
THERE is a second way of making a Carbuncle, called, Carbunculus nocte
illuminans, which is far more resplendent and fairer than the former. Those who
have written that it shone in the Night, and made the Possessors of it always
very lucky, only spoke by way of allusion to the Philosophers Stone, to which
alone that virtue can be attributed; that is, the Stone and Carbuncle which is
not to be found, that is, except in the Hands of the Adepti, who alone can make
and possess it. We may here boldly say, That the Carbunculus nocte illuminans,
is not a Stone any where formed by Nature, but made by Art; for Nature cannot
purify the Matters she furnishes us with, and this Stone cannot be made of
them, except when they are purified in the utmost perfection, which Art alone
can do. Thus this Masterpiece of Work, this Carbuncle, this Phoenix, or this
Stone so famous among the Philosophers, is far more precious than any Nature
can form, since by means of it, you may in two Hours time make simple Crystals
as valuable as any Stones Nature spends so many Ages in bringing to perfection.

If there are any Carbuncles in the World, or Precious Stones that have their
Beauty, we are persuaded that they must be the products of Art rather than
Nature, and that they are only made by that pure and incomparable Matter of the
Philosophers, exalted in color and virtue to the highest degree: We are
persuaded by all the Authors we have read, that there is no such Natural Stone;
so that there is only the precious Elixir of the Adepti, whereof a Stone of the
Qualities given to the Carbuncle can be formed, which far surpasses in Beauty,
Rubies, Granats, Jacynths, etc.

But now we come to the way of imitating this second Carbuncle, or rather the
Beauty which Authors attribute to it, not with the Elixir of the Adepti,
whereof we know nothing but the virtues, but with the ordinary Matters known to
all the Students in this Art.

Take ten Ounces of Matter prepared with Natural Crystal, and Saturnus
Glorificatus, and reduced to an impalpable Powder; add to it an Ounce of Gold
calcined, as we shall show hereafter; then mix the whole well together, and put
it in a good Crucible, which must not be above half full, cover it and lute it
well, let it dry, then put it into a Glass-house Furnace for three Days, by
bringing it little by little nearer to the strongest Fire, as we have said
before After three Days take out your Crucible, and put the Matter into a
Marble Mortar, which pound to an impalpable Powder, to which add its weight of
Sal Gem also in fine Powder, which mix well together, and searce through a fine
Sieve, the better to incorporate.

Put this Powder into a new Crucible, which also fill but half way, which
cover, lute, and dry as before: Then put it in the same Glass-house Furnace,
bringing it nearer little by little, where let it stand ten Hours. After which
take your Crucible out of the Furnace, and put it into that where they set
their Glasses to anneal, whence take it out ten or twelve Hours after, and
having broken it, you will find the Matter tinged of a Carbuncle-colour, the most
lively and resplendent that can be made by this Art, whereof you may make what
Stones or Works you please. We have promised the Calcination of Gold, which may
be performed several ways, but as fine Works cannot be made without the most
pure Matters, we will pretermit the more common ones, to show you the
following, which is very fine and proper for this Art. Dissolve an Ounce of
Gold in three Ounces of Aqua Regalis; then add to it four Ounces of common
Mercury purified, and passed through Wash-Leather, which will precipitate your
Gold to the bottom of the Matras joining it self to it. Then your Aqua Regalis
will grow clear, which when it is, and seems to have no more Gold in it, decant
it off, then wash your Matter with warm Water to dulcifie it, and take off all
the Saltness. Add to this Matter, being dried, its weight of Flour of
Brimstone, then pound the whole well together, put them in a Crucible, to which
fit another on the top, which must be bored on the bottom, with a hole big
enough to put a Quill through, which lute well together, and dry them. Then put
them in a round Fire, which you must give them by degrees for four Hours, the
Crucible being the last Hour wholly covered over with Coals, which let kindle
and cool again. Then open the Crucible, and you will find your Gold calcined,
which amalgamate with four Ounces of fresh Mercury; to which add five Ounces
more of Flour of Brimstone, pounding them well together as before, then put the
whole in your Crucibles, which lute and give them the same round Fire as
before, which reiterate a third time, the better to calcine and open your Gold;
then put it into a glazed Earthen Pan, pretty deep, and pour on it good Spirit
of Wine that may swim two Inches above, then put Fire to it, and when it is
burnt, you will have a very fine Gold, in an impalpable Calx, well opened, which
edulcorate with warm Water distilled, and dry it gently.

There is yet another way to calcine Gold more perfectly, by means of which you
may make a good Ceruss,and afterward a perfect Vitriol or Salt, whereof the
Principles may be separated, and you may perform Wonders with them in Medicine
and Metallic Chemistry; but that Calcination would be too long to describe
here, besides it is foreign to our Business, the Gold of that being too much
opened.

CHAP. CXVI. To make Oriental Rubies.
THE true Ruby, which is a precious Stone, diaphanous and very radiant, ought
to have the color of Blood, and Scarlet, and clear Lacca, and show about the
edges of its Fire, a little Azure-colour. This Stone is found in the Isle of
Ceilen, and in the River of Pegu, in a Rocky Matter of a Rosiecolour, which is
the Matrix wherein it is generated and nourished; and if that Rocky Matter be
transparent, it yields the Balass Ruby, whereof we will treat in the following
Chapter.

Sometimes there are found such fine and large Rubies, that some have mistook
them for Carbuncles. If any Ruby ever merited that Name, it was that of Queen
Elizabeth of Austria, Dowager of Charles IX, which after her Death she left to
the Emperor Rodolphus II, her Brother. It had been purchased long before for
sixty thousand Ducats, which was then a very considerable Sum.

Queen Mary de Medicis had also one of an inestimable Value, and Bigness, but I
cannot learn what the Purchase was, or what became of it.

To imitate this fine Color, take four Ounces of our Matter prepared with
Natural Crystal, and Saturnus Glorificatus, two Ounces of Crocus Martis
prepared as in Chap. 25, one Ounce of Verdigrease, two Ounces of Mercury
calcined ad rubedinem, and two Ounces of Sal-Gem, the whole reduced to fine
Powder, well mixed together, put into a Crucible covered and luted and set in a
Glass-house Furnace for three Days, then take it out and put it in the Furnace
where Glasses are set to Anneal, there to cool by degrees for twelve Hours.
Then break your Crucible, and you will find your Matter tinged of a fine
Ruby-colour, which you may divide, cut, and polish, as we have said before.

We could show a way of imitating Rubies with only Orpiment, which are very
fine, but so brittle, that we thought it better to say nothing of it, rather
than give occasion for an Expense that would turn to no Profit.

CHAP. CXVII. To make Balass Ruby.
THIS Precious Stone is of the Nature of a Ruby, since it is found in the same
Matter as that. Its very bright color resembles a Vermillion Rose and Crimson,
being mixed of a Natural Red and of a Sky-colour: We will now show the way to
imitate it.

Take six Ounces of Saturnus Glorificatus, mixed with Natural Crystal, as in
Chap. 113, half an Ounce of Crocus Martis, half an Ounce of Mercury calcined ad
Rubedinem, and two Drams of Sal Gem, the whole reduced to an impalpable Powder,
and mixed well together. Then put it in a Crucible covered close and luted, and
so into a Glass-house Furnace for three Days, proceeding moreover as in the
preceding Chapter, and you will have a very fine Matter, the color of Balass
Ruby.

CHAP. CXVIII. To make Oriental Sapphire.
WE will not repeat here the Nature or Color of the Sapphire, having done it
before: But we will add, that from the true Sapphire, may be extracted the
three Principles, which are of infinite virtue in Medicine, whether united, or
separate. To imitate this Precious Stone, with our Matter prepared with
Saturnus Glorificatus, and Natural Crystal, take ten Ounces, add two Drams of
the Calx of Gold, mix these Powders well together, put them in a Crucible
covered with another, let them dry, then put them in a Glass-house Furnace for
three Days. Moreover do all we have ordered in Chap. 116, and that Mass will be
of a very fair Oriental Sapphirecolour, which cut and polish at the Wheel.

CHAP. CXIX. The Way to make an Oriental Emerald.
THE Chapters wherein we have shown how to imitate this Precious Stone, contain
also its Nature and Colors; and all we design to say here, our Intent being
not to enlarge on all the Properties of Precious Stones, but only to show the
Means of imitating them, as we shall go on to do.

To make this Oriental Emerald, take ten Ounces of our Matter prepared, of
Saturnus Glorificatus, and Natural Crystal, half an Ounce of prepared
Verdigrease, half a Dram of Foretto of Spain also prepared, as in Chap. 20, the
whole reduced into fine Powder, and well mixed together, and put it into a
Crucible covered with another, lute it and dry it; then set it in a Glass-house
Furnace for three Days, and after in the Annealing Furnace twelve Hours. After
which break the Crucible, and you will find the Matter tinged of a very fine
Oriental Color, which cut and polish as before.

CHAP. CXX. The Way to make Turcois.
WE have shown the way to give a Turcois-colour to Glass, in Chap. 50, but we
have not yet spoken of its Color or Nature, which obliges us to do it in this
Chapter. The Name of Turcois, which this Precious Stone bears, comes from the
place where it is found, viz. in Turkey, although this Stone also comes from
Persia and the East Indies, where it is found in abundance, the Color whereof
approaches nearer to Blue than Green, which also distinguishes them from those
that come out of the West, which are more Green and Whitish. They call the
first by the Name of the Stone of the Old Rock, and the other by that of the
New. The Turcois is the finest and noblest of all Opaque Precious Stones: Its
color is composed of Green, White and Blue, and imitates that of Verdigrease.
They attribute great Properties to this Stone, such as bringing good or evil
Luck to People, and to denote things to come to them, either by their breaking
or changing Color, which we omit discoursing of, to show the manner of
imitating them.

Take ten Ounces of our Matter prepared, of Natural Crystal, and Saturnus
Glorificatus; half an Ounce of purified Verdigrease, and one Ounce of prepared
Zaffer, the whole in fine Powder; which mix well together in a Crucible covered
with another, well luted and dried, which afterward put into a Glass-house
Furnace, where leave it for three Hours, then twelve Hours in the Annealing
Furnace, that it may cool gently. Then take out your Crucible and break it, and
take out the Matter, and cut and polish it, and you will have Turcois colored
Stones, like those of the Old Rock.

CHAP. CXXI. To make Oriental Topaz.
IT will be needless here to repeat the Quality of the Topaz, since we have
done it already in this Book: So we shall content our selves to show the manner
of imitating it, with our Paste composed of Natural Crystal, and Saturnus
Glorificatus, whereof take ten Ounces, of very good Orpiment one Ounce reduced
to fine Powder. After having mixed them well together, put them into a Crucible
covered with another, which lute and dry well, then put it into a Glass-house
Furnace for three Hours, and then let it cool gently, in the Annealing Furnace.
Having taken your Matter out of the Crucible, you may cut and polish it as you
please, and you will have a very fine Oriental Topaz.

CHAP. CXXII. The Way to make Chrysolite.
WE have also described the Nature and Properties of the Chrysolite in this
Book, as well as of the Topaz and other Gems, wherefore we will only show the
way here to imitate its Color.

Take ten Ounces of our Powder of Natural Crystal, and Saturnus Glorificatus,
to which add one Ounce of Crocus Martis prepared, the whole reduced to fine
Powder, well mixed, and put into a Crucible covered and luted, as we have said:
Observing moreover what we have remarked for the Baking, and you will have a fine
Chrysolite-colour, which will be of the Native Green.

CHAP. CXXIII. Another Way of making all sorts of Precious Stones much harder,
to turn Iargons of Avernia into Diamonds, to make Diamonds of Alanson, and
harden them, to make white and fine Sapphires as hard as true Diamonds, etc.
HERE we give another way of making Precious Stones, different from those we
have given before, which will be much harder, and consequently approach nearer
the Nature of fine ones, because we employ no Saturn therein, which always
makes Stones softer and heavier, what Preparation soever you use of it.

We shall only make use of Natural Crystal, and some Materials added to it, to
give it the Colors of all sorts of Precious Stones. We also use in the
Composition of the Materials of these Gems, fine and pure Salt of Tartar
prepared, as in Chap. 93, which ought to open our Crystal, and make it the
better imbibe the Color of the Tinctures which we give it, which will make the
Stones appear more fine and shining.

To prepare our Crystal, you must first calcine it, as we have shown in Chap.
92; that is, by heating it red hot in a Crucible, and quenching it often in
cold Water, changing the Water each time. But instead of grinding it to an
impalpable Powder upon a Marble, as we have shown in the same Chapter, you must
pound it in a Brass Mortar with a Pestle of the same, and not use Iron no more
than Marble, then searce the Crystal through a fine Sieve; and this is the
Basis of all our following Gems: We should have desired to have put down all
our Preparations in one Chapter, since there are only the Doses and the Colors
to be changed, the more to abridge this Work; but the fear such a Mixture
should breed confusion, obliges us to continue our Work as we have begun it,
which is to make a Chapter of each sort of Stone, and of the difference of
their Colors.

After that, we will give the true manner of turning Jargons of Avernia into
Diamonds, to make Diamonds of Alanson, to harden them, and make them exceeding
Sparkling; to give hardness to white and fine Sapphires; so that it will be
difficult to distinguish them from true Diamonds. Finally we may chance to add
something further, for the sake of the Curious.

CHAP. CXXIV. The Way to make a fair Emerald.
WE will abridge as much as possible all the Processes of these Chapters, that
we may not trouble the Reader with dull Repetitions. The change of Materials
for this Work making great differences in it, we could not explain in one
Chapter, all the different Ways of making one and the same Stone, because such
a Mixture would occasion confusion.

To make a fine Emerald of our Crystal: Take two Ounces of it, and add to it
forty eight Grains of Crocus Martis,and two Ounces and forty eight Grains of
pure Salt of Tartar, prepared as in Chap. 93, the whole reduced into fine
Powder in a Brass Mortar, which put into a Crucible covered with another, and
luted well together; then put it into the Glass-house Fire, there to bake
twenty four Hours, and then in the Annealing Furnace for twelve Hours, that the
Matter may cool little by little, which then take out of the Crucible, cut and
polish, and you will have a perfect Emerald.

CHAP. CXXV. The Way to make a Violet- Sapphire.
WE shall show several ways of making Sapphires of our Crystal of different
Colors. To make this, take one Ounce of our Powder of Crystal, one Dram of
Salt of Vitriol, and nine Drams of fine Salt of Tartar, the whole in fine
Powder. Then proceed further as we have shown in the preceding Chapter; and
you will have a Sapphire of a very fine Violet-colour.

CHAP. CXXVI. Another Violet- Sapphire of a deeper Color.
THIS Sapphire will be very fine, but of a very deep Color, and if any Person
desire it to be lighter, he may easily make it so, by diminishing one fourth
part of the tinging Ingredients which we add to Crystal.

Take to make this, two Ounces of our Powder of Crystal, two Ounces, five
Drams, and twenty four Grains of Verdigrease, thirty two Grains of Azure, and
two Drams of Sublimate, the whole in very fine Powder. As to the baking of it
observe what we have said in Chap. 124.

CHAP. CXXVII. Another very fine Blue- Sapphire.
THE Blue Color of Sapphire, is no less agreeable than the Violet, and it is
the Male of its Kind. To make it, take one Ounce of our Crystal in Powder, add
to it a Dram of Salt of Vitriol, three Grains of Verdigrease, one Grain of
Azure, and one Ounce, one Dram, four Grains of our fine Salt of Tartar, the
whole in fine Powder; put it into a Crucible covered and luted, to be baked and
purified, as we have heretofore shown, and you will have a very fine Blue-
Sapphire, etc.

CHAP. CXXVIII. Another fine Sapphire.
THE Colors of these Sapphires being different, by the Dose and mixture of the
Ingredients, we will show each in a Chapter by it self.

Take two Ounces of our Powder of Crystal, two Ounces of our fine Salt of
Tartar, five Drams, twenty four Grains of Verdigrease, and thirty two Grains of
Arure, the whole reduced to impalpable Powder, which you must set to bake and
purify in a covered Crucible in a Glass-house Furnace, aswe have said before,
and you will have a very fine Sapphire.

CHAP. CXXIX. Another Admirable Blue.
TO arrive to this fine Color, take one Ounce of our Powder of Crystal, one
Dram, fifty six Grains of our fine Salt of Tartar, the whole reduced to a fine
Powder, put it into a Crucible covered and luted, which bake and purify twenty
four Hours in a Glass-house Furnace, then set it to cool gently twelve Hours in
the Annealing Furnace. Then you will have an admirable Blue, which you may cut
and polish, etc.

CHAP. CXXX. The Way to make Beryl, or Egmarine.
THIS Beryl-colour will be very fine Sky-colour, if you take one Ounce of our
Powder of Crystal, one Ounce of our fine Salt of Tartar, and six Ounces of Salt
of Vitriol, the whole reduced to fine Powder in a Brass Mortar, and searced
through a fine Sieve; farther proceeding as in Chap. 124.

CHAP. CXXXI. Another deeper Egmarine.
THIS deeper Color we give Beryl, is no less fine than the first. Take nine
Drams, forty eight Grains of our Powder of Crystal, three Drams, twenty four
Grains of Verdigrease, and one Ounce, five Drams, twenty four Grains of our
fine Salt of Tartar, the whole reduced into fine Powder in a Brass Mortar, and
then baked, as we have shown in the preceding Chapter.

CHAP. CXXXII. To make a fair Jacynth.
IT is scarce possible to make Iacynth, without Lead in its composition,
wherefore you must put upon an Ounce of our Powder of Crystal, two Ounces and
an half of Minium, with twenty four Grains of Verdigrease, two Drams of
Sublimate, and five or six Leaves of Silver; the whole reduced to fine Powder
in a Brass Mortar, and searced through a fine Sieve, mix them well together,
and put them in a Crucible covered with another, and well luted, then bake and
purify it in a Glass-house Furnace for twelve Hours. Then take it off the
Fire, then pound it again in a Brass Mortar to a fine Powder, sifting it
through a fine Sieve. Then put it in a new Crucible, which cover and lute well,
which set again in the Glass-house Furnace for twenty four Hours, and twelve
more in the Annealing Furnace. The Crucible being cold, take out the Matter
which will be of a fine Iacynth-colour, which cut and polish.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Another fairer Jacynth-Colour.
IF this Iacynth be fairer, it is also more brittle than the other, because it
has more Lead in it. To make it, take an Ounce of our Crystal in Powder, three
Ounces of Minium, and forty five to forty six Grains of Verdigrease. Mix well
these Matters together, after having pounded them well in a Brass Mortar, and
searced them through a fine Sieve. Then put them into a Crucible covered and
luted in a Glass-house Furnace, where let it stand twelve Hours. Then take out
the Matter, which pound and sift well; then put that Powder into another
Crucible covered and luted, which put into the same Glass-house Furnace for
twenty four Hours, and the Matter will be well baked. Then take out the
Crucible, to put it in the Annealing Furnace; and twelve Hours afterward take
your Matter out of the Crucible, which will be of a fine Iacynth-colour, and
may be Wrought.

CHAP. CXXXIV. Another Oriental Iacynth-Colour.
THIS Color will be of a very fine reddish Yellow, such as is the true
Oriental Iacynth: To make it, take one Ounce of our Crystal in Powder, three
Ounces of Minium, one Ounce of Arsnick prepared as for the Topaz, and one Ounce
of Vitriol calcined ad rubedinem. The whole reduced to a fine Powder in a Brass
Mortar, proceeding moreover as in the preceding Chapter.

CHAP. CXXXV. The Way of making a true and very fine PeridorColour.
THE Peridor, whereof we have as yet made no mention, is a sort of a clear
Topaz, of a Goldcolour Light, but which is notwithstanding beautiful. To
imitate it well, take two Ounces of our Natural Crystal in Powder, six Ounces
of Minium, an Ounce of our fine Salt of Tartar, and eight Grains of
Verdigrease; the whole reduced to impalpable Powder, pounded in a Mortar, and
searced through a fine Sieve. You must observe the same Circumstances for
baking this Stone, as for the Iacynth, by reason of the Minium that enters into
the one and the other, and you will have a very fine Peridor.

CHAP. CXXXVI. Another Color of Peridor.
THIS Peridor ought to be harder and more fixed than the precedent, because
there is no Minium in it, but it will not be so Vivacious. Take one Ounce of
our Natural Crystal in Powder, a Dram of Salt of Vitriol, two Drams of Vitriol
calcined ad rubedinem, four Grains of Verdigrease, and of our fine Salt of
Tartar, as much as equals the whole in weight, i. e. one Ounce, three Drams,
and four Grains. All these Matters being reduced into fine Powder in a Brass
Mortar, mix them well together, then put them into a Crucible covered with
another, and well luted, twelve Hours after take your Crucible and break it to
take out the Matter, which cut and polish at the Wheel, then let it be Wrought
by a good Workman.

We will not speak here of other sorts of Gems, which may be imitated by this
same way, adding the Doses of their Tinctures.

CHAP. CXXXVII. Of Iargons of Avernia, and the Way to make those Red which are
of a Gridelin-Colour.
WE have promised to treat of the Jargons of Auvergne, which are little Stones
commonly found in that Country, and several other places of France: They are
red and shining like Iacynth; which has gained them the Name of false Iacynths,
because they much imitate that Precious Stone.

There are found, notwithstanding, many of these small Stones, which are not of
a red Color, but of a kind of Gridelin. You may give these last a Red
Tincture, with as much ease as you can take it away from the former to convert
them into Diamonds, as we will show in the following Chapter.

To give a Red Color to Jargons that are of a Gridelin, you must take equal
parts of purified Sal-Armoniac, and of Tartar calcined to Whiteness, as we have
otherwise shown: Mix these Matters well in fine Powder, then stratifie your
Jargons in a Crucible S. S. S. beginning and ending with the Powders. Then put
the Crucible in a good Coal-Fire, but not hot enough for the Stones to melt,
but only to grow red hot, that they may be the better penetrated by the
Tincture the Materials will give it, then let it cool, and by this Method
they will take as fine and shining a Red Tincture, as the true and finest Natural
Jargons of this color have.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. The Way of Extracting a Tincture of Iargons d'Auvergne, and to
make very fair and hard Diamonds thereof.
THOSE Stones may be made white and hard like the true Diamonds, by taking away
their Tincture, which is no contemptible Secret. There have been made
Rose-Diamonds of them so fine and curious, that the best Goldsmiths have been
mistaken in them, and thought them true Diamonds.

You must boil your Jargons in a Balneum of Mutton-Suet, wherein they will lose
all their Red Color and become White.

Then take equal parts of Emery of Spain, Rock-Crystal, Pumice-Stone, and
Sulphurous Trepoly, the whole reduced into fine Powder, and searced through a
fine Sieve, make a Paste of it with Aqua Vitae, wherewith cement your Jargons
in a great Crucible S. S. S. then cover it with another, and lute them well,
then set it in a Furnace over a gentle Fire for half an Hour, then augment your
Fire till it be hot enough for Fusion, wherein leave the whole for fourteen
Hours, then let the Fire go out, and the Crucible cool of its self; wherein,
after you have broke it, you will find your Stones of a very fine Diamond Color,
hard, shining, and sparkling like the true ones, which you may polish and work
up as the Goldsmiths.

This Sulphurous Trepoly, which enters into the Composition of this Paste,
being not commonly known, we will show the way of making it, that we may leave
nothing imperfect, which might be any Obstruction to the Proceedings of the
Curious. Take equal parts of Trepoly, of crude Antimony and common Sulphur, and
grind them to a fine Powder on a Porphyry Stone, and make them into a Paste
with Vinegar, which being dry will easily crumble. This is the Sulphurous
Trepoly which we make use of.

Some Persons in making the same Process of taking away the color from
Jargons, and giving them the hardness and whiteness of Diamonds, have made use
of Barly-meol, wherewith they make a Paste with distilled Vinegar impregnated
with Lead, wherewith they stratifie their Stones, or Jargons, in a Crucible,
covered with another, and well luted, which they afterward put in a gradual,
round, or Wheel Fire, for six Hours. But this way they could not give them the
true Diamond-colour. Wherefore I advise those who would try this Experiment, to
follow our first Process, which has several times succeeded.

There are moreover some who stratifie their Stones with pounded Coal, which
they put in a Crucible covered and luted, which they set on the Fire six Hours,
so that the Crucible be always red hot. I don't approve of this way, because
the Coals may dry the Humor of the Stone, and calcine it.

CHAP. CXXXIX. The Way to make Diamonds.
THE Quality and Color of the Diamond being so well known, we shall not
enlarge upon them in this Chapter, but only show the way to counterfeit them,
make them endure the Fire, and harden them.

Take of good Natural Crystal, calcined and reduced to subtle Powder, what
Quantity you please; fill a Pot with it, and set it in a Glass-house Furnace
twelve Hours to be melted and purified: Then drop the melted Matter into cold
Water, then dry it, and reduce it again to Powder; add to that Powder its
weight of our fine Salt of Tartar, of Chap. 93. Mix these two Powders well, and
make little Pills of them with common Water. Then wipe these Pills, and put
them into an Earthen Pot on a strong Fire, there to grow red hot for twelve
Hours space without melting. Then put them into a Pot in a Glass-house Furnace,
where leave them two Days, to be well melted and purified, then put the Matter
twelve Hours in the Annealing Furnace to cool little by little. Then break the
Crucible, and you will have a fine Material for Diamonds, which cut and polish at
the Wheel.

CHAP. CXL. Another Way of making the Diamond of Alanson.
HERE follows a way of making Diamonds of Alanson, which is not quite so fine
as the precedent, but has, notwithstanding, several Advantages which attend it;
besides it is more easy, since there only needs an ordinary Fire to succeed in
it.

Take an Earthen glazed Pot, set it on a little Furnace, put in it Filings of
Steel, with some VineAshes at discretion, wherein place by one another Crystals
cut and polished; then pour common Water gently on it, which warm and boil
during the space of twelve Hours, taking care to add boiling Water fresh into
the Vessel, as the Water in it consumes by boiling, and take care it boil
continually. Then see if your Crystals have acquired the color and hardness
you expected: If not, continue the Fire some Hours longer, and they will be
like the true Diamonds of Alanson; taking care to repolish them again at the
Wheel, to give them color and brightness.

CHAP. CXLI. The Way to give the true Color and Hardness of a Diamond, to
Crystals and Diamonds of Alanson.
THERE is nothing in Nature which Art cannot imitate, and oftentimes those
things which seem most difficult, prove to be most easy when managed with
Judgment; or when he that undertakes to do them has experimented any thing of
the like Nature before, and knows the Nature, and Properties, and Powers of his
Subject.

Although the Imperfect Metals be immature, or unripe, they contain,
notwithstanding, a great deal of fixed and volatile Gold, which may be easily
separated, or attracted out by means of Art. Imperfect Metals may be very much
meliorated by Fire, by a proportionable and agreeable coction. There are also
Crystals and Precious Stones, which have no Natural hardness, which may be
given them by Art, having all the Natural Dispositions thereunto required,
since they have the same Principle as the most fine, and that they only want a
little Sulphur, which hindered their thorough coction.

Thus this Defect may be obviated in Precious Stones, as well as Metals, by
giving them a due coction, and so changing them for the better. We will begin
to give the most simple way of attaining it, before we show those that are more
exalted.

You may give the color and hardness of Diamonds to Crystals and Diamonds of
Alanson, by taking good Dutch Trepoly and making a Paste of it with Water out
of the Smiths Forge, wherein you must wrap up the quantity you design of
Crystals, or Diamonds of Alanson cut and polished; then set it in a Crucible
covered and luted on a gradual Fire, where let it stand till the Crucible
become red hot. A little time after take it out, and take out the Stones, then
polish them again at the Wheel to give them their color.

To set them in Works, take Indian Paper, with Leaves of Tin, like those you
put behind Looking-glasses, then let them be set by some good Goldsmith, and
they can scarce be distinguished from fine one^, except by very nice Discerners.

CHAP. CXLII. Another Way to harden Crystals and Diamonds of Alanson.
CRYSTALS also acquire hardness in the Paste we are now going to describe,
because their Humidity exhales, and they become more fixed.

Take Barly-Meal well sifted, with Petroleum, or Rock-Oyl; then cut that Paste
in the middle, and put all your Stones in order, so that they may not touch one
another. Then cover your Stones with the other half of the Paste, then put it
in a Crucible covered with another, and luted well together, and let it dry.
Then set this Crucible in a gradual Wheel-Fire from five to six Hours, a small
Fire the two first Hours, which en^rease from two to two Hours, till the end of
the six; then let the whole cool of it self. Then break your Crucibles, and
you will find your Stones very fine, shining, and sparkling like fine Diamonds,
which repolish at the Wheel, and set by a skilful Workman.

CHAP. CXLIII. A Way to harden Crystals and Diamonds of Alanson, and to make
them sparkle as much as Natural Oriental Diamonds.
ALTHOUGH this be an important Secret, and ill People may commit Cheats by it,
yet I will here give it, for the sake of the Curious, who only seek for their
own Satisfaction.

Take one Pound of Lodestone, a Pound of Quicklime, and half a Pound of
common Sulphur, the whole reduced to powder, and well mixed. With this powder
cement your Crystals and Diamonds of Alanson well cut, in a Crucible covered
and luted well: Being dry, set it in a Glass-house Furnace three Days, in a
place where the Matters may be continually red hot without Fusion, if you have
not a Furnace ready at hand for that purpose; and take care not to take out the
Crucible all at once, but let it cool gently, otherwise the Stones might break.
Having broken the Crucible, you will find your Stones very fine, and shining, and
which will resemble Diamonds of the Old Rock, which repolish at the Wheel to
give it color, then work it; and they can scarce be distinguished from fine
ones.

CHAP. CXLIV. The Way to turn White Sapphire into true Diamond.
THE White Sapphire being fine and fixed, is only imperfect, by reason of its
wanting color and hardness, which may be remedied by means of Art, and be made
to surpass Nature, because she on^y would have made it a perfect Sapphire, but
Art can ^urn it into a true Diamond.

Only Fire can cause this Effect, in changing its Natural color, and giving it
that of a Diamond. Thus take very fine Sand, wash it in several Waters ^o clean
it, till the Water become clear, and then dry it. Of this Sand fill a Crucible
half full, then ^ut in your Sapphire, and fill it up with the same Sand. Then
cover your Crucible with a cover of the same Earth, or with another Crucible;
lute the whole with a good lute, as we have heretofore shown, lay it on an Inch
thick, and let it dry in the shade. Being dry, set it in a Glass-house Furnace,
approaching it nearer the Fire by degrees, and leaving it twelve Hours in the
same degree of heat. Then withdraw it little by little for the space of six
Hours, and let it cool gently. The Crucible being cold, break it, and you will
find your Sapphire within, which will have all the Qualities of a fine Diamond;
that is, its shining and hardness. Repolish it at the Wheel, and work it.

CHAP. CXLV. Another Way of turning the White Sapphire into a true Diamond.
HERE follows another noble Method of converting the Sapphire into a Diamond,
which will be easier to those who have not the opportunity of a Glass-house
Furnace, for it may be done with a Wind Furnace, in twelve Hours time.

The Materials we are going to show, which are used in this Operation, will at
first seem very expensive; but if you consider it diminishes not, but you find
it all again, you will easily see, that the only Expense is in the Fire.

You must therefore begin, by well wrapping your White Sapphire, in a thin Iron
Plate, that it may be easily managed. Then take fine Gold, purified by
Antimony, to the highest, put it in a Crucible in a Wind-Furnace, melt it, and
when it has a good fine Gloss, put the Sapphire, covered with the Iron-Plate,
into the Bath, so that it may float on the Gold on every side; then give it a
strong Fire for twelve Hours, so that the Gold may be all the while in Fusion.
Take out your Sapphire with a little pair of Tongues, shaking out the Gold that
may chance to stick in the Leaf-Iron; then let it cool by the Fire gently, for
fear it should break. Being cold, take away the Plate or Leaf of Iron, and
you will have your Sapphire of an admirable. Beauty, it having acquired by that
coction all the Qualities and Perfections of the Natural Diamond. Polish it at
the Wheel, and Work it.

CHAP. CXLVI. Another way to turn the White Sapphire into a true Diamond.
THIS Way will be found, by several, to be more easy and better, because it
does not oblige to such an Expense in Gold, so that People cannot purchase it.
This is the Reason we show it here, though others have spoke of it, and among the
rest Ioh. Bapt. de Porta, who has writ of this Art.

Take Filings of Iron or Steel, put them in a Crucible, then put in your White
Sapphire, so that it may be wholly covered with the Filings: Set the Crucible
in the Furnace, and give it a good Fire, that the Filings may be red hot
without melting. After it has been some time in this Fire, take it out with a
little pair of Iron-Tongues, to see if it be of the color of Diamond; if not,
put it into the Filings again, and reiterate this till it be perfect.

You may do the same thing with that filing of Steel, and an equal part of
White Enamel in Powder. Having well mixed them together, put them in a
Crucible, and put your Sapphire in the middle of them; after having first
pasted them, with your Powder of Enamel wetted with Spittle, and well dried it
at the Fire. When your Matter is red, and it has remained some time in that
condition, take out the Sapphire with your Tongs, to see if it have taken the
color of the Diamond: If it has not, put it in again as before, and continue
to do this till it be perfect. Then polish it and work it.

This is all we designed to say concerning the Make and Perfections of Gems,
though there are other ways of doing them, and several other curious things might
be said on this Subject; but that would require a large Volume, which perhaps
we may do in the next Edition, if we find the Curious take any Satisfaction in
this.

The End of the Fifth BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK VI.
CHAP. CXLVII. Wherein proper Rules and Matter for all sorts of Enamel are
prescribed, with Directions for qualifying the Fire, in order to succeed well.
How to make Goldsmiths Enamel of several Colors for Gold. A neat Preparation
of the Magnese. A Spirit of Saturn, a fixed Sulphur, and a mild Vitriol of
Venus, of most sovereign Virtue and Use.
THIS most agreeable way of enriching Gold by Enamel, which proceeds from the
beauful Variety of Colors which may be applied, being an Art no less painful
than necessary for Ornament. We proceed to lay down such Methods in this Book,
as shall equally answer the Benefits of the Public, and satisfaction of the
more Curious.

For should we omit this our Intention, the Work would be deficient, and this
Art of Glass deprived of one of its most excellent and principal Beauties;
therefore we propose in the first place, to give direction for the Choice of
Matter to be used, and thence show the Preparations for all sorts, and how to
make and suit the Colors most convenient on Enamel.

The Method not only used by the Goldsmiths, but by such as form Pourtraitures
with it of all sorts, as Man, Beasts, Fowl, and other Curiosities, very
naturally, by a just disposure of the Colors, is most admirable; to effect
which no more is required than a lighted Taper, and a hollow Pipe of Metal for
that purpose, to blow the Blaze to the Matter, and make it malleable and soft,
and thence the several Figures are drawn or impressed thereon.

And this may be so far improved and heightened, as to admit of Performances
rather to be thought the Essay of a Divine than Human Artist. Witness that
notable Piece of Chariot drawn by two Oxen, of which Cardan takes notice in the
fifty second Chapter of his tenth Book, which was so completely done in Little,
that the whole might be covered with the Wing of a Fly. The Ship rigged and Man
armed which Howel says he saw. Those little Statues of Men, with several other
Curiosities of Figure Vormicus also assures of. Not to omit the Church of St.
Mark at Venice, where the Mosaick-Work is plentifully interlaced with History
of all Sorts, distinguishable by the Variety of Colors, and Gildings, and all
consisting of several different Subjects. In short, what Account Agricola has
left us of these Matters, in his twelfth Book, gives us no less cause to admire
this Art than he had, when he saw such notable Pieces of which he makes
mention, and which he assures us was deservedly very great.

The use of Enamel is very ancient, however that of working on Metal is more
modern; and for the great Perfection to which it is arrived, we are obliged to
this present Age, as we shall further show in the Seventh Book, where we will
also endeavor to discover further, and make greater Improvements therein.

CHAP. CXLVIII. To prepare the Matter for Enamel.
NOW we proceed to show the Ingredients by which the principal Matter for
Enamel is prepared, before the Colors can be applied, of which we shall give
Directions in the following Chapters.

Take Lead in Piggs thirty pound, Plate-Tin of Cornwall, thirty three pounds;
mix and calcine them as directed for Lead in Chap. LXXXI. precisely observing
the Directions there laid down. This done, fearce the Calx, and put it all into
a glazed Earthen Pot, filled with Water, put it over a fire, and let it boil a
little; then take it off, and pour the Water gently into another Vessel, which
will carry along with it the more subtle Calx. Repeat this until no more of
the Calx can be subtiliz'd; which you may discover by the Pureness of the Water
in pouring it out of one Vessel into the other. After this calcine the Remains
of what is in the first Pot, as before, and thus continue to calcine and
subtilizetill you can get no more of the subtle Calx. Lastly, put the Waters
out of all your Receivers into larger, and set it on a slow Fire to evaporate.
The Fire must be very gentle for this Reason, that the Calx do not founder or
fall to the bottom, but continue more fine and subtle, than when it was first
calcined.

Your Calx being thus prepared, take thereof about fifty pound, and as much
Fritt of white Tarso beaten and searced, as directed Chap. VI. To these add
eight Ounces of Salt of Tartar, finely searced and prepared as in Chap. XV. Mix
all these Powders very well together in a Pot, and let it stand in the
Glass-house Furnace or Oven about ten hours to digest and purify. Then take
them out, and reducing them to an impalpable Powder, keep it in a close dry
place for use. Thus must your Matter for Enamel be prepared to receive the
Colors, but of that more hereafter.

CHAP. CXLIX. To make Enamel of a Milk-white Color.
THIS Color of all others is the purest; it is used for the Ornaments of
Virginity, the Emblem of Innocence, as also the Symbol of Candor and Chastity.
Nay more, we may even from it form a pretty and impressive Idea of the
Brightness and Excellency of Faith; and it is what has ever been esteemed and
revered by all Nations.

We have already showed how to tinge Glass of this Color, in Chap. LXX. of the
Third Book, and now we will show how to perform the like on Enamel with no less
Beauty, and very easily; thus: Take six pound of our prepared Powder, in the
former Chapter, and forty eight Grains of Magnese of Piedmont, prepared as in
Chap. XVIII. put them will together into one of your Furnace-Pots to melt and
purify over a very swift Fire, which will be done in a little time. The Matter
being thus melted, take it out of the Pot, and throw it into very fair Water,
and being afterward dried, put it again into the Pot to melt; do thus with it
thrice, changing the Water. When you have thus purified it, if you find it
justly white, it is good; but if it be greenish, add a little more Magnese, and
'twill become white as Milk, and fit Enamel for Gold, or other Metal. Take it
off the Fire, and make it up into Cakes, and keep them for use.

CHAP. CL. A Turcoise-blue Enamel.
THIS Color of the Turcois, or Turkey-stone, is very fine for Enamel, but
withal very difficult to make well, and requires a great deal of Experience.
Now it is sufficiently known, that Practice will at length make the most uneasy
Beginners Masters of their Trade, therefore we must not be discouraged if we
fail in our first Trials, because by continuing to repeat them, we shall at
length be sure to perform well: It Is always supposed you understand your
Undertaking, and are sufficiently qualified to distinguish when you are in the
right or wrong, or you can never hope to succeed. For this cause we ought not
to stand dozing on every Unsuccess, for Nature, which never fails, will still
be ready to inform us, provided we have Judgment enough to determine her
Precepts.

Though we have taken occasion from the Turcois, to make this Digression here,
it may nevertheless be a convenient enough Consideration in Cases of a sublimer
Nature, even in all the Undertakings of Man. Since we are so naturally apt to
be impatient and disturbed if we cannot effect those Matters in (as it were) a
moment of Time, which Nature it self takes a whole Age to perform: And this is
what mostly arrests the Accomplishments of our greatest Designs, and imposes on
us a seeming Impossibility in the most easy things: Thus Obscurity interposes
in the brightest Essays of the Sun, and we cannot enjoy one day, though never so
serene and fair, that is not more or less over-shadowed with Clouds.

Thus far I have made my Attempt on this Thought, which I hope the Learned will
freely pardon, because I have discoursed nothing but Truth, and what they
already are much more familiar with, and satisfied of. But now for our Enamel,
which to make of this Turcois (...) you must put of our prepared Powder, Chap.
CXL^^^^. six pound, into a white glazed Pot to melt and purify it; then cast
it into Water, and when dry put it again into the Pot, and being melted over
again, add to it at four times, this Composition, Scales of Copper thrice
calcined, as in Chap. XXXIV. three Ounces of prepared Zaffer, eighty six Grains
of (...), prepared as in Book I. forty eight Grains, all these mixed and reduced
into a very fine Powder, stir the Matter very well each time with your Iron
Hook, that the Powders may incorporate, and for Reasons by us given elsewhere
before.

Thus when your Matter is fully and well tinged, take the Approbation of a
Goldsmith on some of it, as to the Color, that you may have the more assurance
before you proceed to empty your Pot. Your own Experience must show you how to
proportion the Ingredients for tinging the Matter more or less. If you perceive
that the Tinging-powders are too predominant, add the more principal prepared
Powder; if it be too faint, add the greater quantity of the Tinging-powders:
And thus do to improve or lessen the Color until it be complete or to
Satisfaction.

CHAP. CLI. To make a very fine blue Enamel.
FEW Persons but are much taken with this Color, as being the most sightly
agreeable of all others, both from the esteem of its natural Beauty, which
makes it eminent above the rest of Colors, as it has resemblance to that of
the Heavenly Arch, and is taken for the Symbol of Generosity.

You may make Enamel of this Color with four pound of our principal prepared
Powder in Chapter CXLVIII. two Ounces of prepared Zaffer, forty eight Grains of
Copper thrice calcined, mentioned in the precedent Chapter; these reduced to a
mixed impalpable Powder, must be put into a white glazed Pot; when the Metal is
well melted, cast it into Water, and when it is dry return it to the Pot; after
that let it stand upon the Fire until it be well digested and incorporate: Then
take it off, and you have a very fine Enamel for Goldsmiths, which make into
Cakes, and keep for use, as before.

CHAP. CLII. Another blue Enamel.
THis Enamel is altogether as gay as the former, only the Color is not the
same, for which reason we prescribe it here, which else would be unnecessary.

To make it, take Principle Powder of Chap. 148. four pound, Plates of Copper
calcined, as in Chap. 30. two Ounces, prepared Zaffer, as in Chap. 17. forty
eight Grains, mix and reduce 'em to an impalpable Powder, put this into your
white glazed Pot, and having melted the Metals until they incorporate, cast it
into Water, whence being dry, return it to your Pot, and let it remain therein
until it purify; when the Color is well mixed and even so as to satisfy you,
take it off, and Cake it as usual.

CHAP. CLIII. To make a pretty Green Enamel.
THE Gaiety of the Spring being conceived by this Color, renders it exceeding
pleasant to the Eye; it is an Idea of Nature revived, a Triumph over its Death,
and the Symbol of its Victory.

It may be very perfectly imitated if you put four Pound of the Principal
Powder in your White glazed Pot, and let it melt and purify ten or twelve
Hours in the Furnace, afterward cast it into Water, dry it and put it again
into the Pot, and let it be fully refined; then take Scales of Copper thrice
calcined as in Chap. 34. two Ounces, Scales of Iron at the Smith's Forge on the
Anvil-Block, forty eight Grains, mix and reduce them to an impalpable Powder,
and throw it at three several times and Portions into your Pot of Principal
Matter, stirring the Metal very well that it may be equally tinged by the
mixture of the Colors; if it be to your Fancy, and of a pleasant color, let
it stand a while in the Fire, until it be thoroughly incorporated; thus take it
off, and you will have a delicate Green Enamel very proper for all sort of
Goldsmiths Work.

CHAP. CLIV. Another Green Enamel.
THE color of this following, is something different from the former, but no
less excellent: Take six Pound of Principal Powder, two Ounces of Feretto of
Spain, prepared as in Chap. 23. forty eight Grains of Crocus Martis, prepared
with Vinegar according to direction in Chap. 25. make these into an impalpable
Powder, and mix 'em well, and put them into your White glazed Pot; let it
remain in the Furnace to melt and refine the Matter; cast it after this into
Water, and again into your Pot, having dried it before, until it refine very
well; when it is melted, observe whether the color be satisfactory, and let it
stand some hours longer to refine, and when it is taken off, you will have a very
fine Green Enamel for Goldsmiths.

If the color be too faint, add more tinging Powder proportionably enough to
perfect it.

CHAP. CLV. Another Green Enamel.
THERE is another way to make Green Enamel after this manner: Put into a White
glazed Earthen Pot, four Pounds of Principal Powder, and let it refine in the
Furnace a little while, cast the Metal afterward into Water, and (being dried)
again into the Pot; then add at three equal Portions, this Powder compounded of
Scales of Copper thrice calcined two Ounces, Crocus Martis prepared with
Vinegar, forty eight Grains, these well mixed and powdered together, stirring
the Metal with the Iron Hook, to incorporate it, let it remain until it be well
refined on the Fire, and when it is well and perfectly colored to satisfaction,
take it off, and keep it for use.

CHAP. CLVI. The Way to make* Black Enamel.
THO this Color be mournful, and representing the Image of Death and Darkness,
yet it is the Symbol of Constancy, Prudence, and Resolution; the Life of
Silence and Secrecy, and, in short, of all things which are lasting.

It Is most necessary in this Art, and can least of all be spared, because it
has a peculiar Beauty which sets it off among the more splendid and sparkling
Pieces; you may make a very fair Velvet-colour with 4 Pound of the Principal
Powder in Chap. 148. two Ounces of prepared Zaffer, and two Ounces of Manganese
of Piedmont prepared as directed before; mix and pulverize them altogether very
well, and put them into a glazed Earthen Pot in the Furnace for some Hours; the
Pot must be more than ordinary large, because the Metal will rise very much:
When it is purified, cast it into Water and dry it, and return it into the pot
to be refined over again, which will be in a little time; then see whether the
Color be to your Fancy, and accordingly as you find it, put in more or less of
the former Ingredients, and having thus perfected it, take it off and cake it;
this Enamel will be a good Velvet-black for Goldsmiths.

CHAP. CLVII. Another Black Enamel.
THIS second sort is distinct from the other by the difference of the
Quantities and the tinging Ingredients.

Take six pound of Principal Powder, two Ounces of Zaffer prepared according to
Chap. 17. two Ounces of Crocus Martis, prepared with Vinegar as in Chap. 25.
two Ounces of Feretto of Spain assigned in Chap. 23. pound and mix them very
well together, making an impalpable powder, and put it into your glazed pot in
the Furnace to melt and purify, when ^t is well digested cast it into Water,
dry it, and put ^t again into the pot, where let it remain a while to ^efine;
when it is for your purpose take it off and cake ^t as usual, and you will have a
very good and most con^enient Enamel for the Goldsmiths to set in Colors, and
Enamel with.

CHAP. CLVIII. Another Black Enamel.
HERE is a third Way of making the Velvet-black Enamel much fairer and of a
finer gloss, sur^assing the former.

To make which, you must take four pound of ^rincipal Powder, four Ounces of
red Ta^tar, two Ounces of Manganese of Piedmont prepared, reduce these to very
fine powder, and put them into a glazed pot bigger than ordinary, because the
Metal will rise; let it melt and digest in the Furnace, and cast it into Water,
and (after it is dry) again into the pot, there to remain until it melt and
refine anew; when you find the Color sufficient for your use, make it up into
Cakes, and keep it for the Goldsmiths.

CHAP. CLIX. To make Purple-coloured Enamel.
PURPLE is a Color highly in request with all Grave Philosophers, as if it did
express the End of their Expectation, the Fullness of their Delight and Desire;
it was so mightily esteemed by the Ancients, that among the Romans the
Emperors, the Princes, the Renowned Chiefs, and other Magistrates of that
Puissant Empire only made use thereof: And the Lacedaemonians, who looked upon
themselves to be the most Ancient People on Earth, clothed themselves with it,
that they might be the more eminently distinguished, so great an Affection they
bore to this Noble Color: The Emperors of Greece had so much value and regard
for Purple, that they sought out the choicest and most exquisite to have the
young Princes of the Blood Born in, intimating by this a Glorious Omen of their
Generosity, the Color truly implying a perfect Symbol of Heroic Virtue, and
by which their Illustrious Parentage, and Royal Descent from Kings and Princes,
was most eminently shown.

The Art of Dying in this Rich and Noble Color was formerly so very
considerable among the Ancients, that such as practiced it in the City of Tire,
were ex^mp^^ (as well as the Nobility or Members of the Government) from all
manner of Taxes and Contrib^^ions; which Privileges and Advantage have a very
near resemblance to those which our Art of Glass have received; and this costly
Color is equally estimable in both; and besides, the Employment of this latter
admits only of Gentlemen, by whom alone ^uch Privileges are enjoyed without
derogation from their Nobility, as we have shown in Chap. 3.

The grand Prerogatives of these two Gentile Arts, are Arguments which may
serve easily to convince us that they have nothing in the practice of them
either Mean or Vulgar, but have in them always something of Elevation and
Sublimity beyond all other Occupations: And it is observable, that such as
wrought in the first, enjoyed the Privileges of Nobility, and that such of the
Nobility as Exercise themselves in the latter, may do it without prejudice to
their Birth.

Now to make Enamel of a Purple-colour, you must take four pound of Principal
Powder, as prepared in Chap. 148. add to this two Ounces of Manganese of
Piedmont, prepared as we shall direct in Chap. 164. put these into a White
glazed Earthen pot, allowing it large enough to bear with the Ebullitions and
raising of the Metal: When it is thoroughly melted, cast it into Water, dry it,
and put it again into the pot to refine; then consider whether it be well
enough colored, and accordingly make it up into Cakes, and keep it for use as
before.

CHAP. CLX. Another Purple Enamel.
WE will give you another Way to make Enamel of this Color, no less delicate
than the former, for all manner of Goldsmiths Work.

Take six pound of our Principal Powder, three Ounces of Manganese of Piedmont
prepared, six Ounces of thrice calcined Scales of Copper, as we have before
prescribed, reduce all these to an impalpable Powder, and let them dissolve and
refine in the White glazed pot in your Furnace; afterward cast the Metal into
Water, dry it well, and return it into the pot to refine over again; examine
the Color, if it be right, take it off and cake it up for use as before.

CHAP. CLXI. To make Enamel of Violet-colour.
THIS Color as it is the nearest to it, succeeds the Purple, and is a mixture
of Red and Blue, it is worn by the Fathers of the Church Militant, for their
proper Livery, as being altogether Heavenly, and by which the Character which
they bear is best signified.

To make it, take six pound of Principal Powder, as in Chap. 148. two Ounces of
Manganese of Piedmont prepared, and forty eight Grains of thrice calcined
Scales of Copper, make 'em all into a very fine powder, and being well mixed put
them together into your White glazed Earthen Pot in the Furnace, let it melt
and digest, then cast it into Water, and dry it, put it again into the Pot, and
let it refine very well; try its Color, and if it is agreeable, take it and
cake it, and you will have a very fine Violet-colour'd Enamel, proper for all
manner of Goldsmiths Work of that sort.

CHAP. CLXII. The Way to make Yellow Enamel.
YELLOW is the Color of Gold, and may therefore deserve all its Commendations,
which are so extraordinary great, that they require a whole Volume to contain
'em; but we'll only satisfy our selves to intimate, that it bears the likeness
of the first and more perfect Body, which rouls under the Heavenly Arch: And
can there be any other so great Comparison? It Is likewise the Symbol of true
Nobility, and of all excellent Causes.

You may make this rich Color with six pound of Principal Powder, three Ounces
of Tartar, seventy two Grains of prepared Manganese, the whole reduced to an
impalpable Powder, well mixed and put into a glazed Earthen pot large enough to
dispense with the Ebullition and raising up of the Metal; let it stand in your
Glass-house Furnace to melt and incorporate; after cast it into Water, dry it,
and leave it in the pot again to refine very well; then try the Color, and if
it be sufficient, make it up into Cakes as before directed, and you will have a
very taking Yellow Enamel for all sorts of Metal but Gold, which by its
resemblance it would only dull and spoil the Beauty, unless it were placed
among other Colors, as the Goldsmiths already are very well acquainted withal.

CHAP. CLXIII. The Way to make a Crystal-Ground for our Red Enamel.
THE Red requires a Crystal more lasting than any of the former, therefore we
will give you a Composition here sufficient for that purpose.

Take twenty four Pound of Salt of Polverine, Rochetta, or Soda prepared as
directed in Chap. 5. and six pound of Frit, as in Chap. 6. these mixed and
finely powdered, must be steept in Water to bring the Mass into a Body like
Paste; and then make it up into small thin Cakes, lay them on Tiles in a
Lime-kiln, or Potters-Furnace for six Hours to calcine, or near the Glass-house
Furnace Vault, or on the Upper Vault, taking special care that they don't melt,
let them remain there for three or four Days, or until they be very well
calcined.

This done resolve them into an impalpable powder, adding thereto four pound of
Calx of Lead and Tin prepared and calcined according to directions in Chap.
148. and Chap. 81. four pound of White calcined Tartar, prescribed in Chap. 5.
and elsewhere. These being all mixed and very finely pulverized, put them them
into your glazed pot at the Glass-house Furnace to melt and refine; thence
throw the Metal into Water, and again (when dry) into the pot to melt; cast it
a second time into the Water, and dry it, let it melt and refine over-again in
the pot for some Hours, and 'twill be fit for use.

Consider always the Lead which is among the other Ingredients, and be very
careful that you let none of it remain in the pot when you throw the Matter out
into the Water, for it will be apt to precipitate to the bottom, and this for
several Reasons elsewhere given, too tedious and needless to be here repeated.

CHAP. CLXIV. An Excellent Preparation of Fusible Manganese to be used in
making of our Red Enamel.
WE have already given sufficient direction to prepare Manganese of Piedmont,
in Chap. 18. for tinging these Matters, of which we have already discoursed,
but for Red and Rose-colour Enamel, there are some more exquisite Ingredients
and Preparations required, which we think proper to give account of here,
before we speak of the Enamel it self.

Any other than Manganese of Piedmont, will not serve your turn, for that only
is fit for our use to contribute to the Fairness and Life of the Color; take
therefore equal Quantities of this Manganese and Saltpeter, as much as you
please, and let them reverberate and calcine in an Earthen pot in your Furnace
twenty four Hours; take it off and wash it well in warm Water to separate the
Saltpeter, dry it well, and the Mass will be of a red Color: To this add an
equal quantity of Sal-Armoniack, grind these on a Marble with distilled
Vinegar, as Painters do their Colors; dry it, and reduce it to Powder, putting
it afterward into a strong Mattress or Bolt-head of Glass, big-belly'd and
long-neck'd, there to sublimate about twelve Hours; break your Mattress, mix all
the volatile and fixed parts together, adding the same quantity of
Sal-Armoniack, as there are Flowers, and take care to weigh them before
Composition; grind, pulverize, and sublime as before, repeating this until your
Manganese remain fusible in the bottom of the Matras, and this is that which
you must preserve to tinge Crystal with, and make it ruddy and diaphanous, or
transparent as a Ruby.

CHAP. CLXV. The Way to make a Fixed Sulphur, to be used in Compositions for
Enamel.
THIS Fixed Sulphur serves for several uses in Chemistry, and very convenient
for obliging young Artists.

Now, though it be not so unavoidably necessary for making Red Enamel, yet we
will not omit it here, because it contributes to our prescribing two sorts of
ways for it, as well as to satisfy the more curious Goldsmiths.

Put Flowers of Sulphur, as much as you please, into a Glass Cucurbite luted at
bottom, pouring thereto Oyl-Olive as much as will drown the Matter by two
Inches, set the Cucurbite on a violent Sand-Furnace, for a full Hour, then take
it off, and pour in strong Vinegar, and the Sulphur will soon precipitate, and
the Oil ascend on the Surface of the Vinegar, decant this from the Sulphur into
another Vessel, and put in more fresh Oil as before, do thus thrice, and you will
have at length a fixed Sulphur to make use of for Enamel.

CHAP. CLXVI. Another fixed Incombustible Sulphur.
THERE is yet another way for fixation of Sulphur for the same use, and several
Chemical Operations, wherein it has very great Virtue.

Make strong Lie of Quicklime and harsh OakAshes, put therein Flowers of
Sulphur until the liquid Surface be four Inches upmost; boil it for a
considerable while over the Fire, this will cleanse and purge the Sulphur from
its Unctuosity and Corruption, and qualify it for your purpose; separate the
Lie from the Sulphur, and drying it, you will have it white, fixed, and
incombustible, exceeding proper for the Goldsmiths to make use of on Gold.

We could prescribe several ways more to make Sulphur fixed and fusible, but
these two already given are sufficient for our purpose; we reserve them
therefore for some other place to be discovered among Matters more excellent,
and of greater Curiosity, for the Advantage of such Persons who Study the
improvement and profounder parts of Chimistry.

CHAP. CLXVII. To Extract Spirit of Saturn, an Excellent Ingredient for Enamel
and Glass-work.
WE think fit to propose all the Preparations proper for making a Red Enamel,
before we show the way to make it, because the Ingredients to be used must
first be provided, or we cannot proceed regularly to our Business.

Among the rest, this Spirit of Saturn is not to be laid aside, which tho
considered here as useful only in Enamel and Glass-work, may have other Virtues
familiar to the Learned; but for our Business it is such as does very nobly
heighten and much improve the Matter for our Work, and for any other not
immediately relating to us here, we pass over in silence.

Reduce good Litharge, as much as you please, to an impalpable powder, and set
it in a glazed Earthen Vessel over a still Fire; add to this good distilled
Vinegar, till four Inches above it, mix 'em well together, and then let them
settle until the Vinegar become Milk-coloured, which will be in a little time;
decant this Vinegar off gently, and put on fresh, continuing to do thus until
it admits of no more coloring; then put all the Milk-coloured Vinegar into a
glazed Earthen Vessel, and let it stand until the Lead precipitate to the
bottom; from whence pour of the clear Vinegar, which will be at top, and that
Milk-coulour'd Sediment which remains, is what we call Spirit of Saturn, tho
improperly, and that which we'll make use of for the Enamel and Glass.

If it do not precipitate well to your liking, and that the Vinegar at top be
not very clear, cast among it some cold Water; if that will not do, and that your
Vinegar still continues muddy, set all the Water and Vinegar together over a
gentle Fire to evaporate, and thus you will have the more Spirituous part of your
Vinegar a Sediment in the bottom of the Vessel, which is exceeding useful for
Glass-work; keep it together with the rest of the Saturn for use.

This Noble Preparation which we call Spirit of Saturn, does indeed contain it,
but you must have skill to extract it thereout; to say that it is all Spirit of
Saturn is untrue, for it is that wherein the Spirit is contained, and from
whence it may be more easily and better separated, than from the Mass of Lead,
I propose this first step toward extracting it as such, whereby the Curious
may succeed with small trouble.

CHAP. CLXVIII. The Way to make Enamel of a Blood-colour Red.
SINCE we have given a small Elogy to every other Color, it is unjust for us
not to continue the like on this, which is a true Symbol of Blood, by which
the Glory of the Martyrs, who with so much Generosity and Courage shed theirs
for the Faith of Christ, may be represented as well as of those many Brave and
Heroic Persons, who have interposed for the Preservation and Support of Church
and State, it is therefore an Illustrious Badge of Eminent Courage. Thus
Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, and very many other Great and Noble Princes, chose
this Color for their Livery, and for their Shields.

To stain Enamel of this Color, take ten pound of common Frit, mentioned in
Chap. 12. add thereto six pound of Glass of Saturn, prepared as in Chap. 82.
the whole made into a very fine powder, must be put into a glazed Earthen pot
at the Glass-house Furnace, to melt, boil and refine; after this cast thereon
powder of thrice calcined Copper, as in Chap. 34. at discretion, stirring it
all about that they may incorporate together with powder of red Tartar, until
the Mass become red as Blood, observing whether the Color be too pale, and if
so, continue to put in more of these Powders of Copper and Tartar, until it be
perfectly stained; and thus you will have a delicate deep Sanguine Enamel fit for
all manner of Work you can desire to apply it.

CHAP. CLXIX. Another Blood-colour Enamel.
THIS Enamel will be very beautiful, and may serve instead of the Rose-colour
Enamel hereafter prescribed.

To make it, put ten pound of Frit for Crystal, Chap. 6. and six pound of Glass
of Saturn before mentioned, into one of the Glass-house Furnace pots, let it
melt and purge well; after this cast it into Water, dry it, and return it into
the pot; when it is well melted again, throw in at several times, five or six
Ounces of powder of thrice calcined Copper, stirring the whole with the Iron
Crook to mix and incorporate them well together, and also a like quantity of
powder of red Tartar, still stirring it; this being well boiled and refined,
observe whether the Color be perfect, if not, add equal parts of the Powders
of Copper and Tartar, according to your Judgment, as much as you find
necessary, to bring it to a perfection; let it remain to boil and purify,
trying it again and again, until you find it completely colored.

CHAP. CLXX. Another Red Enamel of a very Splendid Ruby-colour.
THE Beauty of this Enamel is very surprising, and of as lively a Luster as the
Ruby it self, which it communicates to all the Work wherein it is used.

For this fine Effect we must have recourse to the fusible Manganese in Chap.
164. add twenty Ounces thereof to each pound of Crystal ground, mentioned Chap.
163. let the whole be well purified, then try the Color, and according as you
find it, add the greater or lesser quantity of Manganese, or Crystal ground
respectively, until it be brought to its just degree of perfection, as a Ruby,
and which ought to be very admirable.

CHAP. CLXXI. Another Ballas-Ruby-colour Enamel.
THE same Manganese must be had to make this fine Color; put ten Pound of
Crystal ground, ^n Chap. 163. in a glazed pot to melt and purge at the
Glass-house Furnace; throw the Matter into Water, dry and melt over again; do
thus thrice, and when the Mass is afterward well melted, tinge it with the
fusible Manganese as before, and 'twill become Purple-colour'd. Add to it at
eight times impalpable Powder of Alom to bring it to a Red. Be very careful
that the Alom do not blacken it, but rather make it Yellowish, and the
Manganese dissipating 'twill become Red, and so make the Color most perfect
and just of a fine Ballas-Ruby.

CHAP. CLXXII. Another Enamel of a Rose-colour for Gold.
NOTHING is fairer and of greater Gaiety than this, for all Work where it may
be used, and therefore we'll give you several ways for its Preparation.

Take ten Pound of Crystal ground, in Chap. 163* melt it at the Glass-house
Furnace in a glazed Pot; add to it at four times five Ounces of red calcined
Copper, as in Chap. 33. stirring the Metal every time, then put into it Crocus
Martis, Chap. 26. and Manganese as before prepared; then let it alone to
cleanse for six Hours, and if the Color is not true, put in by little and
little more Crocus Martis, until it come to your liking, and be of a fine
Rose-colour.

CHAP. CLXXIII. Another very fine Rose-colour.
AMONG our Rose-colour Enamels this seems the finest; to make which, take four
Pound of Crystal ground, of Chap. 163. let it melt in a glazed Pot at the
Glass-house Furnace, cast it afterward into Water, and melting it over again,
add by little and little an Ounce and half of Calx, prepared as in Chap. 148.
stirring the Metal every time to incorporate, then let it alone for a little
while, until you perceive it of an Ash Color; when it comes to that forbear
putting in any more Calx, lest you make it too white; then refine the Mass, and
after add to it Minium two Ounces, purge, refine, and throw it out into Water,
and putting it into the Pot, let it stand to melt and purify over again about
eight Hours, then put in an Ounce and half of red thrice calcined Copper, and
as much crude white Tartar, with a Dram of Boodstone, and the like quantity
of fixed Sulphur, in Chap. 165. these pulverized very fine and mixed together,
stir the Metal and incorporate them very well together; afterward see if the
Color answers your expectation; if it be too deep, add a little more Manganese
to weaken it, if it be too pale, improve it with some more of the last
Composition of Copper, Tartar, Boodstone and Sulphur, until it be to purpose:
And thus you have an Enamel of an exceeding fair Rose-colour.

CHAP. CLXXIV. Another Rose-colour Enamel.
PRACTICE has already experienced so many ways to bring this fine Enamel to the
most advanced Improvements, that it is impossible to expect any greater; and for
such as would make it, they may proceed boldly thus.

Set six Pound of Crystal ground, as in Chap. 163. in a glazed Pot at the
Glass-house Furnace to melt and cleanse; then cast into it at four several
times intermitting, four Ounces of Calx, as prepared of Lead and Tin, in Chap.
148. stir the Matter very well at each time until it incorporate, then let it
all purge for a while, and cast it Ladle-full by Ladlefull into Water, and
again put all into the Pot to melt and refine anew; after this add to it an
Ounce and half of red Copper pulverized and calcined, as in Chap. 33. which
will tinge the whole of a deep Color, but cast it in at three Intervals, and
stir it very well to incorporate; two Hours after, add to it at thrice, an
Ounce and half of Crocus Martis, given in Chap. 24. mix it well as before, and
let it remain to refine about three Hours, then throw on it six Ounces of
Tartar calcined, as in Chap. 57. ChimneySoot vitrified one Ounce, Crocus Martis
again one Ounce and half pulverized, and all well mixed at four several
Intermissions, and Quantities, stirring the Metal always with the Iron-Crook,
lest it swell or boil over: After this let it repose and purify about three
Hours, stir it again and try the Color, if it be red as Blood it is right, if
not, add at discretion, a little more of each of these Powders of Tartar, Soot,
and Crocus Martis, until the Color be full and true, and so let it stand for a
whole Hour, and try it again; if you find it perfect, proceed no further, but
keep it for use, it is very proper to apply to Gold for Enamel.

CHAP. CLXXV. Another Splendid Enamel of a Carbuncle-colour.
NOT to particularize any farther on the Carbuncle, which we have sufficiently
enough discoursed of already, we will show how to imitate the Color ascribed
to it with Enamel, and which will be of a wonderful fine Beauty, as has been
often experimented. Now the whole Secret of this Operation consists in
calcining the Gold perfectly, and bringing it to an absolute and just fineness,
which must create this precious Color.

Take very pure Gold, and for the better assurance refine it your self, and
dissolve an Ounce of it in three Ounces of Aqua Regalis, as directed in Chap.
55. let the Solution distill over a gentle Fire until the Gold precipitates, and
thus repeat an Exhalation and Cohobation six times, and the last time take out
the Gold, powder and put it into a Crucible covered and luted, on a
Reverberatory to calcine; let it remain until it become of a very excellent and
Scarlet Red, which will not be without a considerable allowance of many Hours.

This done, take of our Crystal ground, and melt a quantity of it in a glazed
Pot at the Furnace of the Glass-house, and being well purged, throw in a
twentieth part of the Powder of Gold, in proportion as the quantity of Metal,
stirring the whole very well, let it alone for some time, then try it, and
according as you find the Color, put in more Powder until you bring it to a
true transparent Carbuncle-colour.

We have given another way to calcine Gold in Chap. 115. no less sufficient
than this, together with a way to make a fine Carbuncle, and this rare Color
may as well be given to the Stone as the Enamel by the Directions for preparing
the Gold in either Chapter, the Curious may choose which they will, they being
equally sufficient.

CHAP. CLXXVI. The Way to calcine Copper for making Vitriol of Venus, without
Corrosive.
WE promised in Chap. 45. to show this fine Essay, which is certainly the
Noblest Preparation can be made of Copper, so the Learned may take notice of
it: If the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol has many excellent Virtues for tinging of
Glass, this Vitriol it self, or rather Spirit, must have far greater and more
extraordinary in Matters of a more sublime Nature: A famous Philosopher, very
eminently recommendable and Judicous, was never weary of dwelling on the Praise
of this hidden Treasure, and extolling its Virtues to the highest.

Tho this Virtue be known to many of the Learned, yet we may boldly say, it is
unknown to very many indifferently so, who as soon as they have run over the
Writings of some Sage Virtuoso, pretend to be acquainted with all the Secrets
of Nature, and which they undertake to disclose and unravel as soon as they can
force 'em to any sense comformable to their weak Capacity, tho never so
different from the Author's meaning, to which they are altogether Strangers,
and this gives us Authority enough to condemn them for truly ignorant.

Nature is veiled, and her Virtues not so plainly disclosed to all the World,
she has those secret Recluses for them as can be opened by no other than her
own Key, which cannot be matched, and therefore not to be found in the Hands of
every Man; besides that, one must be lead by the same Genius as he that forged
it, before one can truly find and distinguish it, and we may assure our selves
that none but the Wise are in possession of this rare and precious Treasure.

The greatest of those who have writ on this Art, have always held this Key as
the last Secret; all the profound Arguments they have alleged, and Pains they
have been at to screen those obscure Avenues, were designed to make them
inaccessible to the Base and Unworthy, and preserve these All-Divine Secrets
from being profaned by the Hands of such as would abuse them.

This Sacred Mystery does not only consist (as many fancy) in the making of
Gold and Silver, which is Ambitiously suggested by the mere Avarice of the
major part of all Mankind, but is indeed the meanest Excellency thereof; for
Health, which it contains, is beyond all the Treasure in the World; besides,
the Knowledge it affords us of an Omnipotency in the true God, and of all the
other Most Holy Mysteries of Religion, wherein it gives an opportunity to make
a perfect Discovery: Are not those much more sublime and eminent Virtues which
lead us to a Blessed Eternity? Whereas on the contrary, all the Transitory
Wealth on Earth has nothing in it but Imposture, and serves only to precipitate
us into the Bottomless-Pit.

We'll leave this lofty Subject to be discoursed on by the Learned, and go on
to the calcining of Copper, which is the first Preparation to be made in making
the Vitriol of Venus without Corrosive, which is known to very few, and whereof
we have already given an Elogy.

Take thin Leaves of red Copper, and put them into Crucibles, stratifying 'em
lay upon lay with Powder of common Sulphur, filling your Crucibles until all
the Copper Leaves be put in, as in Chap. 22. then cover well and lute the
Crucibles, let the lute dry, and put them into the Furnace of Chap. 52.
continuing a good Charcoal-Fire for two Hours; afterward let them stand and
cool, then take off the Crucibles, and you will find your Copper calcined and
blackish, inclining to a deep Purple Powder; searce it, and to each Pound add
six Ounces of Powder of Sulphur, mix and put them into a round flat-bottom
Earthen Pot, strong enough to bear the Fire, lay upon the Furnace a strong
Earthen-Dish, fill it with very live Coals, and place your Pot thereon with the
Copper; when the Pot grows hot, and the Sulphur takes Fire, stirring it with
your long Iron Crook, lest it should stick to the Pot, or become concrete,
continue thus till the Sulphur be all consumed and smoaks no more; take the Pot
hot off the Fire, and empty the Copper out with an Iron-Ladle; pound it well in
a Brass Mortar, and searce it all finely, and you will have a blackish Powder,
reiterate this Calcination thrice, with the like proportion of Sulphur as
before, and the third time let it remain until the Copper become Red and
Yellow; then take it off, and pound it in a Brass-Mortar, and searce it finely,
pounding what remains over again, until all be searced, and you will have a very
well colored Calx of Copper, most effectual and proper for extracting this
fair Vitriol of Copper, whereof we will give the Preparation in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. CLXXVII. To make Vitriol of Venus without Corrosive.
THOSE who make Vitriol of Venus, have not all one and the same method, most of
them dissolve the Copper in distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Nitre, or some other
Corrosive, for our part Water alone is the Dissolvent, or rather Agent to
extract the Tincture, as we shall show.

Take Glass Cucurbits as many as will serve your turn, to contain all your Calx
of Copper, and put six Pound of fair running Water to a Pound of Calx, into
each Cucurbite; place them on a moderate Sand-Furnace for four Hours, to
evaporate until one third of the Water go off; let the Furnace cool, and
afterward decant the remainder of the Water into other Glass Vessels, and dry
the Sediment in a Crucible on the Furnace; let this Water settle for two Days,
and then you will find in the bottom of the Vessel small Grains of Copper of a
blackish Color; you must filtrate, or strain the Water, and preserve all the
Grains together, to add to the former Sediment, having first well dried them,
and keep the Water.

Take all these Sediments, and to each Pound add six Ounces of Powder of
Sulphur as before, putting it into your flat-bottom'd Earthen Pot to calcine as
in the former Chapter; take care to stir it well as long as the Sulphur fumes,
and it stands over the Fire, else it will stick to the Pot and not calcine;
take it off and powder it immediately in a Brass-Mortar, searce the Powder, and
you will find it black; mix this again with Sulphur proportionably six Ounces to
a Pound, and put it to calcine anew, stirring it very well as before directed;
let it stand a while on the Fire to alter the Matter from a Russet to a Yellow;
then take it off and pound it instantly in a Brass-Mortar before it cool, and
then searce it all finely over.

Put a Pound of this Powder with six Pound of Water, into each Cucurbit, and
these Cucurbits on a slow Sand-Furnace, where let it stand four Hours to the
consumption of one third of your Water, which decant into other Vessels; let it
settle two Days, then filtrate these Waters, and pour them among the former,
gathering the Sediments that remain in the bottom, and mix them with these in
the Cucurbits.

Dry the remaining Sediments as before, and repeat the calcination anew with
the same proportionable quantity of Sulphur; then extract the Tincture,
filtrate and mix the filtrated and tinged Waters with the former, exactly
observing the Order already taught, and continue to do thus six times, so will
the Copper remaining in the bottom of your Vessels, become as it were a soft
impure Earth deprived of all its blueness, which throw away as fit for nothing,
for all the Virtue of the Copper is contained in the Waters; put these all
carefully together to extract from them this precious Vitriol of Venus, as
hereafter directed.

CHAP. CLXXVIII. The Way to extract a fair Vitriol of Venus from our our
Colored Waters.
OF all the Preparations to be taught for this rare Work, this is the most
easy and vulgar, there being no more required, than to evaporate and
crystalize the Matter; but as we are to leave nothing in the Dark, we resolve
to explain every circumstance thereof for the benefit of our Readers, and such
as would know it.

We have said you must mix together all your colored Waters, now we will tell
you what must be done with them; you must have a low Glass-Cucurbit that will
hold two London Quarts.
Paris Pints, or more, which put into a moderate Ash or Sand-Furnace; put
therein three Pound of the Tincture to evaporate gently, and put the rest into
Glass-Bottles set round your Furnace, so that they may be heated, and ready to
fill the Cucurbit as fast as the Exhalation consumes its Tincture, which may be
done with a Glass Ladle, or the Bottles themselves, lest the Waters being cold
might cause the Cucurbit to burst, and so all would be lost.

Reduce ten Pound of this by evaporation to two and half, or three at most,
which will be a very high Tincture, pour it into two or three glazed Earthen
Vessels, and place them all Night in a moist cold place, and you will find the
Vitriol at bottom, and sticking to the sides of the Vessels, like little long
Icicles, which will have the true color of Oriental Emeralds, pour all the
remaining Waters into the Cucurbit, and dry the Vitriol that it may not stick,
preserving it in a close Vessel.

Place your Cucurbit again on the Furnace to evaporate anew at the consumption
of half the Waters, and crystalize the strong Tincture as before. Thus whilst
any Water remains evaporate and crystalize until all be consumed, to the end
that none of this may be lost, whose Virtues are infinitely useful, not only in
the Art of Glass, and the Metallic, but in Physic too, for the curing of many
Chronick Distempers, which we pass over in silence, as foreign to our Subject,
and continue to prescribe the rest of this rare Work, to conceal nothing from
the Curious, but give them entire satisfaction.

CHAP. CLXXIX. The Method of drawing the Spirit of the Vitriol of Venus, which
has a wonderful Blue, and how to separate the Caput Mortuum for tinging of
Glass.
THE Caput Mortuum of Vitriol of Venus, which we prescribe to tinge Glass of a
Seagreen, and whereof we discoursed in Chap. 45. has engaged us to give this
most excellent and hidden Secret of Nature, which the Philosophers have never
explained but by ambiguous Riddles, and veiled Parables to conceal the
Knowledge thereof from the Vulgar.

We confess, it is not without some regret we condescend to it in this
Ungrateful Age, wherein very few deserve to be instructed, or truly admire, and
so perfectly love the Mysteries of Sage Philosophy, as to imitate the Virtue
and Charity of its devoted Professors; it is however in consideration, and for
the sake of this small number of Votaries that we have explained and delivered
many excellent things in this Book, which we might (but out of regard to such)
have laid aside (as foreign to the Art of Glass) but our desire to please them
has promoted the opening these intricate Paths, and leaving them in a condition
to be enlarged by our small Discovery under the serious Speculations, and smart
issues of their own Wit.

Now to finish our precious Essay, you must take a Pound of this Vitriol into a
Glass Retort strongly luted, as directed in Chap. 52. the lute being dry, set
the Retort in a Sand-Furnace, fitting to it a very large Receiver, as directed
for Aqua fortis in that Chapter; this done, kindle the Fire, and continue it
gen^e for four Hours to prevent a too excessive heat, which would drive out the
Spirits impetuously, and (...) burst the Receiver, whereof great care must be
^^ken not to spoil all: As soon as the Spirits ascend like ^hite Clouds,
improve your Fire by degrees, until ^ey disperse and your Receiver clears again
and ^ols, and all the Spirit comes together: Then let ^e Fire go out of it
self, and after twenty four ^ours, unlute the Joints, take away your Receiver,
^d put the Liquor it contains into Glass-Bottles stopped ^ry close with Glass
Stopples to prevent Air, which ^hey could draw, would disperse it all by
Exhala^n. This choice Liquor has that Noble Blue which ^ords us wonderful
Tinctures, and other inestima^^ Operations, as well as such surprising Effects
in ^ysick, as cannot be equalled.

The strength of this rich Liquor may be known (...) its very penetrating acid
smell, and if we were (...) afraid to profane so sublime a Mystery which
^rsons much more Sage and Considerate than we, ^e kept so secret: We would
enlarge more on its ^^ellent Qualities, and disperse those Obscurities, ^^ we
should look upon our selves unworthy of the ^ht we have been able to acquire in
this most im^^^tant Matter, if we abandoned those Treasures to (...) ravage of
the whole Earth, which ought only to (...) possessed by the Sacred, Wise, and
Studious Mem^^s of the Hermetick Science and Philosophy.

But to return to our Caput Mortuum of this preci Vitriol, which has occasioned
us to give its Pre^ation, and is what we make use of for this fine ^ter-colour,
or Egmarine on Glass, you will find it ^he Retort, out of which the white Spirit
was di^ed, whereof we have discoursed already; to get ^ou must break the
Retort, then reduce it to Pow^ with a mixture of Zaffer, as directed in Chap.
45. and so tinge your Crystal of an admirable Sea-green-colour.

We were mistaken in Chap. 45. in saying that the Caput Mortuum must be exposed
to the Air before you do pound it with the Zaffer, for that is not altogether
incumbent in tinging of Glass, tho this exposing of it cannot but add something
to the luster, for it draws thereby with a certain Magnetic Property, the
occult Spirit of the Air, and so from a Black, of which it was before, becomes
of a pale Blue-colour, and partly assumes what it lost by Distillation and
Extraction of the Spirits, so you may save a great deal of time and pains by
this Preparation, to your no small Advantage, in expediting the Matter.

Such as shall comprehend the Virtues of those things we have shown in the four
last Capters, ought to be secret, for many will read these things, and not
apprehend, or only Laugh at them, whether it be that the Divine Power, for
Reasons best known to himself, will not let them discern, or that they confide
in a false Presumption on their own Knowledge, as beyond all other Men's. God
has nevertheless not confined to one only Wit, the whole Knowledge, or all the
sublime Excellencies of Nature, but on the contrary, to declare his great and
unbounded Charity, permits it to be communicated to many for his greater
Manifestation and Glory; yet he reserves those more important Secrets to be
revealed to his Faithful Servants, that such as would be acquainted with the
same Mysteries, may apply to this Father of Light, who alone can inspire them
with sufficiency enough for penetrating into these which they could never do
without his Assistance.

Now the true Method thereof is obvious to all the World, a Holy and Regular
Life opens the Passage, and continual Study and Application guides us through;
but we must add to these an upright Intention of making good use hereof, that
we may not wander; a Love for our Neighbor conformable to the Will of God, to
bring us to a safe Port, an extended Charity to the Poor, to lay open for us
the Gate of Heaven; and in a Word, an unlimited and immense Love for this
Omnipotent Creator, Eternal, and Incomprehensible, to Hand us to his very
Throne: This is the prevailing Attractive, which all the Judicious Philosophers
made use of to draw down this Divine Intelligence, and which I most heartily
wish to all that would imitate them.

The End of the Sixth BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK VII. Containing the Way to Enamel in all Sorts of Colors on Gold and
other Metals: The Order of the Fire and Furnace: The Preparation of Colors for
Pourtraying with Enamel, and how to do it.
CHAP. CLXXX.
THO this Undertaking depends not altogether on our Art of Glass, being no more
than an Application of Matters delivered in the Sixth Book; however we resolve
to lay down this Manner of Enameling and Pourtraying on Metals, to bring this
our Work to an higher perfection.

The Ancient Works of Enamel on Metals, were only of Black and White, with some
few Tinges of Carnation, or Flesh-colors, as may be seen in the Limoge Enamel;
in Francis the First's Time it became more improved, and they made use of
Lights and Shadows* but the Enamel on Gold was of no better Stuff than that on
Copper, and all the Works of it on Gold, Silver, and Copper, were of
Transparent Matter; such as wrought it on thick, couched each Color by it
self, as is done now a Days in Enameling some particular Pieces of Relief, and
not otherwise.

Since then they have found out the way of Enameling with opaque, and thick
stuff, and the Art of compounding the Colors, is much more improveing and
handsomer than that of the Ancients, as is visible in all our Modern Works; but
we must without all Exception, own the fair Works upon Gold, representing
Pourtraitures, and entire Histories, so neatly, and to the Life, and coveted as
much as Picture done in Oil, over which it has the advantage of Natural Luster
and Varnish, which is never tarnished, to be the Invention of this latter Age,
and the Improvements we owe to the Study of the French therein.

All sorts of Enamel are not to be promiscuously employed on all sorts of
Metal; Gold which perfectly bears with as well all the Opaque as Transparent,
cannot agree with clear Purple, its Yellow mightily changing the Color
thereof, and produces but a very ill Fancy; on the other side, this Purple is
very fine on Silver; so the Egmarine, the Azure, and Green all other Colors,
as well clear as Opaque, disagreeing therewith, and Copper suits with every
thick Enamel, but cannot endure the Limpid, unless prepared for it beforehand,
as shall be directed in due place.

Observe that good Enamel must be hard and lasting, such as is soft being full
of Lead, and subject to change Color, easily becoming sullied and foul; of the
clear Enamel some is harder, some softer; the hardest is always best, however
even of them there is choice; some lose color in the Fire, some are more or
less lively and sparkling, but if you employ constantly such as we have
prescribed in our Sixth Book, you will never be exposed to those Inconveniences;
for the Ingredients being perfectly cleansed, will endure all degrees of Fire,
any change of Color or Quality not ensuing.

CHAP. CLXXXI. Of the Furnace for Enameling and Pourtraying.
THE Enameling of Metals, as well as the coloring of the Stuff, cannot be
effected without Fire, and is wholly different in this point from Painting with
the usual Colors in Oil, which may be dried in the Air only, without other
help.

It would be very hard to believe the Fire would not spoil the mixture of the
Colors, if our daily experience which we made, did not vouch the contrary;
however care must be taken not to let the Work have too much time, but draw it
out as soon as you find it polisht.

The Fire must be Reverberatory, or rather of Suppression, and never to be
under the Stuff; it is the same as is used for cleansing of Metals, whether in
Mints or Goldsmiths Shops, which is very familiar to all the World.



You must have a Furnace round or square, either of Iron or Earth, it is no
great matter, how (or whether of these) it is, which must be hollow in the
middle, to contain the Work with a good CharcoalFire all about, and over it, to
make it melt the better; and you must have it so as to be able to take your
Stuff out, and put it in again, as occasion requires: You may, for better
convenience, make use of a Goldsmith's Muffle; it is a small Arch made of
Crucible Earth, in the shape of half a Crucible, cut length-wise, and they
place it on the Area or Floor of the Furnace, the Opening of it lying just
against the Mouth of the Furnace, to put in and draw out the Work easily; and
for more convenience they place a small Grate over it, which must not touch it,
for fear of breaking it; and on this Grate make a good Fire, and so round about
the Muffle, to heat the hollow very well, under which they put the Work to be
Enameled and Painted; and the Essays, or Trials they have a mind to make on a
little IronShovel, to draw the easier out; but for making Essays of Ingredients
for Enamel, it must be a little Blade of White Enamel, which ought to be
provided purposely for that use.

CHAP. CLXXXII. The Way to Enamel Gold.
WE have already said, that Gold, Silver, and Red Copper may be Enameled; now
to make true Work, you must use only pure Gold, because Silver makes White
Enamel appear Yellow, and Copper rises in Scales, and makes Vapors; for tho
all Enamel sticks to it, yet it is but very imperfectly, and may be easily
divided and peeled off again; besides, the Colors are so wretched on it, and
lose much of their Charm and Luster by the Impurity of that Metal.

Therefore, if you would have good Work, let Gold only be your Subject, and of
the purest, if you employ clear Enamel, because on impure Gold they grow dull,
and become imperfect, that is to say, there appears with this a certain obscure
and Cloudy Vapor in the Enamel, which deadens and takes away the Life of its
Color.

The Gold Plate ought to be rising, and when it is forged very even, the
Goldsmiths apply white Enamel over and under it, tho it is to be wrought but on
one side, but this is necessary for two Reasons: First, Because the Work is
neater and fairer for it: And again, Because if it were only Enameled on one
side, the Fire would swell it, and so make it rise, and that in Bubbles;
because it is always as it were tormented, especially when the Pieces are
great, and the Enamel carelessly laid on; this makes it produce Blisterings,
which disfigure the Work; the French Chemists call such Vegoter, but their
Goldsmiths Petits Ocuillets: This disfiguring of the Work, you may avoid, by
laying Enamel on both sides of the Plate of Gold, and thicker over than under,
this will keep it equal and even on both sides, the first lay of White Enamel
remaining / smooth in this condition, serves for a Field to place all your
other Colors on as we will further discourse of in the Art of Pourtraying.

Oil of Spike is used for dissolving thick and opaque Enamel before it can be
applied; for the Transparent you need use nothing but fair Water, as we shall
show in Chap. 185. and then it is couched flat and bordered with the Metal, and
sometimes we don't border at all, the Field being all Enamel, but this is
troublesome, because the Limpid Enamels as they melt, often mix, and so
confound the Colors which constantly happens when the Pieces (...) small.

Red Enamels are not so, unless by chance, and come generally Yellowish out of
the Fire; as soon as it is applied to the Gold, it alters the Color; one may
soon bring it to a perfect Red Enamel, by turning it at the Mouth of your
Furnace, when you are taking it out from the Fire; and then it is that the
Workmen say they make it Red, and give it its complete Color.

Gold, as we have already said, admits of all sorts of Enamel, clear or opaque,
bright Purple excepted, which is altered by the Yellow-colour of the Gold, and
does not take so good effect there, as on Silver, on which it ought still to be
used. The Way of working every sort of Enamel, is alike; not to make any
useless Repetitions, we will satisfy our selves only to advise you to employ
all those Enamels prescribed in the Sixth Book, which have every illustrating
and convenient Property to be wished for in this Work.

CHAP. CLXXXIII. To Enamel on Silver.
WE have already taken notice in our former Chapter, that Silver agrees not
with all sorts of Enamel, as Gold. We repeat it here again to prevent the use
of any but such as serve to produce perfect and agreeable Effects.

You are to make least use of White Enamel on Silver, because there it becomes
Yellowish, and unpleasing, but nothing can suit better with it, than bright
Purple, Green, Blue, and Egmarine, because the Whiteness of the Silver is then
clearly eminent, and gives its just splendor.

The Work and manner of Enameling on Silver, is no way different from that of
Gold, in forging the Plates evenly to prepare 'em for the Enamel, you may make
use of White on the under side, since the Enamel there serves only to qualify
the Risings and Disturbings of the Metal in the Furnace, which would cause
unevenness, or disagreements in the surface, and prevent its becoming just and
handsome.

We need not repeat again that way of placing the Enamel on your Plates of Gold
or Silver, and so to put them into your little reverberatory Furnace spoken of
in Chap. 181. to melt, and as soon as polished to be taken from the Fire.

CHAP. CLXXXIV. To Enamel on Copper.
THO we have before touched upon the way of Enameling on Copper, yet lest the
Reader should too slightly apprehend it, as not in order, or a distinct
Chapter, therefore we are obliged to enter it here to avoid Imperfection.

The less use is made of this Metal in this Work the better, for the Enamel
never sticks to it perfectly, but is easily scaled, divided, and broke off,
which never happens to Gold; besides, the Copper is so impure, that its Fumes
destroy the Beauty of the Enamel so much in the Furnace, that they quite lose
their Charm and Splendor by the Malignity of those Vapors.

Tho the Copper receives easily all thick or dark Enamels, it cannot be brought
so well to endure the clear and limpid; now if you would make use of these
last, you must first lay a lay of Green, or Black, and thereon a Leaf of Silver
to receive the Enamel suitable for that Metal mentioned in the former Chapter;
so that in the main it is much better to make use of Silver for the Transparent
Enamels, since the Copper is so apt to foul, and the charge in either much the
same.

In Enameling on Copper, you must take a Plate of red Copper forged smooth, and
even applying your Enamel of what Color you desire above and under the Plate
as before; then put this into the reverberatory Furnace, and when it receives
its polishing, draw it out.

CHAP. CLXXXV. To prepare the Enamel for the Metals.
BEFORE you apply your Enamel on the Metal, you must give it this little
Preparation, which is the easiest, and best approved on by the Goldsmith; we
will instance it in White Enamel, because that is more generally made use of
than any other.

Take White Enamel of the Sixth Book, Chap. 149. pulverize it very fine, pour
on it a little Aqua fortis, and let it afterward purify and refine in a small
Glass Cucurbit.

Wash it afterward often in Fair-Water, dry and keep it in a close Vessel for
use.

To make use of it, first pound a quantity thereof in a Stone Mortar, wetting
it with a little Water, and so spread it on the Plates, and into the Furnace
with it as before.

Thus do with all your clear and transparent Enamels, and you will have all your
things in a readiness to go on with your Work as you think convenient.

CHAP. CLXXXVI. To prepare the Colors for Painting on Enamel.
NOTHING can be more splendid than the Paint on Enamel, and for this use must
be chosen the liveliest and most Noble Colors, and such as will easily
vitrifie and melt.

All these assigned throughout the Sixth Book, are as equally sufficient for
this, as for Enameling; if you grind them first on your Marble with the best
Oil of Spike, or mix'em together with the other Ingredients for that purpose,
as we shall give a fuller account in the next Chapter, and of all the Matters
to be used with calcined Enamels, which serve to make up the Paint for Enamel
mixing them well together as Painters do on their Pallets: When you want some
Colors of Enamel, you may with Blue and Yellow make a good fair Green; a Blue
and Red mixed, will produce a fine Violet; a Red and White creates a
Rose-colour; a Black and White forms a gallant Gray, and so of others.

Every Workman has his own Secret, and peculiar way of Working, but most of
them make use of Rocaille for varnishing their Colors, which has an ill
effect, because of too much Lead, which is not perfectly purged off; this
lessens the Life and Splendor, and it always continues as it were tarnished,
cloudy, and dull.

But our Enamel being well refined, will produce Work so fine and agreeable,
that it is not possible to find any thing so illustrious and accomplished; and
such as for their one private diversion, would work herein, and have not the
convenience of a Glass-house, may easily be furnished, by proceeding to make
one according to the directions already given.

Notwithstanding the sufficiency of our Enamel for affording all sorts of
Colors and Tinges in painting on Enamel, we will yet prescribe other means for
this, no way inferior thereto, to answer the Advantage and Curiosity of those
who Work at this Excellent Art.

CHAP. CLXXXVII. To make White for Painting on Enamel.
THE best Workmen, for the most part, use the White Enamel ground, which they
can manage with address enough to heighten and illustrate their Lights, which
is necessary to be done to all their Colors, as in Miniature: But as it is
difficult to preserve the Ground justly for improving those other Colors, and
ordering the Compositions (all one as in Carnation) you must take of our
Crystal ground prepared with Tin and Lead purged and refined as in Chap. 158.
or rather of our Milk-colour Enamel in Chap. 159. which is the fairest can be
made; cleanse it with Aqua fortis, wash, dry, and grind it afterward with Oil
of Spike.

Or you may prepare another White Ground without Lead, thus: Take very pure Tin
calcined, as in the Chapter aforesaid, and let it vitrifie in a Glass-house
Pot, with eight times as much Crystal Frit, as we have directed the Preparation
in Chap. 6, pulverize these very fine, and proceed precisely according to
Prescription for Purification, etc. in Chap. 158.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII. To make a Black for painting on Enamel.
THO the Black Enamels prescribed in Chap. 156. and those succeeding it may
serve to Paint on Enamel with this Color, without any other Preparation than
grinding it with Oil of Spike; yet we will add here another Black no less
excellent and fine, arising from equal parts of Black-Enamel, and Peregrine
well calcined, mix and reduce them to an impalpable Powder, and then apply Oil
of Spike, and you will have a Color which will take with great facility on the
Enamel.

CHAP. CLXXXIX. A Yellow for Paint on Enamel.
WE will only make use of our Enamel, prepared in Chap. 162. mixed and purified
with Aqua fortis, and after washed in clean Water, as in Chap. 185. dry and
grind this Powder with Oil of Spike on your Marble, and it is fit for use. With
this Yellow and a Blue, as we have already hinted, may be made a fair Green;
but those Enamels described in Chap. 153. and the succeeding, are so just and
fine, that it is needless to use any other for that purpose; this Preparation
for the Yellow here laid down is sufficient also for it, without any further
trouble.

CHAP. CXC. A Blue to paint on Enamel.
THE Enamels of this Color assigned in Chap. 151. and 152. are the Noblest can
be used in this Work, purify them with Aqua fortis, and grind them with Oil of
Spike, as before directed for the other Colors.

You may because it is vetrified, make another fine enough Blue thus. Take
Painters Enamel prepared, add to this (put into a Glass-Bottle) best rectified
Aqua-Vitae, enough to drown the Stuff by four Inches, stop it well, and set it
in the Sunshine for five or six Days, shaking the Bottle well three or four
times a Day, that the purer Enamel may dissolve, and the grosser fall to the
bottom; take the Enamel out of your Bottle, and steep the Faces, letting them
precipitate as useless; then evaporate your Aqua-Vitae, and dry your Azure,
which will be a very fine well cleansed Matter for all sorts of this Work;
grind it after on your Marble. This Enamel so prepared, is most proper for
Painting, and far beyond the Vltra Marine, so much made use of.

We shall in the Tenth Book prescribe some other excellent Methods to make
Blues very fine, with a Receipt for Vltra Marine, and several other Colors in
favor of those who affect that Noble Art of Limning.

CHAP. CXCI. A Red Paint for Enamel.
THere can nothing exceed the Perfection of our Enamels of this Color, taught
in eight several Chapters of the Sixth Book; the like may be said of our
Blood-colour, Rubies, Rose and Carbuncle, which is the most exalted Ingredient
for Enameling Metal, or making Paint on Enamel; and those who practice this
fine Art, use no other than that of the Glass-house, or such as they make
accordingly. Now this Red Enamel is prepared as the other Colors with
Aquafortis to purify it, washed, dried, and ground with Oil of Spike for your
use.

There is yet another tolerable Red, which they Paint with on Enamel, in which
is employed calcined Gold; but this would be much more improved, if instead of
their Rocaille they made use of our Matter made of Crystal and Saturnus
Glorificatus in Chap. 113. or of our principal prepared Powder prescribed all
along the Sixth Book, for these are exceeding well purified, whereas the
Rocaille has too great a Surcharge of Lead, the Impurity whereof always renders
the Work defective.

See here their way of calcining Gold, which is not near so fine as that we
have given Chap. 115. and as there are an hundred several ways, so every Man
makes use of his own as most excellent, and thinks it better than another's.

One takes an Ounce of fine Gold in very thin Plates, these dissolved in eight
Ounces of Aquafortis, and regulated with Sal-Armoniack, or old strong Salt, in
a small Glass Mattress, this is put into a Glass-Cucurbit, wherein was already
poured eight Paris Pints of Spring Water, and six Ounces of Mercury, the
Cucurbit is placed on a still Fire, and after four and twenty Hours the Gold
descends to the bottom in a light Land-red Powder, then the Water is poured off
leisurely into an earthen glazed Receiver, or Pan, and the Powder gathered and
dried by a moderate heat, and with a Shamois Skin they separate the Mercury
from the Gold, and grind this Powder with twice its weight of Flowers of
Sulphur together, and then put all into a Crucible over a small Fire, where the
Sulphur will communicate it self with the rest, and then evaporating they find
the Powder somewhat ruddy, which ground with Rocaille, is what they make use of
on the Enamel.

We own this Calcination to be tolerable as to the Gold, but as for mixing the
Calx with the Rocaille, without melting them together to incorporate is
disputable: We believe that in grinding them together with Oil of Spike, they
may in some sort incorporate as other Colors, but can never so perfectly
unite; besides, the Crystal Matter does not so well receive the Color of the
Gold this way, as if it were done by fusion.

Others make Red inclining to Vermilion, which they use in Painting after this
manner. Take Vitriol calcined in two Crucibles well luted together, and set for
an Hour over a flow Fire; then purge it with Aquafortis, wash it in fair
Water, and grind it with Oil of Spike as before, and so make use of it for
Enamel.

All Red Enamel which is good, ought to be hard, and not easily consumed in the
Fire; for that which is otherwise, contains much Lead, and soon becomes dull
and sullied, and is not of so lasting a substance, which the Workmen ought to
be cautious of.

To finish the Preparation of Enamel, and before the manner of painting 'em is
prescribed, take notice, that all the Colors before mentioned, which are not
pure Enamel, ought to be incorporated with a Crystalline Matter, such as we
prescribed in Chap. 148. to the end they may vitrifie the better, which else
they will not easily do, the most Workmen make use of their Rocaille, whether to
avoid the trouble of making (or that they are ignorant how to prepare) a better
Matter; and this has obliged us to give several ways very good and true for
their purpose to make fine and perfect Work by.

CHAP. CXCII. The Way to Paint on Enamel.
THIS Art is revered by all Nations, it is so fine and so excellent, that the
first and Noblest Persons of the World practice in it, as we have said
elsewhere: It is certain that the Art of painting on Enamel is modern, but no
less estimable for that, since its effects are so wonderfully beautiful, so
infinitely lasting, of so Natural a Gloss, and their Splendor never to be
defaced.

If it were possible to make large Works of Enamel, as is done in Picture, they
would be inestimable because of their Luster, and so far surpass what Antiquity
has had such great respect for, and which these latter Ages still caress with
extraordinary esteem.

This way of painting on Enamel, seems much more difficult than Limning;
Practice however convinces us, that they are equally easy, and we can with as
little trouble represent any History on Enamel, as in Limning; the difference
lies only in preparing the Colors, which is not done the same way; for we dry
and varnish our Enamel-paint by Fire, whereas that in Limning is done by the
Air.

To paint on Enamel, you must have a Plate of Gold enameled with White, on
which delineate and pourtray your Design. This done, draw it over again in dark
Red: The Piece being perfectly done off, and the Lines complete to the Subject,
set the Tablet, or Piece in the Muffle, on a reverberatory Fire, to settle as
before directed.

Your Tablet being taken out, apply the Colors in a just order as in Limning,
with this difference only, that here you make your White Ground serve for
filling, where that Color is required to set off the heightnings and luster of
the Lights as is done in Miniature; and because it mightily contributes to the
heightening thereof in the other Colors as to improving their Lights, we have
given a most excellent Receipt in Chap. 187. which very excellently serves upon
this occasion.

When the Piece is thus finished, put it again into the Furnace to fix the
Colors, and as soon as you perceive it varnish or polish, draw it out least
the Colors mix and spoil each other.

You may take out the Work again, and revise it as often as you please, only
putting it still into the Furnace until it receives its just Gloss, etc.

This way of renewing and revising the Tables, is done in Limning with Oil; and
the Painters observe that the Pieces must not be handled until they are well
dried in the Air, so those in Enamel must be let alone until they receive their
perfection from the Fire.

This is all to be observed in Painting on Enamel; it remains only for us to
show how to prepare your dark Red for tracing the Design; you may have it thus.

Take the Caput Mortuum which remains in the Retort, after the Aquafortis is
made of your Vitriol and Nitre, grind it with Oil of Spike, and so you have the
dark Red ready for your use; or you may make it with Crocus Martis, ground with
Oil of Spike.

The End of the Seventh BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK VIII. Containing the Way to make China, or fine Earthen Ware; how to
Enamel, Paint, and Gild them.
CHAP. CXCIII.
POrcelaine, Fayence, China, or fine EarthenWare, is enameled with our White
Stuff, which we have already prescribed for Metals; and its Painting the same,
and of such Colors as we have proposed for Enamels in the foregoing Book, and
this obliges us to discourse thereof in this our eight Book.

The Custom of enameling on Ware, is of greater Antiquity than that on Metals,
for in the time of Porcenna, who generously undertook the Restoration of
Tarquin to the Roman Government in the Consulate of Valor. Publicola and Horat.
Pulvilius Ann. Mund. 3444, five hundred and four Years before the coming of
Jesus Christ, or thereabouts, the practice of enameling on Were was used in the
Estates of that Prince; and what gives us very good reason to believe this is
the Name Porcelaine, which has an Affinity to Porcenna, tho altered by the
corruption of Time, so it is also called fayence from Fayence in the Duchy of
Vrbin, where in the Time of Michael Ange, and Raphael Vrbain, this Art was
practiced.

And as the Secrets of Nature are daily more and more discovered, so has time
employed the Invention of Man to improve this, and make it more excellent, not
only condescending to enameling, but proceeding also to Painting and
pourtraying thereon several Curiosities, to which at length is added the
Ornaments of Gilding.

These Pieces of Ware are of a very general use over all the World, as for
Ornaments over Chimneypieces, on Cabinets and Tables, or Boards. The choicest
come in us from China, and next to those are done at St. Clowd and Rouen; but
there are very good made in Holland, at (...) in Italy, and several other
places in France.

The painting and enameling on these, is what we are properly obliged to take
notice of in our Art; however we shall slightly touch upon the Composition and
Molding the Ware, and for this we will prescribe fine and delicate Methods
sufficient enough to answer the Satisfaction of such as employ themselves in
this Art, and of those Persons whose Curiosity leads them to enquire after
things, whereof they are not already informed.

CHAP. CXCIV. The Furnace for making of China,
MUST be large, with an Opening proportioned to the Vessel you are to place
therein; of these there are several sorts, but the most commodious must be made
as follows.

You may shape this Furnace round or square, but the square is best, because of
the Opening; it must be made of good Brick and such Stuff as can mostly endure
the Fire, of what bigness you please, with three Divisions; the lowest for the
Ashes must be a Foot high, that the Air may be communicated through its Opening
to the Fire; the middle Story is for the Fire, and must be underlaid with a
very good Grate to separate it from the under Story, with an Opening for the
Fuel, and be vaulted above about a Foot in height: According to the Size of
your Furnace this Vault must be made like that of an Oven, and have an Hole in
the middle of the same shape as the Furnace, round or square, and proportioned
to its bigness, through which the Flame may transmit it self to the uppermost
Story, where the Vessels are put to bake in; this last Story is to be at least
two Foot high, and its Opening fourteen or fifteen Inches, to put and draw the
Vessels easily in and out; the top must be vaulted too with such a round or
square hole, and over that a Funnel, for the convenience of the Flame and Smoke
which it draws out.

All the Opening, especially the two uppermost, must be of strong Brick, or
Crucible Earth, or rather of Iron, well luted within side, which must shut and
open easily, and be very exact and sit, that the Fire may not suck in any cold
Air, which might break the Vessels.

This Furnace will serve also for many other uses, as to Melt, Reverberate,
Calcine, Cement, and several sorts of Works in the Laboratory of Chimistry;
because in it all the degrees of Fire may be found by the help of the lower
Opening, and the Funnel of the Chimney.

You may else for Baking your China, make use of the Furnace hereafter
described in Chap. 202. where we discourse of Painting on Glass, putting
thereinto your Vessel of Crucible-Earth for Baking the Ware in, and then
covered over with a vaulted Coverlid, with a hole at top to let out the Flame
and Smoke of the Reverberatory Fire; for this reason there will be no occasion
in this sort of Furnace for any other Opening, because the Baking Vessels with
your Ware, are put in a top before the Coverlid is laid on, and so the Fire
circulates about it, and it becomes very Red, whereby the China-Ware is Baked,
as is done in Baking of Pipes.

CHAP. CXCV. To make your Stuff for China-Ware.
THE Composition for this must be very fine, because of the Ware, and not such
as is used for ordinary Vessels, we will therefore prescribe the Manner of
making it, to prevent the unsuccessful Attempts of such as may be ignorant.

For this you must take of Shells of every sort which are White and
Transparent, grind them well on a Marble, then searce and reduce them to an
impalpable Powder.

To make your Paste of this Powder, first dissolve an Ounce of very white
Gum-Arabick in a Pail of Water; when it is well dissolved and mixed with the
Water, dissolve therein about a quarter as much Quicklime as your Powder
weighs, then stir and mix it very well, and afterward put in the Powder and
stir all together, and knead it as they do Mortar; of this Stuff form your
Vessels according to the different sorts you desire, let them half dry, or
more, in the Air, before you polish them with your smooth Instrument of Copper,
or Iron for that purpose, and so leave 'em until they dry thoroughly: Being very
well smoothed and dried, glaze them over with your White Enamel, prepared as
we'll direct in the next Chapter, and so set them in the Furnace to Bake and
finish, where having kept them a convenient time, let the Fire go out of its
self: When the Furnace is cold, take 'em out and paint them and put them in
again to Bake a second time, observing what directions we have already given
concerning these Matters, and when the Fire is gone out, and the Furnace cold,
you have the Ware in perfection ready to take out for use.

You may make your China-Ware also of pure Earth; let it not be red tho, but
White or Gray; you may try the sufficiency of it after it is prepared, by Baking
some beforehand, and when it comes out of the Furnace sound and uncracked, it is
good and fit for your purpose.

The Preparation consists in drying it well, and reducing it to a very fine
Powder; then put it into fair Water, wherein has been already dissolved a
little Gum-Arabick; but most of those that make it, employ only Water without
Gum; after this you may make your Dishes, set 'em to dry, Polish, Dry, Glaze,
Bake, Paint, and finish them as before; all which, those who work at them know
better than I can express it.

CHAP. CXCVI. How to Enamel the China.
FOR this take of our Milk-white Enamel Chap. 149. grind it very fine, as
Painters do their Colors; put the Powder afterward into a Glass-Cucurbit,
pouring some Aquafortis thereon; let it digest a little to cleanse off its
Impurities, and become fine and transparent; then pour off the Aquafortis,
washing the Powder in Water over and over again, grind it afterward with a
little Gum-Water on your Marble, and so glaze the Vessels with it within and
without, dry them in the Air, and Bake them as before in the Furnace.

Or you may heat the Vessels to a Redness in the Furnace, and melt the Enamel;
when it is in a perfect Fusion, dip the smaller Vessels therein, and pour of it
on the larger, for they will take no more on them than will serve them, set
them by turns in the Furnace, stopping it very well to avoid the Air: Bake,
cool your Furnace, and finish them as before, then take out the Dishes, Paint
and Bake them over again, observing all our former Directions.

CHAP. CXCVII. To paint the China.
THIS is done as the Enamel discoursed of in Chap. 192. but much more easily,
the Figures being only just dashed over in comparison to them; however you must
grind your Colors with Oil of Spike on the Marble, as we have said already,
and so paint on the Dishes Story, Landscape, or any other Fancy, but you must
never expect to have them thereon so complete and handsome, as those painted on
the enameled Plates, because the former are finished standing, and so enlarge in
length or breadth, whereas the other are done on flats, and lying; besides the
Dishes are for the most part round, and not so easily painted; for if they
could be as neatly done as the Enamel, they would be excessive dear.

CHAP. CXCVIII. To Gild China.
YOU must first grind some Shade-Earth on a Marble, with Linseed-Oyl, prepared
as shall be shown in Chap. 200. with which trace out your Figures, which must
be two whole Days a drying; after this apply very thin Leaf-Gold, and with a
sharp Graver, shape the Figures, and then put the Dishes in an Oven, as soon as
the Batch of Bread is drawn out, let the Heat be no greater than one's Hand may
endure, else the Vessels would crack; leave them in it for two or three Hours
or more, if the Oven be not too hot; you may else make use of our own Furnace,
by giving it the same moderate degree of heat, as experienced Persons are well
acquainted with.

CHAP. CXCIX. Another Way.
THIS is much more handsome and lively, besides that it cannot be effaced; you
may with it gild Vessels entirely, or border, or give them any luster you think
convenient for Ornament, and it will look as well as fine Gold.

You must first wet over the Places you would gild with Gum-Water lightly, then
apply your Leaves, and so let them dry, this is enough for plain Gilding; but
if you would have it carved, or figured, you must make use of a Steel-Graver,
and afterward bath the Gold with Water, wherein Borax has been dissolved,
powdering it in the mean time with Crystaline Powder, or Milk-white Enamel
reduced to a very fine Powder; then set the Dish on a Reverberatory Fire to
melt and be polisht; thus you will have as fine a piece of Ware as can be.

CHAP. CC. The Way to prepare Linseed-Oyl for Gilding of China.
IT is but just we should discharge our Promise of prescribing this Preparation.

Take a Paris Pint of Linseed-Oyl in an Earthen Pot which will hold about two
Paris Pints, put this on a Fire, and when it begins to boil throw in twice the
bigness of a small Egg of Gum-Arabick pulverized, stir all well until it be
dissolved, then put in an Onion of an ordinary size, and the like weight of
Garlic cut small; when the Oil boils well, and swells up by the force of the
good Fire which must be underneath, pour it out into another such Pot, and so
in and out of each Pot to the other until all be very well mixed; then put it
on the Fire again, adding half an Egg-shell of Powder of Mastick, and stir it
very well; as soon as it boils again, it will foam and have a great Froth which
must be scummed off, and then take it off the Fire and brew the Ingredients
together with the two Pots as before, continue to do thus with it, or stir it
on the Fire until it rise no more.

This done, take a very dry Toast of White Bead to take off the Grease (the Oil
still boiling) and when you put in the Toast, you must at the same time put in
some Pin-Dust; stir all well together and let it stand for twenty four Hours
afterward; strain the Oil through a Linen-cloth, in which is some very fine
Sand, the better to filtrate it, and take off the Grease, and so you will have it
pure and clear, which Bottle up for your Use.

Or you may (both ways being good enough) first mix with the Oil two Ounces of
Gold Litharge pulverized, adding the Gum-Arabick as soon as it begins to boil,
and to purify it let it filter through a Linen-cloth full of Sand, while it is
hot, into a Glass-Bottle, wherein is already half an Ounce of fine Camphire
Powder, shaking the Bottle very well until the Oil be cold; afterward lay it
in the Sun for fifteen Days, and it will be entirely purged, and the longer
it is kept will be the better.

This is all we have to say at present about China-Ware, until we have further
enlarged our Knowledge in the Matter, which we have not much studied, because
we did not intend to treat of it; however we afterward thought it incumbent on
us so to discourse thereof as an Art dependant on ours; and we hope the Reader
will take this in good part, until we may give him something more at large.

OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK IX. Showing the Method of Drawing all sorts of Story, or Figure, on
Glass, in Paint, Gilding, Marbling, etc.
CHAP. CCI.
THE Art of Painting has been still so Noble and Excellent, that all those
great Persons, who have practiced it, were always distinguished among the most
eminent of their Age; those celebrated Pieces we have of it in our Days, to the
Ornament and Admiration of all Europe, has settled so great a Veneration for
their Memory, as will eternize it to Posterity.

The Dorians, Corinthians, Ionians, and Romans, were the People that paid the
most esteem to this Noble Art, for which they conceived so great Opinion and
Delight, that they looked upon the famous Painters of their Time as Demigods,
and ranged them among the first and most Learned Men in the World.

The Ancients did not only pay a Deference and Honor to the Nobility and
Illustrious Birth of Great Men, but to their Worth and Virtue too: Hence the
Athenians erected a Statue in Memory of Aesop, who was but a poor Slave: Would
they have done it if this eminently Ingenious Fellow had not possessed so many
excellent Parts? No, 'twas not for the sake of his Picture which was too
deformed and ugly to please or Charm 'em, but to convince Posterity how the way
to Glory is not shut up from the meanest Persons.

Can there be any thing more taking, or complete, than the Natural Imitations
which issue from Painting? Has Nature any thing more considerably admirable? Do
we not see her displayed in the Pourtraits of those Excellent Masters, who with
so much Art and Delicacy have expressed all whatever she has produced in this
sublunary inferior Orb, so that it is not possible to see them without
admiring, or to admire them without Astonishment.

What wonderful Fancies too have they drawn from the Superior and Heavenly!
They have so lively shown the Rising and Setting Sun, Night and Day, the Face
of Heaven sometimes Calm and Serene, and again darkened with Clouds, the Thunder
Showers, Storms and Seas raging, with all their Wrecks, and in the Microcosm,
or little World of Man, they have expressed his Joy, Sadness, Smiles, Tears,
Pleasure, Dissatisfaction, Life and Death; in short, all the Alterations which
Creatures are liable to, whereof the enumeration would be very tedious.

This fine Art, as well as that of Glass, does not lessen the quality of its
Practitioners, the contrary whereof happens in all other Arts; for Princes, and
many of our Monarchs, have granted the Privilege of Nobility to several Masters
thereof, to intimate to Posterity the extraordinary Esteem they had for them,
upon the Excellency of those Incomparable Pieces which their Pencils had
produced.

Though painting on Glass be very ancient, it is yet much more modern than that
of Painting on Wood, or Cloth, as being of no longer standing than this Art of
Glass-work: The first who painted on Glass, did it only in Distemper; that is,
in Colors mixed with Glue, but this not abiding the Injury of Time, they
invented the way of doing it with Fire-Proof Colors, which are incorporated
with the Glass, by Baking and Melting them together; and as soon as this Secret
was discovered, every Body took delight to practice the Draught of Figures, and
entire Histories thereon for Ornaments, whereof we have still some remaining
Pieces on old Church Glass; but those Figures before the Year 1500, had not
half the sufficiency of Base, or Relief, as is required in Painting.

Those who would fain Work in handsome and lively Colors, made use of
Glass-Frit, tinged in the Glass-house, as well for Carnation as Drapery,
whereon they drew the first Lines of the Visage, and other Parts of the Body in
Black, and so Shadowed 'em with Strokes and Dashes.

But Painting having since received an Improvement in France, those Works
became more perfect, and in so short a time with such advantage of making fair
and most exquisite Pieces, as are even at this Day the Admiration of the
Learned, of which, all the Honor must be ascribed to the French, who were the
first Discoverers of this great Perfection in the Art.

We might easily assign several ways of this Painting among the Ancients, but
since they are out of Practice, and the latter Methods much more excellent, we
shall satisfy our selves in prescribing only such as may suffice, and gratify
the Curiosity of those who love this Art.

And not only the Method of Painting, but also how to prepare the Colors, to
bake and finish 'em in the Furnace; of this we'll give a short Description in
the next Chapter; that Secret of ordering the Fire, which is the Life and
principal Agent of all the Works, with that of Gilding, Marbling, etc. as will
be shown in the Sequel of this Book.

The most part of Ingredients useful for this Service of Painting, will also
tinge the Glass well enough, and we will make use of those mentioned elsewhere,
to avoid useless Repetitions on the Subject.

CHAP. CCII. A Furnace for Painting the Glass, and Settling the Colors.
WE have mentioned this Furnace in Chap. 194. but did not take notice of its
Form, or Appurtenances, because the Business which obliges us to speak of it
there, is very different from this.

This Furnace must be Square, of good Brick, two Foot high, and so much every
way, and have three Divisions; the undermost for the Ashes, must be six Inches
high, the middle one for the Fire must be six Inches high, and have its Opening
five or six Inches broad, and four deep, with a good Iron-Grate, and three
square Bars of Iron across to support the Earthen-Stove hereafter described:
The uppermost Division must be a Foot high, with a little Opening about the
middle before of four Inches high, and two wide, to put in and draw out the
Ware a Baking, to see if it be well done.

In this uppermost Division must be put the aforesaid Stove of good Fire-proof
Crucible Earth, the Bottom an Inch and half thick, and from thence up to the
Brim ten Inches full; it must be square as the Furnace, and have two Inches
room from on all sides, that the Fire may flame round about it to Bake the
Work, and therefore placed exactly in the middle of the Furnace; there must be
also in the Fire-part of this Stove, an Opening just against, and of the same
Size and Form as that of the Furnace, for the convenience of putting the Ware
in and out.

Take this Method of distinguishing the Furnace in all its parts, and to lay
down a clearer description thereof, observe,

The Letter A is the Ash-hole for the Ashes that fall from above through the
Iron-Grate; and note, That the wider the Opening is, the more violent will the
Fire be.

The Letter B is the Fireplace.

The Letters C are three Square Iron-Bars to support the Pan for the Ware.

The Letter D is the Opening of the Furnace and Pan, through which the Ware
must be conveyed in and out.

The Letter E is the Earthen Pan, wherein all the Painted-Ware must be Baked.

The Letters F are two half Lids of Potters Earth for covering the whole
Furnace above: As soon as the Stove is full of Ware, they must be well closed
and luted together, to prevent the Air coming in any where but by the four
square holes at both ends of the Lid, and the two Semicircles in the middle,
which make a round Hole for a Chimney; when the two half Lids are closed, those
five Holes are for letting out the Smoke and Flame of the Furnace.

CHAP. CCIII. To make White-Ground for Painting on Glass.
NOW to pursue our Work, we will begin with the Preparation of all the Colors
to be used in Painting Glass; for before we proceed to prescribe the Rules, how
to work the Materials must first be considered.

The White is compounded of several Ingredients: The first are small White
River Peble-Stones heated red over a Fire, in an Iron-Ladle, and thrown
afterward into an Earthen-Dish full of cold Water to calcine them, and this
must be repeated several times, until they be prepared; afterward being dried,
pound them with a Stone, or Glass-Pestle in a Stone-Morter, and so grind them
upon a Marble to an impalpable Powder; then mix a fourth part of Nitre with it,
and calcine them in a Crucible; then pound and grind them again, and calcine
them a third time over a smaller Fire than your former, and so take them off
for Use.

This done, when you would Paint with it, add equal parts in weight of Gip, a
sort of Talc found among Plaster-mold baked on the Coals to a Whiteness, and
reducible to Powder, and Rocaille, whereof we have already spoken, grind them
all three very well together in a hollow Plate of Copper, with Gum-Arabick
Water; thus have you your White in good condition to Paint withal.

CHAP. CCIV. To prepare Black for painting on Glass.
AS this Color cannot be omitted in any sort of Painting, so in this; the
manner of using it is much the same, and the Preparation easy. You must grind
Scales of Iron from the Smith's Anvil-Block, for three Hours on the shallow
Copper-Bason, or Plate; add to this one third of the same weight of Rocaille,
with a little Calx of Copper, to hinder the Iron from turning Red in the Fire;
grind it to as impalpable a Powder as you can bring it to, and so keep it in a
close Vessel for use.

CHAP. CCV. To prepare a Yellow Paint for Glass.
THIS Color requires a more costly Preparation than the precedent, because it
cannot be well done without a tenth part of prepared Silver, as we shall show
hereafter.

Take fine Silver in Plates from the Copple, stratifie 'em in a Crucible, with
Powder of Sulphur, or Nitre, the first and last Lay being of the Powder, and so
calcine them in a Furnace; this done, cast it out, as soon as all the Sulphur
is consumed, into an Earthen-Bason of Water, and afterward pound it in your
Stone-Mortar until it is fit for the Marble, and so grind it with some of its
Water wherein it was cooled, for six Hours; then add nine times its weight of
Red-Oaker, and grind them together for a full Hour, and it is done and fit for
Painting on Glass.

CHAP. CCVI. To make a Blue for painting Glass.
THE whole Secret of this Preparation, depends on the calcining the
Ingredients, and goodness of the Crucible: Take two Ounces of Zaffer, two
Ounces of Minium, and eight Ounces of very fine White Sand; put all these into
a Bell-metal Mortar, and pound them very well, and so into a Crucible covered
and luted over a quick Fire for an Hour; then draw off the Crucible, and pound
them again as before: This done, add a fourth of its weight in Saltpeter
powdered, and having mixed all very well together, return them into a Crucible
covered and luted, which place again in the Furnace for two Hours at least,
continuing such another Fire as the former: The Crucible being off and cooled a
second time, grind the Mass as before, and so put it into a Crucible again,
with a sixth part of Saltpeter, and let it remain on the Fire for three Hours;
then take off the Crucible, and immediately with an Iron-Spatula red hot, take
out the Matter lest it should stick, being very clammy and hard to be emptied.

It Is convenient to have strong Crucibles for this Calcination, because it
remains so considerable a while in the Fire, and they must be luted with an
extraordinary lute; you may use that we have given directions for in Chap. 109.
adding Powder of Borax, to the Powder of Glass vitrified, which helps the
Fusion of the Glass, which we have omitted there; but the greatest stress lies
in Baking the Crucible afterward in a small Fire, to cement the Pores, and
make the Earth compact as Glass, which would be very much furthered, if you
threw on it a considerable quantity of Salt as it comes out of the Fire, this
would glaze it, and capacitate it for retaining the Spirits in the Fire.

CHAP. CCVII. To make Red Color for Glass Paint.
THIS requires as much caution as the Blue: You must take Scales of Iron, and
Litharge of Silver, of each a Dram, Feretto of Spain half a Dram, Rocaille
three Drams and half; grind all these for half an Hour on a shallow
Copper-Plate, in the mean time pound three Drams of Boodstone in an
Iron-Mortar, and add it to the rest; then pound a Dram of Gum-Arabick in that
Mortar to an impalpable Powder, to take off the remains of your Boodstone,
and so add it to the rest, grinding them still continually, lest the
Boodstone be spoiled.

The best manner of grinding these is to pour Water by little and little on the
Ingredients as you grind them, neither wetting them too much, nor too little,
but just as much as will keep a good Temper as for Painting: Afterward put all
into a foot Glass, and so drop on it through a small hollow Cane of Wood, or
with your Finger, as much Water as will bring it to the consistence of an
Eggs-Yolk buttered, or a little more, then cover the Glass to preserve it from
Dust, and so let it stand three Days to settle. After this, decant the clearest
and purest of the Colors that rise at top, into another Glass, without
disturbing the Sediment; and two Days after it has settled anew, pour off again
the purest of the Colors as before. This done, set it in the Body of a broken
Mattress, or Bolt-head, over a gentle flow Fire, to dry easily, and so keep it
for use.

When you have occasion for it, take a little fair Water in a Glass, and with
it moisten as much Color as you think convenient, that will be excellent for
Carnation; as for the Faeces, which are very thick, dry 'em too, and you may
moisten these in like manner with Water for Drapery, Timber-colour, and such
other as you think convenient.

CHAP. CCVIII. To make a Purple-colour for painting of Glass.
THE Preparation of this Purple-colour, is exactly like that of the Blue, for
this Reason we need not use any tedious Repetitions: You must take an Ounce of
Zaffer, and an Ounce of very pure and clean Perigeux, two Ounces of Minium,
eight Ounces of very fine white Sand, pound all these in a Bellmetal Mortar,
and reduce it to an impalpable Powder; put it afterward into a good Crucible
well covered and luted, in the Furnace; keep a very good Fire to it for an
Hour, then draw it out, and as soon as it is cold, pound the Mass over again in
the same Mortar; to this add a fourth part of its weight of Nitre, mix them
together, and put them into the Crucible, and so proceed as directed in Chap.
206. until you have a fine Purple-colour.

CHAP. CCIX. To make a Green Paint for Glass.
THE Change of the Ingredients makes this Color, but the Method for
incorporating them is the same as the former: Take two Ounces of Aes ustum, of
Chap. 35. to this add two Ounces of Minium, and eight Ounces of very fine white
Sand, pound these together in a Metal Mortar to an impalpable Powder, and put
it afterward in a Crucible luted and covered into a Wind-Furnace, giving it a
good Fire for an Hour; after this draw it off, and let it cool, then pound it
again, adding a fourth part its weight of Nitre in Powder, grind and mix them
well together, putting them afterward into the Crucible, luted and covered, in
the Furnace, for two Hours, and so forth as in Chap. 206. Thus you will have a
very fine Green.

CHAP. CCX. Of other Colors in general for Painting on Glass.
WE have directed how to make the first MasterColours for Painting on Glass;
now we proceed to show what other depends on them without enlarging on these
Preparations.

The Red in Chap. 207, serve for Carnation, but there ought to be one part of
Feretto of Spain, as in Chap. 21. in the Composition, and another of Rocaille,
of which we will give the Preparation in the next Chapter; grind these on your
Copper Plate, imbibing the Powder with Gum'd Water, until it be made fit for
use.

The Red Faeces there also mentioned will serve in Drapery, and to describe
Timber-work, Trunks of Trees, Hair, Brick, and such other things; you must take
an Ounce of Feretto of Spain in Chap. 21. as in the former Composition, an
Ounce of Iron-Scales, two Ounces of Rocaille, grind them well together upon the
Copper-Plate, moistening them with GumWater, till they be brought to the proper
consistence, neither too thick nor too thin, so you will have a Red inclining to
a dark Yellow, very fit for use.

There be several more made use of in this, as well as in other Painting, but
are compounded of the principal Colors, as we have intimated in our Discourse
of Colors for Painting on Enamel, in Chap. 186.

CHAP. CCXI. The Way to make Rocaille.
ALL Haberdashers of Small-Ware, sell this Rocaille, which are Green and Yellow
Grains, whereof they make Beads, and sell them to the Country People; much also
of these Trangums are exported to the Indies, to Africa, and the adjacent
places, where the Inhabitants wear 'em about their Necks, and on their Scarfs,
Bracelets and Wastbelts.

It is used also in Painting on Enamel and Glass, veryfrequently, though ill
qualified and full of impure Lead. We have already taken notice of this before,
and tho to avoid this they make choice of the most clear and transparent
Rocaille, and such as is least charged with Color, yet still it is very far
from being sufficient; it is true, it contains less Lead, however even that
which still remains is likewise impure, and not at all purified.

We have directed such as work in Enamel, and we cannot avoid it also here to
advise you instead of Rocaille, to make use of our Crystalline Matter made with
Saturnus Glorificatus, Chap. 112. or such otherlike Ingredients, as we have
prescribed, which are perfectly cleansed; however to please every Body, we will
give a Preparation of this Rocaille, and how to compound it, which is very
easily done: Thus,

To make the Yellow Grains, you must take a Pound of fine white Sand, three
Pound of Minium, mix and pound them together very well in a Mortar, and put the
whole into a strong Crucible covered and luted, dry the lute, and put it
afterward into the Glass-house, or Wind-Furnace, where the Fire is violent, to
reduce this Matter into Glass, as that of Saturn, made in Chap. 82. having thus
finished the Rocaille, make it up into Grains, or any other Shape you please.

The Way of making the Green, is quite contrary to that of the Yellow: Put
three Pound of fine white Sand to every Pound of Minium, and it will be very
compact. This Stu^^ will alter its Color, and become a pale Red in melting;
and these are the Compositions and way of making this Rocaille, which most
Workmen use: Thus you see there can be no preparing it without Lead, which
makes it so full of Impurity.

CHAP. CCXII. The Way to Paint on Glass.
THE Painting on Glass is of such fine Effect, as becomes the Admiration of the
Learned in all Noble Arts: Nothing can be more wonderful to the Sight; besides,
its continuance, and resisting all the Efforts of every Season, and badness of
Weather, for several Ages, tho this last Excellency was unknown to the first
Practitioners, and reserved for this latter Age, however the Honor is due to
them, since they made the first Secrets and Discoveries in this Art, and it is
much easier to improve, than form a new Invention.

If Glass were malleable, and discharged of its Natural Frangibility, nothing
could equal the Paint thereon; it is not to be tarnished, but always maintains
its primitive Beauty and Splendor, without any obstruction to the Transition
of Light; and there may as fine Fancy be done on it, as on Limning, there would
certainly be nothing on Earth so rich or precious as Glass, whether Painted, or
Tinged, if it had this principal Perfection of Malleability, which many Learned
Men have studied for, and daily find; but such is the Corruption of this Sinful
Covetous Age, that those Wise Seniors of this Art, do rather choose to pass for
Ignoramus's, than run the Risque of Perpetual Confinement, by exposing so fine
and delicate a Secret, which would incur the Envy of the Great: and this they
take care wisely to avoid.

We have already taken notice that such as formerly Painted on Glass, were both
Painters and Glass-makers, and that such Gentlemen as were of them, received
neither lessening in Birth nor Quality, as in case of other Arts, for this
Prejudice is exempted in the Art of Glass, and our Kings have that Esteem for
the Curious therein, that they have granted them such ample Privileges.

Now to proceed to the Manner of Painting on Glass, which is the Subject of
this Chapter, wherein are several Particulars to be considered, which we will
endeavor to distinguish as well as possible.

First choose such Glass as is usually called Glass of Lorrain, tho there be
such and as good made at Nevers; for this sort of Glass receives the Colors
better than any other, because it is best compact and able to resist the Fire;
it is very easily known; it is not altogether White, but of a Whitish Yellow. But
to proceed.

You must have the Original you Paint by, ready drawn and proportioned, on
strong Cap-Paper, in all its Colors and Perfection; for your better advantage
in Pattern, lay it on a Table, and so choose your Pieces of Glass to be
Painted, and take care to fit them so to each other, as they may join easily
afterward without any prejudice to the Draught from displacing them, and so
confounding the Figures and Pourtraits, or from the Lead which must join them
afterward, by obscuring any parts of the painting; then mark out each piece on
the Tablet, by No. 1, 2, 3. for better distinction, and so trace them over with
the Black given in Chap. 204. with a Pencil, as we shall further show; do this
very exactly, neither too slightly nor too thick, and so let it stand two Days
to dry, before you paint it.

Then having all your Colors in readiness, so as directed in the foregoing
Chapters, fill your Pieces off with Colors, for which use the Nib of the
Pencil, especially in Carnation, where you must be very exact; you must also be
very Circumspect and Expeditions, and take a great deal of care not to blot or
blur the Tracings, and chose rather to paint on the other side of the Glass.

All the Colors, except Yellow, may be applied on the same side, and that you
must do on the contrary side, because it is apt to mingle with the other
Colors, and if near the Blue, will compose a Green; so that for want of such
precaution the whole Work may be spoiled; if the Yellow transmit it self
perfectly through the Quarre, it is as well as if it had been done on the same
side; and take notice by the Way, that the other Colors have not so ready a
Transition, because they consist of a Grosser Body.

The Yellow ought to be very equally and justly laid on in a greater or lesser
quantity, as you would have your Shadows; observe this too in the rest, especially
to lay them on as quick as possible, as we have already said, particularly the
Azure, Green, and Purple require the most exactness of any.

Now to set off and heighten the Lights, in piling a Beard, describing Hair in
Drapery, or otherwise, use the Handle, or But-end of the Pencil, a small
pointed Stick, or Quill, wherewith take off the Colors in those places you
would Enlighten, which is easily done.

Such Works as are done in Grisaille you must paint after this manner: Trace
your Piece with Black, and let it dry for two Days entirely, do it over very
lightly and equally with a Wash so thin laid on, as not to efface the first
Lines, and let it dry for two Days; after this run it over again with the same
Wash where you find it convenient to give a second Tinge, and let it dry two
Days longer: Then to give it the Lights; and convenient Heightnings, take the
sharp But-end of your Pencil, or pointed Stick, or Pen, as before, and take off
the Color of the first Wash, in the most necessary places, and so your Work
will be finished.

To make this Wash is easy: Take a small Pewter Cup, or other Vessel, and put
therein a quantity of black coloring, then dissolve Gum-Arabick powdered in
its weight of Wine, and throw this on the Black in the Pewter-dish, or Saucer,
that it may be very clear, and not easily dried, and that you may have your
Wash for painting Glass in Grisaille, or Gray.

CHAP. CCXIII. How to order your Glass in the Furnace after Painting, and to
manage the Fire.
AFTER your Glass is fully painted, and the Draughts perfectly finished, the
difficulty will be to Bake the pieces, so as to give it a consistency with the
Glass, by penetration, which may be thus done. You must work with the Furnace
mentioned in Chap. 202. and its Stove of good Crucible Earth, to contain all
the Work, which must be stratified on this manner.

Take good Quicklime well digested, searced, and finely pulverized; and for
the better security let it digest thrice in a Potter's Furnace, and so powder
and searce it; then make a very even lay thereof, about half an Inch thick, on
the bottom of your Stove, and then a lay of pieces of broken Glass, and
afterward another lay of Powder, and so another of Glass, then another of
Powder; the reason of making this Stratification of powder and old Glass, is to
prevent any injury from the violence of the Fire, which will be very smart
under the Stove; this done upon the third Bed of powder, lay a lay of painted
Glass, and so continue S.S.S. each lay of powder and Glass being equally or
evenly made, until all the pieces of paint are put in, or the Stove full, and
upon the last lay of Glass lay the uppermost of powder somewhat thicker than
the former; then cover the Furnace with its Shrowds of Earth, joining and
luting them well together, all round with the best lute, so that it may admit
of no respiration, but through the fire holes, or the Opening of the Furnace,
whilst you draw out the proofs or Trials you make, as we have hinted elsewhere.

Your Furnace being thus ordered, and the lute dried very well, begin to heat
it gently with some Charcoal on the outside of the Furnace, at the en^rance,
and so by degrees, and very leisurely improving it, lest the Glass should be
broken, or the paint spoiled; continue thus for two Hours, then thrust the Fire
in further, and let it remain there for an Hour, putting it in by little and
little under the Stove, where leave it for two Hours longer, then increase the
Fire by degrees for two Hours, and so continue to apply Fuel until the Furnace
be full of Charcoal, and you perceive the Flame convey its self through every
hole of the Cover; keep it thus very violent for three or four hours, shutting
the Door of the Furnace; you must be very cautious and circumspect, during the
whole Work, from the first two hours that the Fire remains at the Entrance.

Observe from time to time to draw forth your Trials, or pieces of proof in
your Stove, to see if the Colors be melted and the Yellow qualified, you may
perceive how the Work goes on by the sparkling of the Iron-bars under the Stove.

As soon as you find your Colors almost done, improve the Fire with some very
small Billets of dry Wood, they must be very little for ease in putting them
in, and to prevent Smoking, and to make the Flame environ and reverberate over
and round about the Stove, which must be continued until you have finished,
this will be in twelve or fourteen hours; then let the Fire go out and the Work
cool of its self, and so take it out, and 'twill be finished.

CHAP. CCXIV. Another Way to Paint on Glass.
THO the former way be very fine and lasting as can be, yet we will here show
another more easy, and altogether as effectual.

Take very White Glass, varnish it very thin on one side with a White Varnish,
then having before made choice of some fine Impress, or Cut, on Paper, just fit
for the piece of Glass you design to paint its Fancy on, dip it in Water, and
letting it soak and dry a little, clap the Picture-side thereof to the
Varnish-side of the Glass, as exactly, plain, and evenly as possible, and so
let it dry thoroughly; afterward moisten the Paper on the Blank-side, and with
a blunt Graver draw off and trace the Lines of the Picture, which will
afterward remain perfect and distinctly on the Varnish-side of your Glass
Quarre.

This Draught is for the Model you must paint your Fillings in, and observe
that the Tracings and Strokes of the Picture are to serve you in Shadowing,
which cannot be rejected without disadvantage to your piece.

The manner of painting on Glass, is quite contrary to that of Limning, or
Painting on Cloth, or Wood; for in this the paint being but on one side, is
plainly visible on the other; here the Settings off are first done, then the
compound Colors just run over, and so continuing until perfected; whereas on
Linen, etc. the Settings-off, or Heightnings, are the last strokes, and their
Ground-colour, or first, is that which we end withal, and make our last lay
with in all pieces done on Glass.

We do not show the Way to make up the Colors, nor how to mix and finish the
Artificial ones, for that relates immediately to the Art of Painting, of which
several pieces are extant, and not to this Art of Glass; and these noted herein
are the same as in the other Art of Painting on Cloth, and not very uneasily
prepared.

You must also paint on Glass, just as in Miniature, with Watercolors, laying
your Picture underneath it, as before, and this will show finer than if done in
Oil; besides, the Colors dry in a moment.

Your pieces being thus done in Oil, or Watercolour, may receive a very
additional and improving Beauty, by over-laying all the Colors, except the
Ground, with Leaf-Silver, which will appear very glorious and lively on such as
are transparent; to wit, Lakes, Verditers, etc.

CHAP. CCXV. The Manner of Gilding on Glass.
WE promised to show this Way of Gilding on Glass after we had done with
Painting, and this we will discharge here.

Take any Glass you please, and moistening it over where you design to gild,
with Gum-Water, apply your Leaf-Gold, and so let it dry; cover the Glass over
with any piece of hollow Glass, and set it on an Iron-Plate at the Mouth of the
Furnace to heat gently, and when it is well heated, move it in further, and in a
very little time it will be red hot; then withdraw it, and let it cool slowly
at the Furnace Mouth. Thus if you have laid your Gold well on at first, you will
find it so well communicated to the Glass, that it is impossible for any Trial
to endamage the Gilding.

And after this method you may do with Globes, and give them a wonderful
Beauty, which no Dust, nor injury of Time can alter.

CHAP. CCXVI. Another Way to Gild Glass.
THIS second Way is altogether as fine as the other; besides, the Gilding is
better coated, and less exposed to Injury.

Take a Glass and moisten it every where, you design to Gild, with Gum-Water,
and lay on your Leaf-Gold, letting it dry; this done, run the Gold over with
Water wherein Borax has been dissolved, and so dust it with impalpable powder
of Glass; set it afterward by degrees into your Furnace, until it become red
hot, and the powder on the Gilding be melted and run; then draw it out
leisurely, letting it cool at the Mouth of the Furnace, and you will have your
Glass very finely Gilded, so that nothing in Nature can spoil it, unless it be
broken.

Or you may Gild on Glass with Linseed-Oyl, etc. as in Chap. 198. after the
same manner as on China, but the Ways we have just now given, are so fine, that
we look upon them to be more excellent; such as would make a choice may work by
Directions in this present Chapter.

CHAP. CCXVII. To imitate Precious-Stones in Colors, on Globes, or other
Vessels of White Glass.
THIS Way of tinging is different from what we have already given; and because
we would not willingly leave out any thing that may serve the Curious, we will
give the Method in this Chapter.

You may thus tinge any Vessel of White Glass either Globular, or Concave, with
Mouth-Glue, letting it soak in Water for two Days, and so boil it afterward
until it be all melted, and let it cool ^ little.

Pour it Milk-warm into your Globe, or other Vessel, shaking it therein to wet
it all over, and so pou^ it out again: Then your Colors being all ready i^
Powders, first blow in the Vermillion through (...) hollow Pipe, so as to
represent Clouds or Wavings in like manner blow in the Blue-Enamel, Scales of
Copper, Orpiment, and Lake, all in fine powder; these Colors will stick in
Undulations, because the Glue is moist; you may do thus with any other Colors:
This done, take Plaster well pulverized, and put a good quantity thereof into
the Vessel, and shake it well all over before (and until) the Glue be quite
dry, and it will stick all round, then shake out what remains loose, and you will
have the outside finely party-colored and Marbled, etc.

When these Colors are well dried, they will stick so to the inside, that they
will never come off, but remain always fine; set these Globes on Stands where
they may be for Ornament, and the pleasure of those who shall see and consider
their Admirable Beauty.

The End of the Ninth BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK X. Showing how to Extract the Essential Tincture of all Herbs, or
Flowers, as Yellow, Red, Green, Blue, Violet, Purple-colour'd, etc. With their
respective Lakes: To make Ultra-marine, German-Blue, etc. as well for the Art
of Glass, as Painting.
CHAP. CCXVIII.
NOT to omit any thing which at all concerns the Art of Glass, we thought
convenient in this Tenth Book, to give the Public a Method of Extracting all
manner of Essential Tinctures from Herbs, as well as Flowers; a Work not only
necessary for Painting, but the Art of Glass too: We shall also give Directions
to make Lake of several Colors, Vltra-marine of Lapis-Lazuli, with
German-Blue, etc.

The manner we prescribe for making these Colors, does equally qualify them
for tinging Glass, Stones, Enamel, and for Paint on Enamel and Glasswork, and
all this so prepared, as not to press on the Diversions, or pall the Pleasure
of the several Artists, or other curious Persons, who employ themselves that
way for Recreation.

What can be more admirable, than the Products, and Liberality of Nature, in
bestowing such excellent Enamel on Flowers and Plants, as contribute to furnish
Painting with such fine and lively Colors, which the Industry of Mankind can
extract, and so well adapt to the Convenience of Art, as to produce Effects,
finer, and more beautiful than any other whatsoever.

The use of Flowers and Plants, is not wholly confined to this Noble Art, but
they are also proper for Dying, and have much more excellent success in
Physic, where their Virtues are infinite, etc.

No Product in Nature is useless, but the very meanest has its necessary
Properties; and those which seem the most abject and venomous, (even the
greatest Poisons) have admirable Effects in Medicines, when duly prepared; and
this the Professors of Physic are not unacquainted withal, though very many
pretend to those Studies, whose Endeavors are far short of handing them
through the secret Excellencies thereof.

CHAP. CCXIX. How to Extract Lake from Broom-Flowers.
WE will give several ways of making Lakes of several Colors: The first with a
Lixivium, or Lee, made of Soda of the Glass-house, and fresh Quicklime, which
must be pretty strong, in which put your Broom-Flowers, over a small Fire,
until all the Tincture be drawn from them, the Flowers become White, and the
Lee receive the Yellow Color: Then take out the Flowers, and put the Lixivium
into a glazed Earthen Vessel to boil, adding thereto as much Roch-Allom, as it
can well dissolve; then take it off, and put it into a large Vessel, mixing it
with fair Water, so the Yellow will separate and descend to the bottom, let it
rest there a little, and afterward decant the Water off gently, and so put in
more fresh to it again and again, until the Water has drawn off all the Salt
and Allom from the Lixivium, and it become clear: Thus the Color will be very
well cleansed of the Salt and Allom, and remain exceeding fine and bright,
spread it on pieces of White Linen, and let it dry in the Shade on new-baked
Tiles, and you will have a most admirable Yellow-Lake for Painting.

CHAP. CCXX. To Extract the Tincture of Poppies, Iris (or Flowerde-luce)
Red-Roses, Violets, and all sorts of GreenHerbs, for making Lake of their
Color.
TO avoid unnecessary Repetitions, we have thought fit to bring all these under
one Chapter, because the Method for extracting their Colors is the same in one
as in the other, and done with the former Lixivium of Soda and Quicklime.

You must steep and boil each sort of Flowers, or Herbs by themselves in the
Lixivium, giving it time to draw off the Color entirely, which you will soon
perceive when the Faeces, or Flowers grow white, and the Lixivium deepened with
the Tincture; then pour off the Lixivium gently into your Earthen glazed
Vessels, and set them over a Fire, putting in as soon as they begin to boil as
much Roch-Allom, as they can well dissolve, and so take them off.

After this pour all together into a large Earthen Vessel glazed, and pour into
it fair Water, to make the Color precipitate; let it stand and settle, then
pour off the Water, and put in fresh; and thus continue to change the Water
until it pour off as clear as you put it in, and taste flat, or insipid, so as
you may conclude all the Soda, Salt of Alom, and Lime, are drawn off: Thus
you will have at the bottom, a very fine Tincture to make a pure and delicate
Lake withal, of the same Color as your Flowers, or Herbs that were used;
spread it on pieces of Linen, dry them in the Shade on new-baked Tiles as
before. After the same manner you may draw any other Lake, from whatsoever
colored Herb, or Flower you please.

CHAP. CCXXI. Another Way to Extract the Tincture of Yellow Flowers, of
Field-Poppies, Irises, ordinary and deep colored Violets, Carnation, and
Red-Rose, BorrageFlowers, Red-Coleworts, Flags, etc. Together with the
Verditers of Mallows, Burnet, and other Herbs.
WE shall not give the same in this as in the foregoing Chapter, that
Preparation is common to all those in the Title thereof, and so is this to
these. To avoid Prolixity and Repetitions,

You must have the Flowers, or Herbs newly gathered, fresh enough to stain a
Card with their Juice pressed thereon, else they will not serve your turn; put
these into a Glass Cucurbit with a pretty large Mouth; pour in among them good
StrongWaters to drown them by four Inches, join a Recipient to it, and lute the
Joints very well, letting them dry; this done, place the Alembick on a Sand*
Furnace, keeping a very gentle. Fire under it, giving the Matter time to
digest, increasing it by very little and little, and so the Strong Water will
rise on the Leaves, and draw off the Color, then improve your Fire to distill
your tinged Strong Water, into the Recipient, out of which you must take and
put them into another Alembick, luting well the Jointures, and let it distill in
Balneo, or over a very slow Ash-Fire, and the Strong-water will distill off in
their own Color, without any Tincture, and may be kept for the like occasion
again: The Essence you will have at the bottom of the Cucurbit, let it dry
gently: Thus you may have Lakes from all manner of Herbs and Flowers whatsoever.

CHAP. CCXXII. To make a Scarlet-colour'd Lake.
THE Design of this Chapter, is only to order the first Preparation for
obtaining our Scarlet-colour, whereof we will make a very delicate Lake.

Take Shearings of White Woollen-Drapery, let them be fine as possible, steep
them a whole Day in cold Water, press them afterward very well to take off all
the Greasiness, and Allume it thus.

Put four Ounces of Roch-Allom, and two Ounces of Crude Tartar in Powders, into
a small Kettle, pouring thereon two Quarts of Water; when this begins to boil,
put to them one pound of the Shearings, and so let it boil a full Half-hour;
afterward take it off and cool it for six Hours; take out the Shearings and
wash them in clean Water, leave 'em to steep about two Hours; press them after
this, and dry them, keeping them for the use we shall prescribe in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. CCXXIII. To Extract Scarlet-colour from Kerm-Berries, for making a Fine
Lake.
THE Name of Kermes is purely Arabic, for in that Country these Berries grow
on a small Tree, or Shrub, and from that their Native Soil, were transplanted
into Spain, Portugal, Provence, and Languedoc, where they now are plentiful;
several would persuade us, that it is a sort of Oak, called in Latin, Coccigera,
but the Leaves which are prickled like those on Holly, only smaller, shows us
the contrary.

These Grains, or Berries, have several other uses than in Painting, being of
excellent Virtue in Physic: Of them the Apothecaries make their Syrop called
Alkermes, and from the remainder of them which is left behind in the Strainer,
they draw a substance for the Dyers, which is used in coloring of Stuffs.

Several ways may be given to extract the Tincture of these Grains for making
Lake; we'll only insist on two, the first is indifferent long, but very
excellent, and produces a Tincture whereby i^ made a most admirable fine Lake.

The way of making the Lake in France, is very modern, and it is but of late
they have had this Secret in Paris, which was brought from Venice; now since
few are familiar with it we are willing to publish this, that many may know how
to Wor^ therein.

Take four Quarts of clear Water, and four Pound of Wheaten-Bran, two Drams of
Oriental Piraster, and as much Foenugrec, set all in a Kettle over a Fire, till
the Water be Milk-warm; keep your Hand in it until you can bear the heat no
longer; then take it off, cover it with a Cloth, that the heat may continue
the longer, let it repose for twenty four Hours, then run off the Lixivium, and
keep it for the following purpose.

Get a clean Earthen-Pot, and put therein three Quarts of fair Water to half
the Lixivium; order a Fire, and let this boil thereon, which when it begins to
do, put in an Ounce of the Grains pounded impalpably in a Brass-Mortar, and
searced; then pound a little crude Tartar, to take off the remaining parts of
the Grains on the bottom and sides of your Mortar, and so put it in with the
Grains; when the Water begins to boil again, take it off in an instant, and set
it to cool.

This done, and the Water cold, take the Shearings prepared in the former
Chapter, and let them stain therein about half an Hour: Afterward squeeze it
into another Pot by expression; and after you have thus drawn off all the
Tincture, put the Shearings into the last Pot, stirring them about very well
with a small Stick; that they may stain the sooner, boil all for about half an
Hour over a small Fire, else the Tincture will become black, then take the
Shearings out, and put them well tinged into a Vessel of cold Water; about half
an Hour after pour off the Water gently, and so put fresh on again, then press
and spread them to dry in a clean place, where no Dust can come at them.

This done make the following Lixivium. Put on a Hempen-cloath doubled,
Vine-stalk-Ashes, or Ash; of Willow, or some other lighter Wood; pour thereon,
by degrees, cold Water, letting it strain through into a Vessel set underneath;
pour it again on the Ashes, and when it is all run through, set it to settle
for twenty four Hours, that the Ashes which it carried off, may fall to the
bottom; this done, pour the Lixivium by degrees, into another Vessel, rejecting
the Sediment, put your Shearings into this, having warmed it: When it begins to
be cold, let it boil over a gentle Fire, and it will become red; take a little
of the Shearings, press them well, and if it remains without color, take off
the Kettle immediately, for the Lixivium has extracted it entirely, spread a
Linen-cloath over a Freestone Bowl, set the Shearings therein, and pour on the
Lixivium by little and little to strain and yield the Tincture, then squeeze
the Cloth and the Shearings therein, to press out all the Color that remained
in them, throw away the Cloth, wash the Shearings clean and keep them for the
like use another time.

Then put twelve Ounces of Roch-Allom well powdered, into a Glass Body full of
cold Water, letting it dissolve quite; when this is perfectly done, spread a
Linen-cloath over two Staves, and set underneath a large Freestone Vessel, put
all the Allom-Water into the Bottle of Tincture, and strain it afterward
through this Cloth; the Lixivium will go through it clear, and leave the
Color behind, but if it should not be colored, it is only straining it through
again, and you will have done.

Now to get the Tincture, you must mix all that remains on the Cloth, and
gather it together, spreading it afterward over new-made Tiles (which have not
yet been allowed time to moisten) on the pieces of Linen, then mold them into
Troches to dry suddenly, without moulding, which would spoil them; therefore
you must take great care that the Tiles be not at all moist, and if so, to
change them, that it may dry the sooner, and thus you will have a Lake of
admirable color for Painting; you must lessen, or improve the Color as you
find, by a greater or lesser quantity of Roch-Allom.

CHAP. CCXXIV. A readier way to Extract the Tincture of Kerm-Berries.
THO the Menstruum given in the last Chapter, made with Shearings of Cloth, be
a very good one for this purpose, yet the following is a more easy and as
effectual.

Take Strong Water of the first Run, or Distilling, and put it into a
long-neckt Glass Body; dissolve therein a Pound of Roch-Allom, adding an Ounce
of Kerm-Berries, finely powdered and searced; let it digest well, shaking the
Mattress from time to time, and the Strong Water will draw to them all the
Tincture of the Kermes, and be very sinely colored; then let all settle four
Days, and afterward pour it gently into a glazed Earthen-Vessel.

Dissolve four Ounces of Roch-Allom in running Water, and pour this into the
Strong Water, or Tincture of Kermes, to cause a separation; filter it through
a Linen-cloath, and the Strong Water will fall through White, leaving the
Tincture behind; if they be any thing colored, strain them again and again
until they be clear: Take up the Lake, or Color, with a clean Wooden-Spoon,
and make it into Troches, drying them as directed in the former Chapter: Thus
you may have a quantity of this Color, or Lake, as fine and good as the former.

CHAP. CCXXV. To make Lake, or Tincture of Brazile.
THE Brazile which Dyers make use of, is meant here; take of the finest which
comes from Fernambouck, that being the best.

The way of extracting this Tincture is the same as the former from Kermes, and
may be effected two ways, either with the first prescribed Menstruum, or the
Strong Water, observe only not to put as much Allom to each Ounce of Brazile,
as to the Berries, for that Tincture is deeper than this from Brazile, and
consequently requires more Stuff; use therefore as much here as you find
reasonable, for Experience will give you the best instruction.

Take notice too that when you do it by the first Menstruum, there is a greater
quantity required of Brazile than was prescribed of Kermes-Berries, to each
Pound of Shearings; in every thing else follow the former Directions, and
you will have a fine Color, or Lake, less chargeable, and altogether as good as
the Tincture of Kermes, for Painting.

CHAP. CCXXVI. To Extract Tincture of Madder for Lake.
MAdder is the Root of a Plant common enough* but generally comes from Holland
and Zealand, and used by Dyers; if good, it is red; it is finer than Brazile, and
before you use it, must be finely powdered to give the better color.

You may use either of the former Menstruums of Shearings, or Strong Water,
ordering your Quantities, as directed for the Brazile, if you follow the
Preparation given in Chap. 223. you will have a fine color from this Root, which
make into Troches, drying them as before, this will be a perfect Lake, and very
fine for use.

CHAP. CCXXVII. How to make Ultra-marine, of Lapis-Lazuli.
THIS Rich and Noble Blue drawn from an Azure-Stone, commonly called
Lapis-Lazuli; it is (...) Opaque-Stone, of a fine Sky-colour, or Turkish-^lue,
or like the Blue-Flowers which grow in Corn^^lds, it is embellished with small
Streaks and Spar^es of Gold-colour; the best is that which is fixed, ^^at is,
can endure Fire without altering color, and comes from Persia and the greater
I dies; it is ^^so supposed it may be had from Africa, as well as ^sia, but
questionless, there does not come that ^enty thence as from the other places.

There is also found in Germany, and Hungary, a kind of Lapis-Lazuli, but not
fixed, tho as hard as the former; they call it Lesurstein, and its color
Asurbleau; but its color changes in some time, and becomes Greenish; it is used
however by Painters.

The sixth Lapis-Lazuli has great Virtues in Physic, and much more excellent
ones than are ascribed to it by most Persons, who indeed are ignorant of them,
and so are many of the Learned too; but we'll pass these over here, and reserve
them for another time in some other place. This hint however may serve to
advise the Curious to pry into the Matter, and possibly discover its further
Excellencies and Virtue.

It Is called Vltra-marine, because brought to us from beyond Sea; or rather,
because the first tha^ ever came into France, was out of the Kingdom o^ Cyprus,
a Maritime Country; for so are those Countries called, which border on the
Seacoasts.

Before you proceed to Extract your Vltra-marine take some account of the
Manner, to know whethe^ the Stone be good, for unless it is singularly so,
you'^^ lose your labor: Put pieces thereof on live Coal^ and blow them
continually for an Hour, if they r^tain their first hardness and color
afterward, yo^ may conclude them good, but if they crumble b^tween your
Fingers, they are naught: It may (...) tried otherwise in an Iron-Ladle put
into a Furna^^ with some of the Stone to heat, and so quench it^ strong
Vinegar; if the Color remains still uncha^^ged and splendid, you may assure
your self '^ good.

When you have made this Trial, calcine (...) which to do the easier, break the
stone to piec^ as small Hazel-Nuts, wash them afterward in wa^^ Water, and set
them in a Crucible, on a Win^ Furnace, or into an Iron-Ladle to reunite; the
cast them into a glazed Earthen Vessel of distilled Vinegar to quench them in,
do thus seven times, to prepare them by Calcination for Powdering, and to
prevent their sticking to the Mortar.

Thus calcined, dry 'em well, and so powder them in a Stone-Mortar well
covered, and accordingly searce it with the same caution, as Perfumers do their
most delicate and finest Powders, lest the best should go off, and dispel its
self in the Air: And thus preserve this precious Powder with all imaginable
care.

CHAP. CCXXVIII. To make a Liquid for Moistning and Grinding the Powder withal,
etc.
IT IS impossible to give all the Preparations for the Lapis-Lazuli in one
Chapter, they are too ^edious for that purpose, and cannot be so confined
without Confusion; this we intimate to justify our ^ivision thereof into
several Chapters.

For moistening and grinding your aforesaid Pow^er of the Stone, take a Pound
and half of running ^ater, and put this into a new Earthen-Pot, add (...) it an
Egg-shell full of raw Honey, boil it until it ^ave no more Scum; take the Pot
off, and keep this ^ydromel, or Liquid for use in Bottles, as we shall ^ve
occasion for hereafter.

This done, take four Scruples of the best Gum^ragon, grind it on your Marble,
with some of the ^ydromel, and then put it into a Glass; add thereto (...) much
Hydromel as you find convenient, to bring it (...) a Violet-colour, so cover
it, and preserve it for (...): This Liquid is good for your Powder of
Lapis-Lazuli; if the Color be too Violet, add the less hereof, if otherwise
the more, as your Judgment, or Experience shall direct.

Put half a Pound of Powder at a time into a small Porphyry, or Marble Vessel,
the larger the Mortar the worse, for you will lose more, and be longer a
grinding; pour leisurely by little and little thereon, some of your Violet
Liquid, grind these together for a full Hour, still wetting it; you may use
three or four Ounces of Liquid to the half Pound of Powder, and you will have it
very good; you must take care of grinding it too long, for then it will lose
its color.

When it is thus ground, dry it on a Marble or Flat-stone, where the Sun does
not come at all, cover it well to preserve it from Dust; when it is dry, 'twill
Powder easily between your Fingers, if it be rightly done; if so, let it alone
on the Marble, but if it be clammy, or stick, take it off, for it has still
some unctuosity of the Honey in it, which must be cleansed away by a Cement.

Your Lapis being thus dry, wash it well before you put it to the Cement, for
which you must use a glazed Earthen Basin round above like a Barber's, and well
glazed within, put your Lapis therein, and pour thereon some of the mild
Lixivium in the next Chapter, as much as will rise above the Surface four
Inches; wash the Lapis very well with your Hands, and then let it settle, and
'twill precipitate: The Liquid being cleared again, decant it into a large
Copper, or Earthen-Vessel, then let the Lapis dry in a Shade in the same Vessel
'twas washed in, and spread it afterward on the flat Marble, or Porphyry, and
there let it lie until quite dry: Thus it is prepared for mixing with the
Cement, of which we will give the Preparation in Chap. 231. and those next
succeeding it.

CHAP. CCXXIX. To prepare a mild and a strong Lixivium for the Lapis-Lazuli.
WE have promised to give this Preparation here, and the manner of making
hereof, which we will show, together with another stronger, to wash the Lapis
withal, when it is mixed with the Cement, as hereafter directed.

To make these Lixiviums, take ten handfuls of Vine-stalk-Ashes well searced;
put this into a large Vessel that will hold thirty Pound of Water, with a
Faucet at bottom; press the Ashes very well, and put to them twenty Pound of
warm Water; when it is sunk to the bottom, open the Faucet, so as it may only
drop into an Earthen-Vessel; when it is all come out, stop the hole, and strain
this Lixivium through a Felt Strainer, and so keep it in a Glass, or glazed Pot
well covered: This is the strong Lixivium.

Again, pour in on the same Ashes, the like quantity of warm Water, and do as
before, so you will have an indifferent strong Lixivium, which keep as the former.

Do this a third time, and you will have the mild Lixivium mentioned in the
preceding Chapter.

These three are very useful both for moistening, and to draw the Powder of
Lapis-Lazuli from the Cement; wherewith it must be mixed, as we shall show in
the succeeding Chapters, which Separation being sometimes hard to perform, we
are obliged to have recourse to these Varieties of Lixiviums stronger, or
weaker, as we find them convenient for the purpose.

You may yet make another Lixivium to take away the greasiness of the Cement,
thus: Boil Calx of Tartar, as much as you please, in clean Water, for about a
quarter of an Hour, and keep it for use as the former. This is excellent for
washing the Lapis-Lazuli with; it strengthens and improves the color thereof,
is good for the Itch, Scurvey, etc. and to take away the Witherings in the Fair
Sex.

CHAP. CCXXX. The Form of the Glasses for preserving the Liquids in, which are
employed on the Lapis-Lazuli.
THERE always remains some of your color in the Waters, or Lixiviums, wherein
the L^^^s-Lazuli is prepared throughout all the Process; you must therefore
have a very large Vessel of Bra^^, or Earthen-Ware, glazed and polished very
well at bottom, wherein must be three Holes; one in the middle of the side, the
next a little lower, and the last about two Inches from the bottem; stop these
Holes without-side very close to prevent leakage.

Then pour all your Waters into this; tho you then perceive no color at all,
yet after ten Days you will have it at bottom, whither it will descend gently;
and to get it, you must go artificially to work, first opening the first Cock,
or Hole, and let out the Water above that, before you open the other two; and
thus you may get the color without muddying, or losing any by the Waters,
which mix with the rest.

CHAP. CCXXXI. To make strong Cement to mix with Lapis-Lazuli, to separate the
finer and better Stuff from the other.
ONE cannot so easily part the finer Lapis-Lazuli from its grosser parts,
without making use of this Cement to unbind the parts: Take four Ounces of very
pure and clear Venice-Turpentine; six Ounces of Rosin of the Pine, six Ounces
of Grecian-Pitch, three Ounces of very good Mastick, three Ounces of fresh Wax,
an Ounce and half of Linseed-Oyl cleansed, as shall be directed in Chap. 233.

Put the Turpentine into a new glazed Earthen-Pot, very clean, to dissolve over
a slow Charcoal-Fire, and continue stirring it with a Wooden-Spatula, throw
into this by degrees, the Rosin of the Pine, in small pieces, and stir it still
very well; thus put in successively the Pitch, the Mastick in Powder, and last
of all the Wax sliced small, stirring all continually about to mix and
incorporate: Take great care of your Fire, least the Cement should blaze, or
burn, all the Ingredients being hot of themselves, and combustible: Having well
incorporated them, pour in the Linseed-Oyl, stirring it as before, and so let
it boil gently for a Quarter of an Hour.

To try whether the Cement be enough, drop some of it off the Spatula into a
Vessel of cold Water; if it spread it is not enough; but if it do not, it is
sufficiently boiled; so take it off. Or else you may wet your Fingers, and take
a drop thereof, roll and draw it out in length; if it snaps and breaks of it
self, it is a sign that it is enough; take it off and pour it boiling hot into an
Hypocrass-Bag steeped before in hot Water; take care to let it go all through
into a Vessel of cold Water; and for the better security, squeeze it along from
top to bottom with two flat Sticks, that none may remain in your Bag;
afterward work it well with your Hands, till all the Water be drained from it,
and because being hot it may stick to your Fingers, you may anoint them with
some of the Linseed-Oyl.

The Cement being thus prepared, keep it in a Vessel of cold Water, shifting
your Water every Day, or every second Day, and by this Method you may keep it
for ten Years.

CHAP. CCXXXII. To make a weaker Cement for separating the Colors of
Lapis-Lazuli.
THIS second Cement, which is the softer and milder, ought to be first employed
on the Powder of Lapis-Lazuli; it draws the color much quicker and better than
the strong Cement, which ought not to be used till after the milder, the whole
Secret of separating the Colors, consisting in using the Cements, for without
a due care hereof, it cannot be done perfect.

To make this Cement, you must take four Ounces of very pure Turpentine, four
Ounces of Rosin of Pine, six Ounces of Grecian-Pitch, one Ounce of fresh Wax,
six Drams of Linseed-Oyl purified, mix and incorporate them successively as
before; observe only that this is sooner done than the former, because it is
weaker, and will give the color soonest, therefore you must manage accordingly.

CHAP. CCXXXIII. To purify Linseed-Oyl.
THE use we have for Linseed-Oyl in our Cement, obliges us to give this
Preparation, and way of purifying it, as we promised, whereby it is made more
fit for our purpose.

Take good and clear Linseed-Oyl, of the color of Saffron, and put it into a
Glass, shaped like an Oxe-horn, with an Hole at bottom to let out the Water,
which you must mix with the Oil, letting them settle until the Oil rises all
upmost; then open the Hole, and let the Water out, and the Oil remain behind;
then shake the Oil again, with more fresh Water, let it settle, and the Water
run out, as before; do thus eight or ten times, till the Water comes out as
clear as it went in, and so the Oil will be pure and fit for your use; keep it
well stopped in a Glass-Bottle. If you cannot get Linseed-Oyl, you may use Oil of
Bitter-Almonds, without purifying, for it needs none; but take notice, the
Linseed-Oyl is best of any, tho cheaper than the other.

CHAP. CCXXXIV. How to incorporate the Powder of Lapis-Lazuli with the strong,
or weaker Cement.
WE have given in Chap. 228. the way to prepare the Powder for mixing with the
Cement, to extract the Colors; we now come to show how to mix it with the
Cement, in order to extract the Vltra-marine from them for Painting.

Take a Pound of the Powder, and the like quantity of Cement assigned in Chap.
231. observing always to take the first that was workt with the Hands; cut the
Cement small, and the pieces being a little wet, put them into a glazed
Earthen-Pot, over a Fire of red-hot Ashes, to melt, and take care it does not
boil; if it should, you must prevent the the damage which it might cause, by
putting in some Linseed-Oyl. The Cement being thus melted, anoint all your
Spatula over, from the Handle downwards, with the same Oil, and so put in the
Powder by very little quantities, and taking a great deal of time, that they
may the better incorporate; and be sure to stir it all the while very well with
the Spatula, so as to make it all alike, until it become like an Ointment, or
Salve; then off with the Pot, and throw the Stuff boiling hot into an
Earthen-Bason of cold Water, and at that very instant take off all that sticks
to the sides of the Pot; when it is cold enough to be handled, if it appears
well colored, it is a sign you have worked it well: This done, rub your Hand
with Linseed-Oyl, and work it as they do a Paste of Bread, or Dough, for one
Hour, that it may be thoroughly compact. The longer you work it, the better and
easier the color may be drawn; afterward make it up like a Loaf, or Brick,
and set it in an Earthen-Dish to dry, pouring thereon some fresh Water; let it
steep for fifteen Days, the longer the better for extracting the Vltra-marine.

CHAP. CCXXXV. To Extract the Ultra-marine.
NOW we come to take out the Vltra-marine, from its Confinement to make it
appear Triumphant, and in its full Glory.

Take therefore the Loaf of Cement and Powder, washing it in the same Water
extraordinary well with your Hands; weigh it to know the quantity of Oil it
requires, and put it into an Earthen-Bowl, or Dish, very smoothly glazed,
rubbing first the Bottom with your Linseed-Oyl; then pour in Water scarce
warmed, until it arise two Inches above the Matter; let it stand in this
condition a full quarter of an Hour (or less in the Springtime;) pour this
Water afterward into the Vessel mentioned Chap. 230. adding more warm Water to
your Matter, and so 'twill soften: Continue thus whilst there remains any
Tincture thereon; by this means all the substance that is good for any thing,
will be separated from the Cement, which cannot be done otherwise.

Whilst it is imbibed in the warm Water, you must move and roll it gently round
with two Sticks, or Spatula's of Box, or any other well polished Wood rounded
at the ends smooth like a Wallnut; let them be about an Ell long, and an Inch
thick. Whenever you perceive the Matter stick to the bottom of your Dish, rub
your Hands with Linseed-Oyl, and stir it about leisurely so as to color the
Water, which you must put along with the former, in the mean time holding up
the Matter with your Staves, lest it should stick to the Vessel.

Take notice that a little steeping at first will tinge the Water very much,
and when the Cement is just yielding its color, it will discover certain
Bluish Streaks on the Water, like the Sun-Rays, and then you must strain this
Water out among the other, through a Scarce, that the grosser part of the
Cement may remain; afterward pour in by little and little the fresh warm
Water, stirring the Cement easily, that it may not dilate too much, and give
its color all at once. After you have thus stirred it about five or six times,
close and amass it anew, by which means you will see how much it is diminished,
and what quantity of color it has given.

If the Lapis be good and right, you will find it will the first Steepings yield
about four or five Ounces of Vltra-marine, which keep apart by its self as the
best and finest color, tho it appear grosser than the others of this sort, by
reason of the Gold-coloured Veins, which are peculiarly therein.

For the second, whereof you will have three or four Ounces, you must follow the
Processes aforementioned, this indeed will be finer than the other, but not so
good a Color; keep it also by it self.

Draw off a third, and this will be still siner than the former, but paler and
more bright colored. You must still pursue the same Directions to extract it,
letting your Water be but half lukewarm, and take care to manage the Cement
dexterously with the Spatula's, and so preserve the Color apart.

You may extract a fourth Color after this rate, but the Water must be hotter,
and you must press the Cement very well with the Spatula's to squeeze out the
Color, and if mere Water will not do, make use of the mild Lixivium of Chap.
229. this last Color will be Grayish, or Ash-colored, and of no great value,
and therefore not at all to be mixed with any of the rest.

Observe here that you cannot take up less than eight Hours full, to extract the
Colors, nor than ten or twelve to allow the Water for settling, and if you
perceive the Color does not come out free enough with the warm Water, add a
third part of our mild Lixivium, and if that does not do, use all Lixivium, but
let it be cold, and when that fails too of effecting it sufficiently, you must
make a Lixivium of Vine-stalk Ashes, and this being strained, let it boil for
half a quarter of an Hour, until it be sharp enough to bite your Tongue; and
then let it settle and grow clear; this is your last shift for extracting your
Color, and with this heated, wash your Cement very well, and set it aside: The
whole design of all this trouble, is only to serve for obtaining the greater
quantity of Vltra-marine, and this consists in the goodness of the Lapis Lazuli
and the Cement, which the Circumspection and care taken in all their
Preparations must advance.

CHAP. CCXXXVI. The Method of cleansing the Ultra-marine when it is separated
from the Cement.
AFTER you have extracted all your Colors out of the Cement, and the Water
quite settled and separated from them, pour on some of the mild Lixivium before
prescribed, and so wash them with your Hands (but don't rub it between them)
thus you will take away all the Grease of the Cement; afterward wash it three or
four times in fair Water, and let the Waters settle well before you put them
into their proper Vessels.

You may else another way purge the Vltra-marine, thus. Take the Yolks of
Pullets-Eggs, that have been fed only with Corn, and not with Greens, prick
these with a Pin, and so moisten the Colors, kneading the Mass with your
Hands, and washing it afterward with your mild Lixivium, until the Lixivium
falls off clear again. This done, wash them three or four times over with fair
Water, letting the Waters settle well before you put them into their Vessels.

This last way of purifying the Vltra-marine, is mighty effectual; but here is
another help to be used with it, which is a very great Secret, and performed
thus: After the Colors are quite washed according to former direction, as well
as possible, you must cast therein by little and little, a Bull's-Gall, rubbing
it by degrees with your Hands; so wash them often in clear Water, and you will
have the Color in full perfection.

CHAP. CCXXXVII. To strain off the Ultra-marine already Washed and Purified.
IT is necessary to strain off the Vltra-marine, and the rest of the Colors,
that if any Grease, or Unctuosity of the Cement remain, it may be taken quite
away, for these Colors require a Perfect and Extraordinary Purification.

For this Purpose, take a fine Searce, and pour thereon the last Waters, with
which you washed the Vltra-marine, and so strain them afterward through
another fine Searce, and a third time through Red Quintain, or Crape; but you
must observe when you strain them, to let them stand till you perceive them
limpid and clear, and so soak off the Water dexterously with a Sponge, and be
sure not to strain them promiscuously all together.

This being done to all the Waters, let your Colors settle in their proper
Vessels, and dry in the Shade; when dry, put them into little LeatherBags; tie
these close, rubbing and pressing them with your Hands; this will make them
very subtle, and when the Bags are opened, they will show much fairer than
before.

CHAP. CCXXXVIII. To Correct the Colors just before prepared.
FEW Persons, unless such as are very curious of their Work, make any use
hereof, because of the time it takes up, tho it would turn very much to their
account; for one Ounce of this Color corrected, will go farther than three
that are not.

If you would make your Colors just before prepared, much finer and effectual
than they are, mix them again with a strong Cement, and let them remain therein
for three Days; afterward proceed according to the last directions, to
separate them again; reiterate this over again, and you will have them exceeding
good, and tho they diminish somewhat in weight, yet that Loss will be repayed
considerably in the Beauty and Value.

CHAP. CCXXXIX. Another Way to make Ultra-marine, and draw off the Colors with
more Expedition.
THIS Method of making Vltra-marine, is much more ready than the former; and
Experience will show whether the Color be a gainer or loser thereby.

Take a Pound of Lapis Lazuli, calcine it in a Crucible, and quench it
afterward in Vinegar, so let it dry, and then reduce it to a very fine Powder;
grind it on a Porphyry, with fair Water, and so set it in a glazed Earthen
Vessel in the Shade, until it be dry; if you find it coagulated all in a Mass,
you must Powder it again.

This done, make a Cement of three Ounces of Grecian-Pitch, four Ounces of
Rosin of the Pine, three Ounces of Mastick, three Ounces of Frankincense, two
Ounces of Oyl-Olive; set these over a slow Fire in a small Earthen Pot, into
which pour first the Oil, and when that is hot, put in the Rosin, then the
Pitch, then the Incense, and last of all the Mastick, stirring them continually
with the Wooden Spatula, and let them boil a little.

Having made the Cement, get another Earthen Vessel, and put thereinto the
Lapis Lazuli, and pour on it the Cement hot, stirring the whole together with
the Spatula very leisurely, until they perfectly incorporate; let this stand a
whole Day, and when you would draw off the Colors, pour thereon boiling Water,
stirring it very smartly.

When it begins to cool, pour it out, and so put in more hot Water; do thus
till the Water begins to draw off the Color, and so continue until it be quite
extracted; you may distinguish the Waters, and so set them apart, and obtain
the Variety of Color, as in the former way.

If your Color seems to be clammy, or nasty, you may correct it thus. Add
thereto Tartar dissolved in Water, as much as will drown it, and let it repose
for one Day at least, so wash it in warm Water, and you will by that means have
it very correct, and well purified.

CHAP. CCXL. Another Way to make Ultra-marine.
GRANTING the two former ways to be sufficient, we will however here give a
third, which we believe may as well be pleasing to those who are not satisfied
with the other; as to such Persons as have a Curiosity for these sorts of Work;
and thus we propose to proceed.

Not to discourse of the Ways to try the goodness of the Lapis Lazuli, which we
have mentioned sufficiently already, you must break it into gross pieces, as
small as Nuts, then set these in a Crucible into the Furnace, till they redden
with heat, and so cast them into cold Water; do thus six or seven times, and so
reduce them to impalpable Powder in a Porphyry-Mortar well covered over, lest
the Powder which is very subtle, should disperse away into the Air, and then
searce it with a fine Searce also covered.

After this, take of Rosin of Pines, ordinary black Pitch, Mastick, fresh Wax,
and Turpentine, of each three Ounces, of Incense, and Linseed-Oyl, each one
Ounce, melt all together in an Earthen Vessel, stirring them very well, that
they may mix; this Stuff being well incorporated, cast it into Water, and keep
it for use.

To each Pound of Lapis Lazuli, add ten Ounces thereof, and set them to
dissolve in a Pot over a small Fire, first melting the Cement, and then casting
on the Lapis Lazuli by little and little, observing such an order in this, and
continually stirring the Mass with a Stick, that they may mix insensibly
together; afterward cast the Mass into an Earthen Vessel of cold Water, and
anointing your Hands with Linseed-Oyl, mould it up into a number of Cakes, or
Rolls, which leave in cold Water for five Days, shifting the Water every other
Day.

This done, put them into a large and very clean glazed Earthen Vessel, pouring
on them some clean hot Water; when that cools, pour in more hot, and do thus
till the Pastils soften with the heat of the Water: This done, put them into
hot Water, and let them be until it receive a Bluish color; strain this Water
to reserve the grosser pieces, and so put it into another glazed Earthen Vessel
very clean, adding more to the Pastils, which strain through a fine Searce
afterward among the former; continue this until all the Color be extracted,
and no more remain behind.

Your Water must be only warm, otherwise it will occasion a Blackness in the
Color, which is to be taken care of, and imports very much.

All your colored Waters being in the Vessel, you may cleanse them of any
Unctuosity, by reposing them for twenty four Hours, in which time the Co^our
will stick to the bottom; then you may pour off ^he Water gently into another
Vessel, and it will carry off the Grease along with it; strain it afterward
into the Vessel where the Color is again, through a fine Searce, and all the
Grease and Nasti^ess will be left behind; do thus thrice, stirring the Color
very well every time you return the Water ^o it, that the Filth and Grease may
ascend from it, and it will always stay in straining on the Searce be^ind the
Water.

This done, let the Color precipitate entirely, and so pour off all the Water
very leisurely, for fear ^f disturbing it; dry this Color, and you will have
^elicate Vltra-marine.

If you would imitate this Color at little charge, make use of our
Blue-Enamel, after the same manner, and instead of the Lapis Lazuli, observing
without exception, the like Regimen and Prescription just now delivered in
every respect, and by this means you will have a very pretty agreeable Color to
Paint with, and for tinging of Glass.

Many other Ways might be given here for making Vltra-marine, besides these we
have already laid down, but because the principal part of the Preparation is in
every one the same; we look upon these as sufficient, and that it would be but
needless to repeat any more.

That the Lapis Lazuli may be made by Art as fine and good as the Natural,
which is gotten from the Mines, we allow, and should freely assign the Method
for it, if there were a scarcity thereof in France, but since we have of it in
abundance, it is much better to employ the time in working the usual way, than
spend it unprofitably by taking a more tedious Method.

CHAP. CCXLI. To make German-Blue.
NOTWITHSTANDING we have in the preceding Chapter shown how to imitate very
nearly the Vltra-marine Blue, with ordinary Enamel, whereof we have given the
Preparation in Chap. 190. yet we will show too the Way to make German-Blue by
Art, which is a Color very fine and convenient to Paint withal.

Take four Ounces of Mercury, or Quicksilver, si^ Ounces of Flower of Sulphur,
and a Pound of Sal-Armoniack; pound these very well in a Stone-Mortar, till all
the Mercury be quite suppressed, and no longer precipitable, then put the Mass
into a Glass Body, the bottom luted up to the middle; set this on a very slow
Ash-Fire, let it stand uncovered until all the moisture be exhaled, then head
it very close, and so improve the heat by degrees, until you bring the Mass to
a Sublimation; and thus you will have a very fine and delicate Azure, or
German-Blue, which reduce to very soft Powder on a Marble, or Porphiry, keeping
it afterward for uses in Painting.

The End of the Tenth BOOK.
OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK XI. Wherein the Manner of imitating all sorts of Pearl is shown, and done
so effectually, as to give them an equal Splendor and Beauty with those which
are Naturally produced in the Sea.
CHAP. CCXLII.
ALL the Ancients who have treated of the several Sorts, and Properties of
Precious Stones, have at the same time discoursed of Pearls, because they claim
a place among the first and best of Jewels, in respect of their Value, as well
as their Beauty, and the fixed Quality which they contain, they having been at
all times sought after, for the Ornament and Pleasure of Ladies, as they are at
this Day; for these Reasons we thought it convenient to give them a Place among
our Works, that (from our Experience) the Curious might be informed how to make
such Ar^ificially as fine and splendid, as those which Nature forms in the
Depth of the Ocean.

We avow that the Production of Pearls, is very different from that of
Precious-Stones, because the latter proceeds from the Earth, and the former
quite contrary, from the Shell-Creatures which are shrouded in the Bottom of
the Sea; these receive their Nourishment from the same Liquld Substance which
crntributes to the Growth of the Shells, and this Slimy Substance is resolved
from the Watery Humor of the Creature, by three several Processes. The first
dries it by degrees, the next brings it to an hardness, and last of all, it is
at certain times emplyed by the Animal, for the Increase of its Shell, and the
place where this is effected in the inmost inveloped recesses thereof. Now the
first Principle of these, and all other Precious Stones, descends from Above,
to wit, the Universal Seed, which alone can give Birth and Increase to all the
Tenants of this vast Universe; and these Precious Stones, as well as the
Metals, are nourished in the Womb of the Earth, so the living Creatures bear
each other the Foetus within its Parent, etc.

The Oriental Pearls are generated in the Fish, which contains them with the
Mother as the Occidental, or Western in our Oysters, but the Beauty of these
two, is very different, the Oriental being of a Silver White, and exceeding
splendid to the Occidental; the best of these latter seldom arriving to any
higher than the Color of Milk. We will not here take notice of the particular
Places of the East, where they are found, but only inform you, That the best
and most beautiful* come from the PersianGulf, about the Isle of Ormus Bassora:
They are found in Europe, not only in the Sea, but in Rivers, and Fresh Water;
we have them from Scotland, Silesia, Bohemia, Frisia, Lorrain, etc. in all
which Places they are found very fine, only those of Frisia, are very small.

It Is thought the Fish wherein the Pearl is generated, becoming Sickly and
Weak, and not able to dispose of the Slimy Moisture for the Growth of its
Shell, it remains in the Body thereof, and is dried: Hence the Birth of the
Pearl, and so by a continual supply of the like Substance still coating it
anew, it becomes large, just as the Stone in the Bladder of Man, and other
Creatures, engenders, and is fed by a Clammy Humor, which cannot be emitted by
Urine, but remains behind, and so hardens and becomes a Stone: After the like
manner the Bezoar Stone is bred in the Indian Goats of the Kingdom of
Golcondea, and in the Galls of Wild-Boars in India, and the Hedgehogs of
Malacca; so several other Stones, to which they give the Name of Bezoar, are
found in the Galls of Beeves, Deer, Goats, and other Animals in France, and
elsewhere, all which have great Virtues in Physic.

How great and effectual those Pearls are in Physical Matters, and what
Successes they reach there, is not to our Purpose; we only intend to show the
way of imitating their Beauty by Art so finely, and with such exactness of
Luster, as not to leave it in the power of any to distinguish them easily from
the true and Natural ones, they being made of the very finest sort of Paste
that can be, and the same Stuff as the true ones.

Poverty and Pride are two inseparable Companions among our French; such Ladies
as make use of pure Pearl, are those that can afford it, and the little
Creatures that cannot reach the Price, but would however appear gay, are
obliged to have recourse to the Counterfeit, and content themselves with
Imitation only of Nature: It Is some Years since the Use of these latter was
introduced in France, which now, not only the Puny Ladies, but those of Birth
and Quality do wear; this proceeded all from that Fashion which insensibly
reached still at the larger Pearls, which these Ladies coveted for Ornament;
and because they could not be furnished enough with true, they made use of the
Artificial; whence the Common Sort of Persons received the Advantage to vie
with Persons of the First Rank and Quality; which they don't fail to do,
without Consideration of either Estate, or Condition, but only to conform with
the Mode.

The Counterfeit Pearls, which are usually made, are just the Color of the
Pastes, and of no Continuance but for the present; they are done with a
Composition of Brittle Glass and Wax a little melted; and for Coloring, they
use prepared Mercury, Mouth-Glue, or any other Drug, to give them a Brightness,
which soon Peels off, and Scales away, especially in the Heat of Summer: The
Way which we will give, is not only very good and solid, but exceeding fine,
being effected with Seed Pearl; we grant these Pastes to be much dearer than
the former, but consider their Fineness, and that they will last for ever; we
shall also show how to make the Counterfeits finer and harder; and we are
persuaded, that the Preparation of those we shall assign, will appear so easy,
and yet produce such fine Imitations, as shall be very satisfactory.

CHAP. CCXLIII. To imitate fine Oriental Pearl.
THE Difference between those which are at present wore by the Ladies, and such
as we shall prescribe, as to the Goodness, Hardness, and Fineness of the Stuff,
we have already endeavored to clear.

But before we proceed any further, take these remaining Parts of the Furnace
in Chap. 52.

The Letter O, is the Balneum Mariae.

P, The Vessel for containing the Sand, or AshFire.

Q, The Eyes, or Holes of the Furnace.

R, Their Cover, which when they are set on, draw in the Air, and increase the
Heat for Fusion; the others are Crucibles.

We did also intend to give the Description of another Furnace at the close of
the Fifth Book, as well for the Service of the Matters in that, as the Sixth
Book: You may, however take it along with you here.

A, is the Ash-hole; you may add to it an Hovel, for sucking in the Air, which
must be luted to it very firmly.

B, is the Inside where the Ashes fall into; this ought to be lofty for drawing
the Air.

C, is the Grate, and must be of very strong Iron Bars.



D, is the Opening through which the Crucibles and Fuel is put in, this ought
to be of well tempered Iron, and luted within side with very good Lute, at
least three Inches thick.

E, is the Chamber where the Works are Baked.

F, is the Coverlid of the Furnace, which is to be Vaulted firm, and made of
the same Earth.

G, is the Chimney, over which you may set several Iron Plates one above
the other, for drawing the Air.

H, is the Hovel, or shelving place of Iron for the Ash-Hole.

I, are Funnels for the Chimney Plates, and the Hovel.

K, is a Crucible.

If this Furnace be made five or six Inches thick, it will bear all degrees of
heat, and serve very conveniently for Private Persons, by making it of a
suitable largeness instead of the Glass-house Furnace: When you make your Fire
of Wood, there will be no occasion for the Hovel of the Ash-hole. But to go on
with our Pearl.

You must take two Pound of thrice distilled Vinegar, one Pound of Venice
Turpentine, mix them together, and so put the Mass into a Glass Cucurbit; fit
to it the Head and Receiver, luting the Joints; let them dry, and so set it on
a Sand-Furnace to distill the Vinegar; keep a gentle heat, lest the Stuff swell
up.

Afterward put the Vinegar into another GlassCucurbit, wherein you must hang a
quantity at discretion, of Seed Pearl, strung on a Thread of Silver or Gold,
done about with a piece of very thin Silk; these must hang in the middle of the
Body, so as not to touch the Vinegar: This done, head your Cucurbit with a
Blind Head, and lute it very well; set it in a moderate B. Mariae well closed,
there to remain for a Fortnight; the heat of the B. will elevate the Fumes of
your Vinegar, and they will continually circulate about the Pearl, and so soften
and bring them to the Consistence of a Paste, which being once performed, take
'em off and mould them up in what Form you please, round, long, or Peaalike,
and as big as you think fit; do this with Moulds of fine Plate gilded within;
you must not touch the Paste at all with your Hands, but altogether Work it
with a Plate Spatula, which will fill the Moulds, then bore them through with a
Porkers Bristle, or Gold-Wire, and so let them dry a little; then Thread them
again with Gold-Wire, and set them in a closed Glass, which lay in the Sun, to
dry them to a hardness; set them afterward in a Glass Mattress, in a Stream of
Running Water, leaving it there for twenty Days; and about that time they
assume their first solidity and hardness.

To give them Transparency and Splendor, you must prepare some Mercury-Water,
after the Rate we shall prescribe in the next Chapter. When you have taken them
out of the last Mattress, wherein they were for twenty Days, as the Running
Water* hang them in a Vessel of Glass where the Mercury-Water is, and so
they will moisten, swell, and assume their Oriental Beauty: This done, shift them
out of this Water into a Mattress closed Hermetically, for fear that any Water
should be admitted into it, and so down with it into a Well, leaving it there
for eight whole Days; then draw it up, open the Mattress* and you will have them
as fine and good as any Oriental Pearls whatsoever.

This Method is a little long, but withal it is effectual and sure; however it is
not thus the Philosophers, or Virtuosi Work, for they have another Way, much
shorter, having regard only to one Spirit; nor have I Experience enough in
their Matters, to make a Discovery thereof; and if I had, it could not be done
without disobliging them irreconcilably; therefore take what I have delivered
on this Important Subject, in good part; and be assured, that if you were
acquainted with that Secret which they so closely reserve, there could be
nothing done more by it as to Goodness and Beauty in this Work, than by our
prescribed Method, which is very estimable, and more precious than you will
imagine, whereof I can assign you no better, or other Argument, than
Experience, to convince you.

CHAP. CCXLIV. To make Mercury-Water for giving Transparency and Splendor to
the Pearls.
HAVING promised this Secret of making Mercury-Water to complete the
Transparency, and Natural Luster of your Pearls, which is a Matter so highly
valuable, that a very considerable Sum has been offered in our Presence, for
the Discovery thereof, to a certain Person; yet we are free, that Experience
should have its due course of informing the Ignorant, and shall, for our part,
generously acquit our Engagement.

You must take Plate Tin of Cornwall calcined, let the Calx be very fine and
pure, amalgamate one Ounce thereof, with two Ounces of prepared Mercury well
purified; wash the Amalgama with Water, until the Water remains clear and
insipid; then drying the Amalgama thoroughly, put it into a Mattress over a
Furnace, keeping such a degree of heat as is required for Sublimation; when the
Matter is well Sublimated, take off the Mattress and let it cool, and so take
out the Sublimate; to which add one Ounce of Venice Sublimate and grind them
well together on a Marble, so put them into another Mattress, close it very
well, and set it topsy-turvy in a Pail of Water, and the whole Mass will
resolve its self in a little time, all into Mercury-Water: This done, filter it
into a Glass Receiver, and set it on a gentle Ash-Fire to coagulate, and it
will be brought to a Crystalline Mass; take it (...), and with a Glass Pestle
and Mortar pound it very well to a very fine Powder, which searce through a
fine Searce, and put it into a well stopped Mattress in B. Mariae, letting it
remain till it resolve again into Water; and this last shall be the
Mercury-Water which you must preserve to employ on your Pearl.

CHAP. CCXLV. Another Way to make these Pearls.
THIS is an easier way than the former, for by Baking them, (as we shall show)
you very much shorten the time which the Preparation would else take up;
however you must not expect them so Delicate and Natural as the first, the
Cause whereof is easy enough conceived; for these Pearl having enlarged
themselves in the Water, as we already noted, it is reasonable to believe the
hardening them afterward in the Cold, will be of a much more Natural Effect,
than if done with heat.

Take very fair Oriental Seed Pearl for this purpose, and reduce it to
impalpable Powder on a Marble, to dissolve afterward in Mercury-Water, or
clarified Juice of Lemons; if this be not effected quick enough, set it in a
Cucurbit over warm Ashes, and be very careful to take the Cream (which in a
little time will appear at top) immediately off, so withdraw the Dissolution
from the Fire, and let it settle a little; this done, pour it gently into
another Glass Body, and keep it apart, you will have the Pearl in a Paste at the
bottom, with which fill your gilded Plate Moulds, made to what bigness, or form
you think fit, pressing the Paste with the Silver Spatula, and so shut them up
four and twenty Hours; after you must take and bore them through with a
Porker's Bristle, close up the Moulds, and leave them in the Oven in a Paste of
Barley Dough, which being half Baked draw out and open, taking away all the
Pearl, and steep them in the Dissolution just before directed to be kept
apart, putting them in and out several times; so close them in their Moulds
and Bake them again with the like Paste as before, only let this last be almost
burnt up before you draw it out; thus you will have the Pearl well baked and
hardened.

This done, draw it out, open all the Moulds, take away the Pearls and string
them on one or more Gold or Silver Threads; steep them in Mercury-Water, given
in the former Chapter, for about a Fortnight; after this dry them by the Sun in
a well closed Glass Body, so you will have very fine and splendid Pearl.

CHAP. CCXLVI. Another Way.
THO this be a more common way than the preceding, we will not omit it, because
every one may have his choice to take that Method which best suits with his
Apprehension, or Convenience.

You must, as in the former, take very fair Oriental Seed Pearl ground to an
impalpable Powder* and dissolve it in Allom-Water, then rack off that Water,
and wash the Paste of Pearl which remains at bottom, first with some distilled
Waters, then i^ Bean-Water, and set it in B. Mariae, or Horse-dung, to digest
for a Fortnight; afterward take out your Vessel, and the Matter being come to
the Consistence of a Paste, mould up the Paste in the gilt SilverMoulds, as
before directed, bore them with a Bristle, string them on Gold or Silver
Thread, and hang them in a very well closed Limbeck of Glass to prevent the Air
from coming in to spoil them.

Thus dried lap them one by one in Leaves of Silver, and split open a Barble,
as if you were to Fry him, and so close them all up in his Body, make a Paste
of Barly-Meal, and Bake him in it, as you would a Batch of Bread, and no more,
afterward draw it out, and let them dry.

To give a Transparency and Splendor to these Pearls; if you don't care for
using our Mercury-Water, instead thereof, take the Herb Grati^ squeezed in
Water, put into this Water six Ounces of Seed Pearl, one Ounce of Saltpeter,
an Ounce of Roch-Allom, an Ounce of Litharge of Silver; the whole being
dissolved, take your dried Pearls, heat them first, and then cool them in this
Dissolution; thus do for about six times at least, heating and cooling them at
this rate therein.

If your Pearl should happen to fail of coming to a sufficient hardness, you
may correct and make them exceeding hard by Baking them a second time after
this manner.

Take two Ounces of Calamy, or Lapis Calaminaris, in impalpable Powder; add to
this two Ounces of Oil of Vitriol, and two Ounces of the Water of White Eggs;
put all these into a Retort, lute thereto a Receiver, and let them distill,
you will have from them a very fair Water, with which, and some very fine
Barly-Meal, make a Paste, Coffin your Pearls in this, and Bake them in an Oven
as before, they will thus become exceeding hard, and recover their Natural
Transparency.

There are many other Ways very good to make Pearl with Oils, which add to the
Growth and Largeness of the Seed Pearl, as much as you will have them, but all
these Preparations being very tedious, and our Book large enough already, we
are of Opinion, it is best to let them alone for the present; besides, we have
said enough to hand the Intelligent Readers to those Secrets discoursed off,
and taught them herein, reserving the more enlarged and fuller Instructions for
the first Edition we make hereof in two Volumes.

CHAP. CCXLVII. How to blanch fine Pearl.
THE Beauty of Pearl consists entirely in the Brightness of their White Color,
such as are Spotted, or of a dark Yellow, being the least estimable; you may
however restore these last to a true Luster and Whiteness, by letting them soak
and cleanse first in Bran-Water, then in Milk-warm Water, and last of all steep
them twenty four Hours in the Mercury-Water assigned Chap. 244. This done,
string and hang them in a well closed Glass Body, to dry in the Sun, as before.

The Bran-Water is made by boiling two good Handfuls of Wheaten-Bran in a Quart
of Water, until the Water has drawn all the Strength thereof to it; and thus
you are to use it afterward for cleansing the Pearl; you must string and lay
them all together in a glazed Earthen Pan, and pour thereon one third of this
Water, when they have soaked, until the Water be tolerably cooled, that you may
endure the heat, rub them with your Hands gently to cleanse them the better;
continue so until the water be cold, throw out this cold water, and pour on
another third part of the Bran-water still boiling, and so use it as the
former, throwing it away when cold, and then pouring on the remainder of the
water, proceeding still after the former manner; after this, just heat some
fair water, and pour it on them, to refresh and take away the Remains of the
Bran; shift this water, pouring on more fresh warm water; do thus thrice
without handling them, then lay them on a Sheet of very clean white Paper, to
dry in a Shade, and last of all steep them in your Mercury-water, to bring them
to Perfection.

CHAP. CCXLVIII. Another Way to Blanch and Cleanse fine Pearl.
THERE are several other easy ways to cleanse and whiten the Pearl, which may
serve on indifferent occasions, and for ordinary uses.

Pound Alabaster to impalpable Powder, and rub the Pearl with it very gently,
this will cleanse them, or you may let them remain in this Powder twenty four
Hours afterward, they be still much the better for it.

White Coral has also the same Effect as the Alabaster, using it after the
like manner.

Tartar calcined white, and divested of all its moisture, as we have shown
elsewhere, is very good for the same use.

Clary, or Old Salt dissolved, filtered, coagulated, well dried and ground, is
as effectual as any of the former things, for cleansing and blanching of Pearl,
by rubbing them therewith a considerable time; you may afterward lay them up
in some Millet ground large, and it will contribute to them a Natural
Brightness.

There are several other ways to cleanse and whi^en Pearl, but those we have
here proposed, are suf^icient.

CHAP. CCXLIX. To make Counterfeit Pearl, very like the Natural.
THIS Receipt for making Counterfeit Pearl has a much more fine and solid
effect than any now adays in use.

Take Chalk well purified, and separated from its grossness and Sand, make
Paste thereof, and so mould it up like Pearl in a Mould for that purpose;
pierce these through with a Bristle, and let them afterward dry before the
Sun, or for more dispatch in an Oven, till they receive a just hardness; then
string them on a very fine Thread of Silver, color them over lightly with
Bole-Armoniack, diluted in water of VVhites of Eggs, then drench them with a
Pencil and Fair water, and so apply Leaf-Silver all over, and let them dry;
this done, burnish them with a VVolf's Tooth, till they shine very finely.

To give them the true Color of Pearl, make a Glue of Parchment, or rather
Vellom Shavings; thus Wash the Shavings in warm Water very well, and boil them
after in a new Pot to a thickness, and strain this Glue.

When you use this Glue, you must warm it on ^ flat Vessel, then dip the string
of Pearl therein, so as not to fill the interval Inches between each Pearl but
that every one may be done all over equally; after this let them dry; if you
observe any Baulk, (...) Defect on them, you may dip them in a second time^
thus they will assume a finer and more transparen^ Whiteness, and will have a
certain Darkness within and Luster on the outside, which compleats and ^rings
them to the Natural Beauty of real fine Pearl.

You may after this manner do with Transparent Beads of Alabaster, and very
white Mouth-Glew, and it will add very much to their Beauty; but Leaf Silver
does certainly contribute most of any thing else whatever to their Splendor.

OF THE ART OF GLASS.
BOOK XII. To make Crystal Looking-glass: How to Grind, Polish, Diamond-Cut,
and Silver them: To Make Glass and Metal Mirrours, etc.
CHAP. CCL.
THIS is the Twelfth and last Book of our Art of Glass, which should have
indeed succeeded the First; but we waited some Memoirs on the Subject, nor we
have not yet found them; this made us put it off, and place it here: Besides,
there is such a Coherency of Matters, in the Order of the Second Book, as we
could not possibly dispose of any other way, without breaking their due Course,
and the Affinity and Connection they have with each other, which the Reader may
easily perceive; but what matter is it where we place this, so that it may be
found among our Works; and we deliver nothing therein, but what we have been
familiar withal.

That of Looking-glasses is undoubtedly the finest and more admirable part of
Glass-Work; it is the most perfect Masterpiece of all the Art. We presume the
Order we have given in placing it here, will be approved of, since it is the
Subject of the last Book, and the Twelfth, which is a perfect Number, and
comprehends all other in Sacred Philosophy.

Twelve, the Number of Grace and Perfection, has been highly esteemed at all
times for those Wonderful Properties ascribed to it; it is very much celebrated
in Holy Writ, and the Divine Plato has used it with the same Deference in his
Works, if the Account which those, who were intimate with this Famous Number
Twelve, have left of it, were not Foreign to our Design, we could give the
Curious such extraordinary Relations, as would create a Mighty Respect in them
for the same.

We already noted in the First Chapter, that it is about Two Hundred Years since
the Invention of Looking-glasses, and also how they were found out: Before
these the Ladies made use of Steel, or Copper, or well polished Marble
Mirrours, these have been in use for many Ages: We can by the help of History,
look back on them as far as the Time of Ozias King of Judah, which was about the
Fourth or Fifth Olympiad; and as many Years before the Building of Rome; Seven
Hundred and sixty four Years after this, our Christian Era commenced. Now though
the Tyrians were very conversant in Glasswork, yet they had not the Knowledge
of making Looking-glass.

Among all the Excellencies of the Art, none comes near this, nothing can be
finer, or admit of greater Admiration, than to see that all the Actions of the
Beholder, are so justly and lively represented in these Glasses, that he has an
opportunity of discovering what is to be valued on him, and correcting what is
amiss; these Truths are too apparent for any to disprove; for the Experience of
them are at this Day to be made as easily by the Meanest as the Greatest
Persons.

We shall discourse but very briefly of the Metal for making these Glasses; for
it is the same Crystal we have prescribed throughout the First Book, but we will
enlarge on this Matter a little, for the convenience of making the Mirrours of
Metal, etc. whereof we'll show how to compound the Stuff, and the way of
working them.

CHAP. CCLI. The Way to make Looking-glass.
ALL those who employ themselves in the Art o^ Glass, do it always without
derogating from their Quality, as we have noted in Chap. 3. which our Kings
have always taken care to maintain.

The Undertakers of the Royal Glass-Manufacture in France, when they obtained
their Grants of Privileges, did at the same time require, That al^ Persons of
Quality, who should associate in the Manufacture, might do it without lessening
their Quality; to which his Majesty agreed with Exemptio^ from their Taille,
and several other Privileges, a^ Quartering of Soldiers, etc. for all such,
their Substitutes, Servants, and Domestics.

The first Grant of Privileges to this Manufacture, bears Date in October
1665. in Favor of Nicholas du Noyer, for Twenty Years, which was renewed by
Letters Patent of the last of December 1683. for Thirty Years to Peter Bagneux.

The second Privilege for the Manufacture Royal of Large Glass, was granted
December. 14.1688. to Abraham TO Hevart, for Thirty Years, with the saving
Privilege of Nobility as the former: These having settled at St. Gobin, near La
Fere, did by Letters Patent of February 1693. obtain Exemption from the
Tailles, (or Subsidy on the Third Estate, which is a constant Tax) and other
Impositions, as well for themselves, as their Deputies and Servants.

And to avoid all Contest, these two Manufactures were united by Order of the
Council of State, April 19. 1695. and Confirmed May 1. following, under the
Name of Francis Plaistrier.

Now for making these Glasses, the same Crystal assigned throughout Book 1. is
sufficient; the Difference is only instead of Working it as you do there, to
cast it flat and not blow, as in Chap. 3. to which we refer the Reader.

The Manner of Casting the Metal, did not commence with the Invention of
Looking-glass; for the Workmen at first, used to take a piece of Metal very
large, clipped and done on the Marble into Quarries as big as they would have them;
these they set afterward on a Pallet of Iron in the Furnace, till they were in
a Fusion, and so spread and united; hence they took and put them into another
little Furnace for that purpose, S. S. S. with fine searced Ashes to Bake; this
done, they raised the Fire by degrees, and so let it go out again, and drew off
the Glasses, working them after our manner in the next Chapter.

Thus too they wrought their little Round Glasses, or Mirrours, first shaping
them out of a long piece of Metal, by Circumvolution, and afterward clipping
them as the former, so finished them in the Furnaces, and made them fit for
Polishing.

Since that time having attempted to make them very large, they fell upon the
Way of Casting the Glass like other Metal on Sand Beds, such as the Founders
use; and to perform it the better, they have a Roller of Metal to run over the
Surface of the Glass Metal for enlarging the Plate, and to smooth and compact
it withal.

For such as would make them very large indeed, as are wrought at Muran near
Venice, and in our Royal Manufacturers, they had a much better, and easier
Method than doing them on Sand, viz. in large Tables of well polished Copper,
whereon they cast the Metal, but these not having strength enough to abide the
Heat, we have since made use of Iron, which will sufficiently perform the
Effect.

These Tables whereon the Glasses are at first sight Cast to their proper
Largeness, must have their bottom sunk as low as you intend the Thickness of
your Glass-Plate, and have a Convenience to push it out, as soon as ever it is
prepared thereon.

Some make use of Marble ones with Covers, over which they have a Plate, or
Runner of Metal, to slide and press it on the Glass Metal, that the Glass Plate
may be the more compact and even.

Thus are large Glasses made, which are no less surprising than pretty, and
it is a very considerable Improvement they are brought to at this Day, of making
them so extraordinary large for Mirrours: One would admire to what Perfection
the Wit of Man may arrive at, and is capable of bearing from the advantage of
Serious Application and Study in profound Matters.

CHAP. CCLII. To Grind, Polish, and Cut the Looking-Glass.
AFTER you have it from the Furnace, you must lay it on Sand, in a convenient
place to strengthen, else it will break in Working it; then grind it on very
fine Sand and Water.

This time it is that the Workmen give it the first Fashioning; then they do it
over again with Powder of Emery instead of the Sand, and so give ^t a second
Improvement; when they have done it enough with these two, they do it a third
time with Tripoly instead of Emery, this Polishes the Glass perfectly; others
give these Glasses a fourth Process with Calx of Tin, to bring them to a very
extraordinary Luster and Polish.

The Diamond-Cut is done by Grinding the Cry^tal on Drift Sand and Water, as
much as you think ^onvenient.

These are the several Methods for finishing the ^ooking-glass all to the
Silvering, which must be disposed thereon, as in the next Chapter before it ^as
the Quality of a Mirror.

CHAP. CCLIII. To File, or Silver the Looking-Glass.
THE Glass is not perfected, till it be Silvered; for without that, it is
impossible it should distinctly show the opposite Objects; it is the Filing or
Silvering therefore which gives it its just Perfection.

For this you must have a firm well smoothed Table, much greater than the
Glass, whereon spread one or more Sheets of very fine Tin, let them be as thin
as Paper, and so prepared, as not to have any Rumple, Furrow, or Spot, else the
Glass will be spoiled: Over these Sheets spread good Mercury quite covering
them with it; when the Mercury has soaked in well, place the Glass thereon, and
it will stick to them; then turn it, and spread Sheets o^ Paper on the Filing;
press it gently, smoothing an^ stroaking it with your Hands, to take off the
Superfluous Mercury; then dry it in the Sun, or by a sof^ Fire, and it will
become perfect.

But because it is not so easy to file the Large Glasses as the small, you must
have recourse to a Table for the purpose, with a Diamond-Cut rising Border, to
keep the Sides of the Glass firm, whereon yo^ must lay it, with the Backside,
(which is to be filed) upwards; then lay on the Sheeted Tin very smooth and
closely; over these the Mercury,to dissolve them then with the Sheets of Paper
cover all, and (...) smooth, and run it over with your Hands to take away the
Surplus of the Mercury, and so dry it (...) before.

The rest of the Work depends on the Framing them, and giving the suitable
Ornaments accordingly.

CHAP. CCLIV. How to make Spherical Concaves, and Unequal Glasses, commonly
called Burning Mirrours.
BEFORE we discourse of the Metal Mirrours, we will show how to do such of
Glass: The Use of these Glasses is to unite the Sunbeams, and so kindle a
Flambeau, Wood, or any other Combustible Matter. By them Metals also may be
dissolved in a little time as easily as in a Crucible on a Furnace, or at a
Forge.

The Whole Mystery of making them, is to have the Moulds of a Round Shape,
otherwise they have but a very weak Effect on the Sun Beams; the Moulds must be
so exactly made, as neither side shall differ from the other.

To make the Concave Glass, you must have the Mould Unequal, and the Convexity
thereof must be made by a Sphere, according as you have it greater or less; and
it is from this Sphere the Convexity of the Mirror must be taken: As for
instance, Take a Sphere of what bigness you please, divide it equally, and also
one of the Hemispheres in three equal parts, by Planes parallel to the great
Circle, the Unequal, Segment shall then be the sixth part of the whole Sphere,
and the Measure of your Mirror: To do this you may have recourse to the Works
of Archimedes, John Baptista Porta, Kircher, and many other Authors.

If you would make the Mirror a Unequal Glass, you must have the Moulds
Concave, and these you may do two ways, thus: Take the two Concave Sides of the
Mould, and closing them together equally, as the Founders do their Frames, pour
in through the Mouth of the Mould your Crystal Metal, letting it fill the
Mould, and afterward cool. Another way is, to take two Concave Mirrours, and
joining their Faces, solder them well all about, only leaving a small Orifice,
through which you may fill it with some Aqua Vitae, and so stop the Hole, and
frame them with Wood, or Metal: This sort of Mirror, has a more ready
Influence on the Sun Beams then any other; we'll say something of the Effect
thereof when we come to speak of the Metal Mirrours, but upon the whole Matter
you must have these Glasses all very well polished.

These Burning Glasses may be made Parabolick, or Spheroidal, and such have
still a better Effect than the Spherick: You must proceed in Moulding them as
with the former; you must observe a just proportion in doing them; for when
they are too much raised, they are hindered by their Deepness from having a
good Effect; and upon this depends the Whole Nicity of the Art.

CHAP. CCLV. How to make Metal Mirrours, Concave Sphericks, or Parabolicks,
usually called, Steel Burning Mirrours.
THE Authors cited in the former Chapter are very useful to be consulted on
this occasion to demonstrate the Method, Use, and Excellency of these Mirrours;
for which reason we shall say but little on that Subject.

The Moulds for them are prepared as in the former Chapter, whether Concave, or
Unequal, and for such as are flat, they may be cast on Sand.

The Metal of these Mirrours is called Steel, because it is of a very hard and
bright Composure and Temper, and the harder the Metal, the better the Mirror,
and the easier to polish; the Whiteness of it is very convenient for giving the
Quality of Burning, and not only for that, but several other Uses; if it be too
Red, or Black, it alters the true Distance and Color of its opposite Objects;
you must therefore make them of this following Composition.

Take three Pounds of Copper, one Pound of fine Tin, half an Ounce of White
Arsenick, an Ounce of Tartar: First, melt the Copper, then put the Tin in
immerged in the Copper, else it will fume away in the Melting, and leave the
Copper behind; these two being well melted together, cast in the Arsenick, and
Tartar: After this let all melt for two or three Hours, and so Mould it.

Some Persons dose with the former weight of Copper and Tin, half a Pound of
White Arsenick; others instead of Arsenick,put in a quarter of a Pound of
Antimony. Here is another way to compound this Stuff of the following
Ingredients; and after that another Composition much more excellent than either.

Take a Pound of well refined Copper, melt it, then add three Pounds of fine
Tin; as soon as these are well melted, add six Ounces of Red Tartar calcined,
one Ounce of Saltpeter, two Drams of Allom, and two Ounces of Arsenick, let
these melt for three or four Hours, that the Salts may evaporate, and the Stuff
will be fit for moulding; this Stuff is more solid and hard than the former,
and much better to make the flat Mirrours for Looking. You shall be shown how
to polish them in the next Chapter.

We having promised to assign a much more excellent Stuff for Concaves than the
former ones, will give it here; because of the hardness and compactness
thereof, it is more capable of polishing, and consequently much better than the
rest.

Take Plates of Copper one Pound, mince 'em that they may be put into a
Crucible, imbibing them with Oil of Tartar; then powder a quarter of ^ Pound of
White Arsenick, and put these S. S. S. as we have shown the Method elsewhere,
until you fill the Crucible; pour on them afterward Linseed-Oyl to cover the
Arsenick and the Copper; head and lute you^ Crucible, and when the lute is dry
set it on a Sand-Furnace, letting the Sand arise no higher than the Head; heat
the Furnace very gently till it arrive a^ a just degree, and the Oil begins to
evaporate; (...) this time the Oil will prepare the Copper for retaining the
Arsenick, which must enter the Copper as easily as Oil does Leather; set it
again on fresh Sand, and increase the heat of the Furnace, giving i^ the same
degree as before, until the Oil evaporate^ and boil up; then take off the
Crucible, let it cool and break it, you will find your Copper of several Colors,
and would be much better, if instead of Arsenick, you made use of Orpiment.

Take of this Copper one part, of Latten two parts, melt the Latten on a smart
Fire, and so put in the Copper; when they are well melted, cast the Metal Drop
by Drop into a glazed Earthen Vessel full of Water, over which lay a Bush, or
Broom for the Stuff to go through; thus you will have a Metal not to be touched
with a File, nor Brittle, as good as any Steel for all uses whatsoever.

Take of this hard Metal three parts, and best Tin of Cornwall, which has no
Lead in it, one part; melt the Metal before you put in the Tin; after these are
well incorporated, you may fill your Moulds, etc.

This is the best of all our Compositions for making of all sorts of these
Metal Mirrours; it is white, hard, not Brittle, and very easily polished
exceeding fine.

CHAP. CCLVI. To Polish the Steel Mirrours.
WHATSOEVER Exactness you use in Moulding these, they do never receive their
true Shape and Perfection, until they are Polished and Burnished; in doing
which, least you should spoil, or endamage them, you must Work away the Outside
at the Wheel, with the Sand-stone, which the Pewterers and Brasiers make use
of, and then apply the Handle, and Polish them sufficiently by rubbing with
Water.

This done, take it off this Wheel, and put it on the Second, where rub it with
Emery prepared, that it may be finely polished, so as the Scars may be scarce
perceptible. Do this in an Oblique Line.

Then take it off this, and set it on such another; rub it with Boodstone
prepared, and afterward use Calx of Tin, working it for a long time, until it
have its due Burnish and Perfection, still doing it in the same Obliquity.

You must keep these Mirrours from the Moistness of the Air, and Steams; or if
they should happen to be endamaged by any such, you may restore them by rubbing
on them a piece of Deer, or Goats Skin, humouring the Oblique Line; you must
not use any Woollen, or Linen Stuff, for they spoil these Mirrours.

These Mirrours may be also polished with Lead Artificially melted, with Emery
and Water, for the First Process; and very fine Emery and Lead for the Second;
and in the Last, with Boodstone and Tin Dross; these make a finer Burnish
than the former; for the Mirror is highly polished by the Tin-Dross.

This is all we resolve to give account of on these sort of Mirrours, for
attracting and uniting the Sun Beams. There are many other, as Cylinders,
Pyramids, whereof we forbear to discourse, since the Authors which have writ of
them, have done it with much more sufficiency than we pretend to.

They ascribe the first Invention of Burning Mirrours to Prometheus, when he
stole the Fire from Heaven to carry to the Earth. Archimedes made very happy
use of them in defense of his Country, when he burnt the Fleet of Marcellus
before Syracuse, by placing his Burning Glass on the highest Turret in the
City, whence proceeded such a mighty Conflagration, as destroyed that vast
Flota in spite of Neptune and the Waters. Proclus too, a Brave and Famous
Mathematician, burnt the Fleet of Vitelian, that came to Besiege
Constantinople; which he preserved by this Industry.

Many other Fine and Admirable Relations might be given of the Effects of these
Mirrours, but they are too tedious: We shall therefore here put an end to this
Chapter, and consequently the whole Book, desiring the Reader to receive all in
good part, and excuse the lesser Faults of Impression and Phrase, since we can
assure him the Doses are justly prescribed, and the Preparations exact which we
have assigned.

The End of the Twelfth Book.
AN APPENDIX Showing how to Make GLASS-EYES Very Natural.
THIS Secret is fine, and never was made public before: The Eyes may be done
so curiously, that the Nicest Examination can scarce discover them to be
Artificial.

You must have a lighted Lamp, and a long hollow piece of Crystal, as thick as
the middle of a Pipes Shank; the Bore must be pretty wide, and the Pipe about
four Inches in length; let the Mouthend be like that of a Trumpet, and the
other widened and turned outward like the Breech; this may be done by heating
one end in the Flame of your Lamp, and whilst it is hot, turn it so with a pair
of Nippers.

Hold this Pipe in your left hand (having before put a little Cotton into it,
about an Inch or less from the Mouth, to hinder your Breath from being too
violently blown on the Work;) let it be between your two Fore-fingers and Thumb
(as you would make a Pen;) heat the Wide end in the Flame red hot, and so wind long
Thread White Enamel about the grossness of a Bugle; your Threads must be red
hot too, and solid, then they will easily join the Crystal Pipe; make by this
Serpentine Winding a Unequal of such Diameter, as when blown out will answer
that of the Eye you would imitate.

This done, keep the Work in the Flame till red hot, and so blow it out into an
Orbicular Form, of a just largeness; then heating anew the top, pinch with
your Nippers a small Hole, and so turn it with the end of them round, of the
bigness your Eye must be within the White, in this Hole wind pure
Thread-Crystal as small as fine Packthread, till you fill it up, taking away
the Superfluity (if any) with your Nippers; heat it in the Flame, blowing
gently often; by this the Crystal will work Convexly, to give you the full
shape of your Eye.

Upon this Crystal (heating it again) you must wind Crystal Thread small almost
as Horse-hair, and colored as the Eye you would imitate; cover it once over, and
as soon as the Center fills, cut off the Thread with your Nippers, that no
Surplus remain: You must hold it often in the Flame, still gently blowing to
keep it in a true order.

Afterward with a piece of Black Enamel, about the thickness of a Duck-Quill,
lay on the Black of the Eye; be very careful not to give any of these Threads
or pieces of Enamel, too great a heat, nor apply too much of this Black, for it
will spread; therefore you must proportion your Heats and Quantities very
exactly, still continuing the Work in the Flame, and gently blowing as often as
you would restore it to its Shape: After this, cover the Crystalline part of the
Eye with some Crystal of a solid AB, is the Cristal Pipe

A, the Mouth

C, where the Cotton must be

B, the widened end of the Pipe

BD, the glass eye a making

E, the form of the Eye showing how the small colored threads must be laid on



piece, about the thickness of a Goose-Quill, and so heating and blowing as
before, bring it to its due Form. Then hold the Side thereof in the Flame, and
with a Thread of White Enamel, not quite so hot, you may as it were cut out the
Shape of your Eye, as you would have it, Oblique, or otherwise; then border it with
the said Thread, holding the Edges in the Flame, to become smooth and even.

Now if you find too much Enamel in any part of the Border, you may take it off
with another Thread of the same Enamel, not altogether heated so much as that
you would diminish, which must be held in the Flame accordingly: Then proceed to
Cutting or Filing; and last of all, Anneal it in a small Pan of ^^als, and you
have finished.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
BOOK I.
Chap. 1. THE Rise, Antiquity, and Use of Glass. Page 1 Chap. 2. The manner of
Building Eurnaces for making Glass. p. 19 Chap. 3. The way of making Glass, and
the Privileges of Gentlemen who make it. p. 25 Instruments for the Work. p. 31
Chap. 4. The Places where Polverine, Rochetta, and Soda are found. p. 33 The
Virtues of Kali Salt in Curing the Stone, Ulcers, etc. p. 37 Chap. 5. To
Extract Salt of Polverine, Rochetta, and Soda. ibid. To Calcine Tartar. 41
Chap. 6. To make Frit for Crystal. 42 A pretty Dissolution of Glass by Cold.
ibid. Chap. 7. To Extract Salt from Polver. of the Levant. p. 46 Chap. 8.
Observations for a Gold Color in Crystal. p. 48 Chap. 9. To Extract Salt from
Fern. ibid. Chap. 10. To make Salt of several Vegetables. p. 50 Salt for
Manuring. p. 52 Chap. 11. To make fine Crystal of Salt of Lime. p. 54 Chap. 12.
To make ordinary Frit. p. 55 Chap. 13. To make very fine Crystal. p. 57 The
Virtues of Sandever. p. 58 Chap. 14. To make common Glass White and Crystaline.
p. 59 Chap. 15. To purify Salt of Tartar. 60 Chap. 16. General Remarks for all
Colors. p. 61 Chap. 17. To prepare Zaffer. p. 62 Chap. 18. To prepare
Manganese. p. 64 The Philosophers Magnesia. p. 65 Chap. 19. Feretto of Spain
the Mineral. p. 67 Chap. 20. How to make Feretto of Spain. p. 68 Chap. 21.
Another extraordinary way to make Feretto of Spain. p. 69 Chap. 22. Another way
to make it of Copper only. p. 70 Chap. 23. A Second way to make it of Copper
only. p. 71 Chap. 24. To make Crocus Martis. ibid. Chap. 25. Another way to
make it. p. 73 Chap. 26. To make it with Aquafortis. p. 74 Chap. 27. To make
it with Aqua Regalis. ibid. Chap. 28. Another way. p. 75 Chap. 29. The best way
to make Crocus Martis. p. 76 Chap. 30. To Calcine small Copper Plates. ibid.
Chap. 31. Another way. p. 78 Chap. 32. To Calcine it to a Red Powder. p. 79
Chap. 33. To make thrice Calcined Copper. ibid. Chap. 34. Another way. p. 80
Chap. 35. To make Aes ustum. p. 81 Chap. 36. Another better way. ibid. Chap.
37. The way to make Crocus Martis. p. 83 Chap. 38. Another way. p. 84 Chap. 39.
Another easy way. p. 85 Chap. 40. The first Egmarine Color for Glass. ibid.
Chap. 41. Another Bluer Seagreen. p. 87 Chap. 42. Another with Crystal. ibid.
Chap. 43. A fine Egmarine. p. 88 Chap. 44. Another. p. 89 Chap. 45. Another
finer than the rest. p. 90 Chap. 46. To make Emerald Color in Glass. ibid.
Chap. 47. Another finer. p. 91 Chap. 48. Another wonderful Green. p. 92 Chap.
49. Another Oriental Emerald. p. 93 Chap. 50. To give Glass a Turcoise-Blue. p.
94
BOOK II.
Chap. 51. THe Design and Contents of this Book. p. 96 Chap. 52. To make
Aquafortis. p. 98 To make strong Lute. p. 101 A Furnace for several Uses. p.
112 Chap. 53. To purify Vitriol for making the Aquafortis stronger. p. 104
Chap. 54. To make Aqua Regalis. p. 105 Chap. 55. Another far stronger, called
Water of the two Champions. p. 106 Chap. 56. Another more easy way. p. 108
Another with Spirit of Salt. ibid. The Sovereign Menstruum of the Philosophers.
p. 109 Chap. 57. To Calcine Tartar. ibid. Chap. 58. To make fair Chalcedony. p.
110 Chap. 59. A Second sort. p. 113 Chap. 60. A third and last way. p. 116
Mercury purified. ibid. Silver Calcined. ibid. Common Salt purified. p. 117
Sal-Armoniack purified. ibid.
BOOK III.
Chap. 61. THe Design and Contents of this Book. p. 121 Chap. 62. A Gold Yellow
in Glass. p. 122 Chap. 63. A Granat Color. p. 123 Chap. 64. An Amethist
Color. p. 124 Chap. 65. A Sapphire Color. p. 125 Chap. 66. A finer. ibid.
Chap. 67. A Velvet-Black Color. p. 126 Chap. 68. Another fairer. ibid. Chap.
69. Another yet much fairer. p. 127 Chap. 70. A Milk-white color. ibid. Chap.
71. Another fairer. p. 128 Chap. 72. The Color of Lapis Lazuli in Glass. ibid.
Chap. 73. A Marble Color. p. 129 Chap. 74. A Peach Color. p. 130 Chap. 75. A
deep Red. ibid. Chap. 76. Rock-Crystal calcined. p. 131 Chap. 77. To make Pearl
Color in Crystal. p. 132 Chap. 78. To Tinge Natural Crystal of a Viper Color.
p. 133 Chap. 79. To make in Natural Crystal, the Colors of the Ruby, Topaz,
Opal, Heliotrope, etc. p. 134
BOOK IV.
Chap. 80. THe Design and Contents of this Book. p. 136 The Philosophers Lac
Virginis. p. 137 Chap. 81. To calcine Lead. p. 138 Chap. 82. To make Glass of
Lead. p. 139 Chap. 83. To Work this Glass. p. 140 Chap. 84. To give it a fine
Emerald color. p. 141 Chap. 85. To give it a fairer. p. 142 Chap. 86. To give
it a Topaz color. ibid. Chap. 87. To give it an Egmarine. p. 143 Chap. 88. To
give it a Granat. p. 144 Chap. 89. To give it a Sapphire. ibid. Chap. 90. To
give it a Gold color. p. 145
BOOK V.
Chap. 91. THe Design and Contents of this Book. p. 147 The Original of
Precious Stones, and Metals. p. 148 Chap. 92. To prepare Rock Crystal. p. 150
Chap. 93. To make fine and pure Salt of Tartar. p. 152 The Philosophers Salt of
Tartar. p. 153 Chap. 94. Paste for Oriental Emerald. ibid. Chap. 95. Another
deeper. p. 155 Chap. 96. Another fairer. p. 156 Chap. 97. Another fairer. ibid.
Chap. 98. Another very fair. p. 157 Chap. 99. Paste for Oriental Topaz. ibid.
Chap. 100. Another fine Topaz. p. 158 Chap. 101. An Oriental Crysolite. p. 159
Chap. 102. A Sky-colour Paste for Beryl, called Aqua-Marina. ibid. Chap. 103. A
Paste for Sapphire. p. 160 Chap. 104. Another Oriental Sapphire. p. 161 Chap.
105. Another deeper. ibid. Chap. 106. Paste for Oriental Granat. p. 162 Chap.
107. Another of a deeper color. p. 163 Chap. 108. Another fairer. ibid. Chap.
109. Observations for Pastes and their colors. p. 164 To prepare the
Crucibles. p. 165 Chap. 110. To make Sulphur Saturni to be used in Paste for
Gems. p. 166 Observations on the Sweetness of Sal Saturni. p. 169 Chap. 111. To
make very hard Pastes with Sulphur Saturni, and to give them all the color of
Precious Stones. ibid. Chap. 112. Saturnus Glorificatus, how to make it. p. 171
Chap. 113. To make Paste for Precious Stones of Saturnus Glorificatus. p. 172
Chap. 114. To make a very fair Carbuncle. p. 173 The Opinions of several
Authors concerning the Carbuncle. ibid. The Sentiments of our Author. p. 174
Chap. 115. Another more Noble, called Carbunculus nocte Illuminans. p. 175 The
Author's Opinion thereof. p. 176 A fine way to Calcine Gold. p. 177 Chap. 116.
To make Oriental Ruby. p. 178 Very fine Rubies of Queen Elizabeth of Austria,
and Mary de Medicis. p. 179 Chap. 117. To make Balass Ruby. p. 180 Chap. 118.
To make Oriental Sapphire. ibid. Chap. 119. To make Oriental Emerald. p. 181
Chap. 120. To make Turcoise. p. 182 Chap. 121. To make Oriental Topaz. p. 183
Chap. 122. To make Crysolite. ibid. Chap. 123. Another way of making all sorts
of Precious Stones much harder. p. 184 Chap. 124. To make a fair Emerald. p.
185 Chap. 125. To make a Violet Sapphire. p. 186 Chap. 126. Another Violet
Sapphire of a deeper color. ibid. Chap. 127. Another very fine Blue Sapphire.
p. 187 Chap. 128. Another fine Sapphire. ibid. Chap. 129. Another admirable
Blue. p. 188 Chap. 130. To make Beryl, or Egmarine. ibid. Chap. 131. A deeper
Egmarine. p. 189 Chap. 132. To make a fair Jacynth. ibid. Chap. 133. Another
fairer Jacynth. p. 190 Chap. 134. Another Oriental Jacynth. ibid. Chap. 135. To
make a very fine Powder. p. 191 Chap. 136. Another Powder. ibid. Chap. 137.
Iargons of Auvergne, how to make those Red, that are of a Gridelin color. p.
192 Chap. 138. To Extract the Tincture of the Iargons, and therewith to make a
fine and very hard Diamond. p. 193 How to prepare a Sulphurous Tripoly. p. 194
Chap. 139. To make a Diamond. p. 195 Chap. 140. To make Diamond of Alanson. p.
196 Chap. 141. To give the Natural Color and Hardness of true Diamonds to
Crystal, and Diamond of Alanson. ib. Chap. 142. Another Way. p. 198 Chap. 143.
Another way to harden them, and make them sparkle as much as fine Natural
Diamond. ibid. Chap. 144. To turn White Sapphire into a true Diamond. p. 199
Chap. 145. Another way. p. 200 Chap. 146. Another way. p. 201
BOOK VI.
Chap. 147. THE Design and Contents of this Book. p. 203 Chap. 148. To prepare
the principal Stuff for Enamel. p. 205 Chap. 149. Milk-white Enamel. p. 206
Chap. 150. Turcoise color Enamel. p. 207 Chap. 151. A very fine Blue Enamel.
p. 209 Chap. 152. Another. ibid. Chap. 153. A very fine Green Enamel. p. 210
Chap. 154. Another. p. 211 Chap. 155. Another. ibid. Chap. 156. A Black Enamel.
p. 212 Chap. 157. Another. p. 213 Chap. 158. Another. ibid. Chap. 159. A Purple
colored Enamel. 214 Observations by the Author, on the Nobleness of this
Color. ibid. Chap. 160. Another Purple Enamel. p. 216 Chap. 161. A Violet
color Enamel. ibid. Chap. 162. A Yellow Enamel. p. 217 Chap. 163. To make
Crystal-Ground for Red Enam. p. 218 Chap. 164. A fine Preparat. of fusible
Manganese. p. 219 Chap. 165. To make a fixed Sulphur. p. 220 Chap. 166. Another
fixed and incombustible Sulphur. p. 221 Chap. 167. To Extract Spirit of Saturn.
ibid. Chap. 168. A Blood-red Enamel. p. 223 Chap. 169. Another. p. 224 Chap.
170. A Sparkling Ruby-red Enamel. p. 225 Chap. 171. A Balass-Ruby color
Enamel. ibid. Chap. 172. A Rose color Enamel. p. 226 Chap. 173. Another very
fine Rose color Enamel. ibid. Chap. 174. Another Rose color Enamel. p. 227
Chap. 175. A Splendid Carbuncle-colour Enamel. p. 228 To Calcine Gold. p. 229
Chap. 176. To Calcine Copper for making Vitriol of Venus without Corrosives. p.
230 The Author's Report of the Excellency and Virtues of this Vitriol and its
Spirit. p. 231 Chap. 177. To make Vitriol of Venus without Corrosives. p. 232
Chap. 178. To Extract this fine Vitriol. p. 234 Chap. 179. To draw off the
White Spirit from the Vitriol. p. 236 To separate the Cap. Mort. for tinging of
Glass. p. 237 To restore it to a Blue color, by the Air. p. 238
BOOK VII.
Chap. 180. THE Design and Contents of this Book. p. 240 Chap. 181. The Furnace
for Enameling and Pourtraying withal. p. 242 Chap. 182. To Enamel on Gold. p.
243 Chap. 183. To Enamel on Silver. p. 245 Chap. 184. To Enamel on Copper. p.
246 Chap. 185. To prepare the Enamel for applying it on the Metals. p. 247
Chap. 186. To prepare the Colors for pourtraying on Enamel. p. 248 Chap. 187.
The White. p. 249 Chap. 188. The Black. p. 250 Chap. 189. The Yellow. ibid.
Chap. 190. The Blue. p. 351 A very fine Preparation of the Blue. ibid. Chap.
191. The Red. p. 252 Gold Calcined, and how. ibid. A Vermilion Red. p. 253
Chap. 192. To Pourtray on Enamel. p. 254
BOOK VIII.
Chap. 193. THe Design and Cont. of this Book. p. 357 Chap. 194. The Furnace
for baking and finishing the China-Ware in. p. 259 Chap. 195. A fine
Composition of Mold for China-Ware. p. 260 Pure Earth for China-Ware. p. 261
Chap. 196. To Enamel China. p. 262 Chap. 197. To Paint China. p. 263 Chap. 198.
To Gild China. ibid. Chap. 199. Another finer Way. p. 264 Chap. 200. To prepare
Linseed-Oyl for Gilding on China. p. 265
BOOK IX.
Chap. 201. THe Design and Cont. of this Book. p. 267 Chap. 202. A Furnace for
finishing the Painted Glass. p. 270 Chap. 203. A White for Painting on Glass.
p. 272 Chap. 204. A Black. p. 373 Chap. 205. A Yellow. ibid. Chap. 206. A Blue.
p. 174 To prepare the Crucibles. ibid. Chap. 207. A Red. p. 175 Chap. 208. A
Purple. p. 176 Chap. 209. A Green. p. 177 Chap. 210. Of other Colors in
general. p. 227 Chap. 211. To make Rocaille. p. 278 Chap. 212. To Paint on
Glass. p. 280 The Privileges granted to such as Work therein, etc. ib. Chap.
213. The Order of Baking the Glass in the Furnace, after it is painted. p. 283
Chap. 214. Another way to paint on Glass. p. 285. Chap. 215. To gild on Glass.
p. 287 Chap. 216. Another way. ibid. Chap. 217. To paint all sorts of Colors
in Globes. p. 288
BOOK X.
Chap. 218. THE Design and Contents of this Book. p. 290 Chap. 219. To Extract
Yellow Lake from Broom-flowers p. 292 Chap. 220. To Extract the Essential
Tincture of Poppy, Iris, Rose, Violet, and all manner of Green Herbs to make
Lakes of the same Colors. p. 293 Chap. 221. Another Way to Extract the
Tinctures from these and several other Flowers, Greens, etc. p. 29^ Chap. 222.
The first process in making Scarlet Lake. p. 29^ Chap. 223. To Extract the
Tincture of Kerm-Berries for Scarlet Lake. p. 29^ Chap. 224. A readier way to
Extract the Tincture (...) Kerm-Berries. p. 29^ Chap. 225. To make Lake, or
Tincture of Brazile. p. 30^ Chap. 226. To Extract Tincture of Madder for Lake.
p. 30^ Chap. 227. How to make Ultra-marine, of Lapis-L^^zuli. ibid. Chap. 228.
To make a Liquid for Moistning and Grining the Powders withal. p. 30^ Chap.
229. To prepare a mild and strong Lixivium for the Lapis-Lazuli. p. 305 Chap.
230. The Form of the Vessel for settling the Liquors in, which are employed on
the Lapis-Lazuli. p. 306 Chap. 231. To make strong Cement to mix with
Lapis-Lazuli, to separate the finer and better Stuff from the other. p. 307
Chap. 232. To make a weaker Cement for separating the Colors of the
Lapis-Lazuli. p. 308 Chap. 233. To purify Linseed-Oyl. p. 309 Chap. 234. To
incorporate the Powder of Lapis-Lazuli with the strong, or weaker Cement. p.
310 Chap. 235. To Extract the Ultra-marine. p. 311 Chap. 236. The Method of
cleansing the Ultra-marine, when it is separated from the Cement. p. 314 Chap.
237. To strain off the Ultra-marine already Washed and Purified. p. 315 Chap.
238. To Correct the Colors just before prepared. p. 316 Chap. 239. Another Way
to make Ultra-marine, and draw off the Colors with more Expedition. ibid.
Chap. 240. Another Way to make Ultra-marine. p. 318 A Color inclining to, or
near the Ultra-marine; and that the Lapis-Laz. may be Artificially made. p. 320
Chap. 241. To make German Blue. ibid.
BOOK XI.
Chap. 242. THE Design and Contents of this Book. p. 322 The Origin of Pearls,
and how they are increased; with the like account of the Bezoar-Stone. p. 324
Chap. 243. To imitate fine Oriental Pearl. p. 326 A further Description of
Furnaces, etc. ibid. The Philosophic Pearl. p. 329 Chap. 244. To make
Mercury-Water for giving Transparency and Luster to the Pearl. ibid. Chap. 245.
Another Way to make those Pearls. p. 330 Chap. 246. Another Way. p. 332 Chap.
247. How to Blanch fine Pearl. p. 334 Chap. 248. Other Ways to Blanch and
Cleanse fine Pearl p. 33^ Chap. 249. To make Counterfeit Pearl like Natural. p.
336
BOOK XII.
Chap. 250. THE Design and Contents of this Book p. 33^ The Original of
Looking-Glass, with an accou^ when Metal, and Marble Mirrors were in use. p.
3^^ Chap. 251. To make Looking-glass. p. 34^ The Privileges of the Royal Glass
Manufactures. (...) Of Round Mirrors. p. 34^ Chap. 252. To Grind, Polish, and
Diamond-Cut t^ Glasses. p. 34^ Chap. 253. To File, or Silver them. p. 34^ Chap.
234. To make Concave, and Unequal Burnin^ Glasses. p. 34^ Chap. 255. To make
Metal, or Steel Burning Mi^rors, whether Concaves, Sphericks, or Parabolicks,
p. 34^ Chap. 256. To Polish the Steel Mirrors. p. 34^ The Invention and Effects
of Burning Mirrors. p. 35^ An Appendix concerning Glass-Eyes. p. 35^
FINIS.

