Casus Medico-Chirurgicus: OR, A most Memorable CASE OF A NOBLEMAN, Deceased.

Wherein is showed, His Lordship's Wound, the various Diseases survening, how
his Physicians and Surgeons treated him, how treated by the Author after my
Lord was given over by all his Physicians, with all their Opinions and Remedies.

Moreover, The Art of Curing the most dangerous of Wounds, by the first
intention; with the Description of the REMEDIES.

By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for M. Rooks, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London.
1678.



THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
READER,
HIs Lordship's Aunt having acquainted me, that it was his Majesty's Command, I
should write my Lord's Case, the humble obedience I owed to so great and high
Authority, has obliged me to describe the said Case in all its circumstances;
not doubting but that it may prove as useful in its kind, especially if it
shall meet with an Answer, as any Physical Consultation that ever was yet
printed. For, first, it contains the best Cordial Method, and Practice of the
chiefest, Experienced, Learnedest Physicians. 2. Their best Methods and
Remedies for curing all the sorts of Colicks. 3. Their best Methods and
Remedies for curing the Scurvy. 4. Their best Methods and Remedies for curing
the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys. 5. Their best Methods and Remedies for
transferring a total suppression of Urine. 6. Their best Method and Remedies to
cure a Diabetes. 7. Their best Method and Remedies for curing a Fever, Acute
Pains, Vomitings, Gripes, and many other Diseases. 8. After all this, a clear
Demonstration, that his Lordship was troubled with no other Disease, than what
was occasioned by the puncture of a Nerve, or procured by Art.

But what I chiefly pretend unto in this Tract, is to inform you how to cure
the most dangerous of Wounds by the first Intention, that is, in fewer hours
than most simple fleshy Wounds are days or weeks in curing; which certainly
will prove of great advantage to you, whether you be a Physician, Surgeon,
Apothecary, or neither; for it is the Public good I aim at in this Treatise,
and in that called The Family-Physician, and the House-Apothecary: For which,
in recompense, some Apothecaries, some Physicians, and some near Neighbors,
did very lately combine into a Conspiracy against my Life and Estate; but if
that should miss, they were resolved not to miss their stroke in stabbing my
Reputation: And what defense is there against a premeditated Stab? So, courteous
Reader, I bid you

Farewell.
THE Medical and Chirurgical CASE OF A NOBLEMAN.
1. FRom the esteem of those numerous observations in Physic communicated to
the World, is greatly detracted by the Romancing vein of their Authors, or by
being so common and vulgar, that they seem no novelty to every Nurse: So that
they are only very few that recompense Physicians for their pains in reading
of them; and among those few, the Case I am now describing, may merit a
remarque for rarity and variety of Symptoms, equal to any ever published;
assuring you, there shall be nothing inserted here, what is not respondent to
the truth in the least particular; though nothing is more to be regretted, than
that an accident so unfortunate in all its circumstances, both of the Wound,
Cure, and Mistakes, should befall a person, whose Magnanimity, Valor, ancient
Descent, and other singular Endowments, did render him a true English Nobleman,
and Peer of the Realm.

2. His Lordship received a Wound in the right Hypocondre, the Sword entering
about an Inch more or less (by conjecture) below the short Ribs, almost
perpendicular to the right Pap, and passing thwart down through the Abdomen,
seemed to stop on the Os coxendix (or hip bone) somewhat above the Acetabulum.
The Sword felt very cold as it passed, and on this side the termination near
the Groin, made a prick or puncture so smart, that it caused his Lordship to
fall down; which also occasioned a great Bruise or Contusion on the Hip; that
is, a contusion of the Musculi glutaei, and the Cutis above them. His Lordship
got up again, and walked to some considerable distance, until he arrived at a
person of Quality's house in, etc.

3. My Lords constitution of Body was strong and vigorous; his Temperament Hot
and Humid, that is, Sanguine; his Habit replete, fleshy, and well-colored: he
was (...), that is, of good and sound Bowels; aged near eight and twenty; his
(...) was only observable in this, that his Nature could in no manner bear
strong Catharticks; whereas on the other hand, the gentlest Lenitives or
Laxatives, and Eccoproticks, in a very moderate Dose, would ever operate
plentifully with him, and that upon occasion cum (...). My Lord's (...) (if I
may so term it) was a most passionate aversion from the Roman Catholic
Religion, and a great inclination to Learning and Languages; wherein he was so
far advanced, as to be noted to be an universal Scholar; an expert Linguist,
and an excellent Mathematician. His Candor and Affability rendered him beloved
of all persons of whatsoever degree, that had the honor of knowing him. He was
undaunted in the greatest of dangers, as appeared in the late Sea Fights, in
which he served his Majesty as a Voluntier. He was entirely just in his
actions, and free of all manner of Debaucheries of the Times.

4. After a short repose at the place abovementioned, his Lordship was advised
to send for a Surgeon nearest at hand, who proved to be a French man: He no
sooner came, but immediately probed the Wound, which finding to penetrate into
the hollow of the Belly, crammed in a Tent, armed I suppose with some
Stegnotick, though without any great occasion, in regard the Wound did issue
forth but a small proportion of Blood. This done, he took away some eight or
nine ounces of blood out of the right Arm.

5. Whether the foresaid Frenchmam was a Barber, a Blood-letter, or Surgeon, I
know not, being wholly unacquainted with his education, by which at Paris one
is obliged to be Apprentice four years to a Master-surgeon of Paris, and
afterward examined: or if he has attained to his profession with some Master
abroad, he is to serve three years in one of the Hospitals of Paris before he
can be admitted Master-surgeon of Paris. Neither is this French man, according
to my information, received among the Company of Surgeons at London as a forain
Brother: So that if he was not a Master-surgeon of Paris, or other great City,
nor yet a foreign Brother in England, I judge it was a great presumption in him
to offer to dress so great a person as his Lordship.

6. However, he has the rereputation of a Surgeon here, which any French
Lacquey, having only served a Barber ten or twelve months, and coming into
England provided with a Pot of Turpentine, a Lancet, and a stock of impudence,
shall never miss of, viz. of the repute of a famous Surgeon lately come out of
France. By the first ingredient he is to cure you of the Chaude Piss; by the
second, of the Fever; and by the third ingredient it is he makes you believe he
is as great a Physician as he is a Surgeon; whereas in effect, he is only a
Surgeon of the three Ingredients.

7. The first Physician sent for, was my self, having served his Lordship in
that capacity seven or eight years; but not being in Town, Dr. Polyphemus his
assistance was desired, who immediately prescribed Clysters, Ointments,
Fomentations, Cordials, and what not, to fill up the Sheet, in order to remove,
or at least to appease the violent pain of the left side in the lower part of
the Belly, among Physicians termed the Hypogastrick region. What the
Prescriptions contained, the Doctor's own Apothecary knows best; neither can I
speak further of them, than that in the time of four and twenty hours, or
somewhat longer, the Bill amounted to three pounds odd shillings.

8. Dr. Polyphemus observing the storm of Symptoms to increase upon him, in
point of prudence did not judge it convenient to see himself sole Pilot in a
Sea where so many Sands and Rocks might possibly environ him, and he not
perceive 'em; he therefore pressed that some more able Head-pieces might be
joined to his, by which means, if a Shipwreck should happen, they could readily
excuse one another; it being customary to many Physicians, first to consult
their own reputation and profit, and next to that, the welfare of their
Patients. To answer that indication, Dr. Timon and the Ephesian Doctor were
called in. The first thing in debate was, what parts were hurt; for the
discovery of which, they commanded their French Surgeon to make his soundings,
which he performed not by the Probe, but by his Fingers, screwing one or two of
them into the Wound, and turning them round: upon the forcing them out again
certifi'd his Principals, that the Peritonaeum was divided, his Finger having
grated quite round and round the Perforation, and so conseqvently the Sword
must have passed through the hollow of the Belly. Whereupon the eloquent Dr.
Polyph. according to the usual custom of his Polyglot, did discharge himself
in a most elegant Harangue, (which some in Burlesque term, prating, a quality
more becoming the Stage, than a Patients Bedside.) The substance was, That
Wounds are more or less dangerous according to the parts that are hurt;
therefore it were highly incumbent upon them in this conjuncture to make use of
their best Anatomical craft; in which particular the learned Dr. Timon, by his
industrious and most minute dissections of Animals and their parts, as Heads,
Plucks, Dogs, Cats, at Oxford (humane Carcasses being very rare there) has
acquired so great a share ( as appears in his egregious piece de C.) that he
might with right challenge the dignity of Speaker in that little Council, whose
determination then was: First, That the Liver was not hurt. Second, That the
Sword slid over the Guts (being slippery) under the Peritonaeum. Further this
Deponent says not.

9. Next Dr. Polyphemus flung in his Anatomical Talent, implying the external
coat of the Colon to be raced by the Point of the Sword. Moreover, That the
Sword did not pass under the bowels, (a sort of expression I never expected
from any Physician) and consequently that the Mesentery escaped being pierced.

10. The Doctor of Ephesus, then not a Fellow, nor indeed so much as a
Candidate, spoke last, and least, and closed with them both in a concedo totum.
Should I pass by this last Doctor's care, I should eclipse his merit: For
though every night either one of the Surgeons, Apothecary, or their men, were
pressing to watch with his Lordship, yet the Doctor's passionate care did often
exclude them, to prefer himself to sit up all night; for which service he was
ever saluted next Morning with three Guinies, besides Pipes, Tobacco, Wine,
Ale, and paying the Apothecary for the Opium, which was usually given when the
Doctor watched.

11. The French-Surgeon (who has the honor of being called Dr. Polyph. his
Surgeon, whether from following his Coach, or from being his Tributary, I know
not) had the boldness to say, in the presence of two Noblemen, and before the
Physicians faces, The Doctor be all mistaken, it be neider de Liver, neider de
Gut, neider de Bladder; but it be de Kiddenay be hurt; and did undertake to
prove it mathematically, viz. The Sword entered just under the short Ribs on the
right side, which is one Angle; thence passed thwart over to the Kidde^^y,
which makes another Angle; whence again the Point might easily be retorted to
the Groin, which compleats the third Angle: so that here you have a Wound made
in a Triangle; adding, that if the Point of the Sword should not have reached
the Groin, by consent of parts the pain might very well have been communicated
from the Kidney thither. I confess had he not smiled when he delivered this
impertinency, I could not have inferred him a rational Animal from his
discourse, but only from his Risibility; and for that reason have not thought
it seemly to insert the least Letter of his Name among those so eminently
learned men, as are mentioned, and to be mentioned in this Narrative.

12. Still more Eyes were required; and to that end Dr. W. was invited into
their Conclave; of whose sharp-sighted ingeny nothing was less doubted than a
clear discovery of the seat and cause of those pains that continually tortured
this Noble person. Anatomy had often showed him that the left Vreter commonly
took its way not far off from that region, within whose circumference the
forementioned pains were limited; the difficulty of Urine thereunto being
added, whereby his Lordship was at intervals much incommoded, were Arguments
sufficient enough to induce him to believe the left Vreter to be pierced
through.

13. Affairs daily appearing in a worse dress than other, it was prudently
resolved among the forementioned experienced and learned Doctors, that since in
all appearance a fatal determination would suddenly (in their opinions) happen,
that to render their frustraneous consultations more authentic, it was highly
necessary to admit into the Cabal Mr. Pres. the Fountain of Physic, and Father
to the Family of Physicians; likewise Dr. Nemo, their elder Brother and Elect,
whose deep learning is so universally noted, that his abode cannot be unknown
to any that shall but cast an eye upon the Frontispiece of that elaborate
Dispensatory of the last Edition. By these, whatever had been done by the
others before, was ratified and confirmed; and whatever hereafter should be
acted, done, or performed, should also be approved and corroborated by them. So
that it might seem not a little strange to hear people talk of miscarriages,
errors, and I know not what other discourses concerning the preceding
Physicians, here being the greatest and undeniable Authority to bear them out;
therefore this may be an Item to all persons, that if any of their Relations,
as Father, or Wife, should happily die under the care of such or such a
Physician, not to mutter or mumble that they miscarried, or might have been
recovered, or the like; because the Physician (if legal, as they call it)
acts cum privilegio; and it shall be ratified at any time that they died
learnedly; and this in Law is adjudged to be a competent satisfaction.

14. Though several parts were respectively by these great men in their
scrutiny proposed to be affected, as you have read; yet in the whole their
counsel cannot be deemed to be divided, no more than when any thing is supposed
to be lost, it is determined by the seekers to look for it in places (though
never so distant and absurd) as well where it is not, as where it is: and so it
was in this case, especially, when his Lordships Relation, out of curiosity
hiding her self behind the Curtains in the Room where the Consultation was
held, heard them conclude thus: Let the pain be in this part, that, or the
other part, let us order a Clyster, for that can do no hurt: and so it was
unanimously carried; and for this advice several Guinees were distributed,
which however can hardly be said that it was respondent to the new Motto, Come,
let us prescribe for our Fees.

15. In the next grand meeting, according to the account I had from the same
person of Honor, it was held necessary to advise Barley-water for the
Patient's ordinary drink; for which care the like number of Guinees was
presented: and for a third Consultation, where Milk and Water was agreed on,
they were rewarded with such another sum. So you may observe with what care and
mature deliberation Medicines were particularly advised one by one, and not
thronged in by numbers; yet alas!

Saepe etenim docta plus valet art malum. 16. But Reader, be not transported
in your amazement at the extraordinary industry of these Physicians, in
pitching upon such simple (that is, single) Medicines, as were just before
mentioned to you, when two other Physicians of the Cabal did by far outvie them
in their care, in prescribing a Pippin roasted to their Patient for his every
nights supper; and to show of what importance the preparation of it is, they
fell into a serious debate, whether it ought to be roasted in a brown Paper, or
a Vine-leaf. The Contest grew high, though at last agreed upon the Vine-leaf,
as being more medicinal. Likewise in the case of my Lord, about a month before
his decease, it was thought necessary to call in two of the learnedest
Physicians of London, who having taken an exact inspection of the Disease, and
particulaly examined all my Prescriptions, did positively aver, that the
Disease and Causes could be no other than what I had discovered them to be, and
the applications expressed in the Bills to be very proper: Furthermore they
desired me to retire with them into the next Room to consult; which I excused,
alleging, that it would be more convenient for them both only to consult
together, to have their free scope, and prescribe what they thought fit, that
his Lordship's Relations and others might see what they could advise, whether
it should be the same, or different, or something more than what was in use
then, which on purpose I kept concealed from them. They wrote down, 1. An
Hypnotick (or sleeping) Potion. 2. A Paregorick Liniment. 3. An Anodyne and
Traumatick Glyster. 4. A Vulnerary Decoction. This done, his Lordship's
Relation demanded the Resolves of their Consult; which being expressed to her,
she was pleased to render this Answer: As for the Hypnotick, that in the
opinion of all people has been adjudged to be the principal cause of my Lord's
ruin. Touching the Ointment, there is one made use of now, which is seldom
applied without success. A Vulnerary Drink also is daily taken, by virtue of
which my Lord was (not long since) so well recovered, as to enable him to go
forth two months together. A Glyster is given every afternoon, or at least
every other day, the effect of which has been sufficiently approved. Wherefore
if you have thought upon nothing else, I conceive that the Medicines that are
at present made use of, ought rather to be continued, than to run the risque of
others, though of the same kind; and so I thank you for your pains and
trouble. But that for which I produced this instance, was once more to offer to
your view the great caution that is ever concomitant to the Learned in their
joint advises: for upon my return into the Consult-room, I found the two
Doctors at some variance; the one preferring brown Sugar to be dissolved in the
Glyster last spoken of, and the other striving hard for Sugar Candy.

17. Before I arrive to the recital of the practical attempts of these grand
Physicians, let us pause a while upon the variety of their Sentiments touching
the parts hurt. The Anatomical Physician in his Essay, declares with a pensive
gravity, that the Liver was not hurt; which, considering only the passage of
the Sword, and the posture his Lordship stood in when the Wound was given, (a
circumstance necessarily to be considered) was easily determined. My Lord's
Adversary standing upon a high guard, with his Sword-arm straight extended, his
Lordship made a Pass upon the Second (being the only thrust the other lay
open to) with a full allonge; upon which his Adversary took time, by dropping
his Point, and pursuing it with a thrust on the tiers, by which the Sword
happened to enter a little below the short Ribs on the right side, and passed
thwart downwards to the inside of the left Hip; so that he holding up his
Wrist, and turning the Point of his Sword down, and thereupon making a Pass
with an allonge upon his Lordship, standing in the posture aforesaid, must
necessarily have mist the Liver, and passed through the Mesentery between the
small Guts downwards; whereas if one standing on his guard in somewhat a higher
posture, had received a quart thrust made straight, and the Sword had entered a
little below the short Ribs on the right side, and had passed directly thwart
over, then the Liver could not have escaped being wounded; and in all
probability the Colon and the Spleen also would have been hurt (supposing the
Sword had passed quite through) or if it had descended only a little
downwards, then the Kidney indeed might have been hurt, as the Frenchman
inconsiderately asserted. So that you may observe how requisite it is to take
notice of the circumstances. In fine, I conceive that that learned Dr. was too
short (I crave his excuse for the expression) in his discovery, there being
other parts hurt then not thought on.

18. He that suspected the Colon to be touched, must also have inferred, that a
Wound in that part, though in the external Tunick, turning into an Ulcer, would
soon have perforated the other Coats of that Gut; and consequently Blood and
Matter issuing out at the stool, would have been evident signs of it; besides,
the Excrements every time passing by, whether naturally, or by Glyster, must
also have occasioned inflammations and smart pains, and probably some part of
the Excrements would now and then have been thrown into the capacity of the
Abdomen. If according to the opinion of the other Physician, one of the Vreters
had been divided, there must soon have ensued a Dropsy upon it.

19. The Chirurgical part was performed by two Frenchmen, whose devoires were
to heal the Wound of the right Hypochondre by several intentions, viz. by
stopping the bleeding, digesting, deterging, incarning, and cicatrizing;
whereby on purpose it was kept open for many days, though against the rules of
the most experienced Surgery; there happening, as commonly does, 1. Choleric
Vomitings. 2. Smart gripes of the Guts. 3. A Wound-feaver; and all this,
besides other Symptoms, by keeping the Wound open, through which the crude
nitro-salin air entering into the Body, causes such an impression and
alteration on the Guts and Bowels, as produces those mischiefs aforesaid.
Moreover, if the Remedies to remove such ill attendants be not properly
applied, then there is an addition of new concomitants, whereby at last the
Patient is obliged to yield to his unfortunate Period, and this by the first
mistake of curing a Wound: so that it is in Chirurgical practice, as it is in
the way of reasoning, Admisso uno absurdo, conceduntur mill.

20. Wounds are kept open either for to give passage in extracting some
extraneous Body, as a Bullet, Splinter, a piece of a Sword, or Lance; or to
purge extravasate Blood, or other Juices, that Nature may convert into an
Ichor, Sanies, Pus, or other matter at the Orifice of the Wound. Now in this
case of his Lordship, whatever Blood, or other matter should be supposed to
have been extravased or issued out of the Vessels, disseminated through those
parts that were hurt, it must necessarily through its natural propensity of
weight have descended down into the Pelvis, or bottom of the Abdomen, granting
the Peritonaeum to be divided: if so, how could it rationally be expected, that
the foresaid matter lodging in the bottom of the Belly, should be evacuated at
the upper part, unless the Patient were hung every day by the Heels with his
Head downwards? neither then would it be feasible, in regard that the Epiploon
and the Guts would by such a counternatural position cram and fill up the
Orifice of the Wound, by which the forementioned matter would be intercepted.
Another inconvenience that is consequent to penetrating Wounds of the upper
part of the Belly, is the Epiploon, or the Guts, or both, do ever after upon
Coughing, or by lying on that side, or otherways, make such a Protuberance
there, as is observed to happen upon ruptures, or Hernia's; which also upon
this way of cure befell his Lordship, being thereby rendered subject upon the
least Cough, or lying on his right side, to be extremely incommoded with a
Protuberance of the bigness of a Fist, more or less; for which we advised a
Truss, such as I had seen another wear before, being wounded in the Belly, and
ill cured.

21. The last, and for what I know, the greatest mischief, whereof this way of
cure was the occasional cause (a term best understood by the three first named
Physicians) was, that nature was diverted from her work, namely of protruding
the extravase Blood, that might be suspected to be fallen down into the Cavity
of the Abdomen, toward the Groin, or other external part, to be converted into
an Imposthume, as on the like occasion has been often observed. 2. Of discussing
through the Pores, or carrying off the Gleet (which otherwise soon turns into a
Virus) by Urine, as daily remarques on such cases do sufficiently evince. 3. Of
thickning and concocting the nervous juice (that by a Wound or puncture of a
Nerve is rendered thin and acrimonious) by Natures Balsamic virtue, whereby a
puncture is soudered and consolidated. Of all these three intentions, I say,
Nature was diverted, by keeping the Wound open; which occasioned unsufferable
Gripes, Vomitings, and a Wound-feaver; by which means the spirits were put into
a tumult and outrage, dispersed into several parts, which otherwise would in
three or four days have easily healed both the Puncture and external Wound.

22. I am not only to tell you how this accident ought not to be cured, but
also am obliged to express the manner how his Lordship in probability might
have been recovered in fewer hours than he survived Weeks. The external Wound,
for the reasons alleged before, ought to have been cured by the first
intention only, which is Agglutination or Consolidation, whereunto a Wound is
easily promoted, by applying the lips together, and retaining them so, either
by Bandage, Suture-plaster, or Suture, according to the position of the part,
and circumstances of the discontinuity; supposing there was no extraordinary
Hemorrhage, or expectation of extraneous Bodies to be extracted, or matter to
be repurged, Tendons and Nerves to be recently hurt, so as to have received no
prejudice from the ambient Air, or its own Gleet, which immediately turns into
a Virus, and the whole Wound fresh, to which its own Blood often serves for the
best Gluten and Balsam. But if by long retardation the extravase Blood should
have been coagulated, then it must be washed off with a little warmed red Wine,
and immediately upon it the Lips are to be closed.

23. In case of a Haemorrhage in a fresh Wound, happening upon the division of
some of the capillar or greater Arteries or Veins, make use only of this
styptick Liquor, viz. Put three parts of Colcothar, one part of common Allom,
and one of Sal Prunellae, powdered and mixed together, into a Boltshead,
affusing on them as much Spirit of Wine not rectified, as may swim atop two
Inches; digest them in Ashes eight and forty hours, or longer, then decant the
Liquor; with this wet some dry Lint, formed into a loose Pledget, and apply it
to the Wound so, that each particle thereof may assuge some part of the
evaporation of the Liquor: this being continued until the Haemorrhage be
sufficiently checked; then close the Lips, applying the same Pledget atop, newly
wetted again, and put a Compress on each side of the Lips, about one Inch more
or less distant from them; and over that make a Bandage according to the
structure of the part and figure of the Wound.

24. Possibly what concerns simple fleshy Wounds, their cure by the first
intention may universally be approved to be the best and speediest, barring the
exceptions hinted to before, and some few others; but it is much scrupled where
Nerves or Tendons are punctured or divided, where Gleet, if imprisoned by a
sudden consolidation of the circumjacent wounded fleshy parts, does cause most
exquisite Pains, Inflammations, Imposthumes, Convulsions, and sometimes
Syncopees, and upon their continuation, Death.

25. Surgery is in no part less improved than in this particular, which though
punctures of Nerves or Tendons daily happen upon unskilful bleedings, yet
allowing, they dilate the cuticular Orifice to give vent to the Gleet, sanies,
or other matter that may be engendered, and so endeavor to cure the Wound by
several intentions, notwithstanding it is frequently remarqued, that few escape
without great tortures, large tumors, lameness, or the loss of the whole Limb,
and sometimes of Life; and all this by reason the Gleet is not suddenly stopped,
the Puncture healed, and the Air kept out, by a speedy consolidation of the
supercubant wounded sanguine parts.

26. Now to prevent all these mischiefs, and to answer those various
indications by one single intention, I will do the Public that service, to
impart a Medicine so penetrable as to reach a wounded Nerve, Tendon, or any
nervous parts, though in the remotest recess of the Body, and so conglutinative
and balsamic, that it will stop the Gleet, and consolidate the divided Nerve,
and other wounded parts, in an interval of time so short, that only your trial
of it can induce you to believe.

The Medicine is the following Balsam.

Take Oil of Therebinthin what proportion you please, which by gentle
evaporation in Sand reduce to a Balsam; add to it as much Colchotar of Vitriol
as will serve to impastate it into the consistence of an Electuary; hereon pour
as much Spirit of Wine, once rectified, as will swim atop five or six Fingers
breadth; digest it in Sand, until the Spirit of Wine be sufficiently
impregnated or clogged with the Balsam; then decant it, pour on the remaining
Balsam the same measure of Spirit of Wine, which being sufficiently digested,
decant it. Pour the decantations into a Glass-body, fasten the Head to it, and
abstract the Spirit of Wine in Balneo M. until what remains in the Glass-body
be of the consistency of a Balsam or thick O^l.

You may observe, if you make use of compound Balsam of Sulphur, instead of the
Balsam of Therebinthin, impastate it with the Colchotar, and extract it as
aforesaid, it may be preferred in some cases.

The Application is in manner following: The discontinuity of the Nerve, or
nervous part, not being very remote from the surface of the Body, you are to
drop a few drops warmed into the Orifice of the Wound, having first, by washing
with warmed red Wine, or gentle compression, removed the coagulated Blood out
of the Wound, that may intercept the penetration of the Balsam to the parts
intended; afterward uniting the Lips, impose upon them a Pledget armed with a
few drops of the Balsam; and with, or without Compresses, according to the
condition of the Wound make your Bandage. But if a nervous part be supposed
injured in a more retired situation of the Body, a proportionable number of
drops of the same Balsam is to be instilled into a small quantity of white
Sugar, and then dissolved in a draught of red Wine, or vulnerary sanative
Decoction, which taken inwardly twice or thrice a day, will soon reduce the
Patient to a perfect recovery.

What I have here proposed, is to be apprehended only to relate to the manner
of cure, by the first intention; in the mean while, if the Patient be
plethorick, costive, or attended with particular Symptoms; bleedings,
evacuations, and other means, are left to the discretion of the Physician, or
Surgeon, to be administered according to the emergencie of the occasion.

Though among Vulnerary Medicines these beforementioned are the best I know,
yet the many experiments of his Majesty's Vulnerary Drops on Wounds, and some
penetrating also, (which in point of danger might seem to exceed that of his
Lordships in the beginning) so speedily and safely cured by them, is an evident
demonstration, that it is the most excelling of Medicines that ever was
invented, considering how pleasant it is, and amicable to all the Spirits, and
yet so extraordinary penetrating and sanative. These Royal Vulnerary Drops were
procured by the Right Honorable my Lord H. and sent from him to his Lordship by
Monsieur, etc. Which being signified to the Physicians, after they had
sufficiently abused the said Monsieur, etc. for his pains, they declared it was
a Medicine they did not understand; they knew not what it was, and therefore
would not give their consent it should be used; adding withal this ^die sort of
menace, That if his Lordship did take it, they would come at him no more (Would
to God they had not) provided my Lord had only made use of the foresaid
Vulnerary Drops. I am assured, by all what I understand of the circumstances of
that Wound, and the manner how it ought to have been cured, (which I have
already expressed to you) it was very possible he might have been living at
this hour, and have given his Gracious Majesty thanks for saving his life, by
the service that a Nobleman of his vigorous years, and extraordinary
qualifications might enable him to. But then we should have lost our Fees and
Reputation, for not performing the Cure. This puts me in mind of a French
Surgeon at the Hague, (a sort of people to be found almost in all places, where
the price of bleeding exceeds two pence half penny) who being met by a friend
in the street, was inquired of whither he was going in so great haste; the other
replied, To get a brave Gelding, or a fat Ox, out of a Gentleman's Leg; Which
being but superficially hurt, he to accomplish his design, did by sharp
gnawing Ointments and Plasters, purposely widen the Wound, until at length by
his tampering a Gangrene happened, and thereupon his Leg was taken off below the
Knee, which soon after put a period to his life. Now had this Wound been cured
by the first intention, in two or three days, then the Monsieur would have been
disappointed of his fat Ox; or had he suffered another Surgeon more knowing and
expert than himself to be called in to his assistance, which by the rules of
honesty and conscience he ought to have done, when he found himself in an
error, and the Patient in apparent danger; but, thought he, then his male
practice, his ignorance, and want of skill would be detected, especially should
one be called in that was not of his College at Paris, and possibly one that
might have known the Constitution of this Patients Body for several years. No,
says the Frenchman, it is better for my Reputation that this man, and a
hundred more, die under my hands, than that I suffer one to go from me not
cured, to be recovered by another; for the Grave hides a multitude. But would
the Patients Relations have had five or six of his College at Paris sent for,
these he would gladly consult with, (for many Shoulders can easier carry a
Corpse to the Churchyard than one) and the method is usually thus. Brother
(says he in ordinary) I holp you out the other day at a dead lift, and you, and
you, and you; here is a Patient whose Leg is gangrened, he will die; I have
made such and such applications: Then they conclude one and all, this Gangrene
was occasioned by the Patient's ill diet and disorders. Yes, Brother, says
another Cox-comb, this Gangrene is Hereditary, his Father died of a Gangrene in
the Kidneys; you have done what man could do, he is a dead man; but continue
still the same applications, until he is certainly dead, lest another should
come in and set him up again; for that would prove a great scandal to our whole
Society.

Before I recede from my Narrative, give me leave to prevent your suspecting it
fabulous, by making appear, that it is very possible for a Frenchman, though
only a Corn-cutter, a Shaver, or Blood-letter, to pass for an excellent
Surgeon. First he shall show you a rare show of glittering Instruments; then
charm your Ears with prating of hard words; by fleaing of a Dog or Cat before
two or three Novices as Witnesses, declares himself an Anatomist: If he mangles
a Muscul into two parts, he triumphs in the Character of being the greatest
Anatomist in the world, in regard he has first discovered all Musculs to have
two Bellies; whereas, poor fellow, besides a false experiment or two upon the
ductus Chyliferus, or transfusing of Blood, is utterly ignorant of the whole
System of Anatomy: and lastly, with a Stentorophonia, howls it out, he is one
of the College of Paris, which engrosses all; and therefore needs to give no
other account, though he be never so great a Quidam. The same arrogance is
assumed by the Physicians of the faculty of Paris, which is the College also,
who therefore suffer none to mount on Asses, or rather Mules, to visit Patients
in the City, but themselves; whereas those other Physicians that are graduated
at Monpellier, or other famous Universities, have only the liberty of
practicing in the Suburbs; so that if a person of Quality should happen to fall
sick in the City of Paris, he is obliged to live and die under one of the
Physicians of the faculty; and if by Prognostic he is sentenced to die by one
of them, if he sends for twenty more, he will get no reprieve. For this reason,
many Gentlemen, whose sickness will permit them to remove, make choice of the
Fauxbourgs, where they may advise with what Physicians they please, whose
Learning and Experience does not consist in a mere formality of being of the
College of Paris, but it is derived from their close studies, and industry in
attaining to every Branch of the Art of Physic, as Anatomy, Pathologie,
Surgery, Botanicks, Pharmacy, Chemistry, traveling to most of the renowned
Universities of Europe; visiting the Hospitals in all places, and observing
cases, and fishing out of Professors what it is possible for them to learn. So
that it has been often observed, that those that could not be cured in the City,
were easily recovered in the Suburbs. This being represented to his Majesty of
France, it was judged very injust, that a Company of formal Fops should, by
their invincible Bylaws, exclude so many Learned men, and by that disable them
for practicing; and therefore, whoever he be that lies sick in Paris, must
either be killed or cured by one of them, and be mulcted according to his
discretion.

To remedy this, though his said Majesty would not deprive them of their
ancient Privileges, because conferred on them by his Ancestors, yet thought it
expedient to erect a foreign College, into which all Physicians that were
graduated as Doctors in other Universities, were incorporated, and privileged
to practice in the City, as well as Suburbs; which seemed to be a Balance to
the faculty of Paris; by which means if male practice was committed by one of
the latter, it was immediately taken notice of by some or other of the former,
and complaint made to a superior power; and thus vouching for one another, and
killing cum previlegio, was at an end. Another benefit that redounded from
instituting a forain College, was, that they were ever outvying one another in
Learning, Experience, Cures: In fine, they were a diametrical control to one
another; a sick man might be sure he should not be slattered, deceived, or
imposed upon in his Distemper, or Purse, because there were their opposites (I
mean in emulation) ready at hand to be called in upon them.

This new Constitution was likewise very pleasing to many Gentlemen, that had
three or four Sons; the Eldest claiming the Lands jure Haereditario, one of the
rest possibly might be intended for Physic, on whose education in Learning,
Traveling, and taking his Degrees, there must be a good sum of money expended,
and probably all his Portion; now that this Physician so honorably educated,
should have the privilege denied him of practicing in the capital City of his
Country, by a Society of avaritious Monopolizing Physicians, because he will
not repeat or take his degrees over again among them, pay 3 or 4 thousand
Livres, stoop to the meanest of them, though his Juniors, and cohere with them
in all their diabolical vouchings, errors, and ill practices, was one of the
severest things, and worst of customs imaginable. Neither was this all; but
whoever was admitted among them, was to swear, that he would with all
artifices, interest, and power, declame all other Physicians, though duly
educated and graduated, especially those that by their Industry, Studies,
Travels, and Experience, equaled the best of their College, he was obliged to
Mountebank, and call them Quacks, Ignorants, or any other vile name, that might
render them contemptible to the people, to prevent them in their Bud for ever
coming to any considerable employment in Physic.

The people at length grew incensed, and made it a grievance of the Nation,
that a Colledge-physician should, beyond their Prince, have a power of life and
death over them, without being liable to an account for it: Neither did their
solicitude rest here, but would often surmise, what if a brave spirited
Nobleman, or the Prince himself, should be taken ill, his life and their
welfare must depend upon the conjectural opinions of three or four of these
fellows; whereof if one by a hired wilful mistake, error, or ignorance, does
act perniciously, the rest will readily complie with their Leader, unless
controuled and balanced by others of a more sincere and judicious temper. No
wonder then, that these men had contracted the Character of Physicians of the
three S. viz. Son, meaning thereby a Glyster: Seignee, Bleeding: and Sena,
intimating Purging; expressing, as if they could do nothing else, but blow Wind
in their Guts, bleed, and scowre them. It was not keeping a Coach, and living
in Grandeur, that would longer persuade people, they knew a whit the more for
that; comparing them to some Merchants, who by living splendid and high, had
procured a great credit, though looking into their bottom, they found them not
worth a Sous marc. Therefore it is easily believed, that the erecting a forain
College was a great satisfaction to the Subject. But it is time I should have
done describing those Colledge-fripons, Fripnode College, a proverb, vid.
Cotgrave's Dictionary.
and pass over to the remainder of my task, where now I am arrived, to record
the Prescriptions of the learned Physicians of the Universe, and chief
Members of another sort of a College famous and renowned for every thing, that
is, for aliquid in omnibus. I have already told you, that from the seventeenth
of November in the Evening, to the nineteenth in the Morning, there were
ordered Fomentations, Liniments, Cordials, etc. to be prepared by Dr. Polyph.
his own Apothecary.

November 19.
Decoct. enem. praescript. addend. theriac. Andr. zij. injiciatur statim.

Rad. lilior. alb. j. sol. malv. parietar. Mercur. althaeae, flor. melilot.
hyper. chamaemel. an. Mj. sum. centaur. absynth. M. ss. bac. laur. juniper.
sem. lini, saenugr. an. ss. coq. in Aq. commun. q. s. ad lb j. addendo circa
sinem coct. vin. alb. lbss. Coletur pro fotu.

Ingredientia pro fotu (expresso liquore) contusa, in sacculis laneis
applicentur inguini dolenti, illinendo prius sacculum unguento nervino.

Persistat in usu Iulap. Cordialis and decoction.

Decocti pro sotu xij. mellis mercurialis, and rosacei, an j. ol. hyperici j.
Theriac. Londinensis ss. sacchar. vnlgaris ij.

T. C. W. C. R. L. Me.

What this last Prescription was intended for, they forgot to set down; whether
for a Glyster, (which is most likely) or a Fomentation, I know not; but this
being their Mornings exercise, I presume they were in haste.

Note, That all these following Prescripts are transcribed exactly from the
autography of their Bills, both in respect of their Latinisms and Pointing.

November 19.
Aq. ceras. nigror. viij. aq. epidemic. ij. aq. poeoniae compos. i. Sir.
Caryophill. and de succo citri an. vj.

m. f. Iulap. Cardiac.

Decoct. pro syrupo althaeae lbij. sir. e 5 radic. iij.

m. capiat tepid. saepius.

T. C. W C R L

In the Evening they marked down these following:

Aq. cerasorum nigrorum ij ss. Aq. Epidemicae ss. sir. de meconio vj. m. cap.
hor. somni tepid.

Repetatur idem haust. post 6 horas, omisso sir. de Meconio, and ejus loco
substituend. syrup. Caryophil. and de succo citri an. iij.

Aq. ceras nigror. viij. Aq. Epidemic. iij. pulv. perlar. j ss. sach.
crystallin. vj.

m. f. Iulap. de quo cap. cochl. v. vel vj. 3tia quoque hora and deinceps ad
libitum.

T. C. WCRL Me.

I perceive they begin to be puzzled, in regard they fly so early to their
Hypnotic or Sleeping Drink; they cannot conjecture what that pain in the Groin
means.

Novem. 20.
Mann. opt. iij. Sal prunell. j. dissolvantur in lb jss. liquoris poscetici.
Colaturae addendo olei Amygdalarum dulc. recentis iiij. capiat iiij. per vicem
secunda quaque hora donec operetur.

Pergat in usu Iulapii, fotus and sacculorum.

T. C, GC. RL. Me.

Repetatur haustus hypnoticus H. S. cum Sir. de Meconio. Another sleeping
Potion.

Praesto sint enemata duo injicienda, si opus fuerit.

Permittantur reliqua judicio Medici praesentis.

Novem. 21.
Repetat. enema hor. 3tia pomeridiana. Persistat in usu Iulap. Cordialis perlat.

T. C. WCRL

Novem. 21.
Vng. Nervin. vj. Spir. Lavendul. compos. zj. M. probe agitent. in mortar.
marmoreo, and redigant. in Linimentum, quo inung. pars femoris interior. and
inguinis.

Sint in promptu Iulap perlat

Sint in promptu cras mane Mann. and ol. Amygd. an ij. seorsum.

Sal Prunel. and Crem. Tart. an. j. seorsum

Sumat haust hypnotic heri parat hora somni hac nocte. Repetat. enem.

T. C. WCRL Me.

November. 22.
Aq. ceras. nigror. menth. an. j. diascord. j. pulv. e chel. compos. j.
malaxentur in mortar. and add aq. Epidemic. cinam. hordeat. an. j. sir flor.
paralys. ss. m. f. haust. sumend. calidiuscule hac nocte.

Praesto sint 2 enemata injiciend prout opus suerit.

T. C. W. CRL

Novem. 23.
Sint in promptu enemata injicienda semel aut bis in die, prout opus suer it,
persistat in usu Iulap. perlat. Cap. haust. hypnot. cum diacod. alternis noct.
si opus fuerit.

T. C. WCRL

Novem. 24.
Pil. Russi ss. Sal succini gr vj Elix proprietat Paracels. q. s. f pil. iiij
sumend hac nocte sub somnum.

Mann. Calabrin. j. Crem. tartar. ss. dissolut in haust posset sumat quam
primum evigilaverit.

W. CRL

December. 1.
Limacum hortens. mundat. lb i.ss. salsaeparillae medullos vj. folior.
beccabungae, agrimoniae, Taraxaci anam. j. flor. cichorei, borragin. genistae
anam j. cortic. duorum Limonum, totidemque Aurantior. recens decisor. C. C.
eborisque raspat. ana iij. santali albi and citrini ana vj. Glycyrrhiz. ij.
Incisis and contusis affunde Lactis vaccini recens emulcti lbix. and vini
Malagani very lbij. sact aque vj horarum maceratione, destillentur usque ad
siccitatem. Liquor moderate dulcoretur, bibaturque ad iv. ter in die. G* C.

December. 2.
Mittat. sanguis e brachio ad viij statim; but out of which arm, was forgotten.

fotus prius praescript. lb iiij. ut atur ut prius. Applic. hypogastric and
perinaeo ante and post clysterem.

fotus praescript x ol. lini ij. ol. hyper. j. Syrup. Althaeae ij. vitell. ovi
unius M. injiciatur a misso sanguine.

Aq. ceras. nigror. ij ss. Sir Althaeae mecon an. vj. Aq Cinam hordeat ij. m
cap hor somni.

T. C. W. C R L. Postscript.

Aq. ceras nigror. viij. aq. Epidemic. Cinam hordeat an. ij. Sir. Caryophil.
and de succo citri an j. f Iulap. cap. cochl. vj. ad libitum

Hordei integr j. liquirit ss. coq. in aq. font lb ij ad lb j ss f Colatur. cui
add. sir. Althaeae and de Nymphaea an j bibat ut libet.

December. 3.
Ol. amygd. d. ij. sir. althaeae and de 5 radicib. an j. sach. crystalini ss. m
f linctus perfectisme mixtus. sumat cochl ij. in haust liquor. posset calidi
3tia vel 4ta quaque hora. Injiciatur quamprimum enema. and praesto sint 2 alia
in noctem.

Persistat in usu fotus cum sacculo applicand. fiat post fotum applic ung ex
ung. nervin and sp. lavendul compos. Which will make a Liniment, but not an
Unguent.

T. C. W. C R L,

December. 4.
Sumat statim part 4 tam mann and ol. Amygd. d. solut. in decoct. pectoral
praescripto Sumat. part. 2 post horam and sic. deinceps singulis horis interea
urgente dolor colico repetat enem. and sacculi. Excellent Grammatical Latin!

T. C. W C R L

They returned at night, and prescribed in form following:

Repet at hypnoticum hac nocte.

Aq. fl. Camemel. Epidemic. an. iiij. Syrup. de corticib. Citri. j ss. M. f
Iulap. cap. cochl. iiij. alternis horis.

T. C. W. C R L.

December. 5.
Fl. Camemel melilot. sambuc hyperic. an pug ij. semin lini. aneth. ij. coq. in
aq. commun. q. s. ad xij. colato liquori add tinctur. castorei j. Theriac.
Androm. iij. Ol. rutac. camemel. an j. m. f. enema. injiciend. hor. 2da post
meridiem.

Theriac. Londinens. ij. Theriac. Androm. j. m f Empl. add ol. Camemel. chym.
gt xx. applicetur Abdomini inferiori sinistro.

T. C. W C R L

December. 5.
Aq. flor. camemeli, Ceras. nigr. an. j. Aq. Steph. ij. Sir. de mecon. ss.
Laud. liquid gut. 12 m* capiat hac nocte hora somni.

Sir. nostr. Balsamic. vj. capiat bis, ter, quaterve in die aq. lact is
praescr. iij ss. sir Bals. c. 1.

December. 7.
Repetat. hac nocte haustus Cardiac. heri praescr. Sit semper in promtu enema.
and fotus. Pergat in usu Apozematis. Repetatur linctus ex ol. Amyg. etc.

December. 9.
Pulv. sen. comp. major. ss. rhab. pulv. salis prunel. Christ. tart. an. j. ol.
chapter nuc. mose. gut. ij. Sir. de althaea s. q. f. Elect. molle. capiat statim,
and superbibat jusculi momentum. Repet. linctus. Sit in promptu Enema.

December. 9.
Decoct. Emol. lb j. Mell. Merc. sacch. vulg. ana ij. Elect. lenitiv. j.
Terebinth. vitell. ovi solut. z ss. f. enema. Sit in promptu injiciend. vesperi
si opus fuerit.

December. 11.
Milleped. recent. no. 50. Terantur in mortario marm. sensim affundendo
Apozematis praes. 4. f. expressio. Capiat cras mane, and repet. hora quinta
pomerid. calidiuscule, and sic ad quatriduum. Et post duas horas

Opobalsami very ss. capi. die crast. in 4. Aquae praescript. cum Sir.
balsamic. Cochl. j and sic bis in die ad quatriduum. In reliquis ut ante*
Propinetur opobalsamum horis circiter duabus post haustum ex millepedibus.

December. 12.
Magmatis residui ex decocto pro fotu praescr. Contund. in mort. marmor. and
add ol. e pedibus bovinis 4. pro lb j magmatis cum vitellis quatuor ovorum* f.
Cataplasma applic. parti affect ae loco cataplasmatis ex Theriac. Land. etc.
Repetatur fotus quotidie ad horae spatium: and post fotum applic. statim
Catapl. calide and sic quotidie. Sint in promptu enemata, and pergat in
praescriptis. In the Margin was written Neats-foot-oyl with this character.

December. 15.
Labdani, Tacamahac. an. ss. empl. e mucilagini^us, and empl. e bacc^lauri an.
j ss. Picis Burg* j. Styracis liq. ij. dissolv. simul. Extend. super Alut.
applic partibus affectis.

Pulv. ^ezoardic magistral. j. Capiat hac nocte hora somnie C. 1. Iulap
Cardiac. and superbib ejusdem Cochl. 4. aut 6. Et sic ad quatuor noctes.

December. 15.
Rad. Chin* Sarsaeparil. lig. lentisc. incis and contus, an. 4 ras. c c. eboris
an. j ligni nephrit. ij. incid and contund. dein add. Aq. font* lb 12. coq.
(post debitam in B. M. infusionem) ad lb viij. Colaturae calidae infund. ad*
duas horas liquerit. Santal. alb. and rub. an. j. Cinam. confract. j. dein
denuo coletur ad usum. Sumat. 4, aut 6. alternis horis calide edulcorando
tempore usus seq. syrupi cochleari uno aut altero. Sir. Peruvian. viij.

December. 17.
Ol. Amygd. dulc. recens expressi iiij. Aqu. Stephan. and Sir. de Meconio ana
j. m. in haustum mox ab enemate rejecto propinandum.

Decoct. carmin. ix. Balsam Lucatelli 4. M. in Enema quamprimum infundendum.

Perseveret in usu tum destillati antiscorbutici cum Syrupo Balsamico, tum Ol.
Amygdal. and ejusdem Syrupi.

Mi T G G C.

December. 18.
Ol. Amygd. dulc. ij ss. Sir. de Althaea and de 5 radicibus ana ss. Aqu.
Stephani ij. M. Sumat quamprimum.

Pulver. Nephrit. magistral. 4. diluatur vini Rhenani cyatho, i.e. cochlearibus
4 vel 5 circatertiam pomeridianam.

T C, G C.

Pulv. nephrit. ante praescript. iij. dividatur in duas parts aequales, sumat.
unam quam quamprimum in haust. vini Rhenani, alteram partem quando opus fuerit,
id est, post horas 12 vel hora somni.

Ol. Amygdal. dulc. rec. expressi ij. Aqu. Stephani ij. m. capiat hora 1 post
pulverem cum vini Rhenani pauxillo, vel sine pro libitu.

T C. G C. G M.

December. 20.
Decoct. Emol. and carm. lb j. Ole. Hyperic. Rut. an. vj. Elect. e bacc. Laur.
Terebinth. Ven. vitello ovi solut. ana iij. f. enema injiciend. hora tertia vel
quarta pomerid.

Repetat. pulv. praescript. sexta quaque hora alternatim. Sint in promptu Ol.
Amygd. and Clyster. Balsam. and Sir. Balsamic. and Opobalsamum, ( I think, they
embalmed his Lordship before he was dead, for here it is all Balsam and
Balsamic) usurpanda urgente occasion methodo ante praescr.

December. 22.
Spir. Terebinth. rectific. gut. xx. Sir. de alth. de 5 rad. ana ss. m. and
quamprimum in posseti haustu propina; superbibendo Vini Rhenani haustum: and
post sex hor. repetat.

T. C. G. C.

December. 24.
Aqu. Ceras. nigr. vj. cinam. hord. and epidem. ana ij. Mar. pp ij. Sach. and
Sir. Cardiac. ana ss. m. in Iulap. unde singulis horis propinentur ij. G. C.

Infus. Emetic. ij. propinetur extemplo, superbibendo post horulam Oxymell.
Scyllit. Posseto diluti q. opus fuerit.

T. C. G. C.

December. 25.
Decoct. traumat. and pro Syrup. de Alth. ana lb j. m. and ter in die
propinentur vj. vel vij.

Pulv. Holland. ss. Sir. Alth. q. s. ut fiat mixtura mollis, gut. vj vel vij
Balsam. Capiebae condienda, and singulis auroris exhibenda, superbibendo
haustum decocti supra descripti.

Perseveret in usu enematum quoties opus fuerit.

Mi. T. C. D. W. G. C.

December. 27.
Aqu. Epidem. 4. aqu. flor. Aurant. aqu. Cinam. hord. ana ij, Sir. Caryoph. and
e succ. Citr. ana vj. M. sumat. ij. ad libitum in languoribus.

December. 28.
Pulv. Senn. comp. major. ij. Salis Absynth. gr. vj. Bals. de Capiva s. q. f*
Bolus mollis sumend. statim. Aqu. Epidem. vj. Aqu. Cin. hord* ana ij. Sir.
Caryoph. and e succ. Citr. ana vj. m. f. Iulep. Capiat ij ad libitum in
languoribus.

Man. Xsti perlat. lb ss. the Cordail Julep prescribed to day. The ass by 7 to
morrow morn. GC.

December. 28.
Conf. Alkerm. c. m. ij. Theriac. Androm. ss. Pulv. Gascon. ij. Ol. Cinam. gut.
j. Sir. Caryoph. s. q. f. Electuarium molle cum fo. auri no xij. sumat. q. nuc.
moschat. quarta quaque hora and ad libitum* in languoribus.

T C.

December. 29.
Candit Ros. rub. Consosruct. Cynorrhod. Sir. Berberor. M. f. Elect. molle, cui
add Margarit. pull. iij. Confect. Alcherm. vj. M. f. Elect. capiat quantitat.
Iugland. min. superbib. co. iiij vel v sequentis Iulepi repetendo tertia quaque
hora.

Aqu. Cerasor. nigror. citri ana iiij. Epidem. iij. Cinnamom. hord. Rosar. rub.
ana j. Sir. Caryophil. j ss. m. f. Iulepus.

Rad. Symphyti j. Ras. c. c. and eboris, ana iij. fol. millefol. m j ss. coq.
in Aqu. fontis lb ij. Colatura reponetur ad usum, cujus sumat haustum cum part.
aequal. lactis recentis permixtum, ter vel quater in die.

T C G C T W

December. 30 in the morning.
Gummi Arabic. Tragacanth. ana iij. Sacchari penidior. ss. f. pulvis in vj
parts aequales dividendus, quarum detur una mane, and altera sub vesperam
quotidie in tantillo lactis hordeat.

Summit Cupressi M. iv. albumin. ovor. conquassator. lb ss. Cinnamomi
crassiuscule triturati ij. minutim concisis affunde lactis vaccini recentis lb
iv. and destillentur organis vulgaribus ad siccitatem. Destillati capiat uncias
circiter vj statim post unamquamque pulveris supra praescripti dosin. T C G C

December. 30. at Noon.
Rhab. pulv. gr. 24. Gum. trag. Arab. Rad. Symphyt. pulv. ana gr. iij. Sir. e
ros. sic. s. q. M. f. mixtura mollis sumend. hac nocte.

T. C*

December. 30. at Night.
Sem. melon. pepon. papav. alb. ana ss. Amygd. decorticat. and incis. no. 12.
Sacchari Christ. j. Aqu. Ros. rub. ij. aqu. hord. integr. depurat. lb j. f. s.
a. Emulsio. Capiat 4 aut 5 tepide tertia quaque hora, vel insuper ad libitum.

T. C.

December. 31. Morning.
Vnguenti Comitissae iiij. Vngr. parts Lumobales. T C G C

December. 31 at Night.
Sem. Melon. Pepon. ana ss. sem. plantag. portulac acetos ana ij. sem. papar.
alb. vj. Sacch. albiss. j. Aq. Panis and aq. papav. Rhaead. ana lb j. f. s. a.
Emulsio qua utatur ut priori usus est. Rad. Symphyt. sicc. j. Gum. Arab. ss.
Sacch. albiss. vj. m. f. Pulv. subtilissimus. Sumat cochl. unum ex haustu
lactis Avenacei praescript.

T. C G C.

Jan. 4.
Aqu. meliss. Cerasor. nigr. Epidem. ana iij. aqu. mirab. j. Croc. j.
Glycyrrhiz. j. Infund. statim in frigido, and post horam unam f. Colatura, cui
add. Sir. Meliss. Caryoph. ana j. Sumat ij ss. singulis horis. Spir. CC.
rectificat. ij. capiat gut. 15 (quoties urget virium languor) ex ij ss. Iulapii.

T C.

60. Observe, that about every four hours, or a little more, there are four
Ounces of hot W^ters to be swallowed down, viz* A^ua mirabilis and Epidemica,
besides 15 drops of burning Spirit of Hartshorn, almost in every Dose, which in
24 hours will amount to a Pint and half; and an half Ounce or more of Spirit of
Hartshorn; on some occasions, enough to precipitate a well man into a Fever,
and subvert his Senses, but much more a person so much macerated as this Noble
Patient was. Probably the Doctor had amplified his experience by his Travels in
Poland or Russia, where far larger Doses of Brandy, and other sublimed Spirits,
acuated with a Spoonful of powdered Ginger, or half that quantity of Pepper,
are given.

61. But what need I, to justify the foremeant Doctor, fetch a president so
far off, when there is one nearer, in a notable instance (if true) of a
Physician, a degree higher elevated in fame than he? This Doctor was called in
(as they term it) upon another Physician, not of the College, to cure a
Patient; he no sooner saw him, but cries out, This is a sort of Asthma, which
my self and Dr. Willis first found out, and named it Asthma Convulsivum: But
it is I only have appropriated a Remedy to it. What is it, demanded the other
Gentleman? It is, quoth he, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, exhibited in the measure of
a Spoonful without any vehicle. The other replied, I dare not consent to it,
without a good proportion of liquor to dilute it. You are over-cautious, quoth
the Sal Ammoniac Doctor, leave it to me, and behold the Miracle. Nolens volens,
given it was, but the Patient freely expiring that day (which is more than he
had done many days before, his Lungs being obstructed) prevented the Medicine
of performing its effect, and the Doctor of seeing the Miracle. Had the Patient
been dissected, without doubt, they would have observed another occasional
cause, namely a very sharp cutting Ammoniac Rheum, that had inflamed, corroded,
and excoriated the Oesophagus and Stomach, and convelled the great stomachic
Nerves, whence derived this convulsive Asthma, the nerves of the Diaphragm
being likewise convelled by consent: excuse the expression of attributing the
word Convulsion to the Nerves, it being usually applied to Muscles. Now it is
apparent enough, that this Medicine did exceed the former in heat; but by the
way remember, that exhibiting it in that manner, was Authoritas Medica, not to
be imitated by every Physician, nor indeed by any, unless of very great repute,
no more than Steteruntque comae, by every Poetical Paedagogue. The relation of
this forementioned consultation was given me in the company and hearing of
twenty Physicians more, by the same Physician, whom the other was called in
upon; from whose reputation the credit of this instance is to take its measure.
But enough of this, intending to be more at large upon Miracles of this kind
performed at Paris, in a Treatise, entitled, The Conclave of Physicians, where
the subtle and polite Government of the Physical Pope and his Cardinals, is
discoursed of.

62. On the 27th and 28th of December. if you look back on the Recipees, you will
find the Cordial Juleps strained to a higher pitch of heat, and throngs of
Spirits; whereas in the preceding treatment of his Lordship, especially toward
the beginning, the Cordials were prescribed more moderate in heat, being
diluted with Simple Waters; which as the Patients Symptoms increased, were
also thought fit to be stimulated, and made quicker, to keep pace with the
Distemper, until at last both had carreer'd into an high Fever, as hereafter
shall be remarqued.

63. What ever Curatory Indications are desumed, I have ever observed, that
some grand Physicians of, etc. never are forgetful of the Indicatio Vitalis;
whereon they lay so great a stress, that they seem to prefer it before the Cure
of the Malady, and the removing of the Cause: Insomuch, that wherever they
come, the Scene is a Cordial prescribed at the head of the Scrowl, especially
where the Disease does not manifest it self so plainly to their apprehension;
and particularly in the Diseases of Children and big-bellied Women. This sort
of Cordial Practice sounding so safe among the Vulgar, imposes a necessity upon
the minor Physicians to move in the same Zodiac: For should a Friend or
Relation of a Patient come to visit him, and not see the small Vials on the
Table, with the Silken Stoppers, he would rail the poor minor Prophet out of
doors, and cry out, He killed the sick man for want of a Cordial. So that it is
easily believed, that the greatest estates are gotten by prescribing of
Cordials, and not by curing Diseases. However, take my meaning right, I do not
hence infer this Cordial Practice to be an Imposture in those eminent Doctors,
but rather some Ruins of Paracelsus in their Pericranium; whence you may
justly term them Chemists: for by their Cordials they intend to fortify the
general Archeus in the Stomach, or at least to make an impression or idea upon
it (or to use Helmont's phrase, a reflection like upon a looking-glass) which
being successively continuated or propagated (like streams in a water) unto
every particular Archeus, that commands over every part, a Disease, and its
occasional Cause, are expelled in a moment; provided that their Cordials are
virtuated with those Qualifications Helmont designed for his Drif. But these
are only Deliramenta Catarrhi, and so is often this Cordial Practice, unless
when put into use, it has a power adjoined to oppose and remove the Cause of
the Disease. This premised, let us make enquiry whether this Cordial Practice
used from the beginning upon my Lord, might be accounted proper. Secondly,
Whether prescribing gentle and moderate Cordials in the beginning, and very
strong and smart ones toward the latter end, was not much more improper.

63. The Indication for Cordials is taken from the defect of the vital and
animal Spirits, occasioned by the loss of laudable Blood, or a vitiated and
diminuted Chymosis, whence Blood is not sufficiently engendered for matter to be
converted into Spirits and the Succus nutritious, or by the loss of Spirits
dispersed and consumed by great Pains and Tortures, or what other Cause, by the
Phenomenon they then conceived, they please to assign. The loss of Blood was
insignificant here; but the insufferable pains in the lower part of the Belly
were great, through which Sleep was interdicted, the Spirits extremely
depauperated, and the Concoctions of the body subverted, so that a
proportionable measure of Blood could not be generated. To answer the
Indication surmised in this latter notion, they prescribed the common Cordials
usual among them almost in all Distempers; viz. Black-Cherry-water,
Plague-water, Cinamon-water, and Aqua mirabilis; sometime the one, and
sometimes the other. But what could these effect? You may believe, they could
not supply the twentieth part of Spirits that were daily exhausted.
Furthermore, it may be offered to consideration, whether the foresaid Cordials
did not sharpen and fret the Blood and Spirits, whereby the pains might be
rendered more intense, and their causes augmented; which Method being
continued, what could the issue of it be, but that which followed?

64. To illustrate this to you in a more familiar instance; Suppose a man
laden with a burden on his shoulders so weighty, as to make his Joints shake
and tremble under him; if you give him a Dram of the Bottle, he may support a
little the longer: though soon after, his Joints fall on shaking much more, and
then you relieve him with a glass of Canary; which perceiving to effect less
than his first Cordial, in regard the burden on his shoulders has dispersed
more Spirits, and weakened him much more than the first Cordial restored, or
corroborated, you make a third essay (imagining the former Cordials too weak)
and offer him a large dose of Aqua mirabilis, upon which suddenly comes
tumbling down to the ground, both man and burden.

65. My observation upon this is; 1. That the direct way to assist this man, is
to take off his burden from his shoulders, either all at once, or by degrees;
which will prove the best Strengthner and Cordial, especially if supplying him
with proportionable Corroboratives. 2. That the weaker a man grows, his
Cordials ought to be less spirituous, and more temperate; for else it will
drown and overwhelm his Spirits on a sudden. But in these preceding Prescripts,
I find the weakest Cordials exhibited in the beginning, and the strongest
toward the end. However, since it was concluded by such great Physicians, that
the administration of Cordials in that form and proportion was necessary, good
manners prompt me to declare, It was well done, they did what men could do, and
they ought to have been sure to continue it, until the Patient had certainly,
etc.

66. For to appease and lay the pains, Hypnoticks were frequently given: These
by stupefying and condensing the Spirits, gave his Lordship some intermission
of his tortures, during their operation; which no sooner was expired, but they
returned into their accustomed fury. What followed? My Lord was several times
surprised with a total suppression of Urine, a Symptom very dreadful: But the
Ephesian happily thought on a small Wax-candle, which being forced into the
Vrethra (or passage of the Yard) not so far as the Sphincter, did by
stimulation excite the facultas excretrix of the Bladder, by which means his
Lordship immediately discharged his Urine. Now let us examine the Cause of this
Suppression: It was not occasioned by the Stone; for the Wax-candle did not
penetrate so far, as to be supposed to reach it, and thrust it back; neither
was it any grumous Blood, Slime, or Gravel, for the same reason. Then, I hope,
I may without offense, put the question, Whether it was not the too often
repeated Hypnoticks and Opiates, that had stupefied the Bladder, its Sphincter,
and those branches of Nerves that defer the animal Faculty to both, and
consequently the animal Spirits being rendered torpid, had not force sufficient
to evacuate the Urine, whence happened that suppression. That Opiats and
Narcoticks are not seldom attended with so ill a Symptom, as the suppression
of Urine, needs no other proof, than daily Experience; and that his Lordships
suppression depended on such like cause, the argument a juvante seems evidently
to infer, which was a Wax-candle; that by stimulating and exciting the soporous
faculty of the Bladder, procured an excretion of Urine. But Modesty obliges me
to say, This was very well done, in regard such great Masters of Medicine
cannot do amiss.

67. All this while the Physicians were only vagrant in latitude, receding from
one Remedy to another, and not gaining the least way in longitude, but rather
losing ground; which made them come so often to an anchor, by giving of Opium.
However, since they could not always act Lulla by, nor the Patient constantly
be detained in sleep, there was a necessity of launching out, and steering all
manner of Courses, to get into Port.

First then, his Lordship's pains were judged to proceed from a Colica Biliosa,
(or a hot Colic) which they endeavored to purge off by their Laxative,
prescribed on the 20th of November: What success had this? By night they were
forced to summon in their whole Posse Comitatus, viz. Cordial Juleps,
Fomentations, Bags, Hypnotic Potion, two Anodyne Glysters, as appears in their
Prescriptions: the next day the repetition of the Purge was approved of, but
Glysters, Anodyne Liniments, Pearl Cordial, and the Hypnotic, were to be in
readiness. The 22th and 23th the Hypnotic (their Anchora salutis) and Cordials
were repeated. On the 24th of December. they were resolved to try their fortune
once more, by purging of Phlegm out of the Stomach; by which they seemed to
intimate another opinion, viz. That his Lordships Pains issued from a
Wind-Colick, the Wind being occasioned by the attenuation of the Phlegm in the
Stomach, and posted thence into the great Guts; whence it was to be carried off
by Pil. Ruffi, etc.

68. Seeing the Pains proved too obstinate to be longer suspected for any, or
all the sorts of Colic, they would now tentative (a term too much in use among
them) suppose these torments to be Scorbutic, and the pain that often excurred as
far as the Loins, to be a Lumbago Scorbutica. About ship again, steer large;
orders were immediately given to distill an Antiscorbutic Water or Spirit (or
what you please to term it) prescribed on the 1 of December. consisting of
Snails, Brooklime, Dandalyon, Oranges, and Limons, Broom flowers, etc. And that
you may the better understand, that they had treated his Lordship severally and
jointly as a Scorbutic Patient, you may peruse their joint-Prescription of the
seventeenth of December. where it is determined, that the Patient shall persevere
in the use of the Destillatum Antiscorbuticum, which is the proper name they
imposed upon their Prescription of the first of December. Moreover you may
observe, that I have not suggested these Diseases from the virtues or intention
of their Bills, but from their expressed words; as for further instance, in
their Record of the fourth of December you read, they term my Lord's pains a
Colic pain. Where they seem for a while to leave off their Scorbutic method,
and convert their whole efforts against the Colic on fresh: Here Oil of sweet
Almonds, Syrup of Marshmallows, and Chamomil-water, are esteemed as great
Specificks: Their Auxiliaries are Carminative Glysters, Fomentations, Bags,
Cordials, Balsamics, and Hypnotics, their old friend. But Omnia incassum, still
worse and worse.

65. Once more, and that for the last, they are resolved to make a bolt or a
shot of it: They remembered, that My Lord had been taken more than once with a
suppression of Urine, a Symptom that often attends the Stone in the Bladder, and
that which proved an Ignis fatuus to seduce our Physicians into a strange
mistake: For unto the foresaid Symptom of Suppression, they added an
intercurrent pain of the Loins, Vomitings, (now deemed a Symptom of the
Stone-Colick) pains above the Groin, interpreted to be Vellications of the
Ureter by Gravel, or small angular Stones: And lastly, his Lordship's Father
dying of the Stone in the Kidneys, was an Herculean Argument, that those great
Tortures were Nephritic Pains, and the Disease no other than the Stone in the
Kidneys. This they confidently asserted to all my Lord's Relations and
Visiters; and they made no doubt, but there were Engines, Pickaxes, and
Shovels, that they could command out of their Apothecaries Shop, whereby they
should easily dig the Stone out of the Mine of the Kidneys. To work they go
with their edged tools, and make their first attaque with a Nephritic Purge,
marked down on the 8th of December. this to be seconded with a strong Laxative
and Diuretic Glyster; the next day the assault to be renewed twice with a
Diuretic Apozem, virtuated with the expression of fifty Hoglice, and within two
hours to be reinforced with the exhibition of Opobalsamum, commonly called, The
Balm of Gilead, or the best sort of a well-concocted Therebinthin, exactly
imitating the virtues of the Rosin of Venice: In summa, an Imposture put upon
the European Christians, by Armenians and Persian Mahometans. But by the way
consider, the vast Dose of Hog-lice, the Opobalsam, or Armenian Therebinthin
upon that, and Therebinthin Glysters upon that again; whereof some days four or
five of them were administered successively one after another, each Glyster
containing four Ounces of Lucatellus's Balsam dissolved in it; so that in
twenty four hours there were twenty or five and twenty Ounces, that is, above a
Pound and an half of Lucatellus's Balsam forced into the Patient's Belly: How
large the proportion of Therebinthine must be to make such a huge mass of
Balsam, is easily computed. Besides all this, in the intervals were exhibited
Doses of Oil of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Marshmallows, Balsamic Syrups, and a
Decoction of Lignum Nephriticum and Masticwood, Chips so highly decanted for
the Cure of the Stone. All these I account only the Shovels; but the great
Pickax was their Pulvis Nephriticus Magistralis, a Nostrum prepared by their
Privy Apothecary, and to be purchased of him at his own rate by the Apothecary
in ordinary. And forasmuch as collaterally was intimated to me, this famed
Pulvis Nephrit* derived its virtues chiefly from Hog-lice, Eggshels calcined,
Crabs eyes prepared with Oil of Tartar, etc. But whether Cantharides, or
Spanish-flies, did constitute any part of the basis of this mighty Powder, I
could yet never learn; a particularity worthy to be enquired into. A Dram and
half of this Pulvis was ordered for a Dose on the 19th of December, as you may
read before among the Prescripts, and to be swallowed down once or twice a day
in Rhenish Wine. And because the passages, through which the Stone was to come,
should be made big enough, wide enough, and slippery enough, a Draught writ
down on the 17th of December, of Oil of sweet Almonds, Syrup of Marshmallows,
and of the five opening Roots, was to be given a little before; besides, lest
the Stone should stick in the way, a Therebinthin Glyster was to bring up the
rear, to force it on. During all this bustle, his Lordships Urine came tumbling
down in Cataracts, but no Stone. At length the Doctors begin to discover red
Gravel, of which they reported, they had saved near upon one Spoonful and an
half; but in regard it so exactly resembled that sort of red Sand, which is
contained in the German Hour-glasses, scarce any body could look upon it
without smiling. The Gravel descending was interpreted by them to be the
Prodromus of the Stone, which now they expected every minute, with as much
Faith, as the Jews do their Messiah, after a great Storm. And what is more, one
of them like a Bigot Midwife, sat up a Night or two, to assist at this Rocky
birth.

64. They push on still, and add new forces to their Stone-breakers, and
Piss-driving Medicines, by ordering twenty drops of Spirit of Therebinthin (a
strong Piss-driver) to be mixed with the Syrups forementioned, and washed down
with a draught of Rhenish-Wine, this to be repeated after six hours: no Stone
yet, but Urine in abundance; whence they surmised, that since the passages were
so well lubricated, the Stone must stick fast in the Pelvis of the Kidneys; to
loosen which, a Vomit was commanded to be used on the 24th of December. as their
Bill expresses; and on the 25th and 28th, a Purge. From the concussion of the
Vomit in its operation, and the compression of the Musculs of the Belly upon
going to Stool, it was expected the Stone would be shaken, and tumbled down.
But in fine, they were greatly mistaken in their measures; instead of the
Stone, there was a flood of Urine (improperly so called) came down so
impetuously, that this Patient, or Physicians Martyr (as his Lordship was often
pleased to term himself) in twenty four hours made six times more water than he
drank, according as my self, and Surgeon several times found upon an exact
computation by measure: For in a Nights time twelve, and sometimes thirteen
Pints of water, were discharged by the Bladder; which I cannot denominate
Urine, as not having the Color, Scent, or Taste of such; but on the contrary,
looked like rock-water, transparent, and clear, without sediment, scented like
Beef-broath, and tasted sweetish like Honey. Here, from making little or no
Urine, observe well, sourced a most plentiful spring or fountain of clear
water. Now all hands at work, if you are men, Luff, no near. To stopping the
leak they go; and in order to that, on the 29th of December appoint an
Adstringent stopping Electuary; likewise a potent binding Decoction of Comfrey,
Yarrow, etc. On the 30th a thickning Powder of Gum-Arabick, and Gum-Dragant,
with a Distillation of Cypress-tops, Whites of Eggs, Cinnamon and Milk: Upon
this a mixture of Rhubarb, Gum Arabic, Dragant and Confrey-roots, an unpleasant
sort of Tansey. More yet, there must be also plentifully drunk Almond-Milk with
Poppey-seeds in it, and Cordials, and all this in one day. On the 31th in the
morning they made their Visit, and spoke to the woman attending; Well, what
cheer, Nurse? O, Mr. Doctor, abundance of Urine this night! Pain and tortures
so insufferably violent, that his Lordship flung himself twice out of Bed, as
if he had Convulsions! His burning Heat so great, that all night long my Lord
held his hands on bottles of cold water! Fainted several times, that I thought
he would not have seen the Morning! Vomited and strained very often, as if his
eye-strings would have broke! My Lord drew his breath so extremely short and
thick, that I verily believed, he would have been stifled; for his Lordship
would not suffer any Curtain to be drawn, or any body stand near the bedside,
lest he should hinder the air from him! Now, Mr. Doctor, Quomodo pulvis? No
doubt, but the Nephritic Pulvis was a most excellent Powder; never did Medicine
answer expectation better; for perfectly did it remove the suppression of
Urine, and if Stone or Gravel had been in the way, it could never have resisted
the force of it. Therefore, Let Us conclude, one and all, They did what men
could do! Here was no want, but abundance of Remedies, and it was ten to one,
if one of them did not hit. He that throws with ten Dice, cannot easily miss
quater trey, unless he be cursedly unfortunate; and Seamen in a Storm do often
hoist up all their Sails, though they bring the Mainmast by the board.

69. Well, Contra vim mortis non est Medicamen in hortis. After the
Consult-Masse was ended, my Lord's Relation asked them, What think ye of my
Lord? what hopes have ye? they replied (as I am informed) one and all, We have
no manner of hopes, he is a dead man; we will do what we can to give him ease.
They all gave him over; and to all those Noblemen that were Visiters, they
declared positively, that his Lordship could not live; and some went so far,
that they expressed it was impossible, he should outlive seven days. This
desperate Decree of the Doctors was soon conveyed to my Lord's ears by a
messenger, that seldom tarried long by the way to carry news of this nature to
him.

70. His Lordship no whit dismayed at the ill-tidings, about the second or third
of January desired I should attend him. My Lord was then pleased to signify,
that my absence from the Town on the day he received his Wounds, had occasioned
him to make use of several vogued Physicians, whose greatness of fame since he
perceived to be a vulgar opinion, by the success that attended their
experiments upon him, he frequently pressed them to consult with me, as having
had a greater experience of his Constitution upon various occasions, that did
not only require competent Learning and Judgment, but a careful attendance. The
inflammation this sort of discourse raised on their Dura Matter, caused them to
burst into this peremptory answer, that they would not consult with me, let the
event be what it would, because I was not of the College, and if his Lordship
persisted in those demands, they would certainly desert him. This reply being
thoroughly perused, my Lord was obliged to surrender himself to their
discretion, partly through the necessity of pleasing* some of his Relations,
and partly through the new assurances they confidently gave him of a speedy and
perfect Recovery. Since therefore now he found their hopes turned into despair,
he had easily obtained from them, what by no manner of arguments he could
dispose them to before; and in consequence of that, did appoint me to give them
a Consult-meeting on the morning following. In order hereunto, I examined the
Symptoms preceding, and those present, which chiefly were insufferable Pains
and Tortures on the left side of the lower part of the Belly, too horrible for
any man of ordinary strength to endure. 2. A scorching Hectic Fever, that had
so macerated his Body, that it was a perfect representative of a Skeleton,
covered over with a skin. 3. A Diabetes, in the dialect of some borish
Physicians called a Pisspot-dropsie, a Symptom so rare, that among ten
millions of sick persons, scarce one is observed to be afflicted with: For it
is seldom in the power of the worst of Morbisick Causes to produce it, unless
assisted with the Pickaxes and Shovels of the Art of Physic. 4. Syncopees, or
long deep Swoonings, several in a day, and frequent Lipothymies, or faintings.
5. A suffocative Respiration, or stifling breathing; as for want of sleep, a
very low ebb of Strength, Vomitings, a dejected Appetite, and worse
Concoction, etc. I account as nothing, in comparison of these five.

70. Death usually being the termination of each of these Symptoms, even when
singly afflicting the Body, moved this Query in me, Which of all these five
mortal Enemies would in the most appearance kill his Lordship first? Upon some
discussion, my opinion inferred, that the Diabetes would absolve its fatal
course the soonest, probably in eleven days; but then that each of the other
four Symptoms might very well pretend to one days mischief, seemed conjectural
enough, which subtracted from the foresaid eleven, inferred a consequence,
that his Lordship would not outlive seven days, as some of the Doctors had
prognosticated.

How little such a Tragic Scene of Morbisic Attendants could encourage a person
to act jointly with those, that after so many brutal calumnies and affronts,
now seemed only to admit of a Consultation to make use of me, like the Fox of
the Cats foot, was evident; however, the obligation I owed to my Lord, and some
of his Lordships own Relations, engaged me to contribute the utmost of my
endeavors, especially upon the general noise of their Conclamatum of his Life,
and the observation of many particulars, wherein I apprehended they had
egregiously erred.

By appearing somewhat later than the hour appointed, it was supposed my
stomach was taken off by the reflections the Doctors had made the night before,
(for I was not yet of the College) who therefore knowing where I was that
Morning, now pressed earnestly I should be sent for; not so much to consult, as
to hale me in to bear part of the burden. Being come to the famous
Consult-room, I found two men, one much of the Mien of some Renegado-Divine, or
Schoolmaster turned to Physic, vested and tunickt with black; the other
Campaign Tunickt with gray, smoking a Pipe of Tobacco al' Indiano. Whatever
they seemed to me in the external, the Physical Eloquence of the former,
expressed by a tongue so nimble, that my ears could hardly keep pace with him,
and the solid judgment of the latter, did demonstrate them most excellent
Physicians in the general; and in particular, the one has merited, among the
Vulgar, the fame of a good Childrens Doctor, and the other of a Woman's Doctor.

The Prologue of these Physicians was, that they were come thither to hear,
what Proposal I had to offer, in order to my Lords Recovery. A greater
impertinency I have not heard; implying, as if they had looked upon themselves
to be appointed Commissioners to receive Proposals from me, touching some kind
of improbable work, as the draining of a River, or the like; and to be Judges
of Oyer and Terminer of the feasibility of the Project. Thus we see how
arrogant some sort of men are, when finding themselves buoyed up by common
fame, Coach and Horses, and Propt with the dubious interpretation of a Law,
studying Omnibus viis and modis to oppress their equals.

71. The Replication I made 'em was, that according to the form of
Consultations, I expected an account of what course and method had been used,
what Remedies, and against what Diseases, Causes, or Symptoms; which done, I
should show* my self ready in declaring my Sentiment. Upon this, the
well-spoken Gentleman related the nature of the Wound, and by what means cured;
withal, that there were other Distempers survened upon that, viz. Colic,
Scorbutic pains, Stone and Gravel; the latter of which he offered to prove, by
having caused the discharge of a great heap of Gravel, through the force of
those Stone-breaking and Piss-driving Medicines that were exhibited, adding the
hereditary property of the Stone, whereof his Lordship's Father died. The other
Physician was upon the carping auscultation, to which his continuando of the
Virginian smoke contributed, by its Henbane quality of condensing of his animal
Spirits.

72. By passing over all what they had acted, and the reflections thereon, I
endeavored to avoid Disputes and Provocations, and thought to have contracted
an amity and well understanding among them, which is very necessary to render
Consultations successful; and therefore immediately expressed my sense, That in
all Wounds, the termination of the Cause wounding, be it Sword, Lance, etc.
ought to be particularly observed; and for that reason, the Sword wherewith his
Lordship was wounded, was to be exactly traced in its passage; which
considering the prick, that my Lord very sensibly perceived a little above the
left Groin, and caused him to fall down, was an argument the Sword terminated
or stopped upon the Os Coxendix or Ischion, a little above the Acetabulum; if so,
then probably the Sword must have passed the Mesentery, part of the Psoas, and
the Musculus Iliacus internus. The ausculting Physician interrupted me, in
saying, that there was no such Muscul as the Musculus Iliacus belonging to the
frame of Man's Body; and that I was under a great mistake, it was an error; and
farther, it was ignorance in me; and therefore I ought to consider well of what
I said before such men as they were. At that time having no Anatomical
Picture-Book by me, nor the occasion of showing them the Muscul in a dead Body,
I swallowed the affront, for the reason expressed in the beginning of this
Paragraph, and proceeded, intimating that here might very rationally be
suspected, that there was some small proportion of purulent matter collected in
the hollow of the Abdomen, converted into such, out of Blood leaking through
some small Vessels, that were hurt by the passing of the Sword. But this did
not seem a cause sufficiently adequated to produce those acute Pains above the
Groin, which therefore I positively asserted, could be occasioned by no other
than the Puncture of one of those great Nerves, that are originated from the
Medulla Spinalis about the Lumbi, whence issuing a Gleet, which by Stagnation
is soon converted into a Virus, or Venom, the property whereof is not only to
cause horrible pains of the Nerves and Nervous Parts, but Syncopees,
Lipothymies, Vomitings, short oppressed breathings, Convulsions, Fevers; but
never a suppression of Urine, nor Diabetes: Whence these two latter are to be
derived, ask the Doctors, and consult their Prescriptions.

To prove that those forementioned Symptoms did only issue from the puncture
of a Nerve, I instanced the concomitants and accidents, that usually attend and
follow a puncture of a Tendon, or which is much worse, of a Nerve in the Arm,
upon unskilful Bleedings; viz. extreme Pains, Imposthumations, Syncopees, and
the rest.

The Indications are two. 1. To stop the Gleet of the Nerve. 2. To remove the
virulent humor, or liquor, that is already gleeted. By answering the first
indication readily and in due time, the latter is prevented. But in his
Lordships case there were more Indications to be desumed from Diseases, that
were constituted, per Deuteropathiam, per errorem externum, and by occasional
causes.

I cannot here omit, once more to declare the excellency of our Balsam,
described before, how speedily it would have performed in the beginning, what
both the Indications point at; and in many other Distempers its effects are no
less admirable. But nothing is more to be regretted, than the omission of the
Royal Vulnerary Drops, especially being offered so seasonably; which as far as
I can understand, were never yet taken for the cure of the most dangerous of
Wounds, without having certainly performed the effect, that was expected from
them. Moreover, I do believe, that far meaner Medicines might have stopped the
Gleet, as Spirit of Vitriol dulcified, Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitriolum Martis,
or what is more ordinary, common Vitriol tied up in a rag, and applied
externally, near the place where the puncture was, or further off; so diffusive
and penetrative is the nature of Vitriol.

It was not in the beginning, but at the latter end, that I was consulted; and
therefore besides the former, other Indications are to be taken, as well from
the Diseases the Sword had occasioned, as those which Art had procured, viz.
Diabetes, Fever, etc. I soon perceived, that nothing but a Mercurial Remedy
would answer all Indications; but lest the well-spoken Doctor should thence
take an occasion to bespatter me, and cry out aloud, I offered to give his
Lordship Mercury, (a word that sounds barbarous among the ignorant.) I
apprehended it prudence to defer it, until another might be called in, or that
I had prepared his Lordship, or some of his Relations for it. In the mean time
I proposed this following, as answering most of the Indications, as affairs
stood then.

Januar. 5.
Cerus. Antimon. j. Troch. Viperin. ss. Croci Angl. pulv. gr. j ss. Sir. Cort.
Citr. q. s. m. f. mixed. moll. Sumend. hora nona vespertin. superbibendo haust.
decoct. sudorif.

Signed by Dr. etc. and my self.

You may remember, I mentioned two Physicians that were to be consulted that
Morning, before this was prescribed; but one of them being thrown out for a
wrangler, I was yoaked to the other; who did as readily reform, and conform, or
indeed take up any form, as any man I ever met with; though at the same time he
did also expect to be indulged in several of his own Enthusiasms, which resting
too much upon the basis of some of his preceding Opinions, caused frequent
dissentions and jarrings among us. And it is a very common Observation, that
where some great Physicians have taken up a sentiment, and declared it, they
will not recede from it, though they are convinced they are in the wrong, and
that it will tend to a certain prejudice of the Patient; because they will seem
to be more than men, in the impossibility of erring; but I have more charity,
than to believe this worthy Physician was polluted with any such Principle; or
at least I hope he was not.

I have somewhat abruptly given you an account of our first Consultation, which
now I shall set down in the total. After I found that whatever I proposed, was
not only rejected, but rendered in Ridicule, and that at so unfit a season,
where a Person of Honors Life lay at stake; I asked one of them in Latin,
discoursing of the Diabetes, Exhibuisti ne bolum armenum contra hunc affectum?
He replied, Non novi bolum armenum, sed novi quidem bolum armenam. Here I
perceived he rather acted the part of a Schoolmaster, as he had done that of
the Iliac Anatomist, than of a Physician; which made me conclude, they designed
less what might be advantageous to the Patient, than carping, and derision.
Upon that I took my leave, refusing my Fee, because I had done nothing for it;
which notwithstanding they greedily accepted, as if they had labored hard in
prescribing never a Bill; and so we left the Patient in a great deal of Pain
and Misery.

At Night I was sent for again, where I met one of them alone, who singly
agreed to all what I offered, but for formality desired, to defer prescribing
until the other Iliac Physician should be present, which would not be until the
next morning; and so we left the Patient again as we found him. But it happened
before I went away, that a very eminent English Surgeon came thither, to give
his opinion touching his Lordships condition, which imported, that either some
Tendon, Nerve, or Membrane was hurt on that side, where the pain was. This
agreeing very near with what I declared to his Lordship before, we were
appointed to meet the other Doctors next morning. My self and the forementioned
Surgeon, as we returned home, agreed, that in this case, Rebus sic
stantibus, nothing could be more proper, than a Mercurial Medicine, viz.
Mercurius dulcis, a preparation so safe, that it is as commonly given to
Children against the Worms, as Aloes, or Wormseed. But I desired him to propose
it, in regard the Physicians would rather take it from a Surgeon, than a
Physician; such is the cursed emulation of mankind!

On the Morning we met; it being my turn to speak first, the resentment I had
of their false reflections touching the internal Iliac Muscul, and Bolus
Armenus, obliged me to declare, that before I went on further, I would make it
appear, who was in the error; and to that purpose, here was now brought an
authentic Anatomy-Book, and a Pharmacopoea; in the latter they might see Bolus
Armenus, and in the former the Musculus Iliacus internus. This was no sooner
expressed, but one of the Physicians burst out into very scurrilous language,
which without any further ceremony caused me to leave the Room, and the
Consultation. Before I was gone past half the length of the street, I was
called back again; and he that was the most mutinous dismissed, though much
against my desire.

73. During the calm, the use of Mercuri. Dulcis was no sooner proposed, but
agreed to, prescribed and signed by the other Doctor and my self, in form
following.

Januar. 3.
Calomelan. j. Cort. Citr. humid. condit. contus. and per setac. traject. j.
Sir. ejusd. q. s. M. f. Mixtur. moll. sumenda quam primum.

Rad. Sarsaeparil. iiij. Rad. Chin. non carios. ij. rasur. Ebor. corn. cerv.
ana vj. Lign. sassafr. Cinamom. ana ij. Lign. Santal. rubr. ss. post digest.
coq. in aq. font. lb viij. ad consumpt. medietat. coletr. and reponatr. in
ampul. vitr. de q. capiat lb ss. quater ad minimum quotidie.

Erinac. calc. and subtle. pulv. ss. sumat. in cochl. j. Sir. Balsamrubr. horis
duodecim post bolum praescript.

We had some controversy about this Hedg-hog powder, the Doctor pretending he
had done Miracles with it in the like case of a Diabetes; which assertion I
much suspected, in regard such a Distemper, under those circumstances, was not
easily paralleled. Besides, all the Authors that I ever read, and in particular
Fran. Joel. lib. 6. sect. 2. q. 8. recommends it as a singular Diuretic,
against a total suppression of Urine, and seems to intimate, as if it were more
forcible than Hog-lice. Likewise Forestus l. 21. 15. extols it for moving of
Urine and Stool. How could this then be proper to put a stop to a Pissing
Disease, that so potently moved Urine? However he would have it used, because
his experience had supplied him with notable Examples. Neither could we well
accord upon his Syrupus Balsamicus ruber, which according to my information was
a dissolution of Gummi Guaiaci in Spirit of Wine, and sweetened into a Syrup
with white Sugar. This Medicine I objected against, as being a violent
Purgative, and Diuretic, and a great fretter of the Blood. The argument he
valued little, but preferred his own experience; so that I was forced through
importunity to yield to it. Though in the whole I found this was grounded upon
the remains of his former opinion of his Lordship's being troubled with the
Stone and Scurvey. So opiniatre are some men, when they fasten to a Disease.

75. It was his Lordsh. commands, that since he had taken a new Medicine,
prescribed him on Indications different from those of his former Physicians, I
should watch with him; by which means I had occasion more particularly to
observe the manner of his Pains, making of Urine, Vomiting, Breathing, and
Fainting. About eleven of the Clock at Night his Symptoms grew very violent,
insomuch that he called very earnestly for his Hypnotic, or sleeping Potion. I
told his Lordship, I could by no means consent to it, in regard it would six
those virulent humors, weaken his Brain and Nerves, and that it was wholly
disagreeing with the Medicine he had taken in the Morning. A day or two after,
My Lord related to me, that his other Physicians had given it him two and
thirty Nights together, and therefore wondered I scrupled so much at it. You
are to observe, that this ordinary Hypnotic was seldom prescribed, but ordered
by word of mouth; For it is very rare, that Opiates are given in that
proportion, and for so long a continuance; so that it was not convenient to
have those Bills filed in an Apothecaries shop, in perpetuam rei memoriam.
According to my information, this following was the usual Hypnotic.

Aqu. Ceras. nigr. Paralys. Papav. Rh. ana j. Aqu. Epidem. ss. Sir. de mecon.
vj. Laudani Opiati gr. iij. m. f. Pot. sumend. hora somni.

76. On the Morning following the Night I sat up, I gave his Lordship
assurance of removing his pains very suddenly, by Remedies, that nights
observation had indicated; but desired the application might be deferred, for
an hour or two, until the English Surgeon (a person of great Knowledge and
Experience, whose judgment I esteemed far beyond any of the Physicians) and the
Doctor appeared, to whom I offered the use of Ventoses, or Copping-glasses, to
be applied on the part affected, to the intent those virulent humors that
occasioned these torments, should be attracted externally, and so discussed.
The Surgeon well understanding the effects of Ventoses, and the nature of the
Distemper, agreed immediately they should be applied, not in the least doubting
a good success; but the Doctor stumbled at it extremely, and objected
eloquently against it: I suppose, because it was proposed by me, and so well
approved by the Surgeon. At length our arguments prevailed for the Ventoses:
Upon the application of the first Copping-glass, his Lordships Pains abated,
and upon the renewing it the second and third time, his Pains were vanished and
clearly removed, without the least return for two Months together.

77. On the fourth of January in the Morning we met again, and prescribed as
follows.

Aqu. Ceras. nigr. Epidem. ana iv. Sir. Garyophil. de suc. Citr. ana vj. Aqu.
mirabil. ss. m. f. Iulap. de q. capiat cochl. iv. ad libit. in languoribus.

78. This hot Cordial was pressed upon me, and to avoid debates, yielded to; but
advised his Lordship privately to use it very moderately, a spoonful or two
once in five or six hours.

Renovetur Emplastr. parti affectae applicand.

Iugland. condit. No iij. Sumat hora somni.

Cras mane diluculo repetatur Bol. e Calomelan. post cujus usum se alvus non
respondeat intra spatium duar. horar. sumat Sir. e flor. persic. jss. ex haustu
allae coct. In reliquis pergat ut ante.

Aq. papav. Rh. ij. Sir. flor. paralys. j. tinct. Castor. gutt. x. m. f. haust.
sumend. hora una aut altera a sumptis jugland.

79. At Night the other Doctor sited alone by himself, and prescribed this
Cordial.

Aqu. Melis. Ceras. nigror. Epidem. ana iij. Aqu. mirab. j. Croci j.
Glycyrrhiz. j. infund. statim in frigido, and post horam unam f. Colatura, cui
add. Sir. Meliss. Caryoph. ana j. Sumat ijss. singulis horis.

Spir. C. C. rectificat. ij. Capiat. gut. 15. (quoties urget virium languor) ex
ijss. Iulapii.

Januar. the 5th we prescribed,

Cerus. Antimonii j Trochise. viperin. ss. Croc. Angl. pulv. gr. jss. Sir.
cort. Citr. q. s. m. f. mixed. moll. Sumenda hora nona vespert. superbibendo
haust. decoct. sudorif. calide hora tertia pomeridiana. Sumat bolum e pulv.
Erinacei calcinati.

80. Upon the going off of my Lords pains, his Urine came in lesser quantities
and better colored, for a day or two; then the other Doctor would needs crowd
in his Hedg-hog powder again, which procured the return of the Diabetes in the
same degree as before: this being plainly observed by my self and the Surgeon,
we positively told him, if he would not desist from giving this flying
Hedg-hog, we would consult with him no more; so that afterward it was wholly
left off.

Spir. Salis Ammoniac. succin. ss. Sumat gut. xij. in cochl. vj. cujuscunque
liquoris, urgente lipothymia.

At Night the Doctor prescribed alone by himself thus; Bolus e Cerussa
Antimonii and Troch. Viperin. hac nocte hora nona. Haustus hypnotic.

Vin. Ceras. ijss. vel iij. per intervalla. Cras mane pulv. Erinac. In reliquis
ut ante.

81. When I saw this Bill, I would neither allow of the Hypnotic, black
Cherry-wine, nor Hedg-hog. I confess it moved a strange jealousy in me;
concerning the Doctor, prescribing now afresh a Hypnotic Hedg-hog, and adding
black Cherry-wine.

82. January the 7th these following Prescriptions were signed by us both.

Theriac. Andr, Diascord. ana ij. Spec. e chel. Cancr. comp. j. Ol. cinam. gut.
ss. Sir. Coral. q. s. M. f. mixed. moll. deaur. sumend. hora somni. superbibendo
seq. Iulap. cochl. iij.

The way to divide the single drop of Oil of Cinnamon into two parts, was by
dropping it into a little powder, which being mixed together, might easily be
separated into two parts.

Aqu. Epidem vj. Aqu. Cinam. hord. ij. Diascord. ijss. conterantur in mort.
marm. addendo Sir. Garyophyl. de rub. id. cort. Citr. ana ss. m. f. Iulap.
Sumat cochl. ij. alternis horis vel ad libit.

83. About this time his Lordship was on a sudden surprised with a Diarrhaea,
or Looseness, so violent, that it put us out of our road for* a while; but the
occasional cause of it was controverted between us, the one Doctor asserting it
was the operation of the two doses of Calomelon. though it had been given some
days before, and was wrought off by five or six motions on the same day. But
beyond all perad-venture it was to be imputed to the daily use of the Balsamic
Syrup of Gum Guaiaoi, that is so potently purging, and fretting; therefore
without any more ado, my self and the Surgeon desired, that both the Glasses of
the balsamic Syrups of the other Doctors might be taken away out of the Room,
and be seen there no more. Moreover, we judged it highly necessary, to be more
than ordinarily careful, that nothing should be imposed upon us, whereby so
fair an appearance of a Cure might be subverted. Besides this Diarrhaea, my
Lord was every moment heaving to vomit.

On the 8th of January we agreed to these Prescripts;

Mass. Empl. stomach. Magistr. part. ij. Gum. Tacamahac. part. j. Ol. Cinam.
gut. j. M. f. Empl. scutiform. Extend. super alut. and applic. Ventriculo.

Rhab. pulv. ss. Diascord. j. Ol. Cin. gut. ss. Sir. de ros. sic. q. s. M. f.
mixed. moll. deaur. Capiat hora somni haec nocte.

Corn. Cerv. Calc. j. coq. in aq. font. lb iiij. ad consuumpt. medietat. dein
calide affunde super Cinamom. crass. confrit ij. Sacchar. alb. j. post horam
decantetur sine colatura. Bibat iiij. ad libit. per se, vel cum aequali
proport. lact is coct.

Sit in promptu bolus suprascript. sitque in promptu idem bolus sine Rhabarb.
addendo pulv. e chel. Cancr. comp. j. bol. armen. ver. ss. Horis duabus a
sumpto bolo sumat. haust. hypn. usual. Here there was a necessity to allow half
an ounce of Diacod. dissolved in simple Waters for an Hypnotic.

January 9.
C. C. C. j. coq. in aq. font lb iij. ad lb ij. colato liquori add aq. cinam.
hord. sacchar. crystal. ana j. m. Capiat iiij. 4ta quavis hora.

Aq. Cerasar. nigr. vij. Aq. Epidem. jss. Sir. Caryophil. Sir. e suc. Citr. ana
vj. m. f. Iulap. sumat cochl. v. ad libitum in languoribus.

Januar. 10.
Repetatur bolus hac nocte, and cras mane hora sexta.

Repetatur Iulap. cord. and Decoct. corn. Cerv. calc.

Marg. praep. ij. dividantur in part. sex, and capiat part. sexta quarta quavis
hora in cochl. j. Iul. cord. superbibendo ejusdem Iulap. cochl. iiij.

84. The effect of these Medicines having reduced the retentive faculty of the
Guts to their former duty, I judged it expedient to loose no more time, but to
proceed toward a Cure; and in regard it was not improbable, that in a short
interval the Gleet of the Nerve would by stagnation reassume its preceding
virus, and that the superfluous Humors of the body would by nature be thrown
to that part, as being the weakest, I proposed, that a large Caustic should be
applied on the region of the left Ilia, by which means the channel of the
foresaid Humors would not only be diverted outward, but there would be a vent
given to those virulent evaporations, though their fountain was so deeply
remote. For it is consonant to Experience, that an Empyema consisting of matter
more gross, has been rarefied, extracted, and dried up, by several Causticks
applied to the Breast. This being new to the other Physic ian, and because it
was recommended by me, he would by no means assent to it, and therefore
pressed, that another Physician of the Cabal should be called, in which
particular he was indulged by my Lords Relations. He misunderstanding, that it
was the other Doctor advised the Caustic, therefore immediately approved of
it; but the next Morning perceiving his mistake, did as obstinately oppose the
application of a Caustic on the inside of the Thigh a little below the Groin,
as he had easily yielded to the former. The Surgeon, whose Experience and
Judgment I esteemed beyond twenty of them, gave me his opinion, that the
application could not be used without success; and therefore after they were
withdrawn to their several occupations, we caused the foresaid Caustic to be
applied, and three or four days after we judged it convenient to apply another
on the inside of the Thigh, a little above the Knee; the Escar being cast off,
we keep them open for a long time, by putting in several Ivy-pease with a piece
of flatted lead over them, to cause them to make a deeper impression.

85. The Prescriptions they forced in upon me then were these, being two to
one; the major part according to the mode of consultations ever prevailing.

Decoct. Traumat. x. ol. hyp^r. mel. ros. ana j.ss. Balsam. Lucatel. j. Vitel.
ovi unius. M. f. Enem. Injiciatur quamprimum.

Lap. Bezoar. or. pulv. j. Capiat hora una post rejectum Clyst. e cochl. j.
Iulap. cardiac. superbibendo cochl. vj. Iulap. ejusdem.

Conserv. rosar. rub. vet. iij. Balsam Lucatel. j. m. f. Elect. Signetur
Electuar. Vulnerarium.

Balsam. Sulphur. Therebinthin. ss. capiat gut. x in cochl. j. Sir. Balsam.
rubr. superbibendo decoct. Chin. praescript.

I was extremely dissatisfied at these Prescripts, and did vehemently suspect
their effect; but their grandeur influenced his Lordship to use them.

On the 12th of Januar.
Diascord. fr. j. sp. e chel. cancr. comp. j. Lap. Bezoar. or. ss. sir.
Garyophil. q. s. M. f. Elect. Moll.

Capiat octava quavis hora, superbibendo Iulap. card. cochl. iiij.

Balsam. Sulphur. rectif. ij. Capiat gut. vj. octava quavis hora, in haust.
decoct. Chin. Repetatur Enem. praescript.

What happened? The next day we had the Diabetes, a Diarrhaea, Faintings,
Syncopees, Vomitings, and Gripes.

The Balsam of Sulphur was a Remedy offered by me; but in regard the ordinary
Chemical Balsam, that was brought thither, was a Medicine fitter for a horse
(though purchased with all the care imaginable by the Apothecary from the
Chemist) I prevented his Lordship from using it, promising to bring some of my
own preparation, but did not suffer my Lord to take it, until several days
after.

The other Doctors returning, I told them, it was their old Medicines had put
us back again; and once for all declared, they should never be exhibited again,
as long as I was concerned. They replied, it was the Balsam of Sulphur; upon
which I drew a small thumbglass of my own Balsam of Sulphur out of my pocket,
and showed it them full, telling them, though I had carried it about me several
days, my Lord had not yet taken a drop of it; which his Lordship, and the
others that attended, likewise attested: neither should it be used, before I
saw what the effect of their Medicines would amount unto.

78. Being transported into passion, they retired to their several occasions;
one of them repeated his Visit next Morning, very early, leaving these
subsequent directions.

Januar. 15.
Troch. Viperin. j. Pulv. Comitiss. Lap. Bez. orient. ana j. Succ. Kerm. s. q.
f. Bolus exhibend. sexta quaque hora, loco prius praescript.

Aqu. Epidem. aq. Ceras. nigr. ana iv. Croc. j. Infund. in frigido ad horae
spatium, dein coletur and add. Aqu. Steph. and Aqu. mirab. ana vj. Sir.
Caryoph. and e succ. Citr. ana j. M. sumat in onini languore, and alternis
horis, vel tertia quaque hora. Pergat in usu margarit. Add enemati theriac.
Androm. iij.

These to me seemed Bills written upon the fret, and therefore I ordered the
Apothecary to exhibit only half the forementioned Bolus, and that only once
every twelve hours. The Cordial pleased me as little. At night he prescribed
this costly Electuary, which was not used.

Januar. 15.
Confect. Alkermes ij. Theriac. Androm. ss. Pulv. Comitiss. ij. Confect. de
Hyacintho ij. Lap. Bez. orient. j. Ol. Cinam. gut. j. Sir. Caryoph. s. q. f.
Elect. cum fol. xij auri. Capiat j vel ij pro libitu in languoribus.

On the 16th of January in the morning, this Physician finding his Lordship
encompassed with Symtomes so dangerous, that in his opinion he seemed to have
computed the Hours and Minutes, beyond which he could not survive, and
therefore peremptorily declared, that if another Physician of the Cabal was not
called in, he would come no more; an expedient that was made use of by him, to
draw his neck out of the collar. I told him, as he went down the stairs, he
acted not only very ungratefully, having received so many Fees; but
uncharitably and inhumanely, in leaving a Person of Honor in that condition,
who now once in six hours was assailed with a Syncope, that sometimes for the
space of half an hour rendered him in appearance little different from dead.

Conceiving these Convulsions, and other Symptoms, to be occasioned by those
venomous steems, attacquing the Brain, and the whole genus nervosum, and
consequently the Heart, through that nervous branch of the Sixth pair that is
distributed to it, to which the English Surgeon did not only assent, but
likewise offered such demonstrative Arguments, that I should not have expected
from any of the Physicians, moved me to give his Lordship six, and sometimes
eight drops of my own Balsam of Sulphur, (prepared after a mode not common in
the least) in an ounce of a Cordial prescribed by me: for now being left at my
own liberty, I directed such Medicines as I thought proper to answer the
present Indications. At the second exhibition the Syncope and Convulsions
ceased. His Vomiting, which was caused by consent of the great Stomachick
Nerves, and his difficulty of Respiration depending on the affection (by
consent) of the Nerves, that are disseminated through the Diaphragma, were also
very considerably abated.

Notwithstanding the other Physician judged it prudence to change his
resolution, and make officious Visits to his deserted Patient, to observe the
event; and perceiving that the Symptoms went off so strangely beyond his
expectation, on the third morning after he had left us, came into the
Consult-chamber again among us, with much affability and Eloquence, intending
to enter into consultation with me; but we immediately gave him the whole Room
to walk in by himself. My Lord enquired the reason of our leaving the Doctor;
answer was made, that he had a mind to come in upon the review, and it was
thought sit, that since he left his Lordship in extremity, we ought to leave
the Doctor, now the distemper had a better aspect: But however as for my own
particular, if his Lordship was pleased to command me, or if his Honors
Relation would needs have it so, I was very willing to advise with so learned
and eminent a Physician. My Lord waved it, and left himself wholly to our care.

By the way, this is a plain instance of the result of Consultations, and the
difference of a Physicians acting singly and freely without that disturbance,
employing the utmost of his care and endeavors to the advantage of his
Patient: Whereas in Consultations, especially grand ones, it matters not what
the event is, there being a great many vouchers and shoulders, to bear the
corpse upon; besides, oft-times he that prates most, leads the rest by the nose.
And to what purpose should any of them take much pains? For if the Patient
lives, the reputation of his Cure is equal to them all, as well to the Fool as
the Knave; their Fee is likewise equal, he that says little, has as much as
he that speaks all: Moreover, if any of them should prove refractory, or
somewhat mutinous, be sure the rest would never consult with him again; which
must necessarily prove a great loss to him. For there is abundantly more money
got by Consultations, than single Practice: Neither Mayern, Prudgeon, nor
Willis could have got a quarter of the estate they left, barring Consultations;
moreover, it is a safe practice, and no hazard of a man's Reputation. Every
Physician expects no less than a double Fee, and for that each of them will
foist in his medicine, which too often proves to be such a hodgpot, that it sends
the Patient in a little time to his Ancestors. Fernelius, Hollerius, Duretus,
and Cardan, men in their time of far greater fame than any of my Lords
Physicians, chanced to be called in Consultation; the one advised Bleeding, the
other a Julep, the third a Decoction, the fourth a Cordial Bolus, besides many
other Medicines, all to be used in one day: a great charge this must amount to!
The Patient was a Youth troubled with a Headache, Drouth, Gripes and Fever. The
Physicians were no sooner gone, but there comes an Old-woman, recommended by a
Jesuit, who without much consultation anoints his Belly, especially about the
Navil, with a Liniment of Ox-gall, Colocynthis, and Aloes, which in less than
an hour moved a Stool or two, and brought away five or six Worms: Upon this the
Lad was immediately restored to his health. The Physicians returning next
morning to see the Patient, who was abroad at play, were very ill-received by
the Mother of the Boy, who called them Rogues, that would have killed her
Child by bleeding; and Cheats, for taking her Money without deserving it.

Some days before this Doctor left us, there happened a long dispute between me
and two of the former Physicians, who baited me for three hours together in a
Consultation, concerning a purulent evacuation, which I had observed his
Lordship made by Stool. Here they cavill'd, in objecting, they saw no passage
by which matter could be transmitted into the Guts. I told them the passages
were not different from those, through which Nature in a Dropsy, being
stimulated by a Purge, does throw off water, that is collected in the capacity
of the Abdomen. Let them read Hippocr. Aphor. 14. Sect. 6. (...). Likewise it
has been many times observed, that in an Empyema the purulent collection has
been discharged sometimes by Stool, but more commonly by Urine, by the matter
being admitted into the Vessels, and so by Circulation posted down. Read
Scultetus in Armament. Chir. Observe. Li. item Observe. 46. Felix Wurts in his
Surgery, in the Chapt. Of Wounds in the Breast. Also Fabrit. Hildan. in his
Observe. and Skenkius, besides many others. In Impostnumes of the Liver and of
the Mesentery, the matter is commonly evacuated by Stool, by means of the
Vessels, or sometimes by perforation of the pus through the Guts.

It was much about this time, since affairs went on so successfully, the
Physicians of the Brotherhood made it their business to disperse themselves
into most of the great Coffee-houses of the Town, where they sometimes
reported, I was a Mountebank, sometimes a Surgeon, and othertimes an
Apothecary, or a Chemist; for what I had done was merely by chance. I much
wonder, how many such Mountebanks they can show me, that are of their
combination. As for my Education, I question whether I have not had far better
than any of them. The Latin and Greek Tongues I attained in the Low Countries;
then was placed in Exeter-College in Oxford, Doctor Conant being at that time
Rector, where I studied Philosophy several years; then went to Leyden, where I
had one Collegium Theoreticum, and two Collegia Practica under Professor vander
Linden, two Collegia Anatomica under Professor van Horn, and one Colleg.
Botanicum under Professor Vorstius. I went twice a week to the Hospital with
the foresaid Professor vander Linden, to learn to know Diseases, when they came
before me, and how to cure them. I was also instructed there in the Chemical
Art by a German. My Lodging was at a Surgeons house, on purpose to learn the
practical part of Surgery; once a day I went to an Apothecaries shop, kept by a
Relation of my Landlord, where I was taught the trade of an Apothecary. After
this I passed into France, to improve my self by visiting the Sick of the
Charite-Hospital every day, for some Months together; and twice a week I went
to l'Hostel Dieu, made what Observations I could, and committed them to Paper.
Thence I made the petit tour, and in my way I took my Degrees in Physic, both
of Bachelor and Doctor. Upon my return to Paris, I made an agreement with
Monsieur Iannot to dress and assist at the greater Operations in Surgery, at
the forementioned Charite-Hospital: in the intervals of my Studies I was
present at Monsieur Gayen his Anatomies, as many as happened to be during my
abode there. I passed also a course of Chemistry with Monsieur Barlet. Hence I
returned into Holland, where I was admitted Fellow of the College of Physicians
at the Hague, as appears by their Dispensatory in print. After some months I
returned to London, whence I was sent to Flanders, to be Physician (or
Doctor-General, as they commonly phrase it) to the Army, where I continued till
I was tired of the employment, and then took my course for Italy through
Germany; passed away some time at Padua, Bolonia, and Rome; and having seen the
other chief Cities, came back through Switzerland, and so down the Rhine to
Collen, thence into Holland, and soon after into England, where I have
continued ever since, and followed my Practice. Now how these Gentlemen can
make a Mountebank, Surgeon, Apothecary, or Chemist of me, without touching
their own Copyhold, I cannot tell: Sure I am, I was never a Renegado Divine, a
Schoolmaster, or Trooper turned to Physic, or ever put the dice upon them by a
forged Diplome from Oxford; neither am I a mere Velvetier, that has nothing
but the Plush-jacket on his Back, to show what Trade he is of; neither was I
ever Member of a Society that harbored such, but scorn to be of it. I never
gave Mercurius Dulcis to a Lady against Fits, that served me such a jades trick
as to Salivate her, and put her in danger of her Life. I never advised a young
Lady very lately to loose twenty or thirty Ounces of Blood, upon a spotted
Fever, which killed her. I have at no time administered Laudanum Opiatum so
unskilfully, that Patients never awakened again. I never gave Vomit or Purge,
that killed the Patient in the operation. I have not prescribed a Purge very
lately to a young Gentleman, whose small Pox appearing, was mistaken by the
Physician for Heat; which the next day, when the Purge should have been taken,
were plainly risen all over the body, and caused the Doctor to go to Prayers
with the Lady his Mother and the Family, to give God thanks the Purge was not
taken, and made his confession, that it would have killed him, had he swallowed
it, standing ready upon the Table for him. Thus you see Physicians sometimes
tie a Sword over your head by a hair. Was it not the Town-Idol, that by his
Anatomical Craft directed the place of Incision in a Child, whose Anus was
imperforated, upon the Sphincter Muscul, whereof the Infant soon died, he
having wholly missed the Venthole? Did he not a considerable time treat a Lady
out of Town, for a a Rhumatisme of the Shoulder, which proved a large
Imposthumation ready to be opened, and upon apertion discharged above a Pint of
purulent matter, and so was suddenly recovered; who otherwise by this Rhumatic
course might have lost the use of her Arm, and possibly of her Life? But enough
of this at present; Only lest they should run into an inconvenience by a
mistake of the name, I will give them this Advertisement, That there is one
Harvy, whom the courtesy of England gives the title of Doctor, he lives
somewhere near Suffolk-str. learnt his Trade of John ^ontaeus, and does sell
Medicines up and down the Country, though whether he keeps the Stage, I cannot
inform them. Thus much for my own vindication.

The Vulnerary Decoction and Bags derived their Virtues chiefly from Traumatic
Herbs (viz. Pyrola Virga aurea, Sanicula, and some others) that were gathered
on the Alps of Switzerland, and carefully dried, in energy and goodness far
exceeding ours, which were presented to me by the Right Honorable my Lord
Holles.

The form of my Prescriptions of the Vulneraries, Cordials, and other
Medicines, may be seen on the Apothecaries file, the transcription whereof I
have omitted, not only because it would swell this Treatise into too great a
mole, but chiefly by reason those, that shall think fit to answer this Tract,
should have some matter to work on; So that I hope they will as faithfully
transcribe my Bills, as I have done theirs: For I should take it very ill, if
they should traduce me in that particular. A third Reason you shall also know
in my Reply.

My Lord's Diet was chiefly upon Broth made of Mutton, Veal, and Poultry;
sometimes with Vulnerary Herbs in it, other times without. I allowed him no
Flesh for a month or six weeks. From Glysters I disused his Body gradually;
directing at first but one in two days, then one in a week, at length wholly
omitted them for a long interval: They were either of Mutton-broath alone, or
of Milk and Sugar, according as I judged requisite. My Balsam of Sulphur was
continued; I directed also a Vulnerary Decoction; afterward Vulnerary Bags to
be infused in Eight-shilling Beer, and to be drunk in his usual Drink; likewise
Cordials, and sometimes Cordials and Antepileptics mixed together.

The effect of these Medicines were such, that in a short space his Urine
appeared in moderate proportions, of a good laudable consistence and color,
and a healthy hypostasis. Then I thought seasonable, to add Comfry-roots and
Milfoil to his other Vulneraries, to heal and consolidate the punctured Nerve.
After this his Lordship went abroad for two Months, flung off his Medicines too
soon, against my advice; only once in a fortnight I prevailed with him to take
a Laxative of Manna and Syrup of Roses, dissolved in Broth. In the interim my
Lord kept a very ill Diet, sometimes did eat Coleworts, powdered Beef, fresh
Cod, Salmon, Tarts, and the like; dined often abroad, where he scarce refused any
thing, that was brought to the Table: Drank all sorts of Wine, though
moderately; and once beyond other times drank sharp Rhenish-wine upon a
plentiful Dinner of fresh Cod, which occasioned a smart ebullition of his
Humors, bursted open again the Puncture, that was so lately healed, and
procured a fresh Gleet, so violent, that his Lordship relapsed into Pains as
great as ever. There was no way to stop the impetuous current of this Gleet,
and consequently to remove his Pains, but by giving a lift to his humors, and
turn the stream upwards; which I performed by raising a Salivation so gentle,
that his Mouth was scarce sore, or his Face swelled: his Lordship did not
salivate above a Pint and an half in 24 hours, neither was it continued beyond
seven or eight days. The Salivation was no sooner raised, but his Pains vanished
immediately, and in the time of the Flux recovered his Appetite and Strength;
an observation contrary to what it uses to effect in others. However, this was
a Demonstrative Argument a juvante, that his Lordships pains were occasioned,
by a venomous Gleet from a punctur'd Nerve. Upon this I caused my Lord to take
two or three Sweats, upon a draught of a Decoction of Sarsa with Vulnenaries,
in a chair, to sweat out the remains of the Mineral, and dry up the
superfluities of the Succus Nervosus, and other humors: Afterward continued
the same Decoction for some time, though not so long as I did advise. In every
draught of the Decoction were used ten or twelve Drops of my Tincture of
Antimony, which put his Lordship into a condition to be abroad again for
several Weeks; but returning to an irregular Diet, fell into a plain Rhumatism,
viz. smart Pains in his Breast, which after a short continuance would remove to
his Shoulders, thence to his Neck and Elbows, and sometimes to his Back; for
this I advised his Lordship to be blooded a moderate quantity, twice in eight
days, or thereabouts, by which means this foresaid Rhumatism went very well
off. Then I used all the persuasive Arguments, not forgetting that of the
Pitcher going so often to the Well, to observe Rules strictly, and particularly
those relating to his Diet, which my Lord thought a Penance so great (as indeed
it would have been to any man, that had been so long in a course) that he soon
shoke off all directions, and was again as irregular in his Diet, or rather
more than before. The effect of this proved likewise worse than formerly; for
besides Pains, I began now to observe matter (pus) in my Lord's Urine, about
the quantity of a dram, which by degrees increased to the measure of a spoonful
or two, and that of an ill color: For deterging, I gave his Lordship some of
my Balsam of Sulphur, likewise another Tincture of Antimony, with directions
how to use it in a Vulnerary Decoction that was prepared, sometimes with
vulnerary Herbs, boiled in a small Aqua Calcis, and sometimes in water and a
little French-wine. The matter by these means soon grew of a better color, and
well-digested into a white pus, then gradually diminished, until it came to
that pass, which required consolidation and healing: To which intent I gave a
Tincture of Mars of my own preparation, which being all used, as much as I had
of it ready prepared, I was forced to advise Tunbridge-waters, having a Virtue
not only to cleanse, and consolidate, (witness many that have been cured both
of internal and external Ulcers) but to discharge the malignant Gleet of the
Nerve, to which I ever had a particular regard, as being the cause of all.
These Mineral-waters were drunk with so great success in Town, that I was
encouraged to persuade his Lordship to go to the Wells, where the waters, by
the observation of all people, are found much more effectual: But it happened,
that the rockiness of the ways thither had so disturbed those tender parts
(which might have been prevented by a Litter; but that my Lord would by no
arguments yield unto) that it threw him into his pains, which so put us out of
our course, that it was not in the power of Art to recover our point again;
neither did his Lordship drink the Waters more than once; which he should not
have done, had I been present. Being returned to Town, the Ulcer recruded
again, and discharged matter, sometimes for eight or ten days, until what was
engendered was quite drained; then there was an intermission of the discharge,
until there was a sufficient quantity regendred, which would then again be cast
off by Urine.

At length there was so great a Debilitation of the Nerves and Brain,
occasioned by the frequent return of the Pains, and regurgitation of the
venomous Gleet, that it oft-times cast the Patient into Cataleptic Fits, which
by internal Medicines, the application of Ventoses and Epispasticks, I did more
than once bring his Lordship off, beyond the expectation of all persons. His
Body being daily more and more macerated, his Spirits diminishing, and Strength
extremely impairing, God Almighty was pleased to deliver him of all his
miseries, on Michaelmass-day in the morning, about seven of the Clock.

His Lordships Body was opened two days after by command of the Coroners Jury,
who ought to have understood, it was my business (who had attended this Noble
Patient three quarters of a year, and in all probability knew best, where to
discover the Cause (the occasional of his Death) by directing the Surgeon,
Monsieur etc. (a Master-Surgeon of Paris, and of the Hall in London, that
likewise attended last) in the Dissection: But it was so managed, that the
other Physicians and Surgeons had designedly so pallisado'd themselves about
the table, that I had only room to peep through, to observe the hand of the
dissecting Surgeon, that he might not drop in a Pebble into the hollow of the
Kidney, to palliate the reputation of his Masters. After they had left the
Room, I returned to make a narrower search than they had done, there being also
present two Doctors of Physic, not of the College, who were both very expert
Anatomists. Here I found all his Intrails sound, not the least Stone or Gravel
in the Kidneys; but the Psoas Muscul, on the left side, was gangrened, and part
of the Colon, both being turned black, though not sphacelated: for in a
Sphacelus, which is a perfect Mortification, the part is so rotted, that it
will scarce hang together, and is usually attended with a stink; whereas a
Gangrene is only a tendency to, or the beginning of a Sphacelus. I likewise
observed, that the foresaid Muscul, comparing it with the Muscul of the other
side, was diminisht one third part, being corroded away, and turned into
matter, that was engendered through the Ebullition, or in their sense
Fermentation of the malign Gleet and the Blood, which being received i^to the
Veins, was by Circulation carried to the Emulgents and Kidneys, and thence with
the Urine to the Bladder, in the same manner as I have already mentioned
before. So that here in this part was the Ulcer, where no matter was found at
that time; because it had been drained and carried off before, his Lordship not
having discharged any matter five or six days before his Death. Moreover,
pressing hard with my Fingers upon the said Psoas Muscul, that was so extremely
wasted, I felt those great branches of Nerves of the first and third Lumbal
Conjugations (whose anterior branches are disseminated through its body) like a
cord, rigidly contracted, and knotted throughout, a true sign the Puncture was
in one of those Nerves, neither was any other accident capable to produce all
these and the other Symptoms; so that it was no wonder, if upon contraction of
the Nerves, his Lordship's left Leg was contracted shorter than the right. His
difficulty of breathing was beyond all dispute occasioned by consent of a
branch of the first Lumbal pair of Nerves, that is distributed through the
carnous part of the Diaphragm; likewise his Gripes by consent of those other
branches of Nerves, that excur to the Guts. The pretented tumor on the left
Ilia was only a tension of the Membranes. In Conclusion, I will presume to
offer these Queries. 1. Whether I ever receded from the opinion I first stated,
or from the Indications I first desumed. 2. Whether it be not probable, had I
acted as variably as others have done, these great Physicians would have judged
Oribasius de Laqueis a fitter author for me to read than Hippocrates. 3.
Whether a good old Surgeress in the Country might not in the beginning have
been more successful with a Poultess of a few green Herbs on the Common, and
the good Allom Posset. 4. If the method that was followed by me, had been used
at the time, when they began to give his Lordship Opium, and before they had
made use of their Pickaxes and Shovels, whether in all probability the success
would not have been different. 5. Whether it was not as ridiculous as
malicious, in some of these Physicians, to report, that two or three small
Doses of Mercurius Dulcis, (whereof Children of three or four years old have
taken six or seven Doses with great success against the Worms) and those
consented unto by the chief of 'em, as appears by his Mark set to the
Prescription, should have done his Lordship the least injury, having been given
at least Six or Seven Months before. I have no more to say at present, but,
From grand Consultations in Physic, Liberae nos Domine.

Amen*
FINIS.

