THE VANITIES OF Philosophy and Physic: TOGETHER WITH Directions and Medicines
easily prepared by any of the least Skill, whereby to preserve Health, and
prolong Life, as well in those that live Regularly, as others that live
Irregularly.

Comprizing moreover HYPOTHESES different from those of the Schools throughout
almost the whole Art of Physic, and particularly relating to Indigestion, and
other Diseases of the Stomach, Fevers, Consumption, Stone, Gravel, Suppression
of Urine, Apoplexy, Palsy, Madness, Diseases of the Eyes, and others: With
Variety of Medicines, and Rules whereby to make particular Choice out of them.

The whole being a Work very useful to all, but especially to those that have
any Relation to the Art of Physic.

By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. The KING's Physician to the TOWER.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper at the Black Boy, and R. Basset over against the
King's Head, both in Fleetstreet; and W Turner, at the Angel, at Lincoln's End
back Gate, 1699.

THE INTRODUCTION.
HEre is no stout Dedication to any Illustrissimo for a Protector, who beyond
all peradventure knows nothing at all of the matter; and though you should
flatter him with all the hyperbole's of his Family or Ancestors, and of his
great Endowments and heroic Virtues, yet he would think himself not paid in
full, for lending of his Name to adorn your Frontispiece. The motive of
publishing this Tract, is not the intercession of Friends; for none of 'em ever
had the view of any part of it. Neither would I be so unfortunate to please
many of the Faculty; for that must infallibly draw upon me the Envy and Hatred
of Ten times the number, besides Calumnies and Reflections* The chief
inducement proceeds from an inclination to Mankind, to instruct them, to
preserve and prolong their Lives; thereby to prevent them from using fraudulent
Quack Medicines, (which are now become so Universally vendible among them) or
advising with such as are wholly Ignorant, and consequently very bold. I do in
no wise pretend in these following Sheets, to make a Lecture to the Learned;
though I should think my self sufficiently rewarded for my pains, if I could
arrive to the point of advancing the Art of Physic, by offering to them my
Observations on the pretended and fallacious Methodus medendi, depending upon
false Indications (received for true) abstracted from Diseases and their
Causes, and by proposing the trials I have made of the best and most ^elebrated
Remedies, which upon diligent inquiry in my thoughts I could not find to have
contributed any thing toward the curing of Diseases, and though removed upon the
use of 'em, I am certain ought to be ascribed only to time and strenght of
Nature, and to be termed Curing Diseases by Expectation. Besides, I hope by
making so great a number of Doubts, and moving as many Difficulties, to have
done some Service to the Art, in giving learned Men the occasion to remove
them, and to take seriously into their consideration, whether all, or most
part, and indeed any part of what the Ancients have transmitted to us
concerning Diseases, and their pretended Remedies recited in their Books, and
by others afterward compiled into Dispensatories, ought to be received by us
with an implicit Faith, so as to doubt less of the truth of them, than of
those fine Histories of an Alexander, or a Caesar.

After all, I must tell you, a Self-interest prevailed very much with me in the
printing of this, which is, that writing an ill hand, and being puzzled
sometimes to read it, and the Matter not digested into any sort of order, I
might have a more easy recourse to my own Thoughts and Sentiments, being
expressed in Characters more legible, and so disposed, that I could then more
readily turn to them.

I do also think my self obliged to take notice, that in the following
Discourse I have very much receded from those Opinions written by me in former
Treatises, whereinto the almost universally received Doctrines of Authors, and
my neglect of examining of them rationally and experimentally, had led me, as
you may more particularly observe hereafter, for all which Terence in Adelphis,
Act. v. Sc. iv. seems to make a sufficient Apology, viz.

Nunquam i^^ quisquam been subducta ratione ad vitam fuit,
Quin res, aetas, usus semper aliquid apportet novi,
Aliquid moneat: Ut illa, quae te s^ire credas, nescias,
E^, quae tibi puta^is prima, in experiundo ut repudies.
The Sense in English is; That no Man ever made so exact a Caculation of
matters in his life time, but either the occasion of things, or length of
Years, or Experience, does offer something that is new; and gives you to
understand, that what you thought you knew very well, you do not know at all;
and causes you by making trials to reject that, which before you did most
approve of. This I must own to have found true in my self, and particularly in
reference to continual putrid Fevers, which are most common in France, and
malignant Fevers most frequent in England, very few of the former being
observed here. I did as near I could imitate the generality of Practisers in
curing of them; I advised Bleeding as frequently as others, though nothing near
so frequently as now they do, which is a far greater Error in malignant Fevers
(as most of ours are) than in those, commonly called Continual Putrid Fevers;
not forgetting cooling Apozems and Iuleps, that allay the heat, and abate
Thirst; sweating Iuleps and Pouders to drive out the Heat, that is, those
nitrosulphureous and bituminous Particles that might occasion that heat, as I
then thought, and not negl^cting Glistering and Blistering; for I did observe,
that whoever died without the application of Spanish Flies, the Vulgar did most
certainly impute the Cause of that Man's death to the ignorance or neglect of
the Physician, in not applying of the Tormentors. Upon the calculation of the
whole matter (as Terence says) I found by length of years, that caeteris
paribus, as many as were not physically treated, recovered, and in some Seasons
many more recover^d than thos^ that had been often Blooded, Cordial'd and
Sweated, Glyster'd and Blister'd: Which wrought this Opinion in me, that all
the Hypotheses of Fevers, whether seemingly true or false, were of no manner of
service, to ground the practical part upon; for even ^ow do what you can, the
Fever walks on from the Beginning through the Augment to the State, and if the
Patient has not been over-blooded, or preposterously purged, he may pass
through the Declination to a condition of health. This being seriously observed
by me, put me upon forming a different Hypothesis, and Indications conformable
to it, whereunto the Indicata, or Remedies responding do evidently and sensibly
abate the Cause and Symptoms, without suffering the Fever to run up to a state.
I have bad very lately occasion to make observation upon a sort of malign
Fever, that was popular about us. They were generally taken with Coughs,
Drowsiness, moveable Ioint-pains, commonly termed Rheumatic Pains; some did
spit Blood, and afterward Matter; they were for the greatest part free from
Drought, their Urin of a good color with a whitish Sediment, the Pulse slower
than usually in the state of health. They generally said they ayled nothing,
they were not sick, but they had gotten a great Cold, though they were suddenly
reduced to the greatest weakness. Those that upon their own heads, were blooded
after the fourth day, or were Blooded more than onc^ died. Others that were
blooded sparingly once within the two first days, sensibly recovered upon the
using of an uncommon Antifebril Medicine. Another Mistake I have often taken
notice of imp^r^ing, that what is expectorated by Patients properly
Consumptive, by reason of an Ulcer in the Wind pipe, or the Bronchia (for it is
not f^equently observed to be in the Lungs) attended with an Hectic Fever, is
all pus, or a materia purulenta, which is not possible; for should all that
thick glary green^^s^, yellowish, and sometimes whitish matter be pus, that is
expectorated by such, which I have seen has exceeded the measure of a quart,
and more, in four and twenty hours, it would exceed the quantity of forty or
fifty very large external Ulcers, though situated near great Vessels; so that
I conceive there is only some purulent matter mixed with a slyme corrupted, and
putrefied to an extremity, and therefore that commonly is not only attended
with a stink, but all their breathing out of their Lungs, and Pores of the
ambient Skin, stinks, as does also their Victuals, if by chance they happen to
vomit them up. Wherefore I do apprehend, that all the Humors in their Vessels
are corrupted and stink, and that all their Bowels are tainted: So that the
French have no other word to denominate a Consumptive, than Pourie, which
signifies rotten: Were it only an Ulcer, the Difficulty would not be very
extraordin^^y, that being easily cured; for we see daily, that the Ulcers
occasioned by a Pleurisy, and a Peripneumonia, are often cured very speedily of
themselves, without administering any Medicines. To pretend to cure a Confirmed
Consumptive, is equal to make a new Man, new Bowels, and new Humors: It is in
the beginning only this Disease admits of a Cure, and which must be performed
with Remedie^ very uncommon.

Before I leave this Subject, I ought to obviate a very considerable Objection,
viz. A Stinking Brea^h, which some are affected with during the whole Course of
their Lives, to a degree, that they are capable to perfume a whole Room, is
commonly supposed to proceed from putrefy'd or rotten Lungs, notwithstanding is
seldom or never attended with an Hectic Fever; and as incurable as it is, is
not accompanied with a rotten Cough, nor does it taint the Bowels, nor infect
the whol^ Mass with Putrefaction; and therefore an Ulcer in the Lungs, Aspera
Arteria, and Bronchia, cannot import that Danger, nor infect the Bowels and
Humors with a Stink and Putrefaction, as the foregoing Discourse seems to
insinuate. This Difficulty is easily removed: That sort of Stinking Breath,
which is here instanced, does not proceed from the least Putrefaction of the
Lungs* for very often those Persons so affected have very sound Lungs* breathe
well and free, live to a great Age, and digest their Victuals very well; which
is a sign also that neither the Stomach can be suspected to steem up such a
lasting ungrateful Fum^, though it must be granted, that a stinking Breath may
for a time be occasioned by Steams, arising from a foul Slyme in the Stomach,
corrupting there, and relaxing the upper Orifice so, as it does not close so
exactly as it ought: But this is soon cured, by clearing the Stomach by a
Vomit, or Purge. You are therefore to apprehend, that the Cause of a perennal
Stinking Breath in those healthful Persons, is to be imputed to Slyme ousing
daily and hourly out of the Glanduls of the Throat, and harbored in some deep
small hollowness or crevice near the Tonsils, and sometimes on the backside of
the Uvula, either toward the Right or Left Tonsil, where being kept long, and
constantly meeting there with a putrid Slyme that was left there before, does
corrupt and putrefie the Slyme that ouseth thither every Moment: The Breath of
the Lungs passing by, carries those putrid Steems with it, and so causes that
Stinking Breath, which is but very little amended by sweet perfumed Lozenges,
chawing of Orange-peel, Spices, or sweet Confects. The only Palliative Remedy
is, to use a strong abstersive penetrating Gargarism four or five times in a
Day, especially in the Morning soon after rising, and at other times after
eating and drinking, made of a good quantity of Wormwood-tops, Century-flowers,
Orange-peel and Iuniper-berries, boiled in Vinegar, or White Wind, sharpened
with Spirit of Sulphur. This, by piercing into that Crevice, or Hollowness, and
wiping off the putrid Slyme, removes the Cause, and renders the Breath very
tolerable for a considerable Interval, and by chance may in time wholly cure
it, though commonly it is incurable.

To conclude; I do wish, that what I have published in these following Papers
may be as serviceable to others, as I do conceive (if I am not under a Mistake)
they are, and ^ave been to me.

THE VANITIES OF Philosophy and Physic.
CHAP. I. Representing some Vanities of common Receipts, Herbs and Herbals.
1. Though all Nations are imbued with various Speci^ick Qualifications, wherein
each differ from the other, yet that of Credulity, or an easy rash and
inconsiderate belief may be conceived, to be universal to Mankind, and to which
not improbably ought to be imputed the sequel of the most frequent and greatest
Errors, Deceits, and Impostures, most Men are daily and hourly plunged in, as
the source and spring of all, as may be plainly Evidenced in each of the three
subsequent Faculties, I mean Divinity, Law, and Physic. The Popish, Mohammedan,
Sun, Moon, and Devil Worshipping Religions, embraced by such innumerable
Multitudes, also all Heresies, Schisms, pretended Witchcrafts, Sorceries, and
Exorcisms, howsoever erroneous, imposing, and deceitful these all may be
censured, ^low from no other head or fountain, than an easy inconsiderate
belief given to the insinuations of cunning subtle little Priests; And he that
gives a precipitant credit to the Language of a Seller of Lands, Houses, or
other Merchandises, does not rarely repent his rash belief, especially when he
adds to his ^rror, his too easy acceptance of relief, from the doubtful
remedies of a vulgar Lawyer: But it is the third Topic beforementioned, is
designed for the chief subject of the present Discourse, which I shall
endeavor to expl^in in its extent.

2. That most of Men do very readily take upon trust any Remedy, or receipt,
that is confidently recommended to them, can scarce be contr^dicted; and their
fond passion in the inconsiderate belief of 'em is so great, that without any
loss of time, they are to be Registered in their Book of Receipts, handed to
them possibly by their Grannam, and Archive like to be locked up in their Desk,
secured in a locked Closet, within a locked Room. Three such Locks being broke
open by a Notorious Thief, Stole thence a Hundred Pounds in Moneys numbered,
and a Book of manuscript Receipts finely covered. The party injured condoled
the loss of his Remedy-Manuscript to such a degree, that it wholly drowned the
loss of his Money-bag, which he would readily have compounded for the restoring
of the Book, which the blank paper in it excepted, would have been overvalued
at Twopence.

3. The next recital coming within my knowledge, will give you a farther taste
of this sort of foolish Credulity. The Servant of a Linnen-Draper had so great
an Interest in her Mistress, as to borrow out of her Husband's Closet a Book of
scribled Receipts, which through a Communicative kindness to one of my
Maidservants, was entrusted with her to be Transcribed; but the Master daily
conversing in his Closet, soon missed what he so frequently eyed, and valued
above all what was in it; upon a strict enquiry after the matter, his Wife as
soon qualified his uneasiness, by acqainting him where this valuable Treatise
was to be found, who not long after accosted my Maid several days, being
delayed for want of an opportunity of Transcribing. The person being tired by
unsatisfactory answers, resolved to disclose to me the cause of his so frequent
Conferences with this Menial of mine; and promising to use my Authority with
her, I did not doubt, but I should oblige him with the return of his Book next
Morning at a certain Hour, at which time precisely he came, when I did not fail
to discharge my promise, in repossessing him with his Book, which he received
from me with all the respectful Reverence, that Hands and Knees could express.
You will not judge it improbable, that my Curiosity should lead me to inspect
these Papers, which to the best of my Memory contained an excellent way to Stew
a Calves-Head with Oysters, another to make Fritters, and some other pieces of
Cookery; also a Salve for Chilblains, a Plaster for all sort of Swellings, an
infallible Drink for the Stone, a most certain Remedy against a Consumption,
and all sorts of Coughs of the Lungs, being a Syrup jumbled of most strange
Materials. Varieties of other Infallibilities of Remedies equally foolish I
pass by, and shall only remark the immensity of this Man's belief, by his
Mournful Countenance, whilst his Book of Secrets was absent from him, and to
what serenity he was restored upon his reinstatement.

4. Suppose one of these Medicines were to be taken out of this Magazine of
Health, and to be applied against a Consumption, Stone, or any thing else, the
failure he would most certaintly attribute to the want of some of the
Ingredients, their too long being gathered, too much or too little being
boiled, or to a hundred other Miscarriages, insomuch, that it would not give
the least shock to the stability of his belief, which might not be singular in
this person, but general in thousands.

5. It would by many be Censured an Usury in a person, that from the Expense of
thirty or forty Shillings, in the purchase of a Gerard's Herbal, or such like
picture Book, he should expect such an excessive Interest for his Money, as the
value of knowing the faces and virtues of so many hundreds, or rather thousands
of Plants does amount to: And indeed the Bargain of that Plant-Book would prove
extraordinary Cheap, did what is contained in the hundredth part of it, answer
to Truth in matter of Fact, which gives me occasion to make this Inference;
that Herbals are sitter for Gardiners than Physicians, in furnishing the former
with a Scheme of Figures of so many thousand Weeds there described, and
consequently to throw them out of their Manures, as Absorbers of the juice of
the Earth, that should give Nourishment to their Esculents. However, to prevent
contradicting the Old Phrase, Natura nihil facit frustra, it may not untruly be
affirmed, that the generality of Herbs growing in Fields, Meadows, and Hills,
Nature seemed chiefly designed to bestow upon Beasts. It would therefore be an
Employment sitter for Boys, that love Rambling and santring about Fields, and
Hedges, to go upon Simpling, (as our Botanists do term it,) than for Men, to
make such needless, and not unchargeable Journeys, to the remotest Hills, and
Woods, only to be acquainted with some New faces of Plants, and take the
Portrait of 'em, to be placed together in some bulky Volume, whose immensurable
industry does no more than equal those, that have taken the pains to abstract
the Pictures of variety of Beasts, Fishes, Birds, Flies, and other Insects, in
the manner of Aldrovandus and his Mimicks, who in that sort have passed their
Lives in doing of nothing.

6. What respect is paid to Hippocrates and Galen, for their Services in
Medicine, and to Geber or Paracelsus in Chimistry, Dioscorides may Challenge in
Herbary, he being by Profession an Old Soldier, and worn out by the Fatigues of
Campaigns, with the assistance of his Crutches and Stumps made a shift to
Perambulate Woods, Hills, and Dales, in pursuit of Herbs and Weeds, with a
design to get his Bre^d, by Experimental Application in the Cure of Diseases,
wherein be attained the success of Gypsies, that by foretelling the ignorant
their good or bad luck, sometimes hit, and sometimes missed. Their casual
hitting gives them Reputation enough, to persuade people, that their missing is
occasioned by their misunderstanding the South-Sayer's Predictions, or their
own forgetfulness of what was told them, so that many do readily believe these
Gypsies to be never failing Prognosticators, not unlike Dioscorides his Herbal
performances, who by his green Remedies observing some Diseas^s disappearing,
made no doubt of ascribing their Cure to 'em, and as boldly to hand the
Probatums to succeeding Ages, which as confidently without the least scruple,
even to this day do receive them, not thinking that length of time, change and
spareness of Diet, alteration of the Air and Season, universal and particular
evacuations might perform the main part; the Truth of which seems by many
instances to appear to me. That Betony, Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, Mother of
Time, French Lavender, Piony, May-Lilly, Lime-Tree-Flowers, and the like, upon
the use of 'em, by direction of the Learned, for many Days, Weeks, and Months,
have failed in the Cure of Headaches, Tremblings, Swimmings of the Brain,
Convulsions, and other Distempers of the Head, can best be attested by the
Advisers; though it cannot be denied, that some of these Diseases have gone off
in very few, upon the application of the foresaid Vegetables; but whether to be
imputed to the virtue of these, may be matter of inquiry: However, hit once and
miss a hundred times, is a sign of no great infall^bility.

7. That a Million of Consumptives laboring of an ulcerous Disposition of the
Lungs, have been frustrated by a very long use of Ground Ivy, Maidenhair,
Ysop, Scabious, Lungwort, Coltsfoot, Sanicle, Golden-Rod, Ladies-Mantle, Bugle,
and forty more, though used in all the forms and shapes; is sufficiently
recorded in most of the Churchyards of this Island.

8. The Stone-grinding and Piss-driving-Herbs, as Saxifrage, Maidenhair,
Spe^dwell, Horseradish, Fennil, Persly, Broom, Gromwell, Daucus,
Butchers-Broom, Cicers, Winter-Cherries, and the rest, are not much depended
upon by those, that have made trial of 'em for four or five Months
successively, though now and then one or other, that has fancied a great
relief, does revive their dying Reputation. These and the like instances do
aptly compare the practice of Physic to a Lottery, where one Fortunate
Adventurer saves the sinking credit of that Cheating Mystery, against a hundred
blank Miscreants, by being proclaimed such by sound of Trumpet.

9. To Madder, and many other Vegetables is ascribed Opening, Stopping,
Binding, curing of the Jaundice, removing Obstructions of all sorts,
suppressing the Menstrua, Loosenesses, and all sorts of Bleedings, besides many
other feats, that are contrary to each other. As for Amulets and other
Transplanting and wonderful deeds, theyare appropriated toabundance of Plants,
of which, and several Physic Golden Legends the Herbarists speak wonders, if
you can believe them. As for my own particular, beyond forty or fifty
Vegetables, though I have made trial of hundreds of 'em, I find no great occasion
for them, and therefore shall supersede taking any farther notice in this place.

CHAP. II. Of the insignificancy of the Old and New Philosophy.
1. THings in Philosophy and Medicine, which we do not know, are beyond all
manner of Comparison more than those things we do know.

2. The greatest part of those things in Medicine, which we pretend to know, is
conjectural, and uncert^in.

3. Many, if not most of these things, which we do peremptorily affirm to be
this, or that, to be caused by this, or that, or to cause and effect this or
that, are, or may be proved, to be false, ^r erroneous.

These Positions being only my particular Creed, whereinto the weakness of my
capacity has been wrought by thousands of instances, I shall undertake to
offer only some few, the shortness of my purpose no otherwise permitting.

1. Natural Philosophy is propounded under Two Heads, viz.. Physica generalis,
and specialis; that is to say, Gene^^l Natural Philosophy, and particular. The
former expounds in general terms, what a Natural Body is, namely, That it is a
thing extended, moved, or quiet, figured, and so or so placed, Situated, or
posited. Corpus Natural est res quanta, mota, vel quieta, figurata, and
taliter, v^l taliter posita.

2. What is all this but Metaphysics, namely, general Notions drawn from all
particular Bodies? A Natural Body does consist of Quantity, that is, extension
into length, breadth, and depth, mensurability, or divisibility into Particles,
(it is much as one in the Original,) of motion, or rest, of figure, and position
or situation. Upon these five Topics follows a very long Cant, and of little
more signification than the Predicaments, or Materia, Forma, and Privatio. But
its a wonder to my crude Thoughts, Number was lest out, since there is no
complete Natural Body, but does consist of a definite number of Particles;
however ever it may be presumed, that Number is comprehended under Extension,
sc. Quantitas discreta.

3. The Physica Specialis depends upon the application of the forementioned, to
every Subgenus, Species, and particular Body, and by that you are to know, what
any particular Body is, of what it does consist, and how each is differenced
from the other.

4. What sound this modern Science of Bodies makes upon an anvil, the following
recital will inform you. A Smith being very sedulous in the management of his
hot Iron, found himself much interrupted by the importunities of a begging
Scholar, enforcing his Argument for an Alms of a small piece, with an Harangue
of his Merits, arising from his being a Master of Arts, of I know not how many
years standing, a Doctor in Philosophy, embroidered with Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
and abundance of other Giblets of Learning. The Smith to free himself of all
this impertinence, asks, what that red hot thing was, he held in his Tongues,
what it was made of, and what difference there was between that and Copper; to
which the Beggar replied, it was Iron, a Metal, or a Business dug out of the
Groun^, that will melt, and can be hammered; and so is Copper, infers the
Smith; Ergo, Copper is Iron. No Master, says the Medicant, there is a vast
discrepancy between them in their insensible particles, which are of different
insensible extensions, insensible figures, insensible positions, insensible
motions, and insensible immobilities. Ergo, then says the black opponent, no
two Bodies can be alike, two drops of Milk, of Water, of Wine, or any liquid
may be insensibly different. Thou art a most insensible Philosopher, a Man is
not a Horse, a Sow is not an Elephant, Wood is not Ch^ese, and so of all
others, because their Particles are of various insensible figures, positions,
etc. The most subtle Particles of the Forge fire, and the insensibilities of
this Arts Master, had by this time fermented Vulcan into a torrent of
Maledictions, crying out, you are a Cheat, to defraud the impotent poor of
what, they may justly crave from the Charity of all Men; a lazy, slothful,
unthankful Knave, enjoying the fruits of thy laborious Mother Earth, without
returning the gratitude of a days Plowing, or Dunging, which you are made for;
an incorrigible sturdy Beggar; see how the sleeves of your totterdemalion Gown
are crammed from the Elbow to the Ground with Pie-crust, and pieces of
Roast-Beef, and what is here in the bottom? a couple of Silver Spoons, two laced
Hankerchiefs wet, as if newly stolen off of some Hedge. You pilfering Dog,
disrobe that Friar Bacon's Livery, off with your square pancake Bonnet, and put
on that Old Coat of mine there, and this Old Hat; blow the Bellows, and I will
teach you an Art beyond all your Masterships idle soppish Arts, and Sciences,
that shall get you an honest Livelihood, or else away to the House of
Correction, that will soon drive out your insensible Particles, and make you
sensible of what it is to Beg, Cheat, Pilfer, and Steal.

5. To what degree of satisfaction this Globular sort of Philosophy, pretending
by its insensibilities to explicate the principles, causes, and affections of
natural Bodies, does superate the old pedantick Sophistry of matter, ^orm,
privation, and the four Elements, together with their assigning the effects of
natural Bodies to occult qualities, may justly be inquired into, since the
answer is equal, that such or such things are caused by occult qualities, or by
insensible Particles, of insensible blind figures, and unknown positions.
However, both the Globular and Peripatetick Philosophy afford matter sufficient
to Chatter, Cavil, and trifle away the flower of a Man's time, as if designed
only for an Employment to divert from Idleness and Debauchery, not unlike
sending Children to School, to prevent them from Carts and Coaches in the
Streets or Highways. Those do properly enough come within the saying of
Salust. Vitam silentio veluti pecora transeunt; especially when continuing in
an University, and possibly in a Fellowship, till their Bodies are grown rusty
with Sloth and Laziness, and their Heads turned moldy with gray Hairs, whose
Studies indeed ought to have been determined in seven Years, were it only to
quicken their Industry, and make way for other indigent Students to succeed
them. A Peacock in all his gaudy Plumage is a Creature less stately and proud,
than a Master of Arts treading to the Schools in his Formalities; and though
Homage be paid him in his way thither by Undergraduates, and Bachelerios, his
resined Manners will scarce allow his Mastership to ^ouch the angl^ of his
Bonnet. Clarissime M^gister quare rides? Rideo, quia Magister sum.

CHAP. III. Of the Digestion and Indigestion in the Stomach, and the vanity of
the cause thereof.
IT might be reasonably expected from the Tradition of so many Ages, and the
Studies of six or twelve Months of so many Masters of Arts of seven Years
standing or walking, before they assume the tusted Gown, that Galen's Theory
would be rendered as Diaphanous, and demonstrable as Euclid; yet to my dim
Oculation, Many, if not most of their Notions, seem still to be plunged in a
dark Chaos; for as obvious as the Digestion of the Food in the Stomach may be,
though it be the first Operation in the Body of Man, and therefore ought to be
better understood, yet to me seems now, nothing can be worse explained, than by
asserting the dissolution into Chyle, to be performed by the natural and
adventitious heat of the Stomach, brought to it by the Arteries and warm
coverings of the Liver, Spleen, and other adjacents. A Share, SeaWolf, and
other Fish, if Credit may be given to all those Writers of India Voyages have
been found to contain in their Bellies a whol^ Man, being thrown overboard,
with all his Clothes upon him, great Joints of stinking Beef, with their huge
Ox Bones in them, and Carcasses of Sheep with their Wool on their Backs, all
which were discerned almost digested into a thick slimy Juice, without
observing any sensible heat, but rather coldness. The like may in proportion be
instanced in a fresh water Share, I mean the Pike, whose vigor in digesting an
Ox paunch, and other Garbage, likewise Boney Fish of considerable bigness,
without any sensible heat in their Bowels, or any steaming warmth, is an
Argument, that inforceth the former. The heat in the Maws of Poultrey, which is
inferior to that of the Stomach of a Man, cannot be conceived in any wise
proportionable, to dissolve the husks of Barley or Oats, and especially small
pebbles, which the extremity of Fire may melt, but not dissolve, and yet the
heat of the Stomach of a Horse, though much more intense, does make much less
impression upon Grain, which commonly slip away untouched with their Dung. It
has likewise been decided by common observation, that those who heat their
Stomach at Meals with Wine, or soon after with Brandy, have a more difficult
Digestion than others, who moisten their Victuals with small Beer, Wine diluted
with Water, or only Water, as is usual to three fourths of the Universe.

2. Neither am I convinced, that those who ^scribe the Energy of Concoction to
an Acid ^erment, have in any wise hit their Mark; for considering fermentation
imports properly an insensible, and in some things a sensible small ebullition
or simpering of any natural, or artificial, mixed, or compound liquid, soft, or
consistent Body, which by rarefaction, or widening and opening the close parts,
does let out, or expel such particles, or bodies, that are Heterogeneous,
whereby a depu^ation of the said mixed body is attained: And if this
rarefaction, or widening, and multiplying of the pores of the Body, be
protracted to too long a continuance, or performed with too great violence, the
most subtle particles of that body, which are the chief constituents of it, are
forced, or let out together with the Heterogeneous, whereupon a dissolution,
putrefaction and corruption of the whole mixture must necessarily ensue, as
appears in the fermentation of Wine, Beer, Cider, etc. which being raised too
high, or continued too long, does most certainly convert them into Vinegar.
Dow, by yist or levain, is huft up (or in the common phrase does rise) or
rarefied, that is, opened, or widened in all its pores, and often multiplied,
whereby the most subtle particles, or matter of the fire (being the heat of the
Oven) is let in, which together with the constituent most subtle particles of
the Dow, do expel the nitrous, and other heterogeneous slymy parts, which
otherwise would prove very offensive to the Stomach, and in some be rendered
indigestible. Now if the Dow continue too long in rising, or rise too fast, it
soon falls, and is apt to turn sour, and being then put into the Oven, can
never b^ well baked, and does in a short time turn moldy.

3. To say then, that Bones, Grissels, or any other hard matter, is rarefying
in a Dog's stomach, meaning thereby fermenting, and consequently digesting, to
me seems a very improper way of speaking; for fermentation does in my Opinion
ever follow Solution, in order to depu^ate and render homogeneous, what is
dissolved; how then can those Bones be said to be fermenting before they are
dissolved and digested?

4. It is to the Spittle many Physicians of good Fame do attribute the chief,
or rather sole power of dissolving the Victuals into Chyle, by raising a
Fermentation in the Meat and Drink, that is swallowed down into the Stomach; for
being chawed, crushed, rolled, and turned about in the Mouth, it is mixed with
such a proportion of Spittle, which by its Spirits and salive Particles,
assisted somewhat by the native and ambient hea^ of the Stomach, penetrating
through the pores of the Victuals, raises a sort of a small Ebullition, whereby
they are dissolved. But if you consider the nature and use of Spittle, probably
this matter may appear otherwise. Spittle cannot properly be called an
Excrement, which is of no use, and ought to be thrown out and expelled; but a
Recrement, which is of use and ought not to be expelled, unless it be
abounding, and after it has performed what its int^nded for* Horses, Cows, and
other Animals have their Mouths and Throat always moistened with Spittle, but
which is seldom or never expelled by them by spuration, as very often it is by
the Humane kind, when its become superfluous; which is an Argument, its no
Excrement. The use of it to me appears, to moisten the several parts of the
Mouth, Gullet, and Windpipe, and to keep them constantly glib, smooth, and
soft; for otherwise the Tongue and Jaws by their frequent motion, and the
steems that continually pass out of the Lungs in the expiration, would render
those parts so dry, stiff, rough, and unpliable, that they would b^come
useless. The Windpipe would be so corrugated and contracted, that it would put
a stop to the respiration; the Gullet would likewise through want of Spittle
suffer such a streightning and roughness, that it would be utterly incapable to
give passage to the Victuals. Touching the nature of Spittle, it is in no wise
different from Lympha, which is contained in other Lymphae-ducts, the Ductus
Salivales being no other, and as long as it continues in the said Ductus, its
much fuller of volatile saline Spirits, which renders it limpid, fluid, and
thin; but being come to the Mouth and the other parts, out of the said Ductus,
those volatile saline Spirits do soon evaporate, and fly away, whereby the
Spittle becomes thick, mucilaginous, and often frothy, by the admixture of
extraneous Air, and other slimy Particles, it meets about the Mouth and Throat.
So that if Spittle be of this nature, it must rather hinder fermentation, and
consequently the pretended solution into Chyle, which that it does, is manifest
in those Melancholians, that are commonly termed Spitters, who generally have a
very bad Digestion. But suppose a Man that abounds with Spittle, should spit a
quantity of it warm out of his Mouth into a warm bolt head hermetically closed,
containing a small bit of Meat, that had been well grinded in a warm Mortar,
and then this mixture being put into a warm sand Bath, do you believe, here
would happen either a fermentation, ebullition, or solution into Chyle, though
it were to continue there six Weeks? Or, suppose a Man should swallow several
great lumps of Flesh without chawing of it, or mixing it with his Spittle, do
you not think, he would digest it into a Chyle, though it might take up some
longer time, than if his Meat was chawed? What Spittle does a Shar^ or Pike mix
with those great pieces of Flesh and Bones, which they swallow without chawing,
and yet digest them sooner, than any other Creature could, as they are in the
Water?

4. That the Lympha in all the Lymphae-ducts, (and the Spittle also though more
sparingly) is perfused with some remaining proportion of volatile saline (that
is Animal) Spirits, appears to me by the similitude of Argument, for
establishing the circulation of the Blood out of the Arteries into the Veins,
and thence into the Arteries again. The chief motive to me being, that the
Heart throwing at every Pulsation such proportions of Blood into the Arteries,
these must of necessity swell to an extremity and burst, were there not other
Vessels, namely, the Veins, ready to receive and unload the Arteries; as for
the swelling of the Arteries on the side toward the Trunc, and of the Veins
toward the extremities of the Body, upon a Ligature made on any of the Joints;
or the Arterial Blood upon Arteriotomy slowing from the Trunc, and the Venal
Blood upon Phlebotomy flowing toward the Trunc, would scarce be persuasive
enough to me to receive that Doctrine, since other Reasons might be given for
those different Intumescencies upon a Ligature, or the different issuing out of
the Blood out of the Arteries and Veins. In like manner I do suppose, that the
Nervous Lympha, which is the Vehicle, and containing Liquor of the Animal
Spirits, is always flowing or dripping from the Brain, and Medulla Spinalis to
most parts of the Body through the Nerves; and cannot be supposed to return
back again naturally, which therefore must of necessity extremely swell, and
stiffen the Nerves, unless received and disburden'd by some other Vessels,
which in all probability must be Lymphae-ducts, containing in substance,
tenuity, clearness, penetrative virtue, and other qualities, a Lympha not
unlike the gleet, that distills from a wounded nerve. Moreover, considering the
valves in the said Lymphae-ducts, opening toward the Trunc, and shutting
toward the extremities, does add to the apparency of the forementioned
supposition, implying there is a circulation of the Animal Spirits and Lympha.
The foresaid Lympha being received by the Lymphae-ducts, must necessarily be
much impoverished in its volatile saline Spirits, and consequently have lost
its power of apporting of motion and sense, though otherwise of very great use.

5. Neither can I conceive, that the Stomach is capable to contain any Acid
juice powerful enough to dissolve Bones, Grissels, Sinews, Skin, and all sorts
of Flesh without hurt, and danger of perforating its membranes, being much
softer and easier to be dissolved, than Bones or Sinews. If you pour the
strongest Vinegar, or Aqua fortis, upon those edibles beforementioned, and set
them over any degree of Fire in a Vessel, stopped as close as if Hermetically
Sealed, for the space of ten or twelve Hours, you will scarce find any
Solution, or at least not comparable, to what a sound Stomach performs in two
or three Hours. Moreover, where any person by sower Belches perceives his
Stomach to be charg^d with a sower juice, his Victuals will scarce be digested,
or dissolved into a good Chyle, but into that sort of slime, which Physicians
term Cruditas acida. And I have frequently observed, that many upon Drinking
sower Beer, or eager Wines, or using sower Sauces to their Victuals, have not
only undergone a very laborious and painful digestion, but oft-times been
forced to throw up their whole Cargo.

6. The Stomach does sometimes receive such sorts of aliment, as Pudding,
Pancake, Custard, Tansie, Minced-Pie, Plum-Broath, Plum-Cakes, and the like,
which in most persons will ferment, and be rarefied to a degree, that will huff
up, distend, and swell not only the region of the Stomach and Hypochonders, but
also their whole Belly, to an extension and uneasiness, that will oblige them
to unbutton, and widen their wasteband. Those recited, and the like edibles,
containing a fermentative spirit in them, seldom fail in fermenting, during
which, as it suspends, or at least retards the Concoction, (notwithstanding
they seem matters so easily digestible, and incomparatively less difficult than
Beef, Pork, etc.) yet the solution cannot, or is seldom performed with vigor,
until the for^said fermentation ceases, which is perceived by the subsiding and
relaxing of their drum bellies. Hence it is, that many do find, they cannot
digest so easily upon drinking bitter or sower Small-beer, or strong Ale, Beer,
or Wine, as a small alish smooth Beer, Water, or Wine and Water, because the
former contain such a large proportion of fermentative spirits. And it is upon
the same consideration, that new Drink not being sufficiently cleared of its
yist, and other feculencies, proves so offensive to digestion.

7. Since I can in no wise apprehend the dissolution of Victuals in the Stomach
to be caused by heat, fermentation, or any cutting corroding acid juice, no
more than Gold, which the extremity of heat will melt, and not dissolve, nor
will a strong corroding Aqua Fortis touch it, yet a small proportion of fluid
Mercury, (which in that form has no manner of a corrosive sharpness in it,)
with the assistance of a very little warmth, does in a short interval of time
very expeditiously and potently, by its most subtle particles insinuating into
its pores, though more close than in any body whatsoever besides its self, tare
it asunder, dissolve, and divide it into the minutest particles. In the same
manner I do conceive, that all sorts of Victuals, be they hard or soft, are as
easily and readily digested in strong and sound Constitutions, by the most
subtle saline particles of the Body, (which are the Animal spirits) steaming in
clouds out of those large Nerves of the sixth pair, that are inserted into the
Stomach, and their numerous branches that are disseminated through its tunics,
which forcing into the pores of the alimentary substances, rare them asunder,
divide, and dissolve them into the minutest particuls, and being mixed with the
moisture of your Drink, are converted into that juice we call Chyle, Hereunto
the warmth of the Stomach derived from the Arteries, and cirrounding Bowels, is
very assistent, though it has been often observed, that some whose Stomach has
been commonly felt very cold by t^ems^lv^s, yet nevertheless had a very potent
digestive faculty, that would subdue the hardest and rawest of meats.

8. Now when the inward coat of the Stomach ( Tunica rugosa) is covered with
too much slime, (for it is necessary it should be covered with a little, to
defend it from the sharpness and roughness of all sorts of Victuals it
receives) so as to stop and plaster up the pores of the Nerves, whereby the
foresaid most subtle saline Particles are in some propotion hindered from
flying out, the digestion becomes slow, laborious, painful, and difficult,
confecting a slimy chyle, which in process of time does turn into many sorts of
Diseases.

9. Of those that drink thick, austere, or adstringent Wines at, or soon after
Meals, or close their repasts with Quince-Marmelade, Chestnuts, Almonds, or the
like, I have experimentally found, that in many, to whom either the lessning
the use, or wholly weaning themselves from those Things, has been advised,
their digestion has been soon reduced to its former Vigor, which before, by
the continual closing of the Pores of the Stomach-Nerves, was exceedingly
debilitated, by the foresaid cloging, and adstringent things.

10. It is likewise as consonant to experience, that those who usually drink
any Wines, not being diluted with Water, or that commonly conclude their
Dinners or Suppers with Banquets of Sweetmeats, Custards, Chescakes, Creams,
and Gelies, do weaken, and in time destroy their Concoction, so as few of them
are found to be long livers; because those beforementioned ma^^rials
containing a fermentative Juice, by raising a Fermentation, do extremely
interrupt and impede the dissolution of Aliments in their Stomachs. Those
Fermentations in the Stomach, upon Fermentative Edibles, are frequently causes,
that produce those flushings in the Face soon after M^als, and at other times
in many Women, and some Men that have weak Digestions, and contain something in
their Stomachs that is Fermentable, against which drinking of Water, or Water
mixed with very little Wine, has often proved an effectual remedy.

11. Some that have for several Years been afflicted after Meals with pain and
disturbances in their Heads, drowsiness, uneasiness in their Limbs,
palpitations, faintnesses, belches, huffings up, and tensions in their
Hypochonders, and Bellies, have been totally cured of all their turbulent
Symptoms, by throwing off all Malt-drinks, and Wine, and gradually using
themselves to drink Water, when all other remedies were so far from giving them
r^lief, that they rather aggravated their complaints. But what is more, it has
been observed, that Chronical-Coughs of many Years continuance, have been not
only removed, but perfectly cured, by exchanging of Malt-drinks and Wine into
Water, or into Water refreshed with a little Wine. And those that have
traveled through Germany, and the Low Countries, might have observed, that the
strongest and healthfulest Bodies are found among the Boars, who for their
ordinary Drink are scarce acquainted with any thing but Whey, or clear Water,
which contributing so much to perfection of digestion, may very reasonably be
esteemed the true cause of their Health, Vigor, and long Life. These and many
more like instances do force this concession from me, that the choice of Drinks
is of greater importance than of Edibles. When Fermentative Drinks, as strong
Beer, and Wine shall disturb and retard Digestion, and cold Water which
suppresses Ferm^ntations (as appears in many Hysteric Women, that by drinking a
Glass of fair Water, do in a moment turn off a fi^) shall in many promote and
enliven Digestion, how can it then be thought, that Digestion is caused by the
heat of the Stomach, or by Fermentation?

12. Though drinking Water has on several occasions proved successful to
admiration, yet particular regard must be had to the Climate, season of the
Year, Age, Sex, Custom, and other Circumstances; for should drinking Water be
recommended to one, who from his Infancy has been used to small Beer, and
living in a Northern cold Climate, in a rough friezing season, and of a tender
Constitution, very unhappy consequences must be expected from such
unadvisedness. Wherefore, where change of Drink shall be judged necessary, from
the continual use of strong Beer, or Wine, you may descend to small Beer,
Barley-Water, clarified Whey, a weak Mead, thin Grewel, or the like.

CHAP. IV. Of the passing of the Chyle into the Guts, and its depuration there.
1 FRom what is here incidently discoursed, I return to a farther explication
of the Digesture of the Stomach, where the Victuals being dissolved, and by
continuance of Concoction smoothed, and brought to an equation, the Chyle does
then require depuration, which is a separation of the thiner and finer parts
from the groser and feculent, by a Fermentative juice, which I suppose to be an
Acid, joined to igneous Spirits, by an intermedium of some glutinous emplastic
Particles, as may be discovered in Yest, or Levain. This Fermentation (I will
only suppose) happens at the close of the Digestion, and begins to rarefie and
huff up the Chyle in the Stomach, whereby the lighter and thiner parts become
rising and swelling, and gradually work over the Pylorus into the small Guts,
the Stomach in the same proportion contracting it self into a lesser and
shallower compass, as it is emptying and growing less full, and distended, by
which means the trajection of the Chyle is facilitated, until there is nothing
left, but a gross and feculent acid juice, serving to assist as a dissolvent to
digest what may remain more difficult, be it some grisly or sinewy, or other
tough hard part of the Victuals, Pye-crust, or any thing else that is more
difficult to digest, than what is already wrought over the Pylorus into the
small Guts; which being performed, the same acid juice by its sharpness pricks
and stimulates the Fibers of the Stomach, (contracting it self into a very
narrow Volumn) throws that also, together with what it has dissolved, over the
Pylorus. Whence I do give my self a probable reason, why the latter part of the
digestion is always acid, and why at that time we are subject to four belches,
and how it happens, that the fullness and distention of the Stomach, which most
are sensible of at the end of their Meals, does gradually lessen, and as soon
as the sour appears is quite allayed, and the digestion finished. And if I
attribute not too much to fancy, I do observe, that many Persons toward the
end of Concoction, do perceive an uneasiness of heat all over, especially in
their Faces, extremities of their Hands and Feet, but particularly those that
are weakly, as Hypochondriacks and Hystericks, who about that time, and a good
while after, are subject to have flushings in their Faces, and their symptoms
(as faintnesses, palpitations, roaring Winds, etc.) set into motion.

2. Upon the dripping of the Chyle into the small Guts, the Fermentation is
considerably augmented, by the meeting with the excrementitious Juices from the
Glanduls of the Pancreas, and Mesentery, mixed with Gaul from the biliary
Vessels, whereby the Chyle is wholly depurated of all its feculencies, which
being separated, are termed excrements of the Belly. That there is such a
fermentation in the Guts, appears by the tension and intumescence of the Belly,
in some more, in others less, which may be perceived two, three, or four Hours
after Meals, according to the expedition of their digestion, separation, and
subsequent fermentation.

3. As I am not very flexible to recede from the general opinion of the
Ancients and Moderns, importing, that the first Concoction is performed, either
by virtue of the heat of the Stomach, or by force of Fermentation, as it is
asserted by most of the learned, that were cotemporaries with the famous Dr.
Willis, and others that do succeed him: Neither am I willing to be thought so
criminal, as to be contumatiously guilty of Heresy in Physic, yet its
pardonable, if not allowable, to be Shismatical in ones proper opinion, which
in all Mankind is free, and not to be compelled; and therefore I do declare,
that nothing but late experiments of no small number, do induce me to retract
my former sentiments of this, and many other matters in Medicines, as firmly
believing, what I have expressed concerning the first Concoction, and
Fermentation, as that the Sun is the cause of Daylight; though at the same time
its very possi^le for me to be under a mistake. But whether all this be really
true, or only in appearance, I am thence provided with the solutions of hundred
of difficulties, offering themselves on those subjects, and the full and plain
discovery of the causes of many, if not most Diseases, and what is beyond all,
not unsuccesfully conducted in the practical part, which to me is a
satisfaction beyond what I have met with, either in conversing with Printed
Authors, or with Men reputed very learned and experienced in the Faculty.

4. Upon the well beginning depends the well finishing and completing, the
Stomach being the beginning of the whole Body, it is from the true Knowledge of
its fabric, Constitution, Action, or Operation, the knowledge of the
Constitution of all the Bowels, their Actions, and Operations of the whole
Animal is derived. The Stomach is the only and true tuning part of the whole
Body, which being well or ill tuned, causes a Harmony, or Discord of all the
Bowels. The Stomach being strong and vigorous, performing its Office, or
Action, and Operation in perfection, renders the Body Strong, Healthful, and
long Lived; but in proportion, as it is defective in any part of its Office,
Diseases in it self, and all other parts of the Body are engendered, answerable
to the degree and quality of its defect, and to the dependency all the Bowels
have on it; for being the Laboratory of the whole, whatever is ill prepared
here, cannot be mended afterward, by any of the succeeding Bowels, the Chyle
being vicious or corrupted, can never be converted into good Blood, nor that
into good Animal spirits, no more than you can make good Butter or Cheese out
of sower or corrupted Milk. And as most, if not all internal Diseases, (Endemic
and Epidemic excepted,) are Originally produced in the Stomach, they are
likewise to be cured by the Stomach, internal Remedies exerting their first and
stronger force upon it, the virtues whereof it afterward transmits to the part
Diseased. Neither is it to any purpose, to pretend to cure any internal
Disease, without first of all having put the Stomach into good order, which
done, most Diseases are ready to go off of themselves.

5. The Stomach bears an adequate Analogy to the root of a Tree, and may
properly enough be called the root of a Man; for as the root of a Tree is the
beginning of it, receives or draws the juice of the Earth, to prepare and
convert it into Food for the Trunc, and all the Branches, and being well
digested, transmits it to all the parts; in like manner, when the Tree is
observed not to be thriving, or the Branches to be decaying, changing of
color, withering, or dying, where do they look for the cause, but at the root
of the Tree? Even so is it with the nourishing of the parts of the Body, and
the Diseases they are subject unto, in relation to the Stomach.

CHAP. V. Describing Medicines to preserve Health, and their Preparations.
BY the deduction from the preceding Discourse, my Opinion persuades me, that
the weakness of the Stomach, and its faintly performing its Office, is only
occasioned by the debility of the Stomach Nerves, and its numerous branches, by
being plastered up by too much Fleam, gross acid dregs, indigestible Meats, or
offensive Drinks, or other matter admitted into the Stomach, which by lodging
there too long, assume a corroding Quality; or by too much heat, and too little
moisture, are converted into a nidorous crudity. This supposed, I do believe,
and have experimentally observed, that all those Corroboratives of the Stomach,
whose virtue is commonly asserted, to consist in a gentle restrictive and
warming Quality, whereby those slimy Humors are more firmly cemented, such as
Aromaticum Rosatum, Caryophyllatum, Cinnamon Water, those hot spicy
Brandy-waters, a red Tincture of Roses, Methridate, Treacle, all those Compound
Electuaries framed of heating Conserves, Condits, and Peptick Pouders, are so
far from contributing the least strength to the Stomach, that rather a contrary
effect has ensued, and being long continued, do carry danger with them. The
only means I have hitherto found to strengthen the Stomach, are proper
abstersive Medicines, gently wiping off those clammy substances from the tunics
of the Stomach, and the terminations of the Nervous branches, and among these I
have not yet detected any thing, equal to a good Elixir Proprietatis, well
prepared by a long Digestion in a Sand-bath, the proportion of the Ingredients
being somewhat altered from the common, and something also substituted in place
of the Myrrh: A drop of this shall exceed a pound of Peptick Pouders,
Electuaries, and other fop Stomachicks. Do only keep your Stomach clean, you
will certainly preserve its Strength, and prevent most Diseases.

2. It is not to be understood, where a heap or weight of crudities is
accumulated, so gently absterging a Remedy can have a power to disengage the
Stomach, no more than a wet Mop can be supposed to rid a Room of a heap of
Rubbish, in which case something more stimulating is required, that may be used
in all Seasons of the Year, be it sultry or friezing, without the inconvenience
of confinement to Diet, or warmth of the Air, and without offense to the
Stomach, or putting the Body into any disorder, to which purposes, the Pill I
here now describe, I have Experimentally found to be effectually answering in
most respects.

3. Take one Ounce of the clearest shining Aloes, which at the Druggists will
cost about a Groat, or sometimes Sixpence an Ounce, this being free from any
considerable dross* will not require any depuration. Powder it in a Mortar,
covered over with a brown Paper, having a hole in the middle for a passage to
the Pestil, to prevent the little pieces of the Aloes from leaping up, while
you are in the beginning of your pounding; For afterward the paper may be
removed. Observe to anoint thinly the bottom of the Mortar and Pestil, with a
little Florence Oil, to keep it from sticking to the bottom. When its reduced
to a gross Powder, by gr^nding it with the Pestil you must bring it to a smooth
fineness. Put the Powder into a small glazed flat-bottom'd earthen Pan, that
will contain about half a pint, pouring upon it about a quarter of a pint of
fair water, wherein has been dissolved two drams of Spanish juice of
Liquorish, which is done by slicing it very small, and setting the water in a
porringer over a gentle heat; place this small earthen pan into one somewhat
bigger, having sand in the bottom to the height of an inch, and afterward
^illing it up to the brim. Set them over two piles of bricks, of three or four
bricks high, laid flat. The piles must stand at such a distance, that they may
reach the edges of the bigger pan, to support it. Then make a moderate fire of
Charcoal under it, to heat the sand, to cause the superfluous moisture to be
evaporated, until the Aloes is brought to the thickness of Honey. Or you may by
dropping two or three drops on the back side of a plate to cool, make trial,
whether it be reduced to the consistency of Dow; for if it be overdone, the
mass being rendered brickly, will not only lose most of its virtue, but also
its aptness of being framed into Pills; and if itbe not evaporated enough, it
will be sticky, and not apt to be brought to a Mass.

4. The lesser pan being taken off, when the evaporation is sufficient, before
its quite cold, you must with a Spatula, or slice, take out the Mass, and
between your Fingers, being a little anointed with Florence Oil, or Oil of
Sweet Almonds, to prevent the sticking, roll it into a round ball, which you
may keep in a Sheep's Bladder, being likewise thinly wetted over on the inside
with the same Oil, for many Months, if necessary, without any great impair of
its virtue.

5. A small piece of this Mass being formed into six, seven, eight, or nine
little Pills, of the bigness of a Pepper-corn, is a Dose sufficient to give two
or three motions, according to the number of Pills, and the loose or Costive
Constitution of him that takes them. The safety of this Medicine adds much to
its Character, since the taking of one Pill or two more or less, imports as
little hazard, as the taking it very often, or in any kind of Season, be it hot
or cold, unless your Body be subject to a Looseness, or the Hemorrhoids, or
your Constitution be thin, hot, and dry.

6. By the addition of the juice of Liquorish the Aloes is designed to be
obtused in its too pungitive quality, whereby its apt to raise the Piles, and
becomes somewhat less precipitating, and consequently hindered from lessening
expectoration, which in this Climate is so necessary in Coughs and Pththysicks.

7. The same correction may also be attained, by dissolving the same proportion
of clean Aloes, in half a pint of juice expressed from the contusion of an
Ounce of Bugloss, or Borrage Roots, or a large handful of their Leaves, and
stirring half a pint of warm water with them in the bruising, and clarified by
subsidence, in letting it stand in a Sellar for a day or two, and pouring it
off the Faeces or Dregs in the bottom. This evaporated in the same manner will
produce a Mass, almost equal in goodness with the former.

8. I cannot hitherto observe, that the use of these Pills, though frequently
taken, either once in a Week, Fortnight, or a Month, according to the time, the
Stomach by reason of its degree of weakness in the digestive faculty may
require, does in any wise debilitate those, that may properly use them; but on
the contrary, rather corroborate their Stomach, by assisting it to throw off
that heap of rubbish, and crude Humors, which those that eat and drink
plentifully, and either live sedentary Lives, as many that are Educated to
Professions, or others that are not used to exercise or labor, are subject to
engender, especially if naturally of a weak Constitution, or of an advanced Age.

9. For three or four days succeeding the use of these Pills, a good Elixir
Proprietatis taken Morning and Evening, in a proportionable Dose, has by my
Observation ever had the good effect of preserving Health and preventing
Diseases.

10. To what I have mentioned touching the advantages of a familiar
Acquaintance with those Mundifyers, both the Pills and the Elixir, the inquiry
I made of a fresh colored vigorous Dutch Burgher, I casually met in my
Travels, who exceeded the Age of four score, may in somewise add a
confirmation. He did averr to me Bona side, that for 40 Years last past, he had
seldom or never omitted once in a fortnight, or sometimes sooner or later,
according to the direction he received from his marks of fullness and
uneasiness, to cleanse with Seny stewed with Prunes, from which custom he did
derive his capacity of eating a hearty Meal of any thing he liked, without
advising of the wholesomness, or easiness of Digesture, and at times of
drinking a Glass of Wine to an Altitude, to accommodate his Friend.

11. As lesser Purgatives do rather contribute strength by their consequence,
so the greater being properly used, do not carry that danger with them People
commonly imagine, since I have known many, that for Three Months successively,
have taken strong churlish purging Pills every Morning, some few days only
omitted; I may say, some have swallowed a pottle of strong Purgative Pills in a
few Years, and lived in full h^alth to a remarkable Age, and not without a
libertine Mode of eating and drinking. Whence its apparent, that the toughness
of the Nerves, upon which the strength and action of the Bowels only depend,
does suffer as little by the strongest Purgatives, as an India Cane by a
thousand times bending, which notwithstanding will recover its former figure
and full strength. It were to be wished, that bleeding could be administered
with the same safety, of which it may be justly said, that the Lancet has, and
does in proportion kill more Men than the Sword, and it is as commonly observed,
that those Physicians who do so generally practice it, know little else what to
do; and on the other hand their Patients are as rash and prodigal of their
lives, to submit to their heedless advice. As the first and second bleedings
may be of great use to many Bodies and Distempers in the colder Climates, so I
have ever remarked, that the third and fourth have proved as detrimental, and
not seldom fatal; having observed, that with two bleedings at most, succeeded
with other proper remedies, incomparatively more continual Fevers,
Rheumatisms, Pleurisies, and Phthysicks have been cured; then have survived
those frequently reiterated bleedings, which in common Practice usually give
the parting blow.

12. Its a consequence an Idiot inserts, because a Person having been blooded
eight or ten times in a great Distemper, does recover his Health, he owes the
benefit of it to the bleedings, whereas it ought rather to be said, neither the
Distemper nor bleeding could kill him.

13. To return from this Deviation to the use of Purgatives; tho those that are
strong, are required in great Diseases, they ought to be avoided in lesser
Distempers, or where prevention is only intended; for all Purgatives deriving
their power from a specific fermentative Spirit, or Salt, by rarefying or
huffing up morbisick Humors, and afterward by stimulating the Nerves to throw
them off after separation, when strong ones are taken, where no Disease is
engendered, they are apt to cause one by fermening, or rarefying and
stimulating the laudable juices or operating upon those dormant humors, which
by strength of Nature, or assistance of mild preventing Purgatives, and
abstersive Corroboratives, might easily have been worn off. Thus it has often
been observed, that some by taking Extractum Rudij, have soon after fallen into
continual Fevers; others through a preventing care to avert the Gout, have
immediately fallen into a violent fit, upon taking Elixir Salutis, Bromfield's
Pills, Golden Spirit of Scurvy Grass, or the like empirical Medicines, which is
not all the mischief such sort of Purgative vendibles have occasioned, as being
unskilfully invented, and more unskilfully prepared, since not a few have been
thrown into mortal Diseases by the use of them. Yet I stand more amazed at the
folly of Mankind, that is so easily allured by vain boasting and mendacious
Encomia's upon Laudanum liquidum plainly prepared, or disguised by a solution
of Opium into volatile oleaginous drops, to the frequent and constant use
whereof, a Man being once debauched under pretense of ease, and quieting
himself of a few Gripes, Fumes, or Vapors, he can no more leave it off for a
Fortnight, a Week, or a Day, than a labourer his Bread and Chese, or a Man
throw off his Coat and Wastcoat in a hard Winter, or a Brandy-Drinker forsake
his Spirits and return to small Beer. Using ones self to such plain or
disguised Opiates, is like making a contract with the Devil, to live easy and
well for a few Years, upon condition he shall have his Soul to torture
afterward: For certain it is, that the familiar use of Opiates, after some
Months, or very few Years, either does wholly desist from being friendly, by
suffering your trouble or Distemper to return in a more horrible manner, or
create a new one, incomparably worse than the former, or strangles you with an
Apoplexy, or some other soporous Distemper, which is most amply proved by
those, that make Opium their Sacred Refuge in every fit of the Cholick, Gout,
or Stone, who seldom or never fail of a speedy Exit, by some incurable Disease
of the Brain, in very few Years; and those that do advise such a lethiferous
remedy for a common use to their Patients, have a greater title to a Halter,
labell'd with an Inscription of Mathews's Pills, or Pacifick Drops, than those
that murder a Man in the Highway. In what manner those fits of Gout, Stone,
Cholick, and other sharp torturing Gripes, appear to me to be occasioned, and
by what causes, I shall give my opinion after this following interlocution.

14. I have in the preceding Discourse given you my sentiment, that to preserve
Health, and prevent Diseases in valetudinary Constitutions, (for strong
vigorous Bodies stand in no need of other preservatives, or preventives, than
moderation in their Non-naturals, the knowledge and sense whereof, Nature has
implanted in all other Animals, as well as in Men,) no better ways and means
can be used, than applying at certain intervals, to those cleansers or
abstersives here before mentioned; as for Aurum Potabile, or any pretended
Lapis Philosophorum, or all Faber's Quintessences, upon their just trials, they
have been found to contain less virtue in preserving Health, than a good
Chicken Broth.

15. You may remember a caution was given in one of the foregoing Paragraphs,
interdicting all Aloetics to thin, hot, and dry Bodies, and such also as are
subject to the Hemorrhoids; and in regard that such Constitutions, especially
when promoted in Years, do also require the keeping the Stomach clean, and free
from all slimy and nidorous crudities, I do recommend a good Lenitive
Electuary, not the common, which is so ill contrived, and fill^d with rubbish.
This following description gives you the form of an easy, gentle, and
effectual Laxative. Take four ounces of the best Cassia Fistularis newly drawn,
and evaporated to a consistency, (the manner of doing it you may read in a
Treatise, called the Family Physician and House Apothecary,) Rhubarb powdered,
white Mechoacan grated and powdered, and clean Rhenish Tartar powdered, of each
a quarter of an Ounce, sweet Fennil-Seeds powdered, a Dram and half, Syrup of
Marshmallows, as much as will suffice to make it into an Electuary. You may
take hereof a quarter, or half an Ounce, or sometimes a whole Ounce, dissolved
in a quarter of a pint of thin grewel, barley-water, posset, or thin
Chicken-broth, once in a Week, Fortnight, or a Month, according to the
direction given concerning the Aloetics.

16. Rhenish Tartar I do prefer for a Laxative, far before Cream of Tartar,
which does lose all or a great part of its solutive virtue in the preparation.

CHAP. VI. Causes of the Stone, Gout, Cholick, Pleurisies, Rheumatisms,
Apoplexy, etc. Assigned from a different Hypothesis.
1. TOuching the causes of those pains, which are felt to be the ^cutest and
most exquisite of any by them, that suffer the Stone, Gout, Cholick, and sharp
dry gripes; certain sharp subtle serositie, or rather a vitiated lymph
discharged from the Brain through the Nerves on the extremities, being there
locked up, cause those corroding Gout-pains, upon those sensible nervous parts,
though sometimes serosities, and lymphatic fluors, dripping from other vessels,
may cause great pains, but less sharp, and being more subject to be
incrassated, may cause swellings near the Joints. The same subtle nervous
serosities, or vitiated Lympha, being thrown upon the Kidneys, tare and
vellicate their most sensible membranes to such a degree, that scarce any
torture can equal it, and that sometimes, though seldom, without the least
suppression of Urine, but for the most part with a total, or partial
suppression, and a great sharpness of Urine, which is then called a Fit; the
pain which at other times the Stone in the Kidneys does occasion, being only a
heavy obtuse pain of a long continuance, and more frequent returns, which at
great intervals, as Spring and Fall, does invite those cutting serosities to
the part, and then also are the greatest Fits; for I cannot conceive that the
Stone turning angular, and grating upon the Membranes, is so general a cause of
a Fit of the Stone, as many of the Learned do imagine, since a Stone once
removed out of its bed or seat, whereto its cemented by a glutinous tartarous
slime, can easily, if ever return to its place, and be there fastened again as
before, for which reason Physicians are very cautious of administering strong
Diuretics, for fear of driving the Stone out of its place. Neither do I
believe, that those bloody Urines, which are so frequently made by Nephitical
Patients, are caused by the corners of the Stone being moved, and ^ounding or
grating of the Veins, but are rather caused by a sharp Serum corroding the
mouths of the vessels, or blood may be squeezed out of the vessels by the
internal swelling of the Parenchyma of the Kidneys. It does often happen, that
some of those forementioned most subtle limpid serosities have taken another
channel, through branches of the same Nerve, that tends to the Kidneys, being
divaricated and inserted into the great gut of the Colon, where they cause that
great pain, (though less acute than the other, that part being by much less
sensible, than the internal membrane of the Kidneys,) which is termed the
Stone-Cholick. Since then this acute pain in the great Gut cannot be caused by
the Stone, at that distance, its more than probable, that those most exquisite
pains in a sit must be occasioned by some other cause, which by many Arguments
to me can be no other, than the foresaid serosity. Secondly, you must consider
also, that all Opiates being inwardly taken, perform their Operation by
exerting their power upon the Brain, in principio nervorum, in withholding the
influx of the Animal Spirits, (that communicate sense to the Guts,) and
streightning the Nerves, whereby pains are not only appeased in any singular
part, but in all parts equally, supposing they were all in pain. Thirdly, you
are to conceive, that there being a digestion performed in the Brain, in
converting the Arterial Blood into Animal Spirits, there must be a solution,
and afterward a separation and expulsion of Excrements, which in part are a
limpid serum, that is abandoned to the ventricles of the Brain, which are the
proper receptacles of that Excrement, as much as the thick Guts are of the
Excrement of the Chyle, or the Bladder of the Urine, being the Excrement of the
Blood. Fourthly, this concession is also required, that this most subtle sharp
excrementitious serosity, having quite filled up the ventricles of the Brain in
a greater measure, than they can well contain, or throw off through those
passages Nature has ordained, the thinnest part is forced into the principium
nervorum, (the other part being received into the Veins and Lymphae-ducts) and
carried either to the Extremities, or Kidneys, where it causes the Gout or
Stone, or to the Teeth, where it occasioneth a most exquisite Toothache, or
several external parts or joints, producing those violent pains, that are
termed a Rheumatism, or to the Pleura, where those shri^king Pleuratic pains do
ensue. Summarily I do believe, there scarce happens any pain, (unless caused
from without,) Tumor, or Pustul, where this nervous Excrement is not a
principal cause, which may be more plainly explained in another place.

2. Against this Discourse may be objected, That the Nerves obtaining no
visible hollowness, cannot be supposed, to transmit such a quantity of Limpid
Serum, as must be conceived to cause those before recited Diseases. Secondly,
That its uncommon, and not natural, ^or any sort of vessels in the Body, that
are destinated to contain, and convey their natural and proper Liquors, Juices,
or Humors, toconveigh any other that is excrementitious, or praeternatural. To
the first its answered, there must necessarily be proportionable cavities in
the Nerves, to contain such great measures of Juices, as have been frequently
observed to drip from Nerves, though small ones, that have been cut through in
Wounds, and much more from great Nerves; and therefore those larger Nerves near
the Brain must be thought capable to contain a very copious quantity of
moisture. If the Nerves when cut out of the Body and Dead, do not show any
visible cavities, it is because being emptied of their Spirits, and a great
part of their moisture, their pores and channels do subside and fall to a close
compactness. Besides a Nerve that is cut out, and grown from a greater bigness
to that of an ordinary packthread, when its dried and condensed, its reduced to
the smallness of a fine Thread or Fiber, which when it was tumid within the
Body, and fully extended, must necessarily have contained a great hollowness,
though divided into innumerable very small or minutest passages. In answer to
the Second, it has been more than once observed, that purulent matter from
Imposthumations in the Lungs, and Pleura, has been evacuated through the
Kidneys and Bladder by Urine, whither it has been circularly conveyed by the
veins, that have taken it up. The thinner part of the Turpentine, that by
Glyster has been injected into the great Guts, has been taken in by the
vessels, and by circulation carried to the Kidneys and Bladder, as appears by
the Urine, giving by its strong smell of Violets a plain evidence of it. True
it is, these instances are not natural conveyances, neither is it to be
understood so of the Nerves, but to be preternatural.

3. This premised, if you apprehend this Hypothesis to be only probable or
apparent, (which I do believe to be Truth, though at the same time I must own,
that I do retract from my former Opinions, being thereunto induced by sundry
Experiments and Observations) it must necessarily follow, that Opiates
frequently used, do at length not only withold, but entirely stop the afflux
of the Animal Spirits, and closely shut up the beginning of the Nerves, whereby
those acute serosities are pent in, and thrown back into the medullar substance
of the Brain, which happening an Apoplexy, Palsy, Lethargy, or some other Mortal
soporous Disease must unavoidably succeed; and hence it is, that in all those,
who expire upon their seizure with those Distempers, the anterior Ventricles of
the Brain upon dissection, do ever appear filled with such a sort of
acrimonious limpid serosity, the Nerves and other vessels being either too much
filled, or too much closed by subsidence, obstruction, or otherwise, to admit
of a regurgitation thence.

4. Notwithstanding though the daily, weekly, or frequent use of Opiates is
most certainly attended with most pernicious consequences, yet the
extraordinary and stupendous benefit it imports, even very often to the
recovering a Man from the jaws of Death, when cautiously and necessarily
advised in a fit of intolerable pain, a profuse Hemorrhage, an impetuous
Catarrh, violent Vomitting, a fludding Diarrhaea, long and strenuous Hysteric
Fits, when they begin to threaten danger, want of Sleep for many Days and
Nights, and such like urgent symptoms, may give a just cause to hold a
correspondency with that or the like Medicine, provided it be not too familiar,
and be very well prepared, and that in the interval you prevent the necessity
of calling this dissembling pacisick Friend in again, by removing the cause of
those hazardous Diseases, and that the Patient have Strength, and Spirits
enough to wrestle with such a fallacious and dangerous Guest, should he prove
too rude. Wherefore I account it the greatest boldness in so many little Quacks
and empiricks, even some Widwives, and Nurses also, who being entirely
destitute of the necessary skill in preparing this ruffian Juice, and much more
of the true knowledge of applying it, dare assume the confidence of
administering it so indifferently to the loss of so many Lives, who in my
Judgment can scarce have too severe a Law made against them, especially where a
Man may be Murdered privately, without giving the least jealousy, that any
thing else besides his Distemper killed him.

CHAP. VII. Hypotheses of the motion of the Heart* and of Respiration.
1. I Have for a long time with an implicit Obedience submitted to the Dogmata
of the Ancients, confirmed by the approbation of the Learned succeeding Ages,
as appears in former writings, touching the Animal Spirits and Pulsation, which
latter in the Heart and Arteries is by them resolved, to be caused by a
pulsifick faculty in both, or as some will have it, originally in the Heart,
and from thence derived or continued in the Arteries. This sort of explication
now appears to me very negligent, and universally applicable to any thing; for
to say the pulsation is caused by a pulsifick faculty, is equally to saying,
that Sight, Hearing, Vomiting, or Purging, is performed by an Optic, Auditory,
Emetic, or Cathartic faculty; or, to be shorter and more general, by a
specific or occult faculty; from which any inquisitive person can receive but
little satisfaction, or scarce make a solution of any Phenomenon, with the
least advantage to the practical part of Physic. Wherefore to make my marks
bear the better, in resolving many doubtful Queries, and serving for a true and
safer conduct in the practick, I do rather make choice to say, (in imitation of
Copernicus's affirming the motion of the Earth to the exclusion of that of the
Sun or Firmament,) that the Heart and the Arteries do not move the Vital or
Arterial Blood, but that the Blood moves the Heart and Arteries to a pulsation;
in the same manner as may be conceived, that the Air pressing and silling the
Lungs, at the same time press the Air, that fills the interstice between them
and the Diaphragm, and in a great measure moves the latter to a dilatation in
the Inspiration, lifting up at the same time the Belly with all the included
Bowels, and crowding or condensing the ambient Air, the weight whereof (if I
may so call it,) or its inclination to be relaxt again, (in endeavoring to
return to its former position,) together with the fuliginous steems, that are
forced out of the whole circumference of the Body, in their turn cause the
retraction or repercussion of the Belly and diaphragm, in the Expiration; for
its a plain and received Doctrine, that the motion of the Diaphragm, which is
accounted a great instrument in Respiration, is as much natural, and more
natural I may say, than it is spontaneous in Beasts and Infants, or voluntary
in Men; and I do farther conceive, if there were no Diaphragm created in Men
and Beasts, the ambient Air is sufficient, to set the wheels of the Lungs on
going: For there are abundance of moving living Creatures or Animals, that have
Lungs, and do inspire and expire, on which Nature has not bestowed a
Diaphragm. So that the great use of the Diaphragm seems to me, to be an
instrument of expulsion, in causing, or chiefly assisting to exonerate the Guts
of its Excrements by Stools, the Stomach of its offensive contents by Vomit,
and the Lungs by Coughing. It may be likewise compared to a Flabellum, or Fan,
that ^oves and ventilates all the internal Air contained in the great cavities
of the Body. The motion of this internal Air, I do conceive, is as much
assistent to the motion of the Spirits and Blood in the Arteries, Veins, and
Nerves, and to the peristaltic motion of the Stomach, as the Air and Wind is to
the motion of the Sea, which latter the greater it is, the higher the Waves are
moved. Secondly, Natural Philosophy does Teach us, That as much Air as is
inspired and admitted into the Body by the Lungs, so much Air must n^c^ssarily
be forced out of the Body, to make way for its entrance, which plainly tells
us, that the inspiration by the Lungs is the cause of an universal
transpiration through the whole Body, and that the same ambient Air being
lately squeezed out of the Lungs, must necessarily by expiration return into
the Body again, through the ambient pores, to make way for that, or else you
must allow a vacuum, or void place in the Air, which is impossible, for a place
(locus vocatur, quia continet locat^^) is that which contains and
circumscribe^ something, and how can a place then contain nothing, which is a
vacuum? Thirdly, I take the Diaphragm to consist of two Muscles, which appears
plain enough in the dissection and narrow inspection of a Bullocks Midrif,
whereof one is made use of in the dilatation, and the other in the contraction
of the Breast; for its absurd, to believe, that the same muscle can perform two
contrary motions.

That no living Creature can subsist without the Air, and perspiration, is
allowed by all, but for what Reason, or what use or benefit the Air does afford
it, is only slightly asserted, viz. That it is for ventilation only, that is to
say, it gently fans and moves the living Spirits, and therein assists them in
separating Fuliginous, and other Heterogeneous little Bodies or Particles,
which otherwise would choke, or suffocate the said living Spirits. In the same
manner I do conceive, That the Air in ventilating the focal Fire, or any
burning flame, does assist its most subtle particles in separating and
expelling fuliginous and other corpuscles, and rec^ives them also in those
places, which it (I mean the Air) leaves to fill the places, left by the said
fuliginous and other corpuscles; so that a Fire or flame seems to be
extinguished, or rather suffocated, through want of Air, because it has no
places to depose its fuliginous and other corpuscles into, and stands in need
of its assistance for ventilation and gentle motion.

From this premised Discourse, I deduce these consequences to my self. 1. That
upon the goodness of the Air (which consists in a just temperament, a due
thinness, and clearness or purity) depends chiefly the Health and long life of
Man. Too much heat, or too great thinness of the Air moves the Animal Spirits
too impetuously, and consequently disperses and consumes them, weakens the
Body, and hinders all Digestions; whence it is, that people are short lived,
and weakly in the Indies, long lived and strong in the Northern Climates.
Frequently and gently moving, and often changing the Air from one place to
another, though only out of one room into another, seems to me to conduce very
much to Health, because by those frequent removes you avoid inspiring the same
fuliginous Air, which you do expire; on the other hand, they that live
sedentary Lives, that are slothful, or much addicted to lie in Bed, are seldom
Healthful, but commonly crazy, and dull in their senses.

2. If change of Air generally is of so great an Advantage, it is far greater,
and consequently of necessity to those, that labor under any Distemper of the
Lungs, or any kind of difficulty of breathing; so that I have observed, that
many cannot be cured without change of Air, notwithstanding the assistance of
the best and most proper Applications, which sometimes the Air alone does Cure,
and other times being assist^d with very small Remedies.

3. That using often violent motion, and continued long, does at last render the
Body Diseased, and is very contrary to Health; for its observed, few of those
are long livers.

4. I am apt to believe, That in the Air are contained most subtle corpuscl^s,
that are homogeneous to the Spirits, (though in some kinds of Air more, in some
others less,) that nourish or multiply, increase, or are added to the Animal
Spirits, whereby the Body is considerably strengthened. Lastly, I do believe,
That the Air is the Primum movens externum of all living Creatures; for by
inspiration it moves all the Animal Spirits, (as after my manner I have showed
before) which move all the humors and muscles of the Body. Take away the Air,
and Life (which consists in motion of the Animal Spirits,) ceases at the very
moment.

CHAP. VIII. Of the motion of the Blood, and the cause thereof, also of its
quickness or slowness.
1. I Return to the Heart, which to me appears for use, like unto a draining
Water-Mill, serving to throw off, and disperse the water to any parts, whither
the Wheelshall cast, or direct it by its impulse; in like manner the Heart is
an instrument, whose principal Office is, to throw the Arterial Blood to all
parts of the Body; And as the spirituous and forcible eruption of Water out of
a deep cavern of the Earth at the source of spring head, together with its
being highest in situation, (in respect of the declination of those places, to
and over which its impelled,) is the cause of that motion, so the Brain may
very probably be esteemed the Source, as being the highest situated; whence
the Animal Spirits do forcibly rush out into all the Chanals, Humors, and Parts
of the Body. Wherefore, I suppose the Brain and it^ Animal Spirits, in respect
of the Microcosm, to be what the Sun and its Spirits, or Particles (being its
Irradiations or Beams) are, that are distributed to all parts of the
Terraqueous Globe, where motion is perceived, penetrating to the deepest bottom
of the Waters, and through the closest and most compact heap of Earth, into its
Bowels, where Metals and other subterraneous Bodies are engendered. In like
manner do the Animal Spirits penetrate, from the highest part of the the Body
to the extremest parts, as Toes and Fingers, which the sense of Feeling does
attest to us; and likewise to the deepest parts of the Bowels. I do not imagine,
that the Animal Spirits being transmitted through the Nerves, must arrive to
the extremities of them, before they can be dispersed to all the circumjacent
parts; but that the Nerves are pervious throughout all their extent, with
lateral Pores, or minute Chanals, through which they burst out in their
descent, giving motion to all parts moveable. Neither do I believe there are
any Vital or Natural Spirits, (as they are commonly termed) but they are all
Anim^l Spirits (though in a greater Proportion in the Arteri^s than the Veins,)
that occasion the Blood to circulate; for to me it appears improbable, that the
motion in the Art^ri^l Blood, should cause the Blood in the Veins to move at so
great a distance from the Heart, when necessarily their motion must be spent at
the Capillars, if the force of motion in the Arteries, be by experience found
to be less and less, in proportion of its greater distance from the Heart. But
that the same motion of the Arteries, should cause the motion of the Animal
Spirits, seems to me much more absurd; for the Animal Spirits being
incomparatively more subtle, and infinitely stronger and more forcible (as
appears by moving all the Joints together with the whole Body) can in no manner
be conceived to be moved by Vital Spirits, that are much more gross, and of so
little force, that they cannot make the least impulse upon them. If these
Maxims be true, that Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem; And In
omni genere oportet ut sit quiddam primum, Principium numeri est unum, and
omnes numeri consistunt ex uno, (or if I may so say) DIVERSIS UNIS; The Brain
does justly challenge the dignity of being the first and sole principal part of
the whole Body, having an absolute Empire and Command over all other parts,
performing by its Animal Spirits all the Motions, Functions, Actions and
Offices of, and in every Bowel, Humor, and all other subservient Parts, which
are only Instruments that modify and determine the said Spirits. This whole
premised Discourse is plainly proved to me, by this sole Argument. The whole
body of Man is created for the external Senses, and local Motion, and these for
the internal, viz. Understanding, comprehending humane or rational Imagination,
common Sense and Memory, which are only th^ee distinct Acts of one sole and
chief Faculty of Understanding; of which, the Brain is the Seat, and the Animal
Spirits the Instrumental Cause; so consequently all the Parts of the Body must
be created, to be subservient to the Brain and its Animal Spirits, Secondly,
That the Animal Spirits do move the Arterial Blood, and the Heart, is clearly
evinced by the Observation of Passions. The Sight, or Hearing, perceiving any
dangerous Object, conveys it to the understanding Faculty in the Brain; which,
by retracting its Animal Spirits, do at the next instant, cause a slow languid
motion upon the Blood, Heart, and sometimes wholly stop it. On the other hand,
upon perceiving a pleasing Object, a crowd of Animal Spirits are impelled into
the Blood, which immediately occasions a quicker and more lively motion in the
Blood, Heart and Arteries, as may be felt by their pulsation: Whence it
appears, 1. That the Seat of Passions is in the Brain, and not the Heart. 2.
That the Animal Spirits are perfused through all the Arterial, and consequently
Venal Blood. 3. That nothing in the Body, does move so swift as the Animal
Spirits. 4. That the whole Body is pervious with Pores, and most subtle
Chanals, of various Figures and Dimensions. Mercury by external unction, or
sumigation, is let into the Body, through the ambient ext^rnal Pores, even to
the Bowels, and the Brain it self, though applied never so remote. Aloes by
friction about the Navil, or any part of the Belly, passes through the Pores
to all the circumvestient Membranes and Muscles, until it arrives to the Guts,
where it moves Stools, kills and expess Worms. Tobacco applied to the Wrist, by
penetrating through the external Pores to the Vessels, Humors and Spirits, by
circulation reaches the Stomach, provoking it afterward to Vomit, and in some
Bodies violently enough. Cantharides externally applied commonly cause
sharpness of Urine, and sometimes bloody. Opiated Unguents, though applied to
the Soles of the Feet, soon reach the Brain. On the other hand, I have often
observed the scent of some Medicines, which I used to give in Venereal
Distempers, to pass through the Body to the external Skin, which always proved
a certain sign the Patient would be cured. By all which it appears, that those
forementioned Externals were impelled through the ambient Pores, by the Air
lately expired, and crouding into the Body again, at the next inspiration, and
that those Antivenereal Medicines, were driven out of the Body to the
circumferential parts, by the Air expiring. 5. That the Heart is not a
principal part of the Body, but an instrumental and subservient part. 6. That
the Animal Spirits are Toti in toto, and toti in qualibet part, performing, as
I said before, chiefly and principally, as the sole primar efficient Causes in
all the Body, and in every part thereof, all the Offices, Functions and
Actions, except the Rational; wherein its only Instrumentally subservient to
the Anima Rationalis. I must confess, that this Paragraph is not very
Philosophically expressed, neither am I endu'd with Sense enough to defend it
from all Obj^ctions, and seeming absurdities, and therefore, ought rather to be
referred to Metaphysics, or a Cred^ndum. 7. It also follows, that we need give
no greater respect to Cordials, then to Hepatics, Pulmonics, Splenetics, or to
any other appropriated Medicines; but the chiefest and principal Medicine ought
to be reputed a Cephalic, so that instead of saying per Excellentiam, this or
that is a Cordial, we ought to say, its a Cephalic; for all those that are
commonly called Cordials, are no other than true Cephalics, and no otherwise
helpful, than by relieving the Animal Spirits, and comforting the Brain and
Nerves. Moreover, all the Hypochondriac and Hysteric Symptoms, as Palpitations
of the Heart, various Pulsations, sometimes slow, quick, low, or intermittent,
Faintnesses, Swoonings, faint Sweats, Convulsions, swimming in the Head, (
Vertigo) choakings in the Throat, sti^fled, difficult, oppressed, and
insensible low Breathings, frequent Sighing, tottering weakness of the Joints,
desponding sorrowful thoughts, Urine som^times as clear and limpid as fair
Water, othertimes white, turbid and muddy, sometimes high colored, othertimes
pale; Gripings, croaking and thundering Noises about the Bowels and Guts,
Vomiting, and sharp continuating Pains at the Stomach, Belchings, Yawnings,
Dimness, and recurring darkness of Sight, ( Scotomia) noise in the Ears,
creepings between the Skin, Crying or Laughing, or maddish Passions, besides
many more, are all Symptoms of a diseased Brain and Nerves, preternaturally
a^fected, discomposed or vitiated Animal Spirits, and are relieved no
otherwise, than by Medicines, that relieve and operate upon the Animal Spirits,
and immediately by them upon the Brains and Sinews; such are chiefly oleaginous
volatile Spirits, and more especially those that consist of a penetrating
durable Sulphur; for if they are only Volatile Spirits, (though in that form they
are experimented to be very helpful) they exert, lose, and spend their Virtue
before they can arrive to the Brain; and therefore its necessary they should be
oleaginous and sulphurous, and consequently more lasting. It is also found
experimentally, that gentle Narcotics have a great influence, in suddenly
suppressing all those recited Symptoms; which being universally owned to
operate only upon the Animal Spirits, Brain and Nerves, is a manifest Argument,
they are occasioned by an ill affected Brain, and Vicious Animal Spirits. All
these prenumerated Symptoms do accompany a preternaturally affected Brain. and
must be acknowledged to proceed from vicious Animal Spirits, viz. Convulsions,
tottering weakness of the Joints, sorrowful Thoughts, dimness of Sight, noise
in the Ears, etc. excepting Palpitations, intercurrent and various Pulsations,
which cannot be thought a Primar, but a Secondary ( per deuteropathiam)
Affection of the Heart, occasioned through the Vitiousness of the Animal
Spirits, stimulating, or othertimes retarding the Fibers of the Ventricles, and
Valves of the Heart in their motion. How and by what means the Animal Spirits
may be vitiated, either by the ill mixture of the constituent parts of the
blood, and its impurities, and commixtures with adventitious, or other noxious
Particles, will take up more room to explain, than I purpose to allow here in
this small Volumn, which otherwise may easily be rendered intelligible, or
applicable by every Judicious Reader in Physic, and therefore I shall forbear
any further Discourse about it. 8. To corroborate my Assertion in the preceding
Paragraph, viz. that Cordials ought rather to be called Cephalics, may be
plainly deduced from the sudden Relief, Patients in Swoonings and Faintnesses
do receive, fromthe scents of Spirits of Sal Ammoniac, of Hartshorn, Cranium
humanum, Sanguis humanus, of Galbanum, Assa foetida, and the like; also from
the friction of the Temples, with the thinner spirituous Oil of Amber, which
being admitted into the branches of the Carotidal Arteries, are conveyed to all
the parts of the Brain, where they rouse up, quicken and stimulate the Animal
Spirits, and disintangle them from any adhering offensive Particles, whereby
the Patient being suddenly revived out of his Faintness, and Swooning, and the
inordinate pulsation of the Heart reduced, is a manifest proof, that these
Symptoms commonly are not depending upon any Primar Affection of the Heart, but
upon the disturbance of the Animal Spirits. 9. Many have been much puzzled in
some doubtful Matters relating to Infants in the Womb; as, Whether in that
Station they have Respiration, and whether their Heart and Arteries have
Pulsation; and consequently, whether the Blood in the Infant does circulate,
and whether the Animal Spirits exercise the same Functions which they do after
it is come out of the Womb. I do conceive, the Infant, as long as it continues
in the Womb, does only live the Life of a Plant, and is like to a Sucker that
receives its Growth from the Tree, in receiving its Nument and Augmentation
from the Mother: it has no Respiration, or as little as can be imagined; and
consequently, that its Heart and Arteries do not undergo any Pulsation; neither
does the Blood circulate in its Vessels, nor do the Animal Spirits perform
those Functions they are intended for after the Birth of the Infant. The Parts
of the Infant in the Womb lying so compact and close, and every place filled up
with Humors, Excrements and Internal Air, there is no room left to admit Air
from without; especially being enclosed by two thick Members, and a surrounding
Moat of Serous Humors: It being the External Air forcing into the Lungs is the
chief Cause of Inspiration and Expiration, as I have expressed before that
being excluded, there can be no Respiration in the Infant in the Womb. What I
have to say concerning the Manner and Causes of Pulsation, may be best
understood by a Comparison to the Sea; which (though it be in the calmest Season)
is subject to heave up and sink down, or to be dilated and contracted, as
appears by its Waves, which is not unlike the Pulsation or Diastole
(Dilatation,) and Systole (Contraction) of the Heart and Arteries. The Heaving
up of the Sea I will only suppose to be caused by an Expansion and Rarefaction
occasioned by the Motion of the Salin Spirits of the Sea, of which it may be
thought very pregnant by the strong Smell (being a part objecti the Salin
Spirits acting upon or vibrating the Olfactive Organ) of Sea-men's Clothes, and
other things. The Air being crowded or condensed by the swelling of the Waves,
forces, them down again by the Inclination it has to recover its former place:
In the same manner I do conceive that the Animal Spirits that are copiously
perfused through the Arterial Blood do expand, dilate and raresie it, which
causes the Diastole or Dilatation in the Heart and Arteries, whereby the Air
that is entered by Inspiration into the Lungs and all other Ambient Parts of
the Body, and filling all the Pores that are capable to receive it, is
condensed and crowded; they relaxing, beat back the Sides of the Heart and
Arteries, which being streighten'd, have an Inclination to return, and then
occasion the Systole, or Contraction. The forementioned Comparison differs in
this, that the Arteries are moved continually, in Contraction and Dilatation,
throughout their whole Length, reciprocally, all at once; whereas the Sea is
moved into innumerable discontinuated Waves, that are lifted up and fall again
at opposite and different times; while one Wave rises, the other falls. To
which I can only answer, Were the Sea coated about with a thick strong Coat, as
the Arteries in proportion are, all the Parts of the Sea, or the whole Surface,
would be uniformly heaved up at one and the same time, and fall in the same
Order, as the Arterial Blood does in Pulsation.

2. This Hypothesis (how probable soever, or true seemingly, it may be, I will
not discuss at this time) implying the Necessity of Admission of External Air
to cause Pulsations, explains that the Heart and Arteries of the Infant in the
Womb do not pulsate regularly, or orderly; neither do I doubt but that the
Animal Spirits do in some wise move the Blood, (which else by Stagnation, would
be subject to Putrefaction,) though not circulate. And here a Question may be
moved, Whether the Blood in its Circulation, or passing out of the Extremities
of the Arteries, into those of the Veins, is pressed out by the Rarefaction and
Expansion of the Arterial Blood by the Animal Spirits in the Diastole; whereby
taking up more room, and as it were overflowing, it is squeezed out; or whether
it is forced out by the Vigor of the Animal Spirits, and the Compression of
the Arteries in the Systole? But then another Question must follow; How, and by
what Force, is the Blood moved in the Veins, where there is no sensible or
manifest Pulsation? For to say that it is the Force of Pulsation does move it
out of the Extremities of the Arteries, into the Extremities of the Veins,
through the fibrous, intercurring, most minute Passages, or Pores, by
Pulsation, or rather Protrusion: or thrusting forward, must run us into great
Difficulties, if not Absurdities. For, First, Considering that the Force of
Pulsation or Protrusion must be extremely abated in the aforesaid Extremities
of the Arteries, and more in the Intercurring Passages, and yet more in the
Extremities of the Veins, which suppose in the Toes, can you rationally
imagine, that the Force of Pulsation, that is so very much diminished, if not
wholly extinguished, can be sufficient to force and thrust forward through so
great a Length (as reaches to so far a distance as the Heart) so great and
weighty a Mass of Blood, which it must by Process encounter with in the bigger
Veins, besides the Resistance it must meet with in the several Meanders,
Turnings and Windings, and a great many Valves (making a great Resistance) of
the said Veins, that will still yet more deaden the Force of Protrusion; and
yet more, if the Body by streightness of Clothes, or lying upon one Side,
suffer a Compression and Narrowness in the Veins and Arteries? Secondly,
Suppose the left Ventricle, when filled, to contain two Ounces, more or less,
of Blood (according to the Opinion of some Anatomists) in a Heart of a mean
Size; and that, according to the same Opinion, by every Systole the said two
Ounces are with a violent Explosion, as if it were with a Spring, thrown into
the Arteries, it must follow, that by every Pulsation so much is received and
impelled into the Veins, which being destitute of a forcible Pulsation to
return it to the Heart, cannot possibly in the same length of time discharge
it; especially, the Blood being now grown more condensed, incrassated, more
fibrous, less spirituous, and possibly from a lower to a higher place, and
through all the Valves, which as I said before, make a very considerable
resistance. If then the Vein^ can not receive so much Blood, as is thought to
be propuls^d by two Ounces at a time, by every Systole, when probably they
cannot receive a Dram or two at most, at every Systole, what must become of the
remaining fourteen or fifteen Drams, that is by every Pulsation thrown out of
the Heart? Abating so much Arterial Blood as is taken up in the nourishment of
the parts, and in the supply of matter for animal Spirits.
It must either return, and regurgitate into the Heart, upon which, either an
intermittent Pulse must follow, or a total stagnation, and consequently Death.
In short, to make the Veins capable of receiving as much, as by Pulsation is
thrown out of the Arteries, you must grant as rapid a motion or flowing in the
Veins, as there is in the Arteries, which all that have the least sense must
deny; for the Blood in ^n Arteriotomia does spurt out of the Arteries with ten
times the force, and in ten times the quantity, in the same proportion of time,
and consequently is moved ten times swifter. It must then follow, that in every
Diastole the Ventricles of the Heart are either not quite filled, or not
entirely emptied in every Systole, which I do verily believe is so. By what is
here discoursed, it appears, that very often the cause of an intermittent Pulse
is the incapacity of the Veins, by being obstructed in some place or other, to
receive the proportion of what is thrown into them by the Arteries; and the
cause of an universal stagnation may be thought too great a repletion in the
Veins, wholly excluding the reception of any Blood from the Arteries.

3. Should it be allowed, that the Heart by every Systole throws two Ounces of
Blood (which some do assert the left Ventricle to be capable of containing)
into the Veins, and that they receive it; then it will follow, that reckoning
only 500 Pulsations in a quarter of an Hour, there must be circulated fifty
Quarts; and consequently, that the whole Mass of Blood, or all the Blood that
is in a moderate Man's Body (which is thought to contain from Eight Quarts to
Twelve, according to the greater or lesser quantity of the fullest, or thinnest
of Men, being in Health, must be circulated or moved round from the Heart
through the Arteries into the V^ins, and thence into the Heart again in three
or four Minutes, and about a Pint every ^ighth part of a Minute, which must
require a motion more rapid, and make a greater noise, than the Th^mes under
London Bridge. Such a career in the Blood must be supposed to make more way in
fewer Weeks, than the Sea and Wind together do, in carrying a Ship to the East
Indies in many Months. Besides, such a violent motion would not only burst the
Veins, and break the Fibers of the Blood, but chern it into Red Butter, and
Blue Butter-Milk. Moreover, motion causing heat, such a violence would
immediately put the coldest Icelander into a burning Fever. It is observed,
that the too violent and quick motion in a continual Fever, makes a separation
in the Blood of the Oily sulphurous parts, swimming on the serous.

4. That the Ventricles of the Heart are not filled by every Diastole, nor
quite emptied by every Systole, appears plainly in Hypochondriacs, and
Hysterics, who sometimes having a large, high and quick Diastole, (as may be
felt by feeling the Pulse of the Wrist) and a low, straight, and slow Systole,
shows that the taking in, must be more than the going out. Soon after the
Diastole is changed from large to low, small and slow, and the Systole quick,
which signifies a lesser repletion of the Ventricles, and consequently, that
they were not filled as before. What can you think of a vermicular Pulse? Here
you must allow, that the Ventricles are far from being filled in the Diastole,
or emptied in the Systole. I do foresee, that it may be replied, that
notwithstanding the Pulses do vary from large and full, to narrow and small,
the Ventricl^s may be silled, because in those narrow, low Pulses, the sides of
the Ventricl^s do fall, and then consequently may be filled accordingly* That
is to say, the Fibers of the Heart are relaxed, and so the Ventricles must fall
into a narrower compass, like unto a Bag that is empty, for want of something to
sill it; but then, still its a Sign they have a capacity of being filled, which
they are not by every Diastole, as I have showed before.

5. From this premised discourse it must necessarily follow, that the inslux of
the Blood into the Ventricles, is the cause of silling them more or less,
according to the proportion of the Blood flowing in, and consequently to that,
that its the Blood moves the Heart by rarefaction and stimulation, according to
the proportion of quantity, and quality of the Animal Spirits its repleted
with. If the Blood be thick and gross, for want of Animal Spirits to rarifie
and move it, the Diast^le must nec^ssarily be slow and low, because the Blood
through its thickness, cannot enter in any great quantity, nor stimulate; if it
be thin, much rarefied, and full of good Animal Spirits, the Diastole must be
large and high, and if very stimulating, quick. So that the variation of tunes
of all the Pulses must be caused, in my opinion, by the quantity and quality of
the Animal Spirits, and the Blood; and the causes of stagnation, intermission
of Pulses, and several other affections of Pulses, of Apoplexi^s, and abundance
of other difficulties cannot so readily be assigned, and reasons giv^n thereof,
but by supposing only (though it were really otherwise) that the ins^^^e of the
blood is the moving cause of Pulsation, and not the Heart; which
notwithstanding all Objections, whereof in the next Paragraph I shall recite
the chief of them, I do believe to be true.

6. That a Muscle is the cause of motion, its vulgar definition, or rather
description does imply, viz. A Muscle is ^n Instrument of voluntary motion,
which seems to overthrow, what is by me asserted for a supposition, on which
the proceeding Discourse of the cause of Pulsation does depend; and
consequently that the Heart being a Muscle, must be the cause of the motion of
the Blood. To which I do answer, That the Heart cannot properly be termed a
Muscle, because its motion is not voluntary, as must be owned by all, but
Natural, and if so, must be moved by an Intrinsic (in relation to the Heart)
moving cause, which can be no other than the Blood and the Animal Spirits,
wherewith its repleted: for Quicquid movetur, movetur ab alio. True it is, the
fabric of the Heart is very like to a Muscle, I should rather say to a two
fold Muscle; whose Fibers consis^ing of two different Orders, Positions,
Figures and disseminations, do both meet in the Con^, exactly resembling a
twofold Tendon, so that one Muscle seems formed for dilatation, or opening to
admit the Blood, and the other for contraction, or shutting out, or disp^o^ing
of the Blood, both these analogical ^uscles receiving their Animal Spirits from
a branch of the sixth pair.

7. Touching the motion of the Blood in the Veins, which to me appears, cannot
be caused by pulsion of the Arterial Blood, as being moved incomparatively
slower, by reason of its consisting of thicker and grosser parts, and fewer
Animal Spirits, and being much hindered by the Valves, breaking the force of
its mo^ion, which said motion I do suppose, is caused by rarefaction of the
Blood, through the continual and forcible agitation of the Animal Spirits, by
which means it is squeesed or pressed forward; and furthermore, I am apt to
think, that there is a kind of pulsation in the Veins, but so weak and low,
that it is scarce perceptible. It is likewise my opinion, that the local motion
of all the Humors, whether natural or preter-natural, or excrementitious, is
caused by rarefaction. Before I leave this Subject, I think my self obliged to
let you know, I am not so forgetful, as not to remember, that in some former
Writings, I have set down some Opinions much different, and others contrary to
these I have now declared, being missed by commonly received Sentiments of the
Learn^d, and now (as I do believe, for I shall fearce be ever positive in any
thing) better in^orm'd by many Experiments.

CHAP. IX. Of Celebrated Remedies against Consumptions.
1. FOR the present I have detained the Reader long enough in Theoretics, I
will now make bold to offer some Observations on the Practick, the Vanity
whereof in many particulars, appears to me very extravagant: And in regard I
would avoid being troublesome, I shall only make choice of those Diseases, that
are most universal, and begin with Consumptions, I mean such as are occasioned,
by an Hectic Fever, and attended with a chronical putrid Cough; namely, such
as is caused by a putrid slime, and sometimes accompanied with an Ulcer in the
Lungs, known by its purulent expectorations. I will not undertake here to enter
into a discourse of its Causes, and Indications, that are to be drawn thence,
but only recite such Remedies, to which many do attribute great Virtues, and
make appear, how vain, fruitless and deceitful they are. By the way let me tell
you, there are many consumptions, that may properly be so called, that are
neither occasioned nor accompanied with an Ulcer in the Lungs, but sometimes in
the Bronchia, othertimes in the Aspera Arteria, and sometimes with no Ulcer at
all, but very often with an ulc^rous putrid slime only. Passing by the gentle
Purgatives, as Cassia, Rhubarb, etc. that may be nec^ssary in the beginning,
and sometimes in the Progress; I shall only examine the Remedies, that are so
highly recommended against Ul^ers in the Lungs, and ulcerous Coughs of
Consumptions.

2. Syrup of Turnips is a very celebrated Remedy here in England, and no where
else; which after it had been used by many in propo^tionable quantities, at
seasonable times for three Month successively, they have notwithstandi^g all
its Praises, gone off, without the l^ast aba^^me^t of their Coughs, or
improvement in their habit of Body. Neither can I any ways discover, wh^nce
those pretended V^^tu^s should proce^d, or in what part of the Turnip its
wonderful strength does lie. Its apparent enough, that the expressed boiled
Juice is wat^rish and windy, not nourishing, nor ab^^ersive, neither has it
such a cooling quality, as to have the least prevalence in abating the ^^ctic
Fever; so that I do look upon it to be a foolish vain Medicine. True it is,
that the Sugar in it may seem to allay the s^lin ^^ime, smooth; and lenify the
Gullet, which upon t^is occasion is ^ver very rough, and so in s^m^ measure
seem to case that part for a li^^l^ ^ime; but after it has been some little
time in the Stom^ch, turns into a very s^^r, ^ie^ging, and almost corroding
mois^ure, which allowing after some considerable time it does arrive to the
Lungs and Windpipe, must under those qualifications render the said Parts more
rough, and rather provoke, than in the least abate the Cough.

3. But Ground Ivy, alias Ale-hoof, alias under several other Names, is the
Catholicon of the Vulgar, and of many Physicians also, who appropriate it to
the Eyes, Kidneys, Bladder, Lungs, and to the cure of internal and external
Ulcers, proclaiming it the chief of all Vulneraries. These singular
commendations do encourage many to use it in all their ordinary Drink; some for
to cure and preserve their Eyesight, others against the Stone, Gravel,
Hypochondriac Vapors; and in Consumptions supposed to be caused by an Ulcer in
the Lungs, it is entertained for a Nonesuch. Quercetan the Armenian gives you
his word, that with the Juice of it boiled into a Syrup with Sugar of Roses and
penid Sugar, mixed with Flowers of Brimstone into a Lohoch, he has recovered
many desperate Consumptives, who either in my opinion, were not in a proper
Consumption; or Chemist like, boasted of what he never observed. All those
eminent qualities of this Ground Ivy, are supposed to flow from a diuretic and
abstersive Virtue, as most Traumaticks are thought to do their feats by. But
where this subtle Spirit, or bitter Salt is to be found, I am yet to seek. I
have sundry times advised it to Consumptives, to be used sometimes singly in a
Syrup, other times joined to Bugle, Speedwel, Sanicle, St. Iohnswort Flowers,
China root, (and sometimes S^rsaparila) Dates and Liquorish boiled to a good
strong Decoction, to be sweetn'd with Sugar of Roses, and taken at Horis
Medicis; besides a smaller Decoction made with the addition of a few fresh
Ingredients, to be drunk at other times. This though used ten or twelve Weeks
successively, with a good Barley Broth and Milk Porrage Diet, I have observed
to be as ineffectual, and unsuccesful, as all of the other celebrated Rem^dies
I shall hereafter write. True it is, that many youthful, or otherwise strong
Bodies, that have been molested with a long strenuous Couch, copious and foul
Expectorations, so as a sensible wasting of the Flesh and other parts has
ensued, have been restored to Health, upon taking Pectoral Syrups, and
Decoctions made after the forementioned Model, whence to those Remedies the
Titles of Infallible and Sovereign have been attributed, whereas the Disease
was not accompanied with an Ulcer in the Lungs, or an Hectic Fever, but removed
by spareness of Diet, and possibly change of Air, so that not the least
advantages have been derived from these Pectorals, but rather a detriment, If
you will with me believe, that all Sugars and sugared Medicines turn sour in
the Stomach, and assume a sharp fretting, and sometimes corroding quality. Is
it not a daily Observation, that many Persons of the best Quality laboring
under a Consumption, whose Fortunes do enable them to be assisted by a Chorus
of Physicians, performing their utmost endeavors, by prescribing all the noted
Pectorals, maugre all their useless efforts, are forced to yield to the fury of
their Distempers? However, take notice that I do not offer this sort of
discourse, to discourage any Consumptive from applying to a Physician; for
considering, one so Diseased is under a Sentence of death, and to continue so,
is to dye every Day, every Week and every Month, which is more terrible than a
Pessilential F^ver, whereof a Man dies but once, the advising with a
Physician, who shall give you hopes every Day, Week and Month, of r^covering of
you, will wholly ab^t^ v^ur terror, until the very fatal Moment yo^ leave him,
and he leaves you.

4. St. Iohns-wort in its Flowers, under the notion that it is one of the
chiefest Tranmatics, having by infusion in Water, Mead, or Small-Ale, and a
little boi^ing toward the latter end, impregnated either of these Liquors with
its Vir^ues, and with Sugar, or rather Honey seduced into a Syrup, is by many
approved very sovereign to Consumptives; the truth whereof can be best
attested, by several that have used it several Weeks to no purpose.

5. Among all the decant^d Remedies against Consumptions, I find Physicians
have a great respect for Sugar of Roses, and for being a kin to that, for
Conserve of Roses; of which former, it is the report of Avicem, that a certain
Woman, who was in a desperate Consumption, was not only recovered by it, but
made fat thereby; add hereunto a concurring testimony of Mesues, that many have
been cured by it of Consumptions, that being no less recommended to them than
the latter, viz. Conserve of Roses by Montanus, Valleriola, and Forestus, who
pretend abundance to have been cur^d by using vast quantities of it; and
Riverius tells you likewise, that he knew an Apothecary, that was cured of a
Consumption, only by almost continually eating Sugar of Roses. On the other
hand I am well assured, that most practicing Physicians, if they are pleased to
speak the Truth, can tell you, they have known hundreds of Consumptives, that
have used it in gross quantities, without the least benefit; as for my own
particula^, I am so far from believing, that any Consumptive, to whom at any
time I have advised it, upon the credit of the forementioned Authors, have
received any advantage, that they rather were rendered much worse by it: And my
Opinion further is, scarce any thing is more unwholsom than Sugar, whose
greatest use is to please the Palates of Women and Children, and to preserve
Fruits and Herbs from corrupting. It cannot be denied, but that eating much
Sugar destroys the Appetite, by raising fermentations and ebullitions, which
extremely annoy Digestion; sometimes causes loosenesses, Fevers, ill habits of
Body, etc. and is no ways P^ctoral.

6. Of all Sweets, nothing is more Pectoral than Eng^^sh Liquorish, and its
Juice; and if it be tru^, that most Countries afford a native Rem^dy for
Endemick Diseases, they are subject to breed, Liquorish may very well be
accounted as such in Coughs, and those Diseases of the Breast.

7. We are then to consider the Sugar in the Conserve, and Sugar of Roses, to
be intended only as a preserver to the Flowers, and their Juice; and therefore
the principal Virtue must reside in the Juice; and how far that is Pectoral, or
abstersive to the Ulcers in the Lungs, I cannot well apprehend, especially if
it be said to be drying, binding, stopping, restringent, and consolidating,
which most certainly are qualifications contrary to smoothing or absterging;
for what is binding and rough, must cement, thicken, detain, bind and fasten
the putrid matter in the Lungs, and entirely hinder and stop up the
Expectoration, either of purulent matter, or putrid slime. So that I cannot
conceive those Authors recommended those Rosy Remedies against Ulcerous
Consumptions, but only against such asthey supposed to be occasioned by a
Catarrh from the Brain of thin salin Rheumsupon the Lungs, which the drying and
constrictive quality of the Roses might thickeen, and by straigthning the
passages, put a stop to the Catarrh. That humors falling upon the Lungs do
cause a Cough, cannot be apprehended; for being without sense, and having no
Nerves disseminated through them, are not capable of being stimulated into a
Cough; so that what ever is conceived to occasion a Cough, must be something
anoying and stimulating of the Bronchia, or Lungpipes. Neither is it probable,
there can be any Catarrh fall from the Brain, that being shut up as close as a
Box by its Membranes, and bones of the Cranium. Wherefore those Rheums can only
be thought to drip out of the Glandules of the Throat, and Aspera Arteria, upon
which those astringent Medicines do seem to have an Influence.

9. Certain it is, that such saline Rheumatick Constitutions are very subject
to be extremely emaciated, against which its no wonder, if a Diet of Asses, or
other Wheyish Milk, together with their Hordeata, and Amygdalata, Snail waters,
Decoction of Snails, Lobsters, and yellow Saunders, proved such auxiliary
Remedies; though I can never believe these Hordeata, Amygdalata, Waters, or
Decoctions of Earth Worms, Snails, Claws of Lobsters, (whereby as Cardan does
write, he has cured many desperate Consumptions, to whom being more an Italian
Romantic Astrologer, than a Physician, little credit can be given.) Syrup of
Comfry, of Milfoil, Bugle, and the like, they being all thickners, ever cured
the least Ulcer in the Lungs.

10. Much less can I believe, that ever Erastus, Fracastorius, and other
Italian subtle fourbs ever cured so many Consumptives (as they pretend more out
of a d^coy to allure Patients, than a real Truth) with a Decoction of Guaiacum,
who probably were macerat^d by a Pocky Consumption, which is so Epidemick among
them, and no less endemick, being the place of its Nativity.

11. Some are so void of Sense, to approve of Spirits of Sulphur, or Vitriel,
given in four or five drops, in a small Glass full of Plantain or Rose Water.

12. The Narcotick Thickning and Emplastick Powder of Hali Abbas, consisting of
the Seeds of white Poppy, Cucomber, Melon, Citrul, Quince, Gourd, Porcelane,
and Mallows, Gum-arabick, Tragant, Starch, burnt Ivory, Juice of Liquorish,
Penid. Sugar, is a mere heap of Rubbish, by which V^lascus de Taranta and
Forestus do each affirm, to have cured a single Patient of a proper
Consumption; but ought not to be credited, that probably being only an
Emaciation from such a Catarrh of a saline Rheum, as is before mentioned;
notwithstanding this Powder is still in great esteem among many Physicians, who
never yet observed their Patients received any great benefit by it.

13. An Elixir Proprietatis tartarised, and so prepared, as to be very little
bitter, and not laxative, used in a Decoction of Mallows or marsh Mallows in
Whey, Mead, or very small Ale, is a Medicine far more commendable than any yet
proposed. But the most proper Remedy I could hitherto yet discover, is a subtle
penetrating Balsamic Tincture, taken in a true pectoral Decoction for a month,
or six weeks.

14. As for Asses-Milk, it is rather a medicinal Diet, than a proper Remedy;
and, as I said before, by diluting and nourishing is helpful to salin emaciated
Bodies, and to ulcerous Consumptives also, though if it ever singly cured one
such, it has failed a thousand times in others.

15. Sulphur, though endued with an extraordinary Virtue against all internal
and external Ulcers, is not to be understood as such, being exhibited in
substance, whether in Flowers or otherwise, but ought to be dissolved and
opened by a proper Menstruum.

16. Before I conclude this Chapter, I can scarce pass by an Observation upon
some deceitful Empirics, who after Patients have Labored a long time under a
proper Consumption, and a tedious fruitless cure of Physicians, have found a
way to let themselves in by a specious Promise, accompanied with a large
Declaration of bombast Words, that they shall be Cured in 6 or 8 Days, by only
administering some common pectoral Julep or Apozem, proportionably enforced with
Diacodium, or Laudanum Liquidum, by which, on a sudden procuring rest, abating
the Cough by suppressing Expectoration, and through those Narcoticks putting a
stop to the violent motion of the Animal Spirits, (into which they are
irritated by the pungent purulent, or putrid slimy matter adhering to the
Bronchia, or sides of the Asp^ra Arteria; for according to what I have observed
before, the Anim^l Spirits are the sole causes of all motion in the Humors) the
Patient has seemingly been wond^rfully recovered, and f^lt himself at a great
deal of ease, though in effect, this way of proceeding did considerably hast^n
his Death, (by locking up the matter) which though hap^ing so suddenly, the
Empirick notwithstanding, finds a way to get great reputation by it, only by
telling the standers by, that they may plainly observe by the great Benefit the
Patient received in so little time before his death, that had he been called
sooner, in all probability, as they may judge themselves, he might have cured
him. Among the rest of those Quacks, I knew one, that by many was called the
Consumption-Doctor, who did confess to me, that his usual Medicine was what
follows. He took of Penny-royal-water and Scabious-water, of each half a pint,
therein he dissolved of Oxymel Simplex (and sometimes Oxymel scilliticum) four
Ounces, and as much of Diacodium, which made a thick Julep, or a thin Syrup;
hereof he would cause the Patient to take four or five Spoonfuls three or four
times in a day. This was the same Person, and the same Medicine, by which he
pretended to have Cured one Captain O Brian of a Consumption, which at that
time made a great noise, and was taken notice of by his Majesty King Charle^,
as the Treatice, which was written upon it, mentions; though at the same time,
you are not to conceive this Patient to be otherwise troubled, then with a long
chronical Cough, occasioned by Debauches; being without an hectic Fever, nor
having his Lungs touched in any sort, of which, and his Leanness, he was rather
recovered by the continuance of a Milk-Diet, and his detainure from Brandy^ and
other strong Liquors, which had caused this Distemper, though the giving
seasonable Rest to his Animal Spirits by the said Narcotic did also in some
measure contribute to it.

17. Air being the life of the Lungs, a Consumption cannot be hoped to be
protracted, or palliated, much less cured, without exchanging from a worse to a
better, which is most agreeable in a dry, gravelly, stony or sandy Soil; not
low, because subject to damps, nor high and mountainous, because exposed to
sharp Winds, that are more offensive to the Lungs than Damps, Vapors or Fogs;
neither can the Air of any place situate Westward of any great River, Bog,
Marsh, Pond, or Moat, be healthful, because the Damps, Vapors or Fogs, that
are raised by a Setting-Sun, continue all night, and are not discussed before
the Sunrising the next day.

18. I am fully convinced, that Consumptions in youthful Bodies, strong before
their Illness, not being very much depraved in their Bowels by a foul ill habit
of Blood, and other Juices (cacochymia) are curable, if undertaken six Weeks,
or a month, at least, before their expected end, and opposed by proper Remedies
given frequently, and in large Doses; for I have often observed, that many
Medicines have failed in their expected effects by being under-dosed.

19. As for Issues made in the Neck, or Arms, they can bring no relief, in
respect of cleansing the Ulcer in the Lungs, or correcting of the putrid Slyme,
neither can External Fumigations signify much.

CHAP. X. Of continual, putrid and malignant Fevers.
1. LOnger Experience has induced me to recede from my former Opinions in
continual putrid, and malignant, I may say, in all sorts of Fevers, where the
Blood tending to a dissolution of the mixture (I ought not to say subversion of
the Crasis, or temperament, being less intelligible) of its constituent parts,
namely of its most subtle parts, which are the Animal Spirits from the less
subtle, and grosser, or of its sulphurous from the mercurial, and saline parts,
may properly be termed Putrefaction, which is not necessary, or constantly
observed, to be attended with a stink, as appears in a Gangrene of any part of
the Body, that is seldom or never accompanied with a stink; though a
Corruption, sphacelus, or Mortification, always is. By this separation the most
subtle parts, or Animal Spirits running together, and being accumulated in
greater heaps, do move much more impetuously, whereby the said mixture is more
and more dissolved every minute. By this acceleration of Motion the natural
Heat (whereof Local motion is the sole cause, as appears by attrition, or
rubbing any thing for a long time together causes a Heat; or by the quick and
violent motion of Spirits of Vitriol, being a^fu^ed upon Steel, raising a great
heat, i^ augmented into a greater and preternatural heat, so that the
preternatural heat following the dissolution of the mixture, cannot be thought
to be the cause (which must precede the effect) but a consequent Symptom, and
effect of a putrid Fever, whose Essence therefore cannot be said to consist in
a preternatural Heat, or can it so be ^efin^d. Moreover, there are some Fevers,
wherein no preternatural Heat, quick Pulse, or high-colour'd Urin is perceived,
as appears in many malignant Fevers, where the mixture of the Blood is
dissolved by a sudden extinguishing, or mortifying the Animal Spirits by
venomous Particles commonly admitted from without, or sometimes bred within the
Body, which confirms, that a Fever is not a preternatural Heat first kindled in
the Heart, whereas its often kindled in other parts: As for Instance, when an
Inflammation of any Bowel, as Lungs, Liver, etc. or where any great pain is
raised, there the Heat is first kindled, and thence communicated to the Heart,
and all the pa^ts of the Body: That there is such a dissolution in the Blood,
is evident by the Blood, that is drawn off by bleeding in putrid Fevers, the
parts being plainly separated one from the other. So that advising all the
Coolers you can imagine, be it Snow-water, Frog-spawn-water, the coldest
Spring Water, Whey, sour Butter-Milk, or Juleps made of Succory, Edive,
Water-lilly, or any other Waters, though enforced with Spirit of Vitriol,
Sulphur, Nitre, or Salt, and a Solution of Sal prunella, they avail so little
in Fevers, that they are generally found to increase them in all the Symptoms,
as the preternatural Heat, high and quick Pulse, deep-colour'd Urin, and the
rest are sensibly raised to a much higher pitch. Neither does Bleeding in the
least contribute to the abatement of a Fever by cooling per fe, but by some
other way per accidens, as I shall endeavor to explain hereafter. That
Physicians have most of em, if not all, wholly abandoned prescribing such sort
of cooling Juleps, as being rather detrimental, and content themselves with
advising small clear Posset, thin Gruel, etc. is an Argument, that putrid
Fevers are not preternatural heats, nor are they not primarily caused by them.

2. That the Circulation of the Blood in putrid Fevers is too quick, and the
Blood too much rarefied, by the too quick motion of the Animal Spirits, is very
apparent, and therefore lessening the Blood by bleeding, must also lessen the
Circular motion, and diminish the Animal Spirits; which being reduced to a
moderate measure, as may be done by one bleeding or two, is as much as can be
expected from that remedy; the Spirits being thereby rendered more free, and
the Vessels more Capacious, are put into a State of performing their Office
with more ease, in throwing off heterogeneous, and very offensive particles,
that are got into the Blood, either from without, or bred in the Body. But
should you proceed to a Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Bleeding, you
will draw off so many Animal Spirits, that the remainder must be insufficient
to perform their aforesaid Office, wherein the cure of a Fever does consist;
and should you tap off all, or most part of the Blood in the Body, as I fear
too many do, and have done out of Ignorance or Stubbornness, the Fever would
and must still continue proportionably in the same Vigor and Degree; so that
this way of proceeding, must sooner kill the Patient than the Fever. As for
Malignant Fevers, the most Sanguinary Physician will scarce Adventure beyond a
single bleeding, which the more judicious think to be one too many.

3. Glysters, gentle purgatives, and Laxatives, also mild Vomits, used
sometimes in the beginning are not looked upon a Remedies per se, and directly
opposite to Fevers, but only helpful per accidens, in removing excrementitious
Humors, that otherwise might annoy the Spirits, and deteriorate the Fever:
Neither can Epispastick or Blistering Plasters be thought to be otherwise
advantageous, than by stimulating the Animal Spirits, (upon which as I
intimated formerly, they seem to Operate peculiarly) to throw off those
heterogeneous and febril particles; for I cannot conceive, any are so wanting
of Judgment, as to think, that the cause of the putrid, or Malignant F^ve^ is
in the Serum, whereof part is contained in those Bladders or blisters, the
Cantharides have occasioned.

4. It remains then, that the whole Stress in curing continual, putrid, and
Malignant Fevers, is by most of our modern Physicians, laid upon such
Compounds, as are called Cordial and Alexipharmacal Waters, Powders, and
Electuaries, also some Chemical Preparations, as Antimonium, Diaphoreticum,
Bezoarticum, Minerale, Spiritus cornu cervi, Spiritus fuliginis, etc.

5. The chief of those Cordial Alexiphamacal Waters now most in use, are Aqua
Theriacalis, Aqua Prothericacalis, (perhaps the better of the two, as
consisting of fewer Ingredients,) Aqua Epidemica, etc. The Electuaries are
Theriaca Andromachi (which is accounted more temperate than Mithridate.)
Theriaca Londineusis, and Diascordium. The compound alexipharmacal Pouders are
usually compiled out of some testaceous Pouders, as pulvis echelis cancrorum
compositus, and others of Crab's-eyes and Claws, Perl, Oriental Bezoar, burnt
Hartshorn, and sometimes mixed with Radix Carlina, Contrajerva, Serpentaria
virginiana (which are the chief) Dictamnum Creticum, Angelica, etc. By these,
and the like, as the Goastone, pulvis Pannonicus ruber, its supposed the Heart
is much strengthened, and the Animal Spirits increased, and propoked to throw
out the materia febrilis by sweat; so that they do esteem Diaphoretics to be
the only true and adequate Remedies, against all continual Fevers, as the
Physicians of the Southern parts do only acknowledge Bleedings.

5. We are to observe, that the Animal Spirits are continually employed, from
the beginning of a continual Fever to the declination, in subduing the Materia
febrilis, which is commonly termed a Digestion, or Concoction; at the
Declination they apply themselves to the separation, and expulsion of the said
febril matter, which in these colder Climates is more frequently by Sweat and
Urin, and sometimes by Stool, Hemorrhage, Imposthumations, or some few
otherways.

6. If then the chief scope is to throw off and expel the febril matter by
sweat, three things ought to be considered. 1. Whether Diaphor^tics ought to be
used before the Declination of a Fever, at which time only they appear to be
helpful in assisting Nature to throw off; for it must be owned by all
experienced Practicers, that the causa febrilis, be its vicious humors,
heterogeneous particles, or what other offensive matter they are please to
allow, must be first subdued, or digested, and separated, before it can be
expelled by Sweat; and therefore should you exhibit the largest Doses of
Diaphoretics, that Nature can possibly bear, and second them by loading the
Patient with a number of Bed-cloaths, he will scarcely be brought to sweating;
and if peradventure he should happen to be forced into a Sweat in the
beginning, augment, or state of the Fever, it must be to a very great
detriment, by diverting the Spirits from their necessary task, and squeezing
the serum from the Humors, whereby they are thickened and hardened, which ought
rather to be diluted at those Seasons. Moreover by putting so great a force
upon the Spirits, they must necessarily be much divided, dissipated and
inflamed. Secondly, whether Sudorificks given in moderate Doses, so as to be
insufficient to provoke Swear, do not assist the Spirits by increasing them, (I
mean, such as contain some vinous Spirits, as Epidemic, as Treacle-water) and
putting them into a gentle agitation, whereby the febril matter may be subued,
or digested. Vox Medicorum does proclaim they do, and therefore they are
prescribed by them from the beginning to the ending of Fevers, in no greater
measures, than what nature seems to require. For my own particular, I can
scarce believe, that those Spirits are, or can be rendered homogeneous to the
Animal Spirits (whatever they are when a Man is in health) being now under a
great disorder, and disturbance; and as for the other subtle particles, that
are supposed to be in the Ingredients of the said Alexipharmacal-waters; how
far they are conducing in subduing the febril matter, can best be proved by the
success, ten dying under the use of them, to one that recovers, whose Recovery
may rather be attributed to the strength of Nature, a due regimen in his Diet,
and doing him no hurt by improper Remedies. Thirdly, supposing fictitiously,
that Diaphoretics were proper, the uncertainty of their Operation would often
occasion a failure of the effect that is expected from them. Purgatives and
Vomitories seldom or never fail in their operations, if justly dosed: But
Sudorificks and Diureti^s very often, though administered in great quantities.
Many quarterns of Plague-water have been drunk for pleasure at one time by
several that are in health, without the least sweat following upon it: And as
many diuretic Juleps have been swallowed by Nephritics, who have not made a
drop of Urin the more after them.

7. Wherefore I do much suspect, that there is scarce any Remedy used, that may
be truly termed an Antifebril; though there are a great many that are in
common use, and yet not commonly known, or acknowledged to he such, which, if
well Dosed, and often exhibited in proper Seasons, may evidently and sensibly be
discovered by any heedful Physician, to subdue the febril matter, though but
slowly, and therefore ought to be began to be given very early, and continued.
Besides these, there are other Medicines, which in four and twenty hours do
abate all the common Symptoms in a continual and malignant Fever, though even
these, if applied too late, the Spirits being then almost wholly ^ubdued, and
the febril matter increased, and rendered indigestible, may fail in their
performances. As for the Peruvian Bark, I have ^^veral times attentively
observed, that the continual Fever being under very promising circ^msta^ces,
has upon the use of it changed sensibly into worse Symptoms in six or twelve
hours, so that no means afterward could be applied capable to retrieve that
Error.

8. Narcotics are seldom forgotten in this Distemper, especially where so
seeming a relief is perceived on a sudden, in the sudden suspension of its
Symptoms, by detaining or holding fast of the Animal Spirits from Operating
upon the Febril matter, that causes these Symptoms, which soon return with a
greater fury, upon the letting loose of the said Spirits, by the dissipation of
the Force of the Hypnotic Medicine. This seeming alleviation does often encourage
the Physician to a continuated use of Dormitives, throughout the whole course
of the Fever, the benefit whereof is experienced, not only to consist in a
longer delay of death, but also in a more certain consequence of it.
Notwithstanding this great abuse does not remove the necessary, seasonable and
seldom use of Narcotics, when and where urgent Symptoms may require them.

CHAP. XI. Of the Stone.
1. THAT the Urin is saturated with Sal Ammoniac, its distillation does plainly
confirm to us, and that the serum of the Blood where of the Urin does consist
must first contain the same, or else the latter could not receive it; for nihil
dare potest quod non habet, and consequently that the whole Mass is thoroughly
replenished with it, does also appear from the distillation of Human Blood,
which yields a plain Spirit of Sal ammoniac, little or nothing at all different
from the other. That Sal ammoniac is the most tough Salt of all others, cannot
be disputed by those, that have pounded common Salt, Sal gemmae, nitri, or any
other Salt, in a mortar, these being the most friably and brittle, and
consequently the less unfit singly to be coagul^ted into a Stone, whereas Sal
ammoniac being so tough and tenacious, especially being mixed with crude slimy
mucous dregs, that remain after the imperfection of the Digestion in the
Stomach, together with some sabulous Matter of the Blood, I do conceive may
easily be coagulated together by a vicious, limpid gle^t dripping out of the
Nerves (as I have already mentioned in one of the preceding Chapters) that are
disseminated through, and are terminated in the par^nchyma, and membranes of
the Kidneys. So that the pretending that Slime-adhering to the Kidneys, or its
inward membrane, ^s baked into a Stone by a preternatural heat of the Kidneys,
like unto Clay baked in a Kill into a brick by the extreme heat of a fire,
seems a Jest to me, since it cannot be imagined, that any heat of that degree
is ever felt by any nephritick Patient, or, if possible, could it be endured by
him. Moreover their pale Complexions, pale Urin, sluggishness, infrequent
Urination, or making of Water, are all indications of Coldness; add hereunto,
that Crystal is generally found, and probably bred in the Snow; Rocks, Flints,
and other Stones in the Bowels of the Earth, where no degree of Heat was ever
perceived. Wherefore what ever extraordinary or preternatural Heat may be felt
by Nephriticks about their Loins or Kidneys, is commonly caused by Gravel,
Stone, or some other obstructing matter, occasioning pain and consequently heat.

2. In what part soever this Urinous Salt, or Sal Ammoniac is found, (through
want of being separated and expelled by the Kidneys) be it in the Gutts,
Urinary-Bladder, Gallbladder, Liver, Spleen, Brain, Stomach, Lungs, in the
fleshly part of the Tongue, and of the Kidneys themselves, also about the
Joints, though as remote as the extremities of the Fingers, there Stones may
be, and have been engendered, as is attested by a multitude of Authors. Some of
these parts being allowed by most Physicians to be of a cold Temperament, as
the Brain, Guts, Bladder, etc. is a second Argument, that plainly evinces, the
Stone is not engendered efficiently by Heat, though it may sometimes very
considerably conduce to it. But to say, there is a Lithopoetic Faculty, or an
innate calculous and fabulous constitution in the Kidneys, as is asserted by so
great an Author, as Fernelius, seems to me very idle; as if he would infer,
that none were subject to the Gravel and Stone* but such as derived
hereditarily a fabulous, and calculous disposition of Kidneysfrom their
Parents: What satisfaction there is in the Word Lithopoetic, I cannot well
apprehend.

3. Before I recede from this subject, I ought to answer one Objection, viz.
That there is not always mucous Matter concurring to the generation of the
Stone, as appears in the Stone, that is sometimes found in the Gallbladder of
a Man, and very often in that of an Ox, which consisting of Gall or choler,
cannot be supposed to have any Slime, Phleam, or Mucus adjoin'd to it, being
for the most part found simple unmixt, and contrary to the Nature of Mucus, or
Phleam, which is always Glutinous or Viscous; I allow the whole, and make
answer, that the Stone in the Gallbladder is often formed by concretion, through
the separating or drying away of its thinner and moister parts; in like manner
Mortar dries in some time into a Stony substance; as also does Tartarum
Vitriolatum, that is made by concretion, besides many others; on the other hand
I must tell you, I am not the first, that has observed the Gall in the
Gallbladder very Viscous and roapy, through the admixture of some Slime or
Mucus, that is separated with i^ from the Blood, and then it will be allowed to
be matter very proper for the Formation of a Stone. In the same manner a Stone
in the Kidneys may be formed by concretion, without the admixture of Mucous
Matter, but then the Stone becomes friable, and not very hard, and of a more
reddy color, whereas according to the proportion of Mucous matter, concuring
to the formation of the Stone, it becomes hard and pale.

The Stone of the Kidneys is commonly observed to precede that in the Bladder;
and any Stone, though of a very small dimension, falling from thence, through
either of the Ureters into the Bladder, is conceived to be the Foundation of
one there, which by lying a considerable time, does receive a daily growth from
the Urinous Salt, and Slime, that descend thither. This in my opinion is not
always necessary, it being possible enough for a Stone to grow in the Bladder,
without having the Rudiments laid in the Kidneys; moreover it has been
observed, that at the same time one of the Kidneys, and the Bladder, have each
contained a Stone.

4. To the formation of the Stone, must be concurring. 1. Depauperated or
Vicious animal Spirits, that are too weak to perform the separation and
Expulsion of the abounding Serum of the Blood in the Kidneys. 2. A Serum too
much Saturated with a Sal Ammoniac, that is mixed with too much common Salt,
which all edibles do contain in some proportion, and so do Urine, Beer, Whey,
and other Drinks; for you are to understand, that Sal Ammoniac is a mixed Salt,
consisting of common Salt, and a Fuliginous Salt, united together, as appears
by the Artificial making of Sal Armoni^c, which is by mixing a pound of common
Salt, to half a pound of Soot, and and boiling them in three or four pints of
fresh Urines, to the thickness of Honey, which is then to be sublimed in
subliming-pots into Sal Ammoniac. The natural Salt Ammoniac is Urin of Chamels,
Horses, or Oxen, concreaced or Evaporated by the hot Sands of Arabia into a
Salt. 3. A Slime or Mucus to Cement the Salt with the 4th, which is Sabulous
Dregs of the Blood, 5 narrow passages of the Kidneys. So that Salt, Salt-Meats,
Pickles, and Spices, are chi^f materials for the Stone. 6. A Vicious gleet
dripping from the Nephritic Nerves, Coagulating the materials together. This is
the short Theory I do propose to my self, of the generation of the Stone in the
Kidneys, which is suggested to me by practical experience, though I could wish,
that among so great a number of very ingenious Physicians we have h^re in
England, (who are as capable, as any in the whole Universe, though not so
industrious) some would take the pains, to detect a more prob^ble Theory of the
Stone, and other Distemp^rs, which would certainly prove a great Advancement to
the Art of Physic, and no less Benefit to miserable Patients. However, as
defective and Hypothetical only this Theory may be, it conducts me much more
successfully in the Practick against the Stone, and other Diseases of the
Kidneys, than the common Doctrine. I do own, that this and all the other
preceding Theoretick Notions might be rendered much plainer, by branching their
Illustrations into so many particular Volumes; but my invincible Aversion to
all manner of Prolixity, together with my weak Capacity of rendering them any
more than scarcely probable, or other than merely supposititious, does entirely
discourage me from any such Attempt.

The Practical Part of the Stone consists in these Particulars; 1. In the Means
to prevent the Growing of it. 2. In the Cure of the Stone. 3. In the Removing a
Fit, or Paroxism of Pains, occasioned by the Stone. 4. In the preventing the
Return of a Paroxysm of the Stone, which may be termed a Palliative Cure.

1. Those that live Sedentary Lives, and use little or no Exercise, as most
Students; and Debauchees in sharp Wines, and very new, or stale Strong Beer,
are very subject, and properly disposed to breed the Stone; but beyond all,
those that eat much Salt with their Meat, or feed much upon Flesh or Fish
Salted, Smoked, or Pickled. Wherefore interposing moderate Exercise between
their Studies, and abstaining from their grave Thoughts, by intermixing
Cheerfulness and sober Mirth, to alleviate the Animal Spirits, which are the
chief Agents of Health, and, being indisposed, or vitiated, of Diseases. This
is one Way to prevent the Stone in the former; And exchanging sharp Wines into
milder, and diluted with a light thin Spring Water, and using them with a
quantum sufficit, and a total Abstinence from Stale Beer, substituted by Small
Ale, will produce the like Effect in the latter. To drink Wine at Meals, as it
lays a Foundation for the Stone, so using Small Drink in its stead prevents it:
And in my Opinion, pure Wine ought not to be drunk, according to the Rules of
Health, before the Chylification is finished, and the Distribution at hand,
unto which it may be very assistent. A Fish-Diet moistened with too much sharp
Wine, and a Bread and Cheese-Diet, seldom fail of administering sufficient
Matter for the Stone. In short, Keeping the Stomach clean, in the manner as
has been before described, is the chiefest Way and Means to prevent breeding
the Stone.

2. The Cure of this Disease is commonly attempted by Bleeding in the Arm
(though some judge it more advantageous in the Foot) in Bodies, that are
moderately replete, to make room in the Vessels, which the subsequent Laxatives
and Purgatives will necessarily require, as working by Fermentation, that will
occasion a Rarefaction of the Humors, and consequently a Distension of the
Vessels, which otherwise might cause some Local Disturbance of the Stone, or
occasion a Paroxysm of Nephritick Pains. Among the Laxatives, Cassia Fistularis
newly drawn over the Steem of a Decoction, made of Emollient or Diuretic
Vegetables, is made choice of as a sacred Remedy, either by it self, or mixed
with Rhubarb and Cream of Tartar, or Diasenna; which is often suspected, because
the Scammony, that is an Ingredient in it, is accounted too rough, as causing
too high a Fermentation, or Ebullition; or Pulvis Senae comp. maj. or Pulvis
Sen. comp. min. This is judged necessary to be repeated once or twice, at
convenient Intervals; which, as I have tried more than once, I have always
found, not to reach the Morbisick Matter, and therefore am obliged to make use
of such Additions, that should penetrate without any Hazard of putting the
Spirits upon a Ruf^le. This being premised, the Saxifragers, or Stone-breakers,
are to be introduced, with this Election and Preference, That those, which have
an extraordinary Character stamped upon them by great Authors, or Physicians,
ought only to be recited; for, should they all be enumerated here, to which the
Faculty of Stone-breaking is attributed, a Quire of Paper would be insufficient
to contain them, there being no Disease in the whole Body of Man, against which
so many Simple and Compound Remedies (in all manner of Galenical and Chemical
Forms) of Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals are recommended, as against the
Stone; for I do believe I never met with a Physician, Apothecary, Surgeon,
Empirick, Midwife, or any Old Woman, that had not an infallible Remedy against
the Stone and Gravel.

But before I make mention of any of these Stone-Grinders, it will not be amiss
to enquire by what Quality, Virtue, or Means it is expected by Physicians, they
should perform this great Work of Breaking the Stone in the Kidneys and
Bladder. Some endeavor to effect it by Medicines, that have a Corroding
Quality, by which insinuating into the Pores of the Stone, tear all asunder,
and dissolve it, in like manner as Aqua fortis dissolves Silver, Copper, and
Tin; Aqua regia Gold; and Juice of Limons, and distilled Vinegar Crab's-eyes,
Pearl, Coral, etc. To this purpose, for Corroding and Dissolving the Stone, are
recommended Spirit of Vitriol, Sulphur, Salt, Nitre* and Juice of Limons. I
have experienced most of these in the Cure of the Stone, and ever observed,
that within less than an Hour, they would certainly put the Patient into an
horrid Fit of the Stone-Cholick, besides the Pain in the Back; against which,
an Emollient Laxative Clyster, with the Exhibition of a gentle Narcotick at the
end of its Operation, gave present Relief; and glad I was to come of^ so. That
a few Drops of any of those recited Spirits, well diluted with a Parsley or
Fennil-water, and sweetened with Syrup of the five Opening Roots, being thus
obtused, and afterward broke in their Virtues, by passing the Stomach and
other Parts, and carrying thence some slimy Particles to blunt them more,
should at last, upon their Arrival to the Kidneys, be endu'd with a Force
sufficient to crack a hard Stone, is very wonderful. But to clear the Point,
pour Spirits of Vitriol upon Steel, as it is directed in the Preparation of
Vitriolum Martis, these readily entering the Pores of the Steel, whose Figures
are adapted to receive them, move very quick and impetuously, piercing through
the whole Body of the Steel in a very few Minutes, whereby not only a very
great Heat and high Ebullition are occasioned, but the Sulphurous Particles,
that tied the Salin together into a Body, are totally expelled; as you may
perceive by the great Stink attending of them in their Evaporation; and the
Remainder is turned into its First Principle of Vitriol. In like manner the
Spirits of Vinegar, or of Juice of Limons, piercing into the adapted Pores of
Bezoarstone, Pearl, Coral, Crab's-eyes, Egg-shells, Oyster and Mussel-shells,
Crabs-Claws, and the like, by the quick and violent Motion of their most subtle
pointed Particles, cause an Heat and Ebullition, and chase out the Sulphurous
connecting Particles; whereby nothing is left in the Vinegar but a Tartar,
(Limus, or Faex,) and if washed, may be called a Calx extinct, though honored
by Chemists with the Name of Magistery; that is, after the Precipitation with
Oil of Tartar, and the sweetning of it with several Lotions of warm Water;
which in reality, is no other than a Terra damnata; and among those recited, I
take the Bezoar-stone to contain the finest Earth; and next to that the Perl.
As for the rest, I look upon them all as equal.

2. Now if you can suppose the Pores of a Nephritic Stone in the Body, to be
adapted in Figures, answerable to receive the pointed Particles of the Spirits
of Vitriol, Salt, Nitre, Tartar, Vinegar, or Limons, you may reasonably
believe, there is a Virtue and possibility in these Acids, of dissolving the
Stone in the Kidn^ys or Bladder, notwithstanding that they are not taken in so
great a quantity, as almost to corrode, and that they do not arrive in their
full force to those remote Places; yet their frequent Repetitions, and long
continuance of them, under a milder Virtue, will answer their improportionable
dosing, and accomplish the same effect: So that if this supposition were true,
as it is most certainly false and erroneous, you are not to apprehend, that
thos^ Acid Stone-breakers were to perform that Work, in the time almost that
you may crack an Apricock Stone, as most of these Medicine-mongers and
Empiricks pretend to do, in twice or three times taking. But to subvert your
Supposition, and consequently to divert you from losing your labor in the use
of Acids, I need only to allege to you, that they are in no wise shaped in the
figures and dimensions of their Particles, proportionable or adapted to enter
the Pores of a Stone bred in the Kidneys or Bladder, as you may easily make
trial, by pouring of Spirits of Vinegar, (I mean, Vinegar twice or thrice
distilled) Juice of Limons, or simple water acuated with such a proportion of
Spirit of Nitre, Salt, or Vitriol, as to bring it to such a degree of
sharpness, acidity, or virtue, as Spirit of Vinegar, or Juice of Limon is; for
above that degree, no Acid can be taken into the Body, without corroding the
Stomach) upon an indifferent hard Stone, taken out of the Bladder or Kidneys,
which being enclosed in a Mattress with its blind Head, and placed in a warm
Sand Bath for Twenty Weeks together, at the expiration of which, you may take
out the Stone, so far from being pierced by the Acids, that its grown much
harder than it was before* But what is more, should you pour the strongest Aqua
Fortis, or Regia, or Spirit of Vitriol not diluted upon it, and let it stand as
long as you please, the Stone will come out harder than it was put in. As Gold
and Silver cannot well be reduced, or dissolved into a Calx by ignition, but by
amalgamation, and immersive (as the Chemists term it) Calcination by corrosive
Acids; so on the contrary, the Stone that is bred in the Bladder and Kidneys,
cannot readily be dissolved into a Calx, by an immersive Calcination, but by
Ignition. Because the Sulphur, that tyeth the constituent parts of the Stone
together, can only be consumed or destroyed by fire, whereas no acid will, or
can attempt upon Sulphur.


3. That all Acids ( Quatenus Acids, and perse) are Enemies to the Nerves,
nervous Parts, (as Membranes, Tendons. etc.) and to the Animal Spirits, common
experience does attest; whence it is, that most Men, upon only tasting of a
very sour thing, being Potable or edible, are apt to make sour Faces, and to
shiver, or to undergo small Tremblings all over, (which are small concussions
of the Nerves, Tendons, and circumvestient Membranes of the Body) by pricking
of the Membranes; and though this Pricking in tasting of any very sour thing,
is only perceived by the Nerves and Membranes of the Mouth, it is nevertheless
felt all over by the continuity and contiguity of all the Nerves, nervous
Parts, and Membranes of the Body, like unto two, or more unison Fiddle strings,
whereof one being touched, causes the same sound in all the others; or like
unto a Cord that is extended, which when smartly struck at one end, makes the
whole Cord shake as far as the other end; whence I do infer, that what ever
expulsion, whether by Vomiting, Stool, or Urine, (and sometimes per accidens
sweat) is occasioned by the force of Acids, is by pricking, stimulating, or
irritating the Nerves, or nervous parts, by their rigid Pointed Particles, and
a faculty, (which all Acids possess, contrary to all suliginous and ammoniac
Salts) of precipitating of them, and consequently throwing of them down the
Ureters; and therefore I doubt not, but that in some kinds of suppression of
Urine occasioned by the Stone, Gravel, Mucus, Crumbs of Blood, and at some
seasons, Acid Medicines may be of great use, among which, I do in my opinion
prefer this following.

Aceti Vini albi Gallic^ destillati, (vel s^ (...) sucet (...) citri, cujus
posterioris usus praestat) j. Ol. amygdal. dulc. rec. extract. j ss. probe and
diutine cum Sacohar. candi vel Sacchari Althaeae. ss. triti. vin. alb. gall.
iiij. M.

This proves very diuretic in many, and that by stimulation, as I have said
before. But its observed of Juice of Limons, that if frequently used, its apt
to cause a Thrush in the stomach, by its too sharp, or rather somewhat
corroding quality, occasioning sometimes Vomiting, or a violent Looseness, for
which reason the Juice of Citron is preferred, consisting of an acid not so
acute, and yet not less diuretic. However, White Wind Vinegar distilled is
experienced to excel either of them in the diuretic Faculty, and many others,
as being much more penetrating, and consisting of Particles more subtle and
Volatile. Though Vinegar is vulgarly reputed a potent restringent, yet it cannot
deserve that denomination so much as Spirit of Salt, Nitre, Juice of Limons, or
the acid of Tamarinds; and to speak the truth, it cannot properly be termed
Adstringent, which is a quality that is binding, pursing, (drawing together like
a Purse) and contracting, proceeding from austere Particles, such as are
perceived in Allom, Juice of Slows, and the like; but nothing resembling that,
can be discovered in Vinegar, no more than in Juice of Limons, or Spirit of
Salt. True it is, that all Acids cause an Asperity or Roughness by their acute
Particles, pricking the Nerves and Membranes, that are nervous expansions,
which by a sort of resistance rise up into those minute Points, Like unto a
Goose-skin.
thereby endeavoring rather to expel and throw out; whereas the others by
their Austerity, though occasioning a Roughness, yet it is such, as does
detain, and bind in what^ver they contain: What is in Vinegar, but an Acid
Spirit, united to an Acid Tartar, melted as it were per deliqueum into a
moisture or Liquor? Vinegar is so far from binding, that it renders any thing,
to which its united, more piercing, expulsive, and solutive also, as appears in
Sal Tartari Sennerti. Colocynthis steeped in Vinegar, is rendered mu^^ more
purgative, than when macerated in Brandy or Wine. Three Grains of Laudanum
Opiatum taken to cause Sleep, and drinking upon it a Draught of any Julep, that
contains an Ounce of distilled Vinegar, or only as much Oxymel Simplex, shall
occasion a deeper Sleep, than if ten or twelve Grains of Laudanum had been
swallowed, whereout probably some would never awake again. Others upon drinking
of sour Beer, (being of the same nature as Vinegar) are immediately put into
Gripes and Looseness. However I will not be positive in this, or scarce in any
thing else; but to me, the Adstringent quality in Vinegar seems a vulgar Error
of some Ages.

That Acids (excepting those that are merely Austere) are the chief and most
proper Medicines (I will not say certain, for they don't prove always so) for
Expulsion, and promoting or irritating the Expultrix Faculty efficiently in the
Animal Spirits, and Instrumentally in the Nerves and Membranes, may be
Instanced in Vinegar, which in a greater quantity provokes Vomiting, in a
lesser, Stools and Urin, and Sweat in those that are disposed. It is certain,
that Prophylactic Waters made by Infusion, and not distillation, being commonly
well impregnated with Vinegar, and Acetum theriacale are imcomparatively more
ready and potent in half the proportion, in promoting Sweat, (which also is by
expulsion) than Treacle-water, (wherein is contained only the Phlegm of some
Acids, the heavier and stronger part not coming over the Helm in distillation)
Aqua Epidemica, or Protheriacalis. One Dram of Virginian serpentary, being
macerated in Vinegar, shall raise a quicker and more copious Sweat, than three
Drams infused in Wine or Brandy. Cream of Tartar, and Tamarinds, by their
pungent Acidity, move the Expultrix Faculty of the Guts to Stools. Juice of
Limons, Citrons, Oranges, Spirit of Tartar, Nitre and Salt, prompt the Kidneys
to expel Urin, etc.

4. Spiritus tartari, Nitrum tartarisatum, and Tartarum Vitriolatum, are by
most that have made trial of them, accounted the most powerful of Diuretics.
But there being so offensive an empyreumatic stink in the Spirit of Tartar,
proceeding from a remaining Admixture of some lixivial Earthy Particles,
imperceptible to the Eye, whereto the Empyreum is almost inseparably adherent,
causes its use to be much neglected, which however may be removed, by mixing
the Spirit with fine wheaten Flower into a Paste, and that equally mixed with
the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, and so drawn off twice or thrice in a Glass
retort, or mixing the Spirit of Tartar with Golchotar, i. e. Calchantum
rubefactum, and drawing it over once or twice in the same manner; wherein you
need not to fear, that any Vitriolic Spirit will mix with it, in regard that
the degree of heat, that will be sufficient to raise the Spirit of Tartar, is
not by much intense enough, to force out the Spirit of Vitriol. After all, a
pure Acetum destillatum is not much inferior to it.

5. By what means those Magisteries of Crab's-eyes, of Mussel-shells, Egg or
Oyster-shells, operate those pretended effects of forcing down Urin, and
breaking the Stone, is my next business to enquire. It is commonly concluded,
that whatever drives down Urin forcibly, does break the Stone by often dripping
upon it, like the ^ropping of a Gutter falling often upon a Stone under it, does
by length of time make a hole into it. Gutta cavat Lapidem non vi, sed saepe
cadendo. It is then inser^'d, that those recited Magisteri^s are potent
Diur^ties, (which my little experience does wholly contradict,) but whether
they do their work by cutting, hammering, or dissolving the Stone tota
substantia, ought to be considered. It cannot be pretended, that in those
Magisteries, and particularly in that of Crab's-eyes, there is anything besides
a fine Earth, the acid Particles of the Vinegar, having entirely driven out the
sulphurous Particles of the Crab's-eyes, and seated themselves in their rooms
and Pores; which they had left; so that you are not to apprehend, that the
Vinegar is thereby sweetened, because the Alcalious Particles (which in them
ought not to be so called, for they are not such) are mortified or broken, and
thereby the Liquor, wherein the acid Particles were, remains insipid; no, this
is quite otherwise; for the same acid or Vinegar Particles are still in being,
having only changed their place; for put the whole solution together, viz. the
insipid Liquor, and impregnated fine Earth of Crab's-eyes into a Glass retort,
and being placed in a Sand Furnace, you will by distillation with a smart heat,
have your Vinegar returned to you again, not at all, or imperceptibly little
impaired in its sharpness, or lessened in quantity; so that this pretended
Magistery, Solution, immersive Calcination, or what else you are pleased to
call it, is nothing else, but a concentration of the Spirit of Vinegar, in the
entirely destroyed Crab's-eyes, which being washed off from the saline acid
Particles of the Vinegar, or first being precipitated by the instillation of
Oil of Tartar, and afterward washed with repeated lotions of warm water, is
left not worth a straw, and fit for nothing but to make a very indifferent
Fucus, or Cosmetic, which that of Egg-shells does by much excel. Wherefore
Crab's-eyes by Triture upon a Porphir reduced to an Impalpable Powder, and
exhibited in a convenient Vehicle, do in a Moment remove that troublesome
Symptom, improperly called the Heart-burning, by admitting the acute Particles
of the almost corroding acid Liquor (floating in the Stomach, and vellicating
its Nervous Tunicks) into their minute Recesses, whence the Sulphurous
Particles were so suddenly chased; and if upon this the Patient takes twelve or
fifteen Grains of pure ^rystallized Saltpeter, (not Sal Prunellae,) in a
Draught of Barley or Milk-water, at a few Minutes distance, he shall perceive
the Crab's-eyes, with the contained corroding Particles, sensibly precipitated
into the Guts.

6. Crystallized Nitre is certainly the most wonderful Salt of any, and the
most active and potent Diuretic, or Piss-driver, of all the whole Catalogue.
It is a Salt entirely consisting of Sulphurous Spirits or Particles,
concentered or closed up in a very little Saline Matter: Its Activity and quick
impetuous Motion is beyond all others, except Mercury; for no sooner can you
touch your Tongue with it, but immediately its subtle piercing Particles enter
the Pores of the Moisture residing in the spongy Recesses of your Tongue, and
of the Spittle about it, which they divide, attenuate, expand, and dilate, or
raresie so very quick, that your Mouth seems to run over with Moisture in an
Instant. This Nitre, or Crystal Mineral, being taken in a proportionable Dose,
in a sufficient quantity of a suitable Vehicle, does soon after raresie,
attenuate, and tuinesie all the Humors, Liquors, Serosities, and Moistures it
meets with in the Stomach, and other Bowels and Passages, whereby the thinner
Parts are separated, thrust forward, squeezed, and expelled toward the
Kidneys, and thence to the Ureters and Bladder; so that I have not yet found
any thing comparable to it for a Piss-driver. Tha^ I do prefer it thus
unprepared before Sal prunellae, is, because by the melting and inflaming
Sulphur upon it, a great part of the most active and penetrating Spirit^* and
most subtle Particles are driven out, and consequently much enfeebl'd. But
perhaps you may reply, That their crude Particles are by the inflaming of the
Sulphur expelled, and the Nitre thereby digested; which is all fantastic.
Beside this extraordinary Virtue, these Crystals Mineral have a Power so
surprising in ^he Thrush of the Mouth, Internal, and External Inflammations,
and many other Diseases, that it is a great Wonder to me, it is no more taken
notice of in Physic.

7. To return to the Remainder of Enquiry into the Manner and Ways, whereby
these Virginal Earths of the aforesaid Testaceous Magisteries do drive down
Piss; upon the strictest Search my slender Capacity can make, I do not find any
thing to attribute that Faculty unto, except to little cutting pointed Sands of
those Earths, that by pricking the Membranes of the Stomach, Guts, and other
Parts, they stimulate them; and by Contiguity, and Continuity of Parts,
stimulate all the Membranes of the Body to expel loose, separated, and floating
Serosities to the Kidneys and Ureters. That by pricking one Membrane, you do,
as it were, prick all the rest, appears in the Instances above-written, of a
Touch upon a Cord extended, or a Sound made upon one Unison; or by the pricking
of the Membrane of the Tongue by any very sour Taste, all the Membranes of the
Body seem to be affected with the same little Punctures, as appears by sudden
small Shiverings all the Body over; as likewise, in another Instance of the
Bladder, which often, upon having made Water newly, the Air from without presses
into it, to fill up the Vacuum in some measure, whose Nitrous Particles
wherewith it is repleted, do prick the Membranes of the Bladder; upon which, a
sudden Shivering (which is an Attempt or Endeavoring of Expelling) happens all
over the Body, by the propagated Sense of pricking to all the Membranes.

8. It Is in this respect, that Glass being powdered, is also recommended for a
potent Diuretic, by reason of those acute cutting or pointed Particles, that
are supposed to be in it, which pricking and stimulating (being likewise
accompanied with Weight, that contributes very much, and therefore ought to be
administered in greater Quantities, than are usually given) the Tunics of the
Stomach impel Serosities to the Kidneys in manner before expressed. Upon the
same Consideration it is, that Lapis Iudaicus, Lapis Nephriticus, Lapis
Spongiae, Medlar-stones, and probably Peach and Apricot-stones,
Mountain-Crystal, Lapis Lyncis, little Stones that are found in the Stomach and
Gallbladder of an Ox in the Month of March, in the Liver of a Wild-Boar, in
the Head of a Perch, and in the Throat of a Carp, and the Stones that are taken
out of the Kidneys and Bladder of a Man, and indeed all other hard Stones, that
being reduced to a Powder, do still retain some acute cutting Particles; for if
any hard Substance be finely pulverized, and afterward grinded into an Alcool,
or impalpable Powder, upon a Porphir* so as all the Points of the Minute
Particles are obtused, and entirely broke, it loses all its Diuretic Virtue.
Wherefore it is, that the Magistery of Crab's-eyes, and other Testaceous Bodies
are so far from being Diuretic, that they prove Emplastick, and consequently
putting a stop to all manner of Expulsion. For the Reasons alleged I am of
Opinion, that Crab's-eyes, Coral, Bezoar, and the rest of Testaceous Bodies are
destroyed by all manner of Preparations, (whether in order to Magisteries,
Tinctures, Salts, or Deliqueous Oils,) except moderate Pulverisation, which
renders them more susceptible of Acid Salts, whereof the Moisture or Liquor
being disrobed, now serves for Increase of Serous Matter, that is to be
expelled to the Kidneys for the Matter of Urine, or the Ambient Pores of the
Body for the Matter of Sweat, whereunto the Membranes are stimulated by the
Acid Spirits, wherewith the Testaceous Pow^ers are impregnated

9. Among the pre-cited Stones, Dogmatists pay the most Respect to the
Nephritick Stone, and Crystal; which latter, when brought into a Powder, by how
much it retains more hard, subtle, acuated and pointed Particles, so much the
more it is adjudged to exceed Glass in a Diuretic and Saxifragous Quality,
both operating in the same manner, and by the same means: As for the N^phritick
Stone, there are such wonderful Stories recorded of it, that I am almost
ashamed to offer the Recital of them; and at the same time, am surpised at the
unlimited superstitious Belief of Mankind: Before I proceed, I ought to give
you some Description of it, that you may not be imposed upon by a false one.
The best of these Stones are brought from Turkey, and the Spanish West Indies,
which they call Igiada* though some slight ones are sometimes taken up in some
Parts of Bohemia, Spain and Carniola* Others are of a very considerable Weight
and Bigness. They are fine Stones to look upon, of a dark green Color,
clouded, though some are of a lighter Green; the Surface feels always greasy.
It Is reported by some, that this Nephritick Stone being grinded into a fine
Powder, or prepared probably by Calcination, or making it red-hot in a Fire,
and afterward quenched in strong Vinegar, whereby it is easily reduced into a
subtle Powder, and given to the quantity of a Dram and an half, in Fennil or
Parsley-Water, does in a Moment remove the violent Pains in a Fit of the Stone;
and being taken three or four times, does in a wonderful manner dissolve the
Stone into a Slime, Mud, Gravel, and Crumbles, as they pretend to instance in
the perfect Cure of abundance of Nephriticks in Germany, where their Wines, and
the common Excess in drinking of them, do in abundance of People breed Stones
in the Bladder and Kidneys. They add further, That if it be given in too large
a Dose, or taken too often, it breaks so fast, that the Mud and Gravel, into
which it is dissolved, come down so fast, that they are apt to dam and choke up
the Ways, as containing too little Room to give Passage to so much Rubbidge.

10. But the Excellency of this Lapis Nephriticus consists more in the External
Use of it, than Internal, the various Narratives whereof appear wholly
incredible. Authors tell you, That being worn on the Wrist, many have been
cured by it, who could not receive the least Benefit from any other Internal
Medicine. Another Author tells you, That by wearing a piece of this Stone about
the Neck, next the Skin, a Person that was miserably troubled with the Stone,
which though stubborn to all manner of Remedies, yet in a short time was so
dissolved into Gravel, that was not only avoided at the Bladder, but by the
Corners of the Eyes, through the Pores of the Skin by Sweat, and by Stool also.
The same Author confirms the Truth of this, by the like Success upon a great
many others. Monardes lib. d^ occult. Medicam. propriet. adds, That a certain
Duchess, whom he names, had undergone three Fits of the Stone in a short time;
but upon wearing Bracelets made of this Stone, she had been freed of them for
ten Years together. The same Author reports further of a Nobleman, that was
afflicted with the Stone; who, upon the wearing the Nephritick Stone about his
Arm, was used to throw off such vast quantities of Gravel, that he was forced
sometimes to leave it off, for fear the avoiding so much at a time might do him
some Hurt. The Excellencies of this Stone are farther displayed, by their
producing several Instances of Persons, that have been cured of otherwise
incurable Catarrhs, or Defluxions of Rheum upon the Lungs, of Dropsical swelled
Legs, of any sort of Suppression of Urine, and of Aedematous Swellings in other
Parts; all which was effected by expelling Urine in great quantities: And as a
Proof that all this was to be attributed to the Virtue of this Stone, they tell
you, That upon leaving o^f the wearing of it, those Distempers would return,
and as soon cease again, as the Application of the said Stone was renewed. They
further add, That sometimes it would move Stools as violently, as if caused by
a strong Purgative. But one great Inconvenience they mention the wearing of
this Stone is attended with, viz. of causing a very troublesome Itching all
over the Body; which would at any time be removed by leaving off the Stone for
two or three Days, but return again upon the Re-application.

11. Chemists set no less Value upon the Stone, that is taken out of a Man's
Bladder or Kidneys, and is called by them Ludus Paracelsi; the Preparation
whereof consists only in calcining it with a vehement Fire into a Salt, and
letting it turn into an Oleum per Deliqueum, by standing in a Cellar, or other
damp place. Whatever Virtue may be supposed to be in the aforesaid Stone, is to
be attributed to the Sal Ammoniac that is in it; which, whether it be not
destroyed by Calcination, may justly be doubted; and therefore, the Urine newly
made by an healthful Young Man, using Wine, does seem to be endu'd with a
greater Diuretic and Stone-breaking Power: To which purpose, I have known
several Nephriticks have chosen to take several Draughts of their own Urine (as
having an Aversion to that made by others, who possibly may be diseased of some
foul Distemper, or other) for many Days together, with good Success: For which
Reason, Physicians do rather choose to recommend Goats Urine, which is
impregnated with much more Sal Ammoniac, than that of any other Animal; and
herein they all agree, being thereto induced by the manifold successful
Experiments upon Nephritick Patients, that it excels all other Diuretic and
Stone-breaking Medicines. The aforesaid Urine must be saved, by tying a Bladder
to the Goat. Others prefer the Blood of a Goat dried, as not only containing a
great quantity of Sal Ammoniac, but its other Particles being dried, are
hardened into Cutting Acute Sands. Both the one, and the other, ought to be
used in large Doses, frequently repeated, and continued for several Weeks, if
any great matter is to be expected from them.

12. In Conclusion, my Opinion touching the Virtues of those pre-numerated
Stones is, That Flints being rendered brittle by Ignition, and Extinction in
Water, or Small Beer, or Wine, wherein a good Lump of Sal Ammoniac has been
dissolved, and afterward grinded into Powder, taken in large Doses, in a
Draught of the same Liquor wherein it has been quenched, may be endu'd with a
far greater Power to drive down Urine, Slime and Gravel, and dissolve the Stone
by a long continuated Use, than any of the most celebrated of them.

Because those that are troubled with Gravel or Stone, are almost perpetually
upon dribbling, which is increased by all sorts of Moisture they can or do
drink, whether binding, stopping, attenuating, laxative, or endu'd almost with
any Quality, be it ever so contrary to the Stone, or Gravel; for it all runs to
the Kidneys, as being the Parts affected, (as I shall further explain below:)
And for that Reason, almost every thing is by the Physicians called Diuretic,
though operating by Qualities wholly repugnant to that sort of Evacuation. Hence
it is, that Porcelane (though adstringent, and binding, and consequently,
contrary to a Diuretic) is in Consil. Cratonis mentioned, to expel the Stone
to a Miracle; and by Rondeletius said to break the Stones of the Kidneys. And
Knot-Grass, as astringent as it is, is by Matthiolus Com. in 4 cap. lib. 4. in
Dioscorid. Solenander, and Mizaldus Cent. 4. Distinc. 4. asserted, to expel the
Stones of the Kidneys and Bladder. Also, Rupture-wort, no less binding, and
restringent, is highly recommended by Rondelet in Consil. 150. Craton. Gesner,
and Quercetan. in Pharma. rest. cap. 10. for a most effectual Plant to break
the Stones in the Kidneys. And Moss that grows on the Ground, a potent
Restringer, is by Durandes in Hort. Sanitat. Heurnius, and Lonicerus, mentioned
to be a certain Stone-breaker. Plantane, that noted Adstringent, by Mr. Ray;
and Oaken Leaves, a greater Adstringer, by Platerus; and Cinquefoil, by
Scroder, are recommended for Diuretics, and Stone-breakers; besides many other
Adstringents that can be named. Moreover, it may be taken notice, that most
other Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals are highly commended, though specifically
appropriated to some part or other: As, among Cephalicks; Pyony, by Trallianus,
Dioscorides, Durandes, Lonicerus, and Fernelius; Betony, by Galen and
Matthiolus; Calamus Aromaticus, by Tabernae Montanus and Solenander; the Rind
of a Bay-Root: And among the Pulmonicks, or Thoracicks; Maidenhair and Carduus
Benedictus, and all other kinds of Thistles; Eryngo, Figgs and Liquorish: Among
the Cordials, White Dictamnum, and most (if not all) Aromaticks or Spices,
which you may find mixed in the celebrated Compound Diuretic and
Stone-grinding Electuaries, and distilled Waters: Also among Spleneticks,
Tamarisk, Spleen-Wort, Roots of Capper; Mugwort, and others, among the
Emmenagoga; most of the Hepaticks; among the Anti-^corbuticks, all, or as many
as can be found, though more particularly, Black Radish, and Horseradish; all
the Vulneraries, chiefly Golden-Rod, and Speed-well; besides a great Number of
Miscellanies, appropriated to several Bowels, and particular Diseases; as,
Birch-Tree, Guaiacum, Dropwort, Grass-roots, the five opening Roots, and their
Seeds, Burnet, Saxifrage, Horse-Mint, Samphir, Ashentree-wood and Bark, the
Juice of Birch-tree, Nettle-Juice and Seeds, Valerian, Orris, Elicampane,
Bramble-roots, Soapwort, Bastard-Rhubarb, Asarabacca, Wake-Robin, Baise,
Onions, Squill^, Garlic, Cabbage and Colewort-leaves, Lovage, Garden-Madder,
Birchwort, Restbarrow, Featherfew, Pennyroyal, Tansie, Origan, Spignel, Poley,
Calaminth, Hysop, Pellitory, Germander, Groundpine, Vervain, Southernwood,
Strawberry-leaves, Willow-leaves, Water-Germander, Wild Thyme, Skirrets,
Chamomil, Lark-spur, and St. John's wort-Flowers; besides abundance of other
Roots, Leaves and Flowers, which by one approved Author or other are all
esteemed Diuretics, and Stone-grinders, as well as all Carminative Seeds, viz.
Parsley, Fennil, Cummin, Anis, Dill, Carui, Daucus, Cardamom, Marsh-Parsley,
Lovage, Seseli, Gromwel, Parsnips, Macedonian Parsley, Broomseeds, Coriander,
Garden-Cress, Basil and Fennel-Flower, the four greater and lesser cold Seeds,
of Mallows, and Marshmallows, Cotton-seeds, Linseed, and Foenugrick-seeds,
etc. Lupins, all manner of Vetches, Millet, Red Cicers, Bay and
Iuniper-Berries, Berberries, Winter-Cherries, Hipps, Bitter Almonds, Peach,
Apricot, Cherry, Plumb, Walnut, and Hazel-Nut Kernels. Among Gums and Rosins;
Gum-Elemi, Arabic, Dragant, Olibanum, Bdellium, the Gum of a Cherry, and
Plumb-Tree, Gum-Lac, Therebinthin, Amber, etc. Among the Animals; the Ashes of
an Hedgehog, of an Hare, of Swallows, of an Ass's Liver, of the Feathers of a
Goose and a Ring-Dove, and of Earthworms; the Skull of a Man, powdered; the
Jaw Bone of a Pike, and the Parings of an Horse's Hoof, powdered; Mouse-Dung,
seven or nine for a Dose; Pidgeon's Dung, Pullet's Dung, Sow's (Millepedes vel
Aselli) Grass-hoppers dried, Beetles, the Powder of an Afterbirth dried in an
Oven, the inward Skin of a Cock's Maw dried, the Guts of a Swan, the Powder of
a young Pidgeon dried in an Oven; the Powder of the Bird Wagtail, dried by the
Smoke of a Chimney; the Ashes of a Troglotite Sparrow, (of which abundance of
Authors speak Wonders;) the Blood of a Fox, drunk warm, as it comes out of the
Veins; the little Bone taken from the hinder Knee of an Hare, (greatly extolled
by Forestus and Fernelius;) Cantharides, which some Authors tell you, may be
given in a total and long-continuated Suppression of Urine, caused by the
Stone, which if not removed, the Patient must die; and therefore as a desperate
Disease requires a desperate Remedy, some that have more Courage than
Discretion, have adventured to give it in a Dose, from half a Fly, unto a whole
one, powdered, in a Draught of Clarified Whey, Emulsion of the four greater
cold Seeds, or Skimm'd Milk once boiled up, and grown to be lukewarm, with
very ill Success; for considering, that the Patient's Strength is reduced to a
very low and deplorable State, before it is administered, if peradventure the
venomous Medicine has wrought through, so as to strain or squeeze out some
Drops of Urine, which appears bloody also, it has left such a painful burning
Strangury, which, with the Addition of the Nephritick Pains, and Defect of
Spirits, has soon put an end to the miserable Sufferer; so that it had been
better to let a Man die, than to kill him: But where that Medicine does not
pass, it does infallibly torture the Patient out of his Life. However, if any
be fond of the Use of them, they must either toast them, and half, or wholly
calcine them into Ashes, which then will have entirely divested them of their
Diuretic Faculty, no other Virtue remaining in them, than what is in the other
Ashes; or calcine them by Corrosion, which is dissolving them in Spirit of
Salt, or Nitre, whereby their venomous Quality is much infringed, and the
Diuretic in a great measure preserved. The Toasting is in holding them over an
hot Fire in an Earthen Pan, and there stirring them, until they fall almost
into Powder, which does greatly abate their Venom, together with some part of
their Diuretic Power. In the same manner Beetles (Scarabaei) may be served,
being not very much inferior to the afore-mentioned Cantharides in their
Pissing Faculty. The Case being well considered, where Diuretics exhibited in
large Doses, and frequent Repetitions, do not answer the End, it is most
certain, the true Cause of the Suppression of Urine is mistaken; and
consequently give what you please of that kind, it will prove unsuccessful; for
a very small Remedy, if it hits the Cause right, does ever bring sudden Relief;
and therefore in such Cases, we ought to use our greatest Industry, in
enquiring what other Cause may in all probability cause such a Suppression, and
not persist in an Opinion, the first Appearance of the Distemper has put us
in. Cantharides may be an useful Medicine externally applied, but a very
suspicious one internally given. I do remember, I have several times made Trial
of infusing two Drams of them in a Quart of French Brandy, and being filtered
through a Paper, have given thereof, from one Spoonful to two, in Clarified
Whey, or Ptisane, against inveterate virulent Gonorrhaea's, but I could never
find I advanced much in the curing of them.

I have here got together a large Catalogue of Diuretics and Lithontriptics in
Simples, yet it is not a complete one; for upon a further search of Authors, it
may be increased to double the Number, so that as far as I observe, no less
than the whole internal Materia Medica, even the addition of Purgatives and
Vomitives, (which seldom move Stools without provoking Urin) cannot be
sufficient to make up a full and complete List of Piss-drivers and
Stone-grinders. The cause of increase of so great a Number of these, I can
assign to no other, than to an incautelous Credit Physicians have given to all
sorts of People, that upon pretense of being troubled with this or that sort of
suppression of Urin, Strangury, or other symptoms of the Stone, have declared a
relief they received from this or that Remedy, though never so contrary,
improbable, or preposterous (as you may perceive by the aforesaid recital of
Simples, and other Compositions thence framed), without examining the bottom,
the possibility, or probability, and manner of acting of such like Remedies, in
respect to the Indications, that ought to be taken from the Disease it self,
the Causes thereof, the Symptoms, and chiefly from the Actio laesa of the
Kidneys, which cannot well be performed, without the true knowledge of the
Function or Action of the Kidneys, and their Modus agendi, which (and indeed
the Function of all the Bowels, and the Modus agendi) in my weak opinion is
slubber'd over, or at least very insufficiently discoursed, so that its scarce
possible to give any good Judgment of it. In order to that, I shall presume to
set down some Positions, which (to speak modestly) you may please only to take
for Suppositions. 1. That the Antecedent cause of a laesa mictio is very often in
the Kidneys, and consequently that the cause of a total or partial suppression
of Urin, a Strangury, a Diabetes, (which is an Aucta mictio) Ardor Urinae and
other Symptoms are in the same part. 2. The Office or Function of the Kidneys
being chiefly the separation, and excretion of the superfluous serum, all, or
most liquid or potable Matter, that is admitted into the Body more, than is
necessary for the Blood to be supplied with, does naturally and by Inclination
(if I may so speak) flow, and tend or is impelled by the Spirits, or (if you
like the Expression better) by the parts of the Body to the Kidneys, especially
if in any wise preternaturally affected; the reason is, because the Spirits (I
mean the Animal) chiefly flowing to succor any part that is in distress, and
they being the only and chief impulsors of all the Humors in the Body, it must
follow, that all Potables, be they adstringent, gross, thick, thin, sharp,
sweet, sour, or endued with any other quality, must be impelled to that part,
whither the Spirits flow most* which must be to the Kidneys, if preternaturally
affected. Hence it is then, that Physic Authors observing all manner of
Simples and Compounds being either potable of themselves, or given in any thing
that is potable, do provoke Urine in those, whose Kidneys are any wise
preternaturally affected, have taken in so many hundreds of Simples and
Compounds, to the almost innumerable Number of Diuretics and Lithontriptics,
though far from being to be esteemed as such, either by Reason or Experience; for
to assert that Adstringents (as many of the reputed Diureti^s are) do move Urin
otherwise, then Medlars do Stools ( per accidens) comprimendo, cannot be
thought reasonable: And daily Experience does prove, that many Diuretics, that
are supposed to be properly such, are taken in large quantities, by those that
are in Health, without adding a drop of increase to their ordinary measure of
Urin, as appears by those, that have continued the infusion of Millepedes in
their Drink for a considerable time, and in others that drink great quantities
of French and Rhenish Wines, without any proportionable increase, and sometimes
scarce piss before the next day, which, as I said heretofore, renders the
operation of Diuretics very uncertain; whereas other Evacuatives, as Vomitories
and Purgers, have a more certain operation in most Bodies.

As to the Modus Agendi of the Kidneys in their Function, I cannot imagine, that
the Serum is separated from the Blood in their Parenchyma, colando (as it is
commonly expressed by Physicians) by being strained through their narrow
passages, as if it were by a Sieve; because the Serum is so thoroughly perfused
and mixed with the Blood, which in many bilious Constitutions is as thin, if
not thinner than the Serum it self, that consequently the Blood must pass with
it, which would always occasion a bloody Urin. So that there must be another
sort of separation, conceived by me, to be efficiently performed by the Animal
Spirits, which you are not to apprehend to be singly floating in the Nerves,
like Air in a Bladder, but that they are contained in a most subtle piercing
Lympha, as may be perceived by the wound of any Nerve, which gives occasion to
the said Lympha to drop out, and is then called a Gleet of a Nerve. This
Spirituous Lympha, that is perfused through the Body of the Kidneys, does by its
most piercing subtle Particles, coagulate the more sulphurous and glutinous
Particles from the abounding salin Ammoniac, (that are dissolved in the Serum)
which by having some repugnancy and contrariety against them, it does, together
with the Serum precipitate down the narrow Chanals of the Parenchyma of the
Kidneys to the Ureters, whence by stimulation, and their own weight, they are
moved to the Bladder. That the aforesaid Function is performed efficienter by
the Animal Spirirs, is proved by several Instances of the same Import, viz.
some may remember many Years past, I Published a Treatise, Intitl'd the Case of
a Nobleman (then) lately deceased, wherein was given an account of a puncture
of a Nerve in the Plexus Nervorum, that is near the Groin, occasioned by the
wound of a Sword, that passed slaunt thwart the Abdomen down thither, upon
which a copious Gleet ensued, and soon after among other direful Symptoms, a
suppression of Urin. This those Physicians, as Learned and Famou^ as they were,
could impute to no other cause than the Stone; but they were deceived by their
Conjectures, as appeared plainly afterward, upon the defection of the said
Nobleman's Body after Decease; his Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder being found
clear of all manner of obstructions, either by Mucus, Gravel, or Stone, though
the Kidneys were exceedingly wasted, and shrunk into a much lesser Demension,
than commonly is found in Men. Upon this fatal Mistake, and consequently wrong
Indications, the forementioned six Physicians did very boldly prescribe the
most powerful of Diuretics in very large Doses, and long continuated frequent
Repetitions; until by chance, one of their Medicines having a power beyond
their Expectation did give a check to the Gleet, that by derivation had
deprived so great a proportion of nervous Lympha, (wherein the Animals do
reside) from the Kidneys, as not to leave a sufficient quantity in them, to
make separation of the salin Ammoniac Serum for Urin, which therefore ought
rather to be called a suppression of the Serum in the Kidneys, than suppression
of Urin, and ought not to receive that Name, before its arrival into the
Bladder. But what followed? The Animal Spirits being returned to their former
Function, and meeting with a great quantity of Serum, (that had not been
separated during the long interval of suppression) mixed with the Blood, that
was extremely attenuated and fused by the preceding Diuretics, they separated
and excerned such a prosluvious torrent, as caused a most violent Diabetes,
which by my prescriptions was removed in a very little time. Further more you
are to take notice, here was not only an abolition, or at least a diminution of
the separation of the Serum, or Urin, as it is improperly called, but an
Atrophia, or defect of nourishment in the Kidneys, caused through want of the
spirituous Lympha, or animal Spirits; so that as I hinted in one of the former
paragraphs, these are the efficients ( causae efficientes, but in no wise
materiales,) of nutrition, separation, and excretion of all the parts of the
Body. Add to the former Instances several others of the Gleets. I have before
and since observed, occasioned by the cutting through of Nerves in a Wound, and
punctures of Nerves in the Arm upon unskilful Bleedings, which though they did
not effect so entire a suppression, as the puncture of a Nerve near the
Kidneys, yet they have caused an evident diminution of Urin, and an Atrophia in
that part, into which they were inserted.

Several other suppressions of the Serum in the Kidneys I have now and then met
with, that were mistaken for suppressions of Urin, occasioned by the Stone, to
the fatal ruin of the Patients, among which I have given an account of one very
remarkable in a Treatise called, The Art of curing Diseases by Expectation. I
shall here make a short discourse upon the Aetiology of the before-cited
Disease, wherein the use I make of the Hypothesis lately set down touching the
modus agendi of the Kidneys in the separation and excretion of the Serum, will
plainly appear. The Patient there mentioned was of a healthful robust
Constitution, and fleshy habit of body, much on Horseback, and scarce at any
time long sedentary; his Appetite was much to salt Fish, Pork, Beef, Cheese,
and other substantial Food. His Blood upon phlebotomy in the Arm appeared
florid, thick and glutinous, with very little Serum. He felt constantly from
the beginning of his Illness a weighty pain about his Loins, and pulsatory
also; his Urin was pale, crude, dreggish and turbid, made at pretty long
intervals, and in very small quantities, because the Serum was not, neither
could it be separated in the Kidneys: For his Blood being engendered out of a
thick glutinous Chyle, and this out of gross, glutinous Aliments, must
necessarily be ^esinous, or thick and glutinous, and consequently as impossible
and unfit to mix with an obtuse Serum, as Rainwater with Therebinthin, unless
something be added to the Water to render it pierceing, whose sharp points may
divide, cut and insinuate into the pores of the viscous Resin. Though the
Patient did drink great quantities of Liquor of one kind or another, the
greater part of the Serum it produced, was thrown out by insensible
perspiration, and very often by copious Sweats, whilst a small proportion would
crowd into the Kidneys, and yield matter for that little Urin that was made.
This glutinous, thick and fibrous Blood must be impelled through the
Extremities of the emulgent Arteries with great difficulty, and very slow, and
with greater difficulty and slowness into the extremities of the emulgent
Veins, whereby a fullness and distention must be occasioned, that caused the
weighty obtuse and pulsative pain in the Loins, through the defect of a just
and sufficient Circulation, which could not but raise great distentions in the
hypochonders, unequal pulsations, and other Symptoms, too many to be here
discoursed of by retail. From no other Remedies, but such as obtain a power to
remove that clammy, stringy Constitution of the Blood, could any benefit be
expected; though on the contrary, improper lithontriptic diuretics were
advised, impelling the Blood more into the Kidneys, and cramming them, whence
the pain increased, and the Serum was more damm'd up, until at last the Patient
being injudiciously sent to the Bath, those hot acidulous Waters inwardly
taken, put a quick period to the whole matter.

Neither is it always a want of salin ammoniac Serum, or defect of its
permixture with the Blood, that are the causes of a suppression or abolition of
the separation and excretion in the Kidneys, is evident in an Ascites, or
Dropsy, where there is salin Serum in abundance, and so thoroughly mixed, that
the Blood is but little thicker than Water, and so little glutinous, that the
least drop will scarce stick to any thing; yet notwithstanding very little
Serum is evacuated by the Kidneys into the Bladder, which redounding therefore
so much in the Vessels, is thrown into the Legs (which are then improperly
called pedes oedematosi) thighs, scrotum, or the capacity of the Belly. So that
the suppression of Urin, as its commonly termed, is the most frequent cause,
and which mos^ Physicians do agree unto, of an Ascites and Pedes oedematosi,
succeeding a long Ague Chronical cachexia, Jaundice, continuated debauches of
Brandy, or other strong Liquors and great Haemorrhages. Though in mo^^ sorts of
such Dropsies, the most potent o^ supposed Diuretics are used, and lixivia
Remedies, as Lies of Broom-ashes, and others taken to excess, yet no more Urin,
but rather less is expelled, and the Dropsy increased. In some of these cases,
I have know^ monstrous hydropical Swellings reduced b^ a month or two's
drinking of the Bath Waters, which, at proper Seasons of the Year, ^ Course of
Spaw would have performed i^ less time. The cause of this kind of suppression
can only be imputed to the Anima^ Spirits, or the spirituous Lympha being
vitiated. But in regard that this subject, together with the examination of its
Remedies that are no less numerous than those against the Stone, would take up
too much room I chose to reserve it to another time.

Among that farrago, and mixed heap of Diuretics, and Lithontripticks, there
remain I should reduce them to a more choice an^ select number, such a^ are
chiefly in use, and most celebrated among Physicians, and afterward give you
my slender Opinion upon their modus agendi, or manner of Operation.

The Roots of the most approved are the five opening Roots, but more especially
Persly, Restharrow, black Radish, and Horseradish; among the Leaves, White
Saxifrage, and Burn^t Saxifrage; the chief Seeds, Berries, and Fruits, are,
Grumwell-seeds, Burdock, Broom, Daucus, Persly, Fennil, Anis, etc.
Winter-cherries, Hipps, and Iuniper-berries, more particularly Red Cicers; In
the number of Animals, Millepedes, or Sows; and among the Stones, Salts, and
Minerals, Ludus, or the Stone taken out of a Man's Kidneys, or Bladder, Goats
Blood, and Goats Urin; Lapis Iudaicus; Cineres lep^ris combusti, vitrum ustum,
sal succini, sal prunellae, and Tartarum vitriolatum.

The principal of the most famed Compositions are Electuarium Lithontribon, and
Electuarium Iustini, the description whereof you may read in Cordus and
Wecker's Dispensatories, being a rude and unaccountable empirical hodg-pot of
abundance of Carminative Roots and Seeds, some deobstruent Roots, most sort of
Spices, some Gums, etc. as ill proportioned, as may be.

Among the Magistral Compositions, by this following Syrup Horatius Augenius
does affirm to have cured Six Hundred of the Stone, which is above Five Hundred
Ninety and Nine more, than I do believe.

Rad. Saxifr. Rusc. Eryng. Levist. Onon. Alth. Gram. Foen. Petros. a^ ss
Raphan. sylv. ij. fol. Beton. Pimpin. Alth. Urtic. Puleg. Nasturt. Calam.
Polygon. Min. Pariet. a^ m. 1. fruct. Alkek. No. xx. Sebest. No. xv. cort. rad.
Lauri iij. Sem. Ocym. Bardan. Petros. Daue. Sesel. Mil. Solis a^ ij. Uvar.
pass. liquir, a^ vj. Capil. Ven. Polytric. a^ m. 1. Coq. S. A. in Aq. Capil.
ven. lbx. in duplici vase ad lbvj. e quibus cum Sacchar. fin. lbiiij. and Mell.
despum. lbij. f. sir. perfect coct. and aromat. Clnam. j. and Nuch. Mosch. ss.
m.

Montaguana recommends the following Electuary to that degree, that he does
avow, there can be no Stone, which by it cannot be broke, and grinded into Sand.

Sem. Apii, Petros. gran. Mil. Sol. Rad. Sax fr. Polii Mont. Aristol. rot. a^
j. Lap. Spong* Judaic. Lync. a^ jss. Vitri combust. Sang. Hirci praep. a^ iij.
liquirit. pulv. ss. Oxymel. compos. Sacchar. alb. a^ lbss. Acet. Scillit. ^^.
M. pro Electuario.

The five Opening Roots, Grass-Roots, Carminative Seeds, with other Roots,
Barks and Seeds like them, are supposed to contain a subtle hot Spirit, or
subtle moving Particles, which by putting the Animal Spirits upon a quicker
Motion, do by attenuating and rarefying the Blood, separate the Serum from it,
and consequently make Matter for the Urine, which being driven down, acquires
them the Name of Diuretics, that can no otherwise deserve the Title of
Stone-grinders, than by ofent dripping by or upon Stones, may in Length of Time
make little Holes into them, and render them brittle.

The Millepedes containing a subtle acidulous Spirit, are thought not only by
precipitating the Serum to be very diuretic, but also by piercing into the
Pores of the Stone, whose Figures seeming to be adapted for the reception of
those acid pointed Particles of the Sows, become thereby Stone-breakers. But
considering their preparation, they are not only thereby deprived of those few
subtle acid Spirits, that fly away by the drying of them in an Oven, or
otherwise, which is one way of preparation; or are wholly destroyed in their
Substance and Virtue, by the other way of preparing them, which is, by washing
them well in Rest-harrow-water, next soaking them thoroughly in Spanish Wine,
which being poured off, they are to be put into an Earthen Pot or Pipkin, very
closely covered and stopped, and then to be dried in an Oven after the Bread is
drawn, which if it be not done with a very mild heat, and several times
repeated, they will be apt to be stewed, and never fit to be reduced into
Powder; others do choose after washing of them in White Wind, to dissolve them
in Spirit of Vitriol, whereby not only the Spirit of Vitriol is obtused and
impaired, but the acidulous subtle Spirit of the Sows amortised. This solution
is pretended to dissolve the Stone in the quantity of five or six Drops, given
in Persly-water, or such like Vehicle. In my Judgment Millepedes need no other
preparation, than washing the dirt and slime off them with fair Water, after
which they are to be but just broken, or very little bruised in a Stone Mortar,
and about the number of two or three hundred put into a Mattress or Bolt-head,
and pouring three Pints of White Wind upon them; the Glass Vessel being closely
stopped, they are to stand 24 Hours, and the Wine is to be filtered off, the
Remainder is to be dried in an Oven in an open Pipkin, and then reduced to
Powder; hereof from Two Scruples to Four may be taken in nine or ten spoonfuls
of the impregnated Wine. That this will prove diuretic to those, that are
Nephritick, is often observed, though I have known them taken, being bruised and
steeped in Ale, for their ordinary Drink, for a quarter of a Year together by
those, that were troubled with running Eyes, dimness of Sight, Bloodshed, and
Inflammations of the Eyes, Dropsies, Jaundice, Phthisick, and other Distempers,
without any abatement of those Diseases, or causing more Urine than ordinary;
so that People need not be so scrupulous in their Dose in any other Distemper,
but that of the Kidneys, whither they, as all other Diuretics, are apt to carry
all gross slimy Humors, they meet with in their passage. Many will put seven
or eight of 'em in a Mortar, bruise them into a mash, and pour a Glass of
White Wind upon them, and drink it off without straining. Others hang four or
five hundred of them in a Linen Bag in a Firkin of Ale, and after a Fortnights
Infusion, drink the Ale for their ordinary Drink.

From a pretended Observation, that Goats Blood will break the hardest of
Stones, which is a Diamond, most Physicians prefer it beyond all other
Lythontriptics, advising it to be taken warm, as it comes out of the Veins:
this requires some further preparation according to the Sentiments of Vulgar
Authors, which is feeding a young Goat with Persly, Fennil, Carrot and Parsnip
Tops, Cabbage Leaves, and the like supposed Diuretics, for three Weeks or a
Month about the Spring; though others prefer the Autumn, near the Vintage, at
which time a Goat is apt to feed much upon Grapes, if he can come at them,
whereby they think his Blood is rendered the more diuretic, and cutting. Being
then killed, they prefer the Blood, that comes out of his Veins, about the
middle of his Bleeding, before that which flows out first or last. No Blood of
any Animal does sooner coagulate in the Air, and dry into a hard, brittle, and
sandy substance. On the contrary, the Blood of a Stag only will not coagulate
at all, but continues fluid. Now whether the Blood of a Goat being drunk warm,
will not so coagulate in the stomach, as to occasion a great weight, pain, and
indigestion there, whereas the Blood of a Stag consisting of more Volatile
piercing Salts than any other whatsoever, cannot coagulate, by reason of the
said copious Volatile Salts, which at the same time will render it the more
diuretic, and piercing: so that two Drams or more of Stags Blood warm, as it
comes out of his Veins, with four or five Ounces of Goats Urine, will make a
more potent Medicine, than any of that kind. Many in a Fit of the Stone, and
the Cholick thence caused, by drinking their own Urine (which is much worse
than that of a healthful Young Man) have suddenly removed both to a wonder, and
continuing the use of it Mornings and Evenings for several Days together, have
rendered the Stone brittle; but this sort of Urinous Draught is attended with a
great inconvenience of taking away the Appetite, and weakening Digestion. Beyond
all doubt the Urin of a Fox is stronger, and more piercing than any of the
before mentioned, as feeding chiefly upon Blood and Flesh, which abounds much
more with Volatile Ammoniac Salts, than most sorts of Herbs.

As for Alcalious Salts, or such as are by Fire rendered lixivial, as the Ashes
of several Animals, their Hair and Feathers, also Dungs, and several Chemical
Salts of Vegetables and Minerals, operate by an abstersive stimulation, and
shrinking or contracting the Vessels, whereby they propel the Humors, and
precipitate those that are acid: But all lixivials are experimentally found to
abate the Appetite, and extremely disturb the digestion of the Stomach.

The red Cicers (which are no other than red Pease, and little different in
substance and taste from Common Gray Pease) that are in so high esteem for
moving Urine, perform it no otherwise than by a flatuous Spirit, whereby they
distend the Bowels and Vessels, and rarefie the Humors contained in them, that
are forced forward to gain more room; which is no more than what a Decoction of
Tares, and most sorts of Vetches, Pease, Horse-Beans, and Cabbage can, and some
of them do effect in a more powerful manner.

It is to be further observed, that all Diuretics, of what kind soever, must
be used with the highest Caution in the Stone, Gravel, or any kind of
Suppression of Serum, or Urine, lest by forcing and bringing down gross Humors
with them, they cramb and choke up the Passages more than they were; for which
Reason they are rarely prescribed singly, or in great Doses, and frequent
Repetitions, in a Fit of the Stone, Gravel, or Suppression; but either mixed
with those Remedies, that have a Power by their Mucilaginous and Unctuous or
Balsamic Particles, to smooth, relax, widen, and render the Passages slippery;
as, Oil of Sweet Almonds and Linseeds; Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the
Wall, Bear's-Breech, Violet-Leaves, Borrage and Bug-loss; or giving small Doses
of the milder sort of them, and seldom, etc. And in a Fit, they choose to
consine themselves only to Mucilaginous and Emollient Medicines; also to
Balsamicks, as Therebinthin, Lucatellus's Balsam, Balsam of Tolu, of Peru, etc.
by Mixture with some other Balsamicks, or gentle Diuretics, made into
Bolusses, Electuaries, or Pills, and sometimes Elixirs, and Tinctures; at
Intervals advising Clysters, Emollient and Carminative, and now and then
Narcoticks; also Half-Baths, up to the Middle, and whole Baths, besides Bags
and Cataplasms.

The Prevention of the Return of Fits consists in gentle proper Purgatives and
Laxatives, followed by proper Diuretics; Mineral-Waters, whether wholly
Diuretic, as the Sulphurous Waters at the Bath, Sunning-Hill near Windsor,
Heywood-Hill near Totteridge, Islington, Richmond, Astrop, Deptford, Henden,
and other Waters; or both Purgative and Diuretic, as Dulwich-Waters, Barnet,
Epsom, Chigwell, Pancras, Acton, Pescot-street at Windsor, Stretham, etc.
operate by Quantity, Weight, and Stimulation, some by Fermentation and
Rarefaction, and others by Quantity, Weight, Stimulation, Fermentation, and
Rarefaction.

To conclude the whole Matter, I could never yet, among all these
forementioned Remedies, find any beyond proper Oleous Balsamic Volatile
Elixirs, and Tinctures; and these ought to be framed of Ingredients as various
and different, as the Causes of Suppression of Urine, and Generation of the
Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys, may be supposed.

CHAP. XII. Of Madness.
1. I must own, that among the whole Catalogue of Diseases, nothing seems more
abstruse, and inexplicable, than that Preter-natural Disposition of the Brain,
that is attended with a Madness; either without a Fever, as a Mania; or with a
Fever, as a Phrenitis; or any sort of Delirium, as a Paraphrenitis with, or
without a Fever, which does affect the Brain only secondarily, and per
Deuteropatheian, as the two former do primarily, and per Protopatheian. In all
these are Laesa the Imaginatio, Sensus Communis, and Memoria. The Manner or
Modus of their Laesion cannot well be understood, without first apprehending
the manner, how they are performed in their natural State, which is the great
Difficulty, that neither all my Reading, nor the Meanness of my Capacity can
remove. I am apt to conceive, there is properly called (without any Necessity
of terming it Analogous) a Sensitive Memory, Common Sense, and Imagination in
all Animals, in some more, greater, or more exquisite, and of greater Power,
than in others. A Dog seeing a piece of Meat held to him, at a greater distance
than he can be supposed to smell it, the Ide^ or Impression which at another
former time the said piece of Meat, or something like it, made upon his Sight
or Smell, is an Argument of Memory, or else would no more run at it, than to a
Stone, or a Logg; the distinction he makes, that it is neither a Stone or Logg,
or any thing else, but a piece of Meat, signifies he has common Sense, and
many Dogs though they are not hungry, and cannot eat it, they will run at a
piece of Meat, or a Bone, carry it away into some retired place, and there bury
it, whither they will repair, to dig it up and eat it upon the return of their
Hunger, all which implies evidently, they are endu'd with Memory, common Sense,
and Imagination; which appears plainer, when a Dog has been observed sometime
to bark, walk about, return to the place he left, and do several other Actions
as if he were awake, in his Sleep, caused by Impressions or Idea's made in his
wakeful time, that move his Animal Spirits when sleeping; the variety of which
motion excited by those impressions, imply Imagination, Common Sense, and
Memory, which is further confirmby the Madness or Mania, Dogs, Hogs, and other
Beasts, feeding upon Carrion and corrupted Food, are subject unto, depraving
their internal senses, so as to commit Violence to all Creatures, they formerly
were familiar with: And lastly their sensitive Passions, (so termed in
distinction to those, that are excited by the intellective or rational Faculty)
as Love, Fear, Anger, hatred, is a sign they do know, and distinguish, which
are Acts of the Internal Senses. The Love of a Dog is easily perceived by his
Fawning, his Fear is discovered by the holding a Stick at him, his Anger by
biting, and his Hatred, which is a continuated Anger, by his Aggressing of
Cats, Rabbits, Bears, Bulls, etc. And among all Beasts, the exercise of the
Internal Senses, and Sensitive Passions is most remarkable in an Elephant, as
may be observed in the several wonderful Relations, very credible Authors do
make of them. For a little digression the affinity of the Subject puts me upon
this Query, Whether a Maniac or a Madman biting another Man, or a Dog, may not
have the same Influence upon the Man, or Dog that is bit, in causing him to go
Mad, and occasioning an Hydrophobia, as the biting of a Mad Dog has upon a Man,
a Dog, or a Hog? Though it be probable, that the venomous bite of either is
reciprocal, yet I never heard it confirmed by experiment.

Without ascending so high as the Intellective Faculty, comprizing the Rational
Memory, Common Sense, and Imagination, I shall for the present endeavor to
satisfy my self in the Modus of these sensitive, or Animal Internal Senses, by
the following Notion. I will suppose, that all external Sensation (of the
external Senses) is performed by an Impression, or rather Pressure, made by the
sensible external Object upon the Sensory or Organ immediately, and mediately
by that, upon the sensitive Nerve, be it Seeing, Hearing, etc. Or it may be
conceived thus; Sensation is the perception of any sensible Object: All
Perception is by Contact: All Contact is by corporeal Impression, and
Impression by local Motion. Here arises an Objection, that its not likely,
that a visible Object at fifty or threescore Leagues distance, as the Peak of
Tenariff, should reach so far, as by Contact, Impression, and local Motion, to
affect the Tumica Cornea or Sight; or that the fixed Stars, Which are more
remote beyond all Comparison, should reach the Eye, so as to make a corporeal
contact upon it. The Answer contains no difficulty, if you will suppose that no
obsect is visible by it self, but by light or Lumen, and that Lumen is a
circular Emission or Emanation of luminous Particles from Lux (which in
reference to the precited Instances is the Sun) and is extended as far above
the Sun probably, as it is to us below it. The Interception of the said
luminous Particles by colored, figured and quantitative Bodies, and their
being by them in the Interception modified and determined, do thence reach to
our Eyes. And why should not Light be as diffusive, or dispersive a Body as
Air, (filling so vast a Region as it does) being much more subtle than it, as
passing through every pore of it? Light has quantity, viz. Longitude,
Latitude, and Profundity as much, and as properly, as Air, or any other Body.
Being condensed by a thick Unequal Glass, it has Weight or Gravity, a^ might be
experimentally found, were the Glass artificially weighed) No less than Air
condensed in a Retort by a Pump. Light rarefies the Air, which Darkness
condenseth. The Light, and Colors, which are only Modifications of the Light,
(for without Light, all things are dark, and of no Color,) make a Pressure
upon the External Tunick of the Eye, (consisting chiefly of the Filaments of
the Optic Nerve, whence it is this Membrane or Tunick becomes the most
sensible of any in the whole Body, scarce enduring the softest Touch of any
external thing without an exquisite Pain,) which is very perceptible to those,
that look against the Light of the Sun; this being continuated to the Optic
Nerve, and thence to its Beginning, is what I understand by Sight.

But here an Objection may be offered; Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
Recipientis. The Sensitive Nerves, as the Optic, Auditory, etc. being all of
one Composure, Constitution, or Temperament, and the Spirits that actuate them,
being all the same, must receive the Impression of Sensible Objects all alike,
and after the same manner; and consequently Light must be tasted, or a Sound
must be seen, etc. which is false.

To this I give in Answer, That all Sensation is by Contact, that is, by a real
or material Action, and not by immaterial Species, or Emission of Animal
Spirits, which are vain Expressions. The said Contact i^ the same, and made in
the same manner, but the Positions and Figures which it makes upon the Nerves,
and its minute fibrillous Parts, are different as much, as the Figures upon a
piece of Dow, (which is the same in comparison throughout all its Parts,) made
by several Stamps; so that the Figures made by a visible Object upon the Pores
of the Optic Nerves, and upon the Spirits included in them, are different from
those that are made upon the Nerves of other Senses by other Sensibles. 2. That
the Sensitive Nerves do differ each from the other in Softness, Bigness,
Density, and other Qualifications. 3. That the immediate Sensation is not in
the Nerves themselves, and the Animal Spirits contained in them, but in their
invisible minutest Terminations, or subtilest Fibrillae; and therefore I
assert, that the Sight is in the Tunica Cornea, the Hearing in the Tympanum or
Drum, as much as the Sense of Feeling is in the External Cutis: For supposing
that the Tunica Cornea, and indeed all the Tunicks of the Eye, are Expansions
of Nerves, and composed of innumerable most minute Chanals, that communicate
with the Por^s, wherewith all the Humors of the Eye are pervious, and all
filled with Animal Spirits; the Positions they are pu^ into, and Figures that
are impressed upon them, are continuated to the Optic Nerve, and thence to its
Beginning in the Brain. I will not here undertake the Task of an Oculist, in
explaining the Concentration of the Optic Spirits about the Pupil, and the
several Changes of Figures they undergo by Reflections in the Humors of the
Eye, but pass ov^r to the Hearing, the Seat whereof (as asserted before) I take
to be in the Drum, and the Terminations of Fibers of the Auditory Nerve in it,
upon which Pressure being made by the Air containing the Sound, and continued
to the Beginning of the Auditory Nerve, is the Cause of Hearing. Wherefore I
can in no manner be persuaded, that the Sound made upon the Drum, beating the
Hammer (Malleus) against the Incus (Anvil,) and propagating the Sound to the
Internal Air contained in the long crooked Passage beyond it, is by the Means
thereof carried to the Auditory Nerve; the Use of the said Internal Air being
rather to keep the Drum stretched, (as a Bladder is kept distended by the Air
that is blown into it,) and magnify the Sound by the Hollow, containing
nothing but Air, as you may observe in a Military Drum, the Hollowness whereof
does exceedingly magnify the Sound that is made upon it by any sort of
Percussion. That these little Bones placed in the Hollow of the Air, are so
instrumental to Hearing, I cannot well understand, but do rather conceive their
Use to be for a Stabiliment or Fulciment of the Hollow, and keeping the Drum,
and the Circumvestient Membrane of the said Hollow distended. Hence it is, that
the Drum of the Ear being by moist Weather, or damp Southerly and South-West
Winds somewhat relaxed, the Hearing is dulled, and not so sharp as it is in
clear dry Weather, when the Wind gently blows Easterly, or North-East.
Moreover, when the Drum has been extremely stretched by a near violen^ Noise,
Thunder, or Great-Gun, so as it cannot return to its due Streightness, but must
fall into a wrinkl'd Skin, the Hearing is either wholly lost, and destroyed, as
it has happened to several having a thin dry weak Drum, upon a near and
extreme sharp Sound; or is so obtused, that they can hear but very
indistinctly. The like Accident may happen to the Sight, when any very Luminous
Body makes too long and too near an Impression upon the Tunica Cornea, whereby
being too much thinn'd, and distended, it does cause a Blindness; to prevent
which, Nature has framed the said Horny Coat thicker and stronger, than any of
the inferior Tunicks of the Eye, the Use whereof (namely the Tunicks) I take
chiefly to contain the several Humors, which reflect or turn back the visible
Object, or Pressure made by it, to the Tunica Cornea, as the Quicksilver on
the backside of the Looking Glass stops, or returns the Object to the Surface
of the Glass.

The most excellent of the External Senses is the Sight: Its Organ, that
wonderful Machine of the Eye, consists of a greater Number of fine smooth
polished Parts, than any of the other Senses, and is more in Use and Exercise
than all of them together; for a Man that is awake is always seeing, and is
commonly accounted awake, because we observe his Eyes are open; so that
necessarily a far greater Proportion of Animal Spirits, and the finest and
subtilest of them, is consumed by Seeing, than by all the other Senses
conjunctly; whence it is, that Sleep being destinated for the repair of the
Animal Spirits, we always perceive the necessity of it approaching first in our
Eyes, which makes People commonly say, they are so sleepy, they cannot keep
their Eyes open; and therefore we do as commonly conclude a Man to be in sleep,
because his Eyes continue shut. It is no wonder then, if blind Men can abstain
longer from sleep than others, or that their other Senses are much more
exquisite, than in those that can see; because that great flood of the finest
Animal Spirits which the sight does require, is distributed to the other
external Sensories. Their internal Senses are also much stronger, in regard
many blind Men have been observed to have stupendous Memories, and wonderful
Fantasies: Thence it is likewise, that when a Man has a desire to call any
thing to mind, which he had almost forgotten, or to think very seriously upon a
Subject, he is apt either to shut his Eyes, or look down to the ground, whereby
a proportion of the optic Spirits are kept in the Brain, to assist the
^nternal Senses. Moreover, because so vast a supply of Animal Spirits is
required, to be transmitted to the Eyes for Sight, Nature has framed the
Optic Nerves bigger, than any in all the Body, b^ing the only Nerves, that
have a perceptible hollowness in them, and thereby rendered capable to give
passage to such great Floods of Spirits; not only to supply for that long
continuance of Seeing, but also to supply that variety of Parts, which is
greater than those, the Organs of Hearing, Smelling and Tasting do consist of.
I expressed, that commonly a Man sees, or uses his Sense of Seeing, as long
as he is awake, by reason of the constant readiness of visible Objects, that
will crowd in upon the Sight; he does not in like manner always hear, or his
Hearing is not always in exercise, though he can always hear, by reason there
is not always a Sound or Noise in Being, to crowd in upon him. And though it is
possible for a Man to consume or spend abundance of Animal Spirits, by hearing
a continual Noise from Morning to Night, so as thereby to make him sleepy, yet
it seldom does happen, because Nature can better endure the waste of Auditory
Spirits, which are incomparatively grosser than the Optic, the loss and wasting
whereof being much greater, and a greater abundance being required for the
Sense of Seeing is the cause, why we allways perceive the necessity of Sleep in
our Eyes, before any of the other Senses, in which also the like necessity is
perceptible, in regard, that when a Man grows sleepy, he does not care to hear,
or use any of his other Senses. And though by much stirring or local Motion,
and other Labors, the wasting of the Animal Spirits in the Joints, does
occasion sleep, yet its always first perc^iv'd by weight or drowsiness of the
Eyes, because they are deprived of their due proportion of Animal Spirits, that
were transmitted to the Limbs, and wasted by their continuated Exercise.

Before I recede from this Subject, its convenient I should explain, what I
mean by describing all Membranes to be expansions of the extremities of
Vessels, in order to make it appear, that the Seat of all the External Senses
is in the Membranes, and not in the Nerves. That the cutis or ambient Skin of
all Animals is a Membrane, cannot be doubted, when its looked upon, after its
dressed by the Tanner of Fellmonger into Leather. That it consists of the
Expansion of the Extremities of all the Vessels, as of Nerves, Arteries, Veins,
and Lymphaeducts, is evident by its exquisite Sense of Feeling, and by the
least superficial hurt of a Scratch, causing small owsings of Blood, and by
Sweat, the extremities of the Nerves importing feeling, as the extremities of
the other Vessels lets out Blood and Sweat. By expansion, I do not understand a
flat spreading out of the ends of the Vessels, as if it were Dow expanded by a
Rowling-pin, but I do apprehend the said Vessels toward their terminations, to
be divided into thousands of small Filaments, and glewed together in the Cutis,
by a glutinous substance, (engendered out of the Humors, brought thither by the
aforesaid Vessels) that is not so stringy or sibrous, as to be called Flesh. It
is fearce denied by any of the Learned, that the Ambient Skin is the chief Seat
of Feeling; for though other Membranes, as the Periostium, the Internal
Membrane of the Kidneys, and most of all the Tunica cornea, and next to that,
the drum of the Ear, are of a much more exquisite Sense, than the Skin, as
consisting of a far greater proportion of Nervous Expansions, and consequently
too tender, and therefore not so proper to distinguish all sorts of Touches or
Impressions, as hard, soft, rough, smooth, hot, cold, etc. which Impressions
are thence continuated, by the nervous Filaments to the bodies of the Nerves,
and at the same Instant to the beginning of them, and thence to the Common
Sense, which does distinguish these Touches or Tacts into specifications of
hard, smooth, etc. And here by the way, it may be observed from the instance of
some Paralytics, who have lost the Sense of Feeling in some of their Joints or
Members, though their mobility or motion remains entire, that for the most part
those Nerves, that proceed from the Brain, bring the Sense of Feeling, and
those from the Medulla Spinalis are causes of local Motion, which is an
Argument, that the Spirits that flow immediately from the Brain, are much more
subtle, than those that are derived from the Marrow of the Backbone.

What I say here, is not to be understood so generally and absolutely, which
made me only intimate, that for the most part, and not all, the Nerves
immediately proceeding from the Brain, do only bring Sense; for some of them do
also conveigh motion, but withal a motion so agil, nimb^^ and durable, or
frequently repetible, beyond what any of the Spinal Nerves do or can perform,
as appears in the nimble and frequently repetible motion of the Eye and
Eyelids, of the Tongue, etc. Neither do I exclude the Spinal Nerves, from
transmitting Sense and Motion together; but am to be understood, that these
fine Spinal Branches of Nerves, and consequently containing Spirits more
subtle, that are disseminated through the Cutis, being the Seat of the Tact do
communicate the Sense of Feeling, and the other that are more gross, and
dispersed through the Bodies of Muscles, cause Motion.

That the Sense of Feeling is more exquisite at the ends of the Fingers and
Toes, proceeds from the greater concourse of fine capillar Nervous Terminations
in those extreme parts.

The spongie Membrane of the Tongue, which appears to be an expanded
Contexture, out of the Filaments of the gustative Nerves, and of the
Extremities of the Coats of Arteries, Veins, Salival and Lymphaeducts, is
likewise found to be the Seat of the Taste, especially about the Tip, where
there is a greater concourse of Nervous Filaments.

In like manner, I do conceive the Drum of the Ear to be a thin subtle
Membrane, composed of the Filaments of the Auditory Nerve, and the extremities
of other Vessels, that are inserted into it. The sound that from without makes
its pressure upon the Drum, being enlarged by the hollow (...) the Tortuous
narrow passage, is carried by those Filaments to the Trunc of the said Nerve,
and thence continuated to the beginning of it, and to the Common Sense: So that
the sound to me does not appear, to be carried down to the further end of the
said tortuousPassage, and thence to the Auditory Nerve, no more than the
pressure of a luminousObject upon the Horny-coat, is continuated to the
Crystalline and vitreous Humor at the bottom of the Eye, to be thence
communicated to the Optic Nerve, with which it does not seem to have any
immediate Communication; for as I said before, the humors of the Eye wrapped up
by the several Coats to keep them together from dropping asunder, seem to me
only intended, to modify and reflect the Object back again to the Horny tunic,
whose contexture is chiefly of the numerous Filaments of the Optic Nerve. The
Tunica Cornea to be aptly disposed to receive the Pressure of visible Objects,
must be kept up distended by the watery Humor ( humor aqueus) under it, which
if it be any thing lessened, either by evaporation in a hot Season, or by a
Fever, so as to relax the said Tunic, the Sight immediately grows dim upon it;
and if it wholly runs out by a Wound, so as the Tunic happens to fall in
wrinkles, then the Sight is wholly lost. In old Men the Sight becomes dim, and
so it does often upon a continual Fever, by reason that by length of Time, or
Age, and by Exiccation, the humor aqu^us is somewhat diminished, and the Tunick
thereby is somewhat relaxed, which makes it seem thicker, and consequently not
adapted to receive so vigorous an Impression.

It may likewise be observed, and is now generally so received, that the Seat
of Smelling is not in the Olfactory Nerves (I do not mean those that are
commonly so called by the Ancients, that had mammillar terminations, (
Processus mammillares) which are now taken to be rather carriers off of some
Excrements of the Brain) but in the internal Membrane of the the Nostrils,
through which the Olfactory Nerves are expanded in Filaments.

Since then it appears, that Nature having placed the Seat of all the other
external Senses in external Membranes, as parts to which the external sensible
Objects do first arrive, and make their first and most sensible Impression; it
is a persuasive Argument to me, that the Seat of the Sight is in the Tunica
Cornea, or Sclerotica, being the most sensible, and consequently chiefly
consisting of Expansions of the Optic Nerve, whereas the Tunica Uvea or
Choroeides, consists more of a contexture of Terminations of other Vessels. It
will not be impertinent here to offer a few seeming Reasons out of a great
many, that induce me to suppose the Cornea the Principal Seat of Vision,
without excluding the necessary concurrence of every Tunic and Humor of the
Eye, a great Fault in any of them being as capable to occasion an abolition,
diminution, or depravation of Sight, as the least considerable Wheel in a Watch
being disordered, may cause it to stand, move too slow, or too fast*

I have before asserted, that all Sense is by immediate Contact of any
corporeal sensible Object. The Touch, Smelling, and Taste are by simple
Contact, their Objects consisting of grosser Particles; but Seeing and Hearing
are, as it were by a double Contact, that is, by reflection, because their
Objects are more subtle, and without a due reflection, could not be perceived
by the Eye or Ear; for by Reflection the sensible Object is much strengthened,
and consequently obtains a greater force to move the Sensorie. The found made
upon the uppermost Skin of a Drum, would not be so strong, or make such a sort
of a found, were it not reflected by the undermost Skin. Wherefore Light, or
any luminous Object, being a Body the most subtle of all others, must
necessarily require a due Reflection, before it is powerful enough to move the
Sight. Its allowed by most, that Light passes in Rays, that is in Lines of
continuated luminous Particles through the Cornea, and Humor Aquens, to the
Foramen Uveae, where being contracted, or gathered closer, they make a conical
Figure.

The Cryst^llin being the most Diaphanous, Compact, thick, and fullest of
Pores, is capable to be crowded with a great quanti^y of ^u^inous Rays (not
unlike thick Glass, (...) by co^densing the Rays do magnif^ the Light) that are
reflected or turned back by the Humor Vit^eus, which in color and capacity of
receiving luminous Beams, through want of suitable Pores, may aptly be resembl'd
to Quicksilver behind a Looking-Glass, reflecting luminous Objects. That those
Rays are reflected by the Humor Vitreus is seemingly at least proved to me, by
the seeing of those false Appearances of Flies and Motes in a Suffusion, which
appear to the Sight to be floating in the Air before the Eye, or Tunica Cornea:
For supposing that the Light carried those little Flies or Bowls directly down
to the Crystalline, and thence to the Vitreus, Retina, and Optic Nerve, how can
they appear floating in the Air, or on the outside of the Cornea, unless they
were reflected back again from the Vitreus to the Cornea, to make their
Impressions there? All Refractions, which in Optics are vulgarly imputed to a
duplex medium of different Natures, are double, or broken Reflections, as
appears in a Stick, that is partly in the Water, and partly in the Air; so that
a Refraction not being possible without Reflection, it follows, that where a
Man sees every thing double, by reason of the removal of the Crystalline
Humor out of its place by a fall, blow, or other violence, the visible Objects
are refracted, by a part of the Crystalline that retains its place still, and
partly by the Medium that is in that part, whence the Crystalline was removed.

To show, how these sensible Impressions are at the same instance carried to
that part of the Brain, where the Internal Senses are s^ated, is my chief
Design; and in Reference to that, I have been the more particular in explaining
the external Senses, and the Modus sensationis. I do conceive then, that the
Nerves do consist chiefly of congregated Filaments, drawn in to length, besides
others that are lateral, and that the beginning of the Nerves are Filaments of
the medullar part of the Brain, (whereof its only supposed it does consist)
congregated and gathered together into one united body, which by being
afterward divided into so many lesser congregated Bodies, does constitute each
of the beginning of the said Nerves. Wherefore I do apprehend, that an
impression made upon any of the sensories that consist of Nervous filaments,
the impression by continuation (in the manner formerly mentioned in the
Instance of a Cord) is carried to the beginning of the Nerves, and thence to
the united body of the Filaments of the Medulla cerebri, were one object is
distinguished from another, which I term communis sensatio, or sensus communis.
I will likewise suppose, that besides those prolonged Filaments, the Nerves are
filled with innumerable lateral ones, of several figures, and minute
dimensions, the various positions of which being actuated by Animal Spirits
into several representations, impressions and figur^s, if permitted to remain
so, is Memory, and when compared, and variously composed, one to another is
Imagination. So that I do conceive Memory to be the basis, and antecedent to
Imagination, as common Sense is of Memory, which I cannot apprehend to be other
than various Acts of the Cognoscitive, or Sensitive faculty. I do very well
know, that applying the same Assertion to Rational Memory, and affirming that
Memory is the basis, and antecedent Cause of Rational Imagination, admits of a
considerable Objection, viz. That very often Persons of the weakest Memory have
the strongest Imagination, and the best Judgment, and that the Memory may be
lost, though the Imagination and Judgment solely depending upon that, continue
entire; which I do deny, for as much of the Memory of things as is lost, so
much of the Imagination must be lost; for supposing that you have entirely
forgotten the Idea of a Horse, Cow, or Dog, you can never frame any Fancy or
Imagination of them; so likewise if your Common Sense is so far abolished, that
you cannot conceive or make a distinction of the impressions those Animals made
upon the Filaments of your Brain, it is not possible for you to remember them.
Probably then this Inference may be made, that the greater Memory a Man has,
the greater must be his Fancy, Knowledge, Wit and Judgment; which is
otherwise observed, in regard that very often the greatest Memories are not
attended with the greatest Wit and Judgment. That they are attended with the
greater Knowledge is most certain; for a Man that remembers a great many
Objects, or Subjects, must know so many more than another, who does not
remember so many; though for what concerns his Fancy, Wit and Judgment, they
may be quicker, or nimbler, and more agreeable to right Reason in one of a
weaker Memory, but no farther, and of no more Subjects than the number he
remembers.

It may be abjected against what I asserted before, that Common Sense, Memory
and Imagination, are only three several Acts of one Faculty; that Madmen often
retaining their Common Sense and Memory entire, and having only their
Imagination depraved, is an evidence they must be three distinct Faculties,
whereof one being depraved, does perform depraved Acts, and the others that are
entire, do perform Acts as they they ought; wherefore since a found Act, and
one that is depraved, cannot proceed at the same time from one and the same
Faculty, it sollows, they must be three distinct Faculties. I do Answer to
this, that the Common Sense and Memory in a Madman are depraved, to the same
proportion his Imagination is depraved; for to him a Horse may appear to be a
Cow, or he may and does remember things to be otherwise than they were first
represented to him. The fame Animal Spirits, the fame Nerves, and medullar
filaments of the Brain, do all act in the exercise of the internal Senses: And
that perceiving of sensible Objects (which is the act of Common Sense) the
retaining them, (being the Act of Memory) and the composing them variously
together (which is the Act of Fancy) should be other than Acts of the same
Sensitive or Cognoscitive Faculty in Beasts, or of the Rational Faculty in Men,
I can in no wise apprehend.

In regard the Memory of Beasts) though some of them have a Brain of greater
dimensions than a Man) is so little capable of retaining many sensible
Impressions, which are certainly material; and whereas a Man is capable of
retaining of innumerable and infinite impressions of Words, Languages, and all
things sensible and intelligible, it cannot be conceived, but that the Rational
Faculty, and consequently the Soul must be immaterial; for should you suppose,
as commonly its taught, that the Memory is only an Impression made upon, and
retained either by the soft substance of the Brain, or upon its Animal Spirits
gathered into a soft Cloud; were the Brain of as large an extent as a Church,
and could harbor as many Spirits, that nor these could be capacious enough to
retain a tenth part of things, which a Man is capable of remembering. So that I
say, the Rational Faculty must be immaterial, that is, cannot be performed by a
material Organ, as the Brain, and its material Animal Spirits; and therefore
its impossible for any Man to conceive the manner of operation of the Rational
Faculty, as long as the Soul continues confined and immerged in a material or
corporeal substance: And were the Soul of Man material, as some do believe for
want of true Reason, it could be capable of discerning and remembering no more
Objects, than the Soul of a Beast, the Brain of some Beasts being as
organically and aptly framed, as the Brain of a Man, and in some the Animal
Spirits much more sine and subtle.

From this Discourse I do infer, that the Cognoscitive internal Senses, (which
are subservient to the Rational Faculty, comprehending a Rational or
intellective Common Sense, Memory, and Imagination) in a Mania are only
affected; for the Intellective being immaterial, can in no wise be subject to
be affected by any thing that is material; neither could any material Remedy
have a power to act upon an immaterial Disease of a Man, as Madness must be
termed, were the Intellective part touched, more than upon the immaterial
Madness of a Devil.

This premised, I am of opinion, that the Animal Spirits in the Brain being
irregularly and violently moved, is the cause of a Mania, by putting those
sensible Impressions, that are made upon the lateral minute Filaments of the
Brain, into a disorder, and changing their Positions, which occasions the
Common S^nse, Memory and Fancy to be so depraved: That the Fury and Heat,
which Maniacs are so frequently impelled into, are occasioned by the
continuated, quick, and impetuous Motion of the Animal Spirits, which thereby
are grinded into very sharp cutting, piercing Points, that disunite the lateral
Filaments, stimulate, prick, cut, and pierce those Filaments of the medullar
part of the Brain, and of the Nerves, and by the foresaid rapid Motions the
whole sensitive Machine is put into a Flame: That their continual wakefulness
proceeds from the abundance of Animal Spirits (the cause of which shall be
explained below) the Brain of Maniacs is furnished with, the wast of Spirits,
their paucity, Feebleness and slow motion, giving commonly occasion for Sleep.
That they are in no wise subject to Fevers, taking Cold, Obstructions of any of
their Bowels, or scarce any other Distemper, or any preternatural Symptom,
except over-wakefulness, (vigiliae immoderatae) is to be imputed to the Rapid
Motion of their Animal Spirits, attenuating their Blood, promoting of its
circulation, rendering the Body pervious, and free from all Obstructions of the
internal and external Pores; their Blood being more salin and dry, than
sulphurous, is not so much exposed to a febril Putrefaction: Though it must be
observed, that very often before Mani^cs fall into their Distemper, there is a
great Calm and slowness of Motion in the Animal Spirits, which occasioneth a
very slow motion in the Humors about the Bowels, and very often a Stagnation,
that disposes them to a particular sort of putrefaction, whence gradually
proceeding some putrid, salin, sharp, acuated or pointed Particles, that
oppress the Animal Spirits, dull their Motion, and cause such a disorder in
their Blood, that is productive of such Symptoms, which commonly Melancholic
Hypo^hondriacs are troubled with as Sighing, heavy, sorrowful and desponding
Thoughts, palpitations of the Heart, Frights, Fears, Sloathfulness in stirring,
Languidness, etc. These forementioned putrid, salin Particles, as they arise,
and separate gradually, and are afterward mixed with the whole Mass of Blood,
increase the prenumerated Symptoms, until at length great Crowds issuing
thence, do so violently move, stimulate, impel, and hurry the Animal Spirits
into a Tempest and Fury, whence soon after those other Manical Symptoms do
follow.

A Mania or Madness, though it be only a Symptom, and the chief and most urgent
of the others, that are associated with it, is as all other chief Symptoms,
commonly called a Disease by a Metonymia Adjuncti pro subjecto. By the same
tropical manner of speaking a Fever, or rather Fervor, is called a Disease,
from the burning heat that does often accompany it, though it be but a chief
Symptom. This I thought fit to observe, to prevent your judging it a mistake in
me, in calling a Mania, and many, if not all chief Symptoms a Disease* which is
a very common way of speakin^ among most Physicians.

That in Maniacs the functions of the Bowels, and other parts are performed
with greater vigor than in others, appears by their digesting almost any thing
that is edible, by their copious Excretions by Stool, Urine, and Swea^, by their
wonderful and almost incredible strength of their Limbs, so as sometimes the
strength of a Madman, shall exceed the united force of four or five Men, that
have their Senses entire. Their Hearing, Seeing, and other Senses are much more
exquisite (though ^epraved) than in others, in regard Madmen will hear the
least noise, and see the least Object, beyond what they could do when they were
Compotes. The Cause and Reason of all which is the abundance of Anim^l Spirits,
that are contained and engendered in Madmen, insomuch that it may be presumed*
the greatest part of their Blood is spiritualized, or convert^d into Animal
Spirits; for without sup^osing this vast plethory of Spirits, it is impossible
they should be always, Night and Day, using their Tongues and Limbs in so
furious and violent a manner, without any long intermissions of Rest or Sleep.
This Plethory arises from the almost perpetual, violent, quick and nimble
motion of the Animal Spirits, piercing, grinding, and subtilizing the greatest
part of the Blood into Spirits similar to themselves.

If a Madman, after he has continued in a long raving Fury, falls into a long
intermission of Silence, hardly to be provoked out of it, that must be
adscribed to the great expense and wast of Animal Spirits, by his long fit of
Fury, which he is forced to repair, by giving the remainder of his Spirits time
to breed more.

His reciprocal seasons of Madness, intermixed with intervals of Rational
Discourse, in some for a longer time, in others shorter, may be attributed to
the variety of motion in his Spirits, which sometimes moving regularly and
naturally, are the occasion of the latter, to wit his lucid Interval, whereas
he is impelled into the former by Fits, as frequent, as there is a new fallying
out of a crowd of the forementioned putrid falin Particles, mixing with the
Blood, and upon its arrival to the Brain, mixing with the Spirits.

I have been obliged to make an expatiation in the Theory of the external
Senses, to the end I might more easily explain the manner of natural Operation
of the Internal, thereby in some sort to apprehend the manner of their
preternatural Operation in a Mania; which I did the rather, that I might give
my self the occasion of ^xamining the practic part, relating to the curing of
Diseases of the Eyes and Ears, as w^ll as of the Brain. If I have not been so
successful in these most difficult and abstruse Matters, as I could wish, or as
others of a much better capacity might have been, I hope I may be excused for
my attempt, were it only for proposing the Subjects, and giving others an
opportunity to exercise their Industry and great Abilities. However, I shall
presume to give you an Account of what use I make of the said Theory.

First, In relation to the Eyes, the laesion of the Sight is either caus^d by
the fault of the Optic Nerves, and their expan^^d Filaments, the decay, waste,
and vicious constitution of the Animal spirits, or the vicious disposition of
the Tunics of the Eye, but especially of the Horny-coat, or by the fault of the
Humors, I mean the aqueous, vitreous, and crystalline, whose Office I did only
suppose is, to support and keep the Tunics justly distended, and by Reflection,
to return the visible Impression to the Horny-coat.

I do only pretend here to take notice of some defects of the Horny-coat, the
Humor aqu^us, and Optic Nerves; for should I here insert, what may be
practically observed, concerning all or most Diseases that are incident to the
Eyes, and their several Coats, Humors, Muscles, and Optic Nerves, a large
Volume would be scarce capacious enough to contain it.

The forementioned Tunic being of too thin a texture (from the tenuity of the
Nervous Expansion) and the extreme subtility of the Optic Spirits, and the
tenuity of the Aqueous Humor making too little resistance to the luminous
Particles, coming from a great distance; the said luminous Particles being too
much thinned, and lo^ing some part of their Luster, are thereby not congregated
enough, by reason of the rarity of the foresaid Tunic and Humor, and
consequently have too little force to act upon them; whereas in a Tunic, that
is of a more compact texture, and consisting of more numerous, though much
streighter Pores, the luminous Rays are much easier gathered together, and
consequently may operate from a greater distance. This laxity of the said Tunic
and Humor is two fold; one natural, and the other adventitious, by reason of
some Disease, as a Fever, Consumption, etc. The former is in no ways to be
meddled with. The latter either cease upon the removal of the Disease, that
caused it, or if it should continue, may be remedied by washing the Eyes daily
with water, wherein a very little Saltpeter, or rather Sal Prunellae has been
dissolved; or you may two or three times in a Day drop into the Eye, a drop or
two of this Solution, viz. two Grains of white Vitriol dissolved in two Ounces
of some clear Well-water; wherefore you are to take notice, that most common
Eye-waters, that are cried up for Sovereign Remedies against all, or most
Diseases of the Eyes, are strictly to be avoided in all short Sights, whereby
they would be rendered much worse. Such sort of Waters are usually distilled
from Fennil, Celandine, Eyebright, Rue, Vervain, Male pimpernel, Hogs-Fennil,
etc. Besides, in short Sights the distention of the Horny Tunic is too weak and
slack, by reason of the loose texture, and thinness of the said Tunic and
Aqueous Humor, upon which the seeble and almost spent Rays, that arrive from a
great distance, can scarce act or exercise such an Impression or Motion, as is
necessary for Sight. On the other hand, where the said Tunic is of a good
Texture, and fully distended, Objects are perceptible from a much remoter
distance: But where the forementioned Tunic is grown too thick, and
consequently less diaphanous, and less porous, that Sight is neither good at a
distance, nor near, as its often observed in old Folks. Moreover, in those the
Humor Aqueus is very much thickened, so as to deny a full and free passage to
the luminous Beams; the said Humor is also become less turgid, and of small
compass, whereby the Horny Tunic becomes less distended, and a little flatted,
so that the visible Object must necessarily act very feeble upon it, the Rays
not being sufficiently congregated, through its defect in convexity. Add
hereunto, that in them the Optic Spirits are grown few, gross, and fumous,
which renders the perception of the Object dim, and cloudy.

To preserve the Eyesight, is to retard, and hinder it from becoming such, as
it is in old People; that is, 1. By rendering the Animal Spirits light, subtle,
clear, and more copious. 2. By attenuating the Horny Tunic, and the watery
Humor. 3. By avoiding straining of the Sight, by exercising it long and often
upon very small, shining, dispersing, or very distant and remote Objects.

The first of these means consists in keeping the Body clean of gross
Excrements, which gave so frequent occasion to the Ancient Physicians, to
invent Pills peculiarly appropriated to the Sight, and distinguished with Names
referring to it; As Pil. Lucis majores and minores; and others, as Pil. Aureae,
sine quibus, Cochiae majores and minores, etc. I cannot think, any of these
Compositions has any more regard to the Eyes, than to the Toes; but because in
the mass of Pil. Lucis maj. and min. is contained a very small proportion of
Eyebright, mixed with Aloes, and Colocynthis, together with a great many
contrary Ingredients, which serve for nothing else, but to clog the Medicine,
and all this is to be made into a Paste, with Juice of Fennil, they thought
they had reason enough, to expect from them and the others forementioned, all
the Virtues, whereby to preserve Sight, and cure the Eyes of all Diseases past,
present, and to come; but what is a greater wonder to me is, that still there
are many Physicians, that allow a very great respect to the said Pills in
Diseases of the Eyes, whereas most certainly a good Extractum Rudij, or
Catholicon well composed, and made up, will serve abundantly better, cheaper,
pleasanter, and more effectually in any Disease, that may require strong
Purging; so that were all those Colocynth and Scammoniack Compositions, which
modern Dispensatories are crammed with, thrown out, it would be much more
profitable to the Patient, and less troublesome to the Apothecary.

What I mean by keeping the Body clean, is to take now and then those Pills,
which are rec^^mended in the foregoing part of this Treatise, without adding
the least grain of Eye-^right to them. Besides this, its necessary to abstain
from all gross, windy, steaming (...), Salt-Fish and Flesh, sour Sauces, strong
Drinks, ^^edi^g chiefly upon Meat of a goo^ Juice. and that yi^lds but little
Excremen^, and using Drink that is clear, well dig^^^^d, and moderate in
str^ngth. Nothing hitherto has been observed a greater Enemy to Sight, than
Wormwood, which being used in Drink, or otherwise, has been the occasion of
dulling the Sight in some, and of Blindness in others; yet notwithstanding
Dioscorides commends it for a sharpner of the Sight, and therefore little
credit ought to be given to these old Authors in many of their Characters.
Onions, Leeks and Garlic, come not much short of that Plant. All raw Sallads
are experienced hurtful to the Sight, by contributing matter for Crudities, and
being windy. Weeping in Women, a long sorrowful and melancholic Disposition,
and too much gravity do lessen, condense, and blunt the Optic Spirits, which
ought to be serene and agil. Living in a dark House in a foggy Air, work
effects little different from the ^ormer. Too much Sunshine reflected from a
sandy Ground, has been the cause of Blindness in many that live in Spain. Very
hot Countries contain more Blind, than those that are temperate, or cold, though
in the latter, they are not commonly quick or fa^ Sighted, excess of Cold
condensing the Optic Spirits too much. As Weeping and great Debauche^s do often
furnish their Eyes with an outward glazie Coat, so they do not seldom according
to the common Phrase, drink their Eyes out. It may probably be said, Visum
debilitant Balnea, Bacchus, Amor, as well as Corpora: And on the other hand,
whatever may be said to preserve the Body in Health, does preserve the Sight.
Smoke and Dust are none of the least Enemies to the Eyes.

The attenuating the Horny Coat and the Humor Aqueus, (which at the same time
attenuates the Optic Spirits, depurates and renders the foresaid Tunic and
Humor clear and diaphanous) is commonly attempted by inward and outward
Medicines, that have a power to discuss Winds, and move Urine, proceeding from
their subtle Particles, that are supposed to be very attenuating, and
consequently diuretic, and discussive. These Medicines are usually called
Oxydercica, that is, sharpners of the Sight, from (...), acutum and (...),
video. Such are accounted all the greater and lesser hot Seeds, but chiefly
Fennil and Duncus, Elicampane, Orange-peel, Masterwort, Calamus aromaticus,
Virginian Snakeweed, Cubebs, Galangal, Rad. cyperi longi, and rotundi, Paradise
Grains, Cardamum, Zedoary, sem. sileris montani. sem. seseli Massiliensis,
Nutmegs, and most sort of Spices. On the other hand, all Antiscorbutics,
especially Mustard and Garden-Cresses, are accounted pernicious to the Eyes,
and Ginger, Pepper, and Persly, as discutient as they are, offend the Sight,
and so do most Sowrs. These following are esteemed specific Oxydercics, viz.
Eyebright, the greater Celandine, Vervain, Fumitory, Valerian, Avens, Rue and
Clary, than which last, nothing can be found a greater Darkner of the Sight,
and more offensive to the Eyes; for b^ing put into Wort to ferment with it,
renders the Drink the most inebriating, and discomposing all the Senses, beyond
any other vegetable, excepting Darnel. And yet being outwardly applied, is very
excelling in thinning the Coats of the Eyes, and watery Humors, and very
discutient in clearing the Sight from dimness or cloudiness. As great an Author
as Platerus is, he r^commends Radishes and Mustard for specific Sight
sharpners, than which common experience does most certainly convince us,
nothing can be a greater Enemy to the Sight: which informs us, that we are not
to take things upon trust so slightly, as most Physicians and others are apt to
do, without comparing them with the Rules of Experience and Reason.

Those forementioned Aromatics, Seeds and Roots, are discutients of Wind by
their subtle Particles, which they perform by attenuating of gross Humors into
Bubbles, which breaking, emit those Winds, or crude mixed Aerie Spirits, that
afterward are sometimes avoided upwards or downwards, or are impelled into the
Vessels; these mounting upwards, do for a time much disturb the Sight, until
they are either discussed by the Spirits, that are in the Eyes, and assisted
therein by a further continuation of the use of the said attenuating Aromatics,
and Seeds. Hence it is, that very often those attenuating Oxydercics do render
the Sight much worse, and sometimes in Phlegmatic Constitutions usher in
Blindness at first, though othertimes also the continuation of them may discuss
the Winds they first raised; wherefore a great deal of Caution ought to be used
in the Application of them: So that it appears plainly, that the same
Oxydercics may remedy the Sight, and keep off Blindness in some; though in
others they most certainly cause Dimness of Sight, and Blindness.

Diuretics, by carrying off the Salts of the Blood by Urine, (they by drying
up the Aqueous Humor, and corrugating or condensing the Horny Coat, thicken
and lessen the former, and harden the latter in Old People, whose Eyes
therefore do appear thick, dull, flat, slow in Motion, etc.) have been
experimentally found very advantageous, not only in preserving and meliorating
of the Sight, but in preventing and removing many Diseases incident to the
Eyes. Among those Millepedes or Sowes moderately used either in Ale, or
otherwise, are universally, and by common Experience, preferred beyond all
others; for being copiously furnished with very subtle penetrating light
Spirits, they do not only carry off Salts by Urine, but attenuate and discuss
what is gross in the Watery Humor, and all the Tunicks, and subtilize the
Animal Spirits; which Qualities seem to render them specific to the Eyes*

Some do use Ground Ivy in their ordinary Drink, to preserve their Sight, to no
great purpose: But in Valerian and Vervain (a quantity of one or both being
added to the Wort before, or while it is working) many do affirm to have
experienced a great Power, in preserving their Sight, and removing Dimness. To
mend the Taste of such sort of Ale, a moderate Proportion of Elicampane-Root,
Orange-Peel, or a few Daucus-Seeds might be added. Bean-Stalk Ashes, to the
quantity of five or six Ounces, if they are clean, put to a Firkin of Small Ale
after the working, jumbling them well together, and allowing them four or five
Days to settle to the bottom, did they not blunt the Taste of the Drink so
much, would prove more powerful, than any of those Vegetables.

As for the Externals, I should be loath to advise any Person to Compounded
Eye-Waters, to preserve his Sight: The Washing the Eyes daily with clear Spring
or Rainwater is sufficient. Water that has stood long in a Leaden Cistern, is
accounted hurtful, there rising a very sharp offensive Steem in Length of Time
from the Lead, that mixeth with the Water.

Those whose Eyes are weak from their Birth, ought to avoid tampering with any
sort of Oxydercicks, Internal, or External, their Weakness of Sight depending
much upon a natural Laxity of the Optic Nerves, and Tunicks; their Humors of
the Eye being also thin, and their Optic Spirits loose, and not compact; all
which may be easily rendered worse by uncertain Remedies, and never or seldom
better, though their Growth in Age, Change of Climate, or Diet, may
considerably contribute toward the Melioration of their Sight. A Weakness of
the Eyes, that Sickness might have left, does often go off with the Weakness of
other Parts, by the Recovery of Strength of the Brain and Bowels. But if that
Weakness should singly remain, then besides due Evacuations, general and
particular, Recourse may be had to proper Internal and External Oxydercicks,
which ought to be chosen with the strictest Caution.

Among Diseases of the Eyes, I do account a Suffusion, Cataract, and Gutta
Serena the most dangerous; and an Ophthalmia, or Inflammation, the most
painful, and often an Antecedent Cause of the others.

A Suffusion, or Hypochyma, seems to me to proceed either from some subtle
Winds, or Windy Spirits, sallying out of the Arteries, or Pores of the Nerves,
and breaking into the Watery Humor of the Eye, there causing very minute
Bubbles of various Figures, which being actuated or moved by the Luminous Rays,
(for when a Man's Eyes are shut, whereby the said Luminous Rays are excluded,
he is not in the least sensible of them,) do produce those Appearances of
little Bouls, Flies, and other small Shapes, floating or flying to and fro
before the Eyes.

There are commonly observed two kinds of those Suffusions: The one arising
from Crudities of the Stomach, or Flatuous Hypochondriack Humors of the
Bowels, is not durable, though often returning by Intervals. Those little
Figures, that do deceitfully impose upon the Sight, moving much quicker, than
in the other kind, and meeting together, join into a Cloudiness, that quickly
vanishes, by reason that those Windy Spirits, which issue through the Pores of
the Arteries, being of a Vaporous or Watery Composure, are much lighter, move
nimbler, and are much easier discussed, than those Windy Spirits, that are
pressed out of the Pores of the Nerves, which being of a more faline, tough,
heavy, and compact Mixture, consequently durable, and constantly abiding,
(because not easily discussed,) make Representations of larger Figures, and are
moved much more slowly; and consisting of clammy or viscous most minute
Particles, are very apt to unite; whence it happens, that their Representations
are disposed to grow daily bigger and bigger. These Viscous Windy Spirits are
subject to be precipitated, or impelled to the Pupil, or Foramen Uveae, by the
constant passing of the Luminous Particles in Beams or Rays toward the said
Foramen Uveae, where they are concentrated, or gathered together in the Figure
of a Cone, the said Foramen forming the narrow End of the Cone, as the Cornea
Tunica does the broad. So that it is the said Viscid Nervous Winds, impelled by
the continual passing of the Luminous Rays to the Foramen Uveae into an united
Body, which at length does form that Preter-natural Skin, called a Cataract,
being a discernable Cause of Blindness, in Contradiction to a Gutta Serena, the
Cause whereof is not externally discernable, but commonly ascribed to gross
Humors, obstructing the Hollow of the Optic Nerves, and stopping the Influx
of the Optic Spirits. I cannot but wonder, whence those gross thick Humors
should be sent, or how conveyed; not from the Medullar part of the Brain, where
Arteries or Veins are scarcely discoverable, and whose very Compact Substance
is no more susceptible of of any thing that is gross, than the Beginning of the
Optic Nerves: Besides, such sort of slimy gross Humors might easily, in the
beginning of a Gutta Serena be melted down, and carried off by the common
Head-Purgers, which are generally very strong and churlish; as Pil. Cochiae
maj. and min. Pil. Arabic. e duobus. Elect. Indum maj. and min. and all their
compounded Hiera's. So that to me the Aetiology of this, and almost of all the
rest of the Diseases of the Eyes, seems gratis dictum.

It is more apparent to me, that the most frequent cause of a Gutta serena is
the nervous Lympha, (which is the Vehicle, or rather is the Materia
constituting the grosser Particles, which united with the subtiler and most
subtle Particles, separated out of the best and finest parts of the Arterial
Blood, do compose the Animal Spirits) being grown too gross, thick and viscous
in the Optic Nerves, stagnatethere, and makes a Damm, thereby hindersing and
putting a stop to the influx of the Animal Spirits, from the Brain to the Eye,
which ought not to be termed Optic Spirits before they arrive thither. By this
supposition, a Gutta serena seems to be a Palsy (Paralysis) of the Optic
Nerve; all other Palsies, whether universal or particular, being engendered by
no other cause, than by the stagnation of the Nervous Lympha, (being rendered
gross and viscous) in the beginning of the Nerves in the former, and in
particular Nerves in the latter. After a proper Purge or two to clear the
Passages, and make room in the Vessels, how little advantage can be exp^cted
from frequent Cathartics, though violent, or any other Remedies vulgarly in use
against a Gutta serena, or any other Palsy, may be easily understood from the
forementioned Hypothesis; for should you purge ad infinitum, you can never
pretend to draw off that coagulated Nervous Lympha, but rather by drying all
the Humors in carrying off the moister and thinner part, you must necessarily
render it worse, which by long continuance does turn into a hard substance,
much tougher than the Nerve it self, or the toughest Leather, and consequently
must be incurable. And much less advantage can be hoped from any of the
celebrated Eye-Waters, some whereof are pretended to have cured those that have
been blind 20 years, and go under the Name of some Queen's or Lady's Eye-water,
all whic^^ is no more to be credited, than the Achievements of a Knight
Errant; for you may as reasonably pretend to break the Stone in the Bladder by
applying Millepedes to the Soals of the Feet, as to dissolve a Gutta serena by
an Eye-water, if you consider the great distance from the Horny Tunic (to which
they are to be applied) to the Optic Nerve, the several Coats and Humors of the
Eye, the extreme tenderness and sensibility of the said Coats, and the
necessity of an extraordinary piercing Remedy, which ^ure I am, is not greatly
to be found in those Aromatics, Se^ds, and Oxyd^rcic Leaves, of which most
Eye-waters consist, and are very repugnant to the qualities of Aloes, Honey,
Tuthia, white Vitriol, Sugar candy, Sugar of Lead, and other Materials, that
are often ridiculously enough added to them, I do know, that sometimes, once
possibly in two or three Ages, a Gutta serena has been removed by an
accidental Salivation, othertimes by a sudden violent Fever, that by rarefying
all the Humors, and putting the Animal Spirits into a violent motion, the
viscous Damm has been pierced through, and violently expelled. But these are
means, that if imitated, do s^ldom or never attain the success hoped for.

Besides the cause forementioned, Convulsions, and Tumors of the Muscles of the
Eye near the heads of them, have caused a Gutta Serena; the former, by
contorting the Optic Nerves, and altering the Figures and Positions of their
Filaments, which I do remember occasioned a Gutta Serena in the Lord G's Lady,
when living in the Pall Mall, upon the taking of Vinum Benedictum (Maledictum
sometimes) prescribed by her Physician, at the request of the Patient I
presume, and probably ill prepared, and overdosed by the Apothecary, contrary
to the directions of the Doctor: The latter perform this unfortunate effect, by
compressing the Optic Nerve, which sometimes is removed, but not always.

A Gutta Serena may sometimes be removed with great difficulty in the
beginning, praemissis universalibus, by potent, sulphurous, and oleous internal
Medicines, which under that shape, may preserve a great part of their Virtue
until their arrival to the Brain and Nerves, and possibly some of them may
externally be let in by the Vessels of the Head, but then those Internals must
be frequently exhibited in large Doses, and continued for a long time, even to
the brink of a Fever, or some other contrary Distemper; and this is the only
Method to cure all other sorts of Palsies, which I have followed more than once.

A Cataract is best cured in the beginning, and whilst it continues to be a
Suffusion. Internal means are as n^c^ss^ry as external. Sugar of Lead, b^ing
w^ll prepared by digesting Spirit of Wine with it, and abstracting it
af^erwards by distillation, and dissolved in a convenient Vehicle, is not only
an excellent Topic in this Disease, but in many others of the Eyes, especially
in an Ophthalmia, taraxi^, and Chym^sis, Ulcers of the Tunics, and Epiphora,
etc. for there is a Spirit in Lead, b^i^g w^ll corrected and managed, i^ the
most discutient and penetrating of any in respect to the Eyes; besides, the
Salt, contains a great Sweetness, and is endued with many singular Virtues.

An Ophthalmy I do suppose to be occasioned by Evaporations of the Lympha,
contained in the capillar Nervuli, disseminated in the Tunica conjunctiva,
being grown very sharp and corroding, (as is formerly mentioned) which
Evaporations being condensed into small drops or gleets, and meeting with other
Juices, cause an effervescency and coagulation, to which pain supervening
invites other Humors, that together produce such a sort of Inflammation. I
have often observed, that the application of cold Medicines (as whites of Eggs,
Conserve of Roses, and other Restringents) has so little abated the Distemper,
that it rendered it much worse. This Disease is sometimes painful to extremity,
and very often of a long continuance, insomuch that I have known it protracted to
nine or ten Weeks, and does not seldom leave other mischievous Diseases behind
it.

What Concerns the Practical Part of a Mania or Madness.
Bleeding frequently repeated in the Arm and Foot, also at the Haemorrhoids, is
commonly advised as an universal and necessary premiss, to answer the
Indication of the Plethory of Humors and Spirits, that most Madm^n are subject
unto, occasioned by their greedy and ravenous Appetite; notwithstanding if used
more than necessary, it does certainly cause a moaping, and still leave a
desipientia and depravation of their Internal Senses, so that there must be a
great caution used in this particular. I do very well know, that by bleeding
substracting the matter, whereout that abundance of rapid and furi^^^ Animal
Spirits is engendered, the disord^r of (...) is often l^s^ened, but soon ^^^urns
again: (...) the repl^^^shing of the Body. By abating of the Blood, the Spirits
are diminished; and consequently the heat of the Brain, which the violent
motion of the Spirits occasion, must be in some measure moderated. However, I
can look upon Bleeding no otherwise, than a concurring remedy, or a remedy per
accidens, and does not directly answer the Indication of clearing the Body, and
particularly the Brain, of those putrid, acute, pungent, saline Particles, nor
does it make that change upon the Bowels, so as to prevent the engendring the
same again, which is the chief Indication in the cure of a Mania.

Strong Purging by Senna, Turbith, and Scammony, and particularly by black
Hellebor, is what the pretended Masters of Mad-houses do most depend upon, as
some Physicians do upon Antimo^y, in the form of a Regulus, Glass, or a Crocus
Metallorum, whereby they endeavor not only to throw off the Saburra or heap of
gross excrementitious Humors, but by stimulating and shaking of the Nerves
through the Vomits and stools it moves, they do expect these slimy putrid
Particles should be thrown off from the Brain and Nerves: And in this some have
been successful, though but in few. The inconvenience lies here, if by too
frequent strong Purgations, you do drain the gross saline Humors of their
Serum, which does both render them fluid, and dilute their Acrimony, you do
excessively sharpen those Humors, increase the Obstructions, and by violently
fermenting of them (which strong Purgatives most certainly do) force them to
steam up those putrid pungent Particles, whereby Maniacs are rendered much
worse; wherefore its more advisable, after a smart Purge or two, to depend upon
moderate Purgatives, as Pil. Tartar. Querc. Pil. Stomach. cum gum. Diasenna,
etc.

After all, Bleedings and Purgatives being only aniversal necessary premises,
the chief Indication is to rectify the Bowels, so as to prevent the engendring
those gross saline Humors, and to clear the Brain of the foresaid pungent
Particles, whereby the several parts of the Brain may be reduced to their
natural figures and positions, and the exercise of their Function. I do not
perceive, that practical Authors do recommend any Remedies of that kind with
any confidence, neither do I find many Compositions described in Dispensatories
for that purpose, and those that are, differ little from such as commonly are
advised against Hypochondriac Melancholy, and are to be used for a long
continuance, the tediousness of which Course does not only tire the Physician,
but the Friends of the Patients also, who therefore commonly commit them to the
care of such, as make it their business, and are willing to be watchful over
them, and keep them quiet and in a low moderate Diet, intermixing gentle
Purgings, and Bleedings at Intervals, whereby some are recovered. Now and then
when they are very furious, and overwakeful they give 'em Opiates. Some use
Cupping to the Shoulders, with and without scaris^cation; others use opiated
Ointments to their Temples, and bathing of their Heads being shaved, with
Decoction of Cephalic Herbs, Flowers, and Seeds, etc.

I have had the fortune to cure several, in a little more or less than six
Weeks, by Bleeding of 'em twice or thrice, and Purging them gently with
Minerals. In the Intervals I gave them An^ihypochondriac Tinctures, composed
chiefly of Minerals.

Maniacs, whose Figures and Positions of the Filaments of the Brain and Nerves
have been much changed, and displaced by a long continuance of their Furies,
are incurable. I might add a great many Observations to this Head, but the
shortness of my time obliges me to come to a

FINIS.

