A DISCOURSE About the Charge of NOVELTY Upon the Reformed Church of England,
MADE By the PAPISTS asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion before
LUTHER?

LONDON, Printed for Robert Horn at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange,
and Fincham Gardener at the White Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

A DISCOURSE About the Charge of NOVELTY Upon the Reformed Church of England
made by the Papists, etc.
THe Christian Doctrine was once, by the way of trust, delivered by Christ and
his Apostles unto the Saints, Men of Care and Honesty, and who should preserve
it in its first purity and Spiritual intention, only to prescribe methods unto
Men by Faith, and an Honest Conversation, how they might arrive at Heaven; that
this Religion might make a deeper impression upon their minds and memories and
be more faithfully kept, it was set down in plain and significant Terms, 2 Timothy
1.13, 14. Rom 6.17.1 Tim. 6.20.
and reduced into short summaries called a Form of sound Words, that good
thing, that Form of Doctrine, a depositum, or trust, and by the Church
afterward a Creed. That it might be believed and valued, it was in its own
Nature of the greatest importance, confirmed with variety of the best of
arguments, miracles, prophecies, innocent carriage, and Death of its numerous
Disciples, and severe Curses denounc't against any that should add to or take
from it, Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 22.18.
till their great Master, and its Author, Jesus should come from Heaven again.
Yet notwithstanding all this, by the Malice and Subtilty of the Devil, the
Designs and Passions of Men, the Ignorance and Negligence of some, the Cunning
and Industry of others, this plain and simple Religion began by degrees to be
Corrupted by the mixtures of Philosophy, and niceness, by the Rules of State
Craft and Policy, by idle Traditions, and Inventions, by the Melancholy of
some, and the gayety of others; and the natural Face of it was so strangely
changed that it seemed another Gospel, and you might seek Christianity in the
Christian World and yet scarce find it. Many Kingdoms and People were to blame
in this, being Treacherous to their Master, and false to their trust, 2 Cor.
11.2.
suffering so Pure and Chaste a Religion to be Corrupted or Stolen away, but the
Church of Rome seems the most Guilty of them all, (especially upon her own
grounds, her Bishop being the Infallible Vicar of Jesus, Cyp. Epist. Ox. Edit.
p. 5, 6. Romans 18. Platina vita Bon. 7. p. 159. vide quaeso quantum
degeneraverint, etc.
to whom are committed the Oracles of God) once indeed renowned for her Faith
and Pious Governors, but now as famous for their Degeneracy as well in
Religion as in their lives. Whose Ambition or Interest prostituted the Faith to
those Designs, and made it Earthly and Sensual, or their Negligence and
Stupidity suffered the Enemy in the night of Ignorance to sow the tares, which
so grew up, and choakt the Wheat, that Faith was turned into Fables and Lies,
Foppery and Superstition were nicknam'd Devotion, Ridiculous Gestures and
Habits past for Repentance and Mortification, the Bible was shut up and
contemned, and the Legends opened and praised, Honest and Good Men were
butchered, and unknown Persons and Malefactors Canonized, Saints with their
Pictures and Relics were made Rivals to Christ in Mediation and Intercession,
Good Works were spoiled by Merit and Arrogance, or done by way of composition
for vices, the fear of Hell was abated by the invention of Purgatory, Christ
was fetched from Glory by the Magic of a Priest and put into a Wafer, or into a
more sordid place, riddles and quirks of their Schools were made Articles of
Faith, in short, old truths were rooted up, or new errors grafted on them,
Power and Profit were Styled the Church, the Court of Rome was brought into the
Temple and called the Holy of Holies. Such errors as these in the Christian
Faith came from Rome, and infected our Ancient British Church (not at first
planted by the Labors of the Romish Bishops of old, but Corrupted by their
later Emissaries) and lasted a long time among us, being supported by Power,
twisted with Interest, suitable to the pleasures and vices of Men, incorporated
into the Government having put out Men's reason to try and discern between Truth
and Error, and at length became Fashionable, Legal Terrible with Fires and
Censures which made us Sick unto Death, absolute almost and beyond recovery.
Such was our condition here of Slavery and Ignorance, but it pleased him that
dwells between the Golden Candlesticks, to dispel our Darkness and restore the
Ancient light of Primitive Christianity. His Wisdom and Goodness improving the
passions and inclinations of the some in temporal changes and concerns to
Spiritual purposes, encouraging the secret groans and desires of others,
putting many more upon search and enquiry after Truth, and infusing courage for
it, at length came to a resolution of Arguing and Debating the Errors of the
Romish Faith and manners, of reforming the abuses in Discipline and Devotion
and to call back True Christianity again, and being dispossessed of the Spirit of
Rome which often tore them and rent them till they foamed again, are now clothed
and in their Wits once more; upon this account the Friends of Rome call us
Heretics, Schismatics and Innovators, Discharge Censures and Excommunications
and Eternal Damnation against us, are full of Wrath and Indignation, and to
show a little Wit in their Anger, And pretended reason, pertly ask the
Question, where was our Religion before Luther?

This is the common and trite Objection against our Religion, Bellarm. Campian.
Smith.
very frequent not only in the Mouths of their more Ordinary Disciples, but
also of their more Learned Writers, who (whatever strength they really Fancy
may be in the Argument it self) think it a very proper Weapon to attempt the
vulgar and the Weak withal, to amuse and dazzle the less discerning Eye, at
least when backed and set off with the stately names of Infallibility,
Succession, Antiquity, and the like; and they tell us roundly our Faith was but
yesterday, our Religion is new and upstart, as only Henry the Eighths and
Cromwells contrivance (they may truly say as much as their Treason was Cecils
Plot.) That our Faith began only in the year 1517. in Saxony by one Martin
Luther an Apostate Friar, who for the Sake of a fair Nun and other designs
renounced the Ancient Faith, and set up his new Device of Protestantism at
Spires; which did not quietly last much above seven years, Bellar. Tom. lib. 4.
p. 287.
for in the year 1525. starts up Zuinglius, and after two years more the
Anabaptists, who change and correct Luther's Religion, and draw great numbers
of his Disciples from him; and himself for his reward dyed a strange Death,
great Noises and Crackings were heard in his Tomb, which being opened, neither
Body nor Bones were found, and the smell of Brimstone was ready to stifle the
standers by. And therefore they say, we ought to look from whence we are fallen,
to repent of our Heresy, and return to our first Love, and not stick so close
to our Religion, the new invention of so ill a Man. That we may therefore keep
those firm that are members of our Religion, and bring those back that have
revolted from us into the Romish Communion, we have endeavored to give a
satisfactory Answer to this their Question, Where was your Religion before the
times of Luther? Not to trouble our selves with such Legends as these, and
Uncharitableness along with them, the Answer is thus.

1. Telling them plainly where our Religion was before Luthers time. 2. By
showing what errors and mistakes are included in the Question. 3. To turn the
Question upon themselves, and ask them some others of the like Nature.
1. The plain Answer to the Question is this: That our Religion was long before
the times of Luther, and believed and settled in many Kingdoms and Nations of
the World, and has neither Novelty nor Singularity in it. It Is an old
Religion, I am sure it is of Age and can speak for it self. It has lasted now
these 1600 years and more, founded at first by Christ and his Apostles, handed
down to us through many Sufferings and Persecutions, and here it is preserved.
It contracted indeed in the coming down a great deal of rust by the Falseness
and Carelessness of its keepers, particularly by the Church of Rome, we scowr'd
off the rust, and kept the metal; that is the Romish Religion, this is the
English. They added False Doctrins to the Christian Faith, we left the one and
kept to the other; this is Ancient, those are New. Our Religion is the same
with that of the Early Christians, Martyrs, and Confessors, believed in the
first 300 years, and defended by all Councils truly General: Our Religion in
those first Ages was in Palestine and Greece, Acts. 11.26.
in Agypt, in Antioch where the Disciples were first called Christians and in
Rome it self, and wherever the great labors of her first Apostles carried her
to the different and remote Countries of the World: Then and there our Religion
lived, where Peter, Linus, and Cletus, and all the first and Pious Bishops of
Rome did. It suffered indeed great variety of changes and conditions, by the
interest and Wickedness of men, sometimes more Adulterated, and sometimes more
Pure, it flitted from Country to Country, sometimes Greater and sometimes
Smaller in its number, sometimes in a Dejected, and sometimes in a more
Flourishing State, but somewhere or other it was entire and without mixture, as
it was at first given unto the World, and such an old Religion as this we are
of, holding fast neither more nor less, neither adding to nor diminishing what
Christ and his Apostles taught; and it Antiquity must evidence the Truth of our
Religion, we are safe and secure that we have right on our side. And this will
appear if we consider these following things.

1. What Conformity our Religion carries to that of Christ and his Apostles.
Let any impartial eye compare them both together, and he will find the features
and complexion, the whole body of Religion the same in both. Whatever they
delivered out at first, as Fundamental to Salvation, whatever they Instituted
as parts of Devotion, Discipline, and Order, we still faithfully retain in our
Church, and if any Truth of moment hitherto by fraud or negligence be concealed
from her, she is ready to receive it, whenever it is made plain, not having
stopped up the way of Truth by a pretense of Infallibility or want of Modesty to
confess an error. She has the same sense of the Nature, Offices, the Design
and whole Undertakings of Christ, that the truly Ancient Church had; She
receives the Creed and Bible and any Traditions that can be made out to be
truly Divine, in the same meaning and understanding that Christ and his
Apostles gave to the first Christians, and they to us. What their thoughts of
Saints and Holy Souls departed were, ours are, thoughts of respect, remembrance
and imitation, not Divine Worship. Christ Instituted proper Figures, and
Symbols of Bread and Wine, to represent and confirm, to conveigh and
commemorate his Bloody Passion and Benefits to Mankind, in this sense She
preserves the Institution Sacred, and does not really Sacrifice or Crucify the
Lord of Life again. Christ Commanded good Works under the Penalty of Eternal
Damnation, She does the same, and in our Masters Language bids the doers of
them call themselves unprofitable Servants, beating down Pride and Merit.
Christ and his Apostles told the World what departing Souls must expect, her
sense is the same, that there are no second ventures and trials to be made,
neither can a kind Friend with a good estate left for Masses or Monks compound
for a life ill spent. Run through the whole Constitution of our Church in
Articles of Faith, and Rules of manners, you may trace them to Christ and his
Apostles time, and all other parts of Her Government and Order are truly
primitive. And it must needs be so, if She sincerely follows her Rule of Faith,
the Holy Scriptures, so Ancient, so Divine, and whatever is declared there
Essential to Salvation She Brings into Creed, and resolves to keep it, like a
mighty treasure, Faithfully unto Death. And indeed the Church of Rome confesses
that what we do retain is Ancient and Apostolical, but pretends, that we are
defective in many things, and want some necessaries which they have, to make an
entire Faith. But we challenge them to prove, that those opinions wherein we
differ from them were delivered by Christ or any Men Divinely inspired in those
times. And they seem to acknowledge we do not, and therefore to make up the
matter, pretend a Divine Authority in the Church, to cast new Articles, and
Truths fere de fide, almost fit for a Creed, and some others of them confess
that some of their Opinions as Image Worship and others were not maintained in
the first Ages of Christianity for fear of coming too near the Heathens Worship
and out of other Prudential considerations, so that whosoever does compare the
Doctrine of our Church, with that of Christ and his Apostles, must needs
conclude that our Religion is Ancient Christianity, and that the charge of
Novelty is groundless.

2. The Nature of Reformation, which was not to found a New Church but correct
an old one. Christianity that Pearl of great price, Mat. 13.4, 6.
was hid with trash and filth, that the Romish Church had heapt upon it, our
reformers removed only what loaded and obscured it, and restored it to its
first Beauty and Luster. Such a Reformation indeed is later then their errors,
and it must needs be so, it naturally supposing them before, otherwise it is not
Reformation but a Destructive change; but Primitive Christianity which is our
Religion was long before the Disease of Popery, though the cure of this Disease
was after, or later then the Disease it self, but the sound Body of
Christianity for which we are concerned, was before them both, for it is not
Reformation barely that we are pleased withal, no more then with a Pill or
Potion, but only as necessary to drive away an inveterate Disease, and recover
an old Religion to its former Health. When Christ reformed the Jewish Religion
from the false senses and glosses that the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon
it, and grafted Christianity upon the old stock, will the Romanists call this a
New Religion or rather an old one well amended and improved by Divine
Authority. Bellarmin does allow this for Truth, and says that Christianity was
rather a New State and Condition than a new Church, and he that can call our
Religion New, because it is mended, and made now, what it was about 1600 years
ago, may affirm that Christ built a New Temple when he Whipped the buyers and
sellers out of the old. And that Hezekiah built a New Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.^.
and Instituted a New Passover, because he cleans'd the one and restored the
other to its first Institution; our reformation did no more, it only scaled off
the Leprosy that stuck to the Body of the Romish Church, it only pared off
those Additions that Interest or Superstition, Niceness or Foppery, and glew'd
to it; what after remained, was our Religion, the same that Christ and his
Apostles taught the World at first. And if they can show that any thing has
been added since, pernicious to the Nature of the True and Old Religion, our
Church is ready to remove it, or that any thing is wanting that is necessary to
its complement and perfection, she is ready to entertain it with the same
spirit of meekness and Wisdom, and Regard to the Gospel, that she used in the
Reformation; but hitherto upon good grounds and strict inquiry She is fully
satisfied that Her Religion is absolute and complete Christianity.

3. We have many and impartial Judges on our side, that our Religion is Pure
and Old Christianity. The particular Church of Rome indeed, that supports her
self by a pretended Infallibility, to be true to her principle, refuses to be
tried by any other Church but will be only Judge of her self, and others too;
yet we that are certain and sure of the Truth of our Religion, though not
Infallible, dare Appeal to the Judgment of other Christian Churches. The Greek
Church condemns their half Communion, the Doctrines of Purgatory, Merit and
Supererogation. The Adoration of Images, their locking up the Scriptures in an
unknown Tongue, their extreme Unction, and sale of Masses, and laughs at their
Infallibility, the thing that makes their errors in Faith incorrigible; the
Armenian Christians reject the Supremacy of the Pope, Baren. Tom. 10. p. 256.
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and Excommunicate those that Worship Images.
The Jacobites, the Indians of St. Thomas, the Egyptian and Abassine Christians,
dissent from most or all of the Romish errors which we condemn. We have all the
truly Ancient Christian Churches on our side, and most of the Modern whom the
busy Emissaries of Rome have not terrified or seduc't into their party; our
Writers have Appealed with great success to the Ancient Councils, the Holy
Fathers, and to the Learned and Pious Bishops and Priests of old, and from
thence discovered the Novelty of the Romish Faith and the good old way of the
English Church. And they dare not stand the trial, when we desire to be
determined by the best and Infallible Judge, the Holy Scriptures, except they
must give the meaning of them, otherwise they load them with Ignominious Names,
of a Lesbian rule, mere Ink and Paper, and a nose of Wax. Who will they be
tried by? By a Council truly General? No, except it be called, managed and
confirmed by the Pope. Will they be Judged by any that differ from them, yet
are Men of Good, Honest, and unprejudic't Judgments? No; they are out of the
Pale of the Church and Stubborn Heretics: And the best reason they have for
their assurance that they are in the right is, that they are sure they are so,
and keep themselves safe in their enchanted Castle of Infallibility. The
Arabian Philosopher was offended at and abhorred their barbarous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and Eating of their God, and resolved to stick to his
Philosophical rather than be of such a Christian Religion. The Roman Images and
the Worship of them have laid a Stumbling Block before the Jews who therefore
approved our Sentence and Condemnation of them; having therefore such a number
of good Testimonies and Judgments on our side we rise up and reverence the gray
Hairs of our Religion, which Rome once Clothed in a Wanton and Fantastic
dress, and made it ridiculous, which because we have pulled off, and put on its
Ancient habit and made it look Manly with the Image of God and Christ upon it,
they call us Innovators. Many of their own Writers have spoke in favor of the
English Church, and many of their distinctions in a fair sense have concluded
for her Doctrine and shown their dislike of many opinions of their own Church.

4. That our Religion was long before Luther will appear from the oppositions
that were made to the Papal corruptions, which did not enjoy so quiet a life,
but were frequently disturbed and cried out against, not only by other
Churches, but by many honest and considering Men in their own Communion. Men
they were, not of Interest or Discontent, Peevishness, and given to change, of
little Learning and less Conscience, and note in the World, but Men Eminent in
their Generation, Men of Probity and Studies, of Temper and Consideration, Men;
that stood not alone, but had great numbers of Disciples, a Visible Society of
Christians who followed their Judgments. Some of these sadly bewailed the
degenerate State of the Roman Church, others petitioned for, and advised not
only the correction of the abuses of good Doctrines and Innocent Institutions,
but the reformation of Gross Errors and Scandalous Additions to the Christian
Faith, and others in great Authority promised an amendment, and to reduce the
whole frame of Christianity to its Primitive Sense and Model. And the famous
Council of Trent was promised and begun to rectify Errors and Abuses crept into
the Romish Faith and government, yet after a long Sitting it fatally concluded,
confirming those corruptions which was hoped after so many complaints and
addresses with strong reasons for them, should have been thoroughly redrest and
reformed. The Original of their Barbarous Inquisition will be a standing record
of the frequent, and stout oppositions, that were made against the Romish
Innovation in the Christian Faith. And so long as the Blood of the numerous
Albigenses and Waldenses cries to Heaven for Vengance against the Papal cruelty,
we have a cloud of Witnesses for this Truth, who resisted unto Death the new
Doctrines of Romes. The carriage of old Wicliff and his Followers, tells us
plainly in story, that the corruptions of Rome had no such quiet possession,
but ever and anon some or other in considerable numbers did endeavor to eject
them out of their hold, though they paid dear for it. And so long as the
Treachery of their Council of Constance about the safe conduct granted to poor
Huss. And his Disciples in number above forty thousand, remains upon record
never to be forgotten or forgiven, so long we have clear evidences of strong
resistance made to the Romish Religion before the times of Luther. And in most
Countries and times, where and when the Romish corruptions began from small and
obscure beginnings to be gross and plain, some or other in greater or lesser
numbers began to Renounce and Protest against them. What though some of these
early Reformers might hold some erroneous Opinions which we our selves condemn,
yet however they opposed the Romish Church in her corruptions and these tended
to a Reformation, which was completed only by degrees, and it is no wonder some
Stumbled in such a night of Ignorance. And have not the Agents of Rome
destroyed the Papers and Records, disguised their Adversaries, and falsify'd
their Opinions to serve the Power and Interest of their great Mistress? They
therefore branded the Waldenses with the name of Manichaism and that they
affirmed two Principles or Originals of all things, because they asserted that
the Emperor was Independent of the Pope, and that they denied Christ to be the
Son of God, because they could not believe a crust of Bread to be Christ. And
they have framed as lewd stories against many excellent Men of the later Ages
who withstood the approches of their Doctrine and Government, which we
certainly know, and the more Ingenuous among them confess, to be Notoriously
false. Though we have reason to believe (because of the severity and industry
of the Romish Factors ever warm against those who opposed her practices) a
great number of Honest and Learned Men (as those Ages would afford) are buried
in obscurity and their names unknown, there being an Expurgatorian Index for
the merits of such Men as well as Books and Editions, yet we have a sufficient
Catalogue of them who kept up the Title and claim of old Christianity and would
not suffer their new Errors to plead prescription.

2. By showing what Errors and Mistakes are included in the Question.

1. That these new Errors of Rome are absolutely necessary to the being of a
Christian Church: For though we believe all that Christ and his Apostles taught
all things that are contained in the Holy Scriptures, all things that undoubted
Tradition, or good Reason proves to derive themselves from both or either, yet
because we do not Assent and Subscribe to the new Articles of Faith that Rome
has invented for us, we cease to be a Christian Church, are marked for
Heretics, which are worse than Pagans with them, and must be certainly Damned.
Nay should we embrace all the other Doctrines of Rome, and deny only the Popes
Authority and Supremacy, (that Epitome of their Christianity) it would avail us
little, we are Heathens still. Should we reject but one Article of Pope Pius's
Creed, suppose the Doctrine of Purgatory or Merit, yet because this Questions
Infallibility, the center of all their Religion, we are in the State of
Damnation still: Should we receive their Doctrines as probable and in a larger
and more favorable meaning, yet because we do not entertain them as Articles
of Faith, in the fense of the Church, our case is not mended, we shall meet
with Fires here and hereafter for our reward. Should we wink and swallow them
all down with a good Catholic Stomach, yet if the Bishop of Rome should give
out a new Edition of Faith, enlarged with many more Monstrous Doctrines and
Opinions, yet if we bogle and keck at them, all our former righteousness shall
not be remembered, we are Apostates worse than Turks and Infidels; and who can
tell what this Infallible and Powerful Guide of Christendom will do? For when
things, obscure, or of an Indifferent Nature, when things wherein they differ
among themselves, and only serve a Temporal Interest, when Opinions which they
can dispense withal upon occasion, when only the modes and manner of Truth,
when contradictories, and Doctrines directly leading unto Impiety, and things
Barbarous and Blasphemous have been Christened Articles of Faith and
Fundamentals of Religion, have we not just reason to suspect as ill or worse
may be done again? And the intrigues of Trent be acted once more, and as many
new Articles of Faith as Titular Bishops, by the same Spirit moving in the same
manner; were not the first and early Christians sound Members of Christ's body
though they never thought of such wild Opinions as these, and published Truths
directly contrary to them? And could I suppose them to have known these
Innovations, out of Zeal and Fidelity to their trust, would have detested amd
abhorred them. Was Christ negligent in the discharge of his mighty office, and
his Apostles defective in their duties and Ministry, not to accquaint the first
Christians with these great Truths, and were they revealed in the Tridentine
Council only to us upon whom the ends of the World are come. These Primitive
Disciples of Christ thought themselves secure of Heaven by this short Creed,
that Jesus was the Christ the son of God. And the contrary was the Character of
the Man of Sin, that denied that Jesus was come in the Flesh, that he was the
God incarnate and the true Messiah, and were Scandalized at his meanness and
obscurity. St. Paul told the Jailer that certainly he would be saved if he
believed that Jesus was the Christ all other Fundamentals of Christianity one
way or other being necessarily included in that belief: And thought that he
made sincere and sound Disciples, if they believed what he Preached, only Jesus
and the Resurrection, in their full compass and latitude. Though we believe all
this in a more express and explicit sense, all that is contained in Scripture,
in the Apostles Creed, or the two other Creeds drawn up by the Church to
explain the Christian Religion in some Articles, and to oppose the Doctrines of
Heretics yet the first Christians shall be Saved and we shall be Damned, they
shall be the elect and the Church of God, we must be Reprobates and the
Synagogue of Satan. Or let Rome show her wonted Charity, and say She doubts
also of their Salvation. Or did Christ connive at that time of Ignorance, or
had he as a Lawgiver forgot to declare some part of the will and pleasure of
God, and upon better remembrance after so many hundred years suggested it to
his careful Vicar? Or did Christ knowing their Nature and Circumstances of it,
that they could not bear them at that time, therefore delay the discovery so
long? Or did these new Articles lie hid so long concealed by his Apostles, or
buried by some lewd Heretics in the rubbish of those Churches they pulled
down, but afterward found, (as they say the Cross was) and now restored to
light? Or are these new Articles some way or other contained in the Ancient
Creeds which we believe, and by easy and natural consequences deduc't from
them. Some such fine reasons as these must be pretended, otherwise we can
safely conclude that our Church is truly Ancient and Apostolical, though She
disowns the late inventions of the Romish Bishop and is known to be the Spouse
of Christ by her first Features and Complexion, though She has cast off the
new Italian dress. For, was the Christian Church, the House of God, Irregular
in its building, wanting of Beams and Pillars, the Essentials of Religion, till
Romes curious and careful builder cast it into a new model and completed it?

2. This Question supposes that the Christian Church ought always to be
Visible, which is not so strictly true. For Visible or Invisible make not two
Churches but different States, Conditions or Respects of one and the same.
'Twas designed by Christ, that all that are Baptized into the Communion of his
Faith, and Church, should make an Outward and Visible Profession of it, by
their Religious Assemblies and Worship, by their Sacraments, Discipline, and
Government, whereby being United among themselves, and to Christ their Head,
they should Constitute one Body called the Catholick-Church, in whose Communion
they must Live and Dye. But so it came to pass, that the number of Christian
People so professing and owning the Faith of Jesus, was lesser or greater, more
conspicuous or obscure, as Persecutions or Heresies grew and prevailed among
them, which like raging Plagues wasted whole Countries, destroying some,
perverting others and making many Fly into remoter Kingdoms, and only some
Scattered and Solitary Christians living in Caves and Wildernesses remained
behind, or only the Face of a distressed Christian Church, as it happened to the
seven Asian and the African Churches, which now labor under a Mohammedan Pride
and Superstition: But as it lost in one Country it gained in another, the
Jewish Presecution and others driving several Colonies of Christians into
remoter Countries, where they spread and enlarged their Religion, and many
times the distress or triumph of the Church followed the changes and
revolutions in the Civil State, suffering or flourishing with it. And often the
abuse of Religion, Prostituting of it to Hypocrisy and secular ends, the Wicked
lives of its Disciples, or want of courage or resolution in its defense, has
tempted Providence to permit pestilent Heresies (worse then that in these
Northen parts) to prevail, and Paganism to return again. But still the promise
of Christ to his Church was firm, and the Gates of Hell did not prevail against
her. And though she was forced sometimes to Travail from Country to Country,
and looked small and obscure in the number of her followers, yet still some or
other parts and corners of the World, and True and Zealous Christians in them
made up the little flock, and shall never fail while the World endures. Popery
like the Egyptian darkness had overspread this and other Nations yet here and
there was an Israelite that had light in his dwellings, and a countercharm
against the enchantments of Egypt, the Gospel, that at length did prevail
against corruptions and made its followers Visible and Numerous. They ask us
where was our Religion before Luther? As though it was not, because it did not
Visibly appear, or no where in the World, because not here in England, or in
other parts where Popery did domineer and the Romish Faction was all and whole
Christianity in the World, the Catholick-Church, which implies contradiction
and absurdity. Christianity here indeed was obscured, and like the Sun under
the cloud, but still the Sun was the same, and at length conquered the mists;
it is a fine Question to ask, Where was the Sun before Noon day? We will suppose
her followers to be few, yet Christ is True, though others are Liars, for he
never promised that the Members of the True Catholick-Church should be always
famous for their numbers, or that multitudes should always follow Truth, nor
ever directed Men to follow the multitude in search of Truth, which is found
otherways, not by Votes and Polling for her. Did not our Savior ask the
Question, when he should come again, whether at the Destruction of Jerusalem or
at the Judgment day, whereof the other was a Type and Prefiguration, Luke. 18.8.
whether he should find Faith on Earth or no; did not the Prophet sadly
complain in the Reigns of Jotham, Micha. 7.2.
Ahaz and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah, that the good Man is perished out of the
Land and there is none Righteous among Men; they could not then reckon up of
the Tribe of Judah twelve thousand, and yet there was True Faith, and a Church
of God; Ps. 12.1.
though little and obscure. Does not King David cry out, Help Lord for the
Godly Man cease, for the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men,
corruption in Faith and manners usually going together. 1. Kings. 19.10.
And Elijah tells a sad Story of the Children of Israel, that they had broken
their Covenant and destroyed the Altars and the Prophets and he only was left
alive, that they sought his life also, Ver. 18.
God tells him that yet for all that he had seven thousand Knees that had not
bowed to Baal; still there was a small Church not infected with Idolatry,
though obscure and unknown to Elijah. Have not some of the Romish Writers told
us, that at Christ Passion the Church was only left in the Virgin Mary, all
them forsaking Christ but the Holy Mother. The Shepherd was Smitten and the
Sheep dispersed. And they further confess that in the times of Antichrist there
shall be neither Pope, Monk, nor Mass (if this be all, that Monster is not so
Terrible as he is Painted) and their Annalists complain of such sad things as
these in the tenth Century. Rev. 12.6.11.7.
And certainly they have read of the Woman in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 3.12.
and the Witnesses Slain, and of Hay and Stubble covering the Foundation, which
describe the deplorable condition of the Christian Church, and Fopperies,
Niceties, and Inventions of Men obscuring the Essentials of the Christian
Faith. Should a revolt happen (which God divert) from the reformed Church of
England to Romanism again, might not others ask them the same Question where
was your Religion before eighty three, or eighty four, before such a time.
Would they not Answer at Rome, and in England also, only kept under and
obscured by Heretics and Tyrannical Princes. Ours was also here, locked up in
Bibles, owned by some numbers, desire'd by more, only frighted from a Visible
profession of it, by the torments that did attend it. And Christianity though
not so Visible, yet was purer when it, and its professors dwelt in Rocks and
Mountains and Dens, places of privacy and obscurity, in the Reigns of Nero and
Dioclesian, then when some Kings were its Nursing Fathers and Queens its
Nursing Mothers, and took possession of the seven Hills. And there was a True
Church of God though overlay'd and groaning under Arrianism as before
Persecution, and in Cyprians time, Cypr. Epist. p. 59. Ox. Edit. aspice totum
orbem pene vastatum, etc.
as ours once under the Popish Yoke. And the Truth of Christianity like the
Truth and Essence of other things depends not upon splendid entertainment or
Judgment of others, nor the Church upon the Visible number of its Members, but
it may be a True Church whether Visible or hid, which this Question denis.

3. This Question supposes that the Roman Church cannot err but that it
remained pure and undefiled, as it came from the Hands of Christ, through the
many Centuries of years, till it came to the times of Luther, and from thence
shall so continue till the Worlds end, and therefore we made a false charge
against them of corruptions in their Religion, to excuse our Innovation. But we
have reason to conclude She has foully erred from the Faith, and that more
fatally, and obstinately, because She pretends She cannot err. For upon what
grounds does the found her Infallibility. Upon the Scriptures? They are only so
many dead letters, till the breath of the Church does give them life, and they
are then to do the Church a good turn, and give her Infallibility, which is
such a cirle, as makes Men's brains so giddly turning round in it, that they
scarce know what the Scriptures, and what the Church do mean; the places of
Scripture to prove Infallibility are such, which have only reference to the
Apostles themselves, their Doctrines or Confessions of Faith; as Divine and
Infallible, but not to their pretended Successors. Or else they are restrained,
Mat. 16.18. John. 16.13. Mat. 28.20.
not simply unto all Truth, but only unto all Truth that is necessary to
Salvation, in which the Pope or a Council cannot err, while they follow the
Spirit of Truth in the Scriptures, and not compel the Spirit and Scriptures to
follow them. For they do not irresistibly force the minds of Christians into
Truth: Or else relate only to the Catholick-Church, Mat 18.20.
and not to the particular Roman, or else are applicable to private Assemblies
and their Worship of God, which no body, but Quakers, and Enthusiasts, think to
be Infallible. And all the first Ages of Christianity and undoubted tradition
never in the least imagined such an Infallibility as now the Church of Rome
dreams of. They are at War among themselves where this Infallibility is lodged,
either in the Pope alone, or in a General Council alone, or in both together,
the Pope Sitting in person there or by his Legates, or it the Council confirmed
by the Pope; till they agree among themselves and prove it better, we say it is
no where placed but in the Scriptures, and they do not prove any other person
or persons upon Earth to be Infallible in their determinations. To say such an
Infallible Judge of controversies to guide the Church, is absolutely necessary,
and therefore. Divine Providence has placed him some where or other, and who
but the Pope can be the Man? Is only to prescribe methods unto God, and teach
him how to Govern his Church, and not be thankful for the good old ways of
Salvation and Peace (Scriptures, an honest Judgment with Divine asistance and
humane means) he has chalkt out for us, but contrive some new ones of their
own. Such Infallibility must be of no use to the Church of God, for upon the
Romish principles, it cannot be known, for the Pope before he be Infallible
must be Bishop of Rome, but the Sacrament of Order, according to the Council of
Trent, receives it validity from the intention of the Priest, that when he
ordained him Bishop, he did what the Church intended, and who can tell upon
these grounds, what this supposed Priest was, who gave this Order, or dive into
his thoughts and intentions, which their Casuists confess may sometimes be very
perverse. But if there be this Infallibility at Rome, Archbish. Laud against
Fisher. 272.
why do not the Countries and Religious Orders in them still under their
Dominion receive the Blessed fruits of it, and still all the brawls and
squables among themselves, if his Holiness be at leisure, and it be worth his
while: And why should not the Champions of Rome bend all their Power to prove
this main point of Infallibility, when all other controversies would fall under
and submit unto its Power, a compendious way to make the Christian World at
Peace and Unity with its self. But why need we labor to disprove the Popes
Infallibility when themselves put their shoulders to it, and do the work for
us, in disputing among themselves, whether the Pope being an Heretic may be
deposed, by which Question they confess that he may fall into Heresy, which is
error of the highest Nature, carrying Wilfulness and Obstinacy with it. And
accordingly these Infallible Men have been guilty of Heresies, as Pope Honorius
of Monothelitism, and Liberius of Arrianism, and the like, and many of them
lived most debauched lives, and fatal to Christianity as Heresy, and
Fallibility, and wherein providence is highly concerned. This Doctrine of
Infallibility looks like a plain contrivance of the Romish Church, having some
way or other slipped into these gross errors from small beginnings, and finding
them not defensible by all the sleights and arts of their cunning heads, are
forced to quit their hold and betake themselves to their common Sanctuary of
Infallibility, that let these things be what they will in Dispute between us
and them, they are sure they are great Truths by Virtue of Infallibility, which
is one of the Miracles of Rome, which can change the Nature of things, Fowlis
Hist. Preface. p. 1.
which may be true in England and the quite contrary at Rome, as Father Cotton
and other Jesuits affirmed at Paris. For it is plain to all impartial
Judgments, that their Doctrine of Purgatory, Transubstantiation and the like
are not to be found in Scriptures are utterly unkown to the truly Acient
Fathers and the eldest and purest times of Christianity and contrary to the
reason of Mankind. They may as well tell us that the City of Rome was never
sacked and spoiled because some Flaterers humored her Pride and Arrogance
calling her the immortal City and impregnable Rock, Vrbs aeterna and immobile
saxum Grot. in. Apoc. c. 17.
as that these gross errors never invaded and ruined the Christian Faith,
because of the fine name of Infallibility, which they arrogate to themselves.
And may as well put out our eyes and then bid us see if we can discover any
errors in the Romish Church. And St. Peter's being at Rome proves no more that
he left Infallibility behind him, than Consecrated Clouts sent from Rome that
the Infant that wears them shall ever after be a firm defender of the Romish
Faith.

4. This Question will serve any Heresies or Errors that have got some
Antiquity on their side against a Reformation. If it be true in this case, it is
so in all others, and then what a shelter have they provided for all Heresies,
if they chance to live long, to be safe and secure in, and escape correction.
And there are many errors contemporary with Christianity it self in its first
plantation in the World, at least followed it very close at the heels, such
were the Ancient Gnostics, the Carpocratians or Ebionites, the spawn of Magus
and others, who can plead great Antiquity on their side, and as properly ask
any Reformer of their Heresies, where was his Religion before such a time, as
the inconstant World began to favor his new Faith and Innovation. And so
errors once superinduc't upon the Truth, will become by Age Truth it self, and
are never to be mended for fear of this pert Question, and charge of Innovation
on. And it is plain, that new and old are but uncertain Characters to Judge of
Truth and falsehood by, there being sometimes a new Truth that is, lately
discovered to be so, but really old, and an old error kept up a long time by
Force of Art, and Walking in the Garb of Truth, but truly new, having come in
after the Truth it vies with: Time like a River many times bringing down straw
and trash, and leaving weighter things behind, which when they come to be
retrieved are called new Fashions and Inventions. When Abraham restored the
true Worship of God, and stripped it of Idolatry and Superstition, the Chaldean
Priests, whose Power and Interest was shaken by it, Isaiah. 41.2.
were very brisk and ready to charge this Pious and Mighty Man from the East
with Novelty and Singularity in his Religion, the false service of God in these
Countries being then ancient and almost Universal, though the Patriarchs
Religion did derive it self from a very ancient stock that of Adams in
Paradise, kept up by an Enoch and a Noah in single Families when all Flesh had
corrupted their ways, and now delivered unto Abrabam, and now all the sticklers
for a false Religion began to upbraid the Sons and Followers of Abraham's Faith
with Novelty, and ask them where was your Religion before the times of Abraham;
who set up his, but yesterday, and Scorns and Uncharitably Damns all his
Forefathers, who of old lived beyond the River in our Religion. The same
Objection might have been cast in the teeth of Moses, when he was settling a
Religion delivered to him by God, in opposition to the Idolatries and false
Devotions of the World, and to serve his further designs of providence, that he
affected Novelty and Singularity, that all the World stood against him in this,
Psalm. 79.6.
and one of his Disciples afterward was Inhumane and Uncharitable in praying
God to pour out his Indignation upon the Heathen who had not known his Laws.
And his Successor Joshua might have met with the same fare, when he bids his
People choose whom they will serve, Josh. 24.15.
either the Gods beyond the Flood, and in Egypt, or the Gods of the Amorites,
Old and great Nations, who might have had this Objection in its full strength
on their side, or the God of Abraham, and stoutly tells them, let that
plausible argument weigh with them what it will, as for himself and his Family
they would serve the Lord. And as this Religion might degenerate in descending
Ages, so any restorer of it might be set upon by the same frivolous Objection,
and so it happened to our Messiah (and his forerunner who was to restore all
things) who when he began to reform the false glosses, and corrupt senses,
which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the Law of Moses, and cry down
their Traditions which made the Commands of God of none effect, was looked upon
as an Enemy to Moses, a Blasphemer of the Law, a Prophaner of the Temple, and a
Changer of all their Religion, whose design was only to fill up their Law, and
restore it to its Natural Beauty and Perfection, and before Abraham was, I am,
not only in his Divine Nature, and designation to his office, but in his
Religion also, Heb. 9.10.
which now he was going to teach the Few and Gentile too. And now the times of
a general Reformation being come, and the Apostles were Preaching this
excellent Religion unto all the World, Jew and Gentile comspire together in the
same Language, Acts. 24.14.
and call them setters forth of strange Gods and new Heresies, Acts. 28.22.
Heads and Contrivers of new Sects, and ways, and are whipped for Vagrants and
Impostors, who would cheat the World out of their old paternal Religions, that
were entailed upon them, teach them to speak ill of the Gods of their Fathers,
and Predecessors, and to think they all dyed in a false Religion, and to
embrace a newfangled Faith of a few illiterate and rambling fellows who had
turned the World upside down. And had this argument prevailed then, as much as
the Romanists do desire, if should now, we should have had no Christianity
among us, the Idol-Gods of our Ancestors in this Island, their Woodens and
Twisters would have prescribed against Christ himself.

3. To turn the Question upon them and ask them some others of the like Nature.
Men that are insolent, and ever boasting of the Antiquity of their Family, and
upbraiding others with their obscure Birth, and extraction, do many times meet
with some cross Questions about the Head and Fountain of their Families, which
many times proves only to be a Shepherd, or meaner Original, made Glorious with
arrogant Titles and borow'd Names. Searching into the pedigree of Romes
Religion, we do not find Christ or St. Peter or any of his Apostles to be the
Authors of it, but Pride, Interest, and Design, old Vices indeed but new
Fathers of a Christian Church, which brought in a late and new generation of
opinions, and additions to Christ's Religion, Clothing them with the venerable
Names of Primitive and Apostolical. Where was the Romish Religion before the
Council of Trent concluded only about the year 1563. of a later date then when
Luther first began, which Legitimated all their Innovations, the Issue of
Scholastic Wranglings, pretended Dreams, and Visions, Forced, and Unnatural.
Senses of Scripture, Ambition and Profit, the Exchequer of Rome, to be made
Sons of the Church and Fundamentals of the Christian Faith. Many of their own
Writers confess, that for 1400. or 1500. years, the Pope was not believed to be
Infallible, till of late some of their flaming Zealots have invested him with
Infallibility, whereby the Roman Church is sick unto Death, and no cure is to
be applied, because She is so certain and sure that She is well. Their lewd
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, was not made an Article of Faith, till the
Council of Lateran under Innocent the Third, above 1200 years after Christ, and
many of their own Writers are still dissatisfied about it. The Title of
Universal Bishop was obtained by Pope Boniface the Third, not till about 600
years after Christ, fearing a powerful Rival the Constantinopolitan Bishop, who
affected the same, and therefore by the Popes themselves was declaimed against,
as Proud and Antichristian, but now by Hypocrisy and base compliance with the
Wicked Phocas, who was Guilty of Treason, and Murder, against the Emperor
Mauritius, Rome gained the delicious point, and has made it a Fundamental
Article of her new Religion: Though the Popes came not up to their Swaggering
Temper and Power of Hectoring Christian Princes some hundreds of years
afterward. The Doctrine of Purgatory, which some derive from the Platonic
Fancies of Origin, the Montanism of Tertullian, pretended Visions, and Pagan
Stories, Rhetorical Flourishes and doubtful expressions of the later Fathers,
yet is was not positively affirmed till about the year 1140. and not made an
Article of Faith, till the Council of Trent, then indeed a good estate became a
surer way to Heaven, then then a good Life and Conversation. The use of
Indulgences was the Moral to the Fable of Purgatory, and began to grow much
what about the same time, though it came not to the height and perfection till
Pope Leo the Tenths time, when Luther so stoutly opposed them, then Heaven was
set to Sale, and the best Chap-Man was the greatest Saint, though they boast of
the second Council of Nice for the Antiquity of their Image Worship. (And if it
will do them any good so they may of Simon Magus, who was of an elder date, and
a very fit Patron of such an Opinion) yet the Council of Frankfurt condemned
it, and the purest times did not so much as allow the making of Images. And it
was not the Catholic Doctrine in France, for almost 900. years after Christ,
nor in Germany till after the twelfth Century, then indeed such a Doctrine might
be very proper, when true Religion was turned into Pageantry, and a form of
Godliness. The number of the seven Sacraments is now an Article of the Romish
Faith, yet the Council of Florence ended in the year 1439. was the first
Council, and Peter Lombard the first Man, that precisely fixed that number. That
the Laity ought to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper only in one kind
was never made an Article of Faith till the Council of Constance concluded in
the year 1418. then indeed that Council with the greatest insolence, and a
direct Invasion of the Authority of Christ took the Cup from the Lay Men's
mouths, notwithstanding (as 'twas then acknowledged) the Institution of Christ
to the contrary, and they may as well Christen the Laics Children only in the
name of the Holy Ghost leaving out the Father and the Son by the way of
concomitancy, it being as Lawful to Baptize as to Communicate by the halfs. For
what cannot such a pretended Power do.

The prohibiting of Priests to Marry was not in perfection, as it is now, till
Pope Gregory the Sevenths time. Let them tell us where it is said by Christ, or
his Apostles, or any of the truly Ancient Writers of the Christian Church, that
Penance is a Sacrament, or that Auricular Confession is necessary to
Salvation, or that Prayers ought to be made in an unknown Tongue, or that good
works are strictly meritorious, or where can they find they many Impieties and
Absurdities of their Mass in those early times of Antiquity. And since they are
fond of asking us this Question, we might ask them many more, about the many
Fopperies and Innovations in their Faith and Devotion, and many they are, and
large is the invntory, almost as many as are the Christian Truths in direct
opposition to them, or prevarication from them: But they seem to confess the
newness of their Religion, when they arrogantly set up a Power in their Church,
to frame new Articles of Faith, and many things, only Opinions and Notions at
first, have grown up by degrees to Fundamental Truths, and having once slipped
into error, they are bound to maintain it, for the Reputation and Authority of
of Holy Church. And who knows how many of this Nature are upon the Romish
forge, ready to be put into their Creed, and where must we end; not till it be
believed, that consecrated Feathers and Holy Water, can conveigh Divine Grace
to us, and drive away Wicked Spirits, and the Weathercocks of our Churches be
thought Pillars of it. Would the Champions of Rome speak out, they would tell
us, as their Eckius did the Duke of Bavaria, that the Doctrine of Luther might
be overthrown by the Fathers, though not by the Scriptures; it is a plain
confession that we have the truest Antiquity on our side, and in the beginning
it was not so. But we add, that we have the Fathers also on our side, for
otherwise what mean their Expurgatorian indices of the Fathers, and other
Ancient Writers, but that they very well know, that these are old Enemies to
Pope Pius's new Creed, and the Truth in them confounds their error. Such an
account as this, about the Original and Progress of their new additions to the
old Faith was convenient to be given, not because the Nature of the thing did
necessarily require it, for it had been sufficient only to have proved, that
these Romish additions to the Christian Faith, are contrary to the Word of God,
and no where to be found in any of the Divine Writings, the only Infallible
Rule of Faith, and that they have no power of minting new Articles Fundamental
to Salvation; but because the Disciples of Rome so frequently ask us the
Question, and lay so much stress upon it, Beliar Tom. 2. p. 286.
if these are Innovations crept into their Church, who was the first Author of
them, when did he begin, in whose Reign and in what place did he live, who did
oppose him, what company believed on him, and what his new Opinions were, as
they instance in Arianism and other Heresies, and because they Fancy, we cannot
make all these particulars so absolutely plain, therefore they say we have
falsely charged the Romish Church with new errors, and that their Faith is truly
Ancient and by an uninterrupted Succession of Infallible Bishops has been
conveyed down from Christ and his Apostles in its full purity to this present
Age. To satisfy their curiosity, the defenders of the reformation have done
this, but suppose they could not have been so particular, about the birth of
these new errors, or had made some mistakes in the compass of time, yet however
the charge of Innovation against the Romish Church stands firm and good upon
these accounts.

1. That Reformation carries not so much a respect to the error, when it began,
as to the error it self. Not whether it be sooner, or later, but whether it be
an error, contrary to the True Christian Faith. It may serve some honest
purposes, to know, the who, and the when, the where, and the how, and other
circumstances of its beginning, and proceeding, but the necessity of
Reformation springs from the Nature of the error, which came from the Invention
of Men, and not the Authority of Christ. And matters not much, whether Simon
Magus, who was contemporary with the Apostles, was the first Author of it, or
Pope Hildebrand at so great a distance. It Is enough, that we are certain, and
sure, that the Popish Doctrins, which we condemn, by comparing them with the
Scriptures, are not Christ and his Apostles, have none of their Images or
Superscriptions upon them, who only had full Authority to make them current,
and True Articles of Faith. They have indeed Christianity among them, but like
Joseph's Coat, so dipped in Blood, so over-lac't with Fopperies, and undecent
Ceremonies, and so many new pieces stitcht to the old Cloth, that the old
Fathers, if alive, would scarce know it to be the True Joseph's, and would not
trouble themselves so much, to ask the time, when this came to pass, as lament
the sadness of the change. And the Apostles did not take so much care to tell
the punctual time to the Disciples, when Antichrist should discover himself, as
to make them stand upon their guard to defend that Faith, which he would
invade, where and whenever he should come, or whosoever he was.

2. The difficulty of knowing the precise, and punctual times when errors first
began. In many sorts of changes or Innovations, it is hard to know the nice time
of their beginning, but some latitude of Judging is allowed, and why not in
things especially relating to Religion. Are there not wild Opinions left upon
Record among the Pagan Writers, whose Authors are either unknown, or which are
falsely Fathered upon others, and as hard to be known as the head of Nile. Can
the nicest Romanist tell us, what Rabbi; and in what Place and Age, first
superinduc't the several false glosses and senses to the Law of Moses, yet our
Savior (though he knew them well) thought it sufficient to tell them, that in
the beginning it was not so, and by comparing the Mosaic Religion, it plainly
appears they were new additions to the good old way. And how many errors sprung
up in the times of Christianity, of whose original and other circumstances both
the Romanists and our selves are yet uncertain. And how many things of this
Nature more near our own times, are we puzzled about, and the difficulty of
knowing them arises principally from this twofold account.

1. From the subtilty of the contrivers of errors: Which many times are the
cunning, and the Wise in their Generation, which the necessity of their cause
requires; Truth being strong, and error naturally weak, and that Sly Deceiving
Spirit lends it his utmost assistance to serve the design. Such Men know how to
disguise new falsehoods, in the old habits of Truth, to make them look Ancient,
and Venerable, they feel, and know the temper of the Age, and fit their
Opinions to the Interest and Pleasure of it. They prepare their errors to be
received by degrees, and one part must draw on the other, and the whole must be
insensibly swallowed down. So it happened in the Adoration and Invocation of
Saints and Images, and the whole Structure of the Romish Religion, which by
several steps and in many Ages advanced to its mighty bulk. The cunning knew
the consequences of their own positions, how far they would reach, which the
Vulgar eye discerned not; they well foresaw how their Hey and Stubble, variety
of Phrases, and changes of Syllables, would at length fire the, Foundation of
Religion, yet being invented at first by the Angelical Doctors, and leaders of
an Age, for fame and reputation sake, they and their followers first defended
them for bare Truths, afterward for Sacred and Fundamental ones; and things at
first only Piously believed, soon after have been adopted into a Creed. And Men
of rashness and Superstition only great in Place and Office, have vented
opinions whose fatal conclusions they at first, we hope, did not know, yet the
Cunning many times have hatched what they left, and improved in fatally to
Religion; the greatness of the Man whether an Innocent or an Hildebrand gave
the error its first reputation, and the cunning of others its Strength and
Argument. Many of the great and knowing heads of the World being corrupted unto
the Roman side, to defend those errors, which had got footing in the Church.
But how can we unlock the secret methods of Rome, or describe the ways and
Policies by which the Mystery of Iniquity works? Yet we are sure it is carried
on, by the windings and turnings of the Serpent, and Men that he imploys upon
design to ruin truth, for when the Apostle describes the sad Apostacies and
Defections from the Faith, Ephesians. 4.14.
they are said to be wrought by Men of Skill and Art who lie in wait to deceive.

2. From the Passions and Infirmities of other Men. These give the false and
busy deceiver and easy Victory. When Opinions are so contrived as to serve the
designs of Pride, and Covetousness, Ambition and Lust, and other Vices, they
easily pass for mighty Truths, their Original is not inquired into, the
Judgment is brid'd, and they bear the Title of Ancient and Primitive, or what
the Deceiver pleases: For these Passions, have effeminated the mind, made it
soft and sluggish, and any bold error shall slip down, rather than be at the
charge of a further search and enquiry to know whether these things be so or
no. The Roman Religion being so well cut out in its different Doctrines, to hit
Men's Vices and Passions, Gayety or Melancholy, Enthusiasm or Fury, Power or
Design, it is no wonder, it did prevail in a sly and silent manner, interest
having put out their Eyes, this Kingdom came not with observation, and the
approaches of the Enemy in the Night of Ignorance, viz. the darkness that could
be felt of the ninth, tenth, and eleventh, Century, when all good Learning and
Manners too were fast asleep, the time when many of the new Devices of Rome
were hammering out, and the noise not heard, were not discovered, till they had
taken Possession, and then by virtue of Power and great Names defended their
title. And their own Writers confess, that many of the great Guardians of
Faith, the Popes of Rome, were very Vicious and Illiterate Persons, whose Vice
and Ignorance kept them nodding, while the little Thieves, the Notions, and
Speculations of Men of Wit and Interest set open the Churches doors for the
greater errors to come crowding in. Our Savior confirms the Truth of this when
he compares his Church to a Field, Mat. 13.24, 25.
which had been sown by him, and his Apostles, with very good seed, Wheat or
some other Grain, but while Men slept, when Christians were grown Wicked and
Careless, Ignorant or Factious comes the Enemy, and scatters the Tares, and a
new Harvest of Weeds, Heretical Doctrines, Superstitious Practices, Foppish and
Fantastic rites overran and choakt the purer Grain. And the Apostle tells
his Disciples that Men of dangerous principles abusing the Grace of God, Jude.
4.
speaking Evil of Dignities and despising Dominions, and denying Christ that
bought them, had crept in unaawares, being well disguised with Fine Names and
Pretenses, while good Men were careless and sleepy. And when most begin to
broach new Errors, and spread their Inventions for mighty Truths, they do it
with all the skill and artifice that so bad a design can possibly require.
Error and Innovation necessarily calling for the utmost Cunning, and Slyness to
its aid and assistance. Religion therefore may easily suffer a considerable
change, yet good Men know not how, neither the time nor Authors of it.

It being therefore only absolutely necessary for us to know, that whenever
and howsoever, these errors in the Church first sprung up, that they were
contrary to the Primitive Faith of Christ and his Apostles, and therefore were
to be amended and weeded up notwithstanding the common question where was our
Harvest of Wheat, before the Weeders, our Reformers came, for the Church of
England finding old Christianity strangely overgrown with the new Doctrines
and Creeds of Rome, contrary to the Offices of Christ, the design of his
undertaking for Mankind, and the True Spirit of his Religion, it became a Duty,
as much as they loved their Souls, and would be True and Loyal unto Christ, to
shake off these New and Sinful Impositions, and restore True and Primitive
Christianity. Had our differences with Rome consisted only in things, less fit,
and proper, used by them in their Religious offices, or in Rituals or Gestures
not so decent, they might have had some pretense to roar against us, for
breaking off Communion with her, but when they Plow up the very Foundation, as
one of her Pagan Captains did the Walls of Jerusalems Temple, and lay all waste
before them, their new additions Eating out the very Heart of old Religion, to
thunder out Damnation against us, because we renounce her Communion in this, is
to add Uncharitableness and other gross Vices to their former Sin, as though
they could not preserve Christianity, but by defacing of it more. Our Prince
being constituted by God a Nursing Father of the Church, and our Bishops in
their Episcopal Power being coordinate with him of Rome, or any other in the
Christian World, ought under the penalty of Damnation, and did accordingly,
Reform the Romish Corruptions, which had tainted the Vitals of Christianity an
indispensable Duty it was to preserve the Primitive Faith, 2 Cor. 11.2.
like a chaste Virgin, and not suffer it to be longer prostituted to the Designs
and Passions of Men by a Solemn Vow; and our Souls were at stake, we had
engaged to preserve it pure and undefiled, and therefore with all just and
proper ways and methods, we were bound earnestly to contend for it. In Duty
therefore to our Lord and Masters Command, at such a time we began our
reformation, but wish that it had been promoted and completed many years
before, though the same Question would have been as fitly asked then, or any
other time, except they think that errors must be immortal, and the Gates of
Heaven shall not prevail against them. The Goodness and Wisdom of our
Reformation, would be readily acknowledged and imitated, did not Fame and
Ambition, Power and Secular Interest, infect the Eye, and change the Natural
shape and color of things and it is a sign the cause of Rome wants strength,
when such a trifling, only popular, Objection against our Reformation is made
so powerful to preserve their Disciples in their Communion, and amuse our own.
And we need say no more against it, but this, and it is no Roman
Uncharitableness and rigor. That if Rome notwithstanding all the clear evidence
against her new and upstart opinions, shall obstinately defend them, and
contemn a Wise and Pious Reformation, let her suffer the just punishment of her
wilful errors. He that will prefer an Old Disease, before a New Cure, let him
be for ever Sick. For we have Healed Babylon and She was not Healed.

FINIS.

