A THEORETICAL AND Chiefly Practical TREATISE OF FEVORS,

Wherein it is made Evident, that the Modern Practice of curing continual Fevors
is dangerous and very unsuccessful.

Hereunto are added several Important Observations and Cures of Malignant
Fevors, not inserted in the former Impression.

Written in Latin by Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Now rendered into English by I. T. and Surveyed by the Author.

LONDON, Printed for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1674.

TO THE Physical Reader.
I Have long since observed, that Physicians did not cure continual Fevors, but
rather did render them mortal: Though, if by good fortune any one has been
delivered of a Fevor, it is only to be imputed to the strength of nature, which
if she had not been disturbed by improper means, would have disintangled her
self from the disease much sooner, and with less danger.

The cause of this so unfortunate practice depends on a false supposition of
fermentation, whence since they desume erroneous indications, the success must
necessarily frustrate their expectation. I confess I have made use of the term
of fermentation in several Treatises, and possibly in the illustration of
Fevors, but to this intent only, that I might in some manner be complaisant to
the received opinion of the times, not in the least imagining the notion
thereof necessary, or contributing any whit to the knowledge or cure of Fevors.
Moreover the Reader is to take notice, that at present I have not written or
acted the part of a Professor in the Chair, making a Methodical and Pedantick
Lecture on the definition, division, next the causes, then the Diagnostick, and
afterward the Prognostic signs of Fevors, etc. But it is my purpose, to
discourse succinctly of such things, as are most necessary for a Practical
Physician, and of such other cases, as I could call to mind, since the time,
when I had seldom less in cure than two hundred Patients that lay sick of
Fevors.

What concerns other theoretical notions, and farther observations touching the
several kinds of Fevors, I shall hereafter propose them in distinct Sections;
in the mean time, farewell.

Hatton Street near Holborn.
THE BOOK SELLER TO THE READER.
TAking my measures from the reception of the Latin Copies, I judged I should
do the public service in causing this Treatise to be faithfully translated;
and that it might be attended with a greater welcome, I have obtained the favor
from the Author to make a superficial survey of the Translation, and to insert
the addition of very remarkable and important observations and cures, which
have rendered the Treatise at least a fourth part bigger than it was before; in
having procured this, I doubt not but that you will easily believe I am,

your Friend and Servant, W. T.

A Theoretical and Practical TREATISE OF FEVORS.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Innate Heat.
IT is usual among Authors, to derive the name, they intend to impose upon the
distempers of parts, from the chiefest symptom; whence the word Febris, (or
Fevor) being taken from fervor, i. e. heat, or from februa, a sort of fiery
sacrifices of the Ancients, or from the verb februo, i. e. I cleanse, likewise
(...) in Greek a Fevor, from (...) a fire, seem to be applied to this
distemper. The word Fevor in English is certainly derived from fervor, heat,
only leaving out the r, and therefore ought to be written Fevor, and not Fever,
unless you derive it from the French word, fievre, by omitting the i.

Wherefore what this fervor or heat, or (...) fire signify, will best appear
by conferring with them the words Calor warmth, and Calidum heat, being their
opposits: from warmth Calor, and heat Calidum we have our strength and live,
but through Fervor a destructive heat and fire, we lose our strength and end
our days.

It will much conduce to our purpose I judge, to premise the difference of
these words. Calidum heat denotes a hot essence or substance, but Calor warmth
signifies only a quality separable from its subject or hot nature by our
thoughts or concept, and not really, though (...) calidum or heat, and (...)
Calor warmth, are by Hippocrates used in the same sense. Neither are you to
imagine, that in feeling of Pulses of such as are ill of a Fevor, it is not the
quality of heat, but fiery steems, bodies* really physical, do strike your hand
and ends of your fingers. (...) fire is by Hippocrates expounded the Innate
Heat of man, but among the Latins generally a Fevor; whence a Fevor may be
commodiously defined, A fire kindled out of the Innate heat of the body,
chiefly of the heart, ( but secundarily:) Wherefore that the heart and its
constitutive principle, is the part, for the most times hurt, is evident, from
the fevorish affection, and life (the proper action of the heart,) being
immediately oppressed, from the inordinate pulse, a sudden decay of strength, and
the actions of the whole economy being very considerably, and all at once
depravated, and diminisht. The experience of those, that have put their finger
into the ventricles of the heart (the breast being suddenly opened) of
malefactors, who by sentence have had their head cut off, and have extracted it
again thence very hot, does confirm, that the Calidum, or heat of the heart, is
a substance really burning about its chambers, and thence diffusing flames,
through the articles, to the circumference. If on the other side, the
destructive nature of a burning heat be objected, it is not material,
considering the burning, or flaming of brimstone, or spirit of wine, whose
purity of flame will not burn those bodies it touches, especially when through
graduation of the air, it may be moderated to any tone of heat or warmth.

Furthermore, I state the Calidum Cordis; or heat of the heart, to be a Bitumen
really ethereal and vital, most exactly defecated or refined, dispersing every
where its most subtle and pure flames, and feeding on the most pure and
flowring particles of the blood. But since it is difficult, to gain an universal
assent, that the nature of blood, excercising so slender a commerce with the
air, and limited within the narrow bounds of the heart and arteries, should be
convertible into a flame, and a perpetual warmth, it may be rendered obvious by
this only instance; Namely; almost all subterraneous waters; that partake of a
continual heat, as the water of Aix la Chapelle, Bathe, and of other hot Baths,
since they source out of the deepest and most remote bosoms of the earth, just
in the same manner does the indesatigable soring of vegetative, or living
blood, leap very hot out of the bosom of the heart into the arteries, like
rivulets; and certainly, that which by natural Philosophers is asserted to be
the cause of heat in those waters, may easily be imposed upon me, to believe
the same, to be the cause of heat in the blood, namely a Bitumen, but not
Sulphur, being immediately extinguished by water; nor calx viva or lime, there
being no such fury of heat discoverable in the caverns of the earth, as is
requisite for its generation.

Wherefore in Bitumen only may be found a heat that is constant, and scarce to
be extinguished; for by water it is apt to be kindled into a higher flame, and to
be nourisht by oil, and oily bodies.

It is then in the heart where nature has placed an abounding fountain of
vital Bitumen, on the purity and continuity of whose flame, lise it self does
depend. Neither must it be asserted, that so great a proportion of this does
flow from the heart, as to suffice to protract the life of it, and of the whole
structure, for so many years, but that it does daily attract a bituminous
nutriment from the streaming blood, which being kindled into vital flames, is
by means of the pulse distributed into the rest of the small channels of the
body. It must also be observed, that all what we eat, or drink, the chyle and
the blood do contain a certain proportion of Bitumen, and as much hereof, as
there is abounding in them, so much they are capable of being serviceable to
the heart.

At present must be explained, what, and of what quality this Bitumen is;
namely a body grown out of a sulphurous oil and a Colophony, into a thick,
liquable, and inflamable substance. Such by distillation it is also discovered
to be in the analytick parts of the blood of a living creature; to wit, an oil
swimming a top the phlegm, and a colophony with a part of fixed salt, settled in
the body of the glass-gourd, withal a volatile salt passing the Alembick with
the oil; which later, namely the volatile salt, it is, that adds to the whole
mixed body all its strength and power; not unlike Gunpowder, whose Nitro-salin
particles being rendered volatile, through virtue of the fire, do assume so great
a force, that they strike any object whatsoever, with the greatest alteration
and the smartest blow imaginable, when in the mean while the brimstone, and the
charcoal-dust, only supply the place of a soporous matter. From what has been
said, the manner of the pulses may commodiously be extracted; only conceiving,
that the Bitumen of the heart, burning until the period of life, and poured
from the ascending vena cava into the left ventricle, does kindle the blood
into a flame, by virtue whereof the nitro-salin salt being blown into most
volatile forcible particles, is like Lightning, or Gunpowder discharged out of
a Gun, propelled as it were by an elastick force into the Great and other
Arteries.

CHAP. II. Concerning the differences of Pulses and their causes.
TO describe the difference and variety of the Waters of the Sea, would prove a
task less difficult, than that of the pulsations of the Heart and Arteries,
which are subject to be altered by every passion, wind, and disease; though
Galen indeed counted them, as if he had blown them out at his fingers ends,
among which notwithstanding scarce every third difference can be distinguished
by the feeling of a Spider. Wherefore I shall only discourse of such, which
every one may almost discern in Fevors.

In the Pulse I use to mind, first, the strength or force, next the swiftness
of motion, and thirdly the equality. From the strength a pulse is called strong
or weak; hereunto are accounted a great pulse (to wit, full and strong) and
small, namely empty and weak: the causes of the strength of the pulse I state
to be the abundance of volatile salt, being vigorously and smartly discharged
through the pulse of the blood, and the strength of the fibers being well
nourisht with the moisture of the brain. On the contrary, the defect of salt,
and emptiness of the fibers cause a weak pulse. Here it is worthy of your
observance, that the pulse in some sevorish Patients is found much stronger,
than it was in their state of health: and, what is more, in some, who were
reduced to so low an ebb of strength, that they were scarce able to keep death
a day from their door, I remember, their pulse would beat the tops of ones
fingers smartly, which notwithstanding in my opinion, ought not to be called a
strong pulse, but violent; for the vital faculty being irritated, by a
corroding and reverberated kind of salt, is forced into those violent
pulsations; whence falling at last into a very in all and most quick pulse, is
immediately attended with an Asphyxia, or ceasing of pulsation. It is an easy
business, to distinguish a violent pulse from a strong; the former does come
full to the fingers, the later empty. Secondly, I have often met with a weak
pulse in such as lay sick of Fevors, that they seemed not to be able to hold
out two days, which notwithstanding have for a fortnight, or twenty days,
strove very successfully with the disease. This pulse proceeds from a thick and
moist blood, which by a continuated rarefaction, and reiterated circulation,
being advanced to a higher degree of concoction, does revive the vital faculty,
whilst in the mean time, there has been sustained no great loss of volatile
salt in those weak pulsations. I have many times taken notice of this case in
women, that lay sick of Fevors; wherefore it is warily pronounced by
Hippocrates, Aphor. 19. lib. 2. (...), i. e. The predictions of life and death
in acute Fevors are not always certain and without doubt.

That we may avoid being mistaken, we are to distinguish; a pulse that is really
weak, is empty and small, and for the most part inequal in motion and weakness,
neither did it differ much from that degree since the beginning.

Under the motion of pulsation, I take a slow and swift pulse, likewise a thick
and rare pulse. A slow pulse is known by moving slowly from the systole, or a
contraction of the pulse, to the diastole, or a widening or dilatation of the
pulse; and again from the diastole to the systole. A quick pulse is known by
its quick pace from the systole to the diastole, and so reciprocally. A thick
pulse to me is, which is perceived by the finger by its frequent beatings, or
retreats; a rare pulse contrariwise. Here may be noted, in my apprehension a
pulse can scarce be discovered slow and thick at once, when a slow pulse
necessarily does not return frequently or thick, because it is slow; but
according to the common maxim, a thick and slow pulse may happen together,
because it is called thick, in respect of the interval or rest between the
systole and diastole, namely, which returns in a short space of time; but a
pulse may move slow from the systole to the diastole, so that there is but a
small interval between, before it returns from the diastole to the systole, and
thence it is termed thick.

But taking the matter into farther consideration, there is scarce any such
pulse, as a thick or frequent one, according as it is commonly described;
neither is there a rare pulse, because there is no interval of rest between
pulsation; for conceiving, that the pulse is like a reciprocal swelling and
falling, like the tide of the sea, there can only be inferred a point of
reflection, namely, as soon as it swells up, the next moment it falls again,
and as soon as it is fallen, the next minute of time it swells again. Moreover,
this rising or swelling is attended with an impulse from the heart, by means of
the constriction of its fibers, whereby like waves, besides the forementioned
swelling or turgescency, the blood is propelled through the pores of the body,
out of the arteries into the veins. Wherefore that I might not beyond necessity
burden my self in my practice with notions, I scarce am used to take notice of
any thing else, in the motion of the pulse, besides its swiftness and slowness,
neither do I stand much whether it be hard, or hot, or pricking, since this
rather relates to the altered qualities, than the pulse. Thirdly, It is to be
observed that those, whose pulse being naturally full, strikes quick, their
vital faculty is very weakly; wherefore in women and children the arteries
strike quick, but full. Fourthly, In malignant Fevors the arteries do often move
slowly, in such a manner, that one might judge them free from all putrid heat;
but this does not happen, unless death be ready to follow within a day, two or
three.

The natural swiftness of pulsation (not in sick people) must be imputed,
partly to the abundance of volatile salt, but such as is not close and compact;
for as soon as it arrives to the ventricles of the heart, it is apt to be flusht
into too volatile particles, and soon after, the salt being so copious, follows
immediately from the other parts of the salt, whence another pulse is ready at
hand; partly it is to be imputed to a Bitumen, that is easily inflamed, which
quickly kindles and is kindled, whence happens the frequency of the pulse.

By the way, a small question might here be moved, whether the pulse beating
quick in Fevors, there passes more blood through the heart, than when one is
in a state of health? First, It must be agreed upon, whether in every
dilatation the heart is filled full of blood, and in every constriction it be
quite emptied; some defend the affirmative part, which to me does not at all
seem plain; for those, whose pulse at one time beats full, and at another
empty, it must necessarily be argued, that at one time the pails of the heart
must be swelled up with a greater quantity of blood, and at another with a
lesser; and from the consequents it is evident, that reciprocally in diverse
pulses, there must be expelled a various proportion of humors. Secondly, Since
it may be observed, that a large diastole of the heart is sometimes the next
moment followed by a short and weak systole, as appears out of the swelled
diastole of the arteries of the wrist, or any other part, there often following a
short and weak systole, whence it is deemed, there is more received into the
receptacle of the heart, and less expelled, so that often a proportion that is
admitted by one diastole, is expelled in three or four systoles.

To answer to the question, we assert, that the blood is not circulated nothing
near so rapidly or quick in malignant Fevors, as it is in the state of health,
because the pulsifick faculty of the heart is languishing; neither is the
systole of the arteries or heart made with so much force; but in putrid Fevors,
the systole and diastole being violent, the blood is transfused somewhat
swifter, than in a healthful state. Here is to be observed by the way, if a
swift pulse be perceived to go slower a day before, and the day after to grow
swifter, a malignity is to be suspected.

The third particular worthy of observation is, the equality or inequality of
the pulse, in reference both to motion and strength. Wherefore in respect
hereof a pulse is said to be equal, or inequal in motion, to wit, swiftness and
slowness; and in strength, namely fortitude and weakness. The equality which
Authors are wont to apply to a thick and rare pulse, likewise to the tone or
musical rithme, we pass by, being rather apt to occasion confusion to the
practicing Physician. To unequal in motion are accounted the dicrotus or
anvile-pulse, caprisant or goat-pulse, intercedent, and some others.

A strong pulsifick faculty, and not depraved, likewise a temperate mixture of
the blood being well depurated from heterogeneous particles, are both some
causes of an equal pulsation. On the contrary, blood that is unequally mixed with
the vital Bitumen, and several sorts of salts, occasions an unequal pulse, both
in respect of motion and strength. As for other differences, proceeding from
the force of passion and other procatarctick causes, we refer to another place.

CHAP. III. Of what is generally to be observed in Urins.
SInce the Urine for a more certain presage must give place to the pulse, we
have thought fit to discourse of this after the other.

Through the abuse of pispot-gazers, and some Physicians, that imprudently
pretend to tell wonders, the doctrine of Urines among some is fallen into
disgrace; nevertheless since it makes an ample discovery of the diagnosticks
and prognostics of diseases, it ought not to be dismembered from the art of
Physic. First, we shall set down, what Urine is, afterward what particulars
are to be observed in it. To me the Urine seems, to be a liquor melted from the
volatile and fixed salts, likewise of some excrementitious phlegm, dissolved in
the serum or water of the blood, which being thoroughly filled and impregnated
with the foresaid contents, through its weight tending downwards, is posted to
the kidneys, thence as if it were distilled by descent, it falls down by drops
toward the bladder. But that the nature of urine may be made more plain to
you, some particulars are to be taken from the constitution of the blood, and
proposed here. Those volatile salts I conceive to be the principal efficient of
concocting the blood, adding to it a scarlet tincture, sweetness, homogeneity,
and fluidity, in which shape the blood arriving to the pores of the parts, that
are to be nourisht, does desert the salts, which return with the superfluous
blood to the veins and lymphatick channels, that afterward disburden themselves
into the emulgents. That those salts do not only illustrate the blood with a
tincture, but likewise the urine, shall be demonstrated by sight. You shall
find, that spirit of sal armoniack scarce differing from spirit of Urine, or
spirit of Hartshorn, or spirit of Soot, a drop or two being dropped into whitish,
drabbish and undigested urine, shall immediately concoct it into a golden or
vitrinous color, and an excellent consistency. But if you effuse an acid
spirit, that is forced out of a fixed salt, you shall see it turn more drabby,
more crude, and of a heavier weight. In the same manner, if you pour some drops
of those forementioned volatile liquors into a small quantity of blood, though
crude and phlegmatic, you will digest it into laudable blood and preserve it
warm and slorid; but upon dropping some oil of Vitriol into it, it turns
immediately into a curd, the serum or whey is depressed downwards, and assumes
a purple red color. Spirit of Nitre does pervert the redness into a whitish or
ash color, but does not precipitate the whey, suffering it to swim a top. Upon
the further pursuit of the matter, I dropped a drop into a large proportion of
blood almost coagulated, whereby almost in a moment the tie of the coagulative
particles was dissolved, and endued with a shining luster, not at all inferior
to the best digested blood. Neither does it only from this external use deserve
to be termed so admirable, but that in a short time, being used inwardly, as I
have often made trial, it has singularly digested the crude blood of
Asthmaticks, Scorbuticks and of worfer habits. A consistency between thick and
thin, signifies a vigor of concoction, chiefly to be ascribed to the volatile
salt, living in the vital Bitumen: The causes of the thinness or tenuity of
urine in those, that are sick of a Fevor, are the scarcity of volatile and sixth
salts, not being separated from the torrent floating through the great vessels,
also the drying away of the mucilage of the blood, through the heat, or its
dissipation through the pores. The thickness of urine is occasioned by the whey
or serum, imbibing too great a quantity of salt, and thick mucilage. Touching
the matter of the hypostasis, or settlement of the urine, there has hitherto
but little certainly been stated among Authors, though most are of opinion, it
proceeds from the superfluous humor of the third concoction. To me the
sediment appears to be a mucilage, partly imbibed by the serum, or whey within
the vessels, partly deterged from the slimy substance of the intern tunick of
the ureters and bladder, wherewith they are liquored, to prevent their most
exquisite sense be not hurt by the urine, that flows by. This mucilage if you
examine the Chamber Pot, shall be found to be a glutinous, thick and slippery
slime; moreover, that it is dissolvable by heat, and apt to be thickened by cold
like phlegm, may be observed in turbid urines, which as long as they continue
warm, after they are made, are clear and perspicuous, but a little after
growing cold, are turned into turbid and dark, being deprived of the energy of
the particles of hot volatile salts, that dissolved the slime; for if you do but
hold the urinal a moment to the heat of the fire, or hold it in warm water,
they will resume their former shape of clearness. Bubbles that often swim a top
the surface, I judge ought not to be imputed to a slatuous, but lixivious
constitution of urine; for ashes, soap and other lixivious things, being
dissolved in water, render it subject to turn frothy and bubbly with the least
stirring.

The color, consistency, and contents are chief universals, whence a Physician
may extract, what preternaturals lie hidden in the body. The color discovers
the active qualities of the salts, the consistency the state of the serum or
whey, and the contents the quantity of the foresaid salts and other excrements,
that had performed their office; a further and particular explication of all
these, relating to the kinds of Fevors, shall be reserved to the sequel of the
book. Lastly, it is to be noted, that in the contents are included the
enaeorema and hypostasis.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the true and Spurious Essence of a Fevor.
IN the first Chapter we had hinted at the definition of a Fevor; what concerns
its explication, we have partly referred hither. That a Fevor is a derivative
from the nature of fire, is abundantly suggested from its destructive manner of
acting, most fierce heat, the tongue and roof of the mouth being crusted with a
black smoke, likewise from other symptoms thence proceeding, as thirst, dryness
and roughness of the skin, and inflammation of several parts. Here the Reader
is to assume, that the vital Bitumen of the heart and the whole body, being
kindled into a fire, is the disease or Fevor, or rather that the fiery
distemper of the heart and the whole body or part, is the disease; but not the
preternatural heat, being that is rather to be counted a symptom, immediately
flowing from the disease, in no wise differing from the manner the heat
emanates from the fire. Wherefore the definition, which is extant among
Academick Authors, as Fernelius, Sennertus, and others, ought justly to be
rejected. To wit, A Fevor is a heat against nature, kindled in the heart, and
from thence by means of the spirits and blood, diffused throughout the whole
body, and doing hurt to all the natural actions.

The objections against this definition I offer you in these positions. First,
I assert, that the essence of a Fevor does in no wise consist in an universal
heat; nor secondly, that the heat, which attends a Fevor, does not altogether
arise from sparks glittering in the heart. The argument that confirms the
former, is taken from the genus of a Fevor, which is stated a disease; but a
disease is said to be the constitution of a part hurt or injured, which kind of
saying does not at all agree with a preternatural heat, that depends on the
burning fixed Bitumen of a part; or often on miasms or steems, blown from the
heart (the receptacle of the fire) to all or most parts of the body; but those
torrid miasms are not to be taken for the disease, but causes, that in process
of time, through their heat, may occasion a disease. Here may be offered a
probable objection, that a Fevor is the kindling or heat of the influent
spirits of each single or more parts, whose hurt is to be imputed immediately
to the heat of the spirits, whence a Fevor may justly be judged a heat.
Hereunto must be replied, that the name of a part of the body can in no wise be
given to the spirits, because they flow continually, neither are they in any
manner permanent, but are assigned for the animation and nutrition of the
parts, and for that reason their distemper ought not to be taken for a disease;
if notwithstanding the subversion of the temperament of a part should flow from
a tumult of the influent spirits, and that thence they should be incapable of
performing their offices, nevertheless because it is a mediate affection, and to
be derived from the burning of the spirits, it is not to be taken for a disease,
but a cause. Secondly, If from the general opinion you have a mind to instance,
that the putrid heat of all the parts of the body is a Fevor, to wit a
continual putrid one, supposing likewise, that the said heat is risen out of
the blood only, being through its means conveyed to the sanguin parts; I
answer, it ought not be inferred a disease (since the blood also, because it is
a fluent matter, cannot justly deserve the name of a part) but a cause of a
disease* or the vehicle of it. Thirdly, The bones, cartilages, and ligaments,
are not sensible of heat, neither are they subject to receive any putrid heat,
because in a Fevor they are seldom or never observed to be taken with a
putrefaction or rottenness; how can then a Fevor be termed a preternatural heat
of all the parts? Likewise, Fourthly, Why ought the name of Fevor to be
attributed to a fevorish heat more than to a shaking, or fevorish coldness in
the beginning of a paroxysm of a Fevor, both the former and the later flowing
equally as symptoms from a Fevor? Fifthly, An universal heat is erroneously
ascribed to a Fevor, for in a lipyrious Fevor, a torrid heat does torment the
internal parts, though the externals are cold; moreover it often happens, that
the hands and feet are stiff of cold, and the entrails do in a manner glow with
a burning heat. Furthermore, it may be observed, that a Fevor does sometimes
only haunt one single part, as the foot or hand. Neither have I forgotten a
certain Fevor, whose heat extended no further than the head and face. Hereunto
add, that those particular Fevors are not only inferred, to be such, because of
the preternatural heat, but also by reason of the preceding cold, shaking and
ulcerous lassitude. Sixthly, those that swell so much with the Doctrine of
Fermentation, they do not altogether affirm, that it is a preternatural heat
that constitutes a Fevor, since the forementioned heat does take its rise from
a heap of influent spirits, striving to expel humors and such small bodies as
are annoying; which heat ought therefore rather to be judged natural, than
against nature.

In the second position we maintain, that the heat, that attends a Fevor, is
not always kindled in the heart, as if the primar hearth were there, which
assertion is proved from the kinds of symptomatick Fevors; for the Fevor that
surprises a wounded patient, or one that is detained with an inflammation of an
entrail, as the Spleen, Liver or Kidney, certainly it is not first kindled in
the heart, but in the part affected, whence afterward it is dispersed
throughout the whole structure. Secondly, If the heart were the only brand of
fevorish heat, the blood that passes through its ventricles should retain a
mark of being burnt, and undergo some change of tincture; when on the contrary,
thousands that have been bleeded in Fevors, their blood that was extracted has
appeared to the eye to be of a pure scarlet and florid, until the fourth, and
often until the sixth and eighth day.

In the next paragraph I have thought fit, to please my self with the
examination of the vulgar opinion, concerning the common seat of continual
putrid Fevors, intimating it to be the blood seething in the vessels, and
stained with putrefaction: but how grossly this rabble of Physicians is
mistaken, may be extracted from what shall be proposed: First, If the sprout of
a continual Fevor were ingraffed on the blood, it would not be so refractory to
cure, but consisting of fluid, and moveable elements, by means of alteratives,
purgers, diaphoreticks, and emptying the vessels by opening a vein, might in a
short time be reduced to its former purity and temperament: moreover, through
one nights seething of the blood, nature does often expel those thin little
bodies, that float in it, and the grosser it casts forth into pustules, botches
and other such tumors. Secondly, I cannot grant, that what is stirred by
motion, and continual flowing as the blood is, that it is easily taken with
putrefaction; for being full of vital spirits, and living heat, it is held in a
continual motion. Thirdly, Until the third, fourth, sixth, eighth or tenth day,
computing from the beginning of the distemper, according to the degree of the
height of the Fevor, the blood at the first phlebotomy is extracted pure and
florid, as I have observed in hundreds; whence it is evident, that the primar
matter of putrefaction, and the seat thereof, is erroneously placed in the
blood, though afterward passing the entrails, it be stained with a malignant
quality, loading it self thence with hot Miasms and Salts. Fourthly, pure
phlegm, or veiny gelly, being watered with an immoderate quantity of a pale,
green, and blew lymph or whey, since it makes two thirds of the blood, in the
veins of those, that are troubled with the Dropsy, Green Sickness, and other
kinds of diseases, why is not that blood, which is so heterogeneous, and so far
remote from a temperature (moisture abounding and the plurality of particles
breeding putrefaction) always forced into a fevorish heat? And on the contrary,
why are hot and dry temperaments, where choler is abounding, constantly so
inclinable to putrid Fevors, whereas dryness does so particularly resist
putrefaction? Summarily, the blood according as I have asserted in the
premises, since upon no pretense it is to be accounted among the parts of the
body, does utterly exclude it self being capable to be a seat, place or part
affected. If peradventure you doubt, that I have hitherto receeded from the
path of the received doctrine, stating the heart or other entrail the seat in
Fevors, you have the liberty to take it from the fountain, what is to be
concluded concerning the matter. Avicen. fen. 1. lib. 4. tract. 2. cap. 43.
dictates thus, Dicamus quod Febris sanguinis est Febris putredinis, and Febris
calefactionis and ebullitionis, that is, Let us say, that a Fevor of the blood
is a Fevor of putrefaction, and a Fevor of heat, and ebullition. Here is to be
noted, that the blood is inferred the subject, matter, and seat of a putrid
Fevor. Also Galen. lib. 2. de Cris. cap. 12. Manentibus igitur in venis
humoribus, continuae ex ipsis Febres generantur, that is, The humors remaining
in the veins, continual Fevors are engendered out of them. Likewise, Aetius
tetrab. 2. Sermon. 2. cap. 74. Putrescentes igitur humores, aut intra vasa
arctati, continuas and nunquam intermittentes usque ad perfectam morbi
solutionem Febris efficient, that is, Wherefore humors putrefying, or
straightened within the vessels, do cause continual Fevors, and never
intermitting, until the perfect solution of the disease. Here by the way
observe, though according to Galen, Fevors are seated in the veins, by their
name Arteries are also described, as lib. 1. de Crisib. cap. 7. it is by him
more largely expressed. Febres omnes sunt passiones venarum; itaque in Febribus
omnibus, quoniam venosi sunt generis passiones, nam arterias in hoc genere
comprehendimus, ad urinas praecipue attendere oportet: the English is, All
Fevors are passions of the veins; wherefore in all Fevors, because they are
passions of the veiny gender, (for we comprehend the arteries also in this
gender) we ought chiefly to heed the Urins.

On the other side, they have destined the seat of intermittent Fevors to be
without the vessels, as appears here and there by the writings of Galen and
Avicen. Notwithstanding I can scarce apprehend the foundation of these seats,
wherefore I desire to be satisfied in this doubt, whether continual Fevors are
said to bud forth in the veins, because the blood, that leaps out upon
phlebotomy, does appear hot to the touch, and shows deep red being mixed with a
blew, milky, or yellowish whey? But this blood is not different from any other,
that is extracted in an intermittent Fevor, or any other disease. And whether
the difference of seats is expounded to be such, because the blood within the
vessels, having an immediate commerce with the heart, is capable to foment a
strong heat, whereas entrails, that are more remote from the heart, do only by
fits profuse those putrid and fevorish steems, and under that shape do occasion
an intermittent heat? Certainly not. Moreover, the entrails being tied to the
vessels, are not less commodiously situated, by means of these small channels,
that tend directly to the heart, to foment a fevorish heat, than if the cause
were engendered within the foresaid vessels: or whether, because the vessels are
of a just capacity, wherein they may receive such a quantity of fevorish
matter, as may suffice to nourish a Fevor without intermission, whereas the
entrails are stated to be straight, and not provided with a hollowness to
retain matter enough.

On the other hand, the entrails according to what the thing requires, ought to
ingurgitate a larger quantity of matter, which might suffice to protract an
intermittent Fevor, to some months and years, as does often happen. But to touch
the knot of the difficulty, the cause of the continuation, intermission,
remission, and intention of Fevors, is not to be imputed so much to the
quantity, as the quality of the fevorish matter, as hereafter shall be treated
more at large. In the precited definition, the heart is idly stated the part
primarily affected; for thence would follow, that the greater part of Fevors
should be mortal, because the composure of its temperament being once
subverted, is not easily restored. Secondly, Suppose an inflammation of the
Liver, or other entrail, attended with a Fevor, which do you think the part
primarily affected, the Heart or Liver?

CHAP. V. Concerning the fopperies of Fermentation.
ALmost every Barber and Plaster-spreader have got the knack, to buzze every
patient in the ear, the song of fermentation, and know how to fit the tone of
it to every disease, but chiefly to a Fevor, illustrating the exposition
thereof with this commentary, that the blood fermenteth, and the humors are in
a fermentation, likewise the ferment of the Heart, Spleen, Liver, and it may be
of the Fundament too, if they go not orderly to stool, is depravated; moreover,
if a Corn of the Toe does but ache, the distempered ferment is the cause of it.
Summarily, fitting the word ferment to every disease, cause and symptom, they
conceive the case to be very well handled, and thence tell the Patient, they
will expel the disease by correcting the serment, and so, as if they had done
their business mighty well, they send the Patient home swelled with hopes.
Concerning this abstruse Philosophy, borrowed from certain theorems of the
Wine Press, and chemical notions, Anthonius Guntherus, Theobaldius
Hoghelandius, Felicianus Betera, Conringius, Martinus Kirger, and others have
prosessedly treated, whose Treatises if you peruse, you will find the word
fermentation to serve in diverse significations; the one in a large sense gives
the description of it, not at all different from Peripatetical mixtion,
excepting, that this performs its task by qualities, the other by action and
reaction. But fermentation in a narrower signification, as it relates to
fluids, is stated an effervescency of any liquor, tending to concoction. At
present we will examine, whether a Fevor be a fermentation, or effervescency of
the blood.

To the resolving of this, we must resume from what has been said in the
foregoing Chapter, that a Fevor, as it is a disease of the body, does
necessarily inhere in a part, as its subject and foundation; but the blood
cannot perform the office of a part; therefore neither a Fevor or fermentation
can be properly attributed to it. Secondly, Neither can the blood fermenting be
probably conceived to be the continent cause of a Fevor, because its fluid
mixture is absorbed in a few days, whereas a Fevor is protracted to some weeks.
Suppose a fevorish Patient, to contain four and twenty pints of blood in his
vessels, whereof a quarter of a pint is consumed every day by abstinence, and
dissipated away through the pores into vapors, and some days a whole pint, or
at least three quarters, are drawn off by phlebotomy; for it is very familiar
amongst the French, the first and second opening of a vein, to extract a whole
pint of blood, and every bleeding afterward (which is commonly every other day)
to take away two Porringers, containing three ounces a piece: by this
computation the whole mass should be drawn off in two weeks or less, and
consequently the fermentation must be quieted and stopped, and the Fevor
expelled. But on the contrary, if you should extract blood forty times (as I
have often observed in France they have done) the height of the heat will not be
half a degree abated, but rather augmented. Who would then maintain the blood,
boiling through fermentation, to be the cause of a Fevor? However this
experiment is observed to be true, if you take off the third part of any liquor
that is a fermenting, whether of Wine, Beer, or any other mixture, it will
immediately be taken off from working; but ofttimes the blood is tapt off to
the half, and sometimes to the last fourth part, without the least quieting of
the fermentation, if I may call it so. Possibly you reply, that according as
the vessels are emptied by bleeding, sweating, and other torments, they swell
up again by the food and drink, that is daily taken. On the contrary, there is a
thin Diet ordered to such, as are in a Fevor, neither do most in the whole
course of a Fevor, allow their stomach so much, as whereout the sanguifick
faculty may engender a pound of blood: add hereunto, that their appetite for
fourteen or twenty days is quite dejected. But you reply, that they take as
much food, as answers, what is consumed; to this I return, that the blood,
which is daily engendered, and newly admitted into the vessels, either it is
pure, or stained; if the former, then it ought to dilute, and temperate the
fermenting mass, which it does in no manner do; if the later, it is not to be
doubted, but that it has contracted its stain, from the concocting and
depurating entrails; whence follows, that the primar and principal cause is not
to be attributed to the blood, but the entrails. Thirdly, It Is confirmed by
experience, that fermentation does happen to any mixed liquor, and soft
compositions, as paste or dow, electuaries, and others, which is observed to be
a mild working of the sulphurous and volatil-salin particles, exerting a
temperate heat, that attenuates, expands, and dissolves the whole essence, and
separates the suliginous-salin parts from the homogeneous ones, by subliming
them into a sharp salin scum; the tartarous and fixed salin particles it
precipitates into a mucid and slimy mud. This being observed to be the
signification of fermentation, according to the true intent and meaning of
those, that imposed it on things, that were to be fermented, it seemed indeed a
very simple and idle assertion, that whilst the blood does sees, boil, hiss,
and burn the hand of him that touches it, and occasion a black and sharp
steem, being an effect of fire, on the mouth and tongue, that all this should
depend on a fermentation, and mild heat of the blood. Does not fermentation
always tend to concoction, but a Fevor often to corruption and death; and that
one and the same word shall signify two contraries, is it not an absurdity? To
express alteration, mixtion, generation, corruption, calefaction, and what not,
by the word fermentation, (a word wondrous pregnant) is to set limits to all
physical re-searches and inquiries. Neither do they detract less from the art
of Physic, who assert a vitiated ferment the cause of a Dropsy, Phthisick,
Pleurisy, and of the whole train of diseases; on the correcting whereof (to
wit the serment) every old Wife and Barber-surgeon shall say the stress of the
cure does lie: and is it not then lawful, for this Tribe to vye with
fermentitious Physicians, yes and exceed them? How formally and cunningly at
this rate is the disease, cause and cure, proposed by every Glisterpipe? What
is it at last come to? What necessity is there, to apply ones study to Anatomy,
Botanicks, Physiology, Pathology, and a thousand other things? O wonderful
Headpieces! You will notwithstanding by the way admire, if this notion of
fermentation be only assumed as a phenomenon or supposition (for the thing it
self is not yet agreed on) by those that are something higher advanced in
Learning, to show themselves more dextrous in illustrating the causes,
extracting of indications, and in the method of curing, yet it is not to be
doubted, but that they ship off a greater troop of sick in Charons Boat, and
deserve a greater freight than the putrid Physicians.

But to the business, let us now be at leisure, to examine the manner and
method, that Fermenters undertake the cure of continual and intermittent putrid
Fevors, what indications they answer unto, and wherein they receed from putrid
Physicians. The Indicantia, and Indicata, ought to be ranged in this order. The
blood too much enraged, or too little moved by fermentation, and a vitiated
ferment, are the chief Indicantia; those things that promote, or quicken the
too slack fermentation, and temperate it, when too violent, and reduce the
ferment, when receeded from its temperament, are the Remedies Indicated. The
vital faculty languishing, and deprived of its spirits, does indicate a cordial
and restorative medicine. The animal faculty being broken, through want of many
nights rest, must be relieved with Opiats. The Belly if forgetful of its
office, must be rowsed up with a stimulating suppository, or laxative glyster:
neither are the urgent symptoms of a two swelling fermentation, to be
neglected. A Frenzy that proceeds from sulphurous steems, fuming up from the
fermenting mass, must be allayed by means that revell or draw back from the
Brain. Astringent medicines bridle a looseness, and enormous vomiting. Thus far
in general, concerning indications, taken from their theorems; nevertheless
these being waved, the Fermenters do follow the method of cure of the putrid
Physicians; in posting away their Patients, to the place of their forefathers,
as shall be recited immediately. That it may be physically illustrated, we
ought to premise their practice, being fitted to a particular sick person;
whose age, sex, temperament, former custom of living, season of the year,
tenor of their Pulse, state of Urine, urgent symptoms, occasional and
procatarctick causes, and manner of the first assault of the Fevor, what
symptoms attended, what symptoms arrived afterward, manner of breathing; the
habit of the Hypochonders, Stomach and Belly; the manner of the look of the
sick man, his manner of speech, what habit of body, what usual evacuations are
suppressed; whether the Fevor be essential or symptomatick; whether first come,
or a relapse; what disease he was troubled with last, what remedies were
applied before the Physicians coming, and many other particulars, that are to
be distinctly proposed, all which I say ought to be represented to the serious
meditation of any Physician, that is to undertake the cure of a Fevor. But they
receed so far from these necessary animadversions, that being sent for to a
Patient, having only felt his Pulse, they look upon the Urine, and make some
little inquiry concerning the state of his Belly, whether loose or costive,
neglecting all other necessary informations, and apply themselves immediately
to prescribing; and their first business is, to put the Belly in order, which
they endeavor by this following form of a glyster; but I am to advertize you
before, concerning the custom, that young Physicians, that are newly come from
the University, diligently repair to the Apothecaries shops, for to inform
themselves with the forms and receipts of the Elder Physicians, and being
acquainted with them, it happens thence, that every Physician is furnished with
the same examples or forms of remedies, neither does the one go an inch from
the road of theo there. Wherefore I shall collect you the most received forms,
throughout the whole course, for to remove a fevor, compiled by our modern
ones; afterward how successfully our age makes use of them, I shall
particularly observe. The presciption of a glyster according as it is commonly
found in the Shops, is this.

R. Decoct. commun. pro clyst: vel juxta alios. R. Decoct. Emoll. com. lib. j.
Elect. lenit. j. Ol. com. vel viol. Mel. Mercur. vel Ros. ana j. vel ij. Sal.
com. q. s. m. f. Enem.
Some there are, that instead of common Salt put in Saltpeter, or
Sal-prunellae, from half a dram to a dram: which for its detergent and cooling
quality, is far beyond the other; and indeed Crystal mineral being added to any
sort of glysters, is far more beneficial, because it agrees so very well with
the temperament of the Guts; on the contrary, Sea Salt being of a drying,
inflaming, and irritating faculty, is very offensive to the Guts: For this
reason the Ancients made use of it as well inwardly, in Pills, thick Syrups,
Glysters; as outwardly in Ointments. Some among the Fermenters do extremely
oppose the giving of purges, or laxative glysters in Fevors, because they
provoke the corrupted excrementitious humors to ferment, whose steems piercing
into the vessels, do disturb, and augment the fermentation of the Fevor. On the
other side the putrid Physicians make this reply to them, that glysters doing
their work quick, and without the Vessels, cannot transmit the least breath of
heat, nor blow up any steems, the valve of the Colon putting a stop to their
passage. Lastly, That it is a ready means to cleanse the body, without weakening
or fermentation of the humors corrupted without the vessels, which otherwise
in process of time, might largely contribute to the malignant matter within the
Veins; for it is the judgment of many, that some Fevors, which at the
beginning were only hurtful through their putrefaction, are changed into
malignant and mortal, by reason the putrid drabby settlement, which lay hidden
in the folds and coats of the guts, is regurgitated into the vessels, and that
therefore purging glysters once or twice repeated, ought to be necessarily put
into use: afterward they cause a glyster of milk and sugar, to be administered
once every day, to soften, deterge, revell, cool, and evacuate. There are those
(but are scarce in their wits) that maintain, the foresaid glyster ought to be
made out of crude milk, and to be applied cold, conceiving that by boiling, the
volatile energetick particles might otherwise be evaporated into the air. But
they are unmindful, how hurtful things are to the membranous parts, and the
guts, that are actually cold, and that they repel those putrid vapors, that
steem out of the hidden places of the mesentery, and guts, to the heart, and
the brain. Others are of opinion, one third or half the proportion of water
ought to be poured to the boiling milk; afterward putting sugar to it, they
administer it warm. Others only simply order milk boiled, and sweetened with
sugar, from half a pint to a pint.

The lower region of the body being thus cleansed, two, four, or six hours
after, bleeding is to be celebrated in the right arm, which Fermenters do
sharply oppose, because it does exhaust the spirits and matter of life, which
failing, the fermentation and concoction are thereby much disturbed, and the
heterogeneous particles getting the upper hand, is a presage of an unlucky
crisis. However the greater number of this Sect do not think it safe, to vary
from putrid Physicians in this matter, because almost all Fevors are too
exorbitant in fermentation, and the spirits oppressed by heterogeneous
particles, the heat being too much heightened, the skin being constipated, and
locked up through the soot of the pores, all which evils bleeding does very much
abate. These reasons swaying with the prudent, they command a vein should be
opened twice, thrice, or four times, according to the degree of plethory;
others tap off the blood every third day, some every other day, until together
with the soul they have drawn out the whole.

In the next place they are to bend their force against the matter, fermenting
too fiercely, by giving Cordials and Diaphoreticks. In this particular the
Fermenters and the putrid Physicians are differing, the later relieving the
impared vital faculty only with cold cordials, as shall be made known to you in
another place. The forms of sudorifick Cordials, as they are hung on the
Apothecaries files, and according as they have been prescribed by the more
famous sort of Physicians, shall now be put down.

R. Aq. ulmar. citr. tot. lujul. scabios. card. Ben. rut. dracunt. (three or
four of these) ana j. Aq. Theriac. Epidem. ana ss. often j. or j. ss. Some add
Diascord. fr. vel Theriac. Land. j. Spec. e chel. cancr. comp. ij. Sir.
garyophyl. vel e suc. citr. j. m. f. Pot. vel. Iul. Capiat cochl. 2. vel 3.
altern. hor. vel cochl. 4. quarta quavis hora.
This prescription though it has been in use almost an age, some sucking
Fermenters have thought fit to make exception against the Treacle-water,
because vinegar makes a great part of the composition, which they say, does
enrage the fermentation; though according to the judgment of others, Vinegar
does qualify the fermentation, and coagulate the fermentative particles;
moreover, it is adstringent, shuts the pores of the body, and stops all
evacuations, for which reasons the use of Vinegar is very much suspected by
them; therefore instead of the Aqua Theriacalis, they allow to the prescription
double the measure of Aqua Epidemica, the description whereof is made public
in a small Treatise of the College of London, Printed a good while since; but
because the Copies are most dispersed, I shall think it no trouble to set down
its description here.

R. Rad. torment. angel. poeon. m. zedoar. glycyr. helen. ana ss. fol. salv.
chelidon. maj. rut. summit. rorismar. Absynth. ror. sol. arthemis. pimpinel.
Dracunc. Scabios. Agrimon. Melis. Card. Beton. centaur. min. fol. and flor.
calend. ana m. j. incidenda incidantur, contundenda contunduntur, and
digerantur per triduum in Vin. alb. opt. lib. viij. ac destil. in Alemb. vitr.
Nonnulli praescriptis adjiciunt cerasa nigra, slor. paralys. papav. Rh. and
quid non?
In Childrens Fevors, Aqua scordii composita is preferred before Aqua
Theriacalis, or Aqua Epidemica, because it is less hot, and consequently less
hurtful. Let us halt a while here, to examine, whether the Vinegar being an
ingredient in Treaclewater, does suppress the fermentation of a Fevor in the
vessels. To those that have but had the least taste of the Chemical art, it does
appear very plain, that fermentation does arise from a strife there is between
the acid, and alcalized, or lixivious salin particles, which in properties are
so contrary to each other, that through the deficiency or failing of either of
them, the action of fermentation is immediately cut off; the same likewise
happens, when either does exceed the other in its just proportion of strength,
through which they fall on each other. It is held for a certain truth, that in
a burning Fevor the blood is full of lixivious and alcalized salts, wherefore,
by giving of a medicine, that is vitriolate, diluted with Vinegar, it does
necessarily happen, through natures ordinary way of working, that the
fermentation (if any such thing may be granted) is intended in its fury,
through the vigor whereof the annoying corpuscles are separated from the mass,
and expelled thence, whereby at last it is perfectly depurated, and defecated.
Moreover that we may lay the case whole open; if the concoction in the stomach
be performed by fermentation (as it is every where declared by it is Assertors)
take notice, that sauces, whereinto Vinegar is poured, (especially if
impregnated with the infusion of Capers, Broom-buds, or other raw sour things)
do set a very sharp edge to it; for as soon as they are ingested, we are
troubled with a glowing heat about the Stomach, and Hypochonders, also about
the face, and top of the head. Secondly, Treacle-water being tempered with
Vinegar, does become thence more penetrating, and more vigorous in its virtue,
whereby insinuating readily into the most inward and central parts of the body,
it performs the work of an antifebril medicine. Thirdly, Since this Treacle
mixture is unadvisedly composed of many things, that are very hot and sharp, as
several spices, Masterwort, and some impure Sulphurs, and others, Vinegar does
very much blunt the edge of them, and freeth those Sulphurs, not only of their
stink, but impure recrements. Whereby it is apparent, how great an error they
are in, that under that pretense of quieting the fermentation, rail against
Treacle-water, and Aqua Apotheriacalis, because of the acid ingredients. But
setting aside these discourses, though I do not contemn Treacle-water for the
reasons newly quoted, yet for other causes I look upon it as a medicine of no
effect and virtue; for the liquor that is distilled off, from the matter
digested in the body of the Still, does appear to be nothing, but a phlegm
impregnated with a small proportion of the virtues of the ingredients, and
those obtused too by acids. Secondly, Acids endued with the salin parts of the
ingredients it has attracted, being thence rendered more ponderous, do not pass
the helm or alembick, but remain in the bottom; so that the Fermenters need not
to be stomacht so much at the hurt of these acids, since they are left behind
at the bottom. Wherefore those with whom this reason does take place, make use
of Vinegar impregnated only with the virtues of Alexipharms against pestilent
and malignant Fevors, setting aside the destilling of it, they hold it to be
strongest by digestion and filtration, by means whereof the faculties of both
are preserved entire. Likewise those that labor, to extract the volatile salts
of Diaphoreticks, and Alexipharmacals, by destillation, having ordered their
infusion in spirit of wine, they destil off the liquor, by all means avoiding
the pouring any acids to it; hereof there is an example in the Aqua Theriacalis
in the Augustan Dispensatory, and in that Treacle-water, which is ascribed to
Paracelsus, mentioned in the mixtura e tribus in peracutis. According to this
way of reasoning, it is inserred, that the Aqua Scordii composita described in
the London Dispensatory, is much weakened in its virtue, because the acid juices
of Sorrel and Citrons, not mounting up to the Helm or Alembick, detain the
virtues of the other ingredients within them; though notwithstanding many
railing at Treaclewater, because of the Vinegar, make a great noise of the
praises of Aqua Scordii, as being composed of Acids, that are not restringent.
These I would have to be answered, out of solution of the Problem, to wit,
whether Vinegar, as it is added to Treacle-Water, be restringent; certainly
not; for in time its restrictive faculty does languish away, by being united
with the alcalized and volatile salts of the rest of the ingredients, until at
length the nature of Vinegar being quite buried, the medicine grows
ecphractick or opening, in the same manner, as Oil of Vitriol exceeding all
others in restriction, and being obtused by the Alcali of Salt of Tartar, is
now arrived to be a very great opener. Secondly, That astringents are very
active (but it is per accidens) in removing the obstructions of bodies,
especially of such, as are inclined to Fevors, is made evident by this
experiment, being confirmed by all men's judgments; Salt of Steel bred out of
the stem of Oil of Vitriol, is not at all different from vitriol it self, since
it is manifestly known, that the foresaid salt is oil of vitriol, coagulated
through the hungry matter of Iron, and reduced to its old form and body of
Vitriol, but advanced to a higher degree of purity; for Iron growing out of
Vitriol, condensed by being separated from its mercurial part, now its late
mercurial part, namely Oil of Vitriol, being returned to it again, is as it
were through a new birth reduced to its primitive body of Vitriol; but its
impure recrements are rejected. So that hence, though the Salt of Steel is made
visibly to be a most special medicine for astriction, nevertheless it is
preferred for a most potent medicine to remove the obstructions of the Spleen,
Liver and Womb. This effect it very successfully performs, by causing a combat
and effervescency in the vessels, between the acid and fiery salin parts of the
humors, whereby the blood coagulated in the veins is at length dissolved, and
that which is thick, is attenuated. Steel prepared with Vinegar (whereby its
vitriolate astringent virtue is increased) is esteemed famous against
obstructions by all Physicians. Hence you may learn, that all chalybeate and
purely vitriolate medicines are per se restringent and stopping, but per
accidens they dissolve and open; wherefore they ought to be used with a great
deal of caution by Dogmatick-spagirical Physicians, according as it is
illustrated in this following relation. A fermentitious Physician of no mean
rank, having given Crocus Martis three times to one, that was troubled with a
bilious diarrhoea, or looseness, and though he had before prescribed him two
infusions of Rhubarb, and Miro^alans, yet had occasioned such gripes in the
Guts, pain, and inflammation of the bowels, that increasing his stools as much
more, sent the Patient to Limbo. On what this unfortunate practice is grounded,
you may judge from what has been premised.

Now it is time, to look back to the place, whence I digressed. The opposition
of the Fevor is not only committed to an antifebril Cordial medicine, but
another that is purely Cordial, is also joined with it for assistance, thereby
to relieve the Heart and Arteries, with a supplement of spirits; in the form as
follows.

R. Aq. melis. tot. citr. lujul. aur. ceras. nigr. ana j. Aq. mirabil. vj.
tinct. croc. or according to others. Spir. menth. ij. succ. kerm. j. or j. ss.
Sir. garyophyl. others write Sir. e suc. citr. j. m. f. Pot. Capiat. cochl. 1.
or 2. altern. hor.
Hereunto some add Confect. Al^herm. or de Hyacinth. j. also spec. e chel.
cancr. comp. ij. or j.

But such as do not so well approve of these kind of prescriptions, because
those distilled waters are so faint, and void of spirits, offer their Patients
burnt Claret spiced, and mixed with cordial waters, and syrups. Also raw Rhenish
Wine, as appears by this following prescript.

R. Aq. Hord. depur. lib. j. Aq. bor. buglos. viol. ana ij. Vin. Rhenan. elect.
iij. Sir. e suc. citr. Garyophyl. ana j. ss. m. f. Iulap. E quo sumat Patiens
iij. tertia quaque hora.
This is a Julep of (...) his composing, as may easily be conjectured by the
Wine it contains; for he does not willingly leave it out of any thing, either
for himself or for another; but I imagine he ought to be better versed in that
ingredient, since he has for so many years made it his mothers milk, than not
to know, what sort of Rhenish Wine ought to be put in, whether Bachrach,
Rinckhower, Hochmer, besides a hundred sorts of Rhenish Wines differing
infinitely in strength and quality from each other, but that is entrusted to his
Apothecaries palate; but as for the success hereof let that be buried with
those that have made use of it.

Cooling Cordials (according as they are called in the common phrase) as the
four Cordial-waters, Aqua frigida Saxoniae, which by the former age none was
thought like it, and others, are now almost quite grown out of use among the
Fermenters.

The strength of a Fevor being scarce abated with these helps, all hope is
reposed on alexipharmacal species, for since the violence of this heat has
granted no kind of truce, this six or eight days, from the stubborness and
continuance of its force, it is now among the vulgar to be termed a malignant
Fevor. Of these foresaid Alexipharmacal species, or powders, there are examples
extant of two forms, the one making mention of precious stones, pearl, and
Bezoar, the other being grounded on the base of Alexicacal roots, among whose
number the root of Virginian Serpentary is in this age extolled above all
others.

R. Spec. e chel. cancr. comp. corn. cerv. n. pr. or instead thereof, rad.
serpent. virg ana ss. Lap. contrajerv. ij. m. f. Pulv.
Hereunto some are pleased to add,

Tro^isc. viper. ij. or salis viper. j. Cochinil. ss. Capiat j. quarta vel
sexta quavis hora in Cochl. 1. Cordial Iulap.
Since Lapis Contrajerva is so famous among us, I shall here set down its
description.

R. Rad. contrajerv. pulv. j. serpent. virgin. ij. ss. Extract. rad. Angel.
tormentil. ana ij. Corn. Cerv. ust. C. C. nov. pr. Coral. rubr. chel. cancror.
laevig. ana j. ss. Antimon. Diaphor. iij. Croc. angl. Lap. Bez. ana j. Cum
gelat. spol. serpent. formentur globuli, sub umbra exsiccandi.
Some add,

Trochisc. e viperis j. Cochinil. ss. vel j. Ambr. grys. gr. 8. or 10. Dos. j.
ad ij. and j.
This form I have also often met with.

R. Spec. confect. liberant. vel Cardiac. magist. vel Diamargar. srig. (one or
two of these, or all of them) ana j. magist. perlar. coral. ana ss. Lap. Bez.
or. gr. 8. m. f. Pulv.
Sometimes in this manner.

R. Lap. 5. pretios. ana gr. 15. Margar. praep. j. Lap. Bez. ss. m. f. Pulv.
Dos. gr. 15. vel j.
Sunenda ter per diem horis medicis in cochl. 1. Cordial. Iulap. Others who
abound in their own sense, do wonderfully magnify a certain Cordial Extract,
Extrectum Cardiacum, but not that of Quercetan; among these there is one
formerly, who was a Captain of a Troop of Horse, but of late years has
practiced as a Doctor of Physic, he declares for a certain, that he can
readily abate the impression of the most furious malignant Fevors, and that by
the sole means of this same extract, ascribing the secret of it to himself,
whereas it is well known, it was composed by one Doctor Read, a famous Physician
in his time. It is often made use of by modern practicers, though with no better
success than attends ordinary Cordials.

The description of the Extractum Cardiacum is this.

R. Mithridat. Diascord. Philon. romans Theriac. Andr. Croc. Angl. Lign. Aloes,
rad Hyoscyam. ana vj. Opii Theb. iij. extrahantur omnia seorsim cum spir. vin.
q. s. and exhal. ut f. exir. Dos. a ss. ad j. and ss.
Patients having passed many nights without sleep, and being grown
lightheaded, they judge it will be very beneficial, if they assist them with
this subjoyned hypnotick, to be taken at the hour of rest.

R. Theriac. Londin. (being less hurtful, because of its moderate heat) vel
Conserv. lujul. ss. Margar. praep. ss Laudan. opiat. gr. 2, 3, vel 4. m. f.
Bol. Capiat hora somni.
All this advice being followed to no purpose, and the fate of the sick patient
drawing near, Physicians fly to the so prodigiously cried up spirit of
hartshorn, as it were to their sacred anchor, giving hereof eight or twelve
drops, twice or thrice a day, in a spoonful of cordial Julep; neither does much
time pass, before Phoenigms and Epispastick Emplasters, in testimony of the
last unction, are applied to the inside of the arm, a little above the wrists,
likewise on the inside of the legs, a little above the ancle, and often near the
armpits, and now and then to the nape of the neck. The task they are designed
to perform, is to drive out the malignant and venomous matter, under the shape
of an ichor, or sharp water, into large bladders, from the deepest parts, to
the outward skin, which being perforated, Melilot plasters are to be applied,
to dry up the moisture. At last they are to bid the Patient his last farewell,
by tying live Pigeons, cut through the middle, to the soles of his feet, or
pickled Herrings, or sharp Leven, Spurge, Crowfoot root, wild Pellitory,
Mustard Seed, black Soap, or brown Salt, one of them, or all, beat together,
and so the sick man is left to the disposition of the Stars, in which case
some, though very few, after they have lain some hours speechless and
senseless, under the shadow of death, they have been raised and awakened by
degrees, nature exerting its drowsy strength; others dye with Convulsions, or
in a fainting fit.

Modern Practicers do not much matter, what drink their fevorish Patients are
to quench their drought with, some bold Physicians allowing them strong beer,
others small beer with a tossed in it, or the cold and rawness being taken away
by warming of it. Some give their Patients thin water grewel to drink, others
the decoction of the shavings of Hartshorn, and sometimes burnt, or both
together. Some allow the decoction of French barley. Juleps tempered with acids,
sal prunellae, and cooling syrrups, are among most grown out of use because of
the acids, which they suspect for the causes newly alleged.

If you require of me what animadversions I make on the premised practice, I
should not frustrate you expectation (though elsewhere, excusing the
slenderness of my judgment, I shall use my endeavors in it) were it not, that
the Belgick-German practice (for there is scarce any difference between the
German and Dutch Practitioners, excepting that the later are more liberal in
bleeding, and the former do much use certain antifebril powders) and the French
method could so conveniently be subjoyned here.

In the Low Countries and in Germany a Physician having discovered a continual
Fevor to surprise the Patient, immediately premising a purging Glyster, made
out of a pint of Emollient Decoction, one ounce or an ounce and half of
Electuary lenitive or Catholicon, with common oil, or oil of Violets, Honey, and
a little salt, advises bleeding out of the right arm, to six, eight, or ten
ounces, thereby to take off from the plethory, to lighten nature of its burden,
open the pores that are shut, and remove the obstructions of the bowls. Next
day to cleanse the foulness of blood, and to remove the heap of foul humors,
that are accumulated in the lower region of the body, he composeth this
following, in a most single form of a potion.

R. fol. sen. or. m. ij. iij. vel ss. sem. foenic. d. ss. vel j. f. infus. per
noct. in aq. cichor. q. s. In Colat. iij. vel iv. dissolv. man. ca* lab. j.
vel. j. ss. vel. ij.
sometimes Sir. ros. sol. j. m. f. Pot. Capiat cras mane cum custodia.
Others make use of the Cold Infusion* as they call it, being made out of the
said leaves of Sena, in the same weight, with or without a corrective, infused
all night in fountain water, without fire, dropping into it salt or oil of
Tartar, ten or fifteen drops, afterward sweetning the expression with Manna,
syrup of Roses laxative, or Sugar.

Rhubarb is set aside, because of the heat, that abounds in it, and its binding
faculty, after it has done working. Although after this manner they give
purges in the beginning of continual Fevors, yet they do not contemn
Hippocrates his precept; (...), etc. that is, humors that are concocted, ought
to be purged and stirred, not crude ones, unless they swell and run up and
down, because they expel only such excrementitious humors, that lie lurking
without the vessels in hidden places of the mesentery, and guts, which
certainly would never be concocted; for, feeding much on roots, cabbage,
salletting, milky diets, butter-milk, and other things, that contain a great
deal of excrementitious juice, their bodies do abound with those kind of
humors. Wherefore the foresaid law of our great Physician does only relate to
humors, floating within the vessels.

Afterward they order a Laxative glyster to be given every other day, for to
suppress those violent flames of the Fevor, and frame Iuleps out of cooling
waters and syrups, and sometimes Emulsions out of Almonds and cooling seeds.

The impaired vital faculty they relieve with a spirituous potion, after this
form, according as their prescriptions here and there in the Dutch Apothecaries
shops do plainly inform us.

R. Aq. 4. cordial. ana j. Aq. cinam. ss. vel vj. Consect. Alkerm. j. Spec.
Diamarg. frig. ij. Sir. e suc. citr. vel granator. j. m. f. Pot.
Ofttimes to these cordial waters the same quantity of Aqua Melissae is added.
Sometimes instead of Aqua Cinamomi they put in Aqua vitae Mathioli; also
Confectio de Hyacintho instead of Confectio Alkermes. Nature moving toward the
extremity, they fly usually to this cordial powder.

R. Spec. Diamarg. frig. ss. Magist. Perlar. Coral. ana gr. v. Lap. Bez. or.
gr. iij. vel iv. m. f. Pulv. sumendus bis per diem mane and sero in Iulap.
Cord. modico.
The animal faculty being much broken through want of rest, they cause sleep by
this following potion.

R. Aq. Bor. nymph. pap. Rh. ana j. Aq. Cinam. ij. Consect. de Hyacinth. j.
Sir. Papav. Rh. j. vel j. ss. m. f. Pot. Capiat hora somni.
They very seldom make use of Opiats in this case, being much dissatisfied in
their unsubdued narcotick force, especially where the strength of the Patient
is scarce proportioned to dissipate it.

The sick body being surprised with a frenzy, they draw blood out of the
foot, or if his principal faculties are two languishing, they revel the blood
by cuppingglasses, from the brain to the extreme parts. The Fevor declining,
and discovering a white sediment in the Urin, they cause an evacuation by purge
once or twice.

The French subdue putrid and malignant Fevors, by bleeding the first time
largely, and afterward repeat it every other day, to five or six ounces; the
days that are between, they prescribe a laxative glyster, and sometimes a
potion of the infusion of Sena, Manna, and Cassia (which later is in great
veneration among them, La bonne Casse as they call it) syrup of Roses laxative,
and Crystal mineral. For the critical days they take no notice of them, often
saying, that to expect the Crisis, is to expect death, and so by drawing of
blood, and purging with glysters, they go on very diligently. For their
ordinary drink they allow ptisan, which is to be sold ready made in the shops
all France over.

The Germans do not differ from the Dutch, except that having emptied the body,
by purging and bleeding, they propose powders, to expel the febril miasms, and
to cool, composed out of Terra sigil. Bol. Armen. corn. cerv. ust. ras. ebor.
rad. tormentil. bistort. and the like, but before all these they prefer Pulvis
Rubeus Pannonicus, set down in the Augustan Pharmacopoea.

CHAP. V. Showing that the modern practice of subduing continual putrid Fevors,
is barbarous, and killing.
THat the practice of Fermentators is to be abominated, and that it is killing,
who can deny? Since among a great company of fevorish Patients, the greater
part whereof are probably strong, young, well slesht-men, not being swelled or
retcht in their Hypochonders or Belly, yet scarce the third man recovers his
former state of health. What must be inferred from hence, when in the rage of a
Fevor, though the Physician be sent for at the first minute of the Disease, and
that the strength of nature is more than proportioned to subdue the Fevor,
nevertheless the poor wretch dies? yes, let all things be administered
according to the most received rules of Physic, let the highest cordial be
given, also Extractum Cardiacum, Pearl, Bezoar and the spirits of Hartshorn it
self, yet very often to no purpose, and the Fevors will triumph until the hour of
death? But if in favor of the Fermentators it be instanced, that before our
Aesculapius came to the assistance of the sick man, the flame was kindled to
the top, and that the Fevor had taken deep rooting, that the malignity of the
disease had trodden down the principal or commanding faculties, the cause of
the fatal day is not to be imputed to the Physician, nor to his remedies, but
to the malignant distemper, too much enraged by too long a stay. Hereunto I
reply, notwithstanding that the Physician was at hand, at the very glimpse of
the first spark of the Fevor (which possibly then was of no such ill aspect) as
I hinted just now, nevertheless the case will run to ruin. But on the other
hand, if any one that lives in the Country, be he a Country man, or come from
the City, be taken with a Fevor, and the care be committed to an old wife,
immediately shegives him a certain posset, that is thoroughly savoured with
Carduus or Pepper, and puts him to bed, covering him well with clothes until he
fall into a dew sweat; this being once or twice repeated, she commits the rest
to nature, wherein she proves so lucky, that out of ten nine, if not all, for
the most part get the better of their distemper. Moreover the Divine old man
scarce ever gave greater relief to any in a Fevor, than by doing nothing, and
committing the whole business to nature, and therefore he often urges that
nature be not interrupted in concoction. Aphor. 22. lib. 1. (...), etc. that
is, do not move crude humors, and Aphor. 24. of the same book. It were better,
if they cannot discover the adequate remedy, to follow Avicens document, sen.
4. lib. 1. cap. 1. Cum ignoraveris agritudinem, relinque eam naturae, quia aut
curabit eam, aut manifestabit eam, that is, when you do not know the disease,
leave it to nature, because either she will cure it, or discover it. Also they
would contribute far greater advantage to the ease of the sick, by expecting
with Hippocrates the crisis, than by a thousand tricks to circumvent nature;
for if they can do no good, let them do no harm at least. But now it is, I am
at leisure, particularly to set down the order of this lazy practice. Those
that reject glysters in the beginning of a Fevor, because they should not blunt
the edge of the ferment too much, do not at all perform their duty in the right
administering of things, since the rubbish of the body that is lodged about the
turnings and windings of the guts, and the hidden places of the mesentery, not
being expelled, does either by profusing steems into the vessels, very
remarkably increase the heat, or by putrid particles creeping into the blood,
is apt to kindle the Fevor. This rubbish because it is incapable of being
concocted, and is lodged without the vessels, does easily yield to a gentle
laxative potion, or purging glyster, without any fear of increasing the heat.
But since people here are such immoderate devourers of flesh, that the belly
being the sink of the whole body, must needs abound with sordid excrements, is
not a laxative purge, or Cathartick glyster very necessary? But it must be
given in the first preceding days, or afterward the greatest part of that
filth and dirt is carried away into the vessels, by the rapid torrent of the
blood, and therefore all purging is to be set aside; for hereby nature would
else be drawn from its work, with a great disturbance, and that without the
least benefit. Neither is that I have proposed just now contrary to
Hippocrates, as you may observe, Aphor. 10. ^^b. 4. In acutis passionibus eadem
die si fi^i potest, medicandum, nam in his cun^ari malum est, that is, in all
acute passions you must give physic the same day, if possible, for to tarry is
hurtful: also Aphor. 29. lib. 2. and in Aphor. 30. lib. 1. he gives the reason
for it. Circa initia omnia debiliora, and in statu omnia fortiora, quae
purgationem fieri impediunt, that is, about the beginning all things are at
weakest, and about the state at the strongest, which hinder, that a purge
should be given. Secondly, all bodies that are inclinable to Fevors, or are
fevorish, are for the most part in the beginning oppressed with a Plethora ad
vires, or a fullness of the vessels, more than their strength can bear, whereby
the spirits are pincht, and through too great a condensation grow vehemently
hot, the circulation grows slug and dull, and is carried in a disorderly
motion, and the pores are stopped; how urgent is the case then, that some blood
be taken away immediately? thence the spirits will be able to bestir
themselves, the motion of the blood from irregular will become regular* the
passages of the skin will be more free, and the heat will be moderated* But
since it is not seldom, that a Fevor being subdued by the first bleeding,
though not to an absolute extinction of the fiery heat* the sparks raising the
flame again, the blood does swell up a new, and run violently up and down,
reason does like wise advise, that the veins are (...) be deplenisht the second
time, that we may arrive to the same effects. But those that endeavor to
venture the opening of a vein e third time, do unpunisht make a playgame of a
man's blood; for there is not so great a benefit reaped this third bleeding, as
there was by the two former, as I have found by a thousand trials, but the
spirits and forces of the sick are barbarously destroyed, by taking away their
due food and nourishment, and quite ruining their base and foundation; for they
inhere in the blood, as their foundation, and subject, and from it they draw
life. Moreover, neither is the blood then so turgid and impetuous, because
besides the former substraction of blood, the parts of the whole mass are
attenuated, melted and dispersed through a great many little caverns and holes,
that before were filled. Likewise there is now a close engagement between the
vital spirits and the febril corpuscles (what these are shall be told you
hereafter) so that if either you disturb the spirits, or exhaust and lessen
them by bleeding, the fevorish miasms must necessarily get the victory, and
produce death for their trophy. Thousands are killed by the slaughter of the
lancet. That you may understand the case more plainly, I will illustrate it to
you by an example of one, that lies sick of a malignant Fevor, whom should you
bleed but a second time, or sometimes but once, you would certainly bring his
life into danger, for neither Pulse or Urin do signify any great heat, that
should be the cause of the swelling of the blood, neither are the pores stopped
by an abundance of soot; wherefore there must by no means any blood be taken
away, because it does in no kind of manner, nor through its abundance, annoy
the spirits; If however against reason blood should be extracted, the spirits
will be so much wasted, that they will be rendered too weak for the encounter.
Secondly, since the vessels by opening of a vein, are so swiftly deplenisht,
the malignant matter, that stagnates in the capillar vessels, or elsewhere,
lies hidden in remote holes and secret places, is thereby most impetuously
drawn into the great vessels, that lead to the principal parts, where joining
with particles of their own nature, do with a joint force fall upon the strong
holds of life: certainly this is a most clear demonstration. We must here unty
the knots of two particulars, that were asserted above. The first is the manner
of computing the bleedings, whence the first is to be counted, whence the
second and third. The other is, why there are but justly two bleedings set
down. At the first assault of symptoms, that are derived from the spring of a
Fevor, that is not intermittent (as Hippocrates here and there calls it, by
which name are meant both continual and continent Fevors) the same day there
ought some blood be taken away out of the right arm, to quiet and suppress the
febril matter, that it may not be mixed with the mass, flowing through the great
vessels, nor fiercely fall upon the spirits; for as much as this should happen,
so much the quantity of the blood, that is to be extracted, ought to be
moderated. Moreover, the measure of blood that is to be drawn away, is to be
taken from the degree of the swelling of the blood; for if the degree of
intumescence or swelling be at the degree of eight, and if unto this degree
does answer the taking away of ten ounces of blood, then if the intumescence be
at the degree of four, the substraction of five or six ounces will be
proportionable to allay it; and according to this manner you must make your
computation in the others. But where the Orgasmus, or turgid working of the
febril matter is appeased, and its malignant faculty suppressed, you may safely
next day or two days after, by a cathartick potion expel the matter of a Fevor,
that is imprisoned in hidden places without the vessels, and in the capillar
vessels. In the same manner is a malignant Fevor to be dealt withal at the
first assault, though otherwise it would certainly tend to the destruction of
life, yet by so managing your affairs, the sick man will be released. There
ought a laxative or at least an emollient glyster to be administered before the
bleeding. Fevorish patients are often in the beginning tortured with a violent
shaking, extreme vomiting, and frequent fainting, in this case six or eight
ounces of blood being extracted out of the veins the same day, the swelling of
the blood, the plethory of the vessels, and the violent working of the febril
matter have been quite suppressed. But possibly one may reply, that if the
blood should be preyed upon, on every appearance of the foresaid accidents, it
would be often looked upon as a very careless and needless piece of work, when
ofttimes those symptoms do of their own accord (the blood being appeased)
vanish away in six or eight hours, as uses to happen in intermittent Tertians,
and some other kind of Fevors. I answer, that in such a case, the overweight of
blood is never lightened without great benefit, by opening of a vein, since the
forementioned symptoms do issue from a plethory, and a hot burning matter; and
granting that the violent working does settle of its own accord, it will return
again upon the least occasion; wherefore to relieve nature, there must
necessarily some part of the burden be taken off. Secondly, the nature of an
Orgasmus, or violent working is well known almost to every experienced
Physician, whether it appears to be superficial and moveable, or permanent; and
thence may easily conclude about the necessity of bleeding.

But since it often happens, that sick people do not advise with a Physician
before the second, third, and fourth day, or afterward, there first ought to
be inquired, whether the same, or a greater, or a lesser quantity of blood
should be extracted, than if a Physician had had the occasion, at the first
assault, to have given his advice. Secondly, whether nevertheless a Physician
coming the third or fourth day, that substraction of blood ought to be
accounted the first, and whether the fifth, sixth, or eight morning after, the
opening of a vein ought to be repeated: First there must be considered the
degree of concoction; and the ebb of the blood, occasioned by fasting or
thinness of diet, must be taken notice of, before any thing can be certainly
concluded on. Wherefore take it only for a supposition, if hereafter you are
not convinced of the absolute truth thereof, that nature is employed thirteen
days, and sometimes fifteen days, in concocting the matter of acute Fevors,
and afterward does endeavor to separate and expel it the fourteenth or
sixteenth day, according to the course of the Moon, wherefore ( Hippocrates*
pronouncing, Aphor. 13. l. 2. (...), that is, those whose crisis is growing on,
the night before the fit is very troublesome to them) the concoction is brought
to the height or (...) on the thirteenth, because that is accounted the day,
that immediately preceeds the fourteenth, on which according to the dictate of
the same Hippocrates ( Aphor. 22. lib. 2. (...), that is, acute Fevors come to
a crisis in fourteen days) the crisis of acute Fevors are wont to happen. Now
since the night before the crisis all things are very troublesome, it must be,
that nature is at that time most busied, and is at the highest point of
concoction, which namely is the thirteenth day or night, immediately preceding
the fourteenth day, being the day of the crisis, on which, namely the
fourteenth day as I hinted now, nature does gradually separate, and expel the
concocted febril matter, by stool, vomit, through the pores of the skin, or
hemorrhage, but most frequently by urine, in the shape of a white and heavy
sediment, if the concoction be perfect, or reddish if imperfect. Here is to be
noted, that crises which happen to bodies in hot and thin climates, and whose
blood floating in the vessels, is very thin, and the veins free from
obstructions, are very rapid, and swift, expelling the concocted matter by
stool, or through the pores of the skin, all at once as it were, and with a
violence: but those that lie sick in a northern climate, because their blood
being thick, muddy and ropy, does in all parts promote obstructions, and their
skin is hard and thick, and the faculty of their guts is dull; for the most
part they are freed by having the febril matter gradually sent down to the
Kidneys and Bladder. In the mean time it is not to be denied, but that the word
Crisis by its first imposition does denote a sudden change with disturbance,
either to life or death; wherefore though I said above, that the matter was by
a crisis gradually expelled, it is to be understood, in respect of a more rapid
crisis that is proper to hotter countries; and in respect of the lingering
solution of the disease, by translation of the matter, it does justly merit the
name of a Crisis; for the whole matter is expelled in four or five days, more
or less. This by the way. If then the thirteenth day be the top of the
concoction, and that the symptoms are gradually intended from the minute of the
augment or increase, which usually happens to be in true acute Fevors, about
the fifth, or seventh day, according to the variation of the Moon, it will not
be safe to open a vein past the seventh day, because then the spirits are
endeavoring to concoct, and the swelling of the blood is suppressed by fasting
(if bleeding was not premised) and thinness of diet; what is it then you will
exhaust the veins for? If notwithstanding in the beginning of an acute Fevor,
(which is defined to be the first four or six days, because during that time
the first appearance of symptoms is scarce altered) the fevorish Patient has
beyond reason and necessity gratified his stomach and appetite, and that thence
the turgency of the blood has been fed, it may be convenient to take away some
blood, though it be the eight day; so that those things are to be defined,
according to the swelling of the blood, and the decrease thereof by a thin
diet; for if so much be consumed by a thin diet in the beginning, or the first
four or six days, as is proportionable to once bleeding, it will be
advantageous to bleed once besides within the seventh day; but those things are
to be left to the judgment of every experienced Physician: yet let him not be
unmindful, that bleeding and purging are by Galen stated great remedies, on the
use whereof life and death does depend; neither is the former to be less
suspected than the latter, wherefore that Aphorism 29. lib. 2. that was so
prudently dictated, does relate to both, viz. (...); that is, move at the
beginning of diseases, if any thing ought to be moved. Diseases are said to
begin, as long as the symptoms of the first assault continue without
alteration, but as soon as they are sensibly intended (provided there does not
follow a remission presently after) then they exceed the limits of the
beginning and arrive to the Augment or increase of the Disease. Thence does
Galen also admonish us on the foresaid Aphorism 29. l. 2. Ut citius eveniant
coctiones, circa principia melius est evacuare per venae sectionem and
purgationem, that is, that the concoctions may sooner be performed, it is best
to evacuate by bleeding and purging at the beginning. Avicen does often highly
extol bleeding, but at the beginning of a Fevor, sen. 1. lib. 4. tract. 1. Cap.
33. writing concerning the cure of a Fevor. Cum causa est multitudo humorum
atque repletio, tum oportet and in principio properes ad phlebotomiam, that is,
when the cause is the abundance of humors, and repletion, then you ought to
apply your self to bleeding and that in the beginning. Likewise in another
place he says, Evacuatio non est aliqua nisi sicut phlebotomia in quacunque
hora accidat, and non expectatur crisis neque digestio, that is, There is no
evacuation like bleeding, at whatever hour it happens, and that there be no
expectation of a crisis or of digestion. Galen lib. introduct. cap. 3.
discoursing of Fevors expresses himself in this manner: Curatur in principio
venae sectione, in statu tam frigidae, tam aliorum quae refrigerandi vim
obtinent potio confert; idem enim semper remedium accipitur, ut quocunque morbi
initio sanguinis detractio; in English thus, it is cured in the beginning by
bleeding, at the state by drinking of cold water, and other things that have a
power of cooling; the same remedy is always made use of, as also is bleeding at
the beginning of the disease; and in another place he declares; Quod in
consilii inopiam deveniunt, qui statim a principio non vaeuarunt sanguinem,
that those want advice, who immediately at the beginning have not taken away
some blood. Alexander Trall. lib. 12. c. 2. advises thus, Continentes Febres
solerte diligentia curari debent, subitoque id faciendum, quod internotitia
dictaverit, sive missionem sanguinis, sive expurgationem requirat: maximum enim
incommodum est tum omnibus morbis, tum in continentibus dilatio, which is thus
englished, Continent Fevors are to be cured with a prudent diligence, and that
must be suddenly done, which your knowledge does dictate, whether it require
bleeding or purging: for delay is the greatest disadvantage to all diseases,
and to Fevors. What need is there of words? we have abundantly made the case
known by reasons, authorities, and experiments, whence it is evident, how
barbarously they act to the ruin of those sick people, that are troubled with
a continual putrid, and malignant Fevor, by taking blood away from them about
the middle and end of the Augment and State. It is a great truth I shall say,
that at the beginning it is life, in the middle and end of the Augment and
State it is death.

Against what has been said an argument might be here taken from what the
great master of Physic does command, Aphor. 8. lib. 1. viz. Quando morbus
constiterit in suo vigore, tunc victu tenuissimo utendum; that is, when the
disease is in its vigor, then you are to use a very thin diet; that the mass
of blood may not increase so much as to exceed the power of natures government;
wherefore for the same reason one may take away blood in the vigor, that it may
not too much oppress and burden the spirits. The objection is easily refuted; a
very thin diet is commended, that the spirits may not be drawn from the
concoction whilst they are busied in subduing the Febril matter; but not
because of the too great increase of blood, since the mouths of the vessels lie
almost flat, and there is rather a greater proportion of it required, to supply
thence a greater quantity of spirits.

It is not difficult, to extract from the premises a reason for two bleedings
in continual Fevors, since it is to be celebrated in the commencement of the
Disease, or the beginning of the augment, though very seldom; for if it be
performed as often as possible at the time of the beginning, namely in the space
of four or six days, you ought not to open a vein beyond the second time; for
there ought to be at least two days between each bleeding, to recover strength;
whence it is apparent there is scarce occasion left for a third, unless thereby
you intend to annoy nature in the augment, and to cut off from her strength.
But if a Fevor be attended with malignity, bleeding ought not to be attempted
or repeated without a great deal of caution.

What ought to be done in the beginning of a Fevor has been hitherto
discussed. At present, we must take into consideration the cure of the augment
or increase of a Fevor. First of all we must be resolved, whether at the time
of the growing of the Fevor the fermentation is to be promoted. Physicians here
are blinded in a mist, being utterly ignorant of the stages of Fevors, they
follow a heedless and impious practice, daily tainting their hands with the
death of their Patients; what compass do they steer by, to arrive at the exact
minute of opening a vein, or giving a purge? what mark do they aim at, when
they force pouders and cordials on their Patients? and if there should a
faculty of suppressing continual putrid and malignant Fevors be allowed them,
being ignorant of the manner and punctual time of giving them, they are capable
of doing as much mischief with them, as a mad Barber with a Rasor.

Hippocrates being persuaded by this reason, (which is to be rightly noted)
does take the beginning of his Aphorisms from an observation to be minded above
all others in the art of Physic. (...) that is, life is short, art is long,
time is swift, experimenting is dangerous, etc.

It is the third member of this precept, that expresses what is to our purpose,
viz. Time is swift, that is, the exact opportunity and occasion is of great
moment; especially in acute diseases; for the same medicine in respect of time
does both kill and cure. That a Fevor does make as it were four stages, vulgar
observation tells us. It passes the first whilst the fevorish matter lies
hidden about the subservient entrails, the Stomach, Pancreas, Lungs, the
Gallbladder, Glandules of the Mesentery, one or all of them, thence vomiting
up into the blood certain tumultuous miasms, that force it into a heat. As soon
as the foresaid matter is thronged out of its lurking places, and forcibly
rushed into the great vessels, the symptoms thereupon raging in heat do
forthwith show a countenance of the augment or increase. And when the whole
mine of febril matter is quite floated into the channel of blood, then the
(...) or vigor is near at hand. At that time, there is a close engagement with
the febril enemy, and its force being broke, Nature by her victorious arms does
expel those rebellious intestine corpuscles and separated humors into several
sinks of the body; the disease in this manner declining, the sick man does
arrive safe and well. This expedition does contain some particulars very worthy
of note. 1. At the first of the engagement, nature does encounter with the
Fevor at a distance, some steems being only scattered abroad before, the gross
of the preternatural matter lodging in the deep places without the vessels, nor
at all mixed with the torrent of blood. 2. The Fevor increasing, the lesser part
of the matter is confused with the blood that flows by, but the greater part
does as yet remain still and quiet in the spring. 3. At the vigor, all
preternatural bodies are closely intermixed and confused with the natural. From
hence does shine a light, whereby the bottom of the difficulty wound up in the
foregoing discourse may be plainly known and discovered. Wherefore since
fermentation does tend to the same end concoction does, namely of subduing the
heterogeneous quality of the adventitious minims that are got into the blood;
and that whilst the disease is yet in the augment, only part of the Febril
matter is crept into the blood, and not thoroughly insinuated into the depth of
the forementioned scarlet juice: it will prove a help no ways deceitful, if the
sick man does take a Diaphoretick draught, well impregnated with volatile salts,
whereby he may be put into a smart sweat; certainly a very proper means,
through which the vital power may free it self from those hurtful corpuscles;
since as yet the spirits are numerous and vigorous, and are not so much engaged
by the intestine enemy; whence consequently they have still a power of
expelling; the fumes and soot have not yet filled up the passages of the body,
nor pores of the skin, being left open for natures cutaneous evaporation; a
part only of the Febril matter is here and there loosly intermixed with the
blood, and may easily be forced out thence. From all which it does plainly
appear, and is inferred that fermentation (fie upon the abuse of the word) is
in this case to be rendered easy; the liquor of the veins being thereby
attenuated, occasion is given to the spirits to fly together to make an united
force to grind off the sting of the Febril matter, and thereupon to expel it.
But though the fermentation is to be rendered easy, it is by no means to be
increased and intended, for that would put the Bitumen of the blood into too
high a flame, and through the crackling and vibration of the salts would
occasion a very dangerous storm in the blood. Of this nature are almost all the
remedies that are proposed by the Fermenters; namely Aqua Epidemica, Spirits of
Hartshorn, and all the other fiery cordials, as shall hereafter be resolved
more at large. Neither do I esteem those reasons I have now produced so much,
but that the many experiences whereby I have delivered some hundreds after the
manner aforesaid of their continual Fevors without suffering them to come to
the height, do more clearly discover the matter.

According to the mark spoken of before let us enquire, what harbor this Rhomb
of giving hot cordials by spoonfuls will bring them to; undoubtedly if the
Fevor be any thing outrageous, there is danger of shipwreck. For things that
are taken by spoonfuls contribute matter to the inflammation and fire, increase
the matter of the soot, and really stop the pores; moreover, do not concoct the
least part of the febril matter, neither do they separate or expel it being
concocted. Wherefore if a Fevor is of its own accord carried on to the height
without doing any thing, and the febril matter be more closely and intimately
knitted with the blood and spirits, and the whole mine be disturbed, and
profused into the great vessels, certainly in doing ill, they must speed much
worse. What they have acted in the increment, has just now been showed; at
present pray give your judgment; are your toothless wifes in the country more
dextrous in curing a Fevor, or Fermentitious Physicians? Neither are the sick
themselves so void of sense, but that they are sensible, they are precipitated
by the burning cordials of Fermentators in the state of their disease into
their too early Tombs. The forementioned Cordials derive their burning nature
from an impure Sulphur, which does not only plentifully abound in the spirits
of wine, the menstruum of all those compounded alexipharmacal liquors, but the
ingredients themselves, especially the aromaticks contain excrementitious
Sulphurs and impure salts; whence it happens, that those that have liberally
taken of them, arrive sooner to the end of their fatal journey. Wherefore it is
plain enough, that by these things the fermentation is intended, the mass of
blood is forced into a fiercer fire and burning, and the whole sink of the
Febril matter, which only partly flows to the blood, and partly remains in its
hidden station, is violently sucked up, and drawn in by the circulating juices,
and is united with them in every particle; so that to give the prefaced
cordials, which increase the fermentation, and do not at all render it easy,
by a most subtle and diaphoretick virtue, is with purpose to kindle the body
into a flame, and rob the sick of his life. However that inquiry may not be
pretermitted, what admirable effects do issue from the fore instanced Aqua
Epidemica, we are to be resolved from the examination of the context of the
simples. Tormentil Root is in the front, whose power does reside in a ponderous
fixed salt, and for that reason no part of it does ascend the Alembick.
Liquorish in this place is termed alexipharmacal, which was never attributed to
it by any Physician, nevertheless it was possibly added, to abate the acrimony
of the other ingredients: but since it does also obtuse the attractive virtue
of the Menstruum, and render it incapable of attracting the salts of the
simples* neither does the least particle of it climb out of the body to the
head of the Still; certainly it ought justly to be rejected hence. Moreover,
who but a mad man would commend Mugwort, Agrimony, Betony, and other such like
herbs, against the Plague, according as they are inserted by the former age in
this composed medicine? These though they use some small force against the
venom of the air, yet other Alexipharmacals, as long as they are far more
deservedly commended, for oppugning this Epidemick venom with all their force,
ought to be preferred.

What concerns Spirits of Hartshorn, you would stand in a doubt, whether they
be more prevalent in their pernicious qualities, or in their ungrateful taste.
This latter is taken notice of by all, that have had the occasion of tasting
them; the former is very amply asserted from the complaints of those that have
used them; for they are no sooner past the throat, but have caused a furious
burning in the stomach and entrails, raised the fermentation to the highest
pitch, put the whole structure into a fire, and destroyed the spirits and
strength of nature. All these evils do proceed from an impure and venomous
sulphur, that is latent in the spirits of Hartsborn, and corroding fiery
volatile salt, that is united with the foresaid sulphur. Notwithstanding though
the aforesaid spirits are so virulent and deleterious, they are not quite to be
rejected, for experience and authority do witness, that the most mortal venoms,
namely, Antimony, Quicksilver, Arsenick, etc. do contain within their bowels an
alexipharmacal virtue, which is very powerful in expelling of venom, and other
subtle malignitles. Wherefore if the spirits of Hartshorn by a particular
preparation are purged of that virulent sulphur, and the force of its corrosive
salts extinguished, there will be remaining only a pure cordial sulphur, and a
most subtle volatile salt, which by their close union and coalescence do not
only contribute strength to the vital spirits, but with an united force first
extinguish the malignant miasms, and afterward expel them. These spirits do
not burn and inflame, like others, but consist of a pure ethereal and most
penetrating body, and are famed not for intending the fermentation, but
rendering it apt and easy, whereon the efficacy of the cure does chiefly depend.

The fame of Lapis Contrajerva against putrid and malignant Fevors is spread
among most people, but how deservedly, let those judge, that have made trial of
it. The Contrajerva roots, which are the base of the composition, besides dregs
and a mealy thickness, contain neither volatile, not fixed salt, that is
effectual, nor any quality, that may be discovered by scent or taste; but on the
other hand, it is inferred from many experiments, though the root has been
given in a double dose to those, that lay sick in fevors, that it scarce did a
pins worth of good. The Virginian root does potently heat and kindle the
Bitumen of the humors; so that it does not effect so much good by its
diaphoretick virtue, as it does harm by its caustic quality. Cochenil grains
do recreate the sight by its color, but not at all the vital spirits by its
cordial virtue. Priests do swear on the words of the Gospel, but some
Physicians swear more religiously on the stupendous virtues of Extractum
Cardiacum, described above. But whence such great virtues should proceed, may
be lawfully inquired into. Certainly, in all extracts the most active particles
do together with the Menstruum, that is evaporated, fly away into the air, a
gross dreg that is without any soul in it, remaining in the bottom, and
constituting the body of the extract; pray tell me, are there not wonderful
faculties, for suppressing malignant Fevors, hidden in the bowels of such a
kind of Extract? Moreover since Narcoticks are the chiefest parts of it, the
vital spirits being now engaged at the deepest, and somewhat giving way, are
not to be quite cast down and overthrown by such Narcoticks, or their strength
to be settered by them. Wherefore those things are to be given with a great
deal of caution and scruple, especially to such, as lie languishing, to avoid
the throwing them into a sleeping bottomless pit, as most may remember, has
happened to many. Others endeavor to relieve cast down Nature with precious
fragments, Bezoar stone, Pearl, Coral, and shelly medicines, as if they would
redeem her for a certain price, from a deplorable state; but to no purpose, for
these premised stones, since they do chiefly consist of a ponderous earth,
though pure and transparent, being taken inwardly, through their weight sink to
the bottom of the stomach, which for that reason they do extremely burden, and
oppress, and occasion obstructions round about. Under what notion they refresh
the heart, and vital spirits, and oppugn the malignity, has not been my luck
hitherto to discover; it is true, through their splendour and rays they recreate
the optic, and likewise sympathetically the other animal spirits; but do not
in the least strengthen, but by dispersing the sight rather weaken them. When
they are reduced into powder, they contain nothing that is volatile, nor any
fixed salt that may be advantageous for the liquor that floats in the stomach to
extract, unless they are calcined before. If you instance that the acid liquor
of the stomach, which goes by the name of a Ferment, does extract the tincture
out of them, that contains all their energy, and entire faculties, take for
answer, that, 1. At the time of a Fevor, the stomach is quite deprived of that
acid humor. 2. The tincture of almost all stones are not real tinctures, but
alterations and concoctions of the Menstruum, proceeding from the matter, that
is to be extracted, which notwithstanding does not communicate the least thing
to it, since after the extraction is made, if it be weighed in a scale there is
not a grain of its weight lessened. Moreover, what concerns the Bezoar stone, I
have known seventeen grains of it given to a Vintners child, that was scarce
two years old, without the least operation or alteration following upon it.
Some that were grown up, who had taken half a dram of it, found no kind of
alteration, but an oppression and weight at their stomach; besides I pass by,
that the greater part of those stones is fictitious, and counterfeit.

At the conclusion of this chapter, there remains something to be said,
concerning the use of Epispasticks. According as they are usually applied by
Physicians now a days, their greatest benefit is, that a few (namely such as
lay ill of Fevors) having undergone the punishment of Vesicatories, had
recovered their former health, and many that had received the same kind of
punishment, were dead. At present ought to be inquired into the matter of fact,
whether those few ought rather to bless Vesicatories for their recovery, than
many others to curse them for being the occasion of their death. The case is to
be decided by the consequence; a few that have used Vesicatories, have escaped;
many that have used Vesicatories, have perished: it may then probably be
concluded, that the use of Vesicatories is pernicious and mortal. But let us
take the reason of the thing into consideration; for the most part, that small
number, that have escaped from a continual Fevor, (after the concoction was
past, which through occasion of their lowness of strength was not discovered)
have had Vesicatories applied, which by reason of the concoction and separation
have drawn forth a great puddle of salt and sharp water into great bubbles; but
those, on whom the precited Vesicatories have been affixt, where there has
been no concoction or separation before, have had a small quantity of moisture
extracted into low blains, which for the most part is a mortal sign; so that it
does appear thence, that the cause of their cure and recovery is not to be
ascribed to the Vesicatories, but to the subduction and concoction of the
malignant water and heterogeneous humors.

Secondly, in Epispastick medicaments the Cantharides perform the chief work,
the relation of whose properties I judge may be advantageous. They are of a
most hot and burning nature, they often occasion Fevors, great tortures and
pains, a disturbance of the humors in the vessels, and a very sharp
irritation, which a dysury and bloody making of water do often follow, they are
extremely hurtful to the brain and sinews, and suddenly destroy ones strength,
so that they are marked with a signature of the most malignant venom, though
only applied externally.

Wherefore if Epispastick plasters, being thick spread with Cantharides, are
applied to a Patient, that is ill of a malignant Fevor, at the time of the
vigor, when his strength is decayed, do they not increase the Fevor, put the
malignant humors into a rage, heap up one malignity on another, quite oppress
the principal faculties, destroy the forces, and certainly deprive the Patient
of his life? Possibly here may be objected, that though Vesicatories do
occasion a great deal of hurt per se to a fevorish body, yet per accidens they
do abundance of good by exhausting the malignant serum, and putting the
external parts to pain, whereby there is a revulsion made of hurtful humors
and steems from the brain. Hereunto is to be replied, that in this case, the
blood is most frequently wanting of moisture (whence the febril fire burns
the more violent) so that it is possible only to attract a very few drops,
whereby a heap of very great evils is brought upon the Patient. Secondly, since
malign corpuscles are chiefly seated in fuliginous salts, you cannot possibly
by any device extract them; for at the time of the state, they are so very
closely and entirely soldred to the humors, that to draw them asunder, is by
no means feasible. That these things are so, is proved by this argument; The
Ichor or bloody moisture, that by an Epispastick is attracted outward at the
time of declination, or concoction and separation, does swell out in a great
quantity under the blains, which when cut does leap out, being of a sharp taste,
fiery and salt, because it is laden with those foresaid fuliginous and malignant
salts; but being expelled at an unseasonable time, appears limpid, insipid and
fresh. Moreover I will now tell you, what the vulgar will scarce give credit
to; namely, that Vesicatories being applied at the declination to parts, that
are not so convenient, have very suddenly snatched sick Patiens away out of this
sublunary orb. A certain person, that was ill of a burning and malignant Fevor,
aged thirty two, after he had lain sick fourteen days, not without some signs
of perfect concoction and separation, in manner that on the fifteenth he walked
several times up and down his room, being attended with all characters of
health, to expel the latent malignity outward, had by the advice of two
fermenting Physicians, at the hour of Rest, large Vesicatory Plasters applied
to the nape of the neck, and the wrists. The following morning the Fevor was
bursted out again burning enough, his speech was taken away, and was grown
light headed; but that they might make an end of their task, on the sixteenth
they took the man out of the world. Doubtless the malignant salts being
attracted out of the whole body to the brain, and nervous parts, did very
suddenly extinguish his forces and spirits.

Many other tragical cases I could produce for testimonials, did not the
purpose of a compendious tract dissuade me, wherefore take the precited in lieu
of all. It may be stated for a certain, that at the beginning of a malignant
Fevor, especially when it has attracted the seminary of malignity out of the
air, (which seldom happens) Epispasticks being applied to the remote parts, the
symptoms have been subdued immediately, and the Fevor extinguished; but then
they were applied within the third or fourth day. Likewise, being affixt to one
that is taken with a pestilential infection, they have been very advantageous.
In some cases they may also be applied to convenient parts at the declination.

My business does only permit me to premise these particulars in this first
Section; in the second section which will e're long follow, I shall apply my
self to give you a description of putrid continual and malignant Fevors,
likewise of the Small Pox, and Meazels, by their foundation, subject and
symptoms, and likewise shall subjoin practical observations, and the true
method of cure and remedies. In the third section shall discourse of the
division of Fevors, and in particular of intermittent Fevors.

Upon so important an affair as the Practical part of Malignant Fevors, I ought
not to make so sudden a recess, as to leave those salutiserous maxims, premised
in this Tract, only astipulated with reason, but to recommend them to you
confirmed by experience, abstracted from those cures, which for success and
happy event are not to be conferred with the vu^gar methods. Among the number
of them I could here produce, shall only insert some few of the last years
date, whence a proof sufficiently evident may easily be reduced.

The last preceding autumn I was called to one Mr. Van Mildert, a Dutch
Merchant of considerable note, aged about twenty nine, of temperament Pituitous
and Melancholic, not robust of constitution, but of a rare texture of body. On
the Sunday he was surprised with drowsiness and heaviness of his head, a
Catarrhe in his throat, an ulcerous lassitude, a rigor or shivering and
shaking, a nauseousness or inclination to vomit, and some other symptoms
dependant on the former: during the first four days he used the prescriptions
of one of the elder City Physicians, the chief whereof, to the best of my
memory, directed some vulnerary vegetables for a decoction; another was a
decoction of Carduus B. in posset ale, intended to move a gentle vomit, and
after that, advised bleeding. The fifth day I made my first visit, and found
the Patients sense of sight and hearing much diminisht, his pulse extremely
languid, inequal in motion and debility, a little more frequent than in the
state of health, the urine thick, turbid, and a little high colored; the
tongue scabrous, red, dry and fissured; his thirst was so extreme, that no
quantity of any former drink could in the least abate it. By intervals his
rational faculty was perverted with a Delirium that would continue several
hours. Touching his sleep some days and nights he was wholly restless, other
days soporous and comatick* a case of greater difficulty I have not met with,
neither have I observed any to escape such symptoms, being universally declared
mortal, viz. the pulse at the beginning extremely languid, the tendons of the
wrist convell'd and vibrating, the animal faculty suppressed and broken, the
urine very crude and indigested, etc. This being a malignant Fevor and
contagious, (for the Patient had lately conceived the seminary of his distemper
at Amsterdam, where it was then Epidemick,) certainly is a case that may give
evident testimony of the effect of the method premised, and asserts the
rationality of the practice thereof. For only at the beginning I ordered a
Laxative Glyster, and not after; prescribed an Alexipharmacal Apozem with
particular ingredients to allay the fury of those lixivious and absorbing
salts, that continually sublimed to the upper part of the stomach, and
occasioned his excessive drought, which proved so successful, that in twenty
four hours after, no more complaint was made of it, during the whole course of
sickness. The sixth, seventh, and eighth day were exhibited greater doses of
Alexiterial powders, and decoctions, than afterward; soon upon this the vital
faculty began to revive, and pulsate so, that it might sensibly be perceived by
the touch, his urin began to be digested, and was voided in greater quantities.
On the eleventh day the urine was perfectly concocted, and the pulsation of the
arteries was vigorous; all his symptoms did much abate in their violence,
except the deprava^ion of his rational faculty, which persisted by reason of
some febril steems, and calcined salts, that ascended to the brain. It was
here, if at any time, that Epispasticks might be of some use in revelling those
acrimonious steems, and exhausting part of the salin serum, that abounded and
was separated from the blood, likewise there being present all the good signs
of concoction, seldom does any ill issue from them. The thirteenth day they
were applied to the legs, and arms, according to expectation they attracted a
vast quantity of serum, which continued to flow copiously for some days after.
The Patient was perfectly restored.

The first Aphorism of Hippocrates, i e. Occasion and opportunity is of great
moment, is in no case so important as in Fevors, especially if malignant; for
every day and hour you have an opportunity of applying remedies, that for the
most part do cure the distemper; but if you slip this opportunity, and those
remedies are advised late, that ought to be applied soon, and those soon, that
should be administered late, you must certainly destroy and kill the Patient. As
for instance, in the case here recited, if Epispasticks had been applied on the
tenth or eleventh, before a digestion, or if he had been blooded after the
sixth, or if a Purgative Glyster had been made use of near the state of the
disease, or if Antifebrils and Alexipharmacals had not been given in the
beginning in large quantities, whilst there was strength and spirits to subdue
the materia febrilis, in all probability this person must have stoopt to the
distemper.

The Malignant Fevor, by which Mr. Drakes son in Hind Court in Fleetstreet was
attackt in August last, in point of eminent danger and difficulty, does almost
parallel the preceding. He was aged twenty four, and of a sanguine temperament.
It was from a pernicious air on board of a ship of war, and the use of hot
liquors (which for the avoiding inconveniences, arising from the nauseous
salin vapors of the Sea, most do submit themselves unto) this distemper had
taken its growth, and with a speedy career was advanced to a great defect of
vital spirits, the arteries scarce giving any testimony of their pulsation;
likewise a black scabrous sooty tongue, an insatiable drouth, a most piquant
burning heat, want of sleep, anguors, continual jactitauons, dejection of
appetite, nauseousness of stomach, frequent and oppressed respiration, and an
intermittent delirium were symptoms that were very urgent. The seventh day gave
an indubious remark of the malignity, the Patients skin being universally
pencill'd with red spots, Petechiae rubrae. The course of remedies was thus
managed. The second day he was blooded out of the right arm, to nine ounces;
the third day received a laxative glyster in the morning; at four in the
afternoon, an Alexiterial Apozem of Rad. Scorzon. Bistort. acetos. fol. ulmar.
pimpinel. galeg. dictamn. cret. dracunt. sem. Hormin. citr. there was also
added a small proportion of scordium and Absynth. Romans which latter seems to be
the sole specific against naseousness and vomiting in Fevors. To these
forementioned were added some salts and spirits to contemperate their heat and
refine their sulphurs. The first, second, and third doses of this Apozem were
very liberal. A day or two after was prescribed an antilipyrious powder of
Bezoara. mineral. Coral. Terra Sigil. Sal. Prunel. etc. By which means the body
was gradually promoted to a Diaphoresis, and Diuresis, and lastly there
appeared a large Parotis or inflammation under his ear, a symptom
Pathognomonick to pestilency and malignity, which being suppurated, deterged,
and consolidated, the Patient arrived to a perfect state of health. Moreover
both in this and the former case, was prescribed a cordial julep, to take by
intervals, for the present support of the vital and animal spirits. Likewise
twice there was made use of an Opiat. A Diarrhaea, or looseness survening, or
concomitant to a malign Fevor, is judged a symptom as urgent, as any other
whatsoever, and does not only require particular remedies, but often such, as the
malign Fevor does counterindicate, and consequently must show a very ill aspect
to the life and recovery of the Patient. Such was the case of Mrs. Read on
Lambeth Hill, aged thirty, and of temperament phlegmatic and melancholic, her
Fevor was ushered in with a looseness so very importune, that on the ninth day,
her Visitors and Neighbors expected her departure: on the same day it was I
made my first visit, and having examined, what was prescribed by her former
Physician, (who likewise had a very ill opinion of this distemper) and
detecting some great errors in this course, was in hope that by their
rectification, and the prescription of means more rational, I should restore
her to former health. I prescribed a Restringent Cordial, Anodyne Glysters,
Antisebril Adstringent Powders, and an Alexipharmacal Apozem. Thrice also there
was an Hypnotick given. But the chief means was the method, (which I need not
here repeat) that proved so successful, in conquering this dangerous distemper.

I shall forbear inserting the recital of many other cures of this nature,
since these are sufficient to convince you of the truth and excellency of this
method; and pass over to an observation I have universally remarked; that all
or most malignant Fevors, though dexterously cured, leave such an impression on
the bowels, that thereby within a month, two or three, another distemper is
engendered, that for the most part proves obstinate to cure, and in this
particular they imitate the manner of operation of venoms or poisons, which
being accidentally taken inward (and though afterward well cured) yet occasion
such an impression on the bowels and blood, that in a sortnight or month, or
sometime longer, either the Patient loses his nails, the hair of his head, and
the cuticula, or upper skin of his body; or falls into a Jaundice, Consumption,
Dysentery, or some other distemper.

The distempers that are posthumous to malignant Fevors, are chiefly a tertian
Ague, a Pulmonick Consumption, a Hectic Fevor, Rhumatisms, Scurvey, Dysentery,
Yellow jaundice, Cachexia, and a Cephalaea.

Among these the Pulmonick Consumption seems to transcend the others, in
respect of danger and stubbornness of cure, and does very frequently grow out
of the cinders of a malign Fevor.

One Mr. Martin a French Merchant, his age not exceeding thirty, and lodging in
Fanchurch street, partly through a hot temperament of his bowels, that was
natural, partly through the fatigue of his journey from Plymouth hither, and
intemperance of diet, fell into the burning flames of a malignant Fevor, which
his purpre spots breaking forth on the seventh day throughout the whole field
of his skin, did amply detect, whereunto adjoining his preceding vomiting, and
most importune hiccough, his impatient thirst, dry red fissured tongue,
deplorable headache, flammy urine, and low frequent inequal pulse, spoke the
distemper to threaten an ill event. Having ordained his diet to be very thin,
and prescribed a laxative Glyster in the morning, being the second day of his
Fevor; advised eight ounces to be extracted by phlebotomy out of the right arm,
at four in the afternoon. The blood appeared very thin, and in point of color
tending toward a blew, whereinto I instilled a few drops of spirits of Nitre,
to discover the constitution of it. Upon the commixture, the color turned to a
vitellin citrin; an indication the blood was very sulphurous and hot, and not
easily to be reduced to a Crasis. Six hours after bleeding, he was to take a
dose of this following mixture.

R. Rad. Scorzoner. rec. ij. fol. ulmar. lujul. Rut. Caprar. ana mij. Sem.
Citr. ss. Contundantur optime in mortar. marmor. pistil. lign. sensim
affundendo Aq. Card. Ben. scabios. Ceras. nigr. ana iiij.
Liquor valide express. digerendo calore leni Balnei depuretur, in quo dissolv.
Sir. Borrag. Melis. sacchar. perl. ana j. m. f. Iulap. Capiat v. bis per diem
mane and sero.
To every dose of this mixture was added half an ounce of my Aqua Alexiteria,
which wrought so great effects as in few days to extinguish this violent heat,
and expel the malignity. His ordinary drink was the decoction of Hartshorn, and
Scorzonera root, sweetened with syrup of Succory and Borrage.

His tongue growing very scabrous and foul, he made use of this following
collution with great success.

R. Mucilag. sem. cydonior. iij. Suc. plantag. j. Mell. rosar. vj. Sal. prunel.
ij. m. f. Collut. quo saepe colluat os.
July was scarce begun, before this Patient had quitted his sick bed, and was
congratulated by all his acquaintance for the unexpected restitution of his
health; But what was usually subsequent to a malignant Fevor, happened here
also; some three months after, another distemper attempted his lungs, in so
violent a manner of coughing, that in a short time the whole body was
emaciated, and depredated by a Hectic Fevor, against which these remedies were
prescribed.

R. Rad. buglos. ss. Iujub. sebest. ana Par. ij. Flor. borrag. violar. Pj.
Glycyr. ras. j. Tamarind. iij. Sem. faenis. d. ij. Coq. in Aq. Font. q. s. In
Colat. iiij. Dissolve man. Calabr. j. Sir. ros. sol. ss. m. f. Pot.
This operated four times.

The next day I ordered a fontinel to be cut in the left leg above the knee.
The third day he began with this decoction.

R. Rad. Sarsaparil. v. Lign. santal. citr. Rasur. Corn. cerv. ana j. Coq. in.
Aq. font. lb. viij. ad consump^. medietat. sub fin. addendo Rad. Personat. maj.
ij. Lapat. Acut. j. Fol. Heder. ter. farfar. ana m. iij. Iujub. sebest. ana
Par. xv. Dactyl. enuc. Par. xij. Passul. mund. iiij. Glycyr. ras. j ss. Sem.
Anis. x. In Colat. dissolv. mel. coct. vj. Sacchar. cand. iij. m. f. Apoz.
Capiat iiij. ter per diem horis medicis.
Besides, an hour before he took the drink in the morning, and an hour after at
night, I gave him twenty grains of my Specific. antihectic. mixed with a dram of
sugar of Roses.

To these means we sensibly observed the disease give way daily, by the
digestion of the acrimonious matter, and the facil expectoration of it, and at
the termination of three weeks his cough was quite ceased, his appetite
returned, and began to increase in flesh, and so to enjoy his health, wherein
he has been happy ever since without the least relapse.

Another president of the subsequence of a Dysentery upon a malign Fevor, I
shall instance in the distempers of Mr. Cocu, an Elder of the French Church in
London, whose age was little short of threescore, his temperament bilious and
melancholy, and of habit of body very thin and maigre. There was scarce ten
weeks interval between a torrid Fevor he had sustained, and a violent bilious
diarrhaea, that in the space of two or three days changed into a dysentery,
whose fury was discernable in insupportable gripes, and vast discharges of
blood by stool: the weak pulsation of his arteries, signified a great impair of
the vital faculty. A crazy constitution, a declining age, and a torminous
Haemorrhagious dysentery imposed an obligation on me of proceeding cautiously
and gently against the distemper, but withal considering the quick motion it
uses in its tendence to a fatal determination, required medicines, that should
avert it, by speedily stopping its career; to the accomplishing of which was
prescribed first this following bole.

R. Rhab. el. pulv. ss. Bezoard. min. Ter. sigil. ana gr. xij. Sal. Absynth.
gr. viij. Laudan opiat. gr. j. Conserv. ros. vet. q. s. m. f. Boli duo
deaurandi quorum capiat unum vesper. sub ingr. in lect. and alterum sequenti
aurora.
These Boles gave two or three dejections more, than he used to have
ordinarily, but without occasioning any gripes, and moving at such great
intervals between each stool, did not at all diminish his strength. Likewise
sleeping moderately in those intervals rendered those turbulent humors very
pacifick, neither did he eject any blood all that day; the following night
slept very quietly. The next day the number of his motions was much lessened,
but some tincture of Blood was still observable in the ordure. The distemper
continued at this degree some two or three days, and then I gave order the
forementioned Boles should be repeated, which put an end to this great malady;
for the next day had not above two or three motions. For his ordinary drink was
advised this Emulsion.

R. Amygdal. d. excort. j. Sem. cucurb. ij. Sem. cydon. ss. Sem. papav. alb. j
ss. contund. in mortar. marm. pistil. lign. sensim affundendo Decoct. ras.
corn. cerv. lb. ij. in express. dissolv. sacchar. albi iij. Aq. cinam. iij. m.
f. Emuls. capiat ad libit.
This cordial did him great service in supporting his vital faculty.

R. Aq. rosar. iiij. Aq. menth. Ceras nigr. ana j ss. Aq. Cinam. ss. Spir.
menth. j. Confect. Alkerm. j. Sir. cydon. j. cort. citr. ss. m. f. Iulep.
Capiat cochl. ij. altern. hor.
Those days excepted, on which he took his cathartick bole, he made use of this
cordial and adstringent Electuary.

R. Corn. cerv. ust. j. cui instill. spir. corn. Cerv. rectif. gut. x. and
conter. in mortar. Vitr. huic add Coral. rub. opt. laevig. Ter. sigil.
Bezoard. min. ana ss. Croc. angl. gr. ij. Diacydon. s. q. s. m. f. Electuar.
pro duabus. dosib. matut. and vespert.
Since no practice or method of curing a distemper ought to be received, unless
it can be justified by the application to several ages and both sexes; I am
induced to give you the narrative of a malignant Fevor, Captain Mannings
daughter in Bellyard Kingstreet was afflicted with: her age was between nine
and ten years; her temperament sanguine and bilious, habit of body thin and
lean, and in respect of the whole composure weakly. The second day the
malignity appeared in a delirium, and oppression of the vital faculty; her heat
was very great, and drought very urgent. The same day about four in the
afternoon I advised, she should bleed about five ounces out of the right arm;
the next morning a glyster was given. Her ordinary drink was this following
decoction.

R. Rasur. Corn. cer. j. Rad. scorzoner. j ss. Tamarind. ss. Coq. in Aq. font.
q. s. in Colat. lb. ij. dissolv. Sir. acetos. borrag. ana j ss. m. f. Apoz.
Capiat ad libit.
Some four hours after bleeding I prescribed an ample dose of an Alexiterial
Julep, with twelve drops of Essentified spirit of Hartshorn dropped into it, the
same was to be repeated for two mornings and nights following; the operation of
these medicines was signal in a gentle sweat and breathing, which on the
seventh day extinguished the Fevor and malignity. Though this course proved so
successful, as to restore her to a perfect health; I am apt to suspect that
about the next Autumn she will be troubled with an intermittent Tertian,
because malignant Fevors, as I observed before, generally leave an imp^ession
on the bowels, through which in a short time another distemper is engendered.
This observation not long since was verified in the tertian ague, one Mr. Powel
a Tailor in Kingstreet Covent Garden was surprised with, three months after I
had cured him of a very malignant and dangerous Fevor. The principal medicine,
to which I attributed the cure of this Fevor, was spirit of Hartshorn,
depurated of its poisonous Sulphur and salt, by a late invented process. That
the sulphur and salt I do defecate by the forementioned process, from spirits
of Hartshorn, is venomous, appears by these circumstances. 1. The quantity of
two scruples is a proportion sufficient to kill a dog. 2. The scent of it does
commonly occasion vomiting, and a raging headache. 3. The spirit of Hartshorn
that is thus freed and depurated from this noxious sulphur and salt is far more
powerful in provoking sweat and urine in the same quantity and dose, than the
common spirit. Neither does the said spirit cause that burning heat, anguor,
and suffocation, which the common usually does.

His Tertian Ague, though the paroxysms were durable to ten or twelve hours,
and the other symptoms very fierce, yet was easily conquered by taking three
doses of my Pil. Polychrestae.

Since a greater number of particulars than two or three is required to render
an observation universal, I shall insert one or two more. I have a page or two
before given you the journal of the malignant Fevor of Mr. Van Mildert; it was
in him also the preceding observation was confirmed: for about two or three
months after his recovery from the said Fevor, he was taken with a violent
Rigor* i. e. shivering and shaking, a raging headache, vomiting, a great
drought, a bitter taste in his mouth, and after the Rigor a very smart heat, and
toward the latter part of his paroxysm did suffer a most immoderate sweat, a
sign this single tertian Ague would prove very obstinate. After a Laxative
Glyster, there was eight ounces of blood drawn out of the right median on the
intermittent day. Every other day he took a dose of a Vinum Medicatum composed
out of Hepaticks and purgatives done up in a bag, and insused in an anatick
measure of Rhenish Wine and Succory water. Having used this thrice he
intermitted eight or ten days, and then took two doses of Antisebril Pills,
which ^erfectly cured him of this stubborn Tertian.

Mrs. Wilkins a Tradesmans Wise in Drury Lane, three or four days after
delivery of a child, was on a sudden taken with a shaking, after that with a
very scorching heat, and a oppressed frequent respiration; the second night
raved, and was very turbulent. This Fevor, which from those symptoms might
justly be termed malignant, took its rise from her wine Cawdels, and supping of
hot Spirits, which the good women had given her, to support her strength,
whereunto her eating meat, as Pigeons, and other heavy food, did much
contribute, in the causing an ebullition of the blood, and suppressing her
Lochia. I advised her to have the Saphana opened, for derivation and revulsion,
and caused Suppedanea to be applied composed of Pickle-herrings, Soap and Salt
of Tartar: Prescribed Whey made by instilling some few drops of spirit of Salt
into Milk, hereof a half pint to be taken warm three times a day with xxv drops
of essentified spirits of Hartshorn; the success of these remedies appeared in
the quick return of her purgamenta, and occasioning a moderate Diaphoresis,
which soon put a termination to the Fevor. She enjoyed her health near ten
weeks, about which time she sell into a melancholy, and a great palpitation of
the heart, not without frights and fears. This continued eight days, when the
Moon being at full, she grew maniack or Bethlem mad. I ordered she should be
kept in a dark room, and be blooded nine ounces out of the right arm, two days
after gave her a dose of Hartmans Antimonial, Cathartick Pills, which operated
very well. Upon three days intermission repeated the same Pills. Next morning
she took this following Electuary,

R. Vitriol. Lunae fix. Bezoard. Lunar. Sulphur. Antimon. ana ij. sal. succin.
ss. Conserv. Borrag. j. m. f. Elect. Dos. j. mane and sero superbibendo seri
lactis borraginati vj.
For her o^dinary drink one ounce of Tinctura Antimaniaca was added to six
gallons of small ale. Her hair was shaved off, and every morning somented with
the decoction of Marsh Mallows, Violet Leaves, Pellitory, St. John's and
Chamomil flowers, whereunto was affused some spirit of Amber. There was also an
issue made above the left knee; the use hereof in eight and twenty days did
restore her to her former senses, and perfectly freed her from that
distraction, so that she has never been troubled with it since. The malignant
Fevor I formerly cured Mrs. Lamot of (whose Husband is a Merchant in Thames
street, near Fishmongers Hall,) and some weeks after a violent Rhumatism
following, which was removed by two bleedings and a dose or two of Hydrotick
Pills, is a farther confirmation to me of the preceding observation, which to
illustrate by a greater number of instances I judge is needless; and therefore
shall proceed to recommend to you a remark of use so important, that it may
gain the Physician repute and save the lives of many Patients. The observation
is such that it gives me occasion to admire so many preceding ages have so
grossly erred in their practice, and does likewise detect the cause why
malignant, and indeed most Synochical Fevors prove so often mortal.

It is an universal theorem, that in these Northern Climates Fevors are
terminated not critically, but slowly and gradually, by sweat and urine, ( per
Diaphoresin and Diuresin) Through the former, viz. sweat, the salin volatile,
and fuliginous matter is expelled; through the latter, namely urine, the fixed
salin and lixiviated matter is excern'd. To accomplish this usually (as I said
before) are prescribed Diaphoreticks, as Aqua Epidemica, Theriacalis, Scordii
Composita, etc. of one, or more of these, the measure of an ounce or two is
mixed with the same proportion of Alexiterial simple waters, and hereof two or
three spoonfuls is to be given, every second, third, or fourth hour, according
to the Capricio of the Physician, undoubtedly the effect does not answer his
expectation, and no sweat appears; upon this it may be double the quantity is
to be used, and yet not a drop of sweat is forced out; then apologizes your
Doctor for himself, and tells you, if the Patient could but be brought to
sweat, he would soon mend, and further prognosticates, if he does not fall into
a a sweat by to morrow, or it may be next day, he is a dead man, and so Buenas
Noches. Now I will render it as evident to you, as the light of the Sun, that
Mr. Doctor is the cause of this man's death, that is to be understood, (...).
There being nothing more familiar among the fermentators, than to explain their
notions by theorems taken from the Brewhouse, and Kitchen, I shall make use of
arguments desumed from the same Categories. There is possibly a piece of meat
to be prepared for to be eaten, which to maturate or take away the crudity of
it, to mollify or render it tender, to dissolve and to purge it from its filth
and impurity, is to be boiled; if you put to it salt, wine, or other
ingredients, and there be not a sufficient proportion of water, or that the
water boileth away too much, especially if the meat be left dry, it will not
only*harden, but be burned, smell of adustion or empyreum and soot, and be
entirely corrupted and spoiled; whereas if it had been supplied with water, the
meat would have been softened, concocted, and depurated from its recrements and
impurities, which it casts forth into a scum. The case is not different in the
blood, that boyelth up in the veins and arteries of fevorish Patients, which
being full of salin, adust, and other heterogeneou; particles, is by ebullition
to be depurated of the said impurities; if then the blood wants water or
serum, to dissolve those salin particles, it must necessarily grow dry,
coagulate, and be burnt up; and consequently death must be the unavoidable
issue. Now observe, that a Patient, that has been broyling under a continual
Fevor for eight or ten days or longer, his entrails scorcht and parcht, his
blood dried up, and affected with an empyreum, how impossible it is, he should
be put into a sweat by hot cordials though diaphoretick, as Aqua Epidemica,
Theriacal. lap. Contrajerv. to be given every third or fourth hour, by
spoonfuls, or scruples. These certainly must render the blood hotter and dryer,
and totally absorb the remaining moisture. The infallible way to prescribe a
remedy to Patients of this nature, is, to observe that for to cast one into a
sweat, you are to consider the subject, the matter of sweat, the efficient of
sweat, the several causes that hinder, etc. but chiefly the matter of sweat and
the efficient. The matter is the superfluous serosity of the blood. The
efficient is the spirits, that expel the foresaid serosity to the
circumference. These two are nearest causes, without both which at the same
time no sweat can be procured; for if we have only abundance of spirits, and no
abounding moisture, the spirits will be provoked into a greater rage and force,
and consequently if there be any moisture remaining, they will absorb that, and
so quite exsiccate the body; this is that end, which the Fermentators and the
Putrid Physicians attain by their Cochleatim cordials.

The indication drawn hence does direct, that to procure sweat (which as I said
before, is a common terminator of malign Fevours) is to moisten the body well
with appropriate Juleps or Apozems. Which done, give but two drams of any
alexipharmacal water, or five or six drops of spirit of Hartsh^rn rectified,
and you shall certainly cause an abundant sweat.

In the next place, consider though there be moisture sufficient, to
subminister matter for sweat (as sometimes there is in malign Fevors) there
either may be a defect of spirits, or the spirits may be oppressed by the
malignity, and in a manner rendered languid, or drowned by moisture too much
abounding; then in this case Putrid Physicians do commit a killing error, in
forcing the Patient to swallow down their acid Juleps and Apozems. The
indication desumed hence does direct so subtle cordials, as through their
penetrability may insinuate into the most intime effuges of the body, and
disintangle the spirits from those malign particles, that oppress them, which
done, they will soon expel their malign enemies through the pores by sweat. But
since nothing can illustrate this point more than experience, I will give you a
most convincing instance. I was not long since called out out of my bed to see
the child of Mr. Harvey in Fetter lane end next Holborn, who I was told lay a
dying. The child was two years and an half old or almost three. I found she
fetched her breath with great difficulty, her Pulse did beat convulsive,
vibrating, and extremely frequent, as in like cases it usually beats, some
two or three hours before death. She was delirious not knowing any, that were
used to be about her, her eyes were very hollow, dim and very slow in motion,
her face was pale and cadaverous. I examined how she had been the day before, I
was told, that she had a high color, had been very burning, and was very
droughty, and drousie. She had been ill some four or five days. After I had
examined her mouth and belly, I soon understood what it was, viz. a malignant
Fevor occasioned by the Small Pox, which nature could not cast forth for want
of moisture; for hot cordials she had taken in abundance, almost every half
hour, and would undoubtedly have been dead in three hours more had they gone on
in that method. I prescribed four or five drops of rectified spirits of
Hartshom with a grain two or three of Bezoard. mineral. and a dram of Aq.
Scordii comp. to be given in a large draught of pure posset drink; in less than
two hours the Small Pox appeared, and she was put into a tolerable sweat, then
caused two Epispasticks to be applied to the Wrists, which had singularly
performed their operation* by extracting a great proportion of malignant
serosity. By next morning her senses were returned, her aspect appeared florid
and vivid, her Fevor very much abated, and all her malignant symptoms vanished,
insomuch that within two or three days she was perfectly recovered.

Some other observations I must refer to the next opportunity, in the mean time
I wish Physicians would prefer experience before their opiniater notions.

FINIS.

