A LETTER FROM Sir ARTHVR HASELRIGGE IN PORTSMOUTH To an Honorable Member of
the late Parliament.

Published for general satisfaction.

LONDON. Printed in the year, MDCLIX.

A LETTER FROM Sir Arthur Haselrigge in Portsmouth.
SIR,
THough I know the surprise of this place (as it is termed at Wallingford House
that take all for their own) was no novel to you, and therefore 'twas needless
to have given you a bare relation of it, yet now since the laet proceedings of
the Army have ministered an occasion of writing, I will give you a brief account
of the condition of our affairs here, and our thoughts of the transactions
there with you, in pursuance of those resolutions that were taken up by the
Parliament presently upon the late force, after some intelligence with the
Governor here, we were assured of his fidelity to the Parliament, and that the
Town was at our Devotion.

We entered here on Saturday the third of December instant, at four of the
Clock, my Self and my Son Colonel Morley and Colonel Walton, with diverse other
Gentlemen, some whereof were neighboring inhabitants to this place, presently
after came in the Governor Colonel Whetham, who had been abroad that
afternoon, and came to us to the Lion Inn, where we quartered that night, and
very honorably treated us (and indeed he is a very Noble true spirited
Englishman) after a short conference with him, he declared that he would secure
the Town and Garrison for the use of the Parliament, and in order thereunto we
did presently seize some dissatisfied Officers (whose names I suppose you have
had.) The next morning the Magistrates of the Town came to complement us and bid
us welcome, to whom we declared, that we intended not to levy or raise any War
in the Nation, thereby to open a breach for the Common Enemy to enter, being
more concerned against him, then to afford him such advantage, but that the
Treaty being on foot betwixt the Army and General Monck the Commander in Chief
of the Parliaments forces in Scotland, the gaining of this place might be a
means to facilitate it, and balance the affair, and that we hoped it would
produce a right understanding and unity so much desired by all goodmen; they
answered us they would afford us all the assistance they could, and would stand
by us in these our intentions.

We expected some additional Forces out of Sussex, and the neighboring
Counties, but you here what is become of them, however we doubt not of succor
and supply, if they shall offer to attempt us. We hear Coronel Disborough is
designed against this place, your Major Cadwel troubles us very little, we
scarce know where he is.

Yesterday we had notice of a Proclamation for issuing out Summons for a
Parliament to sit down the twenty fourth day of January: It Is a mere delusion
to amuse the people now the Scotch Army is advancing, and signifies nothing:
Besides their fundamentals, as they call them, interpret what a kind of
Parliament it shall be; these are like that Engine the Scrue which instead of
settling will violently force and raise the very being of Government from its
proper Basis, and remove and set it where their fancy best likes them, nor will
the Army abide long by this very form, but as the success and event of their
affairs shall be, so will they be freed from, or obliged to these their
elementary constitutions.

We see now the sword must decide the matter, and therefore by all plausible
ways they would wind themselves into a better Opinion then to be counted
arbitrary and lawless persons. We heard of some late Tumults at London, but
the relation so imperfect, that we could wish you would correspond with us in
some private Character, since all ways are laid to prevent Intelligence. I can
assure you from hence, that nothing will be done by Treaty at Newcastle without
a preliminary Article of restoring the Parliament to a Free Session without any
other condition. This place is so well Fortified and provided, that we shall be
able to preserve it against all the Forces and more then they can make; nor do
we fear any plots or conspiracies to betray it. We are all well and in health,
and I praise God unanimous, and the Townsmen very cheerful and resolute to go
through with us and to bear part of the Duty, hoping by their cordial
concurrence with us to encourage the rest of the considerable places of the
Nation to do the like.

For our own parts we are resolved to assert our cause, and have therefore
adventured all, jacta est alea, and we trust the fortune of the War will answer
our Ends, as it has yet never failed the justice of our Arms, We have
reinforced Ports Down-fort with 4 pieces of Artillery more, and have Lodged
there a convenient Garrison; we have also 6 Companies of Foot of the Army, and
have raised 2 Troops of Horse in the Town, among our selves and servants. Here
were at our coming hither 10 Sail of Frigots and Men of War, who have declared
themselves for the Parliament, two whereof have set sail with Commission upon
our affairs. We do daily and hourly expect the arrival of Vice Admiral Lawson
with the part of the Fleet under his Command to our assistance.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the writing of this Mr. Wallop the most Considerable Gentleman of this
County is come in hither, with 50 Horse most of them his Tennants, we have
already the liberty of the Sea, and we hope our well begun endeavors will
amount to the liberty of the Land.

Sir, Your very humble Servant, ARTHUR HASILRIGGE

FINIS.

