THE ART OF Curing Diseases BY Expectation: With Remarks on a supposed great
Case of Apoplectick Fits. Also most useful Observations on Coughs,
Consumptions, Stone, Dropsies, Fevers, and Small Pox; with a Confutation of
Dispensatories, and other various Discourses in Physic. By Gidean Harvey; M.
D. their Majesty's Physician of the Tower, and Fellow of the College of
Physicians of the Hague.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge at the Post House between Charing Cross
and White Hall. 1689.

To the Right Honorable my Lord Marquis of Hallifax, Lord Privy Seal, and
Speaker to the House of Lords.
IF annual Oblations from Gratitude were celebrated by the Ancients to those,
that had been somewhat extraordinary serviceable to the Public, a perpetual
Anniversary is more justly due to your Lordships most successful Endeavors,
and Zele for the Laws, Liberties, and the Protestant Religion; wherefore may I
among the rest make humble offering of these my little Labors to your
Lordships Immortal Name, as a grateful Testimony that I am.

Your Lordships Most submissive and most obedient Servant Harvey.

THE Art of Curing Diseases BY EXPECTATION.
CHAP. I.
Containing the Description of the Art of Expectation.
1. IF Antiquity be capable of conferring Validity, the Art of Expectation
being contemporary with that of Physic, may be termed equally valuable. In
many cases they are synonymous, where the Cure is attribubuted to the Art of
Medicine, which in reality was chiefly performed by the Art of Expectation; the
Remidies, that were the Tools of the former, being of little or no efficacy,
and consequently delusory; whereas Time, Delays, and doing nothing, are the
principal media of the latter. Hence may easily be apprehended, what is meant
by curing Diseases by Expectation, viz. The applying of Remedies, that do
little hurt, and less good, from which the Patient day by day frustraneously
epecting relief, and benefit, is at last deferred so long, that Nature, and
Time have partially, or entirely, cured the Disease, which notwithstanding the
Physician by subtlety, cunning, and officiousness, does commonly with success
insinuate, that the Petient is Debtor for his Life, and recovery, to the
Doctor's Skill, Judgment, Method, and Remedies; and in this particular, the
wisest of men do become half Fools, by intrusting their Lives, and yielding
obedience to most Physicians, of whom, or their Art, they are incapable of
judging, by reason of their being unacquainted with the inside of their
Persons, and the vanities of their Profession.

2. Suppose your self cured of an Ague, Catarrh, Sickness of Stomach, or twenty
other Distempers, by taking twice or thrice a day, horis medicis, for ten days
together, five grains of Tobacco-pipe powder, (which by a reputed honest, and
most Learned Physician, shall be hinted to be Magistery of Pearl) or by
swallowing down, in the same Medicinal Method, five grains of Terra damnata
Vitrioli, or powder of a well-burnt Earthen Pipkin, intimated to be prepared
Gold. This probably has cost you six or eight pounds. You are now certainly
restored (tuto, cito, and jucunde) to your health, and all is well. Be you
never so rich, so great, or so wise a man, will not your own judgment convince
you of folly beyond Idiotism, in having made in the preceding case a Physician
your Trustee, and giving credit to his pretended Cure, which is no other, than
was effected by the Art of Expectation, in manner following? From the first
Dose of Powder you perceived no benefit, though you were willing to be
persuaded, that what advancement was made toward recovery, was insensible, and
therefore you were contented, to expect five or six days for a sensible
abatement, and so de die in diem, until in good truth it was your abstinence
from Flesh, and strong Liqours, gave your Spirits leisure and opportunity, to
digest, separate, and expel those morbifick Humors.

3. That this is so, is apparent in poor men, whose straightness of Fortune not
permitting, to make application to Doctors or Apothecaries, by fasting, and
keeping themselves from the injuries of the Air, are cured of slight
Distempers, that are curable by Nature, and the Art of Expectation, in the same
space of time the Doctors do require, to set up the rich. As for great
Diseases, where a true method, and effectual Remedies become necessary, more
owe their Deaths to Physicians, than are pretendedly cured by them, as I have
more clearly, and faithfully showed in the Conclave of Physicians. However, it
is to the Art of Expectation Physicians are indebted for their Reputation, that
occasions the ignorant World to continue the use of them. By the way, I have in
the preceding Paragraph only proposed a supposal of Pipkin, and Tobacco-pipe
powder, which I now tell you, is not a merum suppositum non supponendum, but
has been knavishly practiced by some Physicians, with a success equal to what
could have been expected from a Magistery of Pearl, or an Aurum diaphoreticum.

4. As for those particulars, wherein I shall instance the Exercise of the Art
of Expectation, though they are not Pipkin powders, they are very analogal unto
'em. In conclusion, if the Art of Expectation was not more universal than
Medicine, whence does it happen, that many Illiterates, as Gun-smiths,
Heel-makers, regenerate high-waymen, some Apothecaries, and some Surgeons, do
cure a far greater number than the chiefest of Physicians, were it not, that
they are equally skilled in the Art of Expectation. These Expectation-Doctors
are the safe men, the good Childrens Doctors, much in request among some wise
Women. They are such, as in difficult Diseases kill by omission, and cure easy
Distempers, by seeming to do something of no importance.

CHAP. II.
Of the several Sects of Modern Physicians.
1. FRom their Subjects many Trades are observed to mutuate their distinction;
from Brass the Brazier; from Steel or Iron, in French Fer, the Farrier, or
rather Ferrier; and from Pysick the Physician; and from the contraction of all
the three a very proper Nomenclature may be adapted to the plurality of
conclave-Doctors, viz. a Brazen-Ferrier-Physician. To this universal
distinction a more specific sub-distinction, abstracted from the particular
matter they operate upon, seems necessary. Some wholly dedicating themselves to
Iron or Steel, and Syrup of Steel, make use of its efforts against all
Diseases, and do justly deserve the Title of Farrier-Doctors; others applying
the Milk Diet, or Asses Milk to all their Patients, may be dignified with the
Name of Ass-Doctors. A third sort, giving themselves over to the Jesuits
Powder, will be called Iesuitical-Doctors, sourbs from the top to the bottom. A
fourth, seldom miss recommending their Clients to Tunbridg or Dulledg Waters,
as if they pretended to be Dull-head Physicians. Bleeding is prefered by some
in all cases, that are Butcher-Doctors. The last, who are the most numerous,
aver all Distempers are to be expelled at the Fundament, and these are the T --
rd Doctors. Here the Art of Physic, Monster like, appears to walk upon six
Legs, though every Physician stands but upon one, yet not so firmly, but is apt
to be tottered by every slight Distemper, and a difficult one throws him down
to the Ground, whence he easily, like a Jugler, starts up again, and recovering
his one Leg, claps his Wings, and crows himself Conqueror of the Disease,
though with an usurped Title.

2. For the good of the common Cause, these Physicians, though debauched into
different Methods of Practice, all make a consort in one Cant, that by their
sedulous discoveries in Anatomy, (as Circulation, Milkie Vessels, Waterducts,
nervous Liquor, nutricious and pancreatick Juyces, ferments in the Throat,
Stomach, Liver, Heart, Brain, Spleen, Kidneys, and in every part, as far as the
little Toe, besides a hundred little particularies, of no other use than the
Theory of the Spots in the Moon) they have so far out-started all the Ancients,
that they have exalted their Art to the highest Pinnacle or (...), which before
was scarce an Embryo; and all this to enchant you into a firm faith of their
Abilities, to bait and allure you into their Physic Nets. But to speak the
truth, they are much short of the Candor, Honesty, Modesty, Learning, and
Industry, the Ancients used, in making their Observation on Diseases, and
Remedies, which was such, that they found, that abstinence, and lying still
(that is, doing nothing, and being Spectators of Nature) cured more Distempers,
than all their Interruption by Physic; which rule you find very often enjoined
by Hippocras, Galen, and Celsus, throughout all their Works; so that where
these modern Adventurers pretend to cure one Disease, they, by being Spectators
only, cured an hundred, which in effect was nothing, but being Actors of the
Art of curing Diseases by Expectation.

CHAP. III.
Of the Ferrier-Doctors, with the good and mischievous Effects of Steel.
1. THE Ferrier-Doctors are ranged in the front by vulgar Opinions, and the
transmutation of Iron into Gold is in nothing more apparent, than in the
exchange of their Steel Medicines into golden Fees. The effects derived from
the various principles of Iron, operating according to the disposition of
subjects they meet with in the body, prove as often fatal and pernicious, as
seldom happy and hoped for; a powerful detersive, and diuretic, is observed in
the Sulphur of Steel, when it encounters with an acid in the humors, proper to
incite it to combat, otherwise it unites with the vitriolick Salt, and both run
into a cement, which adding a stronger fastness to Obstructions, does
frequently bung up the Vessels entirely. Judgment and Experience are in no case
useful, as in adapting this Mineral to proper Constitutions. It is more bruited
for the killing, then curative part; if you hit the mark right in the choice of
it, you may perform a cure very wonderful; if you miss, the event is
deplorable. Instances of the first kind are by far exceeded in number by the
latter.

By three or four large bleedings (as I remember) advised by a
Coach-butcher-Doctor to Sir R. Bovy, laboring under a Quartan, and by as many
Purges (whereof the least operated between forty and fifty times) prescribed by
a subsequent T -- rd-Doctor, the Patient was thrown into all the kinds of
Dropsy, with a continuation of the Ague, notwithstanding the use of the
Jesuits Powder in all its forms and quantities. From the Head to the Toe a more
monstrous oedematous protuberance was scarce possible, his Belly so extremely
filled with Water, and Wind especially, that would have supported him from
sinking in any River; his Age was almost decrepid, his Appetite little or
nothing, and his feebleness answerable to all Circumstances. Those cathartick
Remedies, which the whole band of Physick-men have, and do hitherto erroneously
depend on, would take no place in a distemper they had caused. Tapping must
have proved speedily terminative.

2. Through the use of Chalybeats variously mixed with Diuretics and
Detersives, he was in few Weeks reduced to his former proportion of Body, which
was lean, thin, and lank, his strength returned, with his appetite, and good
digestion; nothing remained, but the swelling of his Legs, though considerably
lessened, which was discussed by a lixivial Fomentation. His burden of
Serosities I observed was daily lessened by large quantities of Urine, and
insensible Perspirations. The greatest trouble I found at the beginning, in the
cure of his Ague, which was effected by a Powder not unusual. What could be
here successfully expected from Steel, was attained in all its parts, the
sulphurous particles, in their abstersis and diuretic offices, kept even pace
with the salin in the corroboratif and restrictive, whereby the Bowels were
restored to their pristin firmness, and compact texture, and the Humors reduced
to a mediocrity in substance, temperament, and fluidity. But in a hundred
occasions Steel is observed to be retrograde, through ignorance of proper
application to Bodies and Diseases.

3. Some few years past, a Lady brought her Daughter from Reading side to
London, accompanied with her Doctor in ordinary, who justified his Steel course
by a senseless recital of Authors, and other of his Physic Companions, in
endeavoring thereby to procure her Menstrua, to whose nonappearance at their
due times and seasons, he imputed a Cachexia, and pale color, that injured her
Complexion. Three Weeks or a Months progress in that method had entirely
extinguished her Appetit, thrown her into an Hectic Fever, and a Cough so
importune, that would not suffer her scarce to breathe or speak.

4. The salts of her Humors closing with the vitriolique of the Steel, without
loosning and untying the sulphurous particles from them, united their force of
binding, drying, and damning up all the Humors, that by regurgitation were
impelled into the Lungs and Bowels, which being now choked up by such a
cementing Remedy, what was here to be done? Nothing that I could think more
certain than a prognostic, that a few days would put a period to her Life, and
to the Steel course also. This Ferrier-Doctor would needs turn Ass-Doctor, and
abandon his Patient to Asses Milk, at Chelsey* where in less than a week her
hourglass was run out.

5. Another case I remember of a Merchant in London, whom a Ferrier Physician
pretending to cure of a Chronical cough, that had accompanied him twelve or
fourteen years, pressed a solution of Steel upon him thirty days or longer,
which indeed had much abated the Cough, but also had rendered him so hoarse,
that a Mouse could not have heard him speak, at a yards distance, besides the
loss of Appetite and Strength. I advised the Patient to take leave of his
Ferrier and his Steel, ^nless he intended to stop up his Lungs, and desist from
breathing. Much ado he regained his old Cough, which being so antiquated, a
Cure ought never to be attempted beyond palliation, and upon a deterioration
through a new Cold, or addition of a recent defluxion, beyond some lenifying or
smoothing pectorals, an old Cough bearing the Office of a Pump, or an Issue,
which with the superfluities of the Lungs, throws out the Crudities of the
whole mass, the retention whereof would otherwise swell and choke these
pulmonick Bellows.

So true it is, as some certain pectorals are the life of the Lungs, that
Steel, and all chalybeat Medicines are a certain bain unto them, the roughness
and adstringent faculties of its vitriolick Salt, which they contain in a
superlative degree, straitning and contracting in process of time the whole
pneumatick Engine to a total suppression.

6. From the preceding Paragraph flows naturally this observation, that where
Lungs are hereditarily asthmatick, or adventitiously so, by universally
inspiring, a thick smoaky foggy Air about London, which from the dripping fits
of the Climate in the Winter, proves no other all England over; Steel Remedies
either in a dry or moist form, as Iron-waters, and Syrup of Steel ought to be
regarded with a very squint suspicious Eye, and never called in use where the
greatest necessity is not the chiefest indicant.

CHAP. IV.
Reciting a farther enumeration of the mischiefs of Steel, with a very eminent
supposed case.
1. NOW, if you will suppose a Man or Woman afflicted with any hypochondriac
spleeny Distemper, or inveterated obstructions of the Bowels, either being
easily incident into a Couch, and being never so little imbecillitated in their
Lungs, a Steel Medicine exhibited, where the acid within the Body is incapable
to divide the Sulphur from the Salt, they run no small risque of puiking their
gross slimy Humors into their Lungs, that will in time coagulate to an Asthma,
ulcerous disposition of the Lungs, and probably a Consumption, and Hectic
Fever; or if peradventure the Humors do not sublime, they will be compacted
into immedicable Obstructions, and most obstinate Infarctions. Where such
Medicines encounter with Youth, their Vigor possibly may subjugate their
roughness, and menaced Mischiefs, which in those that are turned of forty, do
very frequently ensue, either soon after, or upon a delay of a few years, and
may easily be tract backwards to the Steel Original, whence they will evidently
be found to take their source; neither are you here to expect an enumeration of
all such like cases, which I can give you, unless you are armed with Patience
of reading a Treatise six times bigger, than this will amount unto; neither can
I without astonishment behold, how gredily Syrup of Steel is swallowed down at
Paris, by most of the Patients of a noised Farrier-Doctor, who in the failure
of this, does immediately turn to Ass-Doctor, by his milkie Diets; so that I
cannot tell, whether I ought properly to say, the Farrier upon the Ass, or the
Ass upon the Farrier.

2. Beyond all peradventure the Sulphur of Steel being entirely stripped (as very
few have hitherto yet discovered) of its saline particles, and their
restringent faculties, (which in most preparations will in a great measure
cleave to it (must become a most admirable deobstruent; neither did I ever yet
arrive to any one process, that came near it, except one, which by bringing it
over the Alembick, renders it soluble. The same process has the same effect
upon Antimony, and some few other Minerals, which since not appertaining to the
Art of Expectation, will be improper to describe at present.

3. It is not on the Bowels only, but on the Brain and Nerves, a long or often
repeated Steel course manifests its immedicable Injuries. Palsies, Convulsions,
and extreme weakness of the Joints, I have more than once observed the
consequences of it, which I can deduce from no other preceding causality, then
by cementing and binding vicious humors in deep latent recesses, where by a
long stagnation for some months, and sometimes years, they acquire a levain so
pernicious, as to deprave and subvert the animal Faculty, enervating the whole
systeme of channels, that proceed from the Brain, and impressing a virulency on
the Juyces of the Nerves; in which manner, and through the same means, it bears
a very near affinity to the Jesuits bark, that has so often some years after
caused Convulsions, and Syncopees; though never Apoplectic-fits, a denomination
that makes Physicians that used it, to appear the greatest Block-heads; for
Fits denote a type, and a circuit of beginning, ending, and returning, which an
Apoplexy never did. Either it is a strong one, (Apoplexia fortis) which
according to Hippocrates, and all other experienced Physicians since, does
infallibly kill; or slight, (Apoplexia levis) which for the most part turns to
a Palsy. See Hippocr. Apho. lib. 2. Aph. 42.

4. Imagine half a quier of Physicians of the same stamped treating a Patient,
decumbent of Leipothymick, or rather Syncopal fits, interchanging reciprocally
with violent Convulsions, or (if you please) spasmodic Paroxysms, which
sometimes prove periodical. These symptoms, which are evident to all the World,
what they are, being by them termed Apoplectic-fits, (a denomination never
mentioned by any Author since the Creation) exposes them either to be grossly
ignorant, (as appears by what is manifest before concerning an Apoplexy) or
very sinisterly designing, if not in all, at least in the Babylonian Leaders,
whom the rest easily will follow for large compensations, or to prevent being
by them kicked out of so honorable an Employ. It is probable, the whole Chorus
not arriving together, the first come, upon the sight of such an effroyable
symptom, either being not sufficiently skilful, or not taking time to examine
into the case, might mistake it for an Apoplexy, and too precipitantly advise
bleeding, to make room in the Vessels for the Blood to move, and consequently
to prevent stagnation, and coagulation. Now I would put the question, a Man, or
Woman, being fallen into a swooning fit, Is there one thoughtful Physician
among five hundred, that would have the courage, or so little sense, as to open
a Vein? Did ever any authentic Author in Physic prefer Phlebotomy as a proper
Remedy in this case? If you reply, there may be a Plethory; still not in one in
a thousand will consent to it in the fit.

5. To go on upon the forementioned supposition. I very well know, that a
Physician, to free himself from the censure of a mistake, or erroneous
application of a Remedy, will endeavor to justify himself, by inculcation,
and hammering his Sentiment into every one of the Physicians called in, upon
their first arrival; who either out of a Complement, or false conception of the
case communicated unto them, or untrue relation of the thing, or their proper
ignorance and unskilfulness, being decoyed or fallen into the same opinion, are
bound to justify the first Physician and themselves, and one another, singly
and jointly; moreover, being blinded by the first appearance, they dare not,
nor will not hereafter see plain, lest the standers by should accuse them of
hallucination. The Disease being at first christened an Apoplexy, they were
obliged to hold to that word; but going soon off, and returning with
interchanges of Convulsions, they perceived plain enough, that it was no
Apoplexy; but to conceal their mistake, they judged it necessary to keep to the
first Notion, and slide it of^ to Apoplectic fits, a species of impudence
uncommon to any but themselves; as if the Art of Physic and Physicians were
circumscribed by the walls of their Conclave, though any man might with the
least glimps detect their error, gross beyond what could proceed from Nurses,
or mere Novices in Physic.

6. I have more than ten times seen men otherwise very robust, fall into deep
swooning fits, lying a considerable time, as to outward appearance, like unto
dead, who by frictio^s of their Temples, vellications of their Nostrils,
dolorous contortions of the Extremities, and pouring down their throats strong
alexipharmacs, have usually recovered out of that fit, though soon after, by
translation of the subtle matter to the Brain and Nerves, have been tortured
with a Spasmodic fit, of no longer continuance, than the foresaid matter could
be discussed by volatile Neuriticks, or Cephalicks. These sorts of Alternative
fits, from their duration for several years, possibly for seven, ten, or
twenty, more or less, import no imminent danger, unless attempted to be cured
by unseasonable bleedings, and multiplied purges, by raising a mud of dormant
Humors, which either a long chalybeat, or Jesuitical course, had dammed up,
and cemented.

7. Besides the forementioned causes that are the most frequent, it is
indubitable, that the like Fits may owe their growth to reiterated debauches,
inveterate obstructions, (whereby Humors may assume a virulency) and poisonous
Minerals and Vegetables, which exert their activity in much shorter dimension
of time.

8. In the forementioned imaginary Patient, the first bleeding not being
exempted from a just censure, may plead a pardon from the possiblity of a
mistake of the Disease, by the surprise, and from the force of the Argument
alleged, that a bleeding, by making room in the Vessels, and accelerating
circulation, does prevent the Blood in stagnating. But that Indication being
answered by a first larger bleeding, or a first and second mediocre depletion,
to what end o^ purpose is in the former a second, third, and fourth (whereof
one or two may be in the Jugulars, which is never performed without a great
risque) advised in large proportions, and some of them in the Syncopal fit?
from matter of fact is desumed an Argumentum ad hominem, Bleeding very often,
though administered for prevention only in robust, and healthful Bodies, does
upon the stopping of the Blood throw them into a long and deep swooning, or
Leipothymick fit, whence it has been observed some never returned. So that
nothing is more naturally conclusive, if bleeding out of the Arm, or Jugulars,
does frequently precipitate an healthy strong man into a Swooning, or
Leipothymy, it must necessarily force a weak Patient, who already does labor
under a strong Leipothy my or (which is worse) Syncopal fit, many degrees
nearer to his End. Waving the Experimental, I proceed to the Rational, granting
the first bleeding, especially it large, does by making room, promote and
facilitate the motion of the blood universally, whereby a stagnation is
repelled, and a free perspiration procured. The second bleeding exhausting the
vital, and mediately the animal Spirits, the third more, and the fourth yet
more, the circulation must necessarily more and more be lessened, and impeded,
through want of Spirits (for it is the Spirits, that are the impetum sacientes,
and impulsors of motion within the Vessels) and warmth. Moreover, through the
subsiding, and paucity of the Spirits, the pores are constricted, Perspiration
im^^ded, and the virulent Steems, that occasion all the mischief, remaining
unsubdued, by their minutely accessions, must inevitably become conquerours of
Life, as sundry observations do exhibit unquestionable testimonies, and against
matter of Fact all argumentations will be found sophistical. Upon a replique
may be pretended, that the scope, intentions, or indications for bleeding,
besides the abating of Plethory, are revulsion, and derivation; and secundarily
or per accidens cooling, removing of pain, etc. You must apprehend, that the
indications for bleeding have their respect chiefly to the antecedent cause,
and seldom have any influence upon the conjunct, unless per accidens and
secundarily; but in reference to virulent Steems, or venomous Humors, whereunto
those that occasion the often forementioned Symptoms, are analogal, if not
really such, bleeding upon any supposition can never be put into use more than
once, and scarce that. For instance, will you dare to bleed in a malign Fever
after the beginning, or in the Plague? Suppose a man has swallowed Arsenic,
sublimate, or any other sort of Poison, or is fallen into Convulsions by a
poisonous steem, can you pretend to bleed in this case? I could heartily wish
Physicians did abstract such Theorems, or Maxims from observation, (the highest
Form in the School of Physic) that would serve as Rules, whence to take true
measures for the necessity, season, number and quantity of bleeding, and not to
advise Phlebotomy at random, as most of 'em do.

9. Suppose besides the third and fourth bleeding of the imaginary Patient,
there is by a party Jury of Butcher-Doctors, and T -- rd-Physicians, a smart
Vomit given, and without computing of Clysters, a solution of the species of
Hiera ^i^ra in Brandy, (vulgarly called Tinctura sacra) forced down every
Morning, for several days together, in a body by such repeated losses of Blood
reduced to a low ebb of strength, and the Spirits harassed and tortured by the
return of deteriorated Syncope's and Convulsions, Vomits, and chiefly sharp
fermentative Aloetics so often repeated, all these must rake up the last
remainder of the virulent Mud, and stir up with a violence the most latent
Impurities, which without those disturbances might have continued their quiet
for many years. Such outrageous Assaults, battering the Spirits and Humors
continually, could not fail to press them to their last effort of a Fever,
(which must be termed Febris moribundorum) to the suppression whereof, to
exhibit the Jesuits Powder, is to give le coup de grace, or the rising blow to
one, that has been so often knocked down, and now upon the point of expiring. The
day does not more certainly follow the night, than that the ordinary little
Medicines and Remedies that are used to Hysteric women, without purging or
Bleeding, would have infalsibly recovered such an imaginary Patient; and
nothing will more certainly kill an Hypochondriac man, or Hysteric woman, in
the violence of their returning fits, than the course of bleeding, vomiting,
purging, and Jesuiting before supposed or imagined.

10. Without Candle and Lanthorn one may clearly discern, that nothing is more
resembling Steel in pernicious Effects, than Jesuits Bark, and nothing more
like the Jesuits Bark than Steel; moreover, that either is capable to engender
the worst of Diseases some Months, and sometimes Years after the use of them.

CHAP. V.
Of Sulphur of Steel, and a most excellent substitute.
1. IF nevertheless your confidence is so unically fixed on the Virtues of
Steel, against opiniatre Obstructions, let your choice be determined in the
Salphur of Steel, being a preparation in point of efficacy and security,
over-topping all the rest; but withal let me recommend these (...) bene's to
your consideration, 1. That Steel in its best shape is the greatest Enemy to
some particular Constitutions. 2. That tincture of Tartar is a Medicine
universally agreeing with all Temperaments, where reserating Oppilations is the
indication. 3. That the want of Success of this Medicine, and others of the
greatest efficacy, is to be attributed to the underdosing of it, in the
quantity of six, eight, or ten drops, whereas I seldom give less than half a
spoonful, and sometimes more, diluted with a sufficient measure of a temperate
Vehicle, in the imitation of which you shall seldom or never miss of your aim,
or be frustrated of your Exspectance. 4. That the common Tincture of Tartar is
an exaltation of the Sulphur of Spirits of Wine rectified, through the adurent
particles of a most forcibly calcinated Salt of Tartar, imbibing but very
little of the Salin particles, through want of phleme in the Spirit. 5. That
the Preparation next subscribed, being partly a Tincture, and partly a Solution
of Salt of Tartar, is virtuated with an abstersif quality, derived from
lixivial, slippery, or soapy particles of the Salt, whereby it is rendered a
most excelling deobstruent, and ought to be preferred before the other, by as
much, as it is of a far easier preparation, that may be finished with less
toil, and in shorter time, which processes I have ever aimed at upon all other
materials, well knowing, that laborious and multiplied changes of the form of
things by distillation, sublimation, calcination, and other various fiery
tortures, does very often destroy the nature of the thing, intended to be thereby
exalted in Virtues, or corrected in Qualities. 2. Take two or three Ounces of
well calcined Salt of Tartar, pour on it as much good Cognack Brandy, or spirit
of Wine not rectified, as will over-cover it six ^^ngers breadth, digest it
four days in Sand, in a bolt-head, to a yellow Tincture, then decant it, this
is all; hereof give a Spoonful, and sometimes more in an apt Vehicle, Mornings
and Evenings. 3. The nauseous taste of the Salt, though by this simple is much
abated, yet is not entirely taken off, which may be easily performed in the
Calcination of the Salt; but it does somewhat impoverish its Virtue. By such a
clean sort of Medicine joined with an Equipollent, can be attained in a very
short interval of Time, what can scarce be performed by half yard long Apozems
of the opening Roots, capillar Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, Spices, and
Syrups, as disgustful, as ineffectual, laborious, and chargeable, prescribed
more for Pomp, than Use, by the famed T-rd-Doctors.

CHAP. VI.
Of Ass-Doctors, their Milk Diet, Coughs, Consumptions, and Hectic Fevers;
also of Bulch^r-Doctors.
1. IT is not the least craft in the Ass-Doctors, where they spy a wasting of
the Flesh, to term it a Consumption, which happening to be an attendant almost to
every Disease, hastens Patients to flock in numbers to such Physicians; and
that direful word carrying a dread in its signification, does not a little
multiply their Ass Practice, especially when they so highly advance the Credit
of a milk Diet, by noising it to be the sole grand sweetner of the Blood.

2. Sure I am, the Death of hundreds may be justly attributed to their
Confidence in Asses Milk, in contempt of all such Remedies, or Medicines, that
were proper for the Cure of their Diseases. These Dietetick Fourbs, or
Bonny-Clabber Physicians, are deservedly censured Criminal, for not rightly
considering the nature of Milk, it being a food the most convertible into any
vicious Humor, that is most abounding. In hot choleric Diseases, it is readily
assimilated to Choler, renders the heat of Fevers more burning, a Headache less
supportable, a drought more difficult to be quenched; in hot Stomachs waxes
nidorulent, and in many its very corruptible, coagulable, or curdly.
Phlegmatic Diseases receive from it an addition of slime, the Stone and Gravel
derive their nourishment and increase from it. Palsies, Drowsiness, Blindness,
Catarhs and Rhumes have often followed a Milk Diet. With a temperate Constitution
it harmonies best. To cure so many various Distempers, as is pretended by a
milkie Diet, is as impossible, as by it to reinstall a dis-joynted Limb, or to
cement broken Bones. An Ulcer in the Lungs, with a contemporary Hectic Fever,
and Consumption, can no more be cured by an Ass-milkie Diet, than a Capon be
roasted in the bottom of the Thames. This may be credited, that many emaciated
Persons, incommoded with a Cough, have been restored to a plump habit of Body
by Asses Milk, diluting the Salts of their blood, that preyed upon the carnous
parts, through the abounding Serum of the Milk, and smoothing the roughness of
the said Salts by its butyrous or oily Particles; and in regard of its soft
tender caseous parts, it is easier assimilated, than the stringy or fibrous
Juyces of Flesh-meat. In conclusion, he that cannot cure an Ulcer of the Lungs,
with an Hectic, and Consumption attending, without Asses Milk, in less than
two Months, does not deserve the Name of a Physician. As for the Hectic Fever,
what they generally assert incurable, it certainly goes off with the
consolidation of the Ulcer, without making use of any Anti-Hectick. Whether the
Ass-Patient, or the Ass-Doctor be the greater Ass, is easily decided by those,
that have met with Athenaeus's Saying, a Grecian Philosopher, translated by
Sciopius, exceptis Medicis nihil est Grammaticis stultius, that is, Grammarians
are the greatest Fools of all men, but Physicians are yet greater Fools than
Grammarians.

3. The Livery-men of the prenumerated five Physic Guilds, are obliged to veil
their Bonnets to the sixth of the Bonny-Glabbers, in the milkie Treatment of
Consumptions and Hecticks, that ensue Ulcers of the Lungs, also such as are
putrid, (...) apostemated. The Butchers, to avoid an evident proof of down
right Murder, are forced to obrtain from their wonted course of (...), in a
Distemper where there is the greatest want of Blood, the substracting of which
would probably abbreviate a Months Life, more or less, to a week or a few
hours. The T-rd-men, except those that are very far advanced in Impudence, do
exulate in the use of their Purges, which would extremely promote a looseness, a
Symptom they are commonly incident into; and happening, soon destroys, by
stopping the Cough, and suppressing expectoration, the immediate forerunner of
an instantancous Suffocation. Steel Medicines, and the Jesuits Bark, putting a
stop also to Expectoration, as has been objected before, are a bar to
Ferriers, and Jesuitical Doctors. Neither can the Dull-head Physicians come
into play, with their Aquarius, being contrary to all Expectoration. So that,
as there is an Art of curing by Expectation, there is also an Art of killing by
Expectation; for he that is rendered Consumptive through an Ulcer in his Lungs,
by daily and weekly Expectation in vain, of amendment from a Milkie Diet,
neglects such means as might otherwise conduce to his Cure, whereby at last
makes forfeiture of his Life to the Art of Expectation. Syrups, Lohochs,
Lozenges, and the like, do under no other notion fallaciously deserve the name
of Pectorals, than by their immediate smoothing of the roughness of the
oesophagus or Gullet, wherein by nearness or affinity of parts it does
sympathise with the Windpipe, or aspera arteria. This seeming ease lasts no
longer, than a fresh emanation of saline Rheum, or Slyme out of the Glanduls
wipes off the clammy Syrup; where, and in the Stomach the Rheum by its
sharpness and a vicious ferment (as they term it) converts that, or any such
Saccharaceous Medicine, into a corroding Acid, which is so far from being
auxiliary against the Ulcer upon its arrival to the Lungs, that it excavates
the Ulcer, and by stimulation duplicates the Cough. It cannot be contradicted,
but that Honey in any pectoral Medicine used instead of Sugar, especially
Narbon Honey, may contain a property answerable in some small measure the
Indications of an Ulcer in the Lungs; because it seems to be an extract of the
Balsamic Particles of fragrant oleous Flowers, that probably may arrive to the
Lungs, without being entirely broken in their Virtues.

4. I am not ignorant, that vulnerary Herbs, as ground Ivy, Ladies Mantle,
Bugle, and many others, used in Decoctions, are in high esteem among several
Physick-men, who do very confidently attribute to them the cure of diverse
Consumptions. But I am also very well assured, that those Vegetables, though
supposed to be sufficiently empowered for the cure of Ulcers, must in their
passage through the Stomach and Bowels, and mixture with the Humors, receive
such impressions and changes, as strip them of their faculties, and energy,
before they can traverse to the Vessels of the Lungs. What can be most
favorably construed on their behalf, is, that some who have been much
emaciated, and at the same time accompanied with a Cough of an old date, whence
they have been erroneously pronounced Consumptives, did receive amendment, or a
Cure from them; but then it is to be conceived, here was no Ulcer of the Lungs,
nor Hectic Fever, nor little Imposthumes, nor putrid affection of the Lungs,
which in a proper fense specify a Consumption strictly so called. In a putrid
affection of the Lungs, its not to be doubted, but what is expectorated, is
slyme mixed with purulent Particles, generated in the retired Pores of that
Entrail, through a long Stagnation, which occasions an Hectic Fever, and a
Consumption, that is so universal to this Island, and which neither Milk Diet,
nor vulnerary Decoction, though sufficiently saccharated, or mellified; nor
pectoral Syrups, Loho^hs, nor Lozenges, did ever cure, but inevitably kill by
Expectation, there being but one Medicine, far different from the
forementioned, that is empowered to answer all the Indications of a proper
pulmonick Consumption. From the tonsure Remedy, by cuting off the Hair of the
Head, or from Issues in the Arm, no more help can be expected, than from
pairing the Nails of the Fingers and Toes in an Ulcerous Consumption; though in
some few cases, three or four Cansticks applied to suitable parts of the Breast,
in order to so many sontanels, may prove very advantageous; and it is beyond
all objection, that the change of Air is most conducing to recovery, and a
causa s^ne qua non.

CHAP. VII.
Of Dull-head-Doctors, Gravel and Stone, and several other Distempers.
1. HYpochondriack Affections, some sorts of Scurveys, Obstructions of the
Bowels, sterility and infoecundities of Women, Ulcers within the lower Belly,
and especially, Gravel and Stone, come under the Jurisdiction of Tankerd
Physicians, though their usurped dominion over these Diseases does not extend
beyond the Summer Months (according to the trite saying, mensibus in quibus R.
non bonum bibere water) and the coming into Season of Oysters, which is its
utmost bounds and limits. Notwithstanding the avidity of their perquisites
over-poysing, the greatest prejudice their Hypochondriac, and Nephritick
Patients can receive, they do not stick to impose on them drinking of Dulledg,
or Tunbridg Waters in the hardest Frost, with a Condition of boiling them half
away, or converting of 'em into Posset, or rather a curdy sort of Soupe. What
ever ease and solace the crazy are sensible of from the washing and rensing of
their Stomach, urinary Passages, and Guts, of floaty Humors for the present,
the continuance by a potent Restriction, wedges and impacts (as I said before)
the slymy feculencies into very stubborn Clogs, which can no otherwise be
avoided, then by interposing alternately Purges, respondent to the Indications
of the Disease, morbifick Causes, and other Circumstances.

2. Gravel and Stone are to be considered either in their fits of pain,
diminution, and suppression of Urine; or when unmoved, the the Patient is free
of those Symptoms. To exhibit Waters of the one kind or other in the times of
misery, is to irritate and press those disturbant Causes to a greater fury, and
increase of Pains, and sometimes of total suppression of Urine. Pains thus
augmented, and continued, invite Inflammations and Fevers, which in very many
prove Quarter Masters of Death. The Urine suppressed for six or seven days,
turns to a fatal Drowsiness and Coma, or Lethargy, to which always a Fever is
annexed. Purges are equally obnoxious to the same Evils, and therefore ought
very carefully to be avoided. A course of Waters slabber ^d down out of the
fit, by carrying off a loose mucus, detruding floating thin Impurities, and by
locking up and compacting the grosser Humors, do undoubtedly very much prolong
the interval of fits, tie up Pains, and prevent the quick return of the
Symptoms forementioned; but by this means, the clog of those gross saline
humors is deteriorated into immedicable, and the Stone so aggrandized, that
throwing the Patient into a worse fit than ever, kills him. So that the sum of
all is, that waters are empowered to grant an easy Life, and a short one; and
so contrary to the cure of the Stone, that they do not so much as prevent the
growth of it, unless it be during the time of the course they drink them; which
appears by this, that the next fit a man falls into after his course of waters,
is ordinarily worse, than any he felt before.

3. That the dissolving and breaking of the Stone in the Bladder, or Kidneys,
is within the sphere of Activity of Medicines, is a belief, that in
improbability equals the highest fiction of Poetry. To break a Diamont,
supposed to lie upon the ball of the Eye, by force of hammer, expresses a modus
faciendi, or manner how it may be done imaginatively; but to reduce into
crumbs, gritt, and powder, a hard Stone contained in so sensible a part, as the
Bladder, by Goats blood, and testateous Powders, by Stones and Glass grinded to
the smallest proportion, and by Ashes, whereof there is an Example in the
Electuarium Iustinum, Nephrocatharticum Arnol. Villan. de cineribus avicennae,
diureticum Montagn; and by decoctions or distillations of such blunt materials,
as the five opening Roots, Saxifrage, Strawberries, Winter Cherries, Daucus
Seeds, and the like, does for manner of acting, exceed the Fancy or
Conception of the acutest Philosopher; and yet the powers of the Stonebreaking
Medicines meet with such Credit in Physicians, that beyond possibility they
most impudently assert matter of fact, performed by them daily upon those, that
are troubled with the Stone. Well may it be said, Exceptis Medicis, nihil
stultius, audacius, and mendacius Grammaticis. But farther, to pretend to
dissolve a Stone in the Bladder, by might of cutting Medicines, after their
first edge must needs, have been blunted in the Stomach, and other Bowels,
through which they are obliged to pass with a tedious circuit, before they can
arrive to the field of Action, the Bladder, is a Rotomodate many degrees
higher, out-doing the worst of Gypsies. If my Memory informs me right, I have
met, with a Narration in Duretus's A^notat. upon Hollerius, where he recites a
Physician was presented to a Prince of Conde, to cure his Son of the Stone, by
dissolving it in the Bladder in a few days. The prudent caution of the Prince
or his Brother required the Experiment of his Medicine to be first made upon
another Boy of a meaner Extraction, and troubled with the same Disease; a day
or two after the taking of his dissolving Elixir, the (...) having been
miserably tortnned, Ghosted, whose Stomach, upon diffection of the dead body,
was discerned corroded and ulcer'd in several parts of it.

4. The Millepedes or Sows (next to their Wives and Daughters) hold the highest
rank among the Physicians their Stone-grinders, though hitherto it has not
appeared in what particles of 'em those cutting acuities have been latent. If
to their diuretic impulse they are pleased to affix that power, Rhenish Wine
will plead for the Prerogative, which notwithstanding is accounted a general
parent of the Stone and Gravel to the Germans. But these stupid Fools in
Physic are possessed of a superstitious Faith of a T-rd, and such like
Compounds, beyond the Popish credenda of a rotten wormcaten Relick. If they
meet, in Mesues Avenzoar or Averroes, with a Character of an Elks hoof, or
testicle of a Bever against Convulsions, though a Mouse has oftener carried a
Mountain on his back, than those Simples ever cured any such Distemper; yet do
they continue in the use of them with that opiniatreness and brazen Confidence,
that they conclude a man beyond his Senses, that will not yoke with them in
their Physic bigottry. That a Spider, Toad, or Mercury tied about a man's Neck
is a certain defense against the Plague; or that a Bezoar Pepple, the Goa
Stone, Pearl, and the like, are infallible curatives of that, and all other
malignant Fevers; or an Eel-skin fastened to a woman's Thigh, does dispel
hysteric fits, are part of the foolish credenda of Physicians. From being a
little versed in the silly Methodus medendi, and now and then ripping up the
body of a Malefactor in public, and in their Capacity of prating of monstrous
Pretenses, and vain Discoveries in Philosophy and Physic, they infer
themselves absolute Professors of their Art; whereas a Seahorse in the
bleeding himself, a Dog in eating Grass, a Crane in squirting Salt Water into
his Fundament for a Clyster, must by them be acknowledged for their Masters, to
whom, as their Scholars, they are indebted for part of their practical Physic.

5. This may be received for great Truth, that the procatarctick, internal
antecedent, efficient, material, and adjuvant Causes, being subtracted and
redressed, and that course continued to a great length of time, by defect of
sabulous nourishment, and not being cherished, Nature by help of its Spirits
and restored ferment (as they term it) will convert the hardest and biggest
Stone into a mouldering, (provided by Age, and decay of the Bowels the Patient
be not reduced too low) which perceived, the excretory passages require to be
well relaxed, and rendered slippery by mucilaginous Emollients, and afterward
to be stimulated gently and gradually by some diuretics, to throw off the
gritt. And this is the only certain, and secure method of curing that hitherto
incurable Disease. The Earl of C. now deceased, some years since was extremely
tormented with a sharp pain about a hand breadth above the groin, his easiest
posture was lying on his Bed. To his Quality and great pain were mostly suitable
five or six great Physicians; one might as congruously say six great Magots, or
six great Mites, people very improperly attributing the word Great to a thing
so little and mean as an Expectation C. Physician; scarce one in twenty knowing
the tithe of what he has forgotten, and what he still remembers is scarce worth
knowing. The little success that attended their Prescriptions, convinced his
Lordship of their scauty Judgment, which proved as various as untrue, the one
insinuating the pain to be a Cholick from Wind, the other an Ulcer; the other
this, and another that. At last I had the Honor of having the cure of his
Lordship committed to my care; upon no long examination of the matter, I
assured his Lordship the pain in that part of his Belly was occasioned by an
angular small Stone, that stuck in the Vreter, whereunto, being a long time
prepossest with the false Sentiments of his late chashier'd physic Doctors, he
was very unwilling to give Credit, expressing that none of his Predecessors had
ever been troubled with a Disease, that proves so commonly Hereditary, nor
himself had ever discerned the least sign of Gravel; moreover that a Kinsman of
his had lately been afflicted with a pain in the same part, that was evidenced
to be caused by Wind, from the carminative (wind-breaking) Remedies, that
entirely discussed it. I replied Artifici in sua Art Credendum, and that the
event would infallibly demonstrate the truth of the thing. I kept this Noble
Patient to a very thin Diet a long time, and used Medicines answerable to the
Method, and Indications above mentioned, which in conclusion discharged five or
six Stones, about the bigness of a Pea, sometimes one, othertimes two in a day;
from their color and rough outside, they notified to be affalls and large
crumblings of a greater Stone, formed in the Kidneys, and through substracting
from its growth, defect of cherishment, and through correcting of its causes
was divided into large parts.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Abuses in the Stone, and particularly of the abuse of the Catheter;
also the Strangury and difficulty of Urine.
1. THE rash and too frequent sounding by Catheter and Itinerary, to clear the
doubt, whether a Stone be residing in the Bladder or not, proceeds more from
the Intreague of the gain-thirsty Surgeon, though to the greatest prejudice and
pain of the Patient, than any absolute necessity; for unless his Resolution is
entirely to submit himself to the hands of the Lithotomist, in case such a
quarry be discovered, the certification of the conception and growth of the
Stone must inevitably intail upon him a continual fear and anguish, whereof he
is not like to be freed, before despair has thrown him upon so dubious a Remedy
as the Knife and Forceps. But if his Mind wants firmness of Courage to endure
the cruelty of such an Operation, let him by no persuasion yield to the search
of any crafty Stone-cutter, whose business is more, to dive into his Pocket
than his Bladder, witness that silly ignorant Fellow of the Town, whose Masters
Reputation was his sole Courtcard, whereby to gain so extraordinary a point.

2. Since length of time, with the assistance of assured Remedies, pointed at
by those demonstrable Indications above written, will cure a Patient of the
Stone, and that any other Disease, that may be mistaken for it, be curable by
the same means, to what end shall a search by Catheter be made; especially when
that sort of exploration by the stop of the Instrument at the narrowness of the
Sphincter, so rendered by swelling, a callosity, or a small carnosity, has
proved so often fallacious to that degree, that men have been persuaded to be
cut, where no Stone was, or ever had been; and having passed the dread and
torture of the Operation, were forced to run the risque of a troublesome Cure
of the Wound, that seldom is performed without a remainder* of a perpetual
leaking, and difficulty of miction, and very often with the loss of Life.
Moreover, where probing has detected no Disease in the Bladder, it frequently
has caused one, viz. Inflammation of the Sphincter, bloody Urine,
Excoriations, Ulcers, continual gleets by injuring the prostates, and
involuntary miction, strangury, dysury, total suppression of Urine, and almost
all Diseases incident to the Bladder and Yard, not omitting those that Death
has ensued. On the other hand, the uncertainty of the Catheter and Itinerary
is no less evident in those that really having a Stone fixed in a part, where
that Tool not reaching, or having penetrated through a Stone, whose softness made
no resistance, has imposed on the Surgeon a fallacy of Opinion, that the
Patients were free.

3. There is no case wherein the use of the Catheter can rationally be
justified, except in a total suppression of Urine, occasioned either by Mucus,
crumbs of blood, or Stone being loosned and fallen to the neck of the Bladder,
and the like occasions, to let out that liquid Excrement by removing* the
obstacle.

4. The Stone grown moveable by being forced from its fastness by probings (as
too often has happened) violent motions, vomiting, purging, potent diuretics, and
by its own weight or bigness, is the only argument, that ought to prevail with
the Patient, to surrender himself to the doubtful success of Stone-cutting; for
the pesanture of a Stone of compass, will ever incline it to return to the same
place of declination, where it occasioned the former suppression, unless by
lying still in bed so long, as by peradventure is required to be reattached to
the side of the Bladder, from which it was torn off, it be prevented; so that
the pretenses of Gravel-Surgeons, in removing the Stone from the mouth of the
Bladder by Catheter, to give passage to the Urine that stops by fits, where
there is a long interval of time between, is a most ignorant and impudent
cheat, the Stone in those cases being always firmly fixed to the side of the
Bladder, and a suppression of that kind is ever occasioned by Mucus, Gravel,
and the like causes. True, the Operator may notwithstanding sometimes perceive
a Stone, which the posture or manner of decumbiture in the Patient, or swelling
of that side of the Bladder, may bring nearer to the entrance of the Sphincter,
the touching of which with his Tool, (the Catheter and the Itinerary within it)
gives him that false apprehension, that he moved the Stone, (which in that case
is the greatest nonsense and stupidity imaginable) for in all persons the Stone
is ever fixed in the beginning, and its growth, and never becomes loose or
moveable, but where the ^its of suppression return almost every moment; and the
attachment of the Stone to the side of the Bladder is so universal, that by
reason thereof, many have been discovered to have lodged a Stone many years,
and probably all their Lifetime, upon the dissection of their bodies after
death, who whilst living were never sensible, or suspicious of such a
preternatural growth. Though Ignorance and Knavery are so hereditary to most,
that are appurtenances and giblets of the Art of Physic; yet these Operators
for the Stone (who commonly by reason of their desperate misfortunes are forced
to be Renegades and Mountebancks) contain those qualities in the highest
abstract.

5. A strangury; and difficulty of Urine, proceeding in a lesser stream than
usual, have frequently driven several into erroneous apprehensions of the
Stone, being occasioned by a glutinous Mucus, through stagnation and adhesion,
contracting a smart stimulating acrimony, that has drawn humors toward the
Sphincter, whereby from an intumescence both a narrowness of the passage, or
weakness of the discharging faculty, and an irritation to Urine, have ensued;
the latter specifying a strangury, and the two former symptoms a difficulty. In
neither of these purging, or diuretics have been found advantageous, but
detrimental, so that these Pispot-Doctors to this hour have continued disarmed
of proper Remedies to oppose them.

CHAP. IX.
Of Butcher-Doctors, and their Bleeding.
1. THE Injuries of bleeding or bloodshed, indifferently advised by
Butcher-Doctors, do by far supernumerate the benefits received by it, where
necessarily it has been administered. In the declination of Age it ought not,
without great consideration and scruple to be admitted; for the present ease
can scarce make a balance with the decay, and weakness of Bowels, it does
occasion hereafter.

2. In Consumptions, Hysteric Fits, inveterate Hypochondriacks, Fluxes of the
Belly, and particularly toward the middle of Chronic Diseases, it loses
reputation, when ever put into practice. After the abatement of a continual
Fever by two bleedings in my Lord B. the Spirits being disingaged, had thrown
the morbifick matter into his Legs, where it excited pains night and day,
violent beyond Imagination. Beyond twice taking of half an ounce of Diacodium,
at ten days interval one from another, no hypnotic could be wrested from me.
The Noble men that were his Visitors, expressed their Condolance, by sending
Physicians in esteem with them. The Ferrier-Doctor durst not adventure his
specific in ordinary S. of Steel, which necessarily Tortures to the highest
extremity would have ensued, but le^t him with a prognostic of death. A little
after a Butcher-Doctor, whom the vogue reported to be in his usual exaltations
every Morning before Nine of the Clock, by drinking his Masters Health, would
needs have introduced a bleeding, which inevitably would have verified the
Farrier's prediction. However, his pains were entirely removed in eight days,
in a frosty snowy Season, by a Medicine the most uncommon, and the Patient
restored to Health, protracted to this hour. This observation is only adduced
to expose the bestiality of Physicians in their bleeding and bloodshed in
Chronic Distempers, in Persons advanced in years, beyond forty and fifty, the
error whereof I can attest to have been the sole cause of the death of several
in such cases. The reasons are obvious to those, whom observation has taught
the good and evil effects of bleeding. I conclude with this general remark,
where bleeding and purging have no prevalance, the Conclave Physician is less
valuable, than an old Shoo. To return to the Art of Expectation.

CHAP. X.
Declaring the Warehouse of Expectation Physicians.
1. THE attainment of the End through proper Means, is no more peculiar to
Medicine, or any other Art, than to that of Expectation. It is Health, real or
pretended, both these Sisters (though the one be legitimate, and the other
spurious) drive at. To palliate, meliorate, preserve, and restore, is the
principal and ultimate finis, or end of the medical Art; but Lucre, a Purse,
Gold, Silver, is that of the Artist. So far in point of honesty the one excells
the other. The Ancient Greek, and Arabian Physicians, are now so much despised
by the supposed accession, and advancement of a new Theory, and a Cortex-Steel
practice, that in my Opinion one certain part of Europe would in some tract of
Time want Inhabitants, were not a robust Constitution, and Expectation the
Guaranty's of Health.

2. That the Smallpox, Plague, malignant Fevers, and many other Diseases have
invaded sound bodies, by figuring morbific Idea's on the imaginative Spirits,
is a concession the vulgar of Physicians do acquiesce in. So that, if the Maxim
holds, that Contraria contrariis curantur, it points at the ready means (or
media) by altering, and reducing the figure of the materia subtilissima, or
primi Elementi of the Brain (the animal Spirits) to their pristin form, and
order of motion, through which those counternatural vortices are appeased, and
consequently Health restored; all which is so aptly performed by Expectation
Physicians, in their confident and bold assertion, that the Patient shall be
cured, by virtue of what he writes down in his Recipe's. This making a strong
impression on the sick man's Fancy, and inordinate motions, the fury of the
animal Spirits (which are frequently causes of Diseases) are allayed and
appeased; which being daily pursued, is the undoubted means, the Art of
Expectation uses; whereas, as shall hereafter be rendered plain in various
instances, what is marked down in his Serowls, or Recipe's, can conduce no more
to recovery of health, than a Laplanders charm to procure a fair Wind: and that
which adds extremely to the forementioned strong impression, is the gravity,
port, pretended Learning, and vogue of this bold assuring Physician, and
Undertaker.

3. To know the probability, or capacity of the pretensions, and performances
of an Artist, by the dimension; number, and quality of his Tools, is a matter
of no great difficulty; and considering the nature of a Razor, you may easily
believe it probable, that a Barber is capable of shaving you. My next business
therefore is, to examine the box of Tools of the Physician, which is the
Dispensatory, or Pharmacopoea, that for number and quality exceeds the tools of
an hundred Artists, I may well say, of all that are in Europe, Asia, and
Africa, there being nothing under the Earth, on it, or above it, or what is
contained in all the Elements, even the Elements, and what is consistent of
them, but what is registered there, or at least belongs to it. There is Iapan
Earth, Armenia, Lemnia, Tripoli, Strigonia Earth, etc. all sorts of Water, that
Heaven and Earth afford; all Minerals, all sorts of Dung and Piss; Serpents,
Toads, Spiders; in fine, there is nothing in the Universe, but what is the
Gibblets of the Pharmacopoea, or Physic Warehouse.

4. Every Remedy ought to relate to a Disease; wherefore as the number of
Remedies are indefinite, so Diseases should be proportionable in number; and
what strange Creature would a man appear, were he to be subject to more
thousands of Diseases, than a Physicians head can be stuffed with? A Monkey
having caught a Louce, should he bring a Chain to tie his Legs, a Hatchet, a
Saw, a Knife, a Mallet, and twenty Instruments more to cut off his Head, it
would seem a very unusual farce; but far more ridiculous is it, to see a
Physician muster up all, what Heaven and Earth contains, to resist and expel
those few morbific causes, that occasion all the Diseases of man. And the
Apothecary should he in obedience to the Physicians order, or in complaisance
to his immensurable folly, provide himself with all the materials, his most
elaborate Dispensatory directs, his Shop would no more be capable to contain
them, than a Pill-box could an Elephant.

CHAP. XI.
Expressing the Original, and first building of the Physic Warehouse.
1. THE rambling mode among many Cities, that are honored with a combined
fardle of Physicians, to compile and divulge a Dispensatory, is also imitated
by one, that if from the number of Simples and Compounds, wet and dry, hard and
soft, boiled and roasted, preposterous and incongruous, superfluous, loathsome,
and inconsistent mixtures, measure is to be taken of its Excellency and
Pre-eminence beyond others, you are to concede the Laurel to that Pharmacopoea
(or rather deformed Copy of Medicines) which I once in a Discourse, out of mere
Compliment and Raillery, did aver to be the best: but if to a necessary only,
and select number of Simples, and their agreeable and rational Compositions, a
reference must be had of their worth and validity, it is to be esteemed the
worst of the worst Pharmacopoea's extant. And if the folly of men, that would
appear to the World Viri graves, docti, and wonderfully experienced, will make
you laugh, you may burst with the History of their Physic Cookery.

2. These Velvet Flatcaps being squatted down within their Magic Circle, the
Vrsus Major spews an harangue to the Cubs about him. Since the Supreme
Authority over the Lives and Deaths of men is devolved upon us from all
Antiquity, and that by Custom and Example of their Fathers their Children do
grow up to the same subjection to our power, and undoubted Faith of our
infallible Abilities, it is our duty to express our care, in chalking down such
simplicities, and compound Medicines, and immutable Laws of their Preparations,
that may give a sufficient employ to Apothecaries, by the multiplicity and
numbers of Waters, Earths, Stones, and other Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals,
to amuse their Understandings; and by their mysterious mortarisations,
siftations, and most senseless jumblations of them together, may astonish and
amaze these our Servitors, who lapsing into an admiring trance of our
indefatigable Studies of Infinities, will discourage them from undertaking upon
our Profession, and detain them in a most ignorant slavery to us. This
propagated by them among the Commonalty, and thence descending to all
subsequent Generations, exalts us above the Heathen Deities, and establishes
unto us a perpetual Empire over the Beings of Mankind. Let then our first
decree empower eight Commissioners under the Age of one hundred, who by their
long Travels through all the Saxon Angles, and Norman Counties, and great
forgetful Readings of Arabian Authors, shall accumulate, that ever can be heard
of, thought, or understood of all Physical Bodies, s^^ple or compound, having
virtue to kill, to cure, to mend, to destroy, to heat, to cool, to wet and to
dry all sorts of Temperaments.

3. The octogenerary Legates bringing into the Conclave their Laps full of
Materials, extracted out of Mesues, Avenzoar, and what could be picked out of
the rest of those Barbarian, unpolished, superstitious, and incredibly ignorant
Arabian (or rather mad rabious) Impostors, are approved and ordained to be
digested into those orders and forms you see in their Dispens. with a
Proclamation made, that if any body has any thing more to be added to this
indigested mole, he may be heard, and accommodated to his Satisfaction. There
were very few but thought, that he that did not contribute some Medicine or
other, it would derogate from his Experience, or Capacity; therefore every man
brought in his Grannum's Medicine. One would be admitted for his Ointment,
wherewith his Grandsire of blessed Fame infallibly cured Corns, the other for
an Ague-frighter, the third for a Powder of the Countess of K. brought out of
Gascony; a fourth, for a Powder to cure the bite of a mad Dog, the fifth for an
unaccountable Electuary, wherewith a great King in the days of old cured all
Poisons; another too much addicted to the water of Life, thought the whole work
would be imperfect, if that incomparable Lille Bolera Spirit (Vsque) were left
out. In fine, here is a rude ill shaped big-bellied mass molded together, and
to add luster to it, it is declared to be communi opera adornata; to their
eternal shame be it spoken. These Circulators Alchoran being thus couched, and
put into a Parchmin frame, Allegiance and Supremacy is to be conjured to it by
their dextra, to be kept sacred, and not to be deviated from neither by
themselves, nor, their Servitors; so help them Mimm^^. This is the original of
their great Fabric in gross, which hereafter I will give you in retail.

CHAP. XII.
Presenting a taste of Physic Cookery.
1. THE Octogenerary Spaniels apply themselves to the lapping of all sorts of
Waters, and by their Palate surprisingly discerning, are capable to distinguish
an hundred sorts of Waters, which are to be alphabetically ranged in the front,
to be reserved until any of these Lap-landers shall have occasion, to prescribe
this, or the like Julep.

R Aq. Endiv. Cichor. Borrag. a. iij. Aq. Nymph. Lactuc. a. ij. Sir. Violar.
ij. vel ijss. m. f. Iulap.

Sumat haustum urgente siti. 2. This Julep consisting of six simple Waters, and
prescribed possiby by six silly Conclave-Doctors, in consult (for every one
will put in his water) to contemperate the heat of a Fever, is exactly parallel
with the following prescript of Cookery.

3. Suppose a Conference of six Cooks for making a good Soupe, whose order is,
to take of Thameswater fetched from Hammersmith, of Lambs-Conduit-water, of
New-River-water, and of Hide-park-water, of each one quart; of Well-water, and
Rainwater from Hamsteed, (where the Air is clear, and not smoaky) of each one
pint, etc. one might very well imagine these Cooks broke loose out of Bedlam,
to meet about their Soupe, or at least, their Superstitious Criticism exceeded
the greatest folly of men in their choice of Hammersmith-water, lest being too
near the disimbogue of the Thames, it might conceal some brackishness, derived
from the nearness of commerce with the Sea. And that from the compound of many
various waters might result such an occult Excellency as should contribute an
agreeableness extraordinary, is a notion so exactly square with our
Physick-men, expecting from the jumble of those waters, what was not in the
power of any one of them being single; though in reality the difference, if any
may be conceived, is less between them, than between Thames -- water and
Hide-park-water.

4. The distilling those Waters from Herbs, growing in a good soil and
healthful Air, and gathered at the New of the Moon, moving through a good Sign,
two or three hours, precisely after Sun rising, is perhaps a piece of Nonsense,
surpassing the crazie Conceptions of those Water-Cooks.

Nothing is more commonly and daily prescribed by most Physicians in Fevers,
than such sorts of Juleps, interchanging those Waters as variously, as Ringers
do Bo^-Bells; and yet nothing is more certain, then that River-water being once
distilled, does equallize, if not surmount any of them, either for a Vehicle,
or Contemperation; even thin Grewel (to avoid the trouble of distillation) made
of Oat-meal or Perl-barley, may make an equal poize with either of them. And
here may be moved a question, a rich Patient rewarding six Physicians with six
G^^neas, for consulting about six simple Waters, whether he be the greater
fool, according to the old saying, A Fool and his Money, etc. or the Doctors
the greater Knaves?

5. Pusillanimity, and fear of Death, being often the effects of a Diminution,
and Subversion of the Animal Spirits in great Diseases, may influence the
wisest of men, to reach out their hands to a Shadow of any thing, that bears
the resemblance of help, and for that reason his surpassing profusion to a
Physician, may be censured rather a surprise upon his Understanding. A
Physician on the other hand, excuses his acceptance of immoderate Fees, by the
vulgar Saying, That nothing is freer than Gift; however it is left to your
Judgment, whether his slighting of a Patient by negligent Prescriptions, short
and seldom Attendance, does not put an Extorsion upon him in the exchange of
his reasonable Gratuites into extravagant Rewards.

CHAP. XIII.
Setting forth the wonderful Charity of Physicians.
1. BUT to come nearer home, I must represent a Scheme to you of the Candor and
physical Conscience, Honesty or Generosity, or what else it may be termed of
six Physicians, who they are, and of what quality, where and when to be found;
you may be informed by the perusal of their printed Advertisement, very
industriously distributed among most Coffee-houses, and Street-walkers, by some
of themselves, and Porters thereunto authorized. Behold then the true Copy.
viz. Advertisement. The Physicians of the College, that used to consult twice
a Week, for the benefit of the sick, at the Consultation-house, at the Carv.
A^g. and Cr. in Kingst. near Gld-hall, meet now four times a Week; and
therefore give public notice, That on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and
Fridays, from two in the Afternoon till Six, they may be advised with by the
known poor, and meaner Families for nothing; and that the Expectations and
Demands from the middle Rank; shall be moderate: but as for the Rich, and
Noble, Liberality is inseparable from their Quality and Breeding. Have you any
work for a Cooper? Here lives a Wyer-drawer. To the best of my remembrance, I
have met with some Doctors Bills, viz. Trigs, Tetramagogons, Fletchers,
Nendicks, etc. which have been more ample and significant, giving a Catalogue,
of what Diseases they pretend to cure, as principaliter, Pox not always got by
Women, Meagrim, Gout, Stone, principaliter, Scurvey, etc. Further they
advertise you, they are to be spoken with every day, from seven in the Morning,
until six at Night, a sign they are much more industrious, than those worthy
Gentlemen, who seem to keep holy the Saturday, and not to labor, neither they,
nor their Ass, nor their Ox; but what shall the known poor, and meaner Families
do, or where shall they apply themselves, that fall sick on Saturdays? And what
will the Doctors do for Money to buy a Sheeps-head for the Sunday? though
notwithstanding I presume, the Rich and the Noble shall be very welcome on
Saturdays, and Tuesdays too. And suppose, a man is Noble, and not Rich, there I
humbly conceive, Liberality is separable from his Quality and Breeding; whither
will you send him, ad Infernum? But set the case, a man is both Rich and Noble,
he will possibly chose too send for a Noble Doctor, or a rich Coach-Doctor, and
not give himself the trouble to hunt for a Peripatetick Doctor seven miles off;
neither are there many Noble men within the Precincts of their Diocese. They
say the known poor, How shall they know any man to be poor? There is none poor,
but the poor Devil, he shall have advice Gratis. For nothing! a very
proportionable Reward, for nothing but Advice, ex nihilo nihil fit; but I hope
the meaner Families, and the poor, shall pay for their Medicines, wherein it is
presumed, Mr. Doctors will find their Account. After all, here is a plain
Contradiction, to pretend to give Advice for nothing, and to set up the sign of
an Angel and Crown, ho^ est, an Angel is expected from the meaner Families, a
Crown from the poor, and what you please above a Guinea, from the Rich and
Noble, besides paying the reckoning; Item, for Cordial Powders, for Juleps, for
Canvas, Galloon, Thread and Silk, belly pieces, and sewing of your Sleeves.
Indeed, I think, these Gentlemen Doctors are outdone by the Car-men-Doctors,
who generally are to be found at the sign of the blew Ball.

2. But in plain terms, these sort of Physic Bills, both of the on^ and the
other, are termini convertibiles of M -- bancking. Well, but there must be some
extraordinary Witchcraft, or alluring bait, in proclaiming themselves
Physicians of the College, as if Hippocrates, Galen, Celsus, and a thousand
more eminent men, (that would scorn to be of a College) had been no
Physicians. But what College do they pretend to be of; of Paris, of Amsterdam,
of Sion College, or of Obediah's Colleges, no, they style themselves
Physicians of the College (...), as if there were no other Innuendo, or
College, but that of Nova Porta. But who are the Members? Imprimis, a French
Doctor, a Low Dutch Doctor, a High Dutch Doctor, and few high and low English
Doctors, a pretty parcel of Colleagues, and a very worthy Combination. Methinks
I could fancy six Doctors in a Consultation Room, each sentinel'd at a Window,
to look out sharp for ^ Patient; by Gar, cries the French Doctor, me see a
Patient coming, whereunto in a Chorus, they joyfully echo. Roast meat. But
what is he? He be a very sin Gentliman, but he has a blew Apron on replys
Monsieur; he may be an Aldermans fellow for all that, says another. The
Patient enters with a low Reverance, and a Tres humbel serviture Monsure; the
French Doctor embraces him with a Repar^ee, Monsieur je suis ravi de l'hou
neur^ d' estre capable de vous servir, What Is you* Complaint, you can speak
French? P. Parbleu, my Disease does. Dr. You got de Franche Pock then? pouvre
homme! P. I forgot to say my Prayers on a Saturday Morning, at Night I was
picked up by a Gentlewoman, dressed much A la-mode, I conducted her to a
Tavern, she made me drunk, gave me the Pox, and picked my Pocket of all my
weeks Wages. Dr. Ho! Pauvre Enfant, we cure you in a little time, you pay us
ten pound. P. Good Sir, I am a poor Weaver, I have a Wife and six Children, I
never wrought at a French Loom before, a cursed Trammel, I am an Object of
Charity, such as your Bills point at, and I humbly beg your Misericorde. Dr.
Ierenie, perdons les miserables, you can get de Money to be drunk in Sack, de
half Crown for de Whore, and no largent for de Physician. Peste! point d'
argent, point de Suisse; no Money, no Cure. P. I will turn my Wife and Children
to the Parish, and sell my Looms to satisfy the Charity of Physicians, I
perceive none but Fools and Beggars dye of my Distemper. Dr. Courage then, our
French Galen Doctor Moliere in his non pareil Treatise of le malade imaginaire
gives most admirable Directions, dat are much a propos in dis case. He say dus;
mais si maladia opiniatria, non vult se garire, quid illi facere? In English,
but if the Disease prove stubborn, (as the Pox usually) and will not cure it
self, what is to be done? He resolves Clisterium donare, postea segnare,
ensuita purgare; that is, give a Glister, afterward bleed, and then next
purge. Dis is our Method of Physic in France for all Diseases, and especially
for dis pocky one; and you know, my most worthy Colleagues, de French Physicians
be reputed de best in de Vorld for de Franche Pock, it is our Country Disease,
and much more common with us than de Scurvy in England. Now Messieurs I beg de
pardon for speaking first and last, from de begin of de Consult to de end, it
is de Prerogative of French Physicians, who can speak, and not tinck, (savii in
bocca, pazzi in testa) others can only think and not speak. The
Low-dutch-doctor, Com hier Shentilman, laet me sien; Sacr -- t dat is de
Spaenish pocken, daer in^et you vor betalen one honderd Richs daelders min
here. The High-dutch-doctor, Das dich der thonder sleet, der Barnheyter hat das
Napels zeer, der theivel, las er bezalen. The Low-English Doctor, Clarissimi
Domini, This is a true Object of Charity, a known poor man by his Apron, he
shall pay nothing for Advice; let him pay seven pound to the Apothecary for his
Medicines. So here will come to each Doctor twenty Shillings, and twenty
Shillings to the Apothecary, for his mercurius dulcis and Guaiacum; for
House-rent, firing, and other decrements; in conclusion, the Apothecary has the
most Charity. P. Miserable Wretch that I am, to be struck at once with the
Diseases of all Nations, the French and the Spanish Pox, and the Evil of
Naples; cursed petty-coat, worse than Pandoras Box, steeming a poison enough to
infect a whole Nation. A pox upon all your Banter, I will throw my self on the
public Charity of the Lock, and present the Surgeon with forty. Shillings, the
remainder of my Looms: and from the Charity of Doctors, and the p^upers of
Procters, good Lord deliver us.

3. A Shoemaker, one of the meaner Families these Mounser Doctors seem to point
at, being desirous to be conducted by a Friend to an honest and charitable
Physician, arrived at the door of one, against whom he immediately made this
Objection; that t^other day upon a visit made to his Wife, the Doctor had after
a moments retard prescribed a Glyster of Milk and Suggar, and at his exit he
had presented him with an half Guinea Fee, with an humble beseech, that his
Worship would have the goodness to return next Morning, which he did not; and
therefore imagining, that when he gave him his Fee the day before, the Doctors
Eye was fixed upon his Coach and Horses; it was a plain Innuendo, that the ten
Shillings and nine pence did not answer his Grandeur, he was resolved to fetch
him again with a promise of a stronger Reward, which at their parting was two
half Guineas, the one being intended for the Doctor, and the other for the
Horses; but he found, that the Horse-doctor had plunged his Patient into a
worse state, and for that reason would be handed to another, that was no
Horse-doctor, where the door being open, they entered into the Parlor, and there
perceived the Doctor dead, and nailed up in his Coffin. However his friend
would needs by saluting the Physician with a knock or two at his Coffin, ask
his resolves aloud upon two queries. What shall the Shoomakers Wife take? The
Doctor said nothing. What will your Doctorship have for your Advice? The Doctor
said nothing. Then nothing she shall take replys the Shoemaker, and I thank you
for nothing; and there is no C -- Doctor honest and charitable, but when he is
dead. I will not aver the truth of this Relation, but I will avow, there is
nothing more true than the Moral Wolves charitably helping Sheep out of a
Ditch, or Cats releasing Rats out of a Trap, ought to be recorded among the
Legends of Wonders.

3. Treves de raillerie. The affinity of the Subject, revives my Memory with a
noted Coach-Doctors Avarice, extorting five Guineas from a Noble Patient (whose
Liberality was inseparable, etc. terms tackt not long since to some printed
Mandatory Letters) for five grains of Hues's Powder; a pretended correction of
a Turbith Mineral, or at best an ordinary solar precipitate; but an ill hour
scratch't him, when upon a surprise in the formation of an adulterine foetus,
he was obliged with his Breeches at's heels to blind the Eyes of a Mercers
Nurse with three Jacobusses.

5. It was Charity in another Coach-physician, and quondam Schoolmaster, at an
Assise Court of Judicature, testimonially to clear a Gentlewoman of the
dismantling her Husband; but he proved a very suspicious Evidence afterward in
marrying of her: In my Opinion the Credit of such a Witness ought to be exactly
poized in another affair of the greatest Importance.

6. He that entrusts a Banker with his Estate, if he endeavors a fraud, the
Law puts the Creditor in a Condition to retrieve it; but in making a Physician
a Feoffee in trust of your Life, as all People by Custom and Example usually
do; if he cheats you of it clandestinly, both you and your Heirs are deseated
of all juridical Satisfaction, as Moliere does between jest and carnest
intimate in his Iargon Description of the Power, Authority, and Privileges
granted to a Physician in his Diploma, in the comical Tract above mentioned,
viz. Ego cum isto boneto veneral^ili and docto, dono tibi and concedo virtutem
and puissantiam, medicandi, purgandi, seignandi, pereandi, taillandi, coupandi,
and occidendi impune per totam Terram. In effect, a Physician is as much Master
of your Life, as any Prince in the Universe of the Estate of his Subjects. The
hotter Climates are sufficiently pregnant of Examples, where the Medico is made
the chief machine by his occult Medicines, to transfer great Personages into
another Orb; he best knows how to lacker and lay a Vernish over those direful
survening Convulsions, Syncopees, Dysenteries, and lingering Fevers, by charging
them on Fermentations of dormant Humors, malicious Lunations, and
Intemperatures of the Seasons. Instances of this sort of Practice are numerous,
of Ancient, and fresher date. In the Life of Luis the Eleventh, Meseray record,
the King of Arragon's eldest Son posted to his Tomb by a Bolus, given him by
his Physician, whom his Mother-in-Law, upon some difference between them, had
by a very tempting Fee embarked in that design. Caesar Borgia owed the
Execution of his chiefest Exploits of this Nature to a Physician, that was his
Confident; but History Consult the Minutes of the Court for Poysoners of Paris.
does furnish such an abundance of poisonous Achievements by Physicians, that
it is needless to charge this small Tract with their recital.

CHAP. XIV.
Relating a most signal Example of a knavish Physician, with an Innuendo, that
abundance of that Profession are of the very same stamp.
1. IN the preceding Discourse it is avowed, that the fond concern for Life, and
senseless credulity of an umbragious assistance, throw a man often into a
Precipice of a certain Death, attended with scorn and contempt of his Judgment,
by fastening his hopes upon some brazen Physician or other, an instance whereof
we have the more remarkable, as verified in a Person the most Ruse and
tres-advise Prince of his time, Luis the Eleventh King of France; and the
reading of that passage not being less astonishing, than it is common in
Persons of the highest degree, and consummated Accomplishments, puts an
obligation upon me to transfer it hither. The continuated embaras of mind in
reducing a most disordered People to tranquillity, had at length by sympathy
rendered his Body very crazy, which gave his Physicians frequent occasions for
Consultation.

2. Jacques Cottier a Burgundian, to make his marks to bear in the absence of
the other two (whereof the one was a Scots Physician, taken after the battle of
Nancy, wherein the Duke of Burgundy was killed, and was retained by Louys for
his famed Honesty and Learning; the other was Draconi^ (...), Professor and
Chancellor of the University of Montpelier) perceiving the Kings fear of death,
and his sollicitousness for recovery, had extorted this question from him,
whether he could cure him? Cottier, a man of little Learning, and elevated to
this high post in Physic, by the Favor and Recommendation of the Duke of
Savoy, answered him yes, provided he would solely entrust him; and in doing so
he would do much better, in regard the other Physicians did not know his
temperament so well as he; for as to him, ever since he had been in his
Service, he had studied nothing, but to know his Constitution, and that the
others did not much regard that, and did not acquit themselves of their duty;
minding nothing but to enrich themselves, desiring the King not to reveal to
the others the advice which he gave him. But as to himself, that he would be
constantly near his Person, searching by industrious Readings, at the hours of
his leisure, among the Ancient Authors, Remedies for his Sickness. And the more
he thought on his Disease, the more difficulty he found to cure it. Also that
he had successfully served the King several times, and that without him he had
not been alive, for as much as the other Physicians had often ordered him Purges,
and other strong and violent Medicines, and that he alone had privately
corrected their Prescriptions. He did further persuade him, to command that no
body should come into his Chamber hence forward, without the leave of the
foresaid Cottier, and by this means did secure the Government of the Kings
Person to himself.

3. And to insinuate better thence forward into the Kings Favor, he did
confederate himself with Olivier Ie Dain his Barber, but a man very ignorant,
though the King was much advised by him. This Barber confirmed the King in what
the Physician had told him, and by the same means he put the Apothecary in
ordinary in disfavour, having reported to the King, that he never had good
Drugs, whereby he was cashiered with a great deal of disgrace. Says Luis Guion
(from whom, and Iean de Serres this Relation is extracted) one may easily see
how Princes very often are subject to be deceived by false Reports.

4. The King grew so shagrin, that when they had brought little Lions from
Africa, which he had expressly sent for, he would never see them. One day among
the rest the King was peevish, and took a fancy to discharge one that waited
upon him in his Chamber, because he had given him warm Ptisan to drink, and
said angerly, that he did not only discharge him, but all the Officers of his
House. And ^aques Cottier, who was there present, told him, I know very well
(...), that you understand I shall be comprehended among them, but I do assure
you, swearing a great Oath, that after I am gone, you will not live eight days,
and this will be found true. The King was so frightened with the words of this
man, that from thence forward he put all, both his Person, and his Kingdom, and
all that he had, into the Power of the said Physician, and would no more see,
neither his Children, nor Wife, to which his Physician had contributed very
much.

5. A great Gentleman of Campaigne, who was called Cortenay, had committed two
Murders, coming to Court to procure a Pardon, obtained it by the Intercessions
this Physician made to the King. The Chancellor then having refused to feal
this Pardon, being granted against all Equity; which being come to the Kings
knowledge, caused the Seals to be brought to him, and made the Physician
Cottier Lord Keeper of the Seals, and the Chancellor was sent home with a great
deal of disgrace.

6. It happened, that for ten or twelve days this new Chancellor received but
little money by the Seals, whereof he made his Complaint to the King, who was
sick, that he got nothing, in regard he never stirred from him, and that he used
to get a great deal of money by Consultations and Visits he made to the sick,
before he was confined to be always near him, and that he prayed him to take
notice of that, and of his Merits. This King who believed that his Life did
entirely depend upon this Physician, fearing that he would abandon him, made
his Privy Purse (Thresorier de l'espargne) give him in ready money fifty four
thousand Crowns, (which in those days was as much as six or seven hundred
thousand Crowns now) and should have had much more, if more had been found in
his Coffers, for looking after him only five Months. Mezeray, as I remember,
agrees in the same Sum of Money. Moreover, he caused to be given unto his
Nephew the Bishopric of Amiens, and all his Friends and Relations were
provided with brave and great Estates, such as he liked best. The King being
sick, let him do what he would, and durst not contradict him in any wise.

7. The King grew so thin and dried up, that he seemed to be rather a Skeleton,
than a man, and all through the ignorance of this Physician; for his dry
Melancholy Body ought to have been moistened, and moderately warmed by
Nourishment, as well as Medicines; and whereas he usually asked for Wine, and
boild Capon, this wretched Physician would never allow him any, though
nevertheless very proper for his Health. Mezeray tells you, that by his
Physicians advice, he used to be bathed in Childrens Blood to sweeten his
Humors. Cottier at last prescribed him strong Presumes to smoke his Clothes and
Hair, which being used very often, threw the King into Convulsions and
Swoonings. But somethime before, his fears of Death increasing, moved him to
take hold of another Remedy as deceitful and vain as his using (as De Serres
styles him) an odious impudent audacious Physician, much like most other
pretended Doctors. One Sieur Lavardin perceiving the King was gulled out of his
Life, was resolved at any rate to see him, and told the Physician, the King
ought to be confessed, and to receive the Holy Sacrament, and that he knew him
to be near his end. But the Physician told him, that he knew that as well as
another, and that there was danger to speak to him of it, in regard he had been
afraid of Death this half year, and that if he were spoken to about those
matters, he would certainly dye of fear. Nevertheless Lavardin spoke aloud to
the King, that if he would be cured, he ought to make his Confession every
week, and receive the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, and that his Father being an
hundred years old, and sickly, had received his Health by that means. The King
being persuaded, said, that he did agree to it, provided it was through a
certain religious Friar, named brother Philip, ancient, and of a good Life, and
who was noised to be Learned, and was Monk of the Abbey of Saint Martin. He
being arrived, in confessing of him did remonstrate to him, he ought to ask
pardon for all the Murders and Ravages which he had caused to be committed
during his Life; and advised him, as far as was possible, to make recompense,
where it could be done. Among other things, that those of the Franche conte
complained, though they were almost all reduced to his Obedience, nevertheless
his Soldiers committed the most detestable Insolences, that could be
imagined; remonstrating unto him, that if God had spoken to his good Servant
David, that he should never inhabit that glorious Temple, which he would build
to his Dedication, because he had shed so much human blood by his Wars, and
caused innumerable Acts of Hostility to be done; that God would therefore in
this manner withdraw himself from the Holy Sacrament, which he would administer
unto him, and condemn him to Damnation; wherefore he ought to cause his men to
cease using any more such ways, and to restore the Taxes of the Kingdom to the
same state he found them, for the People were extremely impoverished, and the
most part of them dead through want. He answered, he was so far from repenting
of those Ravagements and Saccages done in Burgundy, that he was extremely
sorry, all the Land of the Duke of Burgundy was not in the same Estate; and as
for the Taxes and Subsidies which he had impoposed on the People, as soon as he
was cured of his Distemper (not else) that he would take them off; nothing else
could be got from him. Wherefore seeing his Obstinacy, for fear he should dye
without Confession, and without having taken the Holy Sacrament, they prayed
the good religious Friar to give him Absolution, and the Communion, which he
did. (But I do not read, that he greased his Temples to make him slip easily
through Purgatory.) Afterward they gave him some small matter to eat, but he
could not, by reason of a great stink, he said, which rose from his Body to his
Brain; therefore he commanded they should smoke him with Perfumes, which they
did a great while, and he gave up the Ghost in receiving of them; and behold
(says Guion) how he dyed smoakt all over like an old Fox.

8. His Physician Jacques Cottier, after the death of the King, retired to his
House, enriched with a yearly Revenue of five and twenty thousand Livers, the
value of which was more at that time, than now thirteen or fourteen thousand
pounds Sterling. It was certified by the return of the accounts of the
Treasurers de l' Espargne, that he had received from them fourscore and
eighteen thousand Crowns.

9. Charles the Eighth, the supposed Son of the forementioned King, (for says
Mezeray, most People did suspect that he was suppositious) caused him to be
prosecuted, to make Restitution of his Estate, as arising from Gifts excessive,
and passing all Reason. But the King being busied in making ready for his
Journey to Naples, and in raising of Money, Cottier gave him fifty thousand
Crowns as Money lent, and so they let fall the Prosecution against him. His
Consort the Barber, Olivier above spoken of, was hanged for Murder.

10. The consequence of the preceding Relation will incline any sound Judgment
to these Concessions. 1. That Princes, and other great Persons are not seldom
served with the worst of Physicians, and that excessive Liberalities do not add
so much vigor to their Care or Diligence, as growth to their Avarice; and its
insatiability does commonly draw a Disease into its greatest length; and so a
string too far extended frequently breaking, unawares Death may be ushered in,
and prove the purchase of transcendent Fees. 2. That the monstrous fame of the
greatest Physicians is a chain of favorable, though erroneous Reports, linked
from the Beggar to the Gentleman, and thence to the Prince. 3. That Priests or
Jesuits, and Physicians uniting, have a most puissant ascendent on the
faculties of the Soul and Body of the sick (whether they be the most
illustrious, most noble, honorable, or ignoble) and thence deriving a
despotick command over their Estates, Secrets, and Lives, are formed into most
exquisite Tools, to acquire, propagate, and establish unto his Popish Holiness
an universal Empire over Christendom; who, to add a greater energy to these
Organs, has marshalled both the one and the other, throughout all Italy, into
separate Colleges of Jesuits and Physicians, knowing that vis unita est
fortior. Behold then an instance of those two influences, how admirably they
conspire into one effect. The Emperor Charles the Fifth, for over-matching
Francis the First, was by the pious Arguments of a Frenchefied Jesuit,
authorized thereunto by his balancing Holiness, persuaded to quit his Throne
for to enter into a Monastery, whence the Rays of his declining Glory still
continuing a warmth in the Affections of his Spanish Subjects, had kindled a
most fervent desire of having their Prince restored; but in prevention of this,
to accelerate his course below their Horizon, the Jesuit Confessor redoubles
his macerating penance of Vigilies, Ave Mary Lectures, and other Castigations.
The Convent Physician substracts from his Diet, and depauperates his dried
Limbs by Purgations; so that by the Harmony of these two State Instruments the
most potent Monarch, and wisest Prince of that Century was very cursorily
reduced to a materia prima. This was un trait achevi de la politic. Adrian
the Emperor, as relates Peter Messiah, was by his Physicians, whereof he had
many, advised not to eat or drink, and being famished to death, dyed with the
Expression of a common saying in his Mouth, Turba Medicorum interfecit ^egem,
that is, a crowd of Physicians have kill^d the King.

CHAP. XV.
Of the secure and justifiable tantamount ways of poisoning and destroying.
MOre are the ways that lead to the Gibbet, than to the Church; the antiquated
venefick Methods are rendered obsolete, by the refined Invention of
Circulation, through which barefaced, and by the light of the Sun, the same
end is attained, as justifiable by innocence of the Medicines, as sinisterly
imposed on the inadvertized populace. Suppose an elder Brother decumbent of a
continual Fever; a dose or two of Extractum Rudu^, (a Medicine in repute among
Doctors and Patients) advised under the Hand and Seal of a gray-bearded
Physician, smartly encouraged by Aurum portabile, in very few days answers the
Expectation of the younger Brother, maliciously aspiring to the Succession of
the first born. What pretense has the Law, the Kindred, or clamor of the World
against the Physician, or his Medicine, which in this case, and several others,
does as seldom miss, as the most celebrated Poison? Bleedings administered long
after the first kindling of a Fever of the same kind, do as commonly give the
fatal blow to the succumbing Spirits, without danger of a repartee from the
Standers by. A Woman reduced to long weakness through continuance of opiniatre
hysteric Fits, by the swallowing down of a strong purgative, though in a very
small dose, especially if with Repetitions, is infallibly hastened to her Tomb;
in which particular it is in the power of the Medico, to oblige the Husband, or
Father in lesning his charge, without hazard of Reputation, or a necessity of
giving an account to his Colleagues, or the World, of such Practice: for what in
the Physician through ignorance, or error in Judgment, and in the Patients and
Nurses, or Attendants, by reason of neglect, may extenuate the Crime, or hide
the misfortune, is in the power of the Doctor to act intentionally, and
wilfully, (when sufficiently gratified) and yet remain secure under the
Pretenses forementioned. To instance all the modes of giving Patients their
dispatches, would be compiling a great Volume, and therefore conclude it
sufficient to have given you just before that general caution, to which
Particulars may easily be reduced.

CHAP. XVI.
The preceding Discourses being intermixed with various Digressions, to prevent
your too tedious amusement on the same Subject, I proceed to examine the
invalidity of the great number of simple Waters, which consequently will serve
for Tools of doing nothing, and therefore are proper means to be used by the
Art of Expectation.
THE distilled Waters of Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Cichory, Dendelion,
Porslain, Lettuce, and the like, in taste, smell, and their other supposed
qualities, do little or nothing exceed those of River water distilled, and
operate less in cooling, moistning, and other requisites, than this last
Element. And a Physician is in nothing more deceived, or imposes more grossly on
his Patients, than in prescribing the distilled Waters of Oaken buds,
Horstails, Plantain, Shepherds purse, Milfoil, knot Grass, etc. for adstriction
and repulsion, that quality being chiefly resident in their terrestrial parts,
which never ascending so high as the Alembic head, cannot be thought to pass by
distillation; wherefore the Prescriber is extremely blameable for his error of
Judgment, in not preferring the decoction of those simples, whereby their
astringent qualities are apparently to the taste, communicated to the Liquor,
in a degree as high or low as answers the proportion of the Ingredients. The
same error is committed in the distillation of Comfrey, Mallows, Marshmallows,
Snails, Muscels, Earthworms, and of all others, whose chief effects are
performed by a lenifying smoothing mucilage, that can no other way be
extracted, than by expression, or decoction; whereas the weight of these mucous
Particles is an undoubted obstacle to their rising so high as the Alembic. Can
any thing be more ridiculous, than to distill Nettles, ground Ivy, Fumitory,
Agrimony, or Speedwel, whose superfluous insipid Phlegm is only collected in
drops, to serve for no other use, than to fill up glasses, that are to be
emptied at the next return of the spring into the Canels? One ounce of the
Juice of Nettles will in virtue overpower a gallon of the distilled water; a
decoction or expression of ground Ivy, or Fumitory, in the quantity of a
spoonful, contains more of the specific, than a Rundlet of their distilled
moisture. Poppy water may justly be rejected, where one drop of Syrup of Poppy
is enriched with more virtue, than a pint of the distilled Liquor. The
deobstruent endowments of all bitter Herbs, as Wormwood, Succory, Elicampane,
Hoarhound, and Germander, remain in the bottom of the Still, whilst the Liquor
that is separated from them, is scarce good enough to wash hands. Sorrel, Lemon,
Citron, Oranges, and other sour materials, will sooner be burnt, or affected
with an empyreum in the bottom of the distilling Vessels, than throw up their
acidity to the Alembic. The distillation of Ox dung does better suit with the
Employ of a Tom-t- d, than with the Profession of such noble Doctors, that have
particularly inserted it in their grave Dispensatory. Can there be so much
madness fixed in the belief of any Physic Doctor, or decrepid Nurse, that Water
drawn by distillation from Swallows, or Magpyes, ever cured the falling
Sickness, or any sort of Convulsions? The number of waters to be distilled,
ought to be limited to such Vegetables, as partake of volatile Particles, and
others, whose fragrant scent is transmigrable with their humidity; and the most
necessary of these are so few, that ten, or a dozen, may for ready Vehicles,
and other uses, over-suffise. To what purpose then do the Augustan Doctors in
their Pharmacopoea, and in imitation of them others in theirs, command near a
hundred simple Waters to be distilled, unless to make a Well of the
Apothecaries Shop, to their needless trouble and charge, and yet grudge them to
reimburs their damage in pouring of them into the sinck every ensuing year, by
charging their losses on the higher prizes of such Medicines, which they shall
have opportunity of selling? so that in this sense it is not eleven pence in
the Shilling profit, but rather twelve pence in the Shilling loss; for which
the poor Apothecary that pays House-rent, scot and lot, is singularly obliged
to their Doctorships.

In the framing of the Pharmacopoea Hagiensis, I had my suffrage as fellow of
that College of Physicians, and where it has been my turn to be twice Dean or
President of the said Society, as you may read by Name in the printed Copies,
which are sold among the Booksellers in London, as well as at the Hague. It was
not in any single power to prevail against all the rest of the Colleagues, to
reduce the twenty two only distilled simple Waters there inserted, to ten or
eleven, which in my sentiment seemed abundance for all necessary Intentions;
notwithstanding that Dispensatory, comparatively with others before, for
smalness of number, election and correction of requisite Medicines, may
challenge the first place with any other of ancienter edition, though it has
not escaped many of those errors, that all others are culpable of, as will be
particularly instanced hereafter.

The simple Waters drawn from the flowers of Rosemary, Lime-trees; Lavendel,
Lillies of the Valley, Piony, and from other cephalic simples, forasmuch as
their simple virtues do in no proportion balance the charge and trouble of
their distillation, deserve no rank in a Dispensatory, especially in regard
they are all contained in several compound Epileptick, and Apoplectick Spirits,
where their faculties and powers are exalted, and copiously extracted by the
means of Wine or Brandy, and may be allayed by the admixture of any temperate
simple Water, to any degree you please.

As for Spirits of spirituous Waters of Wormwood, Angelica, Juniper,
Orange-peel, Mint, Lemon Peel, and twenty more of the same class, are rather to
be esteemed appurtenances of a Brandy shop, prepared to gratify the Palates of
debauched Brandy drinkers, whereas Spirits drawn from two or three choice
Epilepticks and Apoplecticks, shall answer all indications more powerfully and
agreeably to Nature, without such frustraneous Multiplications, according to
the two memorable Edicts of Philosophers, E^tia non sunt multiplicanda praeter
necessitate^. Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest p^r pauciora. To leave
in the bottom of the distilling Vesse^ the most powerful Particles of the
Ingredients of Aqua Hysterica, after a faint stinking water has been abstracted
from them, is the greatest Indiscretion; whereas the infusing or digesting in
Spirits of Wine four or five of the most Energick Simples by way of Tincture,
a^ Aristoloch. Rot. Bac. Sambuc. Puleg. Myrrh. and Cort. Aurant. would partake
more Virtues in half an ounce, than does the distilled water in a pint. Neither
can I well perceive the pretense of Bryony to the discussing of hypochondriac,
or as they fasly term them, hysteric Vapors; being a nauseous violent Emetic
and Cathartic, which rather seems appointed with qualities to excite and
irritate such offensive Ebullitions and Exufflations.

What wonder the Juice of Celondine, and one or two very ungrateful Spices
among the rest, can produce in Aqua Mirabilis, is not so great a wonder to me,
as the folly of those that composed it.

The Aqua Coelestis, Imperialis, Theriacalis, frigida Saxoniae, Gilbert^, and
other compound Waters are most of ^em tautalogical the one with the other, and
abounding with all the absurdities you will read hereafter in the just censure
of Venice Treacle, and other Remarks upon composites.

Whatever laudable effects has been performed by the Aqua Quercetani, are only
imputable to the Therebinthin; the other Ingredients, as Sem. Lactucae and agni
Casti, etc. (as will appear in the disprobation of the Syrup of Chastity) being
idle and of no signification.

Nothing argues greater Stupidity, than not to believe, there is more virtue in
a spoonful of Capons broth, than in a gallon of Aqua Caponis; wherefore,
exceptis Medicis nihil stultius Grammaticis.

What can come nearer to madness, than the commending Aqua scordii composita,
being a meet Phlegm attended with a fainty nauseous smell, more noisome to the
Spirits than the steem of a Dunghill.

Epidemic water requires several Animadversions. 1. Scorzonera roots retaining
little that is volatile, yields less of an Alexipharmac and antifebril in
distillation, than Barley flower or Oatmel. 2. The Pyony root possessing the
total of its prime virtues in weighty terrestrial parts, continues its
residence in the bottom of the gourge, without parting with more than an
invalid steem. 3. Besides scents of an ill hew, and some strong heating oily
Particles of the Cephalicks, I cannot discern any thing material in the
Composition for the purpose. 4. The Fountain water mixed with the best Spirits
of Wine, is labor and cost lost, in not exchanging it for good Nantes Brandy,
or Spirit of Wine not rectified. So that this empirical medley is much
resembling all the rest, described in vulgar Dispensatories. 5. The faeces or
Residence of this and Treacle-water is left possessed of what can be supposed
excellent in those Compositions. Distilled Spirits of Wormwood retain only
what is the most offensive and nauseous part of that Herb, leaving what is most
useful, as all other bitters, in the bottom of the Still.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Medicinal Vinegers and Wine; also of Emetic Wines.
1. WHether for use of the Kitchen, or the Apothecaries Shop, so many sorts of
Vinegars are introduced, is but a civil question. Elder Vinegar the Cooks
impropriate to their share, leaving Rosemary Vinegar, Gillistower, Marigold,
Rose, S^^il, Treacle-Vineger, and the rest to the Physic Doctors, among whom
there is scarce one in a hundred, that in the whole course of his Practice ever
prescribed a drop, unless to smell unto, or apply (...) particular inflamed
part, in form of an Oxycrat, which of late years has been wholly rejected. To
what end then is the Shop burdened with them? If any young Physickster has an
itch to experiment once in his life time, whether Squil Vinegar deserves those
lying Marvels Galen adscribes to it, the Medicine may (pro re nata) be well
enough prepared without an Insolation of forty days. And when he shall be fully
satisfied of its Sublimities, he will have no great appetite to essay Vinun
S^^illiticum, especially in those that are amorous, who desire to avoid a
stinking Breath, and a loathsome Medicine, and wherefore then foisted into the
Dispensatory?

2. Any man of sense will be contented with the sole and safe use of Vinum
benedictum, without running the risque of a Vinum Helleboratum, Rubellum, or
Antimoniale, which too often have thrown Patients into dreadful Convulsions; and
let me be their Remembrancer of Hippocrates his Aphor. 1. Lib. 5. (...). Death
that so often has been an attendant of white Hellebore, is not so much the
consequent of an Hypercatharisis, and an extreme Inanition or Siccity, as of a
venomous quality, that contorts the whole Systeme of the Nerves, and poisons
the Brain; Why then must this poisonous Medicine take its place in the
Dispensatory?

3. I cannot without laughter take notice of the Mace, that is added to the
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, and the Cloves to the Vitrum Antimonii, and yet
the Regulus Antimonii, which is as great a Devil as either of them, is
accompanied with neither Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, nor Cinnamon in the Vinum
Antimoniale. As for the Cloves and Mace, either their office is intended to be
a corrector of the Antimony, or a corroborator of the Stomach; if the first,
they are under a mistake, for ten drams of Mace is not so much a corrector to
an ounce of Antimony, as one grain of Saltpeter. If they pretend to strengthen
the Stomach, then they hinder the Operation of the Medicine, which is to
weaken, irritate, and provoke the Stomach, to let go its hold of those slimy or
choleric Humors that oppress it; whereas to strengthen the Stomach is to
contract moderately its Fibers, by the adstringent quality of those Spices,
whereby at the same time the humors are bound up, and packed in close, all
which is contrary to the intention of vomiting. If you are fearful, that the
Stomach is very weak, give less of the Medicine, and then my most worthy
Kindred, after the operation of throwing up the load of vicious Humors,
approach with a good burnt Claret, wherein your Mace, Cloves, or Cinnamon, will
do you Service. Pray consider; Suppose you thought fit in your Wisdoms to
advise a vomit of warm water and Sallade Oil, should you order Cinnamon or Mace
to be boiled in it, the very Nurses, and all the Boys of the Parish would laugh
at you. What, Cloves and Mace in a Vomitory? This is thrusting from you, and
pulling to you, all at once. This is a Maxim the Rusticks will oppose, without
the help of Logic. Wherefore I do offer to take the blame upon me, if
henceforward the Apothecaries leave those Indian Aromaticks out of these or the
like Medicines. Moreover know, that Minerals are to be disrobed of their Venom,
smoothed of immoderate roughness, and corrected, before they enter into the
Body, by Tonitruation, Sublimation, Precipitation, or Digestion.

4. Have these Physicksters ever had the good fortune to recover sight in a
blind man by Eyebright Wine, or to strengthen a weak Brain by Rosemary Wine?
Vulgar Experience asserts Wine hurtful to the Eyes and Brain, both which have
too often been drunk out by that Liquor. Away with them for shame out of all
Dispensatories.

I had almost forgot to mention the Inconveniency of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, that after long keeping it loses its virtue, and often misseth in
its vomitive Operation, which is endeavored to be prevented by letting the
Wine stand upon the Antimony, and now and then giving it a gentle shake. This
not restoring it to its former virtue, an Oxymel Vomitivum will not only
obviate that desect, but by means of the Vinegar correct the exorbitant faculty
of that Mineral, quicken it in Operation, and attenuate the gross slimy Humors.
So that in my Opinion all the recited Vomitories ought to be expunged, and this
remain the only substitute. As for the simple Waters, all ought to be discarded
to eight or nine, these medicated Vinegers exterminated, except the acetum
destillatum, and the physical Wines abandoned to those, whose Palats will judge
them grateful.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Medicinal Syrups, and Conserves.
1. WAter vyeth with the Earth for the lower most Seat, but in the Physick-shop
it possesses the highest next the Cieling, and the Region immediate to this is
the Dominion of the Wasps and Flies, haunting the Syrup-pots, the chief
Ornament and Note of Distinction of the Trade. Next give me leave to inquire
into their inside and contents; not of all of them, for that would more fit an
Atlas; but of such as are most in use, and equally senseless. The intent of
converting Simples into Syrups, is to preserve them the Winter over, when they
are not to be had green; or to render them more grateful; or for the sake of
their ready form to be dissolved in any Potion, Decoction, or Julep. In
relation to the first, most useful Herbs or Roots may be had in the hardest
Season, if not in their greatest vigor, yet in their greatest decay they do
yield more powerful virtues to a Decoction, than what can be supposed in a
Syrup, which is nothing but a decoction or expression of Juyces, whose most
energic Particles are boiled or evaporated away to a sediment and slyme, which
then is to be inspissated by a further Ebullition, through the addition of a
sufficient proportion of Sugar, into a Syrup. Herewith the Stomach is to be
clogged, injured, and diseased, by its turning four and corrosive, as all
Sugars and sugared Medicines, be they Syrups, Lohochs, Lozenges, or the like,
generally do. Moreover, many Vegetables being preserved dry, some are thereby
exalted in virtue, and others not much debased. As to the matter of
gratefulness, such as retain a fragran^y in their scent, seem most proper for
Syrups, to be prepared without Ebullition; namely, Roses, Gilliflowers,
Violets, etc. The last intimating the readiness for Solution, a sufficient
reason for asserting the necessity of Syrups, may be admitted in Syrupus de
meconio or diacodium, some Purgative Syrups, (appropriated to Children, and
such whose Palats must be courted by the sweetness of Sugar) and a smoothing
lenifying Syrup, as of Mashmallows; in fine, eight or ten Syrups may be
sufficiently capable to satisfy all necessary intents and purposes. Moreover,
that in many Syrups, Honey being endued with healing, balsamic, gently
detersive, and diuretic Faculties, ought to be preferred before Sugar, needs no
further Arguments to procure the ascent of any rational Physician.

2. Leaving generals, I ought to descend to the examination of Particulars,
where beginning with the letter A seems most methodical. Syrupus de Agno ca^^o,
or Syrup of Chastity, intended questionless in disfavour of Nuns and Friars, to
abate the carreer of their galoping Lust; but as by wonderful Providence we are
delivered of their vicious Company, so the description of this Syrup ought to
be razed by their Physickships out of their Pharmaceutic Records. However, I
may be positive, though the Ephesian Doctor had used pounds of it in his
Porridg, it would have as little hinder^d the operation of his sympathetick
purge, in some Constitutions, as a few grains of Cantharides in others, which
is quite contrary. That Endive, Lettuce and Porcelain should be Copartners
with agnu^ castus in the mischief of suppressing the propagation of mankind, is
oppositely attested by most Germans and French, who throughout the whole year
graze abundantly upon it, and nevertheless attain to a numerous Issue.
Hempseed, another ingredient, by affording a copious strong juice to Pigeons,
occasions them to breed more frequently than otherwise. The broaths of Lentils
and Coriander-seeds, the basis of all the rest, is beyond all dispute a strong
provocative. Since their attempt in this kind proves so ridiculous, I will
offer to 'em a most infallible Remedy against Petulancy. Let the Patient
exercise at the Spade in a tough piece of ground from morning until night,
then give him a half pint of thin Water Gruel with a few crumbs of bread for
Supper, this Method continued for eight of ten days, I do warrant will perform
an absolute cure, without the least drop of their Syrup of Chastity.

3. Syrups are very frustraneously multiplied, that are filled almost with the
same Ingredients, and yet intended for diverse purposes; as Syrup of Mugwood,
and Syrup of ground Pine, the former offering at the provoking of the Menstrua
in Women, the latter at the curing the Gout, and all other Arthritick
Distempers in Men; as if the cause of the suppression of the Catemenia were the
same, that causes the Gout; can any thing be more senseless? But these Syrups
consist of a strong brigade of simples as ill ranked and filled as ever I yet
beheld. If nothing will satisfy besides a Syrup, one made of Elicampane roots,
Pennyroyal and Myrrh, shall exceed the former a thousand degrees, with the
twentieth part only of the trouble and charge.

4. To what purpose shall the decoction in the preparation of Syrup of
Mashmallows be clogged with Pellitory, Mallows, Plantain, Maidenhair, Sparagus,
Grass roots, Raisins, and all the eight sorts of cold Seeds, that shall choke
and hinder the main operation of the Mashmallow roots and Cicers, which is to
widen, relax, render slippery, and gently throw off. In lieu of all this
Garbage make a strong decoction of Mashmallow roots, red Cicers, and English
Liquorish, boil them into a Syrup with the best Honey. But if you add to the
Liquor in the boiling a hundred or two of Sows or Mille^edes tied up in a rag,
you will have a Syrup, that in a fresh Scent, Taste, and Virtues shall surpass
all the Syrups of that kind, that ever were invented. And having this Syrup,
what occasion is there for Syrup of Liquorish, Isop, Jujubees, Mucilages, or
other pectoral Syrups, when it is in your power to advise ex tempore and pro re
nata a pulmonic decoction of inciding, and abstersive Vegetables, or such as
answer your Indication, and edulcorate it with the foresaid Syrup, if
necessary. Likewise all Loho^hs are needless, since they can easily be
otherwise supplied. To insert Syrups de Rosis Si^^is, Myrtinus, and de
consolida is super vacaneous, where one of them will suffice in a decoction,
that you shall order for your purpose; unless his Physic Hogship by a
tautology of Compounds intends to puzzle the Apothecary, and impose on his
Opinion, there is a mystery in composition, which shall limit his attempt of
imitating the Physician, and so secure the Practice of Physic to himself.

5. If Syrup of Rhubarb is designed for nice Palats, and Children, the Rhubarb
ought to be left out, than which nothing is more ungrateful, especially where
the Stomach is foul. Is it not a supererogatory folly to add Violet Flowers, as
if that in clogging the Menstruum were not detrimental? But to command the
infusion to be made in Betony, Cichory, and Bugloss Waters, where good spring
Water acuated with Salt of Tartar is infinitely more proper, and less
chargeable, is want of Judgment. Here Cinnamon may well be omitted, where the
Ginger will much better supply its place.

6. Touching Conserves, and Candids, the twentieth part of those set down in
the Augustan Dispens. will overdo, the Reasons are the same I have already
given you, in the Discourse touching Syrups and Sugar.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Idleness of Compound Dispensatory Powders.
1. THE Aromaticum Caryophyllatum, Pulvis Elect. Rosat. Novel. M^suae, and
Rosatum Gabrielis are without all doubt very excellent to dry the Hair, and may
be more serviceable for Barbers than Physicians, they scarce using them in
weakness of the Stomach once in seven years. The second containing about half a
hundred Ingredients, and very ill put together, may easily be outdone by
Zedoary, Cinnamon, and red Roses.

Crabs Eyes, or Pearl prepared and used singly and jointly, I have ever found
to equal the Virtues of all the Ingredients in the mixture of Pulvis e chelis
cancrorum composu^s. But the addition of tosted raw Silk, the fragments of
Sapphir, and Emeralds, and of the bone of a Stags Heart, to the Species
Cordiales, is a most senseless Superstition, never received into the belief of
the least rational, except Physicians.

2. The greater and lesser cold Seeds contracting a rancor in a short time, and
the subtle smell of the Flowers of Buglos, Water Lillies, and Violets, soon
evaporating being powdered, and thence consequently resolved into powder of
Post; what folly can be greater, than to expect from them a Cordial virtue in
the Pulvis Diamargariton frigidus,? Even the white and yellow Saunders, also
Myrtle-berries in the same Composition, contribute nothing cordial besides
bulk. So that these and a hundred more such like jumbles can take place in a
Dispens. no otherwise, than Expectation Medicines.

3. What Sympathy to the Heart can be breathed from an Elcks hoof, the most
abject excrement of that Animal; or from a Stags Heartbone, not much differing
from any other bone of the same Beast, except in the singularity of number; or
from an Unicorns horn, a sort of an Ass, which the horn of an Ox, or Goat may
contend with in Virtue, though not in rarity; or from leaf Gold (much less from
leaf Silver) which undigested passes without casting the least ray of its
luster; or from bole armene, terra lemnia, precious stone Fragments, or Amber,
whose weight or stickyness does empower them to clog and oppress the Stomach;
or from Sorrel Seeds, that usually escape the force of the Pestil, and
therefore as they enter whole into any Composition, so they slide whole through
the body when inwardly taken; or from Endive Seeds, and twenty more like the
forementioned, and yet all of them in greater or lesser numbers, are added to
some Cordial Powder or other in Pharmacop^^a's; as in the Pulvis Bezoarticus,
Pulvis confectionis liberantis Augustan. Pulvis pannonicus ruber, species
Cardiac. M. Species Card. temp. Augustanorum Diamarg. frig. and several others.
Moreover any one of these forenamed compound supposedly Cordial Powders
containing the Virtues and Faculties of all the rest, to what end is the
Apothecary needlessly to be charged with the preparation of four or five of
them, and his Shop burdened with so many Species Glasses? A Cordial properly
and per se is that, which has power suddenly to increase the dissipated and
vanquished Spirits, or to corroborate the relaxt languishing texture of the
Heart; and can any one, except a Physician, have so depraved a Fancy, as not
to think, there is more of Cordial in a Spoonful of good Broth, or a few drops
of Spirits of Wine, than in an ounce of such unproportioned ^op Cordial
Powders? I cannot but repeat, Excepti^ medicis, Grammaticis nihil stultius.
That the pretended subduing of malignant or pestilential Steems, and febril
Matter, whereby the Heart is singularly relieved by these precited Powders,
whence they merit the Title of Cordial, is urged as a reply, may be foreseen,
though easily obviated, by asserting those effects per accidens; and
consequently Vomitories and Purgatives may justly be listed in the Roll of
Cordials, forasmuch as they remove vicious Humors, which per protopatheiam or
deuteropatheiam affect and disease the Heart; all which is mere Physic Cant.

4. As for Pulvis diamosc. d. and A^ar. Dianthos Nicholai, and diambra Mesuae
do rather weaken, and deject the animal faculty much more than a compound
Saxifrage, or a hodg pot mashmallow Powder can be experienced to fail in their
efforts against Stone or Gravel; or the Pulvis Antilyssos Palmarii against the
bite of a mad Dog, and an Hydrophobia.

5. Among all the rest of those Empirical Dispens. Powders recommended me to
the Species Diarrbodon Abbatis Nicholai Mirepsi for an idle and incongruous
Composition; and if you will deduce the virtues of it from its contrary
Ingredients, it shall prevail against abundance of Diseases. The Pearl and
Stags heart bone do appropriate it to Diseases of the Heart, Camphir to the
Plague, and the greater cold Seeds to the Kidneys. The Rhapontic speaks its
excellency against the Scurvy, Juice of Liquorish against a Cough, red Roses,
Mastick, and the Saunders against all bleedings, and all sorts of loosnesses,
and the Spices against Winds, Faintnesses, Dropsies, stoppage of Urine, etc. I
dare be bold to say, that a Mountebanck cannot set up with a more cheating
Medicine against all Diseases, were not the trouble and extraordinary charge a
main impediment to such an undertaking. Great was the Fool that invented it,
and far greater Fools are they, that caused it to be recording in their
Dispensatories some hundred of years after.

Moibanus upon Dioscorides puts a great cheat on the succeding Ages in
recommending pulvis Saxonicus against the Plague, which of all others by the
mezereon shall cause a most burning Plagu^ in the Throat; Stomach, and Guts.

CHAP. XX.
Detecting the most senseless, gross and absurd Errors in the Composition of
Venice Treacle, and Mithridate, also of the other Narcotic Medicines.
1. WHat means such a Troop of Electuaries in Dis. against Winds, weaknesses of
the Heart, Stomach, Lungs, Spleen, Kidneys, and Testicles, when under other
heads and forms such a train of Physic Artillery has already been provided
against them? Actum agere, entia multiplicare, and per plura facere must
certainly be the delight of Physicians. I shall pass most of 'em, the same
Reasons and Remarks set down before, serving to confute their necessity, and
demonstrate their grossest Absurdities. The Autid. Haemagog. is such a one;
that Gog nor Magog can never unriddle the Mystery of its Composition. I
perfectly know, that it performs least, what it is intended for. The Alom,
Ginger, Pellitory of Spain, Capers bark, Elicampane, Pyony, Liquorish, Pepper,
Lupin flower, and thirty more varieties in it will compound a mash fitter for
Infernals, than for Horses, much less for sick men.

2. I do aver, that Diatessaron is a Compos. a million of degrees beyond Venice
Treacle, or Mithridate, both which Physicians will have to ride Admiral and
Vice Admiral over all their wretched Squadrons of Compounds. One monstrous
Thunderbolt of a Medicine will not serve turn, there must be a pair. And that
they shall be exactly prepared at Paris, their Wisdoms have thought fit to
depute a brace or two of Censorious Coxcombs to visit the Treacle and
Mithridate Pots in the Shops. And does one Paris Physician in a hundred know
all the Simples when he sees them? I dare be confident not one in forty is
acquainted with the faces of the tenth art of them. But what if the Agaric, Gum
Arabic, and seven or eight more, should be left out by the Artist, can you
believe, the sight, scent, and taste of those Physicksters could discover it? No
more than an Apothecary can tell, what young Doctor made the last addresses to
his Wife in her Bedchamber. The Venetian Magistrates and Physicians well
knowing, that nothing can prevent Fallacies or Counterfeits of such thrice
noble Medicines, unless they see all the Ingredients prepared singly, and
renged in several Classes, they never fail being present at the jumbling of
them together, and affixing their Seal to their true mixture, to serve for a
Traffic all Europe over.

3. A Lion, a Bear, Tiger, Wolf, Cat, Dog, and a hundred wild Beasts more being
put together, could not make a greater howling in the Air, than all those
untamed Simples in Mithridate and Treacle would do in the Stomach, if the Opium
that is among them did not quiet their Fury, and bridle their Enormity. The
Experiment of this observe is evident in Mathews's Pill, where the poisonous
effort of the white Hellebore upon the Stomach is by the Opium bound up, by
clowding the vital and animal Spirits, until it is passed into the Guts, when
and where the Narcotick Virtue being spent, that malignant vegetable is at
liberty, to vent the remainder of its force upon the Intestins, in moving of
Stools.

4. Give me leave to examine into the merits of these so highly blazoned
Composts, and begin with the greater worthy of the twine, Venice Treacle,
preferred above all others, either because prepared with an exactness
extraordinary, attested by the Venetian Seal, as I have observed before, or by
reason that the Italian Vipers are reputed of greater force, than those brought
hither from New England. The Name of Treacle, or Theriaca it desumes from
(...), a wild Beast, either because Vipers are the chief Ingredients, or
because its virtue is most signal incuring the bites of wild Beasts. It owes
its Invention to Andromachus, Physician to Nero, whence you may compute its
very old Age, and remark how the Tradition of so many hundred years is arrived
to Physicians in the most assured report of its infallible prevalence
(according to Galen) against the greatest Diseases, particularly against the
falling Sickness, Stone, Dropsy, Coughs, Phtisick, spitting of Blood,
Swooning, Leprosy, Gout, Madness from the bite of a mad Dog, all Poisons,
Plague, Colic, plague of the Guts, many Diseases peculiar to Women, and a
hundred more. No wonder, if this mixture was called the Queen regent over all
Medicines, and only worthy to reign in the Closets of Emperors, by whom it was
caused to be prepared with the greatest cost and trouble. How little those
Virtues can be expected from it, and how so vast a charge of those Emperors in
sending for some of the Ingredients over all Asia is expended in vain; and how
senseless and empirical the Composition is, will easily appear from the
following Considerations. 1. That consisting of very many, if not all, contrary
Ingredients, the one must necessarily destroy the other. 2. That Treacle being
a Composition within a Composition of several of the same Materials, many of
them are very foolishly repeated, as in the Trochisci Hedychroi are received
Rad. Phu. Pontic. costi, Cinamom. Shaenanth. Opobalsam. Cassia Lign.
Malabathrum, Nardus indicus, Myrrh. Crocus, and Amomum; all which are also
again mentioned in the body of the Description. 3. Observe the mixture of
Purgatives, as Rhubarb, Agaric, Sem. Thlaspios Sagapenum, Opopanax, Chalcanthum
Rubefactum, a vomitive and purgative, etc. with Adstringents, as red Roses,
Hypocistis, Acacia, Pentaphyllon; consider further these Adstringents joaked
with their opposites, Alexipharmacks, Diaphoreticks, and Diuretics; as Vipers,
dictamnum cretieum, Petroselinum Macedonicum, Sem. dauci cret, Foenic. ses.
Ammeos: Therebinth, etc. next here must be Detergers, Cephalicks, Pectorals,
Hystericks, Stomachicks and Spleneticks, Gums, Resins, Earths, all sorts of
Spices, etc. The Basis is a Spanish Sea Onion, or Squil baked in a crust of
Wheat, and consequently exceeding in weight all the other Ingredients singly.
But take notice also, that Pepper and Opium together make an equal poize with
the forementioned Scallion. Is not Venice Treacle standing on such a Basis
likely to be framed into an incomparable Gallimophory, especially where old
decayed Viper Cakes, and long Pepper are equally supporters of the mighty
Electuary. The ill order, weight, disproportion, and dissonance of such a
multiplicity of Ingredients cannot be paralleled with any thing but it self,
and its Sister Mithridate. Take a mad man out of Bethlehm, who has the humor
of mixing upon him, open all the Drawers, Pots, and Glasses of the Physic Shop
unto him, it will not be possible for him to make a more irrational jumble, and
which shall not equal all the Virtues of Venice Treacle, provided a
proportionable weight of Opium be added by any of a little more sense than the
Bethlemite.

5. Suppose half a score Ingredients more, as Nut-shells powdered, Asses bones
calcined, scraping of Trenchers, and the like, be added to the mixture; or that
the same number of Simples be subtracted, be they Pentaphyllon, Calaminth,
Viper Cakes, or almost which you please, conditionally, that the Opium be
proportioned according to the substraction or addition, will you not believe,
the Composition shall be gifted with the same Endowments and Qualities; or that
it is not possible, for you or any man else not present at the jumble, to know,
or conjecture, what is wanting, or what is thrown in?

6. Next examine the nature of the Ingredients. That the Stomach from the
corrosive burning and cutting Qualities of the Squils is apt to be ulcerated,
is attested by Dioscorides, whereunto the pretended corrective of Orobus, or
bitter vetch flower gives a helping hand, whose violence, according to the same
Dioscorides and Galen, consists in an extreme bitterness, and a faculty of
causing a bloody Urin, and a bloody Flux, with the attendance of Convulsive
gripes. These are the prime Jewels to bedeck the Queen of Medicines, among
which the calcined Copperas is not the least, a Mineral fitter for a galled
horse's back, or the Farsie, a demi-poison promoting suffocating Vomits, and
torminous stools. The Rhubarb is asserted by the Vouchers of Treacle to be
added to strengthen the Liver, and Agarick to comfort the Brain; an absurdity
condemned by the experience of all mankind, that ever purgatives should be
corroboratives. But they pretend to excuse the injuries of those pernicious
Simples by their small proportion, which they insinuate cannot signify much to
so great a mass as the whole Composition amounts to. The same reason may as
justly indemnifie the addition of a dram or two of Arsenic or Ratsbane,
Wolf-bane, and the like. To blow your nose into a man's Porridg can do no hurt,
because the quantity is little, is a parallel way of reasoning, and of all men
only peculiar to Physicians. But let me tell you, the proportion is great, if
you join them together, thus: of Agaric an ounce and half, Rhubarb six drams,
burned Copperas half an ounce, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Galbanum etc. all which
being purgatives, make a strong party. Imagine, that a patient in a malignant
Fever had by advice taken a dose of Venice Treacle, to expel the malignity,
which failing in the intended effect, he happens to dye; The Physician, should
he by accident come to the knowledge, that the Treacle wanted an Ingredient or
two, as juice of Liquorish, Orrice, or any other of less moment, the Hog would
most certainly impute the death of the Patient to the defective Composition. In
conclusion, Treacle is no other, than a most confuse, absurd and senseless
Opiat, which in all its pretenses would be outdone beyond comparison, by a
mixture of of three or four, as Virg. Serpentary roots, Scordium, Bole armene,
and Opium, reduced with Honey into an Electuary; or Angelica r. Terra sigil.
Gentian, and Opium mixed with Honey. The Extract of Hartshorn, Dictamnum Cret.
and Opium is also an equivalent. Great is the superstition of the Indians in
the worship of their Pagode Devils, deformed with monstrous horns, but a
million greater is the superstition of Physic Idolaters, that believe it the
greatest Sacrilege to diminish the least tittle from a Composition, as
Sorrel-seeds, Pepper, and Ginger from Diascordium, or Pellitory of Spain from
the Philonia; the precious fragments and Stags-bone out of Confectio de
Hyacintho; the neglect of rejecting of all these particulars does demonstrate
Physicians to have longer Ears then Asses. To roast Saffron in an Egg-shell to
improve its virtues, is another Argument of their Sagess in the description of
Elect. de Ovo. The Additaments of Pellitory of Spain, and Pepper to correct the
extreme coldness of Opium in the Philonia, is another foolish notion, they
cannot be driven from.

7. To what purpose is the description of so many idle Opiats; as Philonium
Persicum, Romanum, Requies Nicholai, Nepenthes, Pil. de Cynoglosso etc. when
Opium dissolved and digested with Spirit of Wine, with or without Saffron, and
used in drops, or evaporated to a Pill, is beyond all the imaginary
correctives, which it does not stand in need of, since the only danger it can
threaten is oversleeping into a Coma, Lethargy, Carus, or death; and that is no
other way to be prevented, than in omitting giving of it to those, that are not
judged proper to take it, or to exhibit it to others in less quantity, than it
can be presumed to exceed in operation; for though you surround Opium with all
the spices of the Indies, to guard nature from its violence, if you give too
much, it will not fail to kill, or extremely to frighten the standers by with a
posture of the patient very like unto death; and if you judge, that advising
very little of it in Phthisicks, or great Weaknesses, be a sufficient warrant,
you will find your selves deceived, as those have been, which I mentioned in
the Conclave of Physicians. I pass by taking notice of the purgative
Electuaries, whose Absurdities in Composition we shall sufficiently detect in
the Pill Boxes.

CHAP. XXII.
Reflections upon the erroneous and absurd Compositions of Dispersatory Pills.
1. IF for those unaccountably erroneous Compositions of Treacle, Methridate,
Pil. Aloephanginae, Foetidae, and the rest, the Inventors ought to be censured
great Idiots seventeen hundred years ago, the Approvers and Confirmers of 'em a
thousand years after may be inferred greater Fools, but those that subscribe to
the continuance of 'em at this day, must be concluded the greatest Fools; as if
the excellency of Remedies consisted in Compofition, and the more of
Composition there is, the greater Virtues it contributes to the Medicine.

2. That this is the rule, whereby to measure the Capacity of the Artist,
appears in the endeavors of Physicians to prescribe long Bills, filled with
Composition, and by how much the more it is compounded, by so much the more the
Apothecary judges the Prescriber the best Physician. On the contrary, the fewer
Ingredients the better Medicine, which occasions less trouble and charge in the
Preparation, and more certainty in the Effect; for where a Remedy consists of
an hundred Ingredients, to which of 'em can you attribute the effect if
successful, or the fault and damage if the Disease be thereby rendered worse?
But such has been the fallacia non causae pro cause in Physicians, that having
prescribed to Patients against Diseases of the Eyes, Pil. Cochiae maj. and
finding Success, and a laudable Event, infer thence very deceitfully, that
their particular Composition does arrogate specifically an Eye or Sight
restoring power beyond all others; whereas its to the virtue of the Purgatives,
chosen according to the strength and other circumstances of the Patient, and
without any correctives or Conductors, those good effects are to be imputed.

3. The same reason confutes the specific relation of Pil. de Agarico to the
Lungs; Aggregativae, de Tribus, and Imperiales to all the Bowels; Aureae and
Lucis to the Eyes; de Eupatorio to the Liver; Diambrae, Macri, and de Succino
to the Brain; Tartareae Q. to the Spleen; de aloe lota, Aloephanginae,
Stomachicae, and Ruffi to the Stomach; Stomachicae cum gummi to the Stomach and
Spleen; de hiera cum Agarico, and Mastichinae to the Stomach, Lungs and Brain;
foetidae, de Opopanace, and de Hermodactylis to the Joints, and other gouty
Diseases; Mechoacannae and de Gutta Gamandra to Dropsies; de Styrace to sharp
thin Distillations on the Lungs.

4. Pause a while, and with me consider the depth of folly of Mankind, the more
astonishing, for as much as it is signally remarkable in those, who by the
study of their whole Lifetime, and the pretended Learning derived from the
Experience of thousands of years, are advan'd no further, than by giving Credit
to lying Antiquity, to receive such idle absurd superfluous and pernicious
Compositions into the Pharmacopoea, and what is worse, to impose the use of 'em
upon the Physicians of a whole Nation, is a perfect Physic Popery, and
Inquisition, damning all those, that are gifted with too much Knowledge and
Honesty to submit to their Fopperies, as Popery anathematizes such, whose light
of reasoning, of conviction of Conscience will not be subjected to their
impious Indulgences, ridiculous Purgatory, and blind idolatrous Worship. And as
Luther was the first* that succeeded in the detecting the antiquated follies of
whole centuries of Ages, the chief scope whereof was no other, than by an
usurpt Dominion over the Consciences of Men, and detaining of them in that
blind slavery to triumph over the Liberties of their Persons, and enrich
themselves by the high prizes of their Indulgencies, Pardons, and other most
wicked Devices, whereunto their fulminatory Bulls, and cursed Excommunications,
especially at the hour of Death, are so greatly instrumental. And why is it not
equally probable, that any honest and discerning Judgment may with the same
Success, and Perspicuity of Argument expose, and detect the grossest of Errors
and Absurdities in Physic, continued by the unreasonable and tyrannizing power
assumed by Conclaves of Physicians, to no other end than to domineer over the
Lives of Men, and to enrich themselves out of their Estates, by enslaving their
Opinions to their mischievous Compositions, and most senseless Prescriptions?

5. The minute courge, that some few years ago incited me to correct Extractum
Rudii, by throwing off the Pulvis Diarrhodon Abbatis, that idle non-corrective,
and substitute an aromatic or two, as you may read in my House Apothecary, was
an attempt, that never durst enter the thought of any Physician before me,
though soon after was imitated by a whole Society in their Pharmacopoea.

6. What means the addition of Mastick, Hore-hound, Sarcocol, and Myrrh to the
Purgatives in Pil. de Agarico, since the former in their virtues are overruled
and drowned by the latter, and their mutual reaction not only breaks the force
of each other, but clogs the Composition into too large a bulk. The same reason
is much more prevalent against the inspissated Juyces of Agrimony, Motherweed,
Polypody, Mastich, red Roses, Epithymum, Anis Seeds, and Ginger in de
description of Pilulae Aggregativae. The Myrobalans being so weak a Purgative,
are rather used for their adstringent faculty, and therefore ought to be
rejected hence, as also the red Roses and Mastich, which by their adstriction
do hinder, and retard the purgative Faculties of the chief Ingredients. The
Office of Anis-seeds, and Ginger is to discuss the Winds or Flatuosities, which
the Cathartic Ebullition causes; or rather those ensuing Gripes owe their
original to sharp vellicating Humors, thrown off by the Purgatives upon the
Guts, which the hot fiery Particles of the Ginger, and Anis-seeds do extremely
provoke, and increase, and therefore ought be shut out.

7. To speak plain, the proper Assistent to Nature upon the taking a Purge,
which in effect is the true corrective of Purgatives, is some time after the
Cathartic has been swallowed down, to take a Bouillon Maigre, or lean Broth
made of Mashmallow-roots, or young Mallow-leaves, Endive, and Borrage or
Bugloss, with a little fresh Butter, and three or four grains of Salt dissolved
in it; or Posset Drink with a little Butter and Salt may also be used instead
of the Bouillon. The Butter by its oily parts rendering the Stomach and Guts
smooth and slippery, and lineing the Guts to defend them from the acrimonie of
the preterfluent incensed Humors, the mucilaginous and ^molli^nt parts of the
Herbs assisting in the precipitating the Purgative, together with the Humors
out of the Stomach and Guts, and conspiring with the Butter in the defense of
the membranous parts, the Salt by gentle Stimulation spurring the Fibers of the
Stomach and Guts to Expulsion, these are the proper Defensives and Correctives
of a purgative Medicine, though proving so violent as to be suspected of a
malignant faculty, as Scammony, Colocynthis, Hellebore, Gialap, Gum. Gut. etc.

8. The uniting of Purgatives supplying reciprocally each others defects, and
the additament of one out of three or four sorts of Salt for a corrective, is
the only right and suitable way of cathartic Composition, whereby the forecited
Inconvenients are precluded. Thus the flowness of Aloes is quickened by the
prompt Operation of Scammony and Colocynthis, the roughness and emetic quality
of which latter, and of all others is smoothed and precipitated by some sort or
other of fixed Salt, which to Turbith, Hermodactyls, Gum. Gut. etc. does impart
the same advantage.

9. Most sorts of Dispens. compounded cathartic Pills exhibited in a just dose,
do nevertheless in many Constitutions cause most dreadful Oppressions on their
Stomachs, because they are empirically mixed, and clogged with Ingredients
foreign to the Intention, and with adstringent Spices, that forcibly detain
them in the Stomach.

10. Turbith, Hermodactyls, My^obalans, Sem. Carthami, Epithym. Gum Ammoniac,
Opopanax, Sagapen. and the like, mixed only with Aloes and its supposed
Correctives, is most certainly against the right reasoning of Composition, and
thwarts all successful Experience, so that it may justly be concluded, that
Pil. de Aloe lota, de Eupatorio Maslichinae, de Tribus, and indeed all the
compounded Pills of most Dispensatories, are most irrational and empirical,
adapted more for the use of Mountebancks, than dogmatic Physicians.

11. Of all others, Pil. Tartareae Q. may be judged the most ridiculous and
senseless, for reasons mentioned before in several Chapters. More than three or
four sorts of compounded purgative Pills in an Apothecaries Shop is a number
sufficient to answer all, or most usual Intentions of that form, without the
needless increase of Pill-pots, or the rendering the place more loathsome in
stinck, than a Hogsty. Is your Intention to prefer Turbith or Hermodactyls to
draw off tartarous Humors from gouty Joints, or with Ialap, Gum. Gut. etc. to
drain the water from an Hydropic; mix any of them in a just proportion with a
good Extractum Rudii or Catholicon, far differently prepared and corrected from
the common, and you will avoid being burdened with Elect. Cary^^ost. Pulv.
Diaturb. cum Rhab. Pil. de Hermodact. and many others. Next, it is necessary to
substitute an excellent compound Pill of milder Purgatives, to answer the ends
of Pil. Stom. cum gum. which by the extemporaneous addition of several other
purgative Ingredients will supply the superfluous numbers of many other
compound Dispensatory Pills. Besides, one composition or two more, which is not
material to insert here, will accompish all.

12. These instances of the various forms of internal composite Medicines are
premised as short proofs, whose intersperst Arguments may easily by any
moderately rational be applicable to most of those mentioned in vulgar
Dispensatories, whereby my labor being epitomized does excuse me from
dissecting every particular, which otherways would necessarily swell into the
bulk of a large Folio. As for the external Medicines, though their Compositions
do equally abound with Absurdities, and most senseless Incongruities, their use
importing less danger, I will wave giving my self any further trouble.

13. In conclusion, since it so plainly appears, that most Dispensatory
Medicines are not other than Expectation Remedies; Nothing seems more incumbent
upon combined Physicians, than framing a succinct neat Pharmacopoea, consisting
of necessary, select, and experienced^ cines, which cannot be hoped for in this
Century from the preposterous and crude Education of most of 'em, scarce one in
twenty being acquainted with the tenth part of the faces and virtues of the
Simples, and much less of the Composites. Touching Chemical Medicines, most of
their Preparations may rather be termed destructions of those materials, they
are conversant about, and the blazoning of their virtues are so grandiloquious,
and notoriously false, that the correction and improvement of that part of
Pharmacy requires a man of greater reason and skill, then I ever yet knew a
Conclave Physician.

CHAP. XXII.
That the laying too much stress upon the Methodus Medendi, is a great cause of
the hinderance of the improvement of Physic, is attested by very remarkable
Instances.
OF all those pernicious Doctrines, never any proved more ruinous to the Art of
Physic, than that which beyond others was so emphatically introduced by
Capivac. viz. Read my Method and you know all my Secrets, importing the Method
of Physic the only chief and necessary part, and ultimate end of the Art. This
false position being imbibed and sucked in by Infant Physicians, is the great
cause of their neglect of Pharmacy, which in my Opinion is the most necessary
of all, supposing it to comprehend not only the just and due Preperations of
Medicines, but also their certain (...), and throwly experienced Effects and
Virtues. Touching the Therapeutic or Method of Physic, it is no more than a
way, manner, or order of applying of Remedies according to Place, Time, Age,
Sex, Temperament, and other circumstanding, all which the only bare knowing and
understanding the nature of the Remedy, which it self with a little ocular
experience of themselves or others, does naturally show and point at, and
therefore does so evidently render the knowledge thereof the most necessary and
important of all others, notwithstanding the stupid neglect of it hitherto.
This Discourse does not exclude the necessary study and knowledge of all the
other parts of Physic ^urther, than to arrive to a competency, and not to
trifle away the best part of their time in needless Curiosities, and too fine
spun Speculations of Anatomy. A Brick-layer or Stone-cutter, beyond the
knowledge of the brickleness and fissility of a Stone, which rather a little
Experience will inform him in, than a long Theory, should he dwell eight or ten
years upon the study of the Philosophy of Stones, their material, external, and
internal efficient and adjuvant causes, their Species and differences, in
contempt and neglect of his Trowel and Mortar, the use whereof experience does
soon inform him in, without being much instructed in the Method of daubing and
smearing, you would certainly conclude him a mad man, and make a Prediction,
that it was almost impossible, he should ever make a good Workman, as little as
he, that has consumed the gross of his time in Anatomy, or any other part of
Physic, in neglect of Pharmacy, should ever come to be a good Physician; an
instance whereof I will give you in one, that was the greatest Anatomist of his
time, and no extraordinary Physician, namely Dr. William Harvey, whose
erroneous Judgment was very remarkable in the prescription of a Purge for Esquire
Rainton of Enfield, where the Apothecary refraining to prepare more than half
the proportion, notwithstanding gave him fourscore stools, which otherwise
according to the Doctors measures, must unavoidably have scower'd him from the
close Stool into the other World. The Consult made a great noise, when Dr.
Wright, Prudgean, Bates, and others, together with the famed Dr. Harvey were
Principals; and one Mr. Farwell, Barrister of the Temple, was Patient and
Complainent of a painful Disease in his Belly, that deprived him of the use of
his Limbs, Strength, Appetite, and Digestion, etc. the forementioned Dr. Harvey
engrossed to himself the speaking part, by reason of his extraordinary claim to
Anatomy, and which here, if any where, seemed to be of use; after a long
contrectation of all the abdomen, did very magisterially and positively assert
all his Symptoms to arise from an Aneurism of an Artery, and therefore
incurable, as being too remote to come at, wherein all, except Dr. Bates, very
readily concurred, though it was a most absurd offer in Opinion, as ever I yet
heard. The Patient being unwilling to give up his cause so; removed his Corpus
cum causa to Chelsie, where Sir Theodore Majerne lay Bed-ridden at his
Country House, who upon no long examen of the matter told him, he was the
second, or third Patient he had met with diseased in the same kind, and very
boldly expressed, he would cure him, but with this inconvenience, that he could
throw the cause of the Disease either into his Arms or Legs, according to the
choice he would make of those Limbs, which he could best spare, or which of 'em
might be more or less useful to him, without consulting the Will and Pleasure
of God Almighty, an Arrogance unheard of, and favoring more of the Atheist (as
too many of 'em are) than a pious Physician, as then especially he ought to
have been, being not many stages from his Journeys end. Mr. Farwell in respect
of his Profession, where writing is so necessary, replied, that his business
being sedentary, he could best yield to the captivity of his Legs, though even
they upon the Doctors assurance should be released by a Month or six Weeks
diligence at the Bath. You are to apprehend, that the cause of this great
Disease was an obstinate obstruction of the Glanduls of the Mesentery immensely
swelled up, and hardened by coagulation of tartarous and slimy Humors, making a
strong pressure upon the Arteria magna, which by a potent renixe did duplicate
its force of Pulsation, that imposed on Dr. Harvey the false notion of an
Aneuris, which ought rather to have been termed a Vibration. The conglobated
tumor by compression causing ^ coarctation upon the Nerves, milkie, and other
Vessels, occasioned the great Weakness of his Limbs, an Atrophy, etc. and by
hussing up the Bowels against the Diaphragm, rendered his respiration
extraordinary difficult. The grand empirical Medicine (from which his Father
Turquetus, usually by the French nicknamed the Turc, had got great Reputation
by selling it publicly on the Stage, whom Sir Theodore in his younger years
had attended in that Employ, if common Vogue may be credited) being in a
proportionable Dose mixed with some gentle Purgatives, had the success to
dissolve those gross glutinous Humors, and through their weight and tendency
downward, throw them down into his Legs, as being parts much weakened, and
consequently more readily suscipient. Nature by being disburdened of that load,
that had hitherto obstructed the free course of his nutritive and animal
Juyces, was vigorous enough to restore the Bowels to their former Functions, as
afterward the Bath proved no less effectual in retrieving the use of his Legs.
The following case of a Tailor in Fleet Street, whose Name has escaped my
Memory, though I can with little difficulty recover the knowledge of it, was
not ordinary. His complaint to the Doctor was a Sciatica, that rendered him
lame and cripple, besides frequent returns of very sharp pains. The Dr. would
not engage in the cure of so great and hazardous a Disease, without a
considerate and distinct answer to three Points: 1. Whether he could sequester
himself from his Trade for three Months. 2. Whether he valued the expense of
fifty pounds beyond the recovery of his health. 3. Whether he could
contemperate his passion, in enduring the Part to be laid open to the bone, by
cutting or burning. The Patient very readily consented to the two former
conditions, Time and Money; but to the third being entirely averse, took his
leave with the ceremony due to so famed a Physician, and applied himself to
another of a much lower form, who with little preamble advised him to the Bath,
where he received a perfect cure in six weeks. No doubt but Dr. Harvey in
Anatomy, and happiness of theoretic discoveries might justly pretend the
precedence of all his Contemporaries; and others before and since have also
arrived to a great proficiency in Cat and Dog^cutting, also Calf-head and
Sheeps-pluck dissecting; yet few of 'em when concerned in Practice, were gifted
with sagacity to know Diseases when offered to their view, much less capable to
curing them; in which curative particular the Thinking Physician has the
advantage, though the Prating Physician by his pretended Anatomy ingrosses the
opinion of Mankind.

CHAP. XXIII.
Holding forth the Practical Part and Methodus Medendi of the Art of
Expectation.
1. THE tricks of Malpighi's Dioptrical Anatomy are as subject to a deceptio
visus, as the Forests, Seas, and Rivers discerned in the Moon by the glass-eye
of an optic tube. However, the Methodus Medendi can as little boast of the
least alteration to the better, assistence, or use it has mutuated from the
light of those, Circulation, watery and milky chanals, and the rest of the
novel appearances, as a Water-man of his easier passage to Gravesend, by spying
new Cuts and Creeks, that disembogue into: the Thames. The Remedies and the
materia medica are much the same they were one hundred or two years last past,
though the success issuing from their application is rather less now, than in
preceding Centuries, which cannot be imputed to any thing, besides the blind
^aith we give to their idle compound medicines, and the neglect of examining
the virtues of every Simple in particular.

2. So true it is, that Observation drawn from experience of the effects of
single Remedies upon particular Diseases, allowing for variation, as to dose,
time, strength, and other circumstances of the Patient and Distemper, is the
sole Inventer and Improver of the Art of Physic, as that Non-Observation is
the sole cause, that modern Physicians in happy Cures are scarce comparable
with the Ancients; so that, the Art is so far from advancing, that it is wholly
upon the retrograde, and for want of due Education in young Students, it will
in time return again to Machao^ and Podalyrius.

Per varios usus artem experientia fecit, Exemplo monstante viam.

3. The Sun at Noonday is not more clear, than the evidence of that assertion,
and others premised in former Paragraphs, yet their reception among the vulgar,
that is so much debauched by the false Impressions of Physicians, can as little
be hoped for, as the Gospel among Mahometans, that are so deeply prejudiced by
impious Doctrines infused into them by their Priests in their Infancy, and
cherished until their Deaths.

4. The Tools, and the materia medica used by the Art of curing Diseases by
Expectation, are sufficiently discoursed on; the practick part consists in the
Methodus of applying those insignificant Remedies. As the Doctrine of other
Arts depends on certain Theorems, and Postulata, so does this famous one. 1.
Most curable Diseases are cured by Nature and Time. 2. Many Diseases become
incurable and consequently mortal, where Nature is too weak, and time too
short. 3. Nature being strong, and the Disease weak, or not very violent, time
is the grand Remedy, and the principal Indicatum. It follows then, that the
chief scope and intention of the Expectation Physician is the gaining of Time,
and to clude the Patient from time to time, until Nature has conquered the
Disease. The way he deludes the Patient in time is, 1. Confidently he assures
him from this time to that of relief and abatement of his Distemper; in order
thereunto presents him with a Narrative of several of his Patients diseased in
the same manner, how at this hour and that, this day and that day they received
most sensible abatements; but be sure he has a good Memory, for fear the
Patient entraps him, for sick-men are wonderfully ruminating, and oportet
Mendacem esse Memorem. This part being acted with a good mien, as a sour face,
a black yerking, broad Bever, a huge weighty Cane (that adds much) and a
pretended Conscience will extremely (as Rhetoricians say) incline the hearing,
and gain the assent of his sick Auditor, insomuch that his Spirits will be
roused thereby, that he may plainly see them walk and jump all over his Phys*
in a blithe Countenance; this fourbery repeated once or twice a day (if the
Patient feeth well, not else) will make him patiently expect from one day to
another, from one week to another, and from one Month to another (not from one
year to another, unless he be mad) until at last Nature has vanquished the
Disease, the Patient is cured by Expectation, and the Physician steals the
Title of triumphant from Nature, with a Purse of Guinea's.

5. If the Patient prove resty to all good admonitions for gaining of time, the
Expectation Physician changing his Dialect, threatens to desert him, as Cottier
did the King of France, with a Prognostic, if any other (honester) Physician
takes him in hand, he infallibly dies; moreover gives him very negligent
visits, makes the Patient send twice or thrice, before he comes once, and then
tarries so little, that he pretends, this Duke, that Earl, a third and a fourth
Noble man are in a most wonderful hot pursuit for his advice, who all are sick
of his Distemper. This argument is so prevailing, that it will tie the Patient
to his Bed, or his Chamber, as long as the Doctor pleases, and makes him a
slave to any time he thinks fit.

6. Besides this Chamber Conversation and Tongue Practice, there must be some
Remedies prescribed, that do no good, the best of which are such as do no hurt,
and consequently must be very safe. And since all Remedies tend to this scope,
that they may assist the Patient in passing over of his time, they ought to be
prescribed to various set hours, which in waiting for he always passes so much
time; and therefore he ought to have a different Medicine prescribed for him to
take every hour, or at least every two hours; for as I said, the expecting such
and such hours is a great means to pass away time. Those Expectation medicines
should be of different taste and scent, but chiefly pleasant, so however that
they may not be hurtful; these are to entertain the Patient's Palate, and to a
sick man are what the smoke of Tobacco is to one that is well. External
medicines are also of great use here, in regard they will take up the Patient
so much time in applying, renewing, and shifting. As for example, to a great
pain in the head, or any other part, a friendly po^ltis of three or four
insignificant herbs, a little Bran, etc. but ought to be prepared in the
Patient's Chamber, that he may pass away so much time in seeing them sent ^or,
brought to him, and boiled in his presence, and then applied, and knowing
likewise what the Ingredients are, he will give the more credit to such things,
which his Grannum used to tell him, were very good and soverain. In the Gout
likewise, if the Expectation-Physician presents his Patient gratis with this
following nostrum, it will not only be well taken, but much more veneration
will be given to it, than if it came from the Apothecaries shop, and to the
Physician will redound a very lasting diffusive glory and reputation; viz. ten
links of thread, half yard long, dipped in Wax of ten different colors; each is
to be tied by the Patient, if possible, or by his Nurse, to each distinct Toe
of the Feet, and to be untied every hour or two, and changed to other toes,
namely, the red wax't thread where the green was, the blue where the yellow,
etc. By this means a great deal of time will be passed, and if the Patient
continues tying and untying, until a good long fit is expired; it will have
also another good effect of rendering his back very flexible, and being tired at
Night prove a means to make him sleep without the charge of a dose of Opium.

7. Since it cannot well be expected, that I shall exemplify the Methodus
medendi together with the Remedies of this rich and noble Art in all Diseases,
I will only instance it in some few, that are most universal. A continual Fever
after once or twice bleeding, which beyond all dispute is of use, and truly
preparative to a Cure, requires a good thin water Gruel, or a Barley water with
its appurtenances for an ordinary drink. Next two or three sorts of Cordials to
be taken at different hours, for reasons before mentioned. Also some few
testaceous Powders for other times of Physic Devotion. If the Belly has
forgot its Office, that may be minded of its duty by a Milk and Sugar Glyster
every other day. The Spirits of Hartshorn well rectified, and the blistering
Plaster may be put in use in the declination of the Distemper, for then they
will prove the least hurtful. The Cordials usually consist of two or three
simple Waters, as of Carduus ben. Scabious, etc. with a fourth part, or rather
sixth part of Epidemic water, and the Julep to be sweetened with Syrup of
Gilliflowers. Such sort of simple waters mixed with a fourth or sixth part of
small Cinamonwater, Pearl grinded into an impalpable Powder, which Crabs Eyes
will equal in all its pretended Excellencies, and sweetened with fine white
^ugar; all this makes up the Pearl Cordial. For your diet avoid flesh meat, and
content your self with Grewel, Panada, etc. Nothing is more certain then that
this whole course is perfectly Expectation, there being nothing in it that
makes the least step toward a real true cure, so that all those, that are
recovered by such a Method and Remedies, owe the restitution of their health to
strenght of Nature and Time. Desume your curative indications from any
pretended Theory of Fevers; as suppose they are caused by a fermention of the
Blood, the precited* Remedies participate of nothing, that can or does diminish
and extinguish the fermentation, or (if you please) gently help it on so, as it
may terminate, the sooner. Suppose a Fever is caused by a putrefactive
Ebullition, those preternatural Particles in the Blood, that move it into that
violent passion, are opposed by nothing* that (...) contained in those
Medicines and most certainly did not Physicians assent to that Opinion, they
would not so universally have re^ected them, and make the Jesuits bark the sole
Anchor of their (...) in that case. What I have more to object, you may read in
another Treatise.

8. Can any one without scorn behold such drones of Physicians, (I speak
generally, and therefore desire no false Innuendo may be made) that after the
space of so many hundred years Experience and Practice of their Predecessors,
not one single Medicine has been ^et detected by them, that has the least
force directly and per se to oppose, resist, or expel a continual Fever, which
by their erroneous Applications is too often provected to malignity? Should any
by a more sedulous Observation pretend, or make the least step toward the
discovery of such Remedies, their hatred and envy would swell against him, as a
Legion of Devils against Virtue; whole Societies would dart their Malice at
him, and torture him with all the Calumnies imaginable, without sticking at any
thing, that should destroy and rain him root and branch, (or which I could give
you a very memorable Example, were it convenient) for he that professes a
reformation of the Art of Physic, in exposing its Impostures, and advancing
such Methods and Remedies, that are beyond those of the Art of Expectation,
must resolve to run the hazard of the Martyrdom of his Reputation, Life, and
Estate, especially when its considered, that the greatest and best part of
Mankind is prepossest with a Judgment, that is imus^d into them by Expectation
Physicians, to some or other of whom almost every man is linck^d by
Acquaintance, Kindred, Knowledge, or Drunkenness.

9. Nothing has ever proved more fatal than this universal Notion, that in the
small Pox you must always be driving out, in giving strong Diaphoreticks or
sweating Medicines, which in kindling the Fever-^igher, that is usually a
concomitant, or rather preceding, does convert it into malignant, and
continuing as such, its impossible the virulent Eruptions should ever appear,
considering the small Pox is a Crisis, or critical propulsion of virulent
Pustles, (very commonly) of a Febris continua imputris, or Diaria plurium
dierum, ordinarily so termed by Physicians, and oft-times of a Febris continua
putrida. A Crisis is never to be expected but after digestion and separation,
and then ensues Expulsion; so that if you endeavor to expel by sweating,
before Nature is ready by finishing the digestion and separation, you do most
certainly anger the Spirits, and put them into an high fury, and as long as you
continue thus, you may sooner expect Death, than the breaking forth of the
small Pox. In this particular it is, that Nurses, and the careful old Women by
their common Expectation Remedies, as Hartshorn or plain Posset Drink, or a
small Fig-decoction in Water or small Beer, do often excel the best of Physicians
in their erroneous Methods of driving out.

10. Considering further, that in many Children and others, there is proceeding
only a small simmering of the Blood, which may properly enough be termed a
Fermentation, an Ebullition being a more violent and impetuous motion, which if
abated or entirely quieted by cooling aqueous, and acid Juleps, the virulency
is suppressed in the Eruption, or repelled upon the Brain and Nerves, whence
succeed mortal Convulsions; or upon the Vitals, viz. the Heart and Lungs,
occasioning an immediate Suffocation, or terminative Syncope. On the other
hand, where there is an high Fever or putrefactive Ebullition, until that be
reduced to a gentle Fermentation (for in the most laxe sense an Ebullition and
Fermentation differ only secundum magis and minus, and in the end) the small
Pox or Meazels will never break forth, though using the strongest expulsives,
which most certainly failing in their intended effect, never fail in the
raising the Fever to the highest acuteness and malignity; and therefore I have
ever observed, that most of those that are grown up, who dye under the Hands of
Physicians, owe their death to the Fever, and killing Medicines, and not to the
deficiency of expulsion, which cannot be expected, as long as the putrid Fever
is not reduced to a Fermentation, as they call it. When the Eruption appears,
if too slow, it is to be quickened; if too violent, it will be moderated by such
proper Medicines, as resist that Malignity. Moreover, this remark has been
constant, that the great proflux of virulent matter to the skin in a flux't
Pox, proceeds from not resisting the putrid Fever in a foul Body (and in others
also) by peculiar Medicines unknown to most of them, before it came to too
great an height. If any part of their external matter of steems return into the
internal parts in a fluxt Pox, where the external Pores are very often stopped, it
does not seldom prove mortal, the principal parts being too much weakened to
repel it back to the circumference. The truth of these Observations may seem
probable from my own good Fortune, who never to my remembrance was concerned
with Man, Woman, or Child, that dyed under my Hands of the small Pox or Meazels
in thirty years, except one, a Boy aged seven or eight years, to whom I was
sent one day before he dyed, to consult with one Mr. Barmick, a Physic Doctor,
and the Families then ordinary Physician. The Child's Skin being speckled with
black Spots like Pestilential Exanthemata or Tokens, the Pox appearing of an
Olive color, and attended with a bloody Urine, it was told the Parents, it was
too late; we agreed upon two or three Expectation Remedies, and so ended our
grave Consult.

11. Coughs, as I mentioned before, are through Expectation cured by Syrups,
and other sugared composts, which sometimes prove the worst of Expectation
Remedies, in regard they clog and oppress the Stomach, though by a present
smoothing of the Gullet, and giving ease, they readily persuade the coughing
Patient he receives benefit, and therefore is very willing to stay from one
time to another, until by the help of abstinence Nature has thrown up the
abounding slyme.

12. For the better understanding of this matter, know there are more Coughs of
the Stomach, than of the Lungs; and that most Coughs in the beginning are
Stomach-Coughs, though afterward by long continuance some turn into
Lung-Coughs, and then they threaten danger. The Diaphragm with the help of the
Musculs of the Breast and Belly, or abdomen, do as readily discharge or
displode and throw-up humors out of the Gullet, and by succession out of the
Stomach, as out of the Windpipe or Lungs. These humors are lodged in the
glanduls of the Gullet, discoursed of at large in my Treatise of the Scurvy,
which being swelled up, and irritated by Acrimony, contracted from the
admixture of the vitiated dissolvent or ferment of the Stomach, and long
Stagnation, by consent of parts and vellication of the Nerves of the sixth
pair, incite and spur the diaphragm to an Explosion. The Argumentum a
Iuvantibus and laedentibus plainly proves the assertion. 1. Smoothing Medicines
have a present influence upon those Coughs, which must necessarily be from
their immediate acting upon the Gullet, for their property and virtue without
all contradiction must be changed into a different Operation, before they can
be supposed to arrive to the Lungs. 2. Its vulgarly known, that Vomitives, or
Purgatives have cured thousands of these sort of Coughs, by emptying the
Stomach, and drawing from the Glanduls of the Gullet. 3. Sharp four drinks,
Salts, and Spices do often immediately force violent Coughs. 4. The sense of the
Patient does testify a weight and oppression at the Stomach, loathing of
Victuals, and impair of digestion. 5. Fasting by diminishing those humors in
the Stomach is another affirmative proof. 6. Long and deep coughing often moving
to nauseousness and Vomits, plainly demonstrates the Stomach chiefly affected
in this sort of Cough. 7. The slime that is thrown up being often yellow, green,
and of other variegated colors, receives that tincture in many cases from the
different qualities and nature of the dissolvent or ferment of the Stomach,
varying according to the nature of the food ingested a day or two before. 8.
The same slime has sometimes been observed to be mixed with an indigested
chyle. 9. Syrup of Violets has often been return^d by Cough and Expectoration
with Phleme tinctured blue, a Proof, it came from the Stomach or Gullet.
Besides these, I must omit many other Arguments too prolix to be here inserted.

13. Those Coughs that have followed some ten, twenty, or thirty years, and
others I have known to continue forty years, are undoubtedly Stomach Coughs;
and assuming rather the office of an Issue or drain, are scarce to be termed
Diseases, but necessary Evacuations, and are to be treated very cautiously; for
being violently turned downward by repeated strong Purgatives, nature having
lost its accustomed roads, must in some interval of time extremely suffer by
it. Very frequently a long Cough does turn either to a Consumption with an
Hectic Fever, or to a putrid continual Fever. In Consumptions attended with an
Hectic Fever, the slime that is expectorated is intermixed for the most part with
purulent Particles.

My design not being a Treatise of Coughs, further than to give you an instance
of its expectative mode of curing, which in this and the preceding Diseases is
a sufficient pattern for many others, I proceed to the next.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Use and Abuse of a College of Physicians.
THE Term of College of Physicians making such an obstreperous noise, it may be
of use to inform the Reader with the right sense of the matter.

A College of Physicians is a voluntary friendly Club, Society, or Association
of Doctors of Physic, mutually consented, and agreed unto, under certain just
and equal Conditions, Rules, Laws, Covenants and Promises corroborated, made
binding and valid by the Allowance, Concession, or Approbation of the
Magistrate, to the end a mutual friendly Correspondence, Behavior, and Respect
he had to each other, a just Regulation be made in the Practice of Physic, the
Art improved by their joint Endeavors and amicable Conserences, and most
chiesly that all may be intended and designed for the public good in general,
and of every one under their Care in particular, also for the Honor of the
Art. Whatever is not exactly square and suitable with every individual branch of
this description, infers usual and set meetings of Physicians, rather a
Pseudo-Collegium, Combination, Physick-Riot, or bundle of Physicians unjustly
tied together for the attaining of their particular ends, to the prejudice of
the Public; so that, a threat or force put upon Physicians by unlawful
arrests, imprisonment, a magisterial arrogant Citation by Writ and Bedel,
Calumnies, and Scandals, to compel or drive them into a College of Phys. is
neither voluntary nor friendly, nor can ever conspire into a Society, which
implies a real and virtuous Friendship between the Members or Colleagues. On the
contrary, Persons so driven in must very probably retain a resentment, which
shall ever after occasion jarrings, contests, abuses, and affronts. Wherefore,
in all Protestant Colleges of Physicians abroad, it is a Custom flowing from
their Humanity and good Manners, -- didicisse fideliter Arts,
Emollit Mores, nec sinit esse feros.
upon the knowledge of the arrival of any Doctor of Physic to their City, and
his intent of settling there, to depute two Colleague Physicians out of their
body, to congratulate him at his House or Lodgings, and give him an Invitation
in obliging Language, that he will please to give them the honor of his
Company at their College meeting, where showing unto him their Statutes, they
very civily request him to be a Member of their Society by subscribing to their
Laws. After their Physic Affairs an Conferences are finished, they are
entertained with a Glass of Wine, interposed with familiar Discourses one with
the other. This indeed looks like a Society, or friendly Conversation; but to
hurry a Stranger, thought a most learned Doctor of Physic, like a Rascal or
Criminal by their Bedel to their College Tribunal, and there read to him this
Sentence; Thou shall go to the place from whence thou came, and thence attend
all our Members at each their individual dwelling place, (which sometimes is a
Garret) your Flat in your Right Hand, your Left Hand on your Breast, your Knees
bending, and your Head hanging down, with an humble Petition, that they will
please to condescend to your adm^^tance into their College; and having obtained
all their Suffrages, thou-shalt return hither, and yet at the lower end of that
Table with thy Hat on thy Knees, thy Hands on thy Hat, thy Eyes modestly
looking on thy said Hat, and in that Posture make answer to all such Questions
as shall be proposed unto you. After thou have like a good School Boy merited
our Favor, we do require of thee, to pay unto our Treasurer thirty, forty,
fifty, threescore, fourscore, or a hundred pounds. This is the Custom of most
Popish Colleges in France, Italy, and elsewhere, without an Innuendo. At Paris
the Mule-Doctors demand either three or six thousand Livres; at Angers six
hundred Livres; and in another place one hundred pounds. Whether this arbitrary
Extortion supported by a pretended Law, be not worse than a Decimation, Fine,
or Tax set upon the head of a Prisoner by the Banditi of Calabria, I leave to
your Judgment. Whether a legal Doctor of Physic of twenty, thirty, or forty
years Practice, of known Learning and Experience, shall be basely summoned by a
Pseu^lo-Collegium, or a false pretended illegal forlitten College, as many in
France, Italy, etc. (whereof some are Papists, Atheist, Impostors, Barbers, and
Apothecaries, graduated by the French King's Mandate, or gratuitously
doctorated by crowding in among the Attendants of Princes upon their visiting
an University; others may be grofly ignorant, originally blew-Coat Boys, and
unduly educated, in committing of Murders exceeding Italian Bravo's) and by
them without being upon their Oath (for dare fidem is no more, but to promise)
be examined and demanded the most puerile idle insignificant questions, which
though answered with the greatest exactness imaginable, he shall maliciously be
returned by them as ignoramus, on purpose to make a monopoly of Physic; by
excluding all Physicians legally promoted to degrees, by that sort of barbarous
usage, and binding of them to Statutes, that no man in conscience, honesty,
justice, or honor can submit unto; I ask whether all this be not more
agreeable with the Spirit of Devils, than of Men? Should a pious learned and
legal Doctor of Divinity upon his application to his Bishop, before he will
admit him to a Living, be required by him to be examined by his Chaplain, who
shall put him to the reading of his Greek Alphabet, do you not think, this
would be an affront to Universities, and a very unchristian way of dealing? The
case is much the same.

The true description of a College asserts the regulation of practice to be one
of the true ends; that is to agree to such rules or orders, as may direct and
guide them in Consultations; as that the elder Physician shall give his Opinion
first, on last; that the suffrages or Opinions shall be collected and
determined by the Physician in ordinary of the Patient. That no Physician shall
insinuate into the Patients favor to put out the Physici^n in ordinary, and
such like orders: But these are not to relate to any Physician, that is not of
their College, who in all Protestant Countries have an equal privilege of
Practice, which is derived from the Universities. For a College of Physicians
to pretend to examine, and give Licenses to practice, is a down right affront
and injury to the Universities. It is most natural, that they that teach a
Profession ought to be Judges to know, when the Scholar is sufficiently taught
to exercise that Profession. Shall an University be at the trouble and charge
to maintain Professors to instruct and teach Scholars, and not have the honor
and recompense to endow them with the privilege to exercise what they taught
them. It is a cheat in all Universities to grant a power and privilege of
practicing Physic, if they cannot maintain it; this is nonsense all over. If a
College of Physicians will presume to give Licenses, they ought to entertain
Professors to read and teach Physic, and confer degrees; and then they must
come under the notion of an University. Neither can or ought any Popish College
of Physicians (abroad) be so impudently arrogant, as to assume a power to judge
of Male-practice, and thereupon arbitrarily to set a mulct, or imprison; for
that would infer them to be judge and party, which is most absurd. Besides it
implies, they take a Regal Power upon them; for a Prince is the supreme Judge,
there being none above him; and so a College pretends to be the supreme Judge
of Mase-practice, there being none above them to judge of their Male-practice,
as often as they shall commit it, unless you will presume a College cannot err,
no more than a Prince* Moreover to judge, determine, fine, and imprison, is to
undertake upon the power of the Civil Magistrate, to abridge their Authority,
and to affront their respect and dignity, which is the greatest piece of
Impudence, that can be alleged. No more than the Guild of Goldsmiths can
punish and imprison any of their own Members, or Foreigners, for counterfeiting
or abasing the Standart of Gold or Silver in a piece of Plate, can a College
punish any Physician for Male-practice, or Murder, neither can they arbitrarily
extort sums of Money from Apothecaries or Mountebancks, for vending of good or
bad Medicines. These are matters the Civil Magistrate takes cognizance of, and
the Corpus Iuris civilis is provided with Laws under several heads for
punishing Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Mountebancks, and all others for
Male and illegal Practice; and every offense or crime being only punishable by
one sole proper Court, shall a man be punished by a College of Physicians, and
afterward be punishable by the common Laws of a Country? this certainly is an
absurdity; for no man can or ought to be twice punished for the same offense.
In a College of Physicians all ought to be Doctors of Physic, that is, of an
equal rank and dignity, without pretending to any other precedence, than what
for orders sake Seniority allows; or how can they else be termed a Society or a
meeting for sociable Conversation, which naturally includes a parity and
equality of Members? In conclusion, to verify this whole Discourse, give me
leave to present to your view, as an Example, and Pattern, a Translation of the
printed Statutes (annex't to the Pharmacopoea Hagiensi^) of one of justest, and
most learned Colleges of Physicians of Europe, viz. that of the Hague, whereof
my self for thirty years past have been, and am the meanest of their Members.

The Preamble.
The Physicians of the Hague have attended the Magistrates, that they might
diligently according to the utmost of their Power promote the public good,
having established among themselves a College, and being engaged in a brotherly
and inviolable hearty Society, have most willingly bound themselves to this
Order, Rank, and Laws, hereafter to be most punctually observed.

1. LET the honor of the Art and public welfare be the Supreme Law. 2. Let
the whole care of the College be remaining in a Deacon, two Assistents, and a
Secretary. 3. Let the Right and Authority be in the Deacon either of calling
together these Rulers, or the whole College; of propounding matters to be
deliberated; of collecting the Suffrages of things propounded; of concluding
the Sentence (except the matter be weighty) and of deciding equal Votes to
their Satisfaction. 4. Upon a Citation at a certain hour they are required to
be pres^^t at their Secretaries House. Those that come late, that is after an
half hour, are to, forf^it six pence, and twelve pence (...) they are absent.
5. Let every one give ^is Judgment when it is required by the Dea^on, and not
before; Let none interrupt the Discourse of any, without (...) leave from the
Deacon; The C^nsultation being^ended, it is free to every one to propound what
may be advantageous to the College. 6. The Secretary ought to have in keeping
the public (...) wherein the Decrees are (...), the ^^nck or public Stock,
and what is belonging to the College; And when he quits his Office he is to
(...) A^ount of what he has received and (...) to the preceding and succeding
(...). 7. Those that purpose to (...) at the Hague are friendly to be (...);
such as are willing having (...) to the Rulers their Diple^^, or Letters Patent
(...) their (...) prom^tion to the (...), and promised by Subscription to
observe their Lairs made, or that hereafter may be made with the Approbation of
the Civil Magistrate, shall be admitted, th^se that refuse, are to be excluded.
8. Whoever after two Months from the first day of January of the year 1658.
will subscribe to this College, shall immediately pay four pounds ten shillings
to the Treasurer; and afterward every first day of January nine shillings and
six pence. 9. The Rulers shall be chosen every year; In the room of the Deacon
shall succeed the first Assistent, in his room the second; in his the
Secretary, in his the Senior Colleague; and if it shall happen that there shall
not be any that shall have practiced twelve years, beginning again the order
from the Senior, it shall descend to the Iuniors. 10. Each is obliged to
endeavor to preserve an unanimous Concord, and to shun all Envy, detraction,
Calumnies and Contentions. 11. He that is called in to a sick Man that hitherto
had used the advice of another, let him forbear giving his Advice (unless
necessity urge) before the first Physician be come; and also afterward if the
former Physician was dismissed without his Reward. 12. Several being called in
Consultation, let the Power or Authority of examining, of expounding the
Opinions, and applyi^g the Remedies be in the first called Physician. 13. Let
all Consultations be made in the absence of the Patient and his Friends, in an
open and general declaration of all Remedies that have been used, and
particular declaration of those that are to be used. 14. An Affront or Injury
offered to a Colleague by reason of Practice, or through occasion of this
Society, let every man believe it is offered to himself, and hold himself
obliged to its defense. 15. Those Laws made (unless the unanimous Consent shall
otherwise persuade) shall be held immutable, those that are hereafter to be
made shall be observed; those Persons that are refractory shall be expell^d.

The Approbation and Confirmation of these Laws by the Civil Magistrate.
WE the Bailiff, Burgemasters, and Eschevins of the City of the Hague in
Holland, having well perspected, and duly examined the above written Statutes,
have approved and confirmed them, as by these Presents we do approve and
confirm them, reserving unto our selves their Interpretation, Augmentation, and
Derogation; Wherefore we have caused these to be strengthened by our common
Seal, and signed by our Secretary, on the 8th day of the Month of February of
the Year 16^0 Fifty Eight.

Locus Sigilli. Locus Nominis Secretarii.
I am to give you a farther account, that all those Conversations at their
College meeting are managed in the Latin Tongue, and so are all Consultations,
which makes me presume, that many Physicians that are Colleagues in some other
place, would not pass muster with us, not only for being imperfect Scholars,
but for being unduly educated, and probably but half Physicians, and little
Physicksters. Moreover as to the small sum of Money, that is required for the
defraying of necessary charges only, any Doctor of Physic whose streightness
of fortune will not bear so small an Expense, is not only admitted Gratis, but
they are also very inclinable to recommend him to business. Doctor Whitaker,
who was Physician to his Majesty's Family King Charles the Second in his Exile,
and one Doctor Magdowel a Scots-man, were both very sensible of their
Civilities in that kind.

As to the Educating a young Student to the Art of Physic, which I have
cursorily hinted at before, there is no University in the World comparable to
that of Leyden in Holland, which does so far excel Padua, Bolongne, Montpelier,
or Paris, that they ought not to be named in one Paragraph, though I judge it
necessary for a Physician to visit them, and some others, but for different
purposes, which I have exactly described in a Treati^e without my Name to it,
called the Accomplished Physician and Honest Apothecary, Fol. 17. Printed for
W. Thackery in Duck-lane. That Tract, The Noble Man's Case, The Conclave of
Physicians, and this do all variously express the Mistakes, Errors, Frauds, and
unworthy Practices of Physicians, whereof every day gives new Matter, and will
do to the Worlds End.

The Education there described I have to a tittle observed my self, and have
also a Son beyond Sea passing the same Track, which I dare presume not ^ix in
this whole Kingdom have done.

FINIS.
Advertisement of two Books, lately Published by Dr. Gideon Harvey, and sold by
James Partridge.
1. THE Conclave of Physicians in two Parts, Detecting their Intreagues,
Frauds, and Plots against their Patients, and their destroying the Faculty of
Physic; also a Peculiar Discourse of the Jesuits Bark, the History thereof
with its true Use and Abuse; moreover an Account of some Eminent Cases, and new
Principles in Physic of greater Use then any yet known, in 12o.

2. Casus Medico Chirurgius; or, a most Memorable Case of a noble Man,
deceased, wherein is showed his Lordship's wound, the various Diseases
survening; how his Physicians and Surgeons treated him, how treated by the
Author after my Lord was given over by all ^is Physicians, with all their
opinions and ^emedies. Moreover the Art (...) dangerous of Wounds by the (...)
Description (...)


