THE CONCLAVE OF Physicians. In Two Parts. Detecting Their Intrigues, Frauds,
and Plots, Against Their PATIENTS, And their destroying the Faculty of Physic.
Also a Peculiar Discourse OF THE IESVITS BARK: The History thereof, with its
True Use and Abuse. Moreover an Account of some Eminent Cases and new
Principles in Physic, of greater use than any yet known.

The second Edition with many Alterations.

By Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty.

London, Printed for James Partridge, Stationer to his Royal Highness George
Hereditary Prince of Denmark, and sold at his Shop at the Post House between
Charing Cross and White Hall. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CONCLAVE OF Physicians. The FIRST PART. Detecting Their Intrigues, Frauds,
and Plots, Against Their PATIENTS. Also a Peculiar Discourse OF THE JESUITS
BARK: The History thereof, with its True Use and Abuse.

The second Edition with many Alterations.

By Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty.

London, Printed for James Partridge, Stationer to his Royal Highness George
Hereditary Prince of Denmark, at the Post House at Charing Cross. MDCLXXXVI.

To the Honorable Sr. Philip Howard Knight, Captain and Colonel of the Queens
Troop of His Majesty's Guards.
TAm Marti quam Mercurio, was the just Atchievment of the great Sir Philip
Sidney, and he that would imitate Plutarch in the parallel of his Worthies,
must to Sir Philip Howard award not only an equal, but a rank as far superior,
as this latter Age excels the former. The felicity of your Genius has obtained
an Experience so large in the faculties of the Learned, that even in ours you
are received a Judge, as Impartial as Knowing; may I then presume to commit
this Treatise, though small, yet great in Importance, to your Patronage and
Suffrage, which is the submissive Petition of,

Honorable Sir, Your most Humble And most Obedient Servant, Harvey.

Introduction.
Reader,
I Omit Complementing you with Courteous, Gentle, or the like, suspecting the
major part may prove of a contrary hew; and therefore you are to believe, this
tract is not written to please many; for which I expect no other reward, than
what is in my power to bestow on my self, namely a satisfaction, flowing from a
sincere design of cautioning Physicians and Chyrurgions, in the exercise of
their Profession, by setting before their Eyes the Errors, Frauds, and male
practice of some Physic Doctors of Paris, and those also sub tectonomine, it
being wholly foreign to my intention, to detract from the reputation of any
Man, though living at a great distance: And whereas gross aberrations adequate
to those within mentioned may happen at Amsterdam, Hamborough, or a greater
City, whence probably from the consciousness of their guilt some may imagine
themselves levelled at (and so may those at Constantinople, if they conclude
the Presidents recited in this Treatise may be adapted to any Meridian) I do
protest, and call Heaven to witness, I did never declare to any Man, nor ever
shall, that by Paris Physicians and Chyrurgions within named, I mean'd any
other, than those living in the Metropolis of France. This I conjecture will be
termed a Jesuitical Protestation by some malicious Infidels, who will believe
none Protestants, but those that wear little Bands, and cropp'd Hair. An hungry
Guest is impatient to know what he is to have for his Entertainment, and so may
you possibly; and therefore I will immediately acquaint you with your Bill of
Fare. Here is variety of Butchers Meat, fetched from the Shambles of Paris
Physicians, though plainly dressed after the old English Mode, without
interlarding with French Rhetoric. You have some pleasant Entremets, that will
help to digest to other. After this, for a Desert, you are presented with a
Discourse on the Jesuits Bark, relating what it is, and what it is not; how it
is to be used, and how to be abused. Before I take my Conge, I must give you
some account of the Conclave of Physicians mentioned in this little Volume Sans
Queve, as in the Title Page, and elsewhere; and there if (you please) you are
to apprehend it to be the Conclave of Physicians of Venice, and Conclave
Physicians, to be Venetians. Know then this famous Conclave is the eldest Quack
Synagogue, consisting of a Physic Pope or Patriarch, and a Competent number of
Medicinal Cardinals, who being grown Ancient, Covetous, and through
forgetfulness, Ignorant, are to govern the rest, and whenever they are
consulted, they are to impose upon the Iuniors their pretended long Experience,
which they are to embrace with the same implicit faith, the Turks do their
Alcoran. But if Refractory, they are to be convened before Il Consiglio picolo,
which is their Purgatory, whence they may be received again into the bosom of
the Conclave; but if afterward they prove incorrigible, then the Consiglio
Grande, or the whole Conclave sits upon them (which is their Inquisition) and
there they are damned, and utterly expelled without redemption. Thus in my time
I have known several poor Wretches damned, going about Streets like Dogs
without Tails. It is in the Power of the Consiglio Picolo to grant Indulgences
to Nurses, Midwives, Tinkers, and Cobblers to practice Physic, modo poss. prod.
in alcas. The Prerogative of granting Bulls of Absolution for Poisoning a man,
or Dispensations for male practice is invested in most of the Cardinals, but
especially in the Patriarch, and the method of procuring them is casie, viz. by
sending for one of them, (which in their Gibrish is termed, calling one in) and
operating with the Patient or his Relations, to present him with three or four
Hongari's or Chequeens, which procures a plenary Absolution. The foresaid
Patriarch, to keep up the reputation of the Conclave, is by them reputed
Infallible, carrying the Keys of Life and Death about his Girdle, namely, an
Inkhorn and an Escroul, on which setting his mark, all mankind is implicitly
to believe, the Patient either died impossibly cureable, or recovered his
health at the hands of the Learned: So absolute is Custom in rendering the
greatest Fourbery and act of Virtue and Honesty. In their Religio Medicorum
they also acknowledge Saints; as, San Riverio, San Villisio, San Tabore;
likewise adore Relics; as, Peruvian-Chips, Opium, Steel, etc. Against those
that refuse being admitted into their Conclave, and will not conform, they send
forth their Bulls and Anathema's, declaring them Mountebanks, Quacks, Chemists,
Barbers, Ignorants, etc. and if such should at any time have a Patient die
under their Hands of an incurable Disease, they thunder it out, he killed the
Patient, poisoned him, applied wrong Medicines, and the like. According to the
exinanition of their Treasury, once in eight or ten years they proclaim a
Jubilee, setting open their doors to Physicians, Barbers, Apothecaries, and
Renegade Priests, who upon the payment of a certain sum of Chequeens, are
Honored with a Fop Character, and received into the Church Porch of
Aesculapius, being forbidden to enter any further during the time it is
occupied by the whole Conclave or the Consiglio Picolo, though at other Seasons
they have tolerations to peep in, or take a turn or two.

Their immolations are celebrated chiefly in the Winter upon Dogs and Cats by
the younger fry, and sometimes upon Humane Bodies, performed by the Hangman,
their subservient Officer, which being conveyed to their Chauncel, the
Cardinals in their turn fall hewing and slaying these Carcasses like Cannibals,
to the intent all Spectators (to whom at such Festivals free egress and regress
is granted) may behold them sitting in their Pontificalibus, and making a
pretended narrower search into the parts of Man's Body, insinuating thereby to
these Gazers their incomparable Skill and Learning, not without a plain
Innuendo, that they should send for them in time of Sickness: This is their
joint plot, wherein each pretends a share, and it is looked upon to be of such
great prevalence, that some Companies forbid any of their Members to hold
private Anatomies, lest thereby he should draw too great a share of business,
which ought to be in common; of so great a value is esteemed this Anatomy
Jewel, forcing a Trade beyond comparison; but if that be the crafty design of
the Venetian Conclave, I wonder they do not print all their Names together in a
sheet of Paper with their Dwelling-places, and the name of the Street where
they may be spoken with, from eight of the Clock to twelve, and from two to
six, and then cause these advertising sheets to be hung up in every
Apothecaries Shop, and Booksellers Bulk: but after all I doubt that would sound
too much like the noise of Ducks. And what new Discoveries have they made in
Anatomy these twenty years? Certainly none, and I dare presume to say, I my
self have divulged more new Anatomical Observations, which are of greater use,
than all of 'em in a bundle; and yet I must confess, had I employed those
Anatomical hours in the study of other parts of Physic, I should have made a
far better Physician; however as I am, I should be loath to stain my Education
(which as you may read in my Casus Medico-Chyrurgicus, is beyond any Conclave
Physician) in having my Name and Abode Printed in a Catologue, though with
other Conclavists, under pretense of being visited by my Iuniors, or
distinguished from Illiterate Mountebanks, when in effect it is as much, as if
they writ over their door, here lives a Wyer-drawer. Moreover, he that is so
far debauched in his senses as to be admitted into any Conclave of Physicians,
does ipso facto, as much entitle himself to all their Manslaughters, Fourbs and
Impostures, as he that is listed among a Troop of Neopolitan Banditi, does at
that moment participate in the guilt of all their former Crimes and Villainies,
in the same manner as if he had born a part in them himself. What irretrivable
and dangerous consequences ensue a Conclave of Physicians, and an Association,
Combination and Confederacy of such sort of Men is offered to your view in the
said Cas. Med. Chir. and may deserve the serious consideration of all Judicious
Men. At the beginning of this preamble, I communicated to you what my scope is
in publishing these; in the Conclusion I am only to tell you what it is not;
and therefore know, it is not to set up a Beacon to light Patients to my House,
into whose business as I ever was negligent to introduce my self, so being
introduced, the least indignity does stimulate me to leave it, Fees having less
influence upon me than upon the least covetous Conclavist: For I know no other
Virtue great Riches are endowed with, than to make a Man Justice of Peace among
his own Servants, and an Innkeeper or Host to his acquaintance, both which
Offices are rewarded with trouble in abundance, and repugnant to a quiet Life.

Westminster April 30th. 1685.
THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. OF the Subdolous Proceedings in Consultations: together with the
recital of an Eminent Case in Physic. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the specious and
false pretenses of Anatomical Physicians; also of the Use and Abuse of Anatomy.
p. 23. Chap. 3. Of the fraudulent pretext of Anatomy by a most unskilful
Surgeon, obtruded to the Vulgar Barbarous Practice and Errors in Surgery. p.
29. Chap. 4. Of Subtilties used by those of the Conclave, to promote their
Interests. p. 49. Chap. 5. Of false Methods of Physic in Malign Fevers, Great
and Smallpox. p. 63. Chap. 6. Of the bold and fatal Practices of the Conclave.
p. 76. Chap. 7. Concerning the Description of the true Method of Physic,
whereby a Physician is distinguished from a Quack. p. 80. Chap. 8. Of false
Methods, and Methodists. p. 84. Chap. 9. Of two sorts of Mountebanks, viz. The
Anatomical Theater-mounter, and the Bank-mounter; together with the Tricks of
the former. p. 89. Chap. 10. Containing the chief Subject of this Treatise. p.
101. Chap. 11. Of Semitertians, scarce understood by Conclave Physicians. p.
113. Chap. 12. Proving that the Jesuits Powder never yet Cured any Remitting
Fever. p. 118. Chap. 13. Of the Jesuits Bark, what it is, whether Artificial
or Natural. p. 125.
PART. II.
CHAP. I. OF the second qualities of the Jesuits Bark. p. 1. Chap. 2. Willis
his hypothesis of Agues is ridiculously Erroneous. p. 17. Chap. 3. By what
Virtue, manner or quality, the Jesuits Bark does stop Ague Fits. p. 32. Chap.
4. Giving the reasons for the Method and Rules (heretofore set down) of
exhibiting the Jesuits Bark. p. 35. Chap. 5. Containing Animadversions on the
Grand Course of Physic, described in Chap. 11. p. 44. Chap. 6. What sort of
Animal a Conclave Physician is like to prove. p. 52. Chap. 7. Concerning the
Apothecaries and Surgeons Capacity and Pretension to practice Physic equal
with the Doctors. p. 55. Chap. 8. Containing some Eminent Cases in Physic p.
72. Chap. 9. Fevers and other Distempers explained, and cured by new
Principles. p. 93. Chap. 10. Of a most Tragical Case. p. 112.
Some Books Printed for James Partridge, and Sold at his Shop at the Post House
between Charing Cross and White Hall.
MOdern Curiosities of Art and Nature, extracted out of the Cabinets of the
most Eminent Personages of the French Court: in two Parts; the first Containing
diverse secrets in Physic, and Surgery: also curious Experiments in imitation
of Jewels, Pearls, Marble, and Jasper; Curious Perfumes, Essences, Pastils,
Cassollets, the Grounds and Scentings of the best Hair-Powder, the richest
Washbals, Curious Compositions of Secret Inks, of Sweetmeats, Flowers, and
Fruits; Wines how to preserve them, and to recover them when decayed; to
restore Tapistry, Turkywork, Gold and Silver Lace, to their first beauty:
Curious Experiments in Housekeeping, Housewifery, and Gardening; admirable
receipts in Cookery, excellent Receipts in the diseases of Horses, Dogs, and
other Cattle; to destroy Buggs, Lice, etc. and other House Vermin. The second
Part Containing the whole Art of Moulding and Casting all sorts of large and
small Figures, Medals, Leanes, and other forms, in Lead, Tin, Silver, Copper,
Plaster, Wax, Sulphur, Pastboard, etc. as well hollow as solid; also the whole
Art of enriching, Guilding, Coloring, Staining, Beautifying, and Varnishing
all sorts of things, either cast or wrought by hand with several Grounds and
Sisers for that purpose: Composed and Experimented by the Sieur Lemery,
Apothecary to the French King: In Twelves, price bound 2 Shillings sixpence. In
English.

A new discourse of the Small Pox and Malignant Fevers, with an Exact
discovery of the S^orvey; together with observations and discourses on
Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, Rheumatisms and Gouts, with their several
methods of Cure, and Remedies: By Gideon Harvy, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to
His Majesty. In Twelves.

Various new Observations and Discourses upon the Veneral Disease, never
Published, made known or discovered before this time, by any Author, comprizing
all the several kinds thereof, their Signs and Prognostics, with the several
Cures and Remedies for the same. With which is printed little Venus unmask't:
The fifth Edition, with many alterations, by Gideon Harvey, M. D. In Twelves.

Casus Medico-Chyrurgius, or a most memorable Case of a Noble Man deceased,
wherein is showed his Lordships Wound, the Various Diseases, survening how his
Physicians and Surgeons treated him, how treated by the Author after my Lord
was given over by all his Physicians, with all their Opinions and Remedies.
Moreover the Art of Curing the most dangerous of Wounds by the first intention;
with the description of the Remedies. The second Edition, Written and published
by His Majesty's Command, by Gideon Harvey, M. D. in Octavo.

The Conclave of PHYSICIANS: Detecting their Intrigues, Frauds and Plots
Against their Patients.
CHAP. I.
Of the subdolous proceedings in Consultations: together with the recital of an
eminent Case in Physic.
(...).
Life is short, ( but) the Art is long.

1. THe spacious extent of the Art of Physic is by Hippocrates in this
aphorism asserted, to exceed the narrow comprehension or capacity of the
physical man, in that short interval he commonly abides in this Atmosphere; So
that, unless the endeavors and studies of several ages be linked together, it
is not to be hoped, that any considerable progress will be made therein,
specially, when it must be observed, that the path we now adays wander in, is
the old trodden way, and the new one we sometimes light into, (as that of
curing Feavors, and Agues, with the Iesuitical or Devils-Bark) is often attended
with a success so different from our expectation. Give me leave therefore,
judicious Reader, to pay my Duty to that Profession I have from my younger
years been trained up in, by making remarks on some eminent cases in Physic,
that within few years have presented, with a sort of modesty and impartiality,
that those who are the most Malevolent, and the sole Incorporators of Ph^sick,
shall escape the occasion of (...) to the World, I have used them rudely or
maliciously.

2. Solomon, the greatest in wisdom, which implies him in all Natural and
Supernatural subjects the most knowing, gives us this remark, ( Eccles. 2. 3.)
There is a time to kill, and a time to heal; which my Mother-wit interprets,
That a Physician, at sometimes he kills, and at sometimes he cures. Now, if
this Observation does still continue to square with vulgar Parisian Physicians,
(whose education was but mean, though by Association are rendered very
significant) I may infer, that the Art of Physic has not received the least
improvement in the practical part, since the age of that wise King; for even in
these days there is a time to kill, and a time to heal; and for this reason
suffer me once more to tell you, that (according to my Hippocratical Text, Life
is short, but the Art is long) it highly concerns the duty of every honest and
conscientious Physician, to contribute to his Faculty what may tend to the
promoting and advancement of it; which, in my judgment, can best be performed,
by making practical Observations, to the end the time of killing may be
avoided. Furthermore, observe, that as Solomon sets down, that there is a time
to kill before the time to heal: so generally, Physicians (especially of
pretended Societies) kill more than they cure.

3. It is not with every trivial matter I must trouble your reading, but with
what is most remarkable and eminent. Such is the case of Sr. -- ( Eschevin and
Citizen of Paris) a person whose conversation, in his lifetime, was so
qualified with Virtue, as rendered his actions glorious, especially those that
tended so transcendently to Charity and Piety, the marks whereof must survive
him in many poor Widows and Orphans. This worthy Citizen was the Patient, which
in English signifies Sufferer. His Physicians were many, and those of the first
Magnitude; who being all united into one Consult, we may well admire (if great
Learning, vast Skill, Gravity, Formality, conceited Caps, Volpony Gowns,
Anatomical Theater, Circulation Library, Coach and Horses, avail any thing)
that there should any Disease be so great, or indeed so little, that should not
be blown off with such Charms as are marked in their Recipe-scrowls. But you
must suspend your curiosity of viewing the Closet of their Arcana's, until you
are acquainted with the state of the Sufferer's Distemper, his Constitution,
Age, and other circumstances, which you shall read by and by.

5. In most Countries, a Criminal who is to be put to the Rack, or any ways
executed, is usually, from his suffering, called the Patient, or Sufferer; and
so is the sick man, that is to subject himself to the rigid sentence of some of
the combined Physicians; which renders the word Patient or Sufferer truly
synonymous to both; For, if it be well considered, a diseased Sufferer, whose
quality being conspicuous, must in course be tried by a Consult, or Jury of
Physicians: the Quorum whereof consisting of three at least, the first called
performs the Office of an Attorney General; He, in making of his Process,
exhibits his Charge against the Sufferer: declaring, that he has been very
intemperate in eating or drinking, or has been negligent of his health, in
exposing himself to the incertainty of the Air, by leaving off some Clothes,
(as, a pair of Garters, Cuff-strings) or by some violent motion, passion, or
other extravagancy; or has extremely injured himself, by over-waking, or
over-sleeping, or by this, that, or the other senseless occasional cause, (as he
in his wonted dialect does term it) whereby the Sufferer has now cast himself
into a Fever, Dropsy, Consumption, or what other Disease he is (ignorantly
enough) pleased to call it; and so, as they would make the world believe, is
become felo de se, which is his capital Crime. Upon little or no examination of
the Evidence, by this puny Consiglio di sanita, (wherein an Anatomical killing
Idol, a Tom Tattle, a Schoolmaster turned Physician, a Western Bumkin, that
pretends to Limbo Children in the Smallpox by a new method, or, more
especially, a Sir Formal Phlegmatic, must be Chairman,) He is falsely convicted
of this, or that Felony on himself; and, most commonly if his Crime or Disease
be great, is sentenced to die, and to be executed by tying a Halter about his
Arm, and afterward to be stabbed in it with a Lancet, to draw off so much
Blood, until he be Herring-dead. Another way of execution they use, is to
impale the Sufferer with a Machine of Box or Ivory, being in nothing different
from a Clyster-pipe; and this to be used so often, until it comes out at his
mouth: or, if this fails, to order such la Voisine Drenches to be poured down
his throat, which may do them the good service to stifle the Sufferer's ( aura
Vitalis) vital flame in a few days. The Sufferer, since it is for Treason he
has committed against himself, after he is dead, (it is well, if, to make sure
work, it is not done before) is to be quartered, (which in their phrase, is
called opening the Body,) and his Bowels taken out, under pretense of making
inspection what Disease the Sufferer dyed of; but, in truth, it is more often to
be satisfied in the effects of their bleedings, and deleterious Draughts, and
which of the Noble Parts were most injured. But, lest you should suspect this
Paragraph a Burlesque of Partiality, which re vera is the greatest Truth, it
shall be made plain to you from their undue way of Education, and confirmed
Ignorance, thus imposing upon the Vulgar, by the strength of a pretended
Privilege, and their mutual combination to defraud the unwary of their Lives.
I shall leave this subject a while, and proceed on the forementioned
Sufferer's Case.

5. He was surprised on Saturday (preceding the Bills) upon drinking a large
draught of bottl'd-Ale, to quench his droughth, (which his walking into a sweat
in a very hot day had much augmented) with a coldness and shivering, sickness
at his Stomach, pain in his Head, and weariness all over his Body, which in
some few hours turned into a smart or violent heat, whereunto, upon some
interval of time, a moderate Sweat was subsequent. His Urin did not exceed the
color of Amber, and the Sediment thin and scattered; His Respiration answered
his Pulse, which was some what swift, large and high, and not very unequal in
motion; His Age was some few years beyond Forty, which, together with the
soundness of his Entrails, his carnous, plethorick, hail and vigorous
Constitution, seemed strong enough to have struggled with a far greater
Disease, than this ordinary Autumnal Distemper.

It was named by his men of Physic, the new Disease: a name of ignorance, or
their accustomed Asylum ignorantiae, to which they take their refuge, when they
know not what the Disease is, or what to call it. One time they shall tell you,
it is an Ague; another, it is a Feavor; a third, it is an Ague and Feavor; a
fourth, it is Feavor and Ague; a fifth, it is the new Disease: a denomination so
idle, that every Novice in Physic might well suspect they had never read
Hippocrates or Galen; specially, upon observing, that every Autumnal or
Epidemick Distemper is by them termed new: whereas, the gentle Pox excepted,
there is not any among all those they have nominated new Diseases, but what is
amply described in many ancient Authors.

6. The consequence of mistakes in Diseases is so obvious, even to the most
obtuse judgments, that it is received for a mathematical deduction, If the
Doctor has mistaken my Distemper, I am a dead man, or in danger of being so,
And rather than the Doctor will espouse his error in that point, or permit
another (of more sense or experience) to be called in upon him, whereby his
Reputation may in the least punctilio be shocked, or his Fees abated, Thou, and
a Thousand more, shall be posted away to the Subterranean Mansions, where all
things shall be forgotten, and thy evidence against the said Physician wholly
cancelled. Such is the Ignorance, Avarice, and Barbarian perversity of some
Physicians, whom Authority and Law do shelter from all manner of Accusations,
Scandal, or Reproach.

The matter of this Paragraph is not so intricate, but you may easily be
induced to believe, that where so many Thousands do yield their last Breath to
Diseases, in themselves not mortal, it must be imputed to error in judgment of
your Physician; which, how frequent that is, an instance or two of some vogued
Physicians will render a satisfaction more ample. It was Dr. B. Pr. of C -- (a
person sufficiently known) who gave me the recital of this following Case, at
the house of Mr. I. M. Surg --. A Gentleman, moved through care for the
recovery of his (neither sick nor well) Daughter, was l'aps'd into that
stupidity of sense, as to believe it was in the capacity of Dr. -- to restore
her: Upon notice given him, he appears at the Bedside of the Sufferer, where
feeling her Pulse large and quick, and discerning her Skin sprinkled with a
numerous train of red Spots and Blotches, very gravely pronounces his immature
deliberation; (viz.) That the Sufferer's Life was in more than ordinary danger,
through the almost Pestilential malignity that her great Feavor manifested by
those red Tokens: Therefore time was to be taken by the fore-top, and she
immediately to take her recourse to strong Cordials, a great many Bed-cloaths,
and a warm Room, to expel the malignity. So imminent a Danger, such great
Remedies, offered by so eminent a Physician, ( oibo!) could not but be
recompensed by a great Fee. The prevalence of these Physickbulls acquired no
other repute, than maintaining the Distemper in the same tone and tenor, or
rather, adding to it what they most feared: which gave occasion to the
sollicitous Parent of the tender Matron, upon a fortuitous meeting of Dr. B.
(the Relator of these) to exhibit his complaint of the rudeness of the
Distemper, and the inefficacy of Medicines. The Doctor, upon a full hearing of
the circumstances, found he had no cause for condoling, but rather
congratulating him, in the secure estate his Daughter was in; insinuating, that
the hazard of the Disease was much less, than of the Remedies prescribed by the
dictates of a deceived opinion in the first Doctor, of the Disease, and its
malignity; the Distemper proving no other than a diaria plurium dierum, or a
f^bris Synocha imputris, (commonly so called among practical Authors)
occasioned by the ebullition of a plethorick mass of humors, which being by
frequent rapid motions and pulsations too much rarefied and subtiliated,
overflowed the banks of its Vessels, and being diffused into the minute creeks
of the ambient Cutis, (or Skin) appeared in the shap^s of the recited Spots and
Blotches; deserving no other name than mere efflorescencies of the Skin. In
consequence of this Theory, the practick was easily chalked out; ( viz.) That
the kindling and inflaming Cordial-Spirits were to be abandoned, the great
burden of Coverlets taken off, and the temperature of the Air in the Room
moderated; the success whereof was manifested in a sudden recovery of her
former health, to the great disappointment of so contrary course as was ordered
by the other.

7. It is from hence I can be easily persuaded, that, how great an Idol soever
a Fellow is set up by the Vulgar, from the false suggestion of Dog-fleying, he
shall never arrive to a sagacity of distinguishing Diseases, unless he has
from the beginning been trained up to it, by the conduct of able Professors at
home and abroad, and frequently visited Hospitals in several Countries.
Moreover, as in the Art of Writing, Painting* or Engraving, the well forming of
the first Letters, Lin^^ments or Figures, prepares an apt disposition in the
young Scholar to receive the just impressions of the Habit or Art, whence he
shall deservedly be styled a good Writer, Painter, or Engraver: So, unless the
intended young Physician shall be endued with an apt disposition; 1. To attain
the Languages, that render the recorded Rules and Theorems of the ancient and
modern Physicians intelligible unto him; 2. To be gradually instructed in
Philosophy, as well Machanick as Peripatetick; also, in the several parts of
Theoretick Physic; as, in the Nature and Constitution of the Body of Man,
where true Anatomy bears so great a part; in the signs, whereby to distinguish
the natural and counternatural state of the Body, and to presage the event and
issue of the latter; to know the faculties of all sorts of Food, Flesh, Fish,
Herbs, Air, Water, Drinks, etc. 3. To have discovered to him the means whereby
Diseases, both internal and external, may be removed; and to that purpose, to
be acquainted with the faces of Herbs, Drugs, Minerals, Animals, or, summarily,
the whole materia Medica; their Choice, Prices, Preparations; likewise, all
Chyrurgical Instruments, and their uses; in fine, it is necessary be should be a
perfect Theoretick and Practick Apothecary, Chemist, and Chyrurgeon: And
because he should not want that which puts almost the last hand to render him a
Physician, (all others, though they have clamber'd up to a Degree, are little
different from Mountebanks, or Man-slayers) he is to be very well grounded in
the true method of Physic, or order of applying proper Remedies, internal and
external, to Diseases, in their just time and Doses.

8. And now, after all this apparatus we will suppose our Infant-Physician so
completely dressed up with these fore-noted School and Academick Ornaments, and
his mind so gaudily painted and daubed with the ancient, uncertain, and some
new tickling notions in Medicine, that you may hear the clapper of his Tongue
echo from the East to the West-gate of your Town; Yet, introduce him to a
Patient, and grant that he, by appuising or resting his Velvet-Body on his
Iapan Crutch, and fixing his Intellect, by drawing the broadbrimm'd Beaver over
his eyes, seems to mimick a decrepid Gravity, and by that to weigh himself
down to the bottom of your Belly, to rummage for the Disease; when he wakes
(for he has only been in's dumps) out of this brown study, he shall no more
know the Distemper, or the cause of it, (though he has read it in Authors
twenty times) than the Skipper that never was tossed on the Ocean before,
pretends to find out Bermudas by his Waggenaer; Nevertheless does he adventure
to call for Paper and Ink, to figure down a Remedy he never saw before, being
only acquainted with the bare Name of it. This you are to swallow, and to
render your Body the subject, whereout he is to dig his experience, at the cost
of your Health, Life, and Estate. When by his Book-applications he shall thus
have brought your crazy Tenement (and, probably, of Hundreds more,) to the
ground, the World that consists chiefly of the Vulgar, will then, from the
calculation of his numerous experience, (though never so unfortunate) entitle
him a most skilful Doctor, and in flocks voluntarily surrender their Bodies to
his torture. Likewise the Rich and Noble, who take the measures of their
sentiments of the Physicians capacity from the crowd of his business, (that
profession being wholly out of the horizon of their judgment) shall accost him
with the same temerity. If unto this you shall add, that he is a great
Anatomist (which perhaps appears no other than a Dog-fleyer, or a
Calfs-head-Dissector) and that he has scribl'd a Treatise of the Heart, Lungs,
Brains, Womb, or some I mean Treatise.
other Entrail, (though of no use) that he is Member of a Herd of learned Q --
ks, Renegado-Divines, Schoolmasters, Apothecaries, and Barbers, (a rare
hodge-potch of Physicians!) or that he is drawn about streets in his own Coach:
these suggestions shall prove a far more alluring bait for the unwary sick
people to be caught by.

9 In conclusion, the forementioned School and Academick Institutes (though
absolutely necessary) without which none can arrive to the name of a Dogmatick
or Rational Physician; yet thereby is little advanced, beyond the Verge of a
speculative man, and so notwithstanding must and does fill Churchyards the
best part of his lifetime. Therefore that which is the Soul of a Physician,
and animates those praevious Dispositions, (for Theory is no other) is Sagacity
and Observation. The former is in a great measure Natural, though improved by
Art, and whereby a Physician does with great facility discover a Disease, its
Causes, and proper Remedies. Observation is that, which confirms him in such
discoveries, and the election of Method and Remedies, and particularly in his
Prognostics. Now, upon application of this Discourse to two or three hundred
Physicians, you shall scarce find six, that can justly pretend to the Title of
a good Physician, or whose Education does hardly qualify them to be rendered
such. Besides all this, suppose a Physician to be accomplished in all the parts
of his Art, if he be covetous, negligent, dishonest, or uncharitable, he is
more capable of defrauding you of your Health, Life, and Money, without danger
of being discovered, than one that is ignorant, and un-experienced. These
considerations do move a pity and compassion toward such, that being Persons
of integrity and honesty do fall under the hands of covetous, negligent,
dishonest, or uncharitable Physicians; and adding thereunto, that they are
insufficiently Educated, ignorant, in-sagacious, and in-expert (as most are) in
what a desperate case are their Patients? But the matter is not much; the
greater part of humanity (I should say inhumanity) not deserving a good
Medicine, Method, or Care of a good Physician.

CHAP. II.
Of the specious and false pretenses of Anatomical Physicians; also of the Use
and Abuse of Anatomy.
1. OBservation speaks this truth; He that dwells a long time upon any
particular introductory part of Physic, seldom or never arrives to a
considerable proficiency in his Art; so that He that shall (beyond the
necessary and competent knowledge in Anatomy, Botany, etc.) Trifle away that
season, wherein a young Students intellectuals are in their prime and vigor,
upon mangling of Piggs, Cats, Dogs, and Plucks; or upon gazing and muzling
seven years upon a Hedge, Ditch, or Banksside, to enquire for new Faces of
Plants and Herbs, which the petulancy of the Earth does thrust forth, to
consume its excrementitious moisture, and sulphurous Sweats, and thereout form
such Herbs, which Nature never intended for the health of man, but probably for
Garniture of the Fields, or to poison Worms, Moles, Flies, and other Insects,
that destroy Corn, Roots, Herbs and such Vegetables, which God has provided
for humane use. I say, that neither out of such an Anatomist, or such a
Botanist, seldom or never grew a good Physician; no otherwise than one who has
amused himself with the Philosophy of Colors, Lights, Optics, Pensils, and
Brushes, to an excessive waste of his time, and applies himself to drawing of
Figures, and afterward to Painting; this Phantastique must necessarily miss
his aim of ever being a Painter, or Limner; because the time, wherein his parts
were most capable of improvement, was neglected, and diverted by a curiosity of
attaining a knowledge, beyond what was necessary for his Art.

2. But to speak in terms more plain; the necessary point of Anatomy consists
chiefly in the temperament, Figure, Situation, connection, action, and use of
the parts; and not in superfluous, uncertain, and probably false, and
indemonstrable niceties, practiced by those, that flea Dogs and Cats, dry,
roast, bake, parboil, steep in Vinegar, Limewater, or aqua fortis, Livers,
Lungs, Kidneys, Calves brains, or any other entrail, and afterward gaze on
little particles of them through a Microscope, and whatever false appearances
are glanced into their eyes, these to obtrude to the World in Print, to no
other end, than to beget a belief in people, that they who have so profoundly
dived into the bottomless pores of the parts, must undeniably be skilled in
curing their distempers: whereas those pretended Anatomical Physicians, who
have so belabour'd, and tortured the particular parts, are generally the least
knowing in the whole body of Anatomy; and the Situation, Connection, and Action
of the parts. On the other hand, there is scarce any Physician, who has had a
due education beyond Sea, but is abundantly more knowing (even beyond what is
necessary) in the Anatomy of all the parts of the body of man, than any of
these particular pretenders.

3. I would enquire, what does it signify to assert, that all Muscles have two
bellies, or are biventered? Which is false, and the erroneous appearance
proceeded, either from over-boyling the Dogs Muscles (and then many more
Bellies might have appeared) or was occasioned by dissecting an old withered
Curr, whose Muscles are generally full of wrinckles, which might have been
taken for so many venters of Muscles by such an Anatomist.

And what does it import, to lay claim to the invention of Transfusion of
Sheeps blood into the Veins of a Man (though discovered long before) or to
measure what proportion of blood passed the Heart in a quarter of an hour?
Which computation must likewise prove false, in regard the blood does not
always pass equally, and some men abound ^n blood much more than others.

My opinion is, that the Studying the Anatomy of all the parts of the body, as
much as is necessary, the being well grounded in the Institutes of Physic,
Surgery, Pharmacy, and Chemistry, and the frequenting Hospitals abroad under
the conduct of experienced Professors, to manuduct him as it were into
Practice; this I say, would have been a way much more honest, and ingenuous,
than by a specious pretense in Anatomy, (being very deficient in the other
parts of Physic) to ensnare and decoy the unwary vulgar, and others, to
defraud them of their money, and too often through unskilfulness to ruin their
Health, destroy their bodies, and at last whirl'em out of their lives. And yet
to my great amazement, with satisfaction to their Friends and Visiters,
imagining that their death was inevitable, since the Anatomical Doctor was here
concerned, (though) if at the same time, a real accomplished Physician had
procured their Recovery, it would have been judged a Distemper easily curable;
so that you may hereby discern, some Physicians get a greater reputation by
killing, than others by curing. But this shall be evidently proved to you, in
the progress of this discourse, where I shall particularly instance the
dangerous and unwarrantable methods of Physic now in use.

CHAP. III.
Of the fraudulent pretext of Anatomy by a most unskilful Surgeon, obtruded to
the vulgar. Barbarous practice and errors in Surgery.
1. ANd since the knack has proved so successful to these Trap Physicians, or
Pseudomedici, some Surgeons have taken the scent, and fallen into the same
path, of which Herd, one who keeps his abode at a City called Paris, finding
himself rankt in the Rear among the meanest of his faculty (and that
deservedly, as deriving his chief Talent only from a Cubb in a Spittle, and not
from Practice in Campanes or Naval services, as he ought to have done) by
proclaiming himself in all Companies an Anatomist of Rats, Mice, Dogs, and
Cats, insinuated into the phancies of the senceless Rabble this erroneous
consequence, that he can best dress wounds, set bones, take off Legs, cure
Claps, and cut the Stone, than knows the Fabric of the Joints, Situation of
the Entrails, and the ramifications of the Nerves, Arteries and Veins, so that
now he is advanced to be the Bell-weather, I should have said, carries the Bell
before all the Fraternity; among whom a man must look with a Candle and
Lanthorn to find one more ignorant and less skilful; for sure I am, there is
not a Hangman in Foreign parts, but knows the structure of the Joints as
perfectly as the Gallows; there is scarce a Butcher that deals in Hogs-flesh,
but is most exquisite in the Situation of the Entrails; and for the Figure and
position of the Muscles, and the dissemination of the Veins and Arteries,
Painters are excellently skilled in; now must it needs follow among these three
Anatomists, that the Hangman is the best Bone-setter, the Butcher the best
Wound-healer, and the Painter the best bleeder, and opener of Imposthumes?

2. But since the Parisian vulgar from such erroneous premises draws so false
a conclusion, I do pretend to conduct them into a better sort of reasoning,
thereby to divert them from following a Bell-weather Surgeon to his Slaughter
house.

Anatomy is no further necessary to a Surgeon, than the knowledge of the nature
of wood to a Carpenter, or of Stone to a Stone-cutter; Therefore the Situation
and Figure of the Bowels, the ramification of the Vessels, and the position of
the Muscules, being well understood by a Surgeon, is of absolute necessity, and
what further progress he is pleased to make in that science, as it is to him
ornamental only, so it cuts off from that time, which ought to be employed; 1.
In knowing the Nature, Kinds, Causes and Signs of Wounds, Ulcers, Tumors,
Imposthumes, Fractures, Dislocations. etc. And 2. In reading the Practical
Observations of the most Famed Surgeons, as those of Fabritius Hildanus, Felix
Wurtz, Soultetus, and many others. 3. In knowing all or most Chyrurgical
Instruments, and their uses, the numerous sorts of Bandages, Oils, Unguents,
Plasters, Cataplasms, the various dressings, etc. 4. And chiefly, in
habituating himself to a dexterity in making use of all the most necessary
Chyrurgical Instruments, in the application of all external Medicines,
Bandages, and Dressings, and in the reposing of Fractures, and Dislocations;
and from this Fourth partiticular (intimating all the kinds of Manual
Operations in reference to the external Diseases of Man) it is the name of a
Chyrurgion ((...), or manual operation) is properly derived, being the very
summary of Chyrurgery, and whence he does principally entitle himself to his
profession. To this last he is to arrive, by the instruction and example of his
own, and several other good Masters; by serving in several Hospitals at home
and abroad, where the rarest of cases may occur; and by his own practice in
Armies, or Fleets at Sea. And after all, this cannot be attained without a
natural Sagacity in his mind, and an aptness and natural disposition in his
Hands. How few good Surgeons there are to be found, may easily be judged by
what is premised; yet it is very probable, there are more in England, than
elsewhere.

3. I have here laid down a measure, by which we may soon fathom this
Bell-weather, and where in the conclusion he will scarce appear to be so much
as the half quarter of a Surgeon; so that this Anatomical device can be termed
nothing but decoy, Fraud, or cheat upon the deceptile vulgus: Who possibly may
reply, Volenti non fit injuria; whereunto must be re-joyn'd, decipiatur ergo
vulgus.

4. He that could never arrive to so much dexterity of hand, to manage a
Lancet, or to a proportion of Judgment to direct him, how deep and how long the
Orifice is to be in the opening a Vein, can never by men of sense be determined
fit to use the Knife in cutting the Stone, amputating of Members, opening
Impost humes in difficult places, and in performing many other subtiler
operations; certainly such a one, who has so often failed in a piece of the
little Surgery, as Phlebotomy, practiced with success by every Barbers Boy, and
Surgery-woman, cannot pretend so much to the name of a Manual Operator, as a
Farrier, a Cowleech, or a Sow-gelder.

5. To say such a man is a very good Surgeon, but he cannot bleed well, is as
much nonsense, as to tell me, such a one is a very good Painter but draws his
strokes crooked; and indeed there be many crooked arms to be seen at this day,
that were occasioned by an ill stroke of this Bell-weathers Lancet; among the
rest that were hushed and stifled, two instances could not be kept from the ears
and eyes of the public; the one was a largely Tumefied Arm of a Gentleman of
the Law, accompanied with inexpressible pain, Fever, upon this several
Imposthumations, a Gangrene, and Putrid sordid Ulcers, which required deep
Scarifications, Cutting, Slashing, besides a vast expense of money distributed
among those, that were called in as Assistants: the torture endured for three
or four months, and a serious debate at last about cutting off his Arm; and all
this occasioned by the unskilful puncturing the Median Vein, together with the
Tendon of the Biceps Muscul near it; which error he would not have escaped, had
he used the ridiculous bluntsided Lancet of an Anatomical Doctor, unless the
point had been blunt likewise; and then how it is to be used, I know not. Sit
ut sit; The Ulcers were incarn'd, and cicatriz'd at last, but not without
leaving so ill an impression, and so great weakness on the Bowels, by gleets
sucked into the circulating mass, that in some time after they were incapable
of resisting a small Fever, that gave him a traverse into the other
Hemisphere; but it was after a year and a day. However that expression might
very well have been forborne, since there appeared no premeditated malice in the
Surgeon, unless you will suppose malice in prae-designing getting of money, by
the cure of the former: or in another case, by a forcible persuasion of a
Patient to be cut of the Stone, on purpose for the gaining of twenty Pistols or
Guineys. The Operation was performed upon the Staff, (that is, with the
Apparatus major) the Knife forced into the membranous part of the Bladder, too
high by an inch, the lower part, (which is interspersed with carnous Fibers,
being the proper place;) but no Stone was to be found in this Quarry; however a
Gangrene survenes upon the wound, and the party was bubbl'd out of his Life.
The Carcass being opened, a Callosity was discovered near the Sphincter, where
the Catheter commonly stopped, which was one imaginary sign of the Stone, and
the other a difficulty, and a partial suppression of Urin upon a violent Cold,
throwing Humors to the Bladder, too much weakened by frequent hurts, received
from being Probed by the Catheter, whence also the callosity proceeded. This
Narrative to me savours of ignorance in the Speculative, unskilfulness in the
Practick, and Avarice in the Mind, ( viz.) of adding twenty Pistols to his
Patrimony; which is Vivitur Ingenio.

6. It was not a mischance, which is merely fortuitous and extraordinary, but a
continuation of his unskilfulness, that attended the dismal and barbarous
Lithotomy, or cutting the Stone on a Child of the Steward belonging to the Duke
of -- who within few days with miserable outcries and tortures left this
World, without leaving any visible cause in his Bladder, for which he was thus
mangled; however here was another addition of twenty Pistols more. Abundance of
these examples can be produced; but what is this to the stabbing the Knife into
the Perinaeon, and wholly missing the Bladder, and then by repeating his stroke
once or twice, to cause a mortal wound?

7. Can it be termed any thing but the most Butcherly unskilfulness, to cut a
young Nobleman, and that (if I am not misinformed, therefore will not be
positive) upon the gripe too, and leave an Ulcer, that turned into a Fistuld,
whence to this hour a constant dribbling does follow him?

8. Another part of this Operation is the extracting the Stone, wherein his
error is as obvious, breaking the Stone in the Bladder, lacerating those
tender membranous parts in the extraction, and leaving pieces behind, whence
the pains have afterward accrew'd greater than before, the Stone being become
angular, and in a short interval augmented to its former bigness.

The total is, that I cannot observe, but four in five do miscarry, and
sometimes the whole number.

9. The Venereal practice is another considerable branch of his Chyrurgical
exercise, where if we track him, we shall find a great number of Gentlemen,
bestowing curses upon him, for running them into the Pox, from very
insignificant Gonorrhea's, Buboes, and Shankers.

10. The most manifest error in the least of these accidents (though the
consequence is no less than a tedious long Cure, a Fistula, Pox, or too often
loss of life) is committed in his opening a Veneral Bubo, when the one part is
scarce soft, and suppurated, and the other hard and in digested; the reason is
obious, and contained in this Maxim, Pus generat Pus, Matter begets Matter.
Like unto an Apple, that is partly rotten, where, if the rotten is suffered to
continue, in a short time converts the whole Apple into a rotten substance; but
being separated, the remainder is much longer rotting: And by the same reason,
or maxim above mentioned, it appears, that a Cataplasme of rotten Apples mixed
with boiled Onions, is a very excellent suppurative.

11. This is not all, the Orifice he made so large, that it extended from one
side of the Bubo, to the other, giving the Tailors reason for it, that he loved
to see his work before him. But what follows? The cold nitrous Air entering,
hardneth the remaining immaturated part like to a Stone, putrefieth the soft
moist substance of the Glanduls underneath, besides their being the Sink of the
Bowels, and consequently subject to receive the putrid noxious humors, that
are thrown down from them, no part of the body being more tender, and apt to
putrefy than Glanduls. Of necessity this Ulcer was to be kept open, until the
forementioned hardness was converted into Matter, whilst in the interim,
Cataracts of Humors were thrown down, by which turning into a corrupt matter,
and Sordes, all the tender flesh was devoured, the little white Vessels of the
Glanduls corroded, and the great Veins exposed to view; which must prove very
dangerous. In fine, in spite of all Purges, Vomits, Salivations, and other
Revulsions, three quarters of a year scarce accomplished a cicatrization,
without leaving a Fistula, and a continual gleet. This and many more which I
have seen, might in four days, or somewhat longer, after a complete
suppuration, have been brought to a safe and sound cicatrize. But then our
Anatomical Spark would have failed an opportunity, of amplifying his Stock with
Thirty or Forty Pistols or Guineys.

12. The Objection is futil, implying in the case forementioned, that where
Matter is locked up, it makes Caverns, Sinus, and Fistula's; For as Nature is
most potent inwards, so likewise is intent upon her own Preservation, the
thicker part of the Matter being better digested, consequently milder, less
corosive, and glutinous or slymy, she converts into a membranous substance, by
the heat which is most vigorous within next the flesh, to defend it; and the
thinner part that is corroding, a crimonious and ichorous, she protrudes
toward the ambient skin, where through its putrid acid Salts it gradually
corrodes, and perforates the skin. Hence you may furnish your self with the
true reason, why most external Tumors, when turned into Imposthumes, most
commonly break outwardly, and not one in a Million inwardly.

13. To give you a further instance of Natures self preservation. Suppose some
excrementitious humors (almost homogeneous) collected in the breast, in a
short time by its heat dries the circumference of those humors, into a Coat,
or Tunic, (which among Surgeons is called a Cystis) to preserve other parts
from further annoyance. Now the foresaid humors cannot be converted into
Matter, because they are in a manner homogenous, and so Nature secures them
from doing any further hurt, by locking them up in a Cystis: Thus a Steatoma,
Meliceris, and Atheroma, are engendered.

14. True it is, where the Air entering in at the Orifice of an Imposthume, or
hollow Ulcer, shall have putrefy'd or corrupted the appelling humors in the
most remote part of the said Ulcer, or Imposthume, into an acrimonious and
corroding Pus, by keeping it open too long, or by applying Medicines, that are
ineffectual, contrary, or putrefying and unctuous, or by negligence in
dressing, or by unskilfulness in compresses and bandage, there it is absolutely
requisite, the Orifice should be enlarged, or another made, that is near the
cavern, where Matter may lurk, to the end that the said Matter may be deterged,
and the vitiated temperament of that part corrected; unless he is skilled in
Injections, that are proper, or other Medicines, whose steem may reach, and
penetrate to the most retired and abscond cunicle of an Ulcer; for such
Medicines there are.

Another Observation of great importance is, that all Ulcers near Glanduls, by
being kept open too long, turn Cancerous, and ofttimes incurable.

Tumors collected in a cold part, as suppose about the Tonsils, or any other
Glanduls, and tending to suppuration, if opened never so little too early,
though they seem sufficiently absterged, and afterward consolidated, yet they
are very apt to be recollected, and appear again about the same season the year
following, and this for several years successively; because there was some
small part of the humor left indigested, and hardened (by the nitrous Air
entering at the Orifice) which afterward does become a Seminary, or Ferment (as
others will have it) by length of time converting the appelling humors into
its own Nature, whereby at last a new Tumor is engendered: Therefore except
some great urgency (as suffocation) does indicate apertion by puncture, or
incision, it is much more advisable, to give Nature her own time in breaking the
said Imposthume, there being no fear, that by such delay any Cuniculi or
caverns will be made, the reason whereof I have already given you in the
foregoing Paragraphs.

15. As I ushered in this discourse with an animadversion of an error in the
little Surgery, viz. Phlebotomy, so I shall conclude it with another of the
same kind, acted by the Idem Operator, who being sent for to a Gentleman of
Quality, of the T -- to open a Vein, pierced his Tool so deep, that the
Neighboring Tendon received a considerable puncture, which caused it
immediately to contract it self into the hardness and unevenness of a Cord,
attended with a most unquiet jactitating Fever, and a pain almost impatible. I
being called to advise, what was to be done in this Tragical case, was not of
opinion, that as the Wound made by a Scorpion was to be remedied by applying
the same Scorpion to it, so the same Surgeon ought to be continued to heal his
own Wounds; But another whose knowledge and skill were sufficiently known to
me, was to be employed, to whom I recommended what external Medicines his
Pledgets were to be armed with, and what Emplaster to be super-imposed, leaving
the application and Bandage to himself, by which means the Patients Arm was
perfectly cured in Six or Eight days.

16. The occasion of this untoward bleeding, was the distorting of the Vein by
the Bandage toward the Tendon, so that they lay as it were Perpendicular;
whereas had the Vein here by the Ligature been drawn a little from the Tendon,
a Blind man could not have acted the least mischief. Now I hope you are
convinced, that a pretense to Anatomy is a mere Decoy, Trap, Delusion, and
Imposture, I shall supersede that Argument, and before I return to the place
where I deviated, I will only take off the amaze, why I should fetch a
pretending Anatomical Surgeon from Paris hither, and thus descant upon him, to
whose Face and Speech I am wholly a Stranger, though not to his ill success,
and male Practice; all which I do franckly tell you, proceeds only from an
innate principle of discovering Falacies and Deceits put upon the vulgar, that
have no rule or measure to distinguish a Meteor in Physic or Surgery from
such, that without mutuating from others, are indu'd with all the necessary
accoutrements of Learning and Experience, that are required in an Artist.

CHAP. IV.
Of Subtilties used by those of the Conclave, to promote their Interest.
1. SOme Physicasters by reputing themselves Virtuoso's, Mathematicians,
Philosophers, and witty Cracks, have insinuated this Enthymeme to the
Commonalty, that therefore they must necessarily arrive to the top of their
profession; for since their porous Brain was capable to imbibe such knotty
Mysteries, it is not improbable, they might much easier suck up the quintessence
of the Art of Medicine. To this Category belonged that famed Doctor of Norw.
who being Posted away from his House with a Coach and Four to a Sick Gentleman
in the Country, an unhappy gaudy Butterfly thwarted the Coach, upon which a
halt was made, and the Doctor with the assistance of the Coach-driver, hunted
so long, until they had him under the broad brimm'd Beaver. Here an harangue
was to be made to his conducting Auditor upon the admirable Structure, Shape,
Organs, and colors of the Butterfly, particularly upon the transparent yellow,
of which color a Cap would better have fitted him than the black Velvet one.
The Butter-fly being cag'd up in a Box, and reserved to a further
consideration, the Journey was pursued, at the end whereof the Doctor found the
Patient just expired of a Syncopal-fit, and the new Widow accosting him with
the information, That her dear Husband had passed through many of them by the
help of a Cordial, and so probably might this, had she not, wretched Creature
as she was! expected his coming to prescribe another. But whether the Doctor,
besides, the Reprimend, and the want of his Sostrum, had the Justice done him,
to be sent home on foot, I know not.

2. But the industrious Craft most in use among the Pedantry of Physicians, is
the sending forth of Emissaries, that are in acquaintance with any of Note,
whose misfortune it is to lie under a main course prescribed by others. To
these is to be intimated that such a Doctor (meaning him from whom they have
their Credentials) has in a very short interval cured such and such of the
same Distemper; and argumentum ad hominem to the Patient, who thereupon with
much impatience expects the new Doctor, by whom several sly Items are given of
mistakes committed by his former Physick-man. Now the new Broom is to sweep
clean those chinks and corners, which the other never took notice of; and
therefore, upon revolving in mind, what has been hitherto exhibited by his
Predecessor without effect, concludes, that remedies contrary to the former
must necessarily operate some alteration or other, and that sometimes with
success. A sort of argumentation that carries subtilty in it. There is now
nothing remaining but the charming the Patients sancy to a firm belief and
confidence of the intended great work, in these terms; Sir, were I to take a
Lease of an Estate upon Your Life, I would proceed so and so, and I should not
question the enjoying it, to the full satisfaction of my purchase. What Answer
can this pithy Oration merit less from the Patient, than Good Mr. Doctor, I am
sensible I have been abused too much by some, and have suffered both in Body
and Purse; but now I am resolved to put my self wholly into your hands, and
follow your Rules strictly: Do with me what you please, and pray accept of this
small Fee, (viz. Five Pist^ls.) All this while here is (...) a syllable of
God's assistance, (...) by Doctor or Patient.

3. An authentic Copy of a transaction of this nature we had four or five
years since, in the sickness of a chief Magistrate of Paris, languishing under
a slow Fever, ( Febris lenta) arising from a Scorbutic Dyscrasy of the Blood,
and hypochondriack Obstructions, whence proceeded his frequent sour Belchings
and Vomitings. Fewer than four or five first rate Physicians could not be
thought proportionable to answer the quality of his Person, or the danger of
his Disease. In this Consult the Senior was the Demiculverin, that made most
noise, and according to whose pricked Song the rest were to tune their Fiddles,
that being no other than the common Method of consultion. Aqua Epidemica,
Poeoniae Composita, Spir. Cornu Cervi, and Salis Armoniaci, being somewhat
allayed with Simple Waters, and sweetened with Syrup of Gillyflowers, were in
this Council determined Salutiferous, and to be repeated for two months,
sometimes interjecting a Milk-Clyster, and a Diascordium Bolus, not forgetting
the Pearl-Cordial. The Sufferer they found gave good Milk, and therefore these
Heroes failed not coming for their Cream morning and evening. The Patient now
grown dubious to what shore his Argonautae designed him, did readily bend his
ear to a she-visiter, that displayed the colors most admirably in favor of a
Quidam Doctor, that cured most desperate Diseases by method and Remedies
contrary to the opinion of all others. Dictum factum, a Coach brings him
immediately, who (by the confederacy of the Female Legate) could, upon
examining his Urine and Pulse, at sight give him a scheme of all his Pains,
Symptoms, and Distempers, even to the surprise of the wealthy Seignior. The
Remedies which were too much in vogue among the Gang of Physicians, he knew
full well, could be no other than hot burning Cordials, such as plague-Water,
Spirit of Hartshorn, and that choking, stinking Spirit of Piss. These had
inflamed and sharpened his Blood, tumbled and ruffled his Spirits, and nourisht
his Distemper; But be assured Sir, I will cure you in as short a time, as I did
Mr. such, and such, who had been ill handled in the same Distemper; Therefore
draw back your Curtains, throw off the Blanckets, and set open the Windows, you
want Air, you are stifled; clear the Table of all those Viols and Galleypots;
your Blood needs Ventilation, Contemperation, and Dulcification; your Spirits
must be quieted, smoothed, and allayed. Here observe, the course is steered
diametrically contrary, heating Medicines are to be changed for coolers,
Alcalies for Acides, and exalters of the Sulphur of the Blood for Narcoticks

Instead of those fiery Comforters, I do recommend Pippin or a Lemon-Posset,
and a delicious Tincture of Roses; take sometimes a draught of the one, and
sometimes of the other; every second night drink two or three Spoonfuls of this
appeasing Cordial upon going to Bed, it will compose you to rest, and allay the
tumult of your Spirits. The issue proved successful. His Vomiting was repelled,
his drought extinguished, appetite restored, and strength so recovered, that in
a Fortnight the dying Testator was congratulated in the Streets by those, that
accidently met him, of his wonderful retrieve out of the Jaws of Orcus. But
it is to be remarqued, that this course was first intimated by one Major W. and
privately carried to the Dr. who did not want craft to make it his own, and by
some sly alteration wholly appropriate it to his particular invention, which
occasioned the old Gentleman to deify him in his Calender, and not only forced
him upon all his sick acquaintance, but would send some one or other of his
Domestics to any afflicted with Distempers, where he conceived the Authority
of his name might prevail, though too many never survived the appointed minute,
to render his Worship their due acknowledgement for his over-officious care. So
that it is evident, that the rule of contraries in his case was only fortuitous
and empirical to his Medico, which without all peradventure to a good Physician
would have been of choice and rational election; though such a transition, as
it is rarely to be used, so a more than ordinary caution and prudence is to be
observed by such, that shall have occasion to imitate it.

4. Those, who shall have listed themselves in the service of the great God,
and by assuming Orders, distinguish themselves from the Laity, exercising that
most honorable Function, by Praying, Preaching, and their exemplary Life, and
Conversation, to the glory of their great Master, and the saving of Souls from
perdition; Those I say, that shall do this only for a time, until they have
subdud the Hearts and Inclinations of all, or most of their Parishioners to
their own Service and Devotion then out of I know not what pretended scrupie of
Conscience, shall out of avarice prove Renegadoes ( Scelus horrendum!) from the
Divine Ministry to the exercise of Physic, in expectation of having all their
Auditors to be their Patients, are of all mankind to be abominated, as being
wholly incapable to arrive to the least competency in that Art, where so long
Study and Experience are required. And certainly those that make use of such a
Renegado Physician, upon a sentiment, that God Almighty will give a peculiar
Blessing to the endeavors of his quondam Servant, who in reality appears to be
a mere Atheist, make a false conclusion, since Divine Justice cannot be
supposed, to return any other than malediction, and confusion upon the
undertakings of all such, that shall exchange his Eternal Celestial Reward for
a Transitory Worldly Salary.

5. If you look for a plain demonstration of the preceding Paragraph, behold
here is one out of many. A Renegade Physician in the Patrowl of his officious
Visits, drops into the House of a noted Painter, who upon the usual Complement
of, how does your Husband? was thankfully answered by the Wife, he had been
attacked by an Ague, but at present his Fits were so much abated by the benefit
of Nature, (a gentle looseness of three or four Stools a day, carrying off the
humor as she thought,) that they were scarce perceptible. Here in the
declination of the Disease, thought the Renegade, was an opportunity of getting
Reputation, and therefore in imitation of the Serpent, tertia Genesis, seduces
the woman into the opinion, that the Ague-fits would soon reassume their
former vigor, unless some proper Remedy was taken, wholly to extirpate them,
and that such a Secret he was Master of, which in the time of a Hixius Doxius,
did infallibly cure all intermittent Fevers. These words falling with such a
zeal from the counterfeit holyman, induced the woman (on whom as on all others,
the Imperative Mood does devolve, during the Inter-regnum of the Husbands
sickness) to use her coercive power upon her sick Painter, who must and should
take, whatever he prescribed. Six Doses of the Jesuits Powder formed into
Pills, were marked down to be swallowed, Eight Pellets every four hours. The
second exhibition dammed up his Looseness, and consequently the Fits were
raised to a higher pitch than ever. Notwithstanding the remaining Doses were
advised with a continuando, which stopping all the avenues of Nature, and
forcing those excrementitious humors, that Nature before had separated, and
thrown to the Guts, into the great Vessels, the intermittent was now turned
into a continual Fever, attended with a great drought, black Tongue, delirium,
low Pulse, etc. This boistrous Hurricane threatening nothing but Shipwreck of
the Decumbents life, and the Reputation of the Revolted Divine: to save the
latter, he calls in the great Warden of the Faculty, who to recompense the
courtesy the Renegade had done him, in giving him the occasion of getting a
Pistol-Fee, could do no less, then on the spot immediately to naturalize his
spurious Practice into Legitimate, by declaring, that what had been directed by
that worthy Physician, nothing could be better, nothing more proper. Now the
Physic Doctor having received Pardon and Absolution from the Papa Medicorum,
both agree in a consult to give the Patient the last Unction by their
joynt-prescription of Cordials, and the Diasinapios gargle; (by this you know
who was Pope) to disimbogue his Throat, that was crammed up with tough viscous
humors, forced up by the Panacaean Bark; though with a non obstante, in two or
three days the sufferer bids 'em both Buenas noches. This was a Scene so
Tragical, that the poor Painter never yet had expressed upon Canvas, and less
dreamed, he should have been the principal Actor on the Physicians Theater.

6. Can it be imagined, that one who had for several years mounted the Pulpit,
should to increase his Fame in Physic, be guilty of so palpable an Imposture,
as to assert publicly, that by giving six grains of Salt of Amber, he had
caused a Dropsical Patient to piss the measure of a Kilderkin? In short, libera
nos from those, that practice Physic in Nomine Domini.

CHAP. V.
Of false Methods of Physic in malign Fevers, great and Small Pox.
1. THe Answer Capivac made to his Polonian Scholar, demanding his secrets in
Physic, that he should read his Method, and then he would have his secrets, is
by many a Drone drawn into such consequence, that he conceives himself
abundantly Doctorated, when he shall have muzzled some few months in the
Institutes of Physic, wherein the Methodus Medendi is that part, which puffs
him up, and makes his fingers itch to be doing with the unfortunate Sick, that
shall become his first Patients. As then, so ever after he is strongly
opinionated, that the Method of applying those inconsiderable stumps of
Medicines and Remedies, deciphered in his Fernelius or Sennertus, is the Crown
of the work, which must, and will advance him to be the Archiater of the Town.
It is in this, that one Fool does value himself above the other, because his
Method is different, and consequently in his opiniatreness better. Hereof I
will give you a taste, that must necessarily dis^relish all ingenious Palates.
The received Method of courting continual putrid Fevers, which pleads an
antiquity of above two thousand years, was not long since not so little scorned
by a Physician of the faculty, as his newly invented one much extolled, and the
imitation recommended to all others, though by me no less admired, for not
killing the Patient, being attended with a continual Fever in the third
climacterick of his age, whose symptoms, as a Delirium, very black Tongue,
insatiable drought, and broyling heat, spoke it sufficiently malignant. The
Morning after bleeding, our Parisian Doctor empties him with a Purge of Decoct.
senae. Ger. and Man. Next day after his Devotion at Mass, upon his visit
finding him worse, interpreted by him to happen, because he was not
sufficiently emptied, immediately caused him to swallow the same Potion with an
addition; Still worse and worse, notwithstanding repeats the same Purgative six
or eight Mornings successively; All his Symptoms persisted in the same tenure
of Malignity, until the Dr. had given over Purging, and then much ado abated,
and at last the Sufferer recovered.

2. The Moral this Methodist abstracts from the preceding management, was, that
Quotidian Purges are adequate Remedies of malignant continual Fevers; though
by me contrariwise constructed, viz. That those daily evacuations raised the
ebullition of the Blood, hindered the digestion of humors, prevented the
transpiration of the fuliginous malignant Salts through the Pores, enraged the
vital and animal Spirits, and were the sole cause that obstructed the Cure: a
tendency whereunto did not appear before the Alexandrian Garthartick was
omitted. This young man had more than Hercules in his Nature, that could at
once thus struggle with two enemies, the Fever, and those Purges; and if any
thing is properly termed a Physicians trying of Skill, Experiments, tricks, or
Impune ludere de corio humano, this was. And if this be Methodus medendi, I
desire to know of Mr. Dr. what is the Methodus occidendi? However not to rob
him of the honor of the first Inventor, I must do him Justice, in Recording,
that it was he, who was first Author of exhibiting Mercury in the Morning, and
Diacodium at Night against Hysteric vapors; which Method did more than answer
his expectation, by raising a Salivation several days after.

3. But I would have this Noble Doctor not be so arrogant, as to engross all
new Methods to himself, since there are others of his Brethren of the faculty
of Paris, who make much more noise than himself, particularly the Doctor of
Contraries, who with Opium and Iesuits-Powder shall make more various sorts of
passes at Diseases, than ever any Roman Gladiator with his Weapon; and these
shall be hits, and do execution. As for instance, if the Doctor is applied
unto, for his assistance against a continual Fever, according to his last good
or ill success in the like case, gives his direction for bleeding, or omits it;
then with an unparalleled assurance makes at the Distemper with an ample Dose
of the Iesuits-Powder, pursuing this fierce onset with a fresh supply of the
same Bark every fourth hour; And finding the fiery adversary provoked, produces
his other Champion ( Opium) to encounter him: so between these two Bravo's,
frail Nature does too often lie down, and yield, and the Patient is brought to
his ultimum vale.

4. The Small Pox, (a Distemper so unaccountable to most Physicians, and
therefore Empirically treated, whence Nurses do equally vie with their Worships
in the Cure) is by this Generalissimo (contrary to all sense and experience)
countermined with Spirit of Vitriol and Opium, by which beyond all others he is
infallible in procuring an Euthanasia. Good God, how the Universities do rob
the Plough! But a propos, let me make an offer to this grand Minister of
Medicine, if his humor holds of making purchases upon the lives of his
Patients, I will bona fide for one years purchase, sell him Annuities upon the
lives of all (or none; for some Natures are so robust, that nothing can subdue,
and therefore some few may escape) he shall treat with the Bark and Opium in
continual Fevers, and with Spirit of Vitriol and Laudanum liquidum in the
Small Pox.

5. Ships cannot be steered so many various and contrary courses by one Wind,
as Physicians tumble and toss the same Diseases by this single part of
Medicine, called Method. So here we have another of a bouncing Fame, that
ordered cooling Juleps for a young Lady his very near Neighbor, until the
Small Pox budded forth, then bleeds her the day before she expired, and
commands to be given 60 drops of Spirits of Hartshorn, one hour, and sixty
drops of Spirits of Sal Ammoniac the other hour, and so de hora in horam to be
continued in a few spoonfuls of a very brisk Cordial. This Method was persisted
in, until she died with some of the Cordial in her Mouth. In case of this
Nature, I should prefer the counsel of Celsus, That it is better to let a
Patient die, than to kill him.

6. The attendant that exhibited the Drops, gave me this account, and probably
to make the number of Drops seem more prodigious, might express ten or twelve
Drops in a Dose more than what was given; however, it was a vast quantity. And
the Catholic Apothecary, to hush the matter, kept the Receipts so close, that
a view could not be purchased at any rate. The bleeding I presume was advised
to stop the Haemorrhage at the Nose, and so two Taps set running at once, must
soon exhaust the tender Cask.

7. It was an undaunted boldness of Method, that lately inspired another
Physic Doctor, to give his Patient three or four Gobbets a day, each mixed with
Sixty, sometimes Seventy, sometimes Eighty, and sometimes Ninety Grains of
Mercury Sublimate dulcis, and these reiterated, until eight or nine Ounces of
Mercury was swallowed. It Is remarkable, that here was an half ounce, five, and
six Drams, that is three hundred and sixty Grains of Mercury Sublimate
Dulcifyed, or prepared Quicksilver, taken each four and twenty hours.

But I believe, your ears itch to hear, for what it was the Sufferer was
condemned to this Penance, and what became of him, being thus tortured by the
Physic Inquisition. His crime was getting a small Shanker, which a Surgeons
Boy had unskilfully cicatrized, without Purging him more than once or twice.
Four or five months were scarce elapsed, but the malignity is mounted up
Stairs, and daubs his eyebrows, and hairy scalp with crusty Scabs, being
coverlids to little Ulcers underneath them; a while after the sinful Distemper
takes a carreer downwards, and there on the lower part of the tibia, intrenches
within a circumvallation less than a Crown-piece, mining into the Bone night
and day, and causing a most exquisite pain, especially nocturnal; then a
Coach-keeping Apothecary takes him to task, and with Pill and Diet continued
for a month or six weeks, removes all but the shin-pain, where I should have
told you, a Node was risen. After this, the Coach-keeper delivers the Patient
up into the hands of the fore mentioned Dottissimo and Expertissimo medico
delli incurabili, who leads him a dance of Mercury. What new steps and Coupees
the Doctor made in this Courant laverole, I have already given you a Breviate.
Nothing remains, but to acquaint you with the intended burden of the Song, and
that was by raising a Salivation, to cast out the Beelz-bub. Know therefore,
that the Mercury did not come out at his Bung-hole, for he seldom had more than
one natural Stool, as they call it, and some days had none; neither did the
Patient salivate. If you enquire then, what became of the Mercury, the Doctor
tells you, it made its exit per poros cutis; this is quasi vero indeed. The
truth is, he did not salivate a salivable Lympha, as most do, but instead
thereof he he voided a pint, and a pint and half a day of coagulated or c^outed
blood, and sometimes long stinking ragged ropes of sincere Blood; but as I said
before, no Lymph, either thin, slymy, or ropy, so that a Gallon and half, or
two Gallons of Blood was forced out of his Throat, and his Jaws. The Surgeon
who understood the affair much better, and in my opinion may deservedly be
ranked among the most expert and knowing of this a^e steps in between, and very
modestly offers himself a Mediator between the Doctor and Patient, and by
undeniable arguments reduces the Doctor to reason, and thereby to a Truce; of
which the chief Article was, that for the space of a month or six weeks he
would desist all acts of hostility, and for that time leave off his Mercurial
Bombs. In the Interim, the Sufferer was to gather his forces out of a
nourishing Diet, and then by mutual agreement the War was to commence again;
But so it happened, that I was consulted before the expiration of the term
limited, and upon a full rehearsal of all transactions, I found that the
Coac-hkeeper had pusht on the point so far, that here was no Salivation
necessary; which had it been continued ad infinitum, could never have scaled or
scraped the Shinbone, and therefore a Caustic was agreed to be applied, to
arrive to the intention just before mentioned, and a Compound Sarsa Drink
prescribed to be mixed with equal parts of boiled Milk, to drink thrice a day,
Horis Medicis. Brevity obliges me, not to tell you, how this Salivation, (had
it been requisite) was to have been managed with less, than the twentieth part
of Dulcis. This is not all, here is a sceleton indeed survived the Mercurial
Wars, and I must allow, that so great an impression and weakness is left upon
his Bowels, that their tone and strength will not be recovered, until the
Resurrection. By this advice I am almost assured, I have Clenched the Nail on
the other side. But the quantity of the Mercury given in a Venereal case, bears
no proportion to those vast Doses of Iesuits-Powder, our Excellentissimo gives
in continual Fevers, or numerous drops of Laudanum Opianum Liquidum in those,
and most other Distempers.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Bold and Fatal Practices of the Conclave.
1. UPon those, that lay so weighty a stress on their Opiniator Methods, ought
to be imposed a Voyage to Russia, there to exercise their Galenicisms upon the
Boyars, and others of their next subordinate quality, who receive Physic from
the hands of their Medico's upon no other condition or terms, than if the
Pills, Potions, Powders, and Bleedings, have not the pretended success, those
that advised them, are to justify the rationality and experience of them upon
their own Bodies, in a double proportion: As thus; a Noble Patient having by
three or four Bleedings received a palpable prejudice, or possibly his untimely
dispatches to the other World, the advising Physician for a punishment of his
unwarrantable and unskilful rashness, is to be blooded six or eight times; or
if by a plenary Purge he should happen to eradicate the Disease and abounding
humors, together with the Life and Soul of the Patient, the Physician is
obliged to swallow down double the quantity of the Purge, which if he survives,
he expiates his crime, and justifies his practice at the cost of his own Body.
I hope that you believe, that those Physicians, upon return to their own
Country, will appear well seasoned with caution, mature deliberation, and
conscience, much different from those, whose Memoires I have so lately
presented you.

2. Had this Justice of Russia in any wise awed a Physician of the Conclave, he
would with much more care and caution have balanced the force of his Purge,
with the strength of the Patient. A wealthy Merchant on P. H. unto whom he had
prescribed Senna, Agaric, rad. Asari, Sir. Ros. Sol de Spin. Cern. etc. In a
quadruple dose, to what I formerly did use to ordain for him, and whom I had
twice recovered out of the hands of three of his Elder Physic Brethren, beyond
the purport of their Prognostics, or expectation of his Visiters. So it was,
that the Cathartick fore-hinted operated by Vomit, and Stool, beyond the number
of a hundred, and being no longer able to sustain the combat, sitting on the
Bed-pan, yields his Ghost to him that gave it. Upon my return from the Country,
where the concern of my own health had detained me a considerable time, I
expostulated the matter with the Apothecary (that in my absence had preferred
the Physician to this employ) why he had not shown my Bills, prescribed in a
former fit of Sickness, to his Excellency, whence he might have taken just
measures of the Idiosincrasia, and strength of the Sick person? He readily told
me, he had so done, but the Doctor took little notice of them, replying by a
particular Method he had done greater feats in Agues, than this seemed to
require. However the case being irrevocable, it was desired, few words might be
made of it, and therefore as you see, I have not made many. But did the public
good so much influence any honest judicious Physician, as to become an
Observator of such Methodists, in the space of a year he might exeeed a Volume
larger than the Septuagints; but then for that term it is necessary he should
have a Sauve guard, to save his brains from being knocked out.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Description of the true Method of Physic, whereby a Physician
is distinguished from a Quack.
1. BY matter of fact it is made appear, what great deeds are pretended by
Method; Next let us put to the scrutiny, what wonderful thing this is, and what
may be expected from it. The Method of Physic is a rational order of Remedies
to be applied to the body of man, to cure Internal and External Diseases; which
consists, first in the knowledge of the Distemper, and cause thereof, the
Election or Choice of proper sufficient Remedies, and then reasoning within
himself, which Remedy ought to be applied first, when, and how, which Second,
and Third, etc. How long each is to be continued, and when the First, Second,
or Third is to be changed. So that here you see the Method of Physic implies
naturally two particulars; First, the knowing of the Distemper and Cause;
Secondly, adequate Remedies, that shall remove those Distempers, and their
Causes. Hence are made these deductions. 1st. That Distempers and Remedies are
Relata, in reference to the Method of Physic, the Disease being the Relatum,
and the Remedy its Correlatum. 2ly. Since in Logic it is a trite axiom, that
Relata do mutually constitute and abolish each other ( Relata sese mutuo ponunt
and tollunt) there can be no Method of Physic, where at the same time there is
not a Disease, and a proper adequate Remedy, to cure that Disease; and
therefore in respect of the Methodus are inseparable. 3dly. There is necessary
(according to what my description of Methodaus does express) a Ratiocination in
the Physician within himself, the result whereof makes a practical Indication,
or conclusion: Thus, This Distemper is hot, therefore the Remedy must be
cooling; it is caused by a Plethory, therefore Bleeding is the Remedy; or a
Cacochymy, therefore purging is to be advised. So that the reasoning part is
nothing else, but the apprehending rightly the nature of the Disease, and
collecting thence, what Remedy it naturally does point at, show, or indicate;
and therefore the Disease, Cause, urgent Symptoms, and strength of the Patient,
are properly called Indicancia, or pointers at Remedies; the Remedies pointed
at are termed Indicata; and the collecting, concluding, or summing them both up
is named the Indication. 4ly. As then the Methodus Medendi does imply the
knowledge of all Diseases, Causes, Symptoms, and what parts they are inherent
in, and likewise the knowledge and experience of all Remedies, so it does
consequently comprehend the sum, and substance, or total of the whole Art of
Physic, and is the end and the ultimate point, whereto all the parts of
Physic do tend, and therein concenter; so that only he, that is Master and
Doctor in the Method of Physic, does alone deserve the Name and Title of a
Real Physician; all others that pretend to Physic, being Empiricks, Quacks, or
Mountebanks.

. 2. Having briefly and generally thus described the true measure of
distinguishing real from pretended Physicians, let us also descend to some
Particular. I am not only of opinion, but possibly certain, that
notwithstanding all the delusions of Anatomy, great Scholarship, wonderful
parts, Vaunting and Boasting, the seat and causes of most Diseases are unknown
and mistaken by the Commonalty of Physicians, as I shall make evident in
another place of this Treatise. Wherefore those, which I have Entitled
Methodists, are no other than, Pseudo-methodici, as neither understanding
Diseases nor Remedies, and consequently neither the Indicantia, Indicata, nor
Indication.

CHAP. VIII.
Of False Methods, and Methodists.
1. THey are those False Methodists, who boast, that with Opium, and Jesuits
Powder, they can cure all Diseases, though instead thereof they either Palliate
for a time, or too often send their Patients to their Ancestors. Neither are they
advanced to much higher form, that imagine ordinary Dispensatories are
sufficiently stocked with Medicines adequate to the Cure of all Diseases,
whereas they contain few others, than such as may serve for Vehicles for
greater Medicines, or are only virtuated to remove slight superficial
Distempers. Whence I may justly conclude, among a hundred Physicians you shall
find Ninery five Learned Mountebanks, and possibly five Real Physicians; which
confirms that distinction to be truly Logical, that there are two sorts of
Mountebanks, the Learned, (though God knows, too many of them are very
defective even in the School-Discipline) and the other Illiterated, who make
their show on their Banks or Stages they mount (whence issues their Name) or on
the Corners of Streets on Posts, obtruding a thousand Falsities to the Vulgar,
to defraud them; whereas the Learned Quacks appear on their Anatomical Theater,
or Coaches, and privately in the Patients Houses Quack their Abilities, that
the Distempers they find the sufferer is afflicted with, they have frequently
met with in such and such, and do not question to cure him as well as others;
though probably never saw the like before, and do as little perform their
Promise in recovering him, as the others they hinted. Moreover, if one of these
Learned Empiricks shall with a lump of Money be dismissed, leaving him to another
of the same Association, who shall be a most confident undertaker also, and at
the same time blame and cast dirt on his predecessor (a Brotherly kindness)
picking the Patients Pocket dexterously, and to prevent a third shall not be
called upon, to succeed him, from whom he is conscious to be served, as he did
the other, puts all to the push, by either Killing or Curing. Now pray what is
all this, but down right Mountebanking in a Learned way? Is their any of them,
who does not pretend, either a secret in his Method, or in the Remedies? which
I have already Illustrated; is Nonsense* for there is no Method without
Remedies, nor proper Remedies without Method. It is no other than
Mountebanking, to advise Syrup of Steel to all Chronical Patients, and soput
their whole stress upon one Medicine, making that his Panacaea, fac totum,
Panchreston, and universal Remedy: what is become of Method here, whence a
Practitioner is styled Medicus Rationalis, in opposition to an Empirick, that
relies wholly upon Experiments, and Secrets, whence sometimes he cures, but
very often kills, and that for applying his Remedies without Reason or Method.

. 2. The courses and Remedies used by most of the Conclave of Physicians of P.
are chiefly these. 1. In acute Distempers, the Jesuits Bark, and Opium. 2. In
Chronical Diseases, either the Milk Diet. 3. Or the Steal Course, or Purging
Mineral, and Mineral Steel Waters. 4. Or Bath Waters. As for Purging,
Glystering, Blistering, and Bleeding, they are fortuitously directed according
to Mr. Doctors Capritio. 5. The Cordial course; to this Classis belongs the
Spirit of Hartshorn, and the Spirit of Piss succinated. It is confessed, they
do somewhat exceed les Medecins de trois S. (son, seign and sena.) in their
number of courses, but not a jot in their Methods. Now for Physicians who
pretend to be Medici legales dogmatici, rationales, and Very Methodici, to tie
their Hands and Pen to only five Spurious Remedies, because they are applied by
them without Method, as you shall read hereafter, is as much Mountebanking in
their Coaches, as the vending Orvietan on a Stage.

CHAP. IX.
Of two sorts of Mountebanks, viz. The Anatomical Theatremounter, and the Bank
mounter; together with the Tricks of the former.
WEre it put to debate, which of these two sorts of Sharlatans, viz. The
Anatomical Theatre-mounter, or the Orvietan Bank-mounter, is the greater
Impostor, would beyond all peradventure be determined by men of Brains, in
favor of the latter, who openly confesses, what he is; a Vagabond, that
rambles from one Town or Country to another, to divert the People by making
Shows, and Sell Ovietan for six Pence the Tin-Box; if you believe you have
over-bought your self, think the Rary-Show is almost worth it, and so the
fraud is not much: But on the other hand, the Anatomical-Quack, by false
suggestion of great Learning, long Experience, and what not, secretly and
methodically poisons your Body, and cuts your Purse, with a greater confidence
than any Pick-Pocket, because he is warranted by Laws, and Privileges of the
Conclave. I mean the Chamber of Phys. of Par.
Therefore there is no sort of men I look upon with greater contempt, than many
Physick-Doctors, and do not only abandon such sort of acquaintance for their
male practice, but other sordid Actions; for certainly if you look for Avarice,
Envy, Malice, Pride, Ignorance, Slandering, Backbiting, Flattery, Lying, and
Defrauding, you may find it in a Conclave Physician; Hypocrisy is an
instrument he manages with incomparable dexterity, the Church-door shall no
sonner be opened, but Ecce Mr. Doctor, sitting in the most visible Seat, Grave,
Deaf, Dumb, and immovable, as if an Apoplexy of Devotion had seized him, out
of which his Apothecary is to raise him, by knocking at half Sermon at his
Pew-door, to fetch him away post to a dying Patient; by which means he draws
the Eyes of the whole Congregation after him; but instead of going to the
pretended House of Visitation, they both drop into a Cabaret, there to pass the
fatigue of a Forenoon Sunday. This knack of confederacy is to be repeated
several Dominical days, until it has made an impression of the People, that he
is a man of importance, and of great Physick-business.

Thus I remember two Physicians at Paris, grew famous; the one being called Le
Sier de Tattle, had by frequenting the Convents of all Sects, made a vast
inroad into the good opinion of the Zealots, and by that means halled in Shoals
of Patients, whereof three fourths within his forty years practice are not to
be spoken with on this side the Moon. The other was the Sieur Phlegmatique,
known better to most men by that Name than any other; In his younger years the
du^ness of his Apprehension, the imperfection of his Memory, and the natural
sluggardness of his Mind, (all contributing to a very slender proficiency in
his Latin Grammar) made a Diagnostick to his Parents, that he was gifted with
too little Sense and Eloquence for a Lawyer, too shallow a Memory for a
Preacher, and therefore what should they make of him but a Physician, arguing
that his heavy dullness would grow up into Gravity, his minute Apprehension
would be over-sufficient to understand a Disease, and his curtailed Memory
would serve well enough to remember a Medicine. Into a Doctor by length of
standing he was dubbed, and now to force a Trade of Pulse feeling and
Piss-gazing, he lays his Plot in the Church, where his constant appearance with
a broad-brim'd Hat, the little Band, an austere Gravity, and dull Countenance,
soon gained him the Title of an Honest Conscientious knowing Physician, which
Character happily commends him to an Hospital, the reputation whereof, how
undeservedly soever, brings any man into vogue, as it did also him, whom
succession of time at least creates Father of the Family of Physicians, still
endeavoring to mimick the part of an Honest Conscientious man, and how far in
that he acted the Hypocrite, this subsequent narrative of his uncharitableness
will attest, viz. a poor woman accosting him with an Urinal of her sick
Husbands water, and lest that should puzzle him, does express particularly all
the grievances, complaints, and symptoms of the poor labourer, that in his
condition was obliged to receive Alms from the Parish, being indeed incapable
of getting his Bread by his Sickness. The Doctor having given the round thoss
to the Urinal, instead of the courteous smile due to the Rich for their Fees,
frowns on the poor Creature, and asks her, Whether her Husband had forty Pound
to spend on a Physician? she answers, Her Husband was a very poor man; to this
the Doctor replys, Woman what do you come to me for then? However she had a
Groat, which was all she had left in the world, and offered it to the Doctor
for casting the water which he had the Conscience to accept.

After so plain and full demonstration of the insufficient Education,
Ignorance, and perverse means of Conclave Physicians, who can blame the
Babylonians for banishing them out of their City, as you may read, Heredot.
lib. 1. and Bodinus de republ. p. 573. gives an account, that Rome for the
space of six hundred years kept out all Physicians, which caused her to
flourish in numbers of Healthy Subjects, more than ever she did since their
admission. How little esteem the Romans had for them Quintilian tells you, lib.
2. c. 2. for they would not grant them the privilege of building their Temple
dedicated to Aesculapius within the City, but assigned them a mean place out of
the Town, whither Slaves used to resort, Sueton. in Nerone. and Seneca. 3. de
benef. cap. 24. Neither is it to be doubted, if all other Countries imitated
Rome in the banishing Physicians, as is frequently practiced in Muscovy, they
would enjoy the fruits of Health by the natural dictates of their reason, and
experience of familiar remedies, and Diet, to a higher degree, than now they
do, in being imposed upon by Amethodici (as Galen terms them, and Pseudomedici;
as Montaigne in his Essays well observes fol. 780. Of a Sick man being asked
by his Physician, what operation he found from the Medicines he had given him,
he answered, He Sweated Violently. That is well, quoth the Physician: At
another time he asks him again, how he had done since? he said, He had felt an
extreme Coldness, and a great shaking: That is well, says the Physician. The
third time? he asks him again, How he did, he answers, I find my self to
swell and ready to burst, as if I had the Dropsy; That is well again, cries
the Physician. Upon this it happened, one of his Domestics came to inquire of
him, how he did: Indeed my Friend (says he) by being well I die. This recital
does resemble another, that happened in the next Climate, where an Apothecary
conducting a Dropsical Patient to a Physician, he advises to empty him. The
Apothecary having given him a Dose of Ialap, and not finding the Dropsicalls
Belly lessened, returns to the Physician, who directs to empty him more, which
he did; but soon after the Doctor meeting the Apothecary, asks how his Patient
did; the other told him, He was dead, then says the Doctor, You have emtied
him too much.

This trite Aporism ( viz. that there is nothing so hurtful or Poisonous, be it
Spider or Toad, but has its use) cannot be universal, unless it may comprehend
the use of pretended Anatomical Physicians, which indeed is great and necessary
in a populous Country, where neither Famine, Pestilence, or War have had any
footing for many years. In this Case men would devour one another, the place
not being extensive enough to feed all, were it not, that Physicians by their
male practice prevented the Plethory of Inhabitants. Moreover, they help off
with a great quantity of the Manufacture of the Nation, as Mourning-Cloath,
Sack and Claret, Crape, Hannen, Drugs and a hundred Commodities more; and
employ thousands of hands, as Coffin and Grave-makers, Clerk, Sexton, Tailors,
Shoo-makers, and what not.

To put a conclusion to this subject, I shall only add; three fourth parts of
the World spin the thread of their Lives to a greater length, without the help
of these imposing Physicians, merely by observation of Remedies their Country
affords, and applying them according to their natural sense, therein exceeding
all other European pretenders, the proof whereof India manifestly gives, in
their not only Curing themselves to a Miracle, but also others, that came out
of Europe, who often when Physicians have left off, are recovered by the Indians
in a moment. The (...) Passion being there an Epidemick Disease, but much
fiercer, and infinitely more painful, than what it is here, when a Patient has
been Clyster'd, and Drenched by a Batavia Physician for several days to no
purpose, his last refuge is to some Skilful Indian, who makes no more ado, but
scrapes some of the Pitch of the Ceco-nut in water, boils it an hour or two,
which is no sooner swallowed by the Miscreant, but his pains are removed, as if
with a Charm, and taking it once or twice more, Cures him Infallibly,

So likewise in a continual Fevour, where Bleeding, Clystering, and Juleping
have been ineffectual, the scorched Patient sends for an Indian, who by
besmearing him with a peculiar Ointment, (made of some of their Juices, and a
sort of fat Clay) puts him immediately into a great Sweat, which is no sooner
off, but the man feels himself perfectly well. By this, and many other
instances, I would press my former argument over again, that without good
effectual Remedies, Method signifies not a straw. And what concerns their five
Courses, mentioned fol. 105. I dare undertake in a weeks time, to inform the
most Illiterate capacity, having only a memory equal to the Sieur Phlegmatic,
how to manage those five Courses with a better method, and far greater
success, than any of these Anatomical Pretenders ever were fortuned with. And
since the faculty, as it is used, savours so much of Cheats, Frauds, and Chance
slaughters, I can easily make it appear, that it is possible, to comprehend as
many plain and necessary Instructions, Rules, and Remedies in one single Sheet,
that by observing of them, any man without other advice may in most cases Cure
himself, with far greater safety, speed, and success, then the best of the
pretenders to Anatomy could ever yet challenge, or lay claim unto; by which
means a man would live out his determinate time, which otherwise by Mal^
Practice is dockt, and interrupted. The Trial of this last proposal is feasible
by assigning two Towns (suppose in the Hundreds of Essex,) that shall lie
parallel in respect of unhealthy Air, and Diseases; now if the Town following
the Rules and Instructions set down in the Sheet forementioned, shall by three
fourths out live the other, that shall make use of pretended Physicians, as
beyond all dispute they will, then it must necessarily appear a clear case.

CHAP. X.
Containing the chief Subject of this Treatise.
HAving taken the Reader aside for mine and his diversion into a by-path, I am
now to reconduct him to the Style, where we made our deviation; and he is no
sooner passed over there, but is arrived into this rugged Field, where he
immediately finds exposed to his view the Method, and Remedies ranged in
Battalia, that are to Encounter the new Disease of the Sieur, etc. Which in
plain Physical terms is to be called a Semitertian, as most of those Epidemic
Diseases were, which at that time reigned. Since that, they have given the
foresaid Distemper, and all like to it, the name of a Remitting Feavor, whose
Paroxysins or Fits do only come to a Remission, and not an intermission.

A. 21.. Aq. hord. cum. Rad. Scorzon. iss glycyrrh. ss coct. lbii colatur. add
vini claret. opt. lbss Aq. cinam. hord. iiii, spir. Sulphur. i. M. capiat in
siti vi.

Phl. A pretty sort of Posset; here is mealy, four, sweet, wine, water, and
Barley Broth. A compost I asure you not common, for I do not find it in Le
Cuisinier Francois.

On the two and twentieth Phlebotomy was celebrated on his right Arm to Nine or
Ten Ounces.

A. 23.. Glycyrrh. i. Rad. Gentian. ii. Centaur. min. M. ss. S^m. cardai. j.
passul. i. corticis Peruviani i. coq. in aq. hordei stiiss. ad lbii. Colaturae
capiat iiij. quarta quaque hora per biduum.

Phl. Morb.. 2. Here I preceive two Iacks joined, the one turning the Spit one
way, the other another. The latter is to take a lease of the Patients Life, and
therefore by all means let the Jesuits Bark he used, or else it is no bargain.
Observe the two last words of their ordonnance, per biduum, and for no longer,
otherwise there will be loss of Fees; however so it happened, that the Sufferer
had no sooner taken it, but grew worse (especially continuing it for his
ordinary Drink) and therefore the Doctors are Summoned to meet next day, where
Morb. gets his Disciple in to make a Party for the Jesuit, in opposition to
Phl. his Posset.

A. 24.. Persistat in usu reliquorum ut antea viz. Decoct: Amar. etc. (that is
with the cortex Per.)

Phl. Foet. Morb.. 3. Two to one is odds, and therefore the poor old Father of
the Family must Submit to the pleasure of his Sons; which is hard, considering
how much a good strenghthning nourishing Cordial Posset is to be valued before
a bitter Hellish Jesuitical Drink, which now begins to threaten Damnation to
the Patient, who is surprised of a sudden with a difficulty of breathing, and
for that reason there must be another convention of these three Physic
Statesmen at night.

A. 24.. Decoct. Pect. lbiii. Sine Hyssop. and Scabios. cum addit. Spir.
Sulphur i. Sir. viol. iij. M. F. Apoz. bibat in siti.

Phl. Foet. Morb.. 4. Isop was too hot, and therefore is left out, but why
Scabios a temperate and pectoral Al^xiph^rm is omitted, I cannot unriddle. But
pray tell me, do you think three pints of Pectoral decoction with those little
and Caetera's is worth three Guineys?

A. 25. Repetatur Apoz. Amar. ut prius praescript.

Phl. Foet. Morb.. 5. This Repetatur at three Guineys more is somewhat dearer
than Neck-Beef. And here I find the Dutch Proverb true, He that is Shipped with
the Devil, most go over with him. If once you begin to freight your Patient
with Jesuits Bark, you must Load him with the same cargo; for there is no
breaking Bulk, either he Sinks, or Swims, and arrives to a Port, or goes to
the bottom.

A 26.. Aq. Ceras. nigr. lujul. ^ iiij. Cinam. hord. i perl. prt. iss. Sacchar,
cand. alb. Q. S. F. Iul. Capiat cochl. iij. vel iiij. in lang.

. 6. What Is here? No body signs the Bill! Despair, Despair, all is like to be
lost. The Vessel is overloaden with Bark, and the mischief is, there is no
opening the hatches by a Purge, to let out the Jesuit. O la madonna de'l tempio
d' Apolline, miserere tuorum Pauperum Medicorum! O Sant' Aesculapio, Santo
Podalirio miserere filiorum artis! The return of the Saints answer to the
Supplicants was only; Alla forca, Alla forca.

A. 27.. Aq. Ceras. nigr. cochl. 4. Epidem. cochl. iiss. capiat cum lapide
indico quarta quaque hora.

. 7. Ha, ha! Farewell Method. The Jesuit is deceitful, he Saves one, and Damns a
hundred. We will turn Empiricks, rather than lose Reputation; if the
West Indies cannot afford us a Remedy, we will for the East, and fetch the
Goa-Stone, and though we know not what it is, or what it will do, we have heard
wonders of it. Flectere si n^qu^o Superos, Acheronta movebo. He can but die,
and therefore we may take the opportunity of trying Experiments, it will save
us a trouble another time. Who can question us? We have the Supreme Authority
of Physic, all other Doctors are our Vassals, who dare not open their mouths;
if they should, we would soon have them into our Physic Inquisition.

A, 27. at night.

. Persistat in usu Iulapij nuper praescript,

Every word in this Prescription costs the Patient half a Guiney, but it is no
great matter, he will not want money whither he is going.

A. 28.. Sir. limon. violar a ii. ol. lini per express. iij. Sacchari alb. Q.
S. M. F. Linctus pro usu.

In omni haust, cerevis. and jusc. Capiat spir. Salis armoniaci loco Spir.
Sulphur.

. Decoct, Carminat, ij, Elect. lenit, i Sacchar. rubr. iij. M. F. Enema add
sal gem m, ss, Capiat statim. Capiat saepius Spir. c. c. in cochl. Aq. Brion.
comp.

Phl. Foet. Morb. Mus.. 8. Iubile, fresh hopes, our Reputation will be saved,
let it go how it will with the Patient; here is a 4th. man come in, a just
number of ^spillones to carry him to his Grave; let each bear the burden of a
Leg or an Arm, and the weight will be in aequilibrio upon our Shoulders. Sa,
Sa, Messieurs allons, Courage, let us set our hands to the Bill, and pass these
three Ordonnances; and let the Senior of us give satisfaction to the Lady:
Madam, the great hopes we gave you three days since, would ere now have had the
happy effect of your Husbands recovery, had the indulgence of his Nurss in
giving him that draught of small beer with a Toast in it been forborne, and the
putting on a clean Nightcap; which together with the keeping his hands out of
Bed, have brought so great a mischief upon him, by stopping all the pores of
his body, that it is not in the power of our Art to make him sweat, spit, make
water, or go to Stool, such are the dangerous effects of taking cold, and in
this case not retrivable. It is a great satisfaction to me, (and the same I
hope it is to you) to see three of the greatest Physicians of France met here,
and concurring with me in the opinion of this Distemper, Method, and Remedies,
that have been applied. We have left no Stone unturned, had he been my nearest
Relation, more could not have been done. But the days of Man are numbered, and
the appointed time no Man can pass. The public will have a great loss, and in
that I bear a share, which makes me truly condole with you, whose loss is
infinitely greater, of so dear and tender a Husband. But let this be your
comfort, he is going to a place of Rest and Happiness; and therefore we must
submit to Providence. Madam, if at any time I can serve your Ladyship, either
by day, or by night, or any of your Family, I will come, go, or run. The Lady
being corroborated with this strong Cordial of words, received the sad message,
with suitable moderation, and in Testimony of the good sentiment she had of
them, desired they would be pleased to continue their attendance, to see the
event. With all their hearts you may be assured, though it had lasted seven and
seven years. Was not this a cleaver one? I confess I have not in my life time
known a Storm of deserved reproach fended off with greater dexterity of words,
which proceeding from such Gravities, might easily influence the world to
believe, all things had been very well done.

A. 29.. Mass. Pil. e duobus Dr. i aq. bry^n. comp. i. F. Dissolutio, and
capiat Statim. cum spir. Salis armon. volat. gut. v.

. Diasinapios, iss. aq. Hyssopi viij. Spir. Sulphur. Dr. j. M. F. Gargarism.
pro usu.

Phl. Foet. Morb. Mus.. 9. Some hours after the Sufferer had swallowed down
this Violent Purgative, not being able longer to resist the efforts of the
Distemper, and the Medicines, submits and departs, though not quietly, being
perfectly strangled in his Throat, and leaving the Pills in his Belly, for a
Legacy to the Drs. Quantum mutatus ab illo. So strong and lusty a man reduced
to dust and ashes! The Names subscribed to these foregoing Recipe's, are the
quondam Sieur Phleg. the Docteur Foetus, Doctuer Morbilli, and Monsieur le
Docteur Musculus: All good men and true; so help them God.

CHAP. XI.
Of Semitertians, scarce under-stood by Conclave Physicians
RAillerie a part, let us seriously examine and consider the whole state of
this Affair; Ludere de corio humano, being no trival matter. The true and only
Test of the practice of Physic is the Methodus Medendi, according to whose
Canons and Precepts the Legality of prescriptions is best determined. That
which is first and chiefly required by this Part of Medicine, is the true
knowledge, and right distinguishing of the Disease; so that the calling a
Distemper by the Name of a New Disease is Empirical, and not becoming the
Learning of a Doctor of Physic, who styles himself Rationalis and Dogmaticus.
The term of a Remitting Fever, though it expresses some small Idea of this, and
the like Distempers, yet not being found among the Records of Hippocrates,
Trallianus, Actuarius, Galen, Cornelius Celsus, Avicen, and the rest of those
Ancient Physicians, who in knowledge and distinction of Diseases exceeded us
cent per cent, it is either their ignorance of Authors, or sloathful
observation of its Symptoms, that wrested this Name from them. We must
therefore search for another Nomenclature among those Ancients, who of all
Diseases were the most knowing in the whole Theory of Fevers, their Causes
only excepted, wherein they were extremely mistaken. Now observing, that this
Distemper commenced with a Lassitude, a Coldness, Shivering, and Shaking,
ensued by a scorching Heat, insatiable Drought; and Sweats at the close of the
Paroxysm, with an abatement of heat, that still continued vigorous enough, to
denote there was a continual putrid Feavor, which the next day toward the
Afternoon was attended with another Paroxysm. In the night toward Morning, and
the third day another Paroxysm returned, which does manifestly detect this was
a Semitertiana, being a continual Fevor complicated with an intermittent,
either double, or single. Thus you are also to remark, there is a Semiquartana,
though very rarely hapening, being a Febris Synocha complicated with an
intermittent quartane, single or double. I know very well, that Celsus by an
Hemitritaeus, meant a Tertian protracted in its Fits to half as much longer
then the usual length, without coming to an intermission, but only to a
remission: And Galen expresses it a continual quotidian, complicated with an
intermittent Tertian, proposing that only as an instance of a complication of a
continual with an intermittent Fevor^; though by that likewise you are to
apprehend, that a complication of a continent Fevor with an intermittent
Tertian is also to be called an hemitritaeus, the Etymology of the Word being
as applicable to this as to the other. This is that sort of Fevor, which some
ignorants call a Fevor, that will tend into an intermittent, wherein the
Iesuits-bark has been given with success, namely at the time when the continent
Fevor was in its declination, and at that season has done no great mischief to
the continent Fevor being going off, and likewise has prevented or stopped the
paroxysms of the Intermittent. In such a case the Doctor of contraries might
luckily enough venture upon a Lease of his Patients Life, for many have been in
this manner Cured, if you call it Curing.

. 2. He that presumes to impose a Name upon a thing, is chiefly to aim, that it
may thereby be distinguished from all others; but this caution is neglected in
denominating the forecited Distemper, a Remitting Fevor, which is more
application to a Paracmastick continent, or a continual Tertian double or
single* in which remissions and exacerbations may be perceived every day, or
every other day. Likewise take this observation with you, that about the same
time a Fevor reigned, that occasioned the Patient to be Hot and Cold, or
sometimes a little Chil, and immediately after Hot, then Cold again, presently
Hot again, and so he had several Fits in a day; this Distemper was also by them
called a remitting Fevor, though erroneously, for it was a Febris Epiala. vid.
Galen, 2. de Diff. Febr. c. 6.

CHAP. XII.
Proving, that the Jesuits Powder never yet Cured any Remitting Fevor.
WHereas the distinction of these Epidemick Fevors is of so great moment, that
upon hit or mis thereof, the Physician either Kills or Cures; I will, not of
purpose of serving an ungrateful and most perverse sort of men (such the
profession generally Fosters) but their Patients, take the Pains of
illustrating this matter. That many Noblemen, and hundreds of others, within
these few years, being seized with this popular FEVOR, and managed with the
Jesuits Powder, have died, or more properly been Man-slaughter'd by their
Physicians, needs no confirmation, which error in practice sourceth from this
Argumentation: Because the Jesuits Powder has Cured such and such, as D. N. A.
S. P. and a hundred more of a Remitting Fevor (ignorantly by them so termed,)
which is continual, therefore the same Remedy must be proper in all continual
burning, or Malignant Fevors, whereby they have Killed thousands, and never yet
Cured any one man, excepting possibly three or four among a million, whose
robust natures neither Disease nor Remedy could destroy.

. 2. The error then lies in the salsity of the antecedent proposition, in
regard the Jesuits Bark never yet Cured any Remitting Fevor, qua talis, that is
quatenus continua, but quatenus intermittent, by stoping its Paroxysms, leaving
the continual Putrid Fevor unto which it was complicated, either lurking under
the species of a febris lenta, or of a milder sort of continual Putried Fevor;
or 3dly. of a Burning Fevor or Causos, or 4ly. of a Malignant Fevor.

. 3. Of these, instances shall be particularly produced, viz. Of the first, in
the Remitting Fevor of an Eschevin of Paris the Sieur P. W. whose Paroxysms
being stopped by the Bark of Peru; not withstanding a febris lenta was left,
which detained him under a great weakness and languishing, not without
immoderate Thirst, want of Appetite, and a preternatural heat though not
pungent; a while after the Tertian returns, and it was judged necessary by the
Physicians, he should take the Bitter Drink purging, and that to be repeated
once or twice, and upon that the Jesuit should enter him in the form of a black
lump, every fourth hour, and this Bolus without a Superbibendo to be continued
some considerable time after the Fits were dammed up. But still the febris
lenta persevering, though invisible to some of them. Another Doctor must be
called in, to open the Windows, draw the Curtains, and help him out of Bed to
give him Air to Breathe; but this show lasted not many hours, before they were
posting him to Bed with all speed, so the opportunity was lost in taking of a
Lease. Then the old Lesson of Decoctum amarum cum sena, sine sena, and
aliquando cum additione salium, must be conned over again, and so to and fro,
backwards and forwards; Monsieur Patient at the end of many Months was at last
recoverd, the Fits being close bung'd up, the febris lenta worn off, and he by
many Pounds lighter in Body and Purse.

. 4. The Fevor of Monseigneur GO. makes proof of the second particular, upon
whom the Chinchina Powder, alias, Jesuits Bark given with a liberal hand, had
the influence to Cloister up his Fits so, that he was capable to walk up and
down his Chamber six or seven days, the strength and vigor of his Youth
bearing the commencement of the mild putrid continual Fevor, that was left,
with almost a countenance of one, that is in a state of reconvalescence, which
for that time beguiled an Anatomical Doctor of the glory he thought his due for
so speedy a Cure upon a person of his high Birth and Quality. But the Fevor
advancing in its increment, soon reduced this young Nobleman to his
Decumbiture, to whom the Jesuit being again recommended from joint advices of
the Anatomical and other Doctors, by rendering this continual Fevor Malignant,
(as it never fails to do otherwise*) soon machinates the death of this great
man, whose life, as it would one day have answered the hopes the World had of
his great endowments, so must certainly have prevented a link of certain fatal
and Tragical events ensuing a few years after, which probably for their
unpracticableness in that Kingdom, Tradition will hand to the next Ages.

. 5. A President relating to the third instance, we have in the Remitting Fevor
of Monseigneur SO. of most illustrious extraction, whose life expressed a true
Portrait of the Valor of the Macedonian, and Prudence of Augustus in Martial
Affairs, no less at Sea than at Land. By as much as the Chinchina abated the
Paroxysms of his Tertian, in an equal scantling it augmented his continual
Fevor, into a burning, and at last by its frequent exhibition Jesuited him out
of his Being.

. 6. The Pewt. near the Cathedral in the West of Paris, having swallowed down
Chinchina Pills and Bolusses, in the usual dose and method of quarta quavis
h^ra, at the instance of his next Physician; found his remissions and
exacerbations converted into a constant tenor of violent heart, and other
Symptoms, that express a Fevor Malignant, and therefore an Anatomical Doctor
was to be in conjunction with the other: But these two Saturnine Planets being
seated in the sixth House, pointing directly toward the eighth ( Domus Mortis)
could not do otherwise, than advise the Jesuits Powder to be given in the
quantity of a Dram, every two hours, which in 24. amounts to twelve Drams, or
an Ounce and half, and in six days to nine Ounces, so that it may be presumed
throughout the course a whole Pound was ram'd down, which about the eighth or
ninth day fulfilled the prediction. It would very well have countervailed the
pains, to have opened his Body, and scooped out the Jesuits Powder, which at a
Crown an Ounce, comes to four Pound, and probably having been thus digested in
simo humano, might perform miracles. In fine, that the Jesuits Powder is
pernicious, and killing in all continual Fevers, if any thing smart and Putrid,
I could demonstrate by matter of Fact out of a hundred examples more, with the
same clearness the Sun appears at noon day, did I imagine those already
produced not convincing, and therefore superseding that, it is necessary we
should make a Transit to the reason of the thing, without resting satisfied,
like Empiricks, in experiment only.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Jesuits Bark, what it is, and whether Artificial or Natural.
. 1. THat none has yet given himself the trouble of inquiry further, whence
this Drug is sent us, than from Peru in the Spanish West Indies, and by whom,
but the Fathers Jesuits, whose name therefore is put upon the Parcel, is
strange, most Physicians contenting themselves with an Empirical use thereof,
without examining, what Tree or Shrub it is excoriated from, what Fruit or
Flower it bears; whether it be transmitted to us Natural, as it appears, or
Artificially prepared by imbibing it with some other bitter Juyces, or
Decoctions, specially since several pieces in the best of the Parcels differ
from one another in Color, Taste, Weight, Resin, and Grain, and much more does
one Parcel disagree with the other, some containing twenty sorts of Barks, all
by Imbibition, or Decoction resembling the same in Taste, though in several
degrees of more or less Bitterness, by which Sophistication the men of Art have
been frustrated in their Cure of Agues.

Many will have this celebrated Drug the rind of dwarf bitter Almond-like-tree,
twice a year putting forth Yellow Flowers of very unpleasant Gusto. Others will
fancy it scraps of the trunk of a Bastard-Indian-Berbery-Tree; others of an
Ash-tree. The Flowers and the Nuts are reputed Vomitive. That this Tree is kept
undiscovered by the foresaid Fathers from the Merchants, to whom they negotiate
it, is upon no other account, than to entail the Commodity upon their Society,
who make great profit by it. Whether it is only growing in the Kingdom of Peru,
and no where else, is not commonly known; but certain it is, that every year a
Cargo comes thence to Calis in the Spanish Galeons. Neither Joseph Acosta,
Linshot, nor Delaet make any mention of this Bark, that I can remember.

. 2. However I am of opinion, the foresaid Drug is Artificially prepared, and
that none of it (though the best) arrives to us in its puris naturalibus, the
Tree spoken of, or some other like it, affording nothing but the Wood, into
which the bitter Taste is immitted, by macerating it a convenient time in the
Juice of a certain Indian Plant, to which that penetrating bitterness is
peculiar. This having sufficiently insinuated into the pores of the Bark; it is
exposed to the Sun, which knits it together into a solider texture. Hence it
is, that the Bark being reduced to Powder, and steeped in any Liquor, does so
easily part with its bitterness, as being adventitious to it, and not connate
to its essential Principles.

But a further confirmation of this I could make by undeniable Arguments, had I
not determined to forbear putting more sense into my Friends of Paris, than
Nature, or their School Learning has planted into them. After all, I could
wish these Fathers had kept their Indian Bark to themselves, and sure I am,
hundreds would be on this side the Grave, whose Bones are now turned into their
first Element.

. 3. But the great thing to be inquired into, is its qualities, effects, and
virtues, and this will afford us matter enough for debate. To propose, whether
it be hot or cold, is entering into the Chicane of the Schools, to prevent
which, we had best state the question, whether does it heat or cool us
primarily and per se. The Decoction, or Infusion of the Bark does manifestly
heat any that shall take it in the state of Health; moreover all bitter things
( quatenus bitter) are hot; bitterness being occasioned by adustion, or by
igneous Particles, or igniculi congregated in a terrestrial substance; thus by
destillation being too long continued is brought over a bitter substance, being
nothing but the faeces and terrestrial part, adust, or burnt in the bottom of
the Still by a violent heat, that brings it over: But I would not have you
disprove me by tasting a red hot Iron, where those Igniculi are potently
congregated in a terrestrious body; Though if you please to burn Leather,
Bread, or almost any thing else, that contains a gross Sulphur (to which the
igniculi may adhere,) in its terrestrial part, and it will prove manifestly
bitter. Now if any thing be burned so long, until this gross Sulphur is
consumed, then you will not meet with a bitter, but a lixivial taste, as
appears when a body is burnt to ashes.

. 4. Whether the Chinchina Bark be drying or moistning, is easily resolved by
the premises; so great bitterness derived from adustion, or Empyreum, chacing
all moisture, must necessarily be advanced to the highest degree of drying per
se, as all those that have taken it, can sufficiently attest, ensuing
immediately after its admission into their Stomachs; though by allaying of
ebullitions in the first region of the body, or by precipitating of hot drying
humors, it may per accidens expel Agues, and Droughts attending them, provided
the taking thereof be not continued to too long a time; for then it will not
only dry, and shrink the body and humors, but at last reduce it into a perfect
Marcor, or total withering, wasting, and Consumption, by causing an incurable
Hectic Fevor, which in this particular exceeds all other Hecticks, in that it
impels the Patient with far greater speed into extinction. Many I could
instance about this Town, that by protracting the use of the Jesuits Powder too
long, have been thrown into Hectic Fevors and Consumptions.

. 5. My self not many weeks since was called to a Patient lying sick of an
intermittent Tertian, whom I found almost totally macerated through frequent
Doses of the Jesuits Powder, directed by a Physician of Note, who being
unwilling to appear coram, after a days delay I threw off his course, and
advised another, by which the Patient amending; upon the news thereof the
Physician of Note thrusts himself in again, and two more Physicians of his
Cabal. There being now four of us to sit in Judgment, I was to bandy with
three, whom finding very refractory out of respect to their good old Cause,
viz. the Coll. and telling them positively, I would meet them no more, I
applied my self to the Patient and Relations in these terms. Madam, You are now
in a hopeful way, I live at a great distance, there are three Physicians
besides, and you are at a great Charge, I will therefore desire to be excused
from further attendance. Upon this the Patient and all her Relations did most
earnestly importune me to continue; but the Shagrin, the Doctor of Note, by
some little indignities (by me not thought fit to be resented on the Bench of
consultation) put me in, rendered me inflexible, and so took leave. At the
expiration of three weeks, I heard she Ghosted, and then one of the Physicians
did confess, I was guided by a right sentiment, which if I would have waved,
and (what most others do,) subscribed to him, that leads the major part in
Consults by the Nose, I should have got very well by it; but it is not a
thousand Fees, that ought to prevail with any man to act against the tenures of
Honesty and Conscience, as by some it has several times appeared in
consultations, and other occasions; Haec obiter.

Those that are pleased to observe these few rules following, shall have reason
to think well of me, for preventing them falling into worse Diseases than their
present Agues, or preserving them from Consumptions, and Hectic Fevors.

1. If possible, and that your Strength and Disease will admit of it, Bleed and
Purge more than once, or Vomit, before you submit to your Physicians advice of
the Jesuits Bark: Or in case evacuations are counterindicated by too short
intervals between the Paroxysins, want of strength, or other circumstances,
exhibit proper Antifebril Medicines that upon certain experience do oppugn the
materia Febrilis, which being partly subdued, and partly spent or diminished by
a few Fits, namely, as many as nature can very well bear without manifest
danger, then probably you may choke up the remainder with good success by the
Bark. This Precept may be of use also in a Semitertian, provided that the Bark
be not given before the continual Fevor comes to a declination, and then it
ought to be seconded also with proper Antifebrils. But if you offer the Bark in
the beginning, augment, or state, you certainly kill the Patient. Let me
present you here with another observation; of late years there have been
several simple tertians, whose fits were short, and intervals long, and so
manifest, that the Pulse has beaten much slower than usual; their Urine well
digested, with a laudable white sediment. To these tertianarians, the Bark has
been advised with all the necessary premises, the Fits have been stopped, and
notwithstanding the Patients have died. What was the cause? a Malignant
continual Fevor, complicated with the intermittent; for you are to apprehend,
that a quick uneven Pulse, and a high Urine, are not necessary or
Pathognomonick Signs of a Fevor.

2. Do not throw down great Doses at once, but small, though the oftener; yet
not too often.

3. Refuse to take it above a day or two longer, than the stopping of your Fits.

4. About three weeks after your Fits have been stopped, cleanse by a Purge, and
for two days after, take a few small Doses of the Jesuit again.

5. About six Weeks after that, repeat Purging, and the next day after, take a
Dose or two of the Bark.

6. If you shall meet with a Physician, that can safely, and not over speedily
Cure you, without giving the Jesuits Powder, never meddle with the Jesuit, with
whom the less a man has to do either sick or well, it is the better.

7. At the change of the Season of the year, enter into some small Purgative,
Aperitive, or De-obstruent course; but by no manner of persuasion be misled
into a Steel course, for that will certainly prove more fatal to you, than the
Jesuit well managed. For the present I crave but your belief, these are
abstracted from experience, and matter of Fact, hereafter you shall be
satisfied with the reasoning part of them.

8. If the Jesuit will not stay with you, but runs through at the bung, it is
frequently a sign, your Body was not swept clean enough to entertain his
Worship.

9. Where the Body is fluid, the most Learned Physick-Doctors prescribe Opium,
or Laudanum Opiatum, or Liquidum, mixed with Jesuits Powder, to detain it from
leaking through; this to me seems joining a puller to, with a thruster from;
but that is Empirical, and therefore, if they design putting a stop to the
looseness, before they exhibit the Jesuit, they ought rather to remove the cause
of the Looseness, which is either Thin, Acrimonious, Stimulating Humors
Boiling, and afterward precipitated downwards; or thick Viscous Salin humors,
adhering to the tunicks of the Guts, irritating the excretive faculty: In these
Cases either gentle Purgatives, or detergents, the one, or the other, or both,
mixed with Laudanum Opiatum, or without Laudamus Opium, is most proper; but
which of them ought to be used, is to be left to the discretion of your
Physician.

10. Though this Jesuits Powder is not a Medicine nowly found, (the virtues for
stopping of quartan Agues, having been experienced above a hundred years since)
but revived by a debauched Apothecaries Apprentice of Cambridge, in the
application to all intermittent Fevors, and he in this empirical practice most
diligently imitated by our most famous Physick-Doctors, as their Aesculapius,
and first master (a hopeful tribe in the mean time, that shall leave their
Sense, reason and Dogmata, to follow a Quack or Empirick) yet I have more than
once observed it as little effectual, as a Chip in some Quartains, and
Tertians, which I have in a very short interval put a more secure and lasting
stop unto by other applications.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part Of the CONCLAVE OF Physicians, Farther discovering their
Intrigues, Frauds, and Plots, Against their PATIENTS* And their destroying the
Faculty of PHYSIC.

With an Account of some Principalls in Physic, of Greater Use than any yet
known.

By Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge, Stationer to his Royal Highness George
Prince of Denmark, at the Post House near Charing Cross, 1685.

The Conclave of PHYSICIANS: Detecting their Intrigues, Frauds and Plots
Against their Patients.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
Of the second qualities of the Jesuits Bark.
. 1. FOr the present we will supersede these preceding Rules, and proceed upon
a further inquiry into the second qualities of the Chinchina Bark, which are
chiesly controverted, viz. whether it be condensing and incrassating, or
rarefying and attenuating; detergent or emplastick; relaxing or adstringent;
deobstruent and aperitive, or obstructing and stopping. The Ducklings of the
Society of Paris have declared it, Attenuating, Detergent, De-obstruent and
Aperitive; because Bitterness (which this Drug contains in the highest degree)
is a necessary cause, source, or spring, whence these qualities and effects do
flow and derive. The implication then is, that it is not Styptick, adstringent,
condensing and incrassating. But Aloes, Colocynthis, Rhubarb, Wormwood, Semina
Santonici, Soot, etc. may contend with it in Bitterness, and consequently in
attenuating, deterging, and de obstructing, yet instead of giving a check or
stop to Ague Fits, they incense and increase them; whence then issues this
virtue of stopping of Ague Fits? To this Query they stand with their finger in
their Mouths; though at last (not daring to own it to be binding and
obstructing; for they are jealous, very pernicious effects would ensue upon
three weeks or a months use thereof,) they tell you, it is the most wonderful,
and strangest Medicine nature ever produced; for in some it occasions a
looseness, in others a costiveness; in many it stops Ague Fits after the taking
frequent Doses; in a few it does its work immediately. Some it raises their
Appetite, to others, dejects it; many it Nauseates, some few it Vomits. On
great numbers it Engenders Hypochondriack vapors, Scurvy, Obstructions, and
tumors of the Spleen and Liver, ill habits of Body, Dropsies, Swelled Legs,
Head aches, suppression of Menstrua in Women, difficulties of breathing,
Phtysicks, Palsies, and other great Distempers of the Brain, which possibly are
never afterward to be removed: But most of these I confess are often occasioned
by Male application of the Bark. Notwithstanding some Physic Ducklings are so
fond of this monstrous Powder, that they prescribe it Panacaea like in all
Diseases, mixing it even with Glysters, and Syrups. A certain Physick-Doctor
lately advised it to a Gentlewoman troubled with an Inflammation, and Ulcers in
her Throat, in a great measure rendered worse by a Guaiacum Decoction premised
by him; whom I afterward Cured in somewhat longer than a Fortnight. Another I
knew directed it to an Infant breeding its Teeth. In fine, the effects appear
so miraculous to many of 'em, that they imagine the Jesuits by Imprecations,
Exorcisms, and Charms on their Bark, have made use of their Cloven-footed
Master. But to take off that aspersion from these poor Holy Fathers, I am of
opinion, it is stupidity and ignorance in School-learning, Philosophy, and the
true Art of Physic, that impels these pretended Doctors to take their refuge
to such occult causes, which to men of more serene capacity may be rendered
sufficiently manifest; wherefore in Answer to the Query before mentioned I
assert, 1. That bitter things ( amara quatenus amara) as far as they are
bitter, are in some measure to be allowed: deobstruent and aperitive per se. 2.
That many bitter Medicines are Emplastick, and others Adstringent; such is
Aloes outwardly applied, and therefore Galen makes it a principal Ingredient of
his Pulvis Adstringens, so much decanted in Ancient and Modern times; for
dissolving it in Water, or any other Liquor, and dipping your finger therein,
you shall immediately perceive it to be sticking, glewy, and somewhat
contracting, Emplastick and Balsamic, for which reason also its a frequent
Basis of external Balsams; though internally taken, its effects prove quite
contrary, by raising a smart ebullition in the Blood; which does not only give
it a quick motion, but a tenuity so extreme, that its very apt to penetrate
through the Pores, and Mouths of the Veins, and Arteries Red Roses, Galls,
torrefyed Rhubarb, and many more, are Bitte^ and Adstringent. 3. Medicines that
are Bitter and Astringent are most potently Styptick; the reason is obvious;
the Bitterness insinuating, and piercing into the most retired Pores of the
Humors, and Fibers of the Bowels, does thereby make way, and crowd along with
it the Adstringent Particles to the deepest cellulae, or Pores of the Parts
continentes and contentae, so that consequently, no Medicine can be parallel in
a Styptick quality to that, which has a Bitterness united to the Adstringent;
whereas other Remedies, that are only Astringent, the Particles upon their
first appulse to the surface of the Parts they are to exercise adstrinction or
contraction upon, do shut up the external superficial Pores, and by so doing
they lock or shut up themselves in the surface, and do as it were praecludere
sibi viam; so that they cannot in any proportion be accounted so potently
Styptick, as Bitter Adstringents.

. 2. The manner of Adstriction may be thus explained, viz. You must suppose the
Minimal particles of an Adstringent simple to obtain a long slender figure,
most subtly pointed at both ends, which renders them capable of insinuating
into the Pores of that Part, or Body, which they are to operate upon. The
slender Minimal particles being at one end fixed in a Pore, by the Heat of the
body, or part, wherein they are fixed, are bent or turned round like unto a
Staple, (not unlike the heat of fire bending Pipe-staves, for to fit them for
making cask) by which means the other pointed end happens to be fixed into
another Pore, and the heat still continuing to bend, both these points must
necessarily then contract and draw the two Pores, wherein they are fixed nearer
together, which causes that pursing or contracting sense we perceive, when we
taste any thing that is Adstringent; and so long as these hooked Particles
continue bent, so long the sense of Adstriction lasts, and no longer; for
upon their slacking, that disappears. Likewise the asperity and ruggedness,
which ever concomitates the part that is thus adstricted, is nothing but those
minute Elevations or Monticuli, occasioned by the contracting the Pores nearer
toward one another. But in regard Adstringents do not operate all after one
manner, some do it by stifning the Pores, and rendering them rigid, and possibly
upon resistance of the part Adstricted, by reaction may also be incurvated and
bent. Thus most Adstringent Salts and Salin Bodies, as Allom, Vitriol, etc. do
perform their Action, namely their acuated thin slender rigid Particles, fixing
themselves into the Pores like so many stiff minute stakes, crowd and run them
up together, and continue so long in that posture, until the heat of the part
shall have relaxed, or softened them, and then nature does easily thrust them
out again. Moreover it may so happen, that these rigid Particles do not only
enter the Pores in a descending strait figure, and so stake themselves, but may
also lie transverse and oblique, by which means the Adstriction must ensue more
violent, and be of a longer duration. Hence it may easily be made out, how our
Ambient Skin happens to be Adstricted, and rendered rugged, in Cold Frosty
Weather, viz. By the slender acuated nitrous Particles in the Air, staking or
fixing in our Pores, and crowding themselves on another; and here it is to be
observed, that these nitrous Particles continue their Adstriction (perceived by
us in Cold Frosty Weather, more or less, according to the number of these rigid
nitrous Particles, precipitated down upon us) until our heat within, or
external warmth of Fire shall have slackned and expelled them. It is those
rigid Frosty Minims filling the Pores of the water, and expelling the Air
thence, that cause Ice. We must then suppose, that in Warm Weather the foresaid
nitrous corpuscles floating in the Air are slack, and swim, or Iye parallel
with the surface of the Earth; but then as soon as the Moon by her motion shall
have turned their Figure downwards, and by defect of the Warmth of the Air
(occasioned by Sulphurous Effluvia's exhaled out of the Earth, and actuated by
the motion of the Sun, whence the Warmth of the Air arises) assuming their
natural rigid structure, they are precipitated downward in great Showers, at
the return of the Frost. Though I have here endeavored to accomodate this sort
of Mechanic Philosophy to the present occasion, I must tell you, that to me
some other Phylosophical Principles Printed Anno 63. renders the thing much
more evident, and therefore where I am to satisfy my self in subjects of that
nature, I do choose to take my recourse to them; however the other being most in
Vogue, I shall spare the pains of obtruding mine.

. 3. The application of the preceding Discourse to the Jesuits Bark, is our
next affair. 1. That it is Bitter, Sense convinces us. 2. That it is Resinous,
the Eye manifests in breaking it. 3. That it is Restringent, the Taste does
attest by the perception of Contraction, and roughness upon the Tongue,
especially in the simple Powder, after the Bitterness is extracted by
maceration, or decoction in any Liquor.

. 4. The Bark being extremely Bitter, Resinous, Viscous, and consequently
Emplastick, and Adstringent, declares it a most potent Styptick; for by its
extraordinary Bitterness the minute slender acuated Particles (being partly
Nitrosalin, and partly others) are readily and deeply fixed, into the remotest
Pores, and thereunto are fast cemented by its Emplastick Viscous resin. And in
regard all these qualifications, figures, positions, and principles do so
rarely concur in one body, it is no wonder not many Barks besides it, are found
so effectual for stopping Ague fits.

. 5. Before we inquire further into the manner of its activity in intermittent
Fevors; we will demonstrate, that the Chinchina Bark is neither Purgative, nor
Laxative per se. The former appears, in that in most bodies it does not raise
any Ebullition; the latter, in that all do agree, it is not moistning, nor much
stimulating, unless taken in too great a Dose, or where the Stomach is charged
with a mass of Humors. Neither is it Diuretic or Diaphoretick per se, which
needs no other proof, than the general attestation of all those, that have
experienced it on the occasion of their Distempers. Wherefore since per se it
neither operates by Vomit, Stool, Urin, or Sweat, being the usual way of
carrying off the Causes of Agues, which properly ought to be termed Curing, I
judge we may safely conclude, its chief Energy consists only in stopping of
Ague fits; for in as much as one, that is troubled with a virulent Gonorrhee,
cannot be said to be Cured by stopping it up with Adstringents, the malignity
together with the putrefied Humors being damned up within the Body, and
therefore is so apt to return, and be converted into a worse Disease, the Pox,
unless Cured by removing the cause, viz. by extinguishing the malignity, and
carrying off the Putrid Humors by detersives or Purgatives; so Agues can no
otherwise be termed Cured by the Jesuits Bark, but only stopped, and the vicious
Humors retained and mured up, whereby either the Fits upon some short interval
do return, or through failure thereof, worse Diseases are engendered (by the
vicious Humors so retained and bound up) as Dropsies, Consumptions, Scurvy, or
twenty other Distempers, that either render the Party his whole lifetime
extremely Crasie, or kill him outright. Your objection I can as soon answer as
conjecture, viz. A Diarrhaea or looseness is often cured by Adstringents; but the
nature throws off the cause by frequent Stools, which in a Gonorhaea, though it
be possible to run off, and so afterward remedied by Adstringents, it is
rarely observed, unless in those that are very mild and little malignant,
though even in those, and in the forementioned Diarrhaeaes, its far the safer
way to carry off the cause. In like manner, where slight Agues by Symptomatick
Vomits before the Fit, and Sweats at the termination of them, have lessened the
Cause, the Jesuits Bark may sometimes put the last hand to the suppressing of
the Distemper, and yet I should rather choose to be cured another way.

. 6. That in some the Bark proves Purgative, in others Vomitive, is only per
accidens, by encountering with floating bilious, or corrupt Pituitous humors
about the Stomach, Guts, precipitating the former, and giving a shock to the
latter; so that according to what I observed in my ninth Rule, where it chances
to operate by Vomit or Purge, it indicates necessity of exhibiting a Purgative,
or Emitick. Therefore in many cases I esteem it male practice to mix opiates
with the Jesuits Powder, to keep in or stay it in the body, unless the Patient
be reduced to a very low ebb of strength, and even then, it ought not to be
continued long, except some other urgent Symptoms should co-indicate it.

. 7. Now we are advanced to the chief point and knot of the difficulty (the
untying of which will manifestly detect the killing errors, committed not only
in intermittent, but principally in continual Fevors) How, in what manner, and
by what means the Jesuits Bark does stop Ague Fits. Wherefore let us proceed by
method, first assert the theory of Agues, and afterward by way of Indication
describe, how the Bark by being so potently and peculiarly Adstringent and
Styptick, as I have before illustrated (wherein its sole faculty and energy
consists) does answer our Intention.

CHAP. II.
Willis his Hypothesis of Agues is ridiculously Erroneous.
THat Excrementious Humors extra vasa put into an high ebullition, and
accended into a praeternatural igneous heat, are the cause of intermittent
Fevors, the old Hypothesis intimates, which in some particulars does nearer
approach the Truth, and expresses the curative indication beyond the Fictitious
modern one of Thomas Willis, who for couching Physical Romances, and Romantic
notions, smoothly, elegantly, and to Physicians of Par. only resembling Truth,
does exceed Monsieur Scudery in his Historical Fictions, could it but be
believed, the style and the Latin were as much his own as the matter. Had the
said Willis from observation abstracted his Novels, a happier success would
have attended his practice, than which nothing ever proved more pernicious and
fatal to most of those Patients, that subjected themselves to his, and the
followers of him, Their debauched advice, which the Bills of Mortality of his
time, and since, did amply testify. His Caprices being ever formed before
experimental observation, he was obliged to strain the latter, to render them
agreeable to the former, which was the cause of that great number of Caytifs
failing under his management; whereas had he made experience the foundation of
his Inventions, a rule that swayed with the Ancients, his endeavors might have
been in some measures serviceable. His judgment was most palpably depraved, in
concluding excrementious humors could be lodged no where, but in the common
receptacles, as the Gallbladder, Guts, etc. There being according to his
assertion no other visible repositories; as if the Pores of the Parenchyma
(conspicuous through a Microscope) of the Entrails, Musculs, Glanduls, etc.
were not sufficiently numerous, to contain a centuple proportion of humors,
more than those cavities he mentions, for the proof of which, you need only
consider, in what places the humors are contained in an Anasarca, Ascites,
pedes aedematosi, all internal tumors of the Bowels, and those of the external
parts. But he conceived these not to be Excrementitious, as the bilis in cysti
fellea, and stercora in intestinis, allowing them only to be humores crudi,
that may be concocted, wherein his error is discovered, by misapprehending the
intendment of the Ancients in the word Excrementitius, signifying omne id quod
excerni debet, and therefore crude blood that has stagnated a considerable time
in the Pores, having thereby acquired a preternatural crasis, disposition, or
quality, is as much excrementitious, as the Urine, or alvi faeces, and thence
being incapable of assimilation to the universal Mass, must be subtracted by
Bleeding, Purging, Transpiration, Urine, Expectoration, Sputation, Vomit,
Excretion at the Nose, Eyes, Ears, etc. For certainly none can deny, but that
Snot, Humors running at the Ears in Infants, Fleam expectorated by Cough, or
Spit up from the Glanduls of the Throat, are Excrementitious Humors, contained
in no visible Cavities, or Cells. Neither does the conceding (as he urges) of
stagnation of Excrementitious humors in the Pores exclude, or impede the
circulation of the Mass in any other part, than where the stagnation is, and
finding a resistance or exclusion, the circulating Blood does preter-flow to
the next passages, that are patent. The Argument most enforcing his objection,
is grounded upon the trite maxim of Physic, viz. That humors extra vasa
Putrefy. This is granted, but how, and when? Post long am moram, not
immediately, as appears in most AEdematous, Skirrous, or Aqueous Tumors, and
many Ecchymoses not tending to Putrefaction before a long interval of time;
though in some Cases, where the external and internal Pores are quite stopped
and choked up and the Bood consisting of Heterogeneous Particles, is
Sulphurous, and full of Spirits, a Putrefaction does ensue immediately extra
vasa, and so it may intra vasa, manifest in Putrid Continual Fevors. Moreover
conceding this Physic Romancers position, that the Blood, or excrementitious
Humors, cannot stagnate extra vasa, the whole structure of the Art of Physic,
raised by the sedulous observation and experience of so many Agues, is thrown
to the ground at once; for then obstructions of the Bowels, all internal
Tumors, Dropsies, Infarctions of the Stomach, and Lungs, with many other
evident distempers, must all be expunged, Purging set aside, Bleeding rendered
useless, and no other Remedies continue in force, besides Alteratives,
Diaphoreticks, and Diuretics. A fine sort of Emperical and destructive
practice, whereunto the man being glued by such like false Opiniater notions,
was driven to a most unreasonable use of Spirit of Hartshorn, posting thereby
Legions of Patients to untimely ends, and still continued by his unhappy
successors, who in imitation of their master, aim at nothing more than getting
of Fees, by defrauding people of their lives.

That this I^trosophist had given himself over to Physic Tales, and invention
of Cases, that never happened, producing them in Evidence, to maintain his
false positions, this instance of a Cure performed at Oxford on a young
Gentlewoman, now the Wife of an Attorney of the Lord Mayors Court, may convince
you; whence, and from the course he directed her Mother, both decumbent of an
intermittent Fevor, he abstracted his Theorems of Agues. To the former he had
exhibited such a proportion of Mercurius Dulcis, as raised a Salivation so
plentiful, that it had almost Embarked her in Charons Boat, and put himself
into the humor of attending her to the end of her Voyage, to anticipate the
reproach and scandal, which then was likely would unevitably ensue, though
through mercy she narrowly escaped his hands scarce Cured, as likewise did her
Mother, which afterward he draws into consequence, as I hinted before, for
installing his erroneous Principles of Agues: This being related to me, did
ever after excite an aversion to the Author, and a diffidence in his Writings.

The groundwork of the Theory and Practice of Intermittent Fevers, rests on
this Hypothesis, that the Original of Agues must be placed in the Mass of Blood
preternaturally affected, raised into a fermentation by the appulse and
commixture of the nutritious juice, which though endued with a good natural
Diathesis, or constitution, yet upon its commixture with the distempered Blood,
through its too great a contrariety excites an high ebullition, which he calls
an Intermittent Fevor. You are to apprehend, he makes mention of two succi
nutritii, the one fol. 119. de febr. Succus nutritious ex esculentorum materiae
suppeditatus; and fol. 120. a pabulo quotidiano suppeditatus; and why would not
this Phantastique continue the old name Chylus? though in another place he
improperly terms it Chymus, by which Hippocrates only intended the Blood, and
Plato and Aristotle Sapor, or Taste. The other he recites fol. 109. a sucus
nutritious e sanguine suppeditatus, and is (as he says) a Vehicle of the Animal
Spirits, a bratt of the brain of Glisson and Wharton, and by Willis highly
approved and Christened the Liquor Nervosus, an opinion so absurd and
ridiculous, that all Europe have with contempt rejected the nursing of it, the
Fools of Paris only excepted. Well, it is the former of these Nutritii or
alibiles succi he purposes, for the first source and causa movens of an
intermittent, and typical fermentation; but what, if the Patient for several
days, by reason of a dejected Appetite, assumes no nutriment, whence must the
Causa movens, Fovens, Adjuvens, commaterialis, or what not, be fetched? and if
upon the prava diathesis of the Blood, the first concoction in the Stomach is
immediately depraved, and perverted (as questionless it is) how will the pot be
set on Boiling through want of sufficient contrariety in the Juices? If by
removing and correcting the humors abo^t the Stomach, the Ague is forth with
chaced and expelled, what becomes of the Hypothesis? if the Iuvantia and
laedentia are only relative and applicable to the Stomach, and the first
original and immediate ( symptomata proxime emanantia) symptoms do only appear
about the ventricle, I judge we need not give credit to Romantic notions, that
like Will with a Whisp shall lead us out of the way to kill people.

That the Chyle for being well and naturally confected, should be impeached a
cause of a Feavorish Disease ( risum teneatis amici) is an absurdity before
unheard of, and to elude the Truth by asserting, that Vomitives Cure an Ague no
otherwise, than by throwing up Choler (how he is forced to strain himself) is
false, since I have often observed intermittent Tertians eradicated, where the
Emetick has cast up an heap of Putrid slime, without the admixture of a grain
of Choler. On the other hand I have seen Bleedings, and such Purgatives, or
Laxatives, which he so highly commends, only to make his marks to bear, a
hundred times continued in use, and repeated in eight, ten, or twelve interval
days, and exhibited before the Fit, with no more success than commonly attended
his first practice at Oxford, which I particularly took notice of (being my
self then a Student in Exeter College) was so inconsiderable, that he was
forced to block at his Pen, and so by forging of Novelties, thereby removing
the bushel from over his Candle, allured a number of poor Country Patients,
though at that time very raw in all manner of experience, nor advanced in the
least in practical observations; so that at last Justice for his having so long
impunitely injured mankind, made him his own Executioner, dying under the same
misapplications, so many hundreds had miscarried by. Though after he had thus
practiced many years, I have met with him in consultation, then whom I never
observed a man less Sagacious in finding out a Disease, and therefore he would
ever submit to any that should discover it, being wholly unfurnished with the
Diagnostick part, whereby he might oppose or approve another judgment. Indeed
it were to be wished most of my Friends of Paris would return to their
Institutes, and perfect themselves in the Semeiotica; for they are so apt to
mistake Diseases, that in five, four are commonly misnamed by them, and not
long since an Anatomical Belweather, (a Doctor) managed a person of
considerable Quality, living within two Miles of Paris, for a Gout, who being
Dissected, was found to die of an Ulcerous Consumption, his Lungs appearing in
a great measure putrefied; but what do I mention this single example, when I
could produce a hundred, whom Syrup of Steel (his general quack Medicine) had
brought to the ground, upon applying it to Diseases by him mistaken.

That which induced this Innovator to state the Focus, Seeds, and Fomes of
intermittent Fevors in the Vessels, was the observing, that many Autumnal and
Epidemick Tertians attacked Bodies of all Temperaments, Ages, and Sexes, (in
some of whom no foul Stomach, or ill feeding could be discovered by him)
likewise such as should live in Foggy marshy places, as the hundreds of Essex,
and lower Kent. Unto this instance, carrying the force of an Objection, I must
make a repartie of those sporadick Agues, that appear plainly engendered by
irregular Diet, where the Air cannot in the least be suspected to bear a part
in a most healthful season, and the best of Climats, on which occasions the
Stomach by the original and immediate symptoms, does show it self principally
and primarily affected, and other parts only per deuteropatheiam; as also it
does even in those intermittent Feavorish Distempers of the Autumn, and of
Marshy places, where though the Nitropyretick Particles of the Air do seem to
introduce a dyscrasie in the Blood, through the Pores and inspiration; yet this
cannot happen, unless soon after the Stomach does receive the same ill
impression from the Spirits of the Arterial Liquor, and Lympha, considering
that through heat of the former, and Salin particles of the latter, it does in
a great measure perform the first concoction, or Chylification, whence
afterward through infarctions of its own, and circumjacent parts, by putrid
slymy variegated humors, variously constituted, and boiling up, those several
sorts of Agues receive their production. Should I charge my self with the
trouble of copying out the Theory of intermittent, and continual Fevors,
abstracted from experience and experimental Observations, the sole original and
fundamental of true knowledge, you would at the same moment be furnished with a
guide easily to conduct you to Remedies equal to Riverius his Febrifugue,
Jesuits Bark, or any other, in Intermittents, and to Medicines in continual,
putrid or malignant, beyond any yet discovered, that shall manifestly abate the
Distemper, and extinguish malignity; but it is foreign to my intention ever to
gratify that ungrateful and malicious tribe of Par. further then present them
with a looking glass of their errors, and to inform the Vulgar, that following
the Dictates of their own sense, and common experience, will in slight
Distempers more safely cure them, and in dangerous ones prove less hurtful,
than they, or the preposterous management of their Art.

CHAP. III.
By what virtue, manner or quality, the Jesuits Bark does stop Ague Fits.
TO avoid Chicaneries, and School-wranglings, we will only suppose Ague Fits to
be occasioned by an high ebullition, Orgasmus, or fermentation (as others
choose to call it) of contrary humors, and Juices about the Stomach, their
Particles being rarefied, attenuated, and of various figures, do vibrate, and
shock one another impetuously, and by their violent local motion against each
other, a great heat is at length raised and an high ebullition, whence
Effluvia's being gradually dispersed, and impelled into the Mass, do according
to their number and quality excite a greater or lesser, longer or shorter,
milder or malignant heat and ebullition, depending also upon the disposition,
and susceptibility of the Blood. The indication drawn hence concludes, that a
Medicine, which is drying, condensing, incrassating, and Adstringent, so as to
be penetrating also, must be singularly energick, and effectual (though not
always proper to be used) to allay the Febril ebullition beforementioned, by
interposing its minute slender acuated corpuscles between the combattant
Particles, and as it were parting them, by staking themselves like so many
Pallisadoes between them, and so by crowding them up close, fetter and imprison
them, whence consequently the ebullition must necessarily cease, and a truce
put to the combat for so long time, as the interposing corpuscles shall there
continue, which being worn out, or by long repulsion of the imprisoned
particles expelled, the battle commences anew, and the fits return, which then
are to be stopped again by the same Medicine.

That this indication is answered in all its particulars by the Jesuits Bark,
the frequent and common experiment, together with the reason thereof, given in
the manifest dissection of its parts, and explication of its qualities, and
effects before recited, do clearly demonstrate: For consisting of such staking
or pallisading particles, and endued with a penetrating bitterness adstrictive,
and emplastick qualities, it obtains a specific virtue to stop febril
Paroxysms. Why other Adstringents, as Allom, Tormentil, Berbery Bark, and such
like are not equally Febrifugues with the Chinchina, is because they are not
sufficiently bitter, and penetrative nor emplastick; or were they bitter,
penetrative, and emplastick, yet not consisting of particles, whose figure fit
the Pores of the Febril matter about the Stomach, so as to enter them, would
fail of the virtue the Jesuit is endowed with, wherein all these requisita
meeting, do therefore render it specific.

CHAP. IV.
Giving the reasons for the Method and Rules (heretofore set down) of
exhibiting the Jesuits Bark.
MY next task is, from this Theory to give you the reason of the rules, set
down fol. 160. In the first Bleeding, Vomiting, or Purging are directed: The
first to diminish the Plethora ad vires, or ad vasa, to make room for the
Spirits to move, the Bood to circulate, cool and ventilate the Humors, open
Obstructions, and remove the constipation of the Pores: The second, to evacuate
the whole Body, and Bowels; but particularly to averruncate those Viscous
Putrid Humors about the Stomach, where the focus, and minera mali lies
absconded: The third, in case Vomiting is counter-indicated by weakness,
tenderness of Sex or Age, indisposition of Parts, or mildness of the Distemper,
not requiring a Medicine of that efficacy. These depletions and evacuations
being in sufficient measure and proportion premised, the Relic of putrid
humors ought to be precipitated to the Guts, or Bladder, or the Ferment (as
they term it,) bound up by a specific styptick, as the Jesuits Bark, and
several others; which done, the Spirits return to their several functions, and
the Concoctions are restored to their Vigor, whereby new humors and juices
are engendered, which gradually diluting and qualifying the forementioned
remaining ferment, the Ague is totally cured without danger of relapse. But in
case the Jesuits Bark shall be exhibited immediately, before the body is
depleted, and evacuated, as of late years has been the practice, the Febril
ferment is by longer detention augmented, and much deteriorated, or rather
those putrid Ebullititious humors do not only receive an addition in quantity,
but quality, which sometimes amounts to malignity. This is not all,
obstructions are inveterated, the Bowels extremely weakened, and subverted in
their temperament, whence more dangerous and obstinate Diseases are to be
expected, than the Ague it self. So that when ever the Fits shall return again,
they shall appear attended with far worse symptoms than formerly, and continue
much longer, and often times be converted to double tertians and quartans, being
only single before. I have more than once known, that a single tertian, by
applying the Bark too early, before proportionable evacuations or depletions,
has been forced into a continual mortal Fever, the violent styptick Medicine
having impelled the ferment, or those Putrid febril humors into the great
vessels. Neither will the purge Willis mentions fol. 142. the infusion of Sena
and Rhubarb (purposely adduced to avoid thwarting of his Hypothesis) signify
any thing in a stubborn, or inveterated tertian; it must be a Cathartick of
another nature, and greater energy, among which I could discover one to the
Physicians of P. that at once or twice purges off those Viscous putrid humors
in a great part, the other it precipitates to the Bladder, and the remainder it
fixes, which three properties ought to concur in any Medicine, that deserves to
be named a Febrifugue, or specific Antipyretick; but that would be casting
Pearls to Sw.

In the second precept great doses of the Jesuits Powder are forbidden, lest by
too sudden a cohibition you crowd the ferment into the great Vessels, or by too
great a dose, or weight, it precipitate it self downwards into the Guts, and
purge, and so carry it self off, not unlike Mercurius Dulcis given in a Dose to
raise a Salivation, instead whereof, by its weight and sermentative quality, as
they call it, it purges, whereas by small Doses it answers the intention;
though I am not ignorant, that sometimes small Doses may by its adstriction
precipitate, and detrude loose floating humors downwards, and so become per
accidens laxative, (as medlers are said laxative, prima mensa comesta) and by
that it signifies the body requires a purgative.

The fourth Cannon enjoins another Purge after some interval, to attempt the
carrying off some part of the humors, that have been bound up, (before the
ebullition revives, the virtue of the Jesuit being almost worn out) and to
cement the remninder by a few Doses of the Bark.

If upon conjectural computation the relic of morbifique matter shall be
deemed considerable, another Cathartique must be interposed after six weeks, to
which duration the adstriction of the Bark may well extend, since after several
previous subductions of humors, the styptick is supposed to continue its
prerogative over a small heap, to a longer interval, which being somewhat
reinforced, does abide in prevalence, until the last small remainder of febril
matter is by the strength of nature dispersed.

The occasion of the sixth injunction is this; though many have been brought
off from their Agues by the method predict, yet considering the nauseous doses
of the Jesuit, the long protracted regimen of Diet, frequent danger of
relapses, which in some has happened twenty times in the time of a year or
two, and after all there has been a translation into an incurable Disease; in
my opinion, other methods ought to be preferred, where the case can bear it.
And grant the Bark is used with all the caution, and success imaginable, still
Experience awards necessity of an aperitive or deobstruent course at the next
season, or at least the subsequent spring, to delete the vestiges of the Bark,
and the ultimate impressions of the Febril lees, or sediment; but a caveat is
put in against Chalybeats, they in point of adstriction being Sisters to the
Jesuit, as hereafter shall be more plainly made out, viz. That all Chalybeat
preparations, and particularly such as are called erroneously Aperitive, are
highly adstringent, styptick, obstructive, and binding per se. Also that most
of those preparations of Steel, which are termed adstringent, are rather,
Epulotick and Emplastick. In my Treatise of the Scurvy, I have partly proved
the assertion, and given instances, how extremely dangerous the use of Steel
is, if misapplyed, hundreds, I may say thousands, owing the irrecoverable loss
of their Health to it, and not a few the loss of their lives: Yet
notwithstanding these convincing proofs, not only Steel, but the Jesuits
Powder, and Laudanum, are become the three Quack-Medicines of this Age.

That Steel is the bane of the Lungs, does not only appear by its suppressing
expectoration, but also by crowding and forcing gross Phlegmatique and Salin
humors up to the Lungs, whence inevitably Consumptions and Hectic Fevers do
ensue, whereof I have seen frequent instances in young and old: And
notwithstanding it is so highly cried up for opening obstructions, I have more
then once observed some Women, that have made use of Crocus Martis Aperitivus
(falsely so called) for the procuring their Menstrua, have fallen into an
incurable suppression. Per accidens it does sometime prove de-obstruent, by
crowding Humors and Spirits up into a heap, until at last they burst through,
and then by Explosion, violence of motion, and a forcible stream, they carry
all before them, and so become aperitive, not unlike to a rivulet, that is
dammed up with a bank of mud, which stopping the water until it is swelled, and
gathered into a great heap, is at length thereby burst through, which
happening, moves impetuously, scours and clears all before it. Moreover, the
material principle of Steel being Vitriol, which is allowed adstringent, and
obstructive in the highest degree, does strongly confirm what before is
asserted.

CHAP. V
Containing Animadversions on the grand course of Physic, described in Chap.
11.
. 1. MY affairs preventing me, I must suspend my intention of discoursing
particularly upon the five courses formerly mentioned; and therefore shall only
set down a few Animadversions upon the grand course of Physic prescribed to
the Sieur, etc. which you have already read in Chap. 11. The first Medicine set
down by the Sieur Phlegm. he knew not what to make of it, and therefore at the
close writes only M. for Misce, it being neither Apozem, because it wants
Syrup, nor Julep, because it is a Decoction. By the Scorzonere and Liquorish he
designs to smooth the Blood, but then by the Spirit of Sulphur, that is
likewise added, he renders it rough again. The Claret Wine, (which he
ignorantly calls Vinum Claretum, signifying spiced Wine, and rendered clear, by
passing it through an Hyppocras bag) is poured to it, because the Patient
having been a Claret drinker, is not to be taken suddenly from the use of it,
for fear through want thereof his Stomach should be palled; the Cinnamon water
is to keep up his Spirits: The whole is the most idle prescription I ever yet
beheld, consisting of contrary Ingredients, and consequently Heterogeneous,
which necessarily must ferment in his body, and therefore instead of allaying
the Febril fermentation (erroneously so termed) he does considerably augment
it; whereupon the Patient growing worse, he thought it not safe to trust
himself to him alone, though a Patriarch, but must have another joined with
him, to render the case worse, who agree in the next prescription, which is a
Decoction of bitter, and sweet, viz. Liquorish, Gentian, Jesuits Bark,
Centaury, etc. A Medicine as idle, but more pernicious than the former, being
wholly Empirical without sense or reason. I perceive these two Gentlemen
ascribed the chief energy of the Ies. Bark in suppressing of preternatural
fermentations, to the bitterness of it, and therefore to exalt the virtue
thereof, the other bitter Simples are added; if so, why is Liquorish put to it?

2dly. It is universally observed, that all things that do ( movere alvum)
cause Stools, not only infringe, but destroy the Virtue of the Jesuits Bark:
Wherefore it is very senseless, to add Centaury, Carduus, and Gentian, which by
a smart stimulation and potent detersion do all occasion Stools, and
consequently precipitate and throw off the Jesuit in a great measure. The
manifest truth hereof you shall find by giving the Jesuits Bark to two Ague
Patients, whose Diseases are indifferently equal in their Symptoms: He that
takes the Bark without the bitter Decoction, shall be rescued from his Fits six
or eight days before the other. Furthermore, I have known the aforesaid Bark
given in substance three weeks successively with a superbibendo of the Decoctum
amarum, without the expected effect; but on the other hand, after the same
Patient had swallowed down three Bolusses of the Peruvian Bark upon the
omission of the Decoct. Amar. his Fits were stopped immediately. So by this you
are to understand, amara are not all of the same nature, witness Aloes,
Colochynth, etc.

3dly. These Signiors were very addle-headed, in directing a Decoction of the
Bark, which only extracts the bitter from the adstringent particules, which
being Terrestrial, were left in the bottom of the Pipkin, whereby the Medicine
is partly destroyed.

4thly. Considering, that most continual Fevers after digestion, and the
aequation of the Heterogenous humors are carried off by Sweat, Urine, or
Stool, can any thing be more contrary and Lethiferous, than the Jesuits Bark,
that stops all the Avenues of the Body, crowds and forces up humors out of the
lower venture into the middle, and supreme venters, as appears by their
prescription of the 24th. where Pectorals are advised to relieve his difficulty
of breathing, caused by the Jesuits Bark; for this Symptom did not attend his
Disease at first, but was an Epiginomenon. And now his humors are thus thrown
up to his Lungs and Throat, the Vital Spirits must needs be extremely
oppressed, and stifled; to whose relief a number of insipid faint musty
Cordials are prescribed. These sages observing, instead of having done little
good, they had done a great deal of hurt by an unknown Medicine, they push on
by trying one experiment upon another, to whose composition they were much more
Strangers, viz. the Goa Stone; to little purpose. But still the difficulty of
Breathing increased, of which he complained so vehemently, as if a house had
stood upon his breast; thus the poor Gentleman was night-mared by the Jesuits
Bark; to remove which, here is a lick-pot (prescribed on the 18th.) of nasty
Linseed Oil, taught them by the Boars of Germany; which though very moistening
and relaxing, could not abate the adstriction the Bark had caused. Hitherto
they have continued the use of Acids; now Empirick-like they pass over to
Remedies quite opposite, viz. Volatile Alcalies, and therefore they recommend
Spirit of Sal Armoniack to be taken in every draught of drink and broth,
instead of Spirit of Sulphur; likewise he is often to gorge down Spirit of
Hartshorn in Briony-water. By these prescripts, I find they are receded from
their former opinion, importing the difficulty of Breathing depended on a
translation of humors to his Lungs, as beyond all peradventure it did: And now
they humbly conceive, it was occasioned by Hypochondriack vapors. But since
those Volatile Alcalies caused no abatement of that Symptom, they even turn to
their old deserted opinion, of a translation of humors to the Lungs, and
therefore on the 29th. they endeavor to purge them off by a violent Purge, the
strongest that ever was prescribed to the strongest man, and in the greatest
dose, viz. Twenty grains of Pil e duobus, consisting of colocynthis, and
scammany. This was an error unpardonable, for these reasons; first for
directing the strongest Purge, in the greatest dose, to the weakest man that
lay dying. 2dly. For ordering a valiant Purge, when a continaul Fever (not
without suspicion of malignity) was near the state, whereas it is accounted a
great error to advise a gentle purge in the beginning and augment of a mild
continual Fever. Now, had any other that was not of their Conclave, been guilty
of an error a thousand parts less, they would in that Country have prosecuted
him not for male practice only, but Murder. At last the sufferer fell into
Rattling in his Throat (the nearest Symptom to death) which they ignorantly
believed, was occasioned by the humors mounting, and therefore they appoint
him a Mustard gargle, which stifles him immediately, instead of halling Flame
out of his Throat by roaps. In conclusion, may I never be guilty of so much
Knavery, and Ignorance, as to become a Conclave Physician.

CHAP. VI.
WHat sort of Animal a Conclave-Physician is like to prove in curing a Dropsy,
Consumption, or any other Malady, is without difficulty conjectured, from his
ignorant management of Fevers and Agues, the most popular and most common of
all Distempers; for upon tracking him 50 years backward, you find him varying,
diffident, and most uncertain in his method, a plain evidence his Theory
appeared to himself dubious and false, which impels him so often into various
different courses. For a considerable time continual Fevers were endeavored to
be removed by bleedings, and acid Juleps, but many more dying than recov'ring,
put the Physic Doctors upon a contrary method; namely, upon the use of Volatile
Alcalies, as Spirit of Hartshorn, Spirituous Sudorific-waters, etc. throwing
off Treacle-water, because consisting of one or two acid Ingredients among many
alcalies. This manner of cure prevailing less than the former, they fall into
an Empirical course, as exhibiting Jesuits Bark against all continual and
intermittent Fevers, which now by all men is judged to be more fatal then any
of the former. Whither they will apply next, who knows? though some already have
cast off the Bark, and began again with Acids, others with Alcalies, as being
according to their sentiments less lethiferous. By these contrary courses a
Conclave-Physician betrays his Ignorance in Theory, and unskilfulness in
Practice. After all, I must tell you, Fevers are curable by methods different
from these, and Remedies, which they never yet have found out, nor ever will,
as long as they continue in their Associations and Confederacies; for all
following one Bell-weather, must like Sheep go astray, whom if any of a Genius
more inquisitive should endeavor to conduct into a true path, would for his
pains be rewarded with ill language, reproach, and all manner of ingratitude;
and therefore no more shall be said at present.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Apothecaries and Surgeons Capacity and Pretension to practice
Physic, equal with the Doctors.
1. TO make a Superscription to a Physician, be his Name what it will, viz. to
such, or such, Doctor of Physic, would now adays appear very foppish and idle;
whereas the Direction ought to be, to such, or such, Doctor of the Jesuits
Bark; for all Diseases, that require to be cured tuto, cito, and jucunde, are
wholly and solely to be managed by this Panacaea, the mode or method of
Application, just Dose, Time, Preparation, Repetition, Substraction, Addition,
Division, Multiplication, and innumerable other Circumstances, being so
extremely intricate and difficult, that they cannot be felt, heard, or
understood in less time, than 10 or 14 years study in an University; though the
first Founder of this Order, Dr. Tabor, of immortal Fame, conceived all this
great Mystery in one nights Drunkenness.

2. But besides these Savii, there is another sort of Doctors, that live at the
Sign of the Pestil and Mortar, and who are of the true Race of the great
Prophet abovementioned, and consequently by descent are gifted with the
knowledge of discerning good from evil Bark; they know how to bruise, powder,
and sift it, infuse, extract, impast it into an Electuary, or Pills, and weigh
it into Doses, of all which the Pen and Ink Doctors being ignorant, they are
incapable of curing one single Patient, without the indispensable aid and
assistance of the Pestil and Mortar Doctors, who for that Reason attain ten
Patients to the others one; for if a man repairs to a superior Doctor, for a
License for the Jesuits Bark, paying therefore a Tribute of five or ten Livers,
and then is remanded down to an inferior Knight of the Pestil, who also for
his Commodity and Attendance, expects in the end, by reason of several
Repetaturs, to be trebly satisfied; what is this, but purchasing Health at the
second hand? So that generally throughout all Paris, the Apothecaries having 50
or a 100 Patients to the Physicians one, it is an infallible Conclusion, that
the Company of Apothecaries get 50 or a 100 times more than the Band of
Physicians; for an Apothecary is continued to the end of the Distemper, the
Physician oft-times makes but one Visit or two, and then is dismissed: besides
the Apothecaries often have hundreds of Patients, whom the Physicians are never
called unto, either because they pretend, and often really do cure them as well
as the Doctors, or because the Patients are unwilling to be at a double charge.
Hence you may easily extract the Reason, why five sixths of the Physicians go
with their hands in their Pockets all day, the greatest part of Business
passing only through few men's hands, (though some of 'em are much more ignorant
than the others) whereas there is scarce any little Apothecary, but one time or
other in the day, there is Life perceived in his Mortar. Now this scarceness of
Business being by Physicians (who probably wish all the World sick at once)
imputed to too great a share one has before another, (though falsely, for it is
equally enough divided amongst most of 'em, some few only excepted) makes them
growl and snarl at one another, like so many barking Animals at a Bone in the
Water, they cannot come at; whereas all this while, were the number of
Physicians ten times greater than it is, there would be too much Business for
them, had they not imparted their Knowledge, Skill, Method, and Remedies, to
these inferior Doctors, at whose discretion it is now, whether any Physician
shall partake with them in their Employ, and whenever they do, it is oft-times
to the Physicians own Disadvantage, as I shall make appear to you.

3. If the superior Doctors will bid high for the Stock, the inferior do not
want confidence to out-bid them, as the subsequent Test will plainly decide.
Suppose a good honest Parisian, of an indifferent Fortune, to find himself
Feverish, he will have a care not to be so profuse, as to throw away (in his
opinion at least) a Fee upon the Master Doctor, but sends to the next Pestle
and Mortar, who has skill enough to discover by his Pulse, he has a Fever, and
upon the instant (if the Patient wants one) to recommend a Lavement, or Glyster
to him, and within a few hours after to cause him to be blooded; he is not
ignorant, that he ought to provide him a cooling Julep, a Cordial, Diaphoretick
Powders, and in a few days to clap on his blistering Plasters: now what could
the Master Doctor have done more? However, if the impatience of his Relations,
suspecting danger by the Apothecaries Countenance, will needs impose a
Physician upon him, who may make a better Figure in case of miscarriage, he
does with all his heart accept of one, provided he be of his own choosing; or
if he must be the Belweather, the Apothecary stands upon his Guard, having
possibly left him room to crowd in Spir. corn. cerv. or a Pearl Cordial, and
possibly not. But if the Apothecary should happen to prove dishonest, in
preferring his Reputation before the Life of the Patient, whom therefore the
Physician shall not cure, whereby he may acquire a Fame above him; for
prescribe what he will or can, it is in the Apothecaries power to make up the
Medicine as he pleases; and suppose a few grains of Cer. should be added to
your Pearl Cordial, not unlike it in color and mixture, this shall so oppress
and stifle the Patients Spirits, that without the least sign of being poisoned,
he shall certainly die, without the least danger of being discovered for his
foul play.

4. Allow a Physician commits to the preparation of the Apothecary a long Bill,
perhaps a purgative Apozem of half a Sheet, containing an hundred or more of
alterative Simples, besides the Purgatives, can any man be so idle, as to
believe, he will send to all the Herb-women, Physick-gardens, and Druggists,
possibly at ten a Clock at night, when the Prescription arrived at his Shop?
No, he is wiser; and discerning the Doctor intends only to exercise his Patient
for two or three days on the Close-stool, laughs at the Vanity of the man, and
puts in only three or four Roots or Herbs, a few Seeds, and the same
Purgatives, dosing it according to his own Estimate, and conveys it next
morning early to the Patient. You may believe, it is not one Bill in twenty is
exactly made up according to the Doctor's Order; neither is it fitting it
should; for often his Prescriptions are so idle and incongruous, did not the
Experience of the Apothecary correct, alter, and substitute what he pleases,
there would be mad work in the sick man's Guts. Or imagine the Bill is
prescribed as it ought, the Apothecary may not be pleased, the Patient should
be restored to his Health in too short a time; or at least is pleased that the
Physician shall miss of his Reputation in curing of him. Therefore grant the
Doctor prescribes overnight a sudorifick Cordial Julep; the other prepares it,
with the addition of a few grains of Resin of Gialap, or Scammony, without the
least hazard of discovery; the next morning the Sick gives an account, that
instead of sweating, he was on the Pot all night. The Doctor, less jealous,
good man, of the Apothecary, than of his own Wife, tells the Patient, this is a
critical Evacuation, occasioned by Nature's being strengthened by the Cordial,
and consequently proves better than he intended; and so shams it off; and if
the Party dies, lays the blame on the malignity of the Distemper, without the
least mistrust of his man Doctor, who privately having much more the Ear of the
Patient, throws all on the Doctor, expecting hereafter he alone shall be made
use of in the Family. Another Knack he is dexterous in; if the Doctor do not
stand well in his Books, he impeaches the Physician secretly of erroneous
Prescriptions, and tacitly turns off the Medico, introducing another that will
serve his purpose, and submit to him in all things. In fine, there are a
hundred Tricks, by which he eludes the Physician, do what he can; and why not?
It is to his advantage so to do, knowing to cure Diseases as well as the other,
and sometimes better, having been entrusted with the Method and Bills of many
Doctors. As to my particular opinion, I do verily believe, the Apothecary is
rather fitter for Practice than the other; for where the latter cures one
Disease, the former cures twenty; and where there dies one under an
Apothecaries Hand, there die twenty under the Physician.

5. Cannot the Apothecary advise a Diascord. bolus cum Rhab. the white
Decoction, Laudanum liquid. and anodyne Glysters in a Looseness? Cannot he make
up Syrups in a Cough, Consumption, and Ptysick; purge in any Fullness of the
Stomach, hypochondriack Crudities, or any other slight Cacochymy, with Pil.
stom. c. g. or prepare Chalybeates in Women's Obstructions, or in fine, mimick
his Masters in almost every Distemper? And will they or can they hinder
Apothecaries, who have so diligently learned their skill of them, from
practicing among their poor Neighbors, who besides paying for the Physic,
(which perhaps is dear enough) are not able to bestow Fees on Physicians? Well,
but suppose these inferior Doctors grow sullen, and leave their Superiors the
Field, what will they do with their Patients? Can they prepare Medicines? Are
they skilful in practical Pharmacy, or Chemistry? If not, what will become of
the Sick? Neither is that part of the Art, viz. Pharmacy, so soon attained.
Perhaps they will pick a Quarrel with the Surgeons too, for practicing Physic;
whose Art does entitle them to Bleeding, opening Imposthumes, reducing of
Fractures and Dislocations, Amputations, Trepanations, and dressing of Ulcers
and Wounds, that often cannot be performed without giving internal Medicines;
which Privilege, if the Physicians deny them, can they perform all those
Chyrurgical Operations themselves? If not, who shall do it? So that it is plain,
the Man-Doctor ought to practice, because the Master-Doctor is ignorant, and
insufficiently educated. Wherefore I say, he does not deserve the Title of
Doctor of Physic, that is not very well versed in Pharmacy, Chemistry, and
Surgery.

6. I confess, I have not always been of this opinion, touching the equal
capacity of practicing Physic, between the Master and Man-Doctors of Paris,
because it was some years afterward, before I was thoroughly informed of the
Insufficiency of the former; though I must likewise acknowledge, that I know
some Doctors of Physic, that have only some honorable Relation to their
Society, who by their due Education are arrived to as high a point of Learning
and Skill, as any in the whole Universe.

7. Moreover in regard many slight Distempers are carried off by purging, it is
found, that many Medicine-mongers do vend a vast proportion of Purgatives under
several Forms, at a very low rate, and to a great relief of the Poor, and
benefit to the Rich: so that computing these, the Practice of Apothecaries,
Surgeons, Midwives, Nurses, and skilful Women, the hundredth part of the
Practice of Physic is not left to Physicians; wherefore they ought not thus to
envy, backbite, slander, and hate one another, since it is not they that take
the Practice from one another, but their receiving into Copartnership all those
forementioned Disciples, through their own ill management of the Faculty of
Physic, which notwithstanding all this, I could without much difficulty, put
them into a way of retrieving their Rights and Privileges; but my best way is
to let it alone. Before I go further; since the distributing of the first
Impression of this Treatise, I perceive many will not be convinced of my right
meaning of the Physicians, mentioned in the whole process of this Tract; and
therefore I do once again expressly affirm to you, I never declared to any, nor
ever intend to declare otherwise, than my meaning to be only the Physicians of
Paris the Metropolis.

8. And now with great grief I cannot but condole the fatal Stroke, that is
given to the Reputation of the Faculty, by the Life and Death of a main Pillar
of a certain Grandissime, and topping Society of Physicians; also by the
reproachful withdrawing of another great prop from their laudable Company. A
man of Letters was Don Diego, and wonderfully versed in the Waters, but much
more in Wine, insomuch that Hats tempered with the Liquor leaking from his Tub,
did exceed the best Codebecks. The splendid mode of his Living was supported by
the great mortgage of the Atheneum, made to his most intimate Friend, for
repayment of whom, he drew on his Deathbed a Bill of Exchange payable by Pope
Joan; but the Bill (I should have said his Testament) was protested, the Corpse
seized, and put into a Deal Box, slightly nailed up, without so much as a penny
Cord about it, and was tumbled into a Hole close by, for it was not packt up
for a longer Journey: thus turned this blazing Light into a Snuff. The other
was also a main piece of Timber, suddenly cracked by the great weight of his
hypocrisy and knavery: strange! a new house built but the other day, to have so
many pieces of rotten timber in it. Let hence his sober creditors, as they call
themselves, draw this Moral, There is no Trust to be put in Religio Medici,
many of whom, I verily dare affirm, believe, there is neither God, Heaven,
Devil nor Hell.

9. If some for a Fee take a Pot or two of Ale, or a Bottle of Wine, (which
possibly is all day evaporating through their Pericranium) or a quarter of a
hundred of red Herrings, a Sundays Dinner, a pair of Shoos, Stockings, a
Campane Coat, a shoulder of Mutton, or the like; I think this can be no
Reflection on the whole Society: however, Meliora speramus; crescit sub pondere
virtus. I hope to live the Time, to see every society-Physician again in his
Velvet Jacket, which the Apothecaries and Surgeons, yea the very Mountebanks,
have so unjustly pulled over their Heads, and put on their own Shoulders. Is
this the Year that Nostredame prognosticated Physic should flourish, and be
Dame Paramount over all the Arts and Sciences? O Tempora, O Mores! The Man is
turned Master, and the Master the Man; the Apothecary if he has too much
Business, or has a Chestnut to pull out of the Fire, the Patient being in danger
of dying, he sends his Man, the Physician, (which he must take for a Favor
too) to the poor Patient, who dying next day, the Apothecary privately to the
Executors lays all the blame upon his Man, the Physician, for prescribing so
impertinently, by which he secures the future Practice of that Family to
himself. This is true Politics, Practica est multiplex; it is no wonder if half
the Physicians cannot get so much, as will buy Water to wash their Hands; and
glad is the Physician, if he can but get his quondam Man the Apothecary's
Daughter into Matrimony, though her Lips be smeared with Pomatum, and her
Stink-Pot with Verdigrease. Thus much of Pantagruel and Gargantua; Simon and
Judas; or Apuleius and's Ass.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing some eminent Cases; and new Principles in Physic.
1. I Have told you, who are the Betrayers of the Liberties of Physic; for
provided the Apothecaries will but call upon them, when their Chestnuts are
ready to be pulled out of the Fire, they care not a Farthing if the whole
Faculty be destroyed, and the rest of their junior Associates beat their Heels
against the Ground: even as it is in some Hogen Mogen Commonwealths, where a
few growing rich by Treachery, they value not if all their Companions and
Commonalty become Slaves to le grand Seigneur. However this touches not my
Copyhold, never intending to herd with any Society of Physicians, unless there
should happen a wonderful Reformation; though I cannot deny, but I have
formerly been a Fellow of a College of Physicians, where they always spoke
Latin, and consulted in Latin, (observe well) but I sufficiently spied the
Inconvenience of colleguing of it: I know very well, their Bulls in no Place
goes beyond seven miles, therefore a Remove so far, or at least assuming to be
Man-Doctor and Master-Doctor in one, eludes all: but it is time enough to think
of that at my return to Paris.

2. To leave all this Ribauldry, I pass over to the discovery of a new
Principle, or rather Theorem in Physic, the use whereof is infinitely greater,
than any thing yet discoursed of by Anatomical Fops, namely, whence such plain
and advantageous Indications for bleeding, purging, alterative, sudorifick,
diuretic, and corroborative Remedies may be deduced, as shall with much more
certainty cure Diseases, whereas hitherto they have been handled by conjectural
means, and most of 'em not without imminent danger.

3. It has been observed, that Inquisitors for estimable Novelties have most
often with great facility, discerned them in the very surface of their enquiry,
to the reproach of those who apprehend, that nothing of moment or rarity is
attainable, unless long and diligent search be made in the most abstruse and
profound Corners. Children would have puzzled Archimedes, in their easy
invention of setting an Egg upright. The Mines of Potozzi were discovered by
Silver, found on the surface among the Shrubs, though by their digging to a
great depth in many Places, they got nothing but their labor for their pains.
The Mariners observing, that the Sea out of the Ocean did always flow through
the Streights of Gibraltar into the Mediterranean, and so it did out of the
Hellespont, yet without any proportionable Intumescence, notwithstanding the
Water had no passage to be disimbogued, soon concluded, that it must run out
again underneath, as fast as it run in atop, which by their Plummet they found
to be true. That this unpolisht sort of People without any Philosophy, should
so easily detect so considerable a Truth, is no great wonder; whereas the Chain
of Physicians, linkt together for so many Ages, could never by all their
Philosophy, Traditions, Study, and their pretended anatomical Industry,
discover the circulation of the Blood, until lately; a thing much more easy,
than the circulation of the Sea in the Mediterranean: for had they like the
Seamen only reasoned thus; the Heart through the Arteries does constantly
throw Blood into the Extremes, and so did also the Veins, according to the
Dictates of all Physicians, from the beginning of the World, until forty or
fifty years last past. Were this true, in less than an hours time all the Blood
of the Body must be thrown into the Extremities; and then what monstrously
swelled, red, bloody Hands and Fingers, Feet and Toes, Nose, Lips, or in short,
Face and Head, must a man have had? For according to their Maxims, it is most
absurd, that two contrary Motions should be granted to Humors, flowing in the
Vessels; neither is it possible, for the Heart by Pulsation does always throw
from it, and what must then become of all that Blood? Here the very Seamen
would have told you, the Blood must take up some other course, and return
through other Channels; and what could these be, but the Veins, that throughout
the whole Body do for that purpose accompany the Arteries, through which the
Blood is conveyed again into the Heart: and this is the Circulation, which any
man would have thought might easier have been defected, than the setting an Egg
upright, or the circuation of the Mediterranean. Here you may see, what a dull
stupid sort of People Physicians have ever been, as if their hard studying and
poring on the Elements, Temperaments, Humors, Faculties, and such like
Trifles, had benumbed their Brains, which makes 'em look with their Eyes fixed
and immovable, their Bodies stiff, like automatick Statues walking up and
down. Had the Apothecaries, who have their Senses and Tongues voluble enough,
(if not too much) applied themselves to the Invention of the Circulation, they
would have found it out with less labor and time, than the making up of a
Composition of Mithridate, or Treacle. For all this, though the Invention did
not partake half the subtilty it seemed, yet such was the Envy and Detraction
of Physicians, they rather chose to ascribe it to Varandaeus, Caesalpinus,
Padre Paulo Sarpa, and others, than to the real Author; and Lindanus, the
Professor of Leyden, (under whom I begun my Course of Physic) pretended to
prove the Circulation out of sacred Writ. And now it is set on broach, Cui bono
is it beyond Speculation, or what use or advantage do they make of it in curing
Diseases, or desuming curative Indications, which if any where, should be most
apparent in Fevers? Yet notwithstanding, the same senseless Method, and
frustraneous Remedies, are still continued, without any considerable
Alterations, the poor broiled Patient by their confident and deceitful
Insinuations gulled of his Money, and Life in the Bargain; for in no Distemper
does the false Art of Physic adduce less Benefit, and greater Detriment, than
in this; and since the first Impression of this Conclave, they are generally so
plainly convinced of their killing Errors, in giving the Jesuits Bark in
continual and remitting Fevers, as they term them, that the same men do now
openly assert it to be destructive in all such Fevers; but who shall expiate
their past Crimes, in murdering so many Persons of all Ranks and Qualities by
it? Let Us also put their other Methods to the Test, where commonly the first
great Remedy advised is Bleeding, which they say is to abate Plenitude, (
Plethora ad vires at least) but what Plenitude can there be supposed a day or
two before the Patient dies, at which time I have known 'em to prescribe
Phlebotomy, even on the same day the Sick expired? Others affirm, they bleed to
cool the Body, which without dispute it does, but how, they know not; though
Riolan, with the rest of his French Physicians, asserts Bleeding to refrigerate
in Fevers, by quickening the Circulation, which running ofter about, does expel
those hot Steems and Evaporations in greater abundance; but then this being too
frequently repeated, drives out the vital Spirits, drawing Death at their
heels, especially in Cases of Malignity; whence it appears, though moderate
Bleeding is very proper and advantageous, yet they have not sense enough to
tell you how. The next Design is to prescribe Diaphoretick Juleps, Bolus's,
Drops, and Powders, to expel the Cause of the Fever by Sweat. How pernicious
this is, you shall understand by the sequel. Observe then, that Nature seldom
throws off any morbifique Matter by beneficial (or critical) Sweats, unless it
be first digested or subdued, and afterward separated, at which time Sweats
are proper, and Nature being debilitated, requires assistance from suitable
Sudorificks; on the other hand, while Humors are in an high Ebullition and
Combustion, to exhibit hot inflaming Sudorificks, (which go under the Name of
Cordials) is to make an addition to the Inflammation, absorb that little
mositure that is mixed with the Blood, and augment all the febril Symptoms; for
it is more easy to force Water out of a Flint, than to promote Sweat in some
burning feverish Patients; and if you should, it must be with vast detriment,
for no febril Matter (as I hinted before) is carried off before Digestion and
Separation. Thus you may behold the Ignorance of Physicians. The last Remedy is
Blistering, by which is intended the attracting the Malignity to the
Circumference, which also does seldom succeed, unless the Ebullition be
somewhat abated, and that is usually toward the latter end; so that if applied
in the beginning, as I have known some have done, it does occasion the same
Mischiefs, the fore mentioned Sudorificks caused. Among a multitude, I will
give you one Instance of a Person of Quality, laboring under a mild sort of
remitting Fever, against which I advised bleeding in the Arm, an antifebril
Decoction for ordinary Drink, and specific Draughts against the Paroxysms.
These answered expectation, in reducing the Distemper to a considerable
abatement, insomuch that on the third or fourth day, the Lady was about her
Chamber, and had her Menstrua come down upon her, flowing after their usual
manner; all very good Signs: but it happened, that a Person of Honor related to
the Patient, out of care and tenderness toward her, was desirous her own
Physician should be sent for next morning early, who appearing there, thought
it necessary to do something, and therefore caused Epispastick or blistering
Plasters to be applied to the Arms and Neck; I coming two hours after, found
the Plasters on, and was told, I must meet in the evening to consult with the
other Doctor, in vogue a very great Physician I assure you; but I replied, The
Consultation ought to have been before the Application of the Blisterers, and
therefore it was too late, for they had already given the fatal Blow, for which
Reason I desired to be excused, leaving withal a very ill Prognostic. By night
her Menses were totally suppressed, and a Metastasis humorum was occasioned to
the Brain, whence a very enormous Delirium, or Raving, was caused; for the
Cantharides had altered the figure of the particles of the Blood, whereby the
motion of Nature was inverted. Next morning I was sent for again very early,
but then I positively refused coming. In the afternoon, to retrieve the Error,
she was ordered to bleed out of the Foot, but to little purpose; for Nature
once become irregular in Motion, is not easily reduced. The Medicines
prescribed by the Doctor abovementioned, were these following.

Aug. 2. Persistat in usu pulveris Cardiaci, Iulapii, and Emulsionis, addendo
aquae Scord. comp. iii. sumantur ut prius.

Applicentur Empl. vesicat. satis larga and acria internis brachiis and nuchae.

. Aq. paralys iiss. Epidem. ii. Sir. e mecon. vi. misce, sumat hac nocte hora
somni post pull. Card. praescriptum.

. Spir. sal. dulc. iii. sumat gut. x. vel plures in singul. haust. potus
ordinarii.

Aug. 3.. Decoct. com. pro Clystere lb i. sir. Violar. iii. Elect. lenit. i.
Injiciatur hora quarta pomeridiana.

. Tamarind. i. ras. c. cer. ii. fol. -- m. ii. coq. in Aq. hord. s. q. ad lb
iss. Colaturae per subsidentiam depuratae add aq. Scord. comp. ii. sir. rub.
idaei i. sir. Garyoph. iss. Bibat iv. hora quaque tertia vel quarta.

Repetatur haust us hyppot. heri praescriptus, sumat hac nocte.

. Spir. c. cer. ss. sumat gut. xv. bis in die vel saepius in cochl. iv. Iulap.
cardiaci.

Aug. 4. The above-meant Doctor finding he had lost a great deal of ground,
since his entering into Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for so indeed it
proved, humbly prayed one of his Brethren might be called in, not so much for
assistance, as confirming and ratifying of all what had been acted by him, that
so he might make his Exit off this tragical Stage, without stain of Blood or
Reputation: Wherefore these underwritten Prescriptions were coucht by both
their Head-pieces.

Applicetur Empl. vesicat. satis largum and acre nuchae.

. Aq. ceras. nigr. vi. aq. Protheriacal. ii. poeon. comp. Bryon. comp. Tinct.
succin. an. i. sir. Garyoph. e succo citri an. i. m. f. Iulapium, sumat cochl.
vi. alternis horis.

. Aq. Rutae, paralys. an. iv. Cinam. hord. iss. marg. pr. ii. Sacch. christ.
vi. m. sumat cochl. vi. alternis horis.

. Spir. sal. ammoniac. succinat. ss. sumat gut. xx. hora quaque quarta in
cochl. iii. Iulapii praescripti.

Abscindatur capillitium, and applic. Cataplasm. e fermento panis and succino
praep. Ad. s. q. aceti and tinctur. Succini.

Aug. 4. Applicentur statim cucurbitulae amplae, umbilico una, and duae regioni
diaphragm. and postea femoribus.

. Aq. Ceras. nigr. vi. Epidem. cinam. hord. an. i. marg. pr. iss. sacch.
Christ. ii. f. Iulapium. Sumat cochl. iv. singulis vel alternis horis.

. Aq. epidem. vi. sir. caryoph. e suc. citr. an. ss. misce. Sumat cochl. ii.
vel iii. alternis vicibus cum priori.

. Decoct. com. pro Clyst. lb i. mel. mercur. sacchar. rubr. an. ii. tinctur.
succin. ss. spec. hier. i. f. Enema injiciatur quam primum. Mortua est; or a
pro nobis.

3. The cordial Powder, Julep, and Emulsion, prescribed by me, were on Aug. 2.
thought fit by the Doctor to be continued, though the day before I had
countermanded the use of them, and advised only the continuation of my first
Apozem, and the Draughts, to which I imputed the chief part of my success. But
then I had a cramp Question put to me; What, will you let her die for want of a
Cordial? To which was replied, There was no occasion for one, and where Nature
was employed in any beneficial Evacuation, (as in our case of Menstruation) she
was not to be molested by multiplicity of Medicines, lest she might be
irritated, or impeded by something in them, which might be contrary, and cannot
always be discerned by a Physician; for in all Persons there is an
Idiosynorasia. But as I said before, the great mischief was perpetrated by the
Blisters, in which they were signally seconded by the two Hypnoticks, taken the
same night, and the night following; for it is a Maxim, That Narcoticks do
suppress all Evacuations, excepting Sweating, which throwing out through the
Pores, does necessarily make a revulsion of the Menstrua, as it does the Urine;
for he that sweats much, makes little Water.

Aug. 3. A purgative Glyster must needs be forced upon the unfortunate Patient,
which I should have most strenuously opposed, nothing adding more to a febril
Ebullition than a Purgative, raking up a Mud also, which otherwise might have
continued dormant. Monsieur le Medecin. finding no great Feats by his acid
spirit of Salt, imitates the Doctor of Contraries, in experimenting the
stinking alcalious Spirits of Hartshorn, with no better success. Therefore
perceiving, that Nature was grown sullen, and would not be pulled or halled,
neither one way nor other, concluded it to be high time, to provide for his
Reputation, and call in one of his own choosing, that should hide his errors,
as probably he had done reciprocally for the other. Now let us see, how both pull
at the Bell-rope. The Vesicatories are commanded to be applied, which operated
no more, than if they had been stuck to one of the Bed-posts, for the Reasons I
have already given you before; so that consequently by them the Ebullition was
raised yet higher; and now the grim Gentleman with his Sithe does begin to
appear at the Door, for there was a very great oppression of Respiration, and
the Breath fetched thick and panting, (an infallible sign of Death in Fevers)
which symptom is endeavored to be resisted by the Spir. salis ammoniac. and
the Antihysterick Julep, supposing the cause to be uterin Vapors, that in
their erroneous opinion was judged not only to infest the Lungs, but the Brain
also, whence proceeded that vacillation of Mind, little Cramps all over, and
(which is a species also of Convulsion) a subsultus tendinum. Wherefore in
respect of the affectus Cerebri and totius generis Nervosi, there was Aq.
Poeon. comp. and Tinct. Succini added to the Julep; and to second this great
Work, the Hair was to be cut off, to give vent to those uterin Evaporations;
also an attractive Cataplasm to draw 'em out by force. Notwithstanding all this
Clutter, those symptoms increased, which spurred on our two associated
Physicians in applying Cupping glasses, hoping to intercept the Vapors, and to
pull 'em out by the middle, before they mounted up higher. That which
encouraged 'em to this hair-brained Advice, was, that the assistant Physician
had often been present with me, where I advised the application of
Cupping-glasses to a Person of Honor, who being sometimes surprised with
stifling, syncopal and convulsive Fits, as if he had been upon the moment of
Departure, was ever instantly relieved, as if by Miracle, through the use of
Cupping-glasses; but then it is to be conceived, these Fits were certainly
occasioned, by venomous Steems flying up; whereas in the Case forementioned,
those symptoms were erroneously apprehended only for symptoms of the Disease,
which in effect were also symptoms of Death, occasioned by Blood copiously
thrown into the Lungs, and now beginning to corrupt and stagnate. Moreoever, to
apply Cupping-glasses to the region of the Diaphragm, which is the chief
Instrument of Respiration, what was this, but wholly to put a stop to its
motion, and stifle the Patient upon the Spot? And how could these Cups have
been applied to the Navil and Thighs of a Lady, without the greatest breach of
Modesty. Certainly most Physicians as they are mere Brutes, so they are the
most ignorant of Mankind. Lastly, To give the Patient Le coup de grace, they
cause a smart irritating Glyster to be infused into her Guts, and what is most
senseless, mixing therewith Tincture of Amber; as if the Fundament with a
Medicine applied to it, were a proper place to cure the Brain; or the Forehead,
to cure Corns of the Toes. And since a Patient is at the last gasp, and on the
point expiring, were it not better to suffer her to depart quietly, than to
kill her? But that too often happens through want of judgment to discern,
whether the symptoms be symptoms of the Disease, or symptoms of Death.

CHAP IX.
Fevers and other Distempers explain ed, and cured by new Principles
1. IT has been hitherto the opinion of Physicians, that a preternatural Heat
dispersed throughout the whole Body, and continued to some space of time, is a
Fever, and the cause of all the Symptoms attending; as quick Pulse, high Urine,
immoderate Thirst, etc. and thence their curative Indication is cooling by
Bleeding, cooling Juleps, Purging, and Diaphoreticks, and these very seldom
answering expectation. Now let us but change, or transfer the Notion, and
State, that violent Pulsation is the cause (mediate or immediate) of all
Symptoms, that accompany a Fever, we shall soon discover many Truths, and be
capable to give a clear Resolve of the great number of Doubts and Difficulties,
that arise in Fevers; also be furnished with curative Indications, whence
greater success may be expected, than commonly attends the vain Endeavors of
Conclave Associates.

2. To pass by all profounder Philosophy than Sense, let us only suppose,
violent local Motion is the cause of Heat and Burning, witness the rubbing of
two hard Sticks one against another, so long until they take Fire, as the
Indians do for want of a Tinder-box, when they intend to make a Roast; likewise
a Wheel by its violent motion about the Axeltree, does easily take Fire, unless
prevented by greasing.

The Heart then being stimulated by heterogeneous Particles, and aculeous Salts
of various Figures, is incited to quicker and more forcible Motion or
Pulsation, whereby the Blood being wheeled quicker and stronger round than
naturally, does soon beget a greater proportion of Heat, which by continuation,
and a stronger motion, is suddenly advanced to a higher degree of heat, that
inflaming the bituminous and sulphurous parts of the Blood, does easily kindle
them into violent Flames, which then is to be called a Fever.

3. That which advances the Blood and Spirits to a higher degree of Heat, is
the sluggish or slow motion of the Blood in the Veins* caused by too great a
plenitude, whereby the Veins being crammed up, must necessarily impede it in
its motion. Now the Heart upon those smart Irritations moves faster and
violenter, throwing the arterial Blood with a fuller stream into the Veins,
than they can possibly carry it back to the Heart, which causes the Heart and
Arteries to beat stronger, or rather violenter than before; because it meets
with resistance, namely, the crammed Blood, that will not, or cannot move so
easily forward as formerly, from which violenter local motion, the Heat must
necessarily be extremely intended, like unto a Hammer, that striking on a Nail,
or any thing that is hard enough to make resistance, grows hot upon a few
strokes, whereas striking a twelvemonth together on a Feather-bed, shall not
contract the least warmth. Whence observe, that the thumping or strong
Pulsations sick People perceive in their Heads in Fevers, are only occasioned
by the carotidal Arteries, raised to a higher and more forcible Pulsation, by
the resistance it finds in striking forward the Blood, that is thrown into the
Sinus's of the Dura matter.

4. Besides the plenitude, or cramming up of the Veins with Blood, there is
another cause of the retardation and unaptness for motion in the Blood, which
is its separation into grosser and thinner, heavier and lighter, bituminous and
salin-mercurial parts, occasioned by the continual quick and violent motion of
the Blood, in manner not unlike Milk, separating into Butter and thin Milk, by
being violently moved in a Chairn. Hence it is, that Blood let out by
Phlebotomy in a Fever, appears of various Colors and Consistencies, which
heretofore and still is by most Physicians called putrefied Blood.

5. The Blood being thus separated into various parts, the bituminous Particles
being very inflamable, become a Fuel to the febril Fire, and the
salin-mercurial parts turn acid, which in passing the Heart, do yet more
forcibly stimulate it to violent motion. Besides this universal motion caused
by the pulsation of the Heart, there is another in the Blood it self, which may
very aptly be termed an Ebullition, or rather Orgasmus, caused by the combat of
its alcalious and acid Salts; for none but a Madman would call this a
Fermentation: neither are you to judge two motions improper to the Blood, since
the one is as it were ab extra, the other ab intra.

6. As the Circulation of the Blood was the most easy to be found out, so
might the manner and ways of it, which notwithstanding hitherto have layn
asleep, though this could scarce have happened, unless among such, as are
greater Blockheads than common Seamen.

7. How have they strained to make their Marks to bear, by declaring that the
Blood passes out of the Arteries into the Veins, by their Anastomosis, or
Inosculation into each other, which is impossible; for were it so, the constant
pulsation of the Arteries would by the continual forcible motion so widen the
mouths of the Veins, whereinto they are inosculated, that they would either
burst, or cause a Varix. Moreover, where they have pretended an Inosculation,
from the nearness of the Arteries to the Vein, upon a narrower search and
enquiry, they have been found divisible. And if an Anastomosis were allowable,
they must be found in all parts of the Body, where the Blood circulates.
Besides, in the Dura matter, where there is so great a Circulation, there ought
to be Anastomoses beyond any other parts, and yet there is not a Vein to be
seen near the Sinus's, but at some considerable distance.

8. Since this manner of passage could not well be squared, to answer all
Objections, they take their refuge to the Pores, which are insensible passages,
that are supposed to be throughout the whole Body. This indeed is explaining
the Circulation per coecos ductus, and qualitates conultas, their old asylus
ignor antiae. But that being granted, the Blood being extra vasa, why does it
not putrefie, according to the Dictates of Galen? Here they seem to boggle and
stumble, being willing to pass over the Matter in silence.

9. Not to detain you longer with these Impertinencies, you may suppose the
Musculs, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Membranes, the Cutis (which is no other than
a Membrane) Bowels, Glanduls, and most, if not all the parts of the Body, to be
fibrous, or to be made up, and consist wholly of a complication of Fibers, of
various figures, and variously disposed or placed, whence the whole Body may
well be termed a Texture. These forementioned parts being dried in the Sun,
upon laceration, or other separation of them, or being inspected through a
Microscope, their Fibers do plainly appear, which by the Eye are also
manifestly perceived, like the Hairs of the Head, to be hollow, and perforated
with a Trunk in the middle, whence minute branches are dispersed to the
Circumference. So that it is not to be doubted, but the Blood circulates, and
passes out of Arteries, through those small Trunks of the Fibers, to the Veins,
having a capillar Artery and Vein inserted, or rather inosculated into them,
the Trunks being destined for transmission of the Blood, and the minute
Branches for conveying nutriment to their minimal Particles. All Tumors,
Pustles, and Discolorations, are occasioned by Blood, stagnating in the hollow
of the Fibers, which being become gross and thick, is incapable of passing into
the capillar Veins, yet notwithstanding the pulsation of the Arteries
propelling it forward, must necessarily then elevate the Blood stagnating in
the Fibers into a Tumor, Pustle, or Discoloration, according to the proportion
of what does stagnate. The Heat that accompanies some Tumors before, and in
Maturation, is caused by violent pulsation of the Arteries, meeting with
resistance, as I have already told you. The external Pores of the Skin are the
terminations of the Fibers of the Cutis, through which the virtue of Medicines
externally applied pass into the capillar Veins, and so into the Body; for as I
have instanced before, there is a communication between all the Fibers, Veins,
and Arteries.

10, Though from these Notions I could desume Matter enough to expatiate into a
large Volume, (by deriving thence the various kinds of continual and
intermittent Fevers) I judge it at present unnecessary, leaving the further
Search to those ignorant lazy Drones that are called Conclave-Physicians.

The practical use of these Theorems is such, that the greatest Difficulties in
Physic may be thereby easily resolved, which hitherto have only been
controverted without any satisfactory Decision. As first; Whether Phlebotomy
(or Bleeding) in continual, and in some intermittent Fevers, ought to be
celebrated? The whole Herd of Conclave-Physicians unanimously declare, it is
the great Remedy for Cooling, and no doubt it is; for being often repeated, it
will infallibly render the Patient as cold as Marble, as I can testify by
several of their unhappy Practices; but how? certainly by tapping off he
Spirits together with the Blood, which are the efficient cause of Heat:
consequently bleed a man too often or too much, and you will kill him. It Is
replied, In Fevers there is a preternatural Heat, occasioned by the too great
abundance of vital Spirits, or at least by the great fury they are in, and
therefore they are to be tamed and diminisht. I answer, The same Reason will
hold, to indicate Bleeding, until the Patient be dead; for being always in a
feverish Heat, until he expires, you should by the same standard bleed, until
the last hour: but the Consequence is false; for no man ought to be murdered
by Bleeding; Therefore. Another false Position encourages these Idiots to
Bleeding, viz. That in all Fevers there is a Plethora ad vires, that is to say,
there are more Humors than Nature can manage, insomuch that they are become a
burden, whereof she ought to be alleviated by Bleeding. This Argument resembles
the other; because almost in all Diseases there are more Humors than Nature
can manage, even in pulmonick Consumptions, and at the moment of death in
Fevers; for a pound weight of Skin is too much for a dying Patient to bear, and
would you therefore flea him?

11. Being a Physician to a Nobleman, that had labored two months under a
chronical Distemper, sometimes complicated with a symptomatick Fever, that
would continue a day or two; another Physician of great Note was by a Stranger
imposed upon me, to consult with. He had no sooner examined the Patient, and
felt his Pulse, but comes to me with a Question in his mouth, Why did I not
bleed my Lord? I answered, in the beginning of the Distemper I had caused him
to be blooded several times; but at present his Lordship having by a thin spare
Diet been kept very low for several weeks, I saw no occasion there was for it.
He cried out again, Bleed him, bleed him; I demanded, for what? TO other
replied, To take off his Fever, it will cool him; but being asked how, it
gravelled him. In short, I concluded with an hypothetick Assent, If you please
to kill the Patient, you may bleed him, and I will leave him to you. After him
several other Physicians were introduced, who reported publicly, the Patient
would die; and some, that he was dead: yet after all this, the Nobleman was
cured by me, and continues in a good state of Health. By the way you are to
understand, this happened at Paris.

Thus you see, what Measures Conclave-Physicians take for Bleeding, whereas an
Empirick, that does not pretend to rational Indications, would have given me
much better satisfaction.

12. To return to my Theme: We are not to call that a Plethora ad vires, where
a Patient has been blooded once or twice, and has abstained from all Food, but
thin Spoonmeat; certainly it would be a madness to say, a macerated Carcass has
too much Blood in his Veins, that are fallen flat, and scarce to be seen;
neither can they always pretend Revulsion, or Derivation, where there is no
urgent Symptom.

13. It is in Fevers, and in all other Distempers where Bleeding is necessary,
you may be safely directed and guided by the Theorems I have proposed to you:
for supposing a man at^^^ked by a continual Fever, (which being an universal
Distemper, whereby more are brought to their untimely end, than by any other
Disease, I do the rather make choice of for an Instance) the Blood moving too
slow in the Veins in the beginning, occasions a violent pulsation in the
Arteries, whence arises a preternatural Heat; here Bleeding is necessarily
indicated, upon which immediately follows a more free Circulation, and
consequently an abatement of the preternatural Heat, and other Symptoms; also a
freer Transpiration, by the depletion of the Fibers. But in some space of time,
the Pulsation being spurred on again, by the motion of the Blood ab intra, (as
I have said before) the violent Heat and other Symptoms return, and therefore
in many a second Bleedieg is indicated, and sometimes a third, though in most
once or twice opening a Vein does suffice in cold Climats, according to the
fullness of the Vessels. Having answered the first Indication, taken from the
violent motion ab extra, the next is to be desumed from the preternatural
motion of intra, which is to be quieted, by subduing the foreign and
heterogeneous Salts in the Blood; but not by a nonsensical Aqua epidemica, or a
stinking Spiritus cornu cervi, or earthly Powders; as Crabs eyes, Bezoar,
Hartshorn, etc. among all which Muscleshells challenge the pre-eminence. Some
little good they may contribute; but toward the curing of a violent or
malignant Fever, they bear no more proportion, than a Mouse toward the
removing a Mountain: and if a man does sometimes conquer such a violent
Distemper, impute the Victory rather to the strength of Nature in the Patient,
than such feeble Medicines. I know your Curiosity will demand, what Remedies
they are, that are virtuated with a power to effect so great a Work. I answer,
That the Materia medica, whereout they are to be prepared; you see one sort
every day, if you look but a little beyond your Nose, you need not grub for it
in the depth; another you tread upon; and a third is as common in your Mouth,
as the Bread you eat: what they are further, I shall never discover publicly,
nor commit their Preparation to any Apothecary; for it is not fit such Medicines
should be abused by every Conclave-Physician.

14. The Delirium, that so often survenes on Fevers, has its source from Blood,
that is too copiously thrown out of the carotidal Arteries into the Sinus's of
the Crassa meninx, and the veins of the Brain, which by exciting a
preternatural Heat, subverts the temperament of the Brain. The truth hereof
appears, by the Remedies I have used on such occasions, which in half an hours
time have reduced the Patients to their right Reason, by no other manner of
operating, than by causing a free Circulation in the Brain.

Why a sudden Fright, or other violent Passion, does sometimes in Bodies
predisposed produce a Fever, is not explicable by the common Principles;
whereas the application of this easy Notion, I have now delivered, renders it
most evident, viz. by causing a quick Pulsation.

15. It is also most manifest, that those who exhibit strong Sudorificks, and
hot burning Cordials, as Aq. epidem. spir. corn. cerv. etc. in the beginning of
Fevers, are culpable of male practice, in regard they accelerate Pulsation,
before the Veins are discharged by Phlebotomy, to give the arterial Blood a
free passage.

In many other Diseases we shall find the use of those Theorems great, though
in some you must be furnished with another of greater importance than the
former; particularly in a pulmonick Consumption, and in an internal Rheumatism,
a Distemper first so named and discovered by me in my Treatise of the Scurvey,
where you may read its Symptoms; to which I will only add this Observation,
That I have known it to surprise Women, upon a suppression or stopping of their
Fluor albus by improper Medicines.

This Fluor albus is either thin, saline, and limpid, or thick, cloudy, and
mucous; and either is putrid and fetid, or imputrid. It is the suppression of
the former, and by a Metastasis thrown upon the Bowels, causes most dismal
shrieking pains in the Guts, Stomach, or other Entrails, and often accompanied
with Vomitings. If at any time palliated, it is very apt upon some Interval to
return. Whence is to be remarkt, of how dangerous a consequence an improper
Cure may prove, not seldom costing the Patient her life; especially since
Conclave-Physicians are wholly ignorant of Remedies against such internal
Rheumatisms.

CHAP. X.
Of a most Tragical Case.
1. FRom the most brutal Barbarian, compassion does emanate toward Infants and
Children, but not the least Spark from the Tartar, a Physician so charactered
by some Phanaticks, from an imaginary resemblance to an (...). They termed him
all Castiliano, Sotos and Devotos, the Stars being often still remaining in the
Hemisphere, when he without intermission of the coldest morning never fails to
show himself in a most humble prostration, in the Basilica, to all those, whom
by that Argument he hopes to convince to be his Patients, whether sick or well;
and how some are like to be managed, this subsequent Narrative will inform us.
It was a continual Fever, had seized on the Daughter of a Chevalier, who kept
his ordinary Residence at a certain Village, distant from Paris few miles,
though the Decumbiture of the tender Patient happened to be, at a Relations House
at Charenton, up the River Seyne four miles, or two by Land. She had lived ten
Octobers, but could not pass the eleventh of the year, etc. If you consider the
liveliness of her Features, or pregnancy of Wit, from which her Parents could
not but be extremely happy in their future expectation, you must imagine, their
chiefest care did center in the choice of a grave, pious, experienced, and
learned Physician, who by his most diligent and watchful Attendance, might be
capable to encounter the feverish Distemper, which in plain Terms did not
appear in the least fierce, or malignant, unless an ordinary Headache could
render it such. The Herculean Remedy was Jesuits Bark, steept in small Beer,
(such hellish bitter stuff, as they brew about Paris) and this to be used ( pro
Potu ordinario) as often as she was a dry. For a revulsion of those velli^ating
Steams, that mounted up to the Brain, a potent Attractive of some dry resiny
Powder, one degree above Saw-dust, was applied to the Soals of her Feet; but
how the notion of this kind of Attraction accords with Pulsion, now wholly in
fashion, I am to seek. The success of these Administrations was great; for the
Distemper did not accrue in the least grain, though the continuance did throw
Monsieur le Docteur on another Phenomenon, representing it might probably be a
verminous Fever, and therein the Doctor and the Lady, Mother of the Patient,
both jumpt in opinion; for I never knew a Woman contradict Worms in Children,
though they complained only of Corns on their Toes. This was a sufficient
warrant, to animate the Medico, to a Prescription of eight grains of Mercurius
dulcis, and six of Diagryd, which was confessed, though possibly it might be
ten or twelve grains of Mercury; for the Bill was either taken off the File, or
Direction given verbally. Upon two or three days Interval, a Repetatur of
Mercury was ordered, to enforce the former, and produce those potent efects,
for which a single Dose was incapable, And to the intent the poor little
Sufferer might arrive with greater speed, to the happy Port of Health, the
Jesuits Bark was still to be continued for her ordinary Drink. Now who would
have thought, but that swift Mercury, agitating the Peruvian Bark, would soon
have wafted this deplorable Passenger, to the Cape of Good hope? The truth is,
Mercury was too boistrous, linking the Indian Bark, before she was got half
Seas over; for soon after the last Dose, the Sufferer's Mouth and Face began to
swell, her Throat to be sore, her Breath to stink, Teeth to loosen, Spittle to
ouse plentifully from her Lips, Drought, Heat, difficulty of Respiration,
furring of the Tongue, and all other Symptoms to duplicate; for here was a
great Drought and Heat occasioned by the Fever, and a far greater Drought and
Heat added and caused by the Mercurial salivation, which daily (as is usual)
increased, insomuch that here was fifteen or sixteen Clothes wetted in four an
twenty hours. This duplication of Causes and Symptoms, concentrating chiefly
about the Throat and Mouth, made such eating and painful Ulcers, that a
Gangrene ensued. Consider what a miserable spectacle this was for the worthy
Parents and Friends to behold; she being passionately beloved by all that knew
her. The Groans, Shrieks, Outcries, and Signs, were inexpressibly piercing. It
was high time to expel Sotos and Devotos, and call for one that should bring
Help from the Stars, (she being past all sublunary Assistance) who proved to be
an Apothecary Doctorated, and honorated, an immense Astrologer, and wonderfully
well acquainted with the Celestial Inhabitants. But alas good Man! as the
Scheam represented here, his chiefest Aid consisted in pitying the Patient,
bringing tidings of Death, and recommending an excellent Surgeon, whose
Inspection immediately discovered a Gangrene in the Mouth, which by him being
cut out, the Bone appeared bare to view. En fin, God Almighty out of his
infinite mercy and goodness, was pleased to release her Innocent Soul, from her
macerated, tortured, and lacerated Body, and take her to himself. I do not
question, but in the Scheam erected by the forementioned Astrologue, Mercury
was the Ascendent and Horoscope, looking with a jealous eye on Dame Luna, in
Copulation with old Saturn in the eighth House, and Mars the fiery Stallion
(the cause of the Fever no doubt) embracing the other Whore Venus in the sixth;
a very Bawdy House, no less than the eighth. Mercury being in Capricorn, the
House of Saturn, a most malevolent Planet, and spying this old doting
Fornicator, cour^ing of his Mistress, was resolved at that moment in revenge of
the inconstant she-Planet, to destroy all Women-kind, that, was under the power
of his Influence; so that the Astro-Doctor might very well say, Mercury killed
the Patient, and it was impossibe, the face of Heavens appearing so full of
Frowns, for any Female to escape, and consequently that his Brother Doctor was
not to blame.

Leaving remote Causes, it is not immaterial to calculate such as are nearer and
immediate; but before I enter further into the Merits of this Cause, give me
leave to ask a question in earnest; Did Quicksilver or the Fever kill the
Patient? you may possibly answer the Question, by asking another, viz.
supposing a man in an high Fever, and on the ninth day, his Wife to quit
scores, gives him a gentle Pat with a Mallet, on the side of his Head; did the
Fever kill him, for it was on the ninth day; or the Mallet? The Learned in the
Law will unanimously answer you, It was the Mallet; Ergo, it was the
Quicksilver. But how.? upon that I will serve you by and by. Would not the
Jesuits Bark alone, without the Mercury, have given the Patient her last
Dispatches, being exhibited in a continual Fever? The first Part of the
Conclave does plainly demonstrate the Affirmative. Lastly, The Jesuits Bark,
and Mercury sublimate dulcifyed, being both killing Medicines in the precedent
Case, which of 'em did the last execution? I told you already, the Mallet;
though beyond all peradventure had only the Bark or Mercury singly be offered,
the error of either of 'em might have been retrievable. I confess of the two,
the prescribing of the Bark was the most preposterous; for had Mercury been
directed with a gentle Purgative, to carry it off, in a verminous Fever, (
caeteris indicantibus) it would have been very practicable; but this had only
the appearance of an ordinary autumnal Fever, contracted by living in a
Waterish Air* near a great River, upon the precedence of a hot Sulphurous
Summer, the Cure whereof ought to have been performed by Method and Remedies,
not yet arrived to Sotos, or his Brethrens knowledge.

Next, let us enumerate the Errors committed in this case; First, the exhibition
of the Bark in a continual Fever. Secondly, Advising a violent scammoniat
Purgative, in a continual Fever, which must necessarily hinder the digestion of
Humors, rake up a Mud, that lay dormant, occasion a new Inflammation and
Orgasmus, and reduce the Blood to a greater Crudity, than at the first kindling
of the Fever. Thirdly, The mixing of Mercurius dulcis with Scammony, instead of
some gentle laxative Electuary, that would have entangled the Mercury, and
slipped easily through the Guts, carrying the Mercury clear off with it; whereas
Scammony before it comes to purge, raises an high Ebullition, whereby the
Mercurial Particles are dispersed throughout the Body, and lodged in the
Glanduls and Pores of the tenacious Lympha, which the Stools afterward provoked
by the Scammony, do not carry off; so that Sotos was extremely mistaken, if for
his excuse he pleads, he gave Mercury with a strong Purgative, to throw it off.
Fourthly. The Capital error of all is, the exhibiting of Mercury upon, and with
the Jesuits Bark, a most potent Adstringent retaining and binding the Mercury
within the Body, stopping all its Avenues and Outlets, so as there can be no
discharge or vent by Stool, Urine or Sweat: but Mercury, a flying Dragon, or
mineral Mastif, being thus pent, locked in, and provoked, will not stick to take
a Patient by the Throat, tearing and worrying those parts, until he is
strangled; and what is more, the Humors by being locked up by the Jesuits Bark,
were become extremely inflamed, acrimonious, and malignant. No wonder, if being
forced up to the Throat by Mercury, they thus lacerated, devoured, and
gangrened those most tender Glanduls. After all, as a Merchant upon a great
loss at Sea, or otherwise, does next day appear more gay and in greater
gallantry than ever, to convince his Dealers, that the Report is false, or at
least that his loss is less to him than a Flea bite; though it breaks his Back
within a week after, that is, as soon as he has taken up of his Creditors to
the full proportion of his Credit: even so this great Doctor, without the least
resentment of the Misfortune, assumed a brisker humor, and made a greater
appearance among his Brethren of the Faculty, and in all public Places, than
before, as if he accused the Friends of the deceased of Ingratitude, for
throwing him off, that had so faithfully performed his Devoirs, conceiving
withal, that time wears off Black into innocent white. Certainit is, his good
fortune exceeds that of Vesalius, the great Ana^omist, who having sent a
Spanish Don to his Ancestors, to testify to his Relations, that an incurable
Distemper was Causa mortis, lost no time in dissecting of him; for upon the
opening of the Breast, his heart was perceived to palpitate and move; insomuch
that the Standers by immediately applied themselves for Justice to the
Inquisition, with an Accusation, that Vesalius had barbarously murdered their
Kinsman. His Catholic Majesty, by using his utmost Interest with the
Inquisitors, at length prevailed to exchange their sentence of Death into
penance of a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem; in which expedition he dyed. To return to
my Narrative; though I cannot offer the least Argument in extenuation of so
erroneous a Practice; yet it is possible, the Doctors Apothecaries Apprentice,
(to whose negligent care the making up of Medicines is ordinarily committed)
might aggravate the Mischief; either by mistaking the weight, wherewith the
Mercurius Dulcis was weighed; or by adding three or four grains more than was
prescribed; or by making use of Mercury ill prepared; or that which was kept
too long, and that probably (as most of 'em do) in a Paper, through the Pores
whereof a subtle nitrous Salt is attracted out of the Air, which opening the
Body of the Mercury, does render it again corrosive; insomuch, that ten grains
of such shall raise a Salivation sooner, than three or fourscore grains of
Mercurius Dulcis newly, and well prepared.

FINIS.

