TREATISE OF THE Smallpox and Measles; DESCRIBING Their Nature, Causes, and
Signs, Diagnostick and Prognostic, in a Different Way to what has hitherto
been known. TOGETHER, With the Method of Curing the said Distempers, and All,
or Most, of the Best Remedies. ALSO, A Particular Discourse of Opium,
Diacodium, and other Sleeping Medicines, with a reference to a very Great Case.

By Gideon Harvey, M.D. His MAJESTY'S Physician of the Tower' And not of the
COLLEGE of Physicians.

LONDON, Printed for W. Freeman, at the Bible over against the Middle
Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street, 1696.

THE Preface.
UPON thought, that the Small Pox and Measles are herein Discoursed in their
True Causes, altogether different from those hitherto Received among the Gang
of Physicians; though very Erroneously, and contrary to all Reason: That the
Manner of their Generation, from their First Source, their Separation and
Expulsion are so evidently and plainly set forth: That their Diagnostick and
Prognostic Signs are so Copiously and Distinctly here described: And lastly,
that their Cure and Management are exactly explained in the proposal of the
Methods, Remedies, and the best of Medicines, wherein you are so guided, as to
make Choice out of their several sorts, and to apply them to their Various
Kinds and Seasons of those Distempers: I say, upon thought of these
particulars, (which are all adapted to ordinary Capacities, if with a studious
care read over) that it is scarce possible for any of Sense to believe, that I
can have any other design, than the preservation of your Life, and the
Informing you to secure your self against such Advices, whereby frequently Men,
Women and Children have been most certainly slaughtered; I mean, against the
Ignorance, Covetousness, and Opiniatreness of such, who profess themselves to
be listed in the Regulated Band of Physicksters. By the Reading the Contents of
these few Pages, you may easily put your self into a qualification of Judging
of the Procedure and Advice of Physicians given to the greatest of Persons, in
all Spiritual Graces and Moral Virtues, not to be paralleled; on which subject,
if you desire the Opinion and Character of others, I must refer you to that
excellent Poem of the most Ingenious Goldent Poet.

The Design of this Tract, and the doubtful Reflections it might cause, did
occasion some to exercise their industry to delay the Pr -- g of it, by a bait
that took very easily with the P -- er, or else this would have come out Two
Months, or Ten Weeks ago; and now it is carelessly finished, a Barrier is put by
the same Parties, to the Common Ten Shilling-Way of Publishing Books, so that
the Publisher is not to be prevailed with to give it Room among his
Advertisements of Puppy-dogs lost, and Geldings Stolen or Strayed.

If I tell you, that here are set down Rules to Assertain the Seasons, Number,
and Proportions of Bleedings, to the true and necessary Occasions, and Diseases
that require 'em (which no Physick-Author hitherto has done yet) whereby the
Vulgar-Road of Bleeding at Random, according to the Capricious Fancy of the
Physickters, at any time, and almost in all Diseases, to the Fatal Injury of so
many Thousands, may easily be shunned; Moreover, if I advert you, that the
Nature of Opium, and all other Sleeping-Medicines, of which the World has been
to this day Grossly Ignorant, is here so manifestly detected, that their
Pernicious Effects may be avoided, and their Usefulness Employed in such Cures,
where this will Instruct you, may be Requisite: And if I may, without
Ostentation, let you know, that possibly out of these few Sheets may be
Extracted more True and Practical Notions in Physic, than by many years
turning over of Voluminous Idle Books in Medicine; all this is Premised to no
other end, than to Caress you to the Reading of this Small Treatise.

One Advantage I shall easily obtain; That the Small Pox and Measles being
Distempers, wherein the Female-Vulgar, in Knowledge and Experience, are on a
Level with the Reputedly-best of Physicians; I shall now readily acquire your
Assent, that as they are plainly Ignorant and Fatal in these Diseases, it is not
im-probable they are so ^^ many, if not most others; which is sufficiently
detected in the latter part of the New Edition of The Art of Curing Diseases by
Expectation, the greater part whereof is wholly new, and has been endeavored
to be Stifled with all the Industry imaginable.

To Conclude this Proeme, I shall only observe, that in some places, Physicians
are generally extremely bold in their Practice (setting aside, that Gross
Ignorance is the Mother of Boldness and Confidence) proceeding from this
Barbarous Apprehension in them, That if they do not Cure a Patient Speedily,
any other Physician may be called in upon them, and they turned out; for which
Reason they will most boldly strain the most Dangerous Remedy they have,
choosing rather, that the Patient should Die under their hands, than with
caution and longer time, be Cured by another of more Honesty and Integrity. But
if perhaps you call in another, who proves to be a Man of the same
Physical-Conscience with the first; he, to gain Reputation over the other
that is left off, shall immediately strain his Remedies to the highest Excess;
fearing either that the Patient may return to the First Physician, or a Third
called in upon him.

Thus I have several times known a Second Physician called in to the Small Pox,
that by Bleedings has in a very little time given his Patient the Lift; the
like I have known has happened frequently by Violent Purges in other
Distempers, by the Second and Third Physician; particularly in Consumptions,
Phthysicks, Dropsies and Fevers.

A TREATISE OF THE Smallpox AND MEASLES.
CHAP. I. Comprising some Objections made by Nurses and Motherly Women, against
Physicians, in the Smallpox, and Measles.
1. IT is no slight Reflection the World makes, that Motherly Women, Nurses and
Midwives, by their pretty inspection of Diseases of their Family, and of those
whom they neighbourly go to visit, do attain to so distinguishing a knowledge
in the Measles, Smallpox, Red-gun, Rash, Blasts, spotted, viz. Red and Purpre
Fevers, that they very frequently hitting right, does embolden them in point of
judgment, to demand a priority of a whole herd of Doctors; ridiculing their
fourteen years Studies with their Reading of Play-books and Romances, and Idle
Chattering in their Halls and Schools for seven years of that time, spending
four or five years or more in Drunkenness, and other Debaucheries, and devoting
the last year to a Candlelight reading of some musty Physic Author, and then
they are singly to be saluted by the name of Domine Doctor doctissime and
expertissime; whence this so boldly censuring World seems to infer, That a
Jovial debauched Conversation is the usual and infallible Expedient, the infant
or growing Physician makes use of to lift a Legion of Acquaintance; whose Fame,
at the expiration of his Academic Apprentiship, they shall not only noise, but
by a strange sort of Credulity, (as if a consummated Learning and Experience
must necessarily attend any debauched University Physician, that is of a man's
Acquaintance) subject their Bodies to all the Experimental Tortures, his
Capricious Indiscretion and Ignorance are pleased to inflict.

2. This popular Reflection so rashly made, and universally applicable, seems
to me to pretend, to cloth all, or a whole Panel at least of Physicians
(though originally cried up by the Populace themselves, and now cried down, who
therefore may well be styled the Mobile) with so much cloudiness, and darkness,
as if they were not able to see, what sort of Pimple is the Measles, what the
Smallpox, what Red-gum, or what Complexion a St. Antony's Fire, and Erysipelas
are of, pronouncing the same Distemper and Eruption, one day the Measles,
another day an Erysipelas, a St. Antony's Fire, a Rash, (in which case,
possibly, a Doctor declares his Patient as well in health as himself, and out
of all danger) the third day the Smallpox, the fourth a Spotted Fever, and the
fifth day the Purpres, with their sentence of Death annexed.

3. The profane Vulgar being so audacious, as to attack the whole Apollinean
Race, are embarked in a Design no less defamatory than malicious, by forming,
without any Logic, a natural conclusion from the Premises, viz. Are Doctors,
through want of Experience, such Strangers to the countenances of so dangerous
Eruptions, as the Smallpox, and Measles, and a Rash, (though aboding no
danger) which our less-knowing Sex is seldom mistaken in, then the Remedies
that are applied, must prove most certainly fatal, if what ought to be directed
for the Smallpox, is designed against the Rash, or simple Fever, or what is
prescribed against a Rash, or simple Fever, ought to respect the Smallpox, and
a putrid Fever, both which, how benign soever, by misapplications may be turned
to the most malignant, and consequently mortal Distempers.

CHAP. II. Reports the general Opinion of the Original of the Smallpox and
Measles.
1. BEginning from the original, source, or root of those Epidemical Eruptions,
though uncommon to the pedantic Method, and Chicaneries of the Schools, will
more readily conduct you to the growth and branches of them, and consequently
your observation following the tract, shall at length discover the
Expullulations and Buds they will terminate into, whether Measles, Smallpox,
or what else.

2. If you will give credit to Tradition, then for some Centenaries of years
this following Opinion is handed to us, and almost Nemine contradicente,
universally received; That there is a Labes, or taint and impurity inherent in
the Maternal Blood, that gives nutrition and augmentation to the parts of the
Foetus, or Child in the Womb; of which impurity, Nature, at some uncertain time
after the Birth, does discharge and purify all the Parts and Juices of the
Body, by throwing it out into Measles or Smallpox.

3. From this Text may be drawn several Doctrines.

1. That there is an original labes in all Maternal Blood. I hope, they will
not assert, That this original labes is synonymous to original Sin, that is, As
there is an original labes in the Soul, supposed to be ex traduce; so there
must also be an original labes in the Body.

2. That all Mankind must, at one time or other, undergo that Purgatory of the
Measles and Small pox; or Measles only, or only Smallpox.

3. That the Smallpox or Measles must be one of the first, and consequently
one of the most Ancient Diseases of Lost Paradise.

4. That the Measles and Smallpox are inevitable and heredity Diseases.

4. The first of these Doctrines seems to be established upon the Opinion of
the Ancient Arabian Physicians, who observing the promiscuous converse of their
Women with Men, fell into a notion, That their Wombs must necessarily attract
thence a great fowlness, which most certainly they did; and therefore now and
then their spurious Issue was surprised at sometime or other with Blotches,
crustly Pimples, Ulcers, and pains of Limbs, they bestowing the names of Bothor
and Pua on that sort of Distemper, which to me appears rather a Distemper of
the Great Pox, than the Small. Moreover, though in those days some of the
rougher Regions of Arabia might in some wise be Coadjutants to that fowl
Disease, yet in others of a more temperature Air, its appearance is not
recorded by any credible Hand; neither was it so universal in any part of their
Climat, but the greater number escaped that sort of taint, throughout all the
stages of their life, contrary to what Modern Physicians figure to themselves,
imposing a necessity on all Mankind of undergoing once in their lifetime the
Measles and Smallpox, which is most notoriously false; many retiring out of
this world, both Old and Young, that never underwent the sense of either of
those Distempers. In conclusion, The Arabian Pox may with greater right deserve
the Epithete of Universal in these days among the Debauchees, than any other.
That the Measles and Smallpox is derived from a stain, taint, or any impurity
impressed from the foulness of the menstruous Blood on the fluid, or solid
parts of the Infant, is scarce possible, if you will but grant, that all
tainted or malign Particles are ever in motion, as it will be proved to you
below; for in thirty, forty, or fourscore years (before which time some have
not the Smallpox) the motion of those Particles must be entirely spent and
vanished.

CHAP. III. Containing Arguments, proving, That the Measles and Smallpox are
not caused by any impurity in the uterin Blood.
1. NAture having in all other particulars showed the greatest providence for
Humane Kind, that in this of its production she should be so defective, is very
strange; since the Fruit of Vegetables is engendered out of their most pure and
exquisitely defecated Sap, whose purity is so much the more exalted, by as much
as the Fruit in all sensible and insensible Qualities, excels all the parts of
the Plant, and is preserved with the greatest defenses of coverings; strong
ones without, to resist all external Injuries; and fine tender soft ones
within, to prevent any hurt it might receive from them; all which is very
evident in great and small Nuts, and many other Fruits, as if Nature designed
to put her last hand to the perfecting of them. If you apply your Observation
to the Fruits of Animals, which as they stand in a degree higher in the Works
of Nature, derive their production from Juices refined to a much higher
exaltation; for instance of which, we need look no further than an Egg, whose
Yolk can so little be thought to be affected with the least taint or impurity,
that rather, in the judgment of all, it is held to be of the purest and sweetest
Juice, and most carefully walled up in a fine Shell. Can it then be thought by
any Rational, besides Arabians, and such as are included in the same Category
of Sense, that Man, the highest Work of Nature, should receive his first
nutrition and augmentation from a polluted Maternal Blood? To me it is beyond
all doubt, That the nutrition of the Foetus, or Infant in the Womb, is from the
purest, and most refined extract of the Maternal mass, through the branches of
the Hypograstrick, and some of the branches of the Spermatick Arteries,
terminating in the fundus uteri, or upper part of the Womb, which being
thickest, and very closely cemented in the inside, with a fine and very
glutinous and tenacious mucus, nothing of Blood can be thought to distill
monthly from thence; but from the lower part, near the Os internum, and from
the Cervix, out of branches of the Spermatick Artery, in which parts there
being many large spongy Pores, the Blood does often stagnate, and thence
oft-times grows impure, acid, putrid, and somewhat foetid. Moreover, it is not
beyond suspicion, that there may be a communication with the internal
hemorrhoidal Vessels, which are frequently found to transport very impure and
foetid Blood. That these menstruous vessels are implanted near the Os internum
uteri, and some without the Os, in the collum, appears plainly in some Women
that have their ordinaries the whole course of their pregnancy, or
Childbearing. Wherefore it cannot rationally be supposed, that Man being the
noblest of the Creation, being so carefully wrapped within two such thick Vellum
(if I may so fay) Enclosures or Coats, and in a part so close, thick and
strong, as the Womb, where nothing can be apprehended to pass of impurity
through all those Cases, should derive his first Constitution from impure,
variolous, menstruous, and recrementitious Blood; but it must be granted, that
out of the purest, and most refined Blood, the parts are nourished; unless you
do conceive, that Nature has been more bountiful in her providence, in the
production of the Fruit of Vegetables, and all other Animals, whose Young, as
Chickens, Pigs, Lambs, and others, consist of a Flesh abundantly more sweet and
delicate, than of Hens, Swine, and Sheep, and consequently engendered out of the
purest Blood, and Juices of the Old ones.

2. To illustrate this matter further, it is very observable, That the care and
prospection of Nature in the propagation of Mankind is so extraordinary, that
where the Mother has been sufficiently poxt, yet the Blood that is transmitted
for the nutrition of the Foetus, is so depurated, that she has brought forth a
strong and sound Infant, living to a great Age.

3. Many Women that never had the Measles or Smallpox in their Lives, have
brought into the world found Children, which notwithstanding have been taken
two or three years after with the Smallpox: Now can it be imagined, that a
Mother can impart an Impurity to her Conception, which she never was tainted
with her self?

4. Since it cannot be supposed, without Injury to the Female Sex of the
Northern Climes, that they only are subject to this Taint and Infection, but
that Women all the world over must be imbued with the same pollution, (which
leads me to the second Doctrine) it must follow, that all Men, Women and
Children must be smutted once, or oftener in their lifetime, with this
variolous Distemper; the contrary whereof is evidenced by a considerable number
of Men and Women, that have escaped both Measles and Smallpox, though
attaining to their Sixtieth, Seventieth, or Eightieth year. The Reply, That had
they lived longer, they would have undergone those Diseases, might be as well
appliable to such as had reached an even term with Old Parr, and therefore does
not merit an Answer; though I will not deny, but all are, or have been imbued
with those impure, contagious Effluvia after their Birth, that have a power to
produce the Smallpox or Measles: But on the other hand I do also assert, That
in those that lived to a great Age, and never lay under those Distempers,
Nature had either thrown them off insensibly through the pores, or by some
eruptions, blotches or pimples, too flight to be taken notice of by those that
were affected with them, or being accompanied with causes of other Distempers,
have been expelled together. However it is agreeable with universal experience,
that three fourths of those Northern Regions do once or oftener in their
lifetime pass that sort of purification, many once, some twice, and some very
few three times.

In the more Southern hot Climats, as most parts of Asia, Africa, and South
America, the Measles and Smallpox are so rare, that few know what they are, or
what Names to give them, and fewer that ever were sensible of those Diseases.

5. It Is most certain, that neither Hippocrates or Galen were acquainted with
any Names that denoted the Measles or Smallpox, unless you will restrain the
word (...) to them, which generally expressing efflorescencies and eruptions,
and being by them no where applied to Symptoms, that accompany those impure
Distempers, can in no wife be intended for that signification some Authors do
accept it in, but only for all sort of heats, pimples, red, purpre, or black
spots in malignant and pestilential Fevers; tho some will have it, that pimples
only were by them named (...), and all sort of malign spots (...), vid. Hipp.
de morb. pop. and Gal. de morb. epid. As for the words of pustulae or pimples,
and papulae, signifying Red Gum, neither of them being particularly applicable
to Measles or Smallpox, it is a great sign they knew nothing of the matter.

6. It Is very remarkable, that tho those Southern people are not subject to
undergo those Distempers of the Measles and Smallpox in their own Country, yet
no sooner they arrive in these Northern Regions, or soon after, but are
commonly surprised with one or other of them, or both successively, at some
uncertain Interval, one after another. And what is more astonishing, the Dogs
and Pigs that are brought over hither from Guiny, undergo the same Distempers.
Moreover, the Swine here have been frequently observed to have Measles, and
also Smallpox; and the like may be taken notice of in Dogs and Chickens.

CHAP. IV. That the Measles and Smallpox are not the first and most ancient of
Diseases, neither are they inevitable and hereditary.
1. THat those foul distempers were to be accounted among the first and most
ancient of Diseases, (as the third Doctrine does imply) must necessarily be
inferred from the foulness of the uterin blood, which our first feminine
Parent, or She-protoplast must have engendered, to transmit it to her
descendents, and consequently must be inevitable and hereditary, according to
what is expressed in the fourth Doctrine. But then here arises another
Question, Whence did our first Parent derive her Foulness? In answer to which,
and the preceding matter, Holy Writ not making the least mention of these
Distempers either in the Books of Moses, or that of Job, renders it ridiculous
to imagine them to be of that priority, or antiquity, or inevitable and
hereditary, which must suppose those impure semina fermentativa, as our great
Author terms them, to be transmitted from the mother to the foetus; but
granting the mother was clear of the supposed impurity, or at least was freed
from it, by having undergone the Measles and Smallpox before her Conception,
then she could not (as has been hinted before) have infected the foetus, which
must be, if you will make those Distempers hereditary; for nihil dare potest
quod non habet, except the Pope.

CHAP. V. Proving the Original of the Smallpox and Measles to be in the Air;
and the explaining the manner of falling into those Diseases.
1. SInce then it appears, that the Foetus receives its Nourishment and Growth
from the purest Blood, and from the most refined Air, strained through the most
subtle Pores of all the membranous coverings it is wrapped up in, and through the
Pores of those thick walls of the Uterus, within all which it is cherisht with a
most temperate warmth of the Mother; when aftewards it happens to launch out
from its little World into the great, it must necessarily encounter with a Cold
(in respect from whence it came) sharp, and rough Air, pricking it round in all
its external and internal most tender, and sensible parts, like Needles, and
Darts (no wonder it cries upon its first arrival) I say it is pricked and annoyed
by the Air, filled with insensible corpuscles or particles of all manner of
Composition, Constitution or Mixture, and of all sorts of Figures; some
crooked, contorted or skewd; others straight, globular; some sharp-pointed;
others blunt; some are benign in quality and effects, others more or less
Malign, many of those Particles are Saline, others Sulphurous; as they are all
various in mixture and figure, so in their Motions, and Positions. Those
immediately upon its Birth crowd through the Pores of its tender soft Skin, and
other Ambient membranes into all its Juices, and the most retired parts of its
Body, so that inevitably its Humors, and all its Parts must be rendered very
rough, extremely altered by being disturbed in their Positions, Motions, and
Figures; and most certainly here it is, it admits the Semina of several
impurities, which soon after break out in red Gum, a running at the Ears and
Armpits, and sometimes into the Measles or Smallpox (though rarely) into the
Thrush, and many others, according to the Powers and Qualifications, the
admitted foreign Particles are endued with: So that all the impurity an Infant
brings with it, is only a little black Matter in the Gut of the Fundament, a
little slime about the Mouth, Nose, and Ears, except what its stained with in
the passage in coming forth.

2. On the other hand were the Infant to be nourisht with such pure Juices, and
benign Air in the great World, as it was in the little, where from the bigness
of a Nutmeg, in less than nine Months it attains to the dimension of a Peck, it
might according to that proportion of time grow in a few years to the bigness
of an Elephant, did not the Determination of Nature put a stop to its growth.

3. To my self I establish this following as a Rule, by which I do not only
desume my Indcaitions successfully, but can also give my self a Solution to
many Queries touching the Measles, Smallpox, and indeed all other contagious
Diseases, and without which I can give my self in those particulars no manner
of Satisfaction, viz.

The Air in all places inhabitable is always filled with all manner of
Particles; namely, such as I have mentioned in the foregoing first Paragraph,
though in some places, and at some times more with one kind than another; but
this wants some probable Proof, and a further Illustration: Suppose a piece of
ground Eight or ten Foot in Dimension; in digging hereof you may possibly
discover either Gravel-stones, Marl, Clay, Iron-stones, Brimstone, or what
else; these do all consist of sensible parts: you cannot imagine but of each,
some of their insensible Particles are always steaming into the Air, which must
make a strange Variety; or suppose a small piece of uncultivated Ground, where
you commonly may discover hundred of different sorts of Vegetables, it may be
Wolfsband, Henbane, Time, Savory, Ashen-trees, etc. each of these must emit
different Particles into the Air, and likewise you must apprehend, they spring
up out of different Juices of the Earth, which makes it possible, that every
handful of Earth may differ from each other; the same may be thought of the
water, that gives its Original to thousand sorts of Plants, and to innumerable
little Animals (discernable by the Microscope) and to great ones, as Frogs,
Leeches, Water-Snakes, great and small Fish, etc. all which do likewise emit
steams into the Air; so that each Pailful of water, for what I know, may differ
from another; the like Variety may be instanced in the Fire; also a vast
proportion of steams must be communicated to the Air from all sort of Cattle,
Vermin, little Animals engendered out of Putrefaction; in fine, every animate
and inanimate Body upon the Surface of Earth does exhale Clouds of particles
into the Air, which Particles are always in Motion. Such a vast density of
Millions of variety of Particles, must by Action and Re-action, by the Rays of
the Sun, and other Motions from above, cause a Change every moment in the
Activity, Force, Motion, Position and figure of Particles, whereby they become
sometimes benign, sometimes more or less malign, at one time ready to cause a
malign Fever, at another the Smallpox, at another a pestilential Fever. These
Particles being most in motion, and agitated Spring and Fall by the Rays of the
Sun, are a Cause, why at those Seasons contagious Distempers, and other
Diseases also are most frequent.

4. The Smallpox and Measles, are either Sporadick, or Epidemick; the former
is when Persons at any time are scatteringly, that is, here and there surprised
with either of these Diseases; which wherever they happen to seize many Persons
in the same Country, about the same Seasons, and Times, become Epidemick, as
they have proved lately for several Months.

5. How some happen Sporadickly to fall into the Smallpox, many others
Epidemically, I apprehend in the manner you will read after I have premised,
that it is only such I mean as never had the Smallpox, or had them imperfectly,
it may be but once, and that not many, and not those that have had them
thoroughly either at once, or twice, who are no longer subject to the
Smallpox. The manner will be best explained by an Instance of one in perfect
Health, who never passed through this Distemper; coming out of the Country, or
from his Habitation elsewhere, to some House or Street, meets with a Cloud of
variolous Particles; these environing of him, enter the Pores of his Skin, and
by Inspiration his Lungs; the Person returns home, falls ill, and has the
Smallpox in such wise, as you will read hereafter. Had this Patient escaped
that Street, or House, or any other, where such variolous Clouds do float, in
all probability he would have deferred catching this Distemper. Though the
variolous, I do here take those Particles, that cause the Small Pox, to be half
Pestilential.
or half pestilential Particles are more frequently floating in or about
Cities, and Towns, it is not very rare to meet with them in scattered Villages,
arising out of Churchyards, standing Pools, stinking Ditches, or Morasses, and
places where Garbage, Carrion, and other Nastiness is thrown, so that it is
sometimes equally possible to fall into that Disease in the Country, as in
Cities, or Towns. Secondly, There must be a Disposition in the Person, that may
be infected, who never had that fort of Contagion, or else it is possible enough
for one to escape both a sporadic and epidemic Smallpox, that has thoroughly
had them before. A proper disposition requires,

First, Fullness of Humors, whose Pores the insufficiency of Spirits being
incapable of filling, are the readier entered and possessed by the half
pestiferous Particles.

2dly, Fitness of the Figures of the Pores, to receive the Figures of the said
Particles.

3dly, Feebleness and poverty of the Spirits; laxity of the ambient Membranes
and Humors, besides several other Concurrents.

5. Many are precipitated into an Epidemic Smallpox, because as in the
Sporadic, only small clouds or parcels of demipestiferous Particles are
dispersed here and there throughout a whole Country, Town, or City only, or may
be transported from one place to another by one, that is lately recovered of
them, through particles still evaporating through his pores out of his body, or
inhering in this clothes; so in an Epidemic Pox, those clouds are more thickly
and to a greater extension spread over the whole tract of Air, which
consequently many that are predisposed must inspire.

6. Here a Question proper enough may be moved, viz. all inspiring the same Air
in an Epidemic Season, Why should not those, that have undergone the Smallpox
thoroughly, relapse into the same Contagion with those that never have been under
it? After may way this is easily answered; The suffering of that Distemper, I
look upon as a seasoning to the demipestiferous Air; for as a new earthen Pot
is seasoned, by letting the particles of the Fire gradually enter its pores,
whereby they are by little and little widened, and then the Fire entering with a
full force, and finding no straitness or resistance, passes through without
any injury to the Pot; whereas should it at first be committed to a vigorous
Fire, it would soon be cracked by the fiery particles forcing the pores asunder,
and this is called a Seasoning. So in like manner the demipestiferous particles
having formerly shaped the figures of the pores of those, that have thoroughly
been afflicted with the Smallpox, and finding free egress and regress, do not,
or cannot fasten on their humors, or parts. From what is premised, it must
necessarily follow, that an Epidemic Smallpox does in many degrees exceed a
Sporadic Pox in danger, the Air being in the former much more, and that
universally loaded with demipestiferous particles, and such as are more acute
or sharp pointed than the other. And in good truth most other Distempers, as
putrid Fevers, Consumptions, Pleurifies, and other Inflammations, internal of
the Bowels, and external, whether of the glandules, or other parts, are
observed to receive such an intension and pejoration by those forementioned
particles, that they very frequently prove malign; as for instance, common
swellings of the glandules about the neck, and under the arm pits, do most of
'em at those Seasons turn to the King's Evil, Coughs, to a Consumption, etc.

8. It is very remarkable, that those Distempers, whose original is usually
attributed to taking or catching of cold, which does not always terminate into
Coughs or Hoarsnesses, but into any other Distemper, which the particles of the
Air do determine it to, according to the figure and other accidental
predispositions of the external membranes, and internal parts, which the said
various particles floating in the Air find adapted to give them entrance,
especially at the reigning of any Epidemic Distemper; for where Diseases are
only Sporadic, the malign particles of the Air are much qualified by the
intermixture, action or motion of other various particles.

9. Therefore the several sorts of Air ought not to be chiefly distinguished by
grossness, thinness or clearness, but by the greater proportion of such or such
particles it is endued with, as will appear by this following instance: The
Mariners and Supercargo's of the Ships of Europe, that trade on the Coast of
Guiney, lying on Board, fell themselves well, but passing a night or two's
sleep on shore, are commonly seized with a malign Fever, that often proves
mortal. No doubt but Air in point of clearness or thinness, does not much
differ in a quarter of a League, or if it does, it is probable to be clearer a
shore, and notwithstanding it is much more insalubrious.

CHAP. VI. Of Contagion, and contagious Diseases, of which the Smallpox is a
species.
1. TO make the marks of the abovementioned Phenomenon (which I may rather
term a truth) to bear, it will be very necessary to premise a short
Interlocation concerning Contagious Diseases, which are all occasioned by
external adventitious particles, ( effluvia, or miasmata) transmitted out of
the ambient Air immediately, or mediately from other infectious bodies.

2. These contagious particles being admitted through the pores, and by
inspiration of the lungs into the Bodies of Animals, do in some few instantly,
in most others after a greater or lesser interval of time exert their power, as
is manifest in those that are infected with the French Pox, whose effluvia or
steams do in some operate soon after their admission, as appear by the starting
up of venereal Symptoms in two, three, four, or more hours, even in others a
moment after; but in many after a week, a month, three, four, five, or six
months; a year, two, three, or four years; and in some old Bodies many years
after.

3. It is universally observed, that many have received a pestilential
Infection, which has showed its malignity in some instantly, in others some
few hours, weeks, or months after; and this particularly is remarkt, that some
having received into their Bodies pestilential particles at Constantinople, did
arrive many months after in Italy, where the said particles had put their
malign powers into action, in that manner, that not only the transporter has
fallen into the Plague, but likewise has infected other Bodies, who have so
filled the Air with pestiferous Miasms, that the whole Country has soon after
fallen into the Plague; whence it is Italian Princes are so careful, that they
will not suffer any person coming from those Levant parts, to travel through
their Country, or remain there, without having performed his quarantine, that
is stayed forty days in the Lazaretto, where, if there be occasion, he must be
purged and sweated, before they will allow him Prattica, that is, admit him to
do his business in that Country.

4. I will only demand this Concession, That all men who live in a pestiferous
Air, must receive and admit by inspiration, and through the pores of their
bodies, pestilential miasms, particles, or filaments, unless you do assert,
That some men do not inspire deep enough, or theit Bodies are less pervious,
and have fewer pores, and those possibly very narrow, contorted, or of a
screwed figure, in which case they being deprived of a facil perspiration, or
rather expiration, must always continue very weak and sickly; but these crazy
and feeble persons are generally found to be chiefly subject to the Plague,
which destroys your Assertion.

5. It is upon the certainty, or at least a strong presumption of the
forementioned Concession, that Physicians do unanimously hold, there is no
other infallible preserevative against the plague, but what is implied in these
three words, viz. Cito, Long, and Tarde; in English, speedily, a long way off,
and slow: that is, you must retire with all speed, remove to a far distance,
and return very slow after the plague is ceased, left it should not entirely be
extinguished. By the way only; this forementioned Expedient being judged so
infallible, does evidently overthrow the phantastic Notion, whereby to explain
the manner of agency of sympathetic Remedies, viz. Vng. Armar. or Weapon-salve,
calcined Vitriol, or sympathetic Powder, and such like asserting, there is a
chain of crooked particles linkt together, that extends from those Remedies,
being guided by the association of some of the Ulcers, or wounded particles on
a Rag or Weapon, to the Ulcer or Wound it self, being possibly at a hundred
miles more or less distance; which if true, would hold much more in pestiferous
Miasms, that are spread over a small Region, or a great tract of Air; though
it is very possible, that a cloud full of 'em may be driven by the wind to a far
greater distance, even over the Seas, from one Country to another, but not by
continuation in the manner of chains extended to such a length; so that we are
only to read such like Histories or Relations, as we do Romances, both being
often written with an adorned style, as if they were true and real.

CHAP. VII. Containing several inferences concerning the Plague.
1. FROM the Concession mentioned in the 4th paragraph of the preceding
Chapter, I may infer, 1. That all men living in a pestilential Air, must be
subject to the Plague by inevitably inspiring, and admitting through their
pores pestiferous particles; though it is not a necessary Consequence, that
every body that is subject to the Plague, must at one time or another fall into
the Plague, because very often those forementioned particles are by the strength
of Nature thrown out by expiration, and insensibly through the pores, as often as
they enter, or return. 2. That among those who are subject to the Plague, many
happen to have the Plague mortally, many have it curably, and as I said before,
many among those that continue the whole time of the visitation, never have it
at all. 3. That many fall into the Plague in the beginning; many more when it
is in its highest rage; and many when it begins to decline, and some several
weeks and months after it seems to be quite extinguished. 4. That some do fall
into the Plague immediately after the admission of pestiferous Miasms, others
one, two, three, or four days, some a week, month, or several months after; and
some also that have left the contagious Air, by removing to a far distance into
the Country, have dropped into the Distemper in their Journey; others some weeks
or months after their arrival at the place designed. The conformity of these
Inferences to Truth and Experience cannot be denied by any of understanding and
observation, that outlived the last great Plague.

CHAP. VIII. Of the analogy and resemblance between the Smallpox and Plague.
1. IT is the great analogy and resemblance between the Smallpox and the
Plague, that has given me the occation of interweaving the foregoing
Discourses, especially since the latter being so well understood by most in
those enumerated Instances, will render the theory and practice of the
Smallpox and Measles so intelligible, that according to my pretense in the
First and Second Chapters, very ordinary Capacities will be qualified to make a
decision in the Debate.

Wherefore, if I make the analogy appear, and give Reasons of those Inferences,
the same will serve to satisfy the Objections and Queries, that may be made of
the Smallpox.

2. In relation to the analogy, I say, 1. They are both contagious Diseases,
and originally caused by malign particles received out of the Air into the
Body, and with very little distinction, those of the Smallpox and Measles
being in these Northern Regions admitted sometimes immediately after the Birth,
though commonly within a few years after, and the other any time after the Air
is loaded with pestiferous particles, which differ from the former in malignity
only, secundum magis and minus.

From the next preceding Discourse you will infer, That since at all times some
Men, Women, and chiefly Children, have the Smallpox straggling here and there (
sporadice) I do suppose that the Air is always endued with variolous malign
particles in these cold Regions. Most certainly, I do suppose the said
particles are ever floating in parcels here and there, as it will be explained
hereafter; and in resemblance to that particular, in some warm Countries, as
Egypt, and many places of Turkey, there is always a scattering ( sporadic)
Plague (which, as the Smallpox, is sometimes epidemick and universal)
occasioned by the putrefaction, and putrid steams, the overflowing of the River
Nilus in the former, and morassy Grounds of the latter do emit. And therefore
for the said Reason it is, I have named the particles, or effluvia, or steams
reeking out of the putrid grounds in these parts into the Air half
pestilential, which in the time of the Plague (that may happen once in thirty
or forty years) do pass into whole pestilential; and therefore it is, that
commonly an epidemic Smallpox does precede the Plague.

2dly, They both occasion either an ebullition only, or a continual Fever, that
may either be simply such ( synocha imputris) or putrid, or highly malignant;
for many have had a slight Plague, that has been attended with no other than
an ebullition of the Blood; others with a simple continual Fever, or synocha
imputris.

3dly, As some sort of Smallpox and Measles do appear mild, others malign;
some mortal, others curable; and some never have either of them, though all are
subject to them, in the sense I have expressed above; so in like manner some have
been seized with a mild, others with a malign; some with a mortal, others with
a curable Plague; and some have escaped it wholly, at least as to a visible
appearance.

4thly, The common symptoms of shiverings and shakings ( rigores) a great
oppression about their Stomach and Heart, pains in the Back, Headache, a burning
heat, and sometimes none at all extraordinary; a very high large strong quick
pulse, and sometimes low, quick, (in others slow or moderate) inequal, and
feeble pulse; the Urine in some very high colored, thin, without any
hypostasis or sediment, in others citrin, with a pyramidal hypostasis, like
unto a well-Urin, and in some few very pale, with a divell'd and dispersed
sediment; in some very few the Urine is bloody; excessive drought, through in
others none at all, or very moderate; scabrous, dry inflamed tongues; in others
white, foul, and slimy, and in some moist and well-colour'd; vomitings,
looseness, delirium, or light-headedness, restlesness, anguishings, and
jactitations, vigiliae nocturnae, or want of sleep, and commonly in the
beginning drowsiness, and abundance of others, though all various in every
particular subject, are the same in both, differing only in degree. Besides, as
in the Smallpox you have pimples, pale, red, brown or leadish, of an
Olive-colour, and sometimes black; spots also intersperst between the pimples,
as various in colors as these, often very small, of the extension of Fleabites.
After these arise sometimes great tumors about the emunctories, in or about the
Face, which turning to maturation, become sordid and fetid Ulcers, of a nature
so malign, that I have known them to resist all manner of cure for three, four,
or six months successively.

2. The Plague is ordinarily attended with spots of all complexions, whereof
the black are usually called Tokens, (which the Dutch name Peppercorns) also
with pimples equally various in color, among which those that are of a shining
purpre red, are named Carbuncles, and soon after turning into a black Crust, is
called a Coal, and is a perfect sphacelus, or mortification; with great and
sometimes small tumors in the emunctories (are called Bubo's) also about the
Nose, Eyes, Cheeks, Neck, and other parts, that exchange into the most fowl,
malign and durable Ulcers; and are such, that some have lost an Eye, their
Nose, and a Joint through them, besides all the other Symptoms mentioned in the
Smallpox, that are equally common in the Plague, excepting only, that
generally here the Tongue is very dry, and usually the Patient is very droughty.

3. In respect of the second Inference, it cannot be doubted, that many do fall
into the Smallpox, that proves mortal, and incurable per se, or accidentally
so, very often by the ignorance and unskilful boldness of Physicians; many others
are cured by Nature, and a true regimen only of the six non naturals, and
particularly by abstinence, and rest, ( quiet and obstinnentia, as Celsus
expresses it) that is, not tampering at all with Medicines or Remedies, but
keeping quiet, still, and temperately warm from the crude, cold and rough Air
abroad, and attended by a careful and unbusie Nurse. And many escape those
Diseases, as I hinted before, all their lifetime.

4. The third Inference is plainly answered by many falling into the Smallpox
in the beginning of a reigning Season, and many more in the height.
Furthermore, as some may have, and have had the Plague two or three times; the
like has been asserted of the Smallpox, tho some, very few only, have had
them the third time.

5. The fourth needs no proof, to wit, that some have been taken with the
Smallpox soon after they are born; others some weeks, months, or years, though
most within seven years, not many after thirty or forty, and very few after
three or fourscore.

5. These Parallels and Resemblances may very justly challenge a ready belief
from all men, that those Diseases are very near akin, and the Causes much the
same, being no otherwise distinguishable than in degree, or secundum magis and
minus, both being venomous and contagious. Wherefore, for further illustration,
and that I may plainly show you the manner how variolous and pestilential
particles are returned out of the retired parts of the Body and Humors, into
the Smallpox, and pestilential Eruptions, I will give you my sense very
briefly of the nature of Venoms in relation to the Body of Main, in the next
succeeding Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Of Venoms or Poisons, and their Differences.
1. I Will begin with the knowledge of Venoms, first in their distinctions and
differences; some are Venoms to the whole immediately and directly, that is, to
the heart or brain; others to some particular entrail or bowel, as Wheesels
flesh, and some Indian Juices to the Liver, causing a Jaundice of the deepest
yellow, and an incurable weakness in the nerves; some to the Lungs, as a Sea
hare; some to the stomach and guts, as Mercury sublimate or precipitate, Aqua
fortis, etc. others to the bladder, as Cantharides.

2. These now mentioned, and many more, are to be accounted whole Venoms;
others are half Venoms, or demi-poisons, which are such as vehemently disturb
the brain and heart, and imbroil the former for some hours, days or weeks; such
are Mandrake, Henbane, Hemlock, Dutrua Seeds, which latter are only energic and
effectual in the Indies, and not in other Climats, as Opium is a demi-poison
here, being taken in a small Dose, and not in Turkey, though in a greater does
become a whole poison. Some -Venoms are most quick, as a certain juice of
Barbary, wherein a Pin, Needle, or Dart being dipped, and afterward making the
least wound in the skin of any of the remotest parts of the body, kills in
few hours; others are flow, and not so quick in themselves, or if most quick in
themselves, are by mixture retarded, as Arsenic, or Orpiment, being mixed with
Opium, or any glutinous substance, as Turpentine, Birdlime, Gum Arabic, and the
like, which, according to the proportion of the commixt ingredient to the
poison, has been limited to days, weeks or months, in the method and manner of
Madam de Brinvillier, who poisoned her Husband, her Father, and two Brothers,
for standing in the way of her Amors, was instructed by Glasier the Chemist,
that published a course of Chemistry, and being afterward taken, with all his
Poisons about him, at or near Geneva, they were both worthily executed at
Paris, according to the Arrest of the Court of Poisoners.

3. Some Venoms are internal, by being swallowed down; others external, entering
the body by inspiration, and through the pores of the ambient skin, as
poisonous perfumes and ointments, arsenical steams in Mines and Caves, which
are the quickest and most malignant of all Venoms. Of this external sort of
Venoms are those, though not of the highest degree, which cause the Smallpox
and Plague.

CHAP. X. Explains the Nature of Poisons.
1. THE Nature of Venom is through its most subtle, piercing, corroding, and
most cutting acute particles, to cause a (...), or secretion, separation, or
divulsion of the constituent or compounding parts of the heart or brain, as
they are mixed or compounded bodies; or it is to decompose or disunite the
composition or union of the heart and brain, or any other bowel that is
poisonable in its constituent or composing parts; so that upon the operation of
a quick Poison upon the heart, death must immediately ensue; such is the nature
of some whole internal Poisons, as Arsenic, Realgar, Wolfs-bane; and of
external, as the Sting of Rattle Snakes, and some kind of Adders, etc. In the
same manner some have very speedily been cut off by the intrusion of
pestilential, and variolous particles, though in most the venom is less quick,
and often retarded and obtused by other causes without, and a resistance it meets
within the Body.

2. That the Air contains venenous particles of various kinds and degrees, and
those so specific, that they appear to be determined against every species of
all Bodies that have life, is little to be doubted. First, in relation to
Vegetables, it is often observed, that both in cold and hot Seasons, showers of
such venenous particles entering the whole bodies of Trees, or some of their
Branches, do sometimes instantly, and other times in a day, two, or three,
cause them to dye in the whole, or in their Branches, that shall look black,
which can be termed no other than a mortification, though vulgarly called a
Blast, and does as much deserve the name of a Plague, as the Murrain in Cattle.
And those venenous particles, that in some places, and at some Seasons, the Dew
that lies on the Grass, is imbued with, does suddenly kill whole Flocks of
Sheep; and that which causes so general a mortality sometimes among Cattle,
called the Murrain, can be imputed only to venenous effluvia of the Air.

3. In regard that those venenous Corpuscles, which destroy the life of Sheep,
do not cause the same effect on all Cattle, it is convincing, they must be of
various sorts in their figures, and as various in their motions.

4. That those venenous little Bodies are not at all times equally piercing,
and acute, but sometimes act in a degree less malign, may be deduced from other
malignant uinversal Distempers resembling a Murrain all kinds of Cattle are
subject to, and therefore it may as rationally be granted, that the Plague and
Smallpox have no other difference in their Causes, than a less acuteness in
pestiferous particles.

CHAP. XI. Expresses the manner of operation of venenous particles in the Air,
whereby, and how they cause the Smallpox or Plague.
1. MY next Task is, to explain the modus agendi, or manner of acting of those
venenous particles, whereby the Smallpox and Plague are produced; to the right
understanding whereof, you are to keep in mind these three following Rules, or
Maxims, whereunto you are to have recourse, as being necessary Antecedents,
whence the Consequences I shall make, will naturally flow. In the first place,
it must be granted, That all venenous particles do first enter the Body through
the pores of the ambient Skin, then crowd through the pores of the Vessels into
the Humors, or Juices, being least able to resist, thence into the sanguin
parts, whence they make their way to the more solid and spermatick. If this be
denied, the manner of operation of a Mercurial Unguent, and a cinabrin
fumigation will oblige you to assent. 2dly, Venenous particles do not always
arrive so deep, as the solid and spermatick parts; either because they are less
pointed, and grosser, or fewer in number; or because they meet with a stronger
resistance, by the unfitness of the figure of the pores they are to enter, or
grosser and more close matter which they are to pass, or a greater number of
spirits they are to encounter with, all which is evident in the said instance
of a Mercurial Unguent, applied by friction, to raise a salivation, which in
some Bodies it fails to do, by reason of the unfitness of the pores they are to
pass, or because it contains too small a proportion of Mercury to emit
sufficient particles; or because the said particles are beaten back by the
spirits of strong Bodies. 3dly, The concession of this does allow, that
venenous particles are always in motion, but quickest in the fluid parts, and
slowest in the hard or solid parts. If, according to the phrase of Physick-men
(for very few of 'em deserve the name of Doctors) it is replied, That all
venenous particles arriving to the solid and spermatick parts, are there locked
up, and remain as it were dead, and without any action for many years; you are
to be convinced by the late instanced Mercurial Ointments too copiously
externally used, and Mercurial Preparations too frequently, and in excessive
Doses taken, also by the French Pox it self; the venenous particles of all
which, or of each of those Remedies, being ill prepared, and worse applied,
insinuating so deep as the solid parts, have there in some weeks, or months,
and sometimes years, rotted or cariated the Bones of the Shins, Arms, Skull,
Cartilages of the Nose, and other parts, (according to the observation of
Authors) which is a pregnant Testimony, they have always been in motion, though
much slower than in the fluid parts.

2. As to the explication of the manner of action or operation of venomous
particles, in reference to Diseases of Human Bodies; I will suppose, according
to the first and second Rules, that in an infectious Season there is a shower
of variolous, or half-pestiferous particles crowded through the ambient
Membranes into the mass of Blood; but you must not conceive, that every pore of
the Blood is filled with the said particles, unless at the same time you will
apprehend the Patient must be dead the next, or very few moments after, without
ever having had the least strength of spirits to expel them, and consequently
to give the least appearance of the Smallpox, or pestilential Eruptions.
Imagine then, here is the hundredth or thousandth part, or to make it more
intelligible, the eighth or ninth part of the pores (by way of supposition
only) filled by venenous particles; or to render it more plain and easy, in
the space that eight or nine drops (or globuli) of Blood are contained in,
there is the ninth middlemost drop almost filled in its pores with venenous
particles, whereby the vital spirits, that are in the said pores, are for the
greater part or number (more or fewer) expelled, who fly to the next
cirrounding eight pores (or globuli) where being too much crowded, are put into
a violent motion, thereby ( vicissim) lifting up and depressing the pores of
these cirrounding eight drops, which give me the idea of an ebullition they
make, whereby those eight drops are separated, or do separate themselves by
their spirits from that one middle drop, that is so tainted, and begun to be
secreted, or disunited, or decomposed in its constituent parts, or (if you
please) in its composition, mixture, or constitution, that it can never become
again homogeneous with the said eight cirrounding drops; which therefore they
by the said ebullition do endeavor to throw off and expel, through or by means
of the Arterial mass (moving to the circumference of the Body) to the
extremities of the capillar Arteries, whence being thrusted to the inside of
the Ambient Skin into a small round figure (which then is either a papula, or
smaller pimple; or a pustula, a greater;) because that expelled venenated drop
is crowded from all sides, and therefore must be round; and must also be small
or not great, because it elevates or devils the Skin ( cutis) but a little from
the subjected Membranes, to which it adheres very close. Now in case the
quantity of three or four drops is successively thrown to the same place of the
Skin, then it must form a pimple three or four times bigger; whence you may
easily conceive, why in the Smallpox the pimples are not all of one bigness;
some few being bigger than the rest, the Nurses call the Master-Pox.

Moreover, these variolous globuli arriving to the inward or under part of the
Skin (now pimples) do not so much elevate the Skin, as to make the said pimples
visible, before they have through the violent motion and combat between the few
vital spirits, and venenated particles contained in them, widen'd or broken the
pores of the Skin circularily, to above half the thickness of it, and then
become very visible, whereas before they were only discoverable by the touch;
so that the pimples of the Smallpox may in most be felt under the Skin by a
moderate pressure 24 hours before they appear to the view, and in some whose
infected globuli are moved slow, they may be perceived by the touch two days
before; tho in some few others the said globuli being thrust out very speedily,
they are scarce perceptible six hours before, and in some very few, an hour, or
scarce at all, before they become plainly visible.

3. From the Contents of the foregoing second Paragraph these Consequences must
necessarily flow. 1. Upon the first moment of the variolous or pestilential
particles attacking the Blood in any of its small parts, there must at the same
infant be an ebullition, together with a separation, or an endeavoring to boil
up Being an effervescency, or a simmering of the Humors.
, and to separate the infected small parts, drops, or globuli from the sound;
as is visible in all external small mortifications, where the ambient sound
parts do immediately endeavor to separate themselves, and throw off the
mortified part; and as Nature is never endeavoring to make a digestion or
maturation of the mortified part, because she can never make it homogeneous to
the sound; so in the Smallpox, Measles and Plague, there is no digestion to be
expected, but separation. 2dly, Where the Blood is very fluid, thin, little
glutinous, and lively (as in Children) the ebullition and separation happens
instantly; but it is either a day, two, or three, before the venom can pierce
through the common Integuments, to arrive to the Skin. 3dly, In persons that
are grown up, there happens at the instant of infection, either an endeavoring
to an ebullition and separation, which possibly lasting but a little while,
because the miasms cannot make their way in, and being only superficial, are
very often thrown out again; or a strong ebullition, which for the most part
turns into a putrid Fever. Many other particulars I am forced to pass by, to
keep within my purpose of a small Treatise.

4. The venomous globuli or drops of the Measles being much less, and of a
thinner body, are moved much quicker, in manner that they scarce make any stop
or elevation in the inner part of the cutis or Skin, but pass to the outward
part thereof, where meeting with a stop, occasioned by its density, do elevate
the cuticula or upper Skin, which being of a very thin pliable nature, is not
raised into a very small obtuse, but a very little acute or sharp pimple, which
feels and appears almost like the roughness of a Goose-skin, but red;
notwithstanding little pimples sharpened a-top they are. The said morbillous
globuli being partly of so thin a substance, and thereby fitted to pass through
the pores of the upper part of the cutis (quaqua versus) everywhere round,
they are very frequently spread into large efflorescencies, or broad
exanthemata, which the Nurses commonly call great rednesses, or large red
spots; but some of the Learned Blockheads will needs have them named an
Erysipelas, which ever is attended with a great burning heat, and a small
elevation of the Skin, which in the Face commonly withdraws it self, by leaving
a large Bladder filled with water behind it. To add other differences will take
too much time. The French observing those rednesses to be common attendants of
the Measles, rather choose to name that Distemper la Rugeole, or redness, than
any proper name to denote the Measles.

He that mistakes a Rash (a term of art used by Nurses) for the Measles or
Smallpox, can be no other than an illiterate drunken bold Fool, deserving the
recompense of a Russia Physician in the case of a great D. dying under his
hands, who ought to know, that Herpes is Latin for a Rash, of which there are
two sorts, Miliaris, and Exedens; but there being much less resemblance between
an Herpes and the Measles, than between a Rat and a Wheezel, it is not worth my
while to teach the difference.

5. In good truth there is some resemblance between what Nurses call the
Red-gum (known to Ancient Physicians by the name of Papulae rubentes) and the
Measles, notwithstanding Nurses usually know their difference with a glance of
their Eye; and further tell you, That a Redgum comes in a minute, and in less
than three more, flies all the Body over like Lightning, and itches so
extremely, that one can scarce be a moment without scratching; but in all other
particulars one's health is not in the least changed or impaired by it, and the
Nurse-Doctrices ordinarily cure such Patients by one night's sweat with a half
dozen spoonfuls of Poppy-water, and three or four of Plague or Treacle-water,
and the most knowing of their Profession will add the bigness of a Nutmeg of
Diascordium, and this to be given to any Red-gummer of twenty years of age, or
thereabouts.

6. After this short digression, tho within the compass of my Subject, I ought
to return to the explication of what succeeds, next after the throwing out of
the variolous globuli, or Smallpox, which is their maturation, or turning into
matter of various consistencies and colors, being either thick, or thin,
ichorous, or sanious, white, whitish, red, greenish, Violet color, leadish
brown, and black. They are either of a great kind, or small; single, or double;
which are of the bigness of two ordinary ones, and running into one another,
which the Nurses call (and the Physicians after them) the Flaxt-pox, corruptly
for the Fluxt-pox, because they flow one into another, and that sometimes in
such a manner, that the whole face seems to be an entire absces, whose covering
turning into one entire Scab, peels off all together. They either appear full
and round, or low and flat. They are either hard and obstinate to maturation,
or soft and easy. They are also either abiding, or apt to go in again into the
Vessels, or only apt to sink a little. They appear either in a greater number,
or lesser; of which latter the bigger are called by the Doctrices the
Swine-pox, and the lesser the Chicken-pox. Either they come out gradually,
(which is most common, and best) in three, four, or sometimes five, and (though
rarely) in six days; or else they come forth all in few hours; or sometimes
with intermissions, some appearing pretty abundantly the first and second day,
or the first day only; then happens a stop for aday, and sometimes longer,
after which new ones spring forth again. They appear most and biggest in the
Face, Hands and Feet. Some go off without leaving any fordid Ulcers behind;
others are succeeded by very malign Ulcers of a long continuance; others again
leave so much impurity behind them, that after the Smallpox seems entirely
cured, and the Scabs peeled off, and the Patient abroad, they do occasion
malignant Imposthumations, and several internal and external Diseases, which
are not cured sometimes in several months after, and other times leave a
weakness of the Bowels during life.

7. That the Smallpox, or Measles, should be termed critical evacuations by
most Physicians, I can in no-wise apprehend a proper orgenuin expression; for a
crisis strictly is only applicable to continual putrid Fevers, whose morbific
matter being first digested, then separated, and afterward suddenly expelled
by Sweat, Urin, Stool, Hemorrhage, or more leisurely by congestion, is thrown
out into tumors. However crisis in a large acceptance may be used for a sudden
explosion or expulsion of any matter, malign or other, in a putrid or imputrid
Fever; but then the putrid matter must be digested, before Nature can be at
leisure to expel the malign matter.
As for any malign matter, they all hold, that it is not capable of digestion,
much less is a venom, the higest of malignites; and therefore to me it seems
absurd to name them critical Evacuations, any more than other Poisons that are
vomited up, or expelled through the pores in great blotches and pimples. If you
will suppose, that it is a critical Evacuation of the putrid Fever, andthat the
Matter of the Smallpox is only a putrid Matter that occasions the Fever And
therefore, as I said elsewhere in a large acceptance, or consider it under
this restrained sense, it may pass for a critical evacuation.
; then it must follow, that all Children have a putrid Fever with the
Smallpox, which is universally denied by all Physic Authors, and physicians;
asserting, That in Children for the most part, there is only an ebulltion of
the Blood, in some few a continual imputrid Fever, and in very few a putrid
Fever, and then chiefly, when the Smallpox are epidemick. Moreover, here is
another gross mistake, The ebullition, continual imputrid, or putrid Fevers,
are not essential, but symptomatick Fevers, or a symptom of the Smallpox; for
generally speaking, Had they not been seized with the Smallpox, they would
have been free of that Fever, though it is possible for one in a putrid Fever to
be taken with the Smallpox, and then they are under two sorts of putrid
Fevers, one essential, and the other symptomatick, in the same manner, as a man
in a putrid Fever may take a strong Poison, which will cause another
symptomatick Fever, in either of which cases the Patients become mortally sick.

8. Before I proceed in giving you my sense of the manner of Maturation, I
think it not amiss to give you the reason, why the term of globuli, (or little
globes, or bowls, expressed in English by the notion of drops) is made use of
in the explication of the production and expulsion of the Smallpox. If you
will give credit to the experiment of the microscope, whereby some do pretend
they have discerned the Blood to consist of globuli, and each of those they
affirm (I presume by supposition) does comprehend five or fix lesser globuli,
as a drop of Quicksilver (I suppose) does by agitation, or shaking, fall into
many little round drops. Whether this be so or not, it is observed, that all
Liquors are divisible into round drops, or globuli, and therefore it may be
judged proper enough to have used them for the intent abovementioned. However,
neither you or I are obliged to apprehend the Blood under that constitution,
and therefore we will suppose it to be a continuous fluid substance or liquor,
which, whenever it happens to be divided in any part of it, its parts, as all
other liquors, are ever divided or separated from that which does divide it
(though it be a square circularly; for instance, If you throw a Brick into the
water, the parts of the water being continous, are separated circularly, as
appears by the round streams the water is forced into, by the Brick breaking
it, which renders it plain, that the Blood is separated from the
formerly-mentioned malign particles in a round figure. Secondly, The variolous
particles entering the Blood through round pores of the Skin and Vessels, can
enter the Blood in no other figure, but in a round one; so that necessarily the
Blood must be infected in drops or globuli.

9. Those infected sanguin drops being formed into Red pimples, or Smallpox,
in the upper part of the Skin meeting with a fresh supply of variolous,
nitrous, and other particles out of the Air, which now is much nearer, there
happens a new great agitation, ebullition, and combat between those and the
Spirits, that were remaining in them (those bloody drops being out of their
proper Vessels, which, whilst in them, never do, or can, be turned into Matter)
whereby those bloody drops are broken in their fibers, and rarefied, by which
rarefaction they lose their color, if red, and are converted into white; for
as density causes the reflection of the Air to seem black, so on the contrary,
rarefaction must occasion a white. If those bloody drops of the Smallpox
happen to be condensed by the total extinction or expulsion of the Spirits in
them, by those fresh adventitious particles, then according to this
Phenomenon, the Smallpox must turn black. So that according to the said
degree of condensation and rarefaction, they turn into violet, green, leadish,
and all colors, being only degrees from white to black.

The hardness and stubbornness of maturation in the Smallpox does depend on
the mixture or constitution of the Blood of some, consisting of tough and
fibrous parts, being naturally such, or so rendered by the malign heat of the
putrid Fever that attends the Smallpox. The toughness of the Blood is also in
a great measure the cause, together with the weakness of the Spirits, being too
much overpowered by the variolous adventitious particles, why the Smallpox
are separated, and consequently expelled very slow, and sometimes not at all.

10. The Smallpox happen to be either sanious, or ichorous, from the acute
malign particles cutting the fibers of the Blood, and from the putrid malign
heat, occasioned by the said particles, melting or fusing, as it were, the
sanguin infected drops.

11. The Smallpox being thrust out, are kept up in the Skin, without sinking,
or flatning, or returning back into the Vessels, or mass of Blood, if the
spirits are any thing vigorous, and hold up against the malign adventitious
particles; but on the other hand, the Spirits sinking, and being overpowered
by the malign particles, the Smallpox is by them forced in again, the said
particles constantly crowding into the Body out of the Air (as has been
declared in one of the former Chapters) unless the spirits are strong enough to
withstand them.

12. The Face, the Nose, inside and outside, Hands and Feet, are commonly
fullest of the Smallpox, because both the former being usually uncovered, and
most exposed to the Air, do admit a greater number of variolous particles; and
the Feet, though covered, yet being next to the ground, the variolous particles
do copiously with the damps of the ground strike into their pores.

13. The reason and causes of other differences of the Smallpox aboverecited,
and of the Measles, may be easily assigned by the Contents of the foregoing
Paragraph; likewise most other Queries and Doubts touching the said Diseases
and their various Accidents, may clearly be resolved by the Rules, and other
Discourses set down in the preceding Chapters.

CHAP. XII. Of the Signs in general of the Smallpox.
1. THE Signs of the Smallpox ought not to be run over confusedly, as all
Authors do, taking it from one another; but ought to be digested in such an
order, that we may with more ease arrive to a discovery of the Distemper. We
ought therefore, first, to know the signs of an Ebullition, which usually
precedes the eruption of the Smallpox in Children, though sometimes there may
be in them a continual imputrid Fever, and now and then a continual putrid
Fever, or a Synochaputrida.

2. To the second Class belong the signs of a putrid continual Fever, mixed with
some malignity, not as it is a cause of the Smallpox, but as it is an effect,
or rather a symptom, or concomitant If you take the Smallpox, as they are
latent, and before they come out, then the Fever is a concomitant, or a
symptom; but if you will only term them Smallpox, when they are come out, then
the Fever does commonly precede.
of the venom, contagion, or infectin of the Smallpox, and commonly precedes
the eruption of them, and is usual and ordinary to such as have, or are to have
the Smallpox, that are of riper years, and are grown up.

3. The third Range will comprehend the signs of a putrid, and every malignant
Fever, as it is also a symptom, or coincident of, and with the venom of the
variolous adventitious particles, and do likewise precede the eruption a very
little time, and sometimes the eruption follows soon after, this is, in few
hours, and this is also most common to persons of years, of a very ill habit of
Body, n d very debauched Livers.

4. After the recital of these diagnostick signs, the next following Chapter
will comprehend the Prognostics.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Diagnostick signs of a variolous ebullition of the Blood.
1. THe signs of a variolous ebullition of the Blod are a floridness, and a
little bloating of the Face, and of the whole ambient Skin of the Body; a
frequent blushing, and recurrent redness, a drowsiness, heavi-headedness, and
giddiness, a distending and heavy pain in the Head and the Back, the Eyes a
little fiery by the swelling of the Vessels in them, and glazy; sometimes
waterish; a floathfulness to stirring and moving, a heat more than ordinary all
over the Body, but not a smart violent burning; the Appetite lessened, and
sometimes wholly lost; a fullness about the Hypochonders, frequently a vomiting
of slimy and choleric matter, tho notwithstanding commonly there is a weight
and great oppression about the Stomach, which they usually express to be about
their Heart, and which their vomiting does not in the least ease or abate, but
they feel themselves rather worse; sometimes there may be a looseness, but for
the most part there is a costiveness. Sleep disturbed and interrupted with
fiery frightful Dreams. Their breathing thick, and quicker than usual;
frequently attended with a Cough, and sometimes with a hoarseness only; a
fretfulness, and not caring to speak; neither commonly will they so much as
complain. Their Urin is thick, whitish, troubled or turbid; the Pulse quicker
than ordinary, not much unequal, but large; a great beating or pulsation in the
Temples; a proneness to sighing. Some few sneeze often, and their Nose will itch,
most do not. Some Children after three years old have all these signs, some the
greater part of 'em, and some. But few of 'em, according to their more or less
ill predisposition of Body, and the degrees in quality and quantity of the
variolous particles, that are entered into their Bodies. These are the signs of
the first and second days.

2. The second, or sometimes the third day, the vomiting is gone off; and the
oppression about the Stomach usually is removed on the third day; but then they
begin to be droughty: Most of these Symptoms are then grown less troublesome,
and seem to be more easy. On the third day the skin all about their Body and
Face appears a little more swelled, and then it is you may feel the little
round knobs under the skin, if you make a pressure with your Finger. The fourth
day usually they appear. Those that may be named the Quick-pox, appear the
third day; the Slow the fifth ^ They are often interlined with Red spots like
Fleabites, and sometimes large rednesses.

3. It is generally on the third day they feel a pricking all about their skin;
that being over, they are apt to complain, that they are a little sorish. They
are commonly very small at the first, somewhat bigger than a Mustard Seed,
growing bigger by degrees.

4. Those that have Hoarsnesses, and dry Coughs, are subject to have the
Smallpox much in their Throat and Windpipe. Some are apt to be Lightheaded
(delirous) the day or night before they break out; and likewise they are apt to
be so, if the Smallpox come out flow, or revert.

CHAP. XIV. The signs of a variolous Putrid Fever.
1. THE signs of a putrid continual Fever, and symptomatick of the Smallpox,
are almost the same with those of an essential, excepting that the febril
symptoms in the Smallpox come many in a crowd together, which in the other do
arrive gradually; besides, the Urin for the most part from the beginning
appears thick and red, like that in an intermittent Tertian, and continues so
without much variation for the most part of the time, until the Smallpox begin
to dry, and then there begins to be a separation of a white sediment, and the
Urin grows paler. Likewise the Pulse of the very beginning is strait, low,
quick, and very uneven; the Countenance of the Patient looks wild. The
Smallpox does most commonly seize persons that are grown up, upon change of
Air, frequent Debauches, immoderate Eating, upon a great Cold of a long
continuance; also by a fright or fancy, by seeing any that had the Small pox
lately, the spirits in a fright, or strong imagination attracting the
infectious Air, that such expire, or hangs about their Clothes; usually the
Head begins to ache first, with a weight and drowsiness; then they are often hot
and cold, pale and high-colour'd successively on a sudden. Afterward they are
taken also on a sudden with a violent shivering and shaking, which causes them
to take their Bed; where, after some small time they grow very hot, and
burning, and high-colour'd, their Face appearing then bloated and swelled,
their Eyes sore with distention, complain of a sickness at their Stomach, great
oppression at their Heart; sometimes they vomit, others do not vomit; their
Tongue is dry and red; they have a great drought, their breathing very thick
and short; those that are plethorick have a Cough, and spit much, some do not
spit; they are apt to be suddenly hoarse, and continue so; they complain much
more of faintness in this Fever, than in an essential one, and sigh much; some
grow lightheaded on the third or fourth night. The days of the eruption of the
Smallpox in Men or Women are much the same as were mentioned in the preceding
Paragraph.

2. About the eleventh day the Smallpox are commonly (not always) at the
height; and at which time the Physicians tell you, that you have a second
Fever. No doubt but it is the same Fever, only the heat is much augmented,
because then the pimples are turning into matter, according to Hippocr. Aphor.
Dum pus conficitur, etc.

3. After they are come to matter, they scab, and dry in three or four days,
though sometimes they are not all dry in a week; some few of the largest and
worst have remained in some three weeks, or longer, before they have been dried.

4. Though most of the before-mensioned signs do accompany the Smallpox before
eruption, you must not imagine all do in all persons; for sometimes they fall
directly into a burning, without shivering or shaking. These signs, if
happening at Spring and Fall, (especially the preceding Winter or summer having
proved very rainy) and to those that never had the Smallpox, make the
discovery of the Distemper more evident to you, and much more, if any of the
Family have lately had them; or if they have been at any House, where any lay
sick of the Smallpox.

5. Those that never had the Smallpox, falling into a sudden loss of strength,
frequent faintings, violent headache, a breathing in quickness and shortness
almost stiffling, a delirium, a continual drowsiness, or wakefulness ( coma
soporosum vel vigil) a very quick, low, and uneven Pulse, and the Urin
notwithstanding like to those that are in health, and very frequent
reciprocations of being high colored and pale, give manifest signs of being
seized with a malign variolous Fever, upon which very soon appear a few
straggling Smallpox of an ill color, which are apt as soon to go in again.
Hereupon usually happen great tremblings of the Arms and Hands, faltering in
their Speeches, Convulsions, etc..

CHAP. XV. Of the Prognostics.
1. TO speak generally, the sporadic, wandering, erratick, of straggling
Smallpox, carry much less danger with them, than those that are epidemick,
popular, or common, which seldom appear without a great mortality.

2. The Smallpox in Children are much less dangerous, than in those that are
grown up, because (as I said before) in the former, you have only for the most
part an ebullition, and in some few an imputrid continual Fever; and in the
latter very often a continual putrid, or a malign Fever; the cause is, that in
Children the Blood is faster or closer mixed, and more homogeneous, they feeding
for the most part upon a more single diet, their Bodies are cleaner; whereas,
in those that are grown up, their Blood is looser, consisting of more
heterogeneous parts, their Food more various, and their Bodies fouler.

3. In old Men and Women they are the most dangerous, and commonly putting a
period to their days.

4. The best conditioned Smallpox are a florid red, moderate in number,
bigness, and softness; for if too soft, they prove upon maturation, sanious, or
ichorous; if hard, they are very flow in maturation, and sometimes so
rebellious, that they will not come to matter at all, and then they are mortal.
They ought to come out on the third, or fourth day; to be all perfectly turned
to matter on the eleventh; and dried and scabb'd by the fourteenth day; those
that come out slow, are very dangerous.

5. Those that are pale, signify feebleness of the spirits; those that are deep
red, and inflamed, are worse; greenish, worse; violet or leadish, worse and
worse; the black, worst of all.

6. The Pox beginning to come out, the symptoms ought to abate; if they do not,
it is a sign of a latent venom, and may prove mortal. It has happened, that
some have had the Smallpox in a small number, and kindly enough; yet when they
have been all dried, on the fourteenth day, and sometimes before, a new sharp
putrid Fever has arrived, upon which some few days after, the Smallpox have
come out on fresh, and have been thrown out in great numbers.

7. To have few is best, provided the other symptoms do abate upon it; for
that is a sign the venom was not great, and all is come out; but if the symptoms
continue, or exasperate, it signifies Nature is weak, the venom strong, and a
great deal of it is remaining in the Body. So likewise if the Pox be numerous,
the other symptoms abating, the party may do well enough, though they should
flux into one another; but to have many, though turning into matter at their
seasonable times, the other symptoms not remitting, the party stands on a
precipice. The chief particulars to be observed, are the Voice, or Speech, the
Breathing, the Pulse, the Understanding and Memory, trembling or not trembling
of the Hands, and tendons of the Wrists, sleep or wakefulness, lying quiet in
bed, or being anxious, and throwing ones self up and down.

8. The Pox going in and out straggling, denotes a struggling between the Venom
and the Spirits; which renders the Victory very dubious; but if they strike in
all together, Death is at the door.

Tho the Pox be florid, or well maturated, if interspersed with Olive-spots, or
Spots like Freckles, or Black Spots, it is Mortal, much more if the Pox be of an
Ill Color.

9. Bloody Urin, or any hemorrhage, be it at the Nose, or by bloody Vomits,
Stools, or the ordinaries of Women, after the eruption are all most certain
deadly forerunners; likewise if the Pox bursting of themselves ouse out blood
instead of matter, it is the message of death.

10. If a Delirium, or lightheadedness continues after sleep, either before the
Pox are all come out, or after, it is very ill. A brownish, dark, or black Urin
is deadly.

Some have died on the seventeenth and eighteenth day, upon the taking of a
Clyster only, after the Smallpox have been all, or most come out, turned to
matter, dried away, and the person seemingly well and recovered, so as to eat
his Victuals, walk about the room, and all other symptoms vanished; either
because the malign evaporations, which always steem out of the Body for some
time, (in some longer, in others shorter) after the Smallpox have been quite
gone, by too soon emptying the Body by Purges, or Clyster, or by putting on
fresh Linen, or shifting the Sheets too early, have been shut up in the Body,
by stopping the pores of the Skin; or because the same person, after being
well, has drawn the same infection back again; or rather, because the same
venomous Particles, which were thrown out by his late Disease, are crowded in
again. For the avoiding of which two dangers, I usually keep them to a
medicinal Diet, and continue the same Antidotes, though in lesser and fewer
Doses, and forbear purging, until the whole month be expired.

11. The matter running too long out of the inward angle of the Eye, turns into
an incurable Fistula lachrymalis, by corroding, or eating away the little
lachrymal Glandul.

12. A large Pox breaking in the Horny-coat of the Eye, in many causes
blindness.

13. A Cough remaining after the Smallpox, often turns to a Consumption.

14. A malignant variolous Fever is incurable, and very suddenly mortal.

15. A Ptyalismus or salivation happening sometimes, signifies the danger of
the Smallpox to be past; wherefore you are not to imagine it to be critical,
in regard it appears not, before the Pox are broken out, maturated, and drying
away; and for that reason it cannot be supposed to carry off any part of the
malignant matter, which is requisite to make it critical. The Humors having
been extremely stirred, and rarefied, as appears by the great swelling chiefly
of all the parts of the Face, and in some measure of all the Body, there must
of necessity have been a large quantity of Lympha separated, and impelled into
the Glanduls, which the spirits having conquered the Distemper, are at leisure
to throw off, so that it seldom happens, but where there has been an
extraordinary swelling of the Face, and other parts.

16. Touching the Measles, they are usually not so dangerous with us, as with
those of a warmer Country; they generally are discussed in four, five, six, or
seven days. Notwithstanding sometimes they are of equal danger with the worst
of Smallpox, if they happen to be of a blew, brown, or black color, and
attended with a Delirium, Looseness, great oppression at the Heart, etc.

17. As there is an incurable Pox caused by the highest venom and malignity of
that sort, most speedily mowing down the Life of a Patient (as it were) with
one stroke, by a most violent irruption upon all the Bowels, and sudden
overwhelming all the spirits at once; so likewise every other kind of
Smallpox, even that of the least venom and malignity, may by contrary
applications be rendered as incurable and mortal, which is made evident by the
comparison of a House, that being set on fire in all its apartments, is
impossible to be preserved by any means whatever; and the same House being
supposed to be on fire in that least part of it, if you endeavor to quench it
by throwing Pitch, Rozin, Brimstone, and Oil upon it, will in a short time be
as impossible to be preserved, as the other beforementioned.

18. Whence I infer, That a Sporadick Pox in a Child, attended only with an
ebullition of the Humors, though in a benign season, the ebullition may by
contrary remedies be turned into a putrid continual Fever, even into malign,
and the Smallpox thereby stopped from coming out; or may be turned into a
violet, brown, or black color, whereby it shall become equally mortal with an
incurable Pox.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Practick, relating to the Smallpox
1. BEfore I proceed any further, I would endeavor to prevent a prejudice in
you, teaching what you will read in the following Discourse; and abate the
severity of your Censure of what you have read already, consisting in Theorems
contrary to the received Opinion of the universality of your most Learned
Physicians. Now that there is a possibility of my being in the right, I will
only recommend this to your thought. Suppose, among the Romans, that Wise and
Learned People, there had been one, who had declared to them, that there was no
such thing as a particular God of the Corn, another of the Wind, etc. that
there was another World near of an equal extent of ground, to what they had
under their Dominion; that he had heard of a Stone, that always pointed to the
North, by the help of which a Ship might be guided thither: That there were
People on the other side of the World, whose soals of their Feet went
diametrically against theirs; and many more such like Discourses; all which
they would have rejected as idle and fantastic. Certainly no person of sense
by might justly blame them for their prejudice, without hearing and weighing
the grounds and reasons that might be offered, notwithstanding the generally
received Opinions among them.

Having premised this, my next Affair is to treat of the Curative part of the
Smallpox.

2. Physicians pretend to cure all Diseases by way of indication; that is, a
showing, or manifestation of what remedy every Disease, cause of the Disease,
or symptom, does require, or point at; wherein the Disease, cause of the
Disease, or symptom, is called the Indicant, that is, Manifestant, or Shewer.
The Remedies are named Indicata, or showed unto, or pointed at. For instance,
The indication of a Fever, being (in their sense) a hot Disease, is to cool;
here the Fever is the Indicant, and points to a cooling remedy, which is the
Indicatum, or remedy pointed at.

Now let us ask this Question, being first in order, What are the Indications in
the Smallpox? and wonder what a mire the Physicians have got themselves into
by their common received Opinion. I know very well, they cannot make an answer
to that Question, without answering another previous one, viz. Is the Smallpox
a hot, cold, moist or dry Disease, or is it a venomous Disease, i. e. morbus
totius substantioe? I presume, they will, and do choose to term this a Disease
of the whole substance; that is, a dissolution or secretion of the mixture of
the parts; and the Smallpox being an universal Disease of the whole Body, it
follows that the mixture of all, and every one of the parts of the Body, must
be under a dissolution, that is in plain terms, a gangrene, or tendency to
mortification; to what an absurdity of expression are the Learned Tribe of
Physicians driven to? This being granted, then the chief indication is to expel
the malignant matter, (as they call it) which being in all parts of the Body,
it follows, you must drive it out of every part. But by the way, this is an
indication taken from the cause of the Disease; whereas that drawn from the
Disease, is to put a stop to the dissolution of the mixture, or gangrene of all
the parts, which, as I conceive, is impossible, and very absurd. However, we
will take it so, that the chief indication is to be taken from the cause, which
is to expel the venomous or malign matter. The Indicata are such Remedies, that
have a power to throw out the matter to the external pores, or circumference of
the Body, because Nature does tend that way. The Remedies that are endued with
such a faculty, are Sudorifick, or Diaphoretick, that is, such as force
sweating. I cannot agree, that this is the first indication, but rather that
the first is to assist Nature in the separation, as I have made plain in
Chapter 8. of the Malign Matter; for if you go to drive out before the said
matter be loosned, and separated from the found parts, it is anticipating the
work, and not possible to be done, and forcing the spirits from their work of
separation; in the mean while, the malign matter gets ground, by infecting the
sound next adjacent parts, so that at last you shall have very little
separation, and less expulsion, and the Patient must necessarily dye by the
killing Error of the Physician.

Wherefore this Rule evidently follows; until Nature begins to show a
separation by expelling some part of the matter, (which, as I said before, is
three, four, or five days) you are only to keep the Patient in a temperate or
moderate warmth; and not keep too great a fire in the room, or overload the
Patient with Bedcloaths, forbearing all hot inflaming Cordials, of which I
shall give my Opinion more largely below.

3. On the other hand, the error is no less murtherous, in keeping the Patient
too cool, by setting open the Windows, and drawing open the Curtains, to let in
the Wind and fresh Air, and by permitting the Patient to cool himself by
drinking of fresh Small-beer in what measure he pleases, rendering it more
cooling by dropping into it Spirits of sulphur, Vitriol, or of Salt, all which
could be invented, and practiced by no other, but one that was by a Country
Apprentiship brought up to be a small Surgeon, and by his unparalled
Confidence invading the Art of physic, had some years after fifty obtained a
Degree of Doctorship by paying the usual Fees, without performing the least
Exercise. That such a Hog should be imitated by those, that look upon
themselves to be of a higher form, may deserve all peoples wonder, and be
judged to be of little better qualifications than their Rustic Master.

What these Remedies are, that have been, and are usually prescribed, you will
read by and by.

4. The sign beforementioned appearing, that there is a separation, you are
then to assist Nature in the expulsion, by gentle and moderate Sudorificks; for
as she is moderate, and gradual in the expulsion, you are not to spur her on
too fast; if you find the expulsion too slow, you may quicken it by
Sudorificks, specific in that case, of a greater force; but if the expulsion
happen to be too violent and quick, you must forbear all manner of Sudorificks,
and expect the work of Nature; for otherwise you will extremely spend the
spirits, and occasion the Pox to flow one into another, which you will prevent,
in giving Nature time to make way for future eruptions, by reducing the
foregoing to a lesser volume through discussing some part of them insensibly.
It is in this case some testaceous Powders are of use, to moderate the too
fierce carreer of the eruption, they being in no-wise sudorifick per se, or
driving out, but sometimes per accidens, which ought to be taken notice of
particularly by all person, that pretend to cure the Smallpox; for the
distinction of Medicines, and their proper times of exhibition, ought to be
regarded more in this Distemper, where the least mistake causes the commission
of a deadly error, than in any other, where it may be retrievable.

5. Though the indication taken from the principal, and immediate internal
cause of an internal Disease, is the first and chief of all others in its own
nature, and ought always to be chiefly regarded; yet it is not always the first
in execution; and therefore Indications drawn from Causes more remote, and such
as either are adjuvant, or impedimental, though subsequent, and of a much less
regard than the principal, do precede in respect of their execution. For
instance, A wound received on the Leg does chiefly and principally indicate the
Union, or the unition of the solution of the continuum; but before you can come
at it, here are indications to be taken from the Shoes and Stockings, and the
hemorrhage (if any be) which must precede in execution, which indicate, that
the Shoes and Stockings are to be pulled off first, and then the hemorrhage to
be stopped, before you can arrive to answer the chief indication, by uniting of
the lips and sides of the Wound together. In the same manner, Physicians do all
agree, That the Humors being peccant in quantity, and quality, which are their
Shoes and Stockings, give an indication of their being removed, by bleeding,
and purging, which they tell you, must necessarily precede in execution, before
you can well arrive to the malign matter, for to expel it through the prose,
which makes the second, or third indication. The last indication, which does
often require a precedence in execution, before any of the former, is taken from
the urgent symptoms; as a hemorrhage (be it of the Nose, or by vomiting, or
stools, or by the Lunars of Women) a looseness, bilious and slimy Vomits, etc.
pointing, that the said symptoms must be removed, or at least considerably
abated, before any attempt can be made by the former indications. What
multiplicity of Errors are committed in all these by Physicians, and how few by
Nurses, and motherly Women, in so much, that ten do escape under the careful
management of these, and by doing little or nothing, to one of the others, by
reason of their ignorance, and unskilfulness, in not making observations,
whence such certain Rules may be established, that may direct them in their
conduct of previous bleeding, vomiting, and purging in the Smallpox and
Measles; this (I say) will be my next work, in examining of the whole matter,
and making it evident by undeniable Rules, and received Maxims.

CHAP. XVII. Of Letting Blood in the Smallpox, and Measles.
I. FIrst, touching Bleeding; it is a general Assertion, and Practice among
Physick-men, That all or most persons, that are grown up, and have the
Smallpox, ought, and must be blooded before the eruption, that is, in the
beginning, namely, on the first, second, third, or fourth, For in some the
Eruption is not visible before the fifth day, and in some very few not until
after the fifth.
day. 1. Because all such persons have Humors, that are peccant in quantity. 2.
Because Bleeding is an experienced remedy against the putrid continual Fever,
that generally attends the Smallpox of Men and Women, by taking away part of
the burden that Nature is overcharged with, and by manifestly cooling of the
Body, through letting out some of the spirits (which that it does, is most
certain) and lastly, by preventing of urgent symptoms, as Hemorrhages,
Delirium, excess of wakefulness, or over-want of sleep, etc. 3. Because
Bleeding opens the Pores, and makes room for the spirits to move and operate
freely, whereas before they were crowded, and oppressed; whence it has been
observed, that often soon after Bleeding the Smallpox have broke out, and so
have the Measles. What relates to Children, Bleeding is generally waved (though
some Sparks, that buoy themselves upon the reputation gained among the
Populace, by the noise of their debaucht Acquaintance, are daring enough by way
of experiment, to venture at it in them also) for these Reasons: 1. Because in
these there is only an ebullition, an effervescency, or a simmering only of the
Blood, accompanying the separation of the malign variolous matter, and
therefore must be mischievous by taking off the effervescency or ebullition,
and consequently hindering both the separation, and expulsion of the Smallpox.
2. Considering the continual wasting of their parts, by insensible
perspiration, fasting through want of appetite, and otherwise, they cannot be
so subject to a Plethory, or fullness of Humors. 3. Because the least
over-losing of Blood precipitates them into a faintness, and a great weakness,
not easily reparable, or retrivable.

2. Now that which goads a supereminent Physician to this height of
confidence, is this thought in himself, by way of a mental questionary
reasoning; What shall I be called to a Child, having the Smallpox, and shall I
stand with my hands in my Pocket, and only direct a Hart'shorn Posset, a
Saffron Stay, and a little Gascons Powder, and for this only can I honorably
expect a reward of a Guinea Fee; or ought not my grandeur rather to act some
great thing, in directing Bleeding (which indeed is a great thing, and which a
common Adviser dares not think of, but much rather admires the greatness of
Advice) to a Child, especially the Parents being persons of Quality, who to
show themselves not timorous, or pusilanimous, do readily concur in admitting
of this grand Advice, the more, because it is a la mode de Paris, and that it
will cost them two or three guineas; besides, because they seem to affect in
themselves a capacity above the Vulgar of judging, that this must be
extraordinary, and good Advice; and so by this means ten qualified Children
shall be posted to their Graves, to never a one of the meaner sort (that are
only tended by skilful Nurses) without the least murmuring on the part of the
Friends of the Deceased, who believed all was done, that was possible to be
done (and that too extremely ill done) by the great Doctor, who without any
reflection within his own thoughts upon this pernicious Success, goes on with
his Bleeding on the next, and so to the next, without endeavoring to find out
his error, and consequently continuing all his lifetime, to be a most notorious
M -- or what the sensible nearest Mourner may justly call him.

3. Before I can render the Solution plain, Whether all those that are grown
up, having the Smallpox, ought to be blooded in the beginning; or many; or
few; or none; it is requisite to premise these following Rules.

1. That Bleeding (and likewise Purging) draws inwards, toward the centrical
parts, that is, toward the Bowels, and chiefly toward the Heart, which
appears by the drawing in of most eruptions upon bleeding; also by the
coldness, paleness, and weakness of all the external parts; also by the
faintness, and swounings, happening not very rarely upon bleeding; likewise by
the Blood moving from all parts in its return of circulation to the Heart, and
Bowels.

2. That the Blood which is let out by bleeding, is neither better or worse,
but of the same quality of the Blood in the whose mass: Wherefore it is a vulgar
error, that commonly the worst Blood is first taken away by opening of a Vein;
for tho the first Porringer may differ in color and consistency from the
second, and that from the third, the cause of difference is to be imputed to
the spirits (being the chief cause of the color and consistency) that are
drawn away in the first Porringer (in whose room the external Air succeeds)
weakening the spirits of the Blood that is to be received in the second
Porringer; so that the lesning of the spirits, and the intrusion of the
external nitrous, and otherwise affected Air, causes the variation abovesaid;
for the Blood is not of the same mixture, temperament, color, and consistency
within the Vessels, as it does appear without.

3. That Bleeding performs its principal, speediest, and most evident effects,
by diminishing, and letting out the spirits, and consequently does immediately
lessen the motion of the Blood (for as much as the spirits are the cause of its
motion) and the consequence of this is, that bleeding must necessarily cool,
because as motion is the cause of heat, so the lessening of that motion must
occasion an abatement of heat. Likewise upon the greater or lesser proportion
of the diminution of spirits, by a copious, or sparing bleeding, depends in a
very great measure the condensation, incrassation, rarefaction, and attenuation
of the Blood. This being the chief Rule of all others, if well apprehended in
it self, and the consequences thereof, no Physician can easily mistake in what
cases to bleed, what quantities, and times, and how seldom, or how often. On the
other hand, without the right understanding of that Rule, no man can act
rationally, or dogmatically in bleeding, but must do it conjecturally, and
empirically, that is, at random, hit or miss, sometimes killing, and other
times curing.

3. One material query I ought to propose, before I apply my self to the
solution abovementioned; viz. The Smallpox, being caused by the malign matter
immediately and univocally, and (according to this Maxim, Sublata causa, sc.
univoca and continente tollitur effectus) being expelled, maturated, and dried
away, whether the putrid Fever does also expire with it? or whether the said
putrid Fever is, or can be removed before the course of the Smallpox be wholly
terminated? That there is always either an ebullition, or symptomatic putrid
Fever attending the Smallpox is universally observed, and the malign matter
being totally extermined either in pustles, tumors, efflorescencies and
insensible evaporations, the symptomatick Fever must necessarily be removed;
though it is not impossible, but that the Smallpox may seize one that does lie
sick of an essential continual putrid Fever; or likewise that the symptomatick
Fever of the Small pox may sometimes, though rarely, cause an essential putrid
Fever, and leave it behind, after the termination of the Smallpox.

4. As to the bleeding of adult persons in the Smallpox at the beginning;
Suppose twenty under equal circumstances sick of the said Disease, whereof ten
have run the risque of bleeding in the beginning, and the other ten have not
been blooded, common experience will attest to you, that two, and sometimes
three, who have not suffered bleeding, have escaped, to one of the others that
have.

5. Perhaps they will attempt baffling all men out of their common Sense, by
arguing the necessity of bleeding in the beginning, from a Plethory there is in
the beginning in all that are seized with the Smallpox; especially being
attended with a putrid Fever. And secondly, because it takes off from the
burden of the fullness, and of malign Matter, that Nature is overcharged with,
and several other reasons spoken of above. To all which I shall answer
particularly.

6. The plethory or fullness of Blood beforementioned, is generally asserted to
be of two sorts; the one ad Vasa, the other ad Vires. That ad Vasa is
understood to be such a fullness of the Vessels with Blood, that they are ready
to burst, which is a plethory many Horses are subject to by being high fed, who
when put to a swift carrear, do sometimes break a Vessel within them, for
prevention whereof the Farrier-doctors bleed such Horses once a Month, or
oftener.

7. The like Plethory the Roman Athletae, or Wrestlers, were incident into, and
therefore was then, and is still called an Athletic Plethory, for which they
were frequently blooded; of this sort of Plethory, examples are so scarce, that
among ten thousand, hardly one is to be found so improved in fullness of Blood.

8. A Plethory ad Vires, implies such a fullness of Blood, that is too great, or
too much for Nature, that is, the Spirits to manage, and is felt to be
oppressive to them; but this kind of fullness seems to be restrained to those,
that are in a neutral state, or such who cannot be said to be well, nor very
ill. These indeed appear to be huffed up in their Bowels, bloated in their
Faces, and swelled in their Limbs; and here the Indication is proper enough to
bleed them to a just proportion, upon which it is usual for them to recover
their strength immediately, and to return to their former Vigor; but then upon
bleeding of them a second time, at the very instant they lose their Strength,
and fall into a Disease.

9. It is presumed, you will infer, that Persons taken with the Smallpox, are
in the beginning Plethoric ad Vires, and therefore indicate bleeding. Here
comes in the universal mistake of bleeding; for if you conclude, that every
sick Man has more Blood than his Spirits can manage, and thence take your
Indication for bleeding; then in all diseased Persons, and at all times, even
at the hour of Death, there being more Humors or Blood than the Spirits can
manage, you ought, and (as is said of you above) you do bleed, even until the
fatal Minute. But is it not better to stand with your Hands in your Pockets,
according to your common saying, and commit such Sick to God Almighty's Care
and Providence, (who does very often out of his signal Mercy, and to his Glory,
raise them to their former Health again) or to let them Dye, than to kill them,
tho killing is no Murder in some sort of People. It is most certain, that all
Men, and most especially those that are conversant about People's Lives, must
give a most exact account of their Actions at the last-day, and particularly
where they seem to endeavor to thwart the Providence of the Great God. I
confess, that in some cases bleeding may be of use in the beginning, as where
there is a very sharp Pain, or Inflammation in any of the Bowels, or a very
accute Headache, or a fullness ad Vires, like unto that appropriated to a
neutral state of Health described before, and some few others.

10. On the other hand, Bleed, Vomit, or Purge in the beginning, where there is
is a great Oppression about the Heart or Stomach, a Vomiting, or Looseness,
Faintings, great Difficulties of Breathing, and c. it does all generally prove
fatal; not but it happens sometimes, that some very few have been blooded,
several times vomited, and purged, after the coming out of the Smallpox, and
have recovered; but they were such, whom no Remedy, Medicine, or Application
could kill; and therefore, because they outlived those Male-administrations,
you are not to draw a consequence, they were in the least beneficial, whereas
scarce five in a hundred would have endured their pernicious efforts.

11. Neither is their plea for this sanguinary Practice excusable, upon the
account they are invited to it, by the example of the Physicians of Paris, who
Bleed three times to their once. To this must be replied, that did they in
France direct bleeding (as commonly they do) six, seven, or eight times to
their once, they would be less blameable, considering that in French bodies,
the Blood being very copiously engendered by their Diet, and so very much
rarefied into Spirits by the extreme fluid and thin Air, which as often as Blood
is taken away, enters the Vessels to supply its vacuity, and rarefies the
remainder into new Spirits, insomuch, that I have known bleeding has been
administered twenty times, in little more than a Month, to bodies seemingly not
very sanguine, affected with ordinary continual putrid Fevers, whereby the
Blood being almost quite exhausted, the Vessels have been in a manner filled up
with Air; and therefore it is no great wonder the French are generally termed an
airy People. But in the more Northern Climates, the Blood is thick, gross,
fibrous, or full of flocky ragged Filaments or Strings, and not copiously
perfused with Spirits; likewise the Air is gross, foggy, and thick, intermixed
with heavy Vapors, and Exhalations, and nothing near so fluid; so that should
you Bleed a French man in such a Country after three or four Months abode at
the rate of his own Country usage, you would instantly convert him into a Corpse.

12. As to the second Reason, whereby they would enforce the necessity of
bleeding, viz. that it substracts from the burden of the Blood, and malign
Matter, is idle, unless they pretend to lessen the Blood, without lessening the
Spirits; for that quantity of abounding Blood, which they attempt to draw off
by bleeding (suppose eight, ten, or twelve Ounces) being actuated, and managed
by an equal proportion of Spirits, to that they leave behind flowing in the
Vessels, cannot be surmised to be more burdensome to those Spirits that are
tapt out with the Blood, than the Blood remaining in the Vessels to those
Spirits they are perfused with.

2. If taking off a small proportion of Blood by Phlebotomy, does ease the
remaining spirits in some measure in their burden, then certainly cutting off a
Leg, or an Arm, or both the Arms, Legs, and Thighs, must ease the restant
Spirits much more, and for what I know may be performed with less danger, than
bleeding largely before, and three or four times after the eruption of the
Smallpox.

3. Since then by bleedings they do so considerably lessen the Spirits, those
that are remaining in the Vessels must be by much too weak to encounter with
the Malign Matter, and consequently unable to expel it; or if administered
several times after Expulsion, that is, Eruption, the Smallpox must
necessarily go in again; or if by being too fast fixed in the Skin, either by
hardness, or closure, or change of the Pores in their Figure, then unavoidably
from a florid red they must turn (the Spirits in them, that should maturate
them, being vanguish'd by the malign Particles) to a green, blew, brown, and
black; and so good night to you.

4. If it be pretended, that bleeding lessens the malignant matter, together
with the Blood; you may easily be convinced by recalling to your memory what
was formerly observed, viz. that all adventitious, or not adventitious malign
Particles, do of their own Nature, Force, and Motion, tend to the centrical
Parts; so that by drawing of Blood out of the Arm, or Foot, which asre furthest
from the Center, there can not the least atom of malignity thence be fetched
away with the Blood.

5. The malignant matter naturally drawing in, and bleeding likewise drawing
in, this must necessarily hurry away the Patient to his long home.

6. Was it ever known, that any Physick-man did direct bleeding to let out the
malignity in the Plague, or of any Poison that was swallowed down, at the
extremity of the Veins; and much less can be expected from it, in letting out
the venomous matter of the Smallpox?

7. A necessity of bleeding may be urged by them, in case the Patient fetches
his breath too thick and short, or panting, that he seems to be in danger of
a sudden suffocation, or stifling. This certainly is grounded on a false
supposition, that the Blood stagnates through fullness in the Lungs; whereas the
Stagnation cannot be caused by fullness, in a Person who possibly has already
been blooded several times to a great quantity, and taken no nourishment for
six or eight days, but is occasioned by the malignant matter, that has not
only ^^mpt, but mortified the Spirits that should move the Blood, and therefore
must necessarily stagnate. But that which adds greatly to the Madness, and
killing Error of bleeding in the foresaid case, which does beyond all
contradiction draw in, is that at the same time they are giving strong
Sudorificks (which in their Physic Cant they call Cordials) to expel and throw
out the malignant matter. This is at one and the same instant of time, to
thrust from you, and to pull to you, which certainly is the most unanswerable
and inexcusable Error that can be committed by the worst of Mountebanks.

8. This symptom of panting is very frequent in the plague, or pestilential
Fever; and did ever any pretender to Physic conclude that said symptom to be
occasioned by a fullness of Blood in the Lungs? and consequently was ever any
man so mad, as to direct bleeding in that case, or in any Fever that is barely
called Malignant? the cause of panting in the plague, and malignant Fevers,
being the same in the Smallpox, why should one dare to bleed in the one, and
not in the other?

9. If bleeding once, and that to a small proportion, is so suspected a remedy
in the beginning before the Smallpox are come out, of what ill consequence
must two, three, or four bleedings be after they are come out?

10. It has been observed above, that the Smallpox are sometimes accompanied
with tumors, filled with the same malignant matter, and appearing sometimes
about the Face, Neck, and Armpits and other times about the Belly, Groin, or
Legs; now that such sort of tumors should be endeavored to be withdrawn,
removed, or abated by bleeding the next Vein to them, under or above them, and
so to evacuate by way of Derivation (not by revulsion, which must be performed
in a Vein at a greater distance, either of those scopes or intentions being
very idle) the malign matter contained in them is a madness, whereas instead of
their designed purpose, they cause the said matter to draw in, and sink into
the Veins again, whereby the malignity in the Body is so increased (were it
only by the matter of a simple tumor being Phegmonick, Aedematous,
Erysipelous, or other) that the Fever is commonly exasperated by so doing, into
an high burning, or a malignant Fever of the highest degree; this must
necessarily be interpreted a folly, exceeding the imagination of all mankind.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Purging in the Smallpox.
1. WHAT relates to Purging, either before, or after the eruption of the
Smallpox, by reason of its drawing in all Humors, together with the malignity
to the centrical parts, it has universally been adjudged, and by common
experience found to be equally pernicious in this Distemper, as in the Plague,
a laxative and not purging Clyster being scarce admitted, unless in the
beginning in a great costiveness and fullness of Excrements in the Guts; though
I do well remember, that some years past a certain red Antimonial Powder, which
was perversely judged sudorifick, was given to a young Gentleman in
Shandois-street, by a Charter House Physician deceased, after the full eruption
of the Smallpox, which moved ten or a dozen large thin Stools, being all
Humors, and little of gross Excrements, and suddenly drew in all the
Smallpox, insomuch that all about him despaired of his life, though afterward
youth and strength, with the assistance of large doses of Spirits of
Hartshorn, struck all out again, so that the party recovered to the surprise
of every one about him. This instance is brought in here, not only to prove the
extremity of danger through purging in the Smallpox, but to offer this remark,
That those imaginary secret preparations of Sudorific Antimony, whether white,
red, blew, or black, (in all which I do pretend to be sufficiently skilful) do
now and then turn in some Bodies to smart Purgers, and sometimes Vomitories,
and therefore ought to be carefully chosen, if not wholly avoided in cases of
this hazard, where the event shall depend upon the good or ill fortune of that
Medicine.

CHAP. XIX. Of Urgent Symptoms in the Smallpox; and particularly of
Haemorrhages.
1. THE next step I am to make, is to the Urgent Symptoms, among which I will
begin with the worst of them, and that is a Haemorrhage, be it where it will.
Here I find Physicians more than ordinary cautious; for though in all cases,
this only excepted, they never show the least scruple in bleeding for
revulsion, as they call it; yet here they universally fly from it, and betake
themselves to put their hands in their Pockets, being contented to be lookers
on, and to be Infallible Judges, in pronouncing of their Sentence of Death,
without considering, that even this Symptom sometimes is curable by an
indiction taken from its true cause, which is not fullness, or a simple thinness
of sharpness of the Blood, but the malign matter being turned in, and immerged
into the Blood (by previous Bleedings, strong Cordails, or Alexipharmacks
overloaded with spirit of Wine, or by frequent exhibitions of large Doses of
Narcoticks, or by Purges, and purging Clysters, or by external Errors, or
lastly, by the too great proportion of malignant matter (overballancing the
force of the spirits in separation and expulsion) through its corrosive
acuteness (as it were) cutting the fibers of the Blood, and running it into an
oleum per deliquium.) So that in this case, tho thickning or adstringent
Medicines internal and external, seem to be proper indicata, yet the malignity,
being by them bound in, and the spirits tied up from separation and expulsion
of the malign matter, does plainly counter-indicate the use of the said
Medicines, and above all bleeding; notwithstanding there are several Medicines
I know of, that do, and have successfully answered this whole indication,
without any counter-indication whatsoever.

2. The same Reason now spoken of of being equally valid against the use such
Medicines that stop Vomitings and Loosenesses; I shall pass by making any
further discourse of them.

CHAP. XX. Of want of rest and sleep in the Smallpox; and of Hypnoticks,
chiefly of Opium, and Diacodium.
1. WANT of sleep, or overwakefulness, is another urgent Symptom, which most
Practicers hold so important, that they seem to take their chief indication
from it, killing in good earnest two Birds with one stone, by pretending
through the indicata, which this Symptom points to, viz. Hypnoticks or Lullaby
Medicines, not only to give rest to the Spirits, but that being so at rest, and
disingaged from their over-furious combat with the malignant matter, they
become more powerful in throwing out the said malignant or variolous matter,
whereunto they are the more spurred on by the common saying, namely, Narcotica
omnes evacuationes supprimunt proeter sudorem, i.e. Narcoticks, or dosing
sleeping numbing Medicines do suppress or stop all evacuations, excepting
Sweat, which is that they chiefly aim at, making this inference, That if they
provoke sweat, they must necessarily throw out the Smallpox; besides that
great and chief benefit, there is an advantage Narcoticks have over all other
Medicines, that through their virtue of stopping all Evacuations, they must
prevent all Vomitings, Loosenesses, and Haemorrhages, which are the Symptoms
that are so much dreaded in this Distemper. These being such inviting
Faculties, have so endeared Diacodium, Opium, and all such Medicines that are
formed out of this latter, as Laudanum opiatum, Laudanum liquidum, Nepenthes,
pil. de cynoglos. de styrace, Requies Nicholai, and a hundred more, to
Physicians, that they are grown most desperately fond of 'em to a madness; and
happy does that Physician think himself, that has a secret Preparation of his
own (though never so idle a one) which another has not, and would sooner trust
his Wife or Daughter with another, than his darling Opium Preparation, and on
which he bestows as fond and doting a name, calling it Pilula pacifica,
Paregorica, Coelestis, Divina, Pantheon, and what not? Whenever Mr. Doctor is
to storm some great Distemper, Diacodium and Laudanum are advanced by him, as
most trusty and faithful, to do the work. To him that is like to be choakt by a
Catarh, or skowr'd out of the world by a desperate Looseness, he does
infallibly recommend one of his Lullabies: And in the Smallpox or Measles,
Diacodium is his Panaca, and Anchor of Health, beginning the first day with an
ounce, the second ascending to two, the third to three, and the fourth day to
four, and there he sticks, continuing that Dose for several days following more
Sid -- no, until he perceives trembling of the Hands, a panting Breath,
mumbling Speech, and the rest of the Heralds of Death. Dr. Prate-all puts on
Diacodium in the Smallpox a singular value, highly raised in him by an
hereditary notion from his him by an hereditary notion from his Father Sidn --
the truth of which the pale and ghastly events in his Man G -- l, little Doctor
Rus. and abundance more might very justly have rendered suspected to him. The
like success attending the Administrations of other Physicians ought to rouse
up the rest of the Lullaby Doctors to a reflecting thought.

2. Wherefore it will be very important to examine to the bottom the operation
(and manner of it) of Hypnoticks; in order to which let us first consider the
occasion of sleep, which happens, whenever the animal Spirits are reduced to be
so few, or lessened, and dispersed by daily labor and toil, that they are
become insufficient to keep up, and to strain the Nerves into a stiffness; and
then they must necessarily subside, and the Spirits become less active, and
flow in their motion, and so the animal Operations ceasing, or rather lessening
in their source, or original fountain or spring in the Brain, sleep follows,
which lasts so long, until during the sleep a new and sufficient supply of
animal Spirits is engendered out of the Arterial Blood, which now being capable
enough to strain the Nerves of Sense and Local Motion, one is awakened, and
roused up.

3. So that here are two Conditions requisite to occasion sleep; the one is the
scarcity and lessening of the animal Spirits; the other is the subsiding of the
Nerves in their source and elsewhere. It must necessarily follow, what ever
lessens the animal Spirits, either by dispersing, or wasting of them, or by
destroying of them, or by drawing of them from their source, must cause sleep;
and thence it is, that labor, and wakefulness of all the day, do occasion
sleep; Bleeding does the like very often, by withdrawing such a proportion of
Blood and Spirits, whereout afterward so many animal Spirits should have been
engendered in the Brain. A plentiful Meal causes sleep by drawing too great a
quantity of animal Spirits from their source to the Stomach, and circumjacent
Bowels.

4. In relation to the subsiding of the Nerves, you are to apprehend, they are
perfused with a glutinous slimy Juice, whereby upon a partial emptiness of
Spirits, their little Pores subsiding are apt moderately and softly to cleave
together, and so lock in the animal Spirits, and then it may properly enough,
from the suddenness of it, be said, one falls or drops into sleep. Now whatever
does cause an excess in quantity of the said glutinous slimy Juice, must also
be said to cause an excess of sleep. 2dly, Whenever it happens, that the said
glutinous Juice is rarefied by the too much violence of motion of the animal
Spirits, being but few in number, then a drowsiness must follow, because such
sort of rarefaction does somewhat hinder the cleaving together of the subsiding
Pores of the Nerves, and seems to huff 'em up a little, so that the animal
Spirits are in that case only dulled or dampt in their motion, or a little
detained, and not locked up, as they are in sleep. Whenever a man has overtired
himself by work or travel, he can only be drowsy, and not sleep fast, because
he has by such too long continuance, or violence of labor, and action,
consumed, or dried up too much of the said slimy or glutinous Juice of the
Nerves, or through the heat of his animal Spirits in this over-labour has
rarefied it. I will pass by the trouble of explaining the causes of drowsiness,
and deep sleeps that happen to some, and overwakefulness to others, that are
debauched with Wine, Brandy, or any other strong Liquors, since it is plain and
easy for any of sense to apply the preceding Hypothesis.

5. This premised Discourse being only introductory to the illustrating the
effects, and the manner of agency of Opium, opiated Medicines, and Diacodium,
as the chief of Hypnoticks; that which is next requisite, is to make the
application thereof. Their faculties of dosing, throwing into a deep sleep, and
stupefying the sense of feeling, so as to make interception or suspension of
pain, whereby Hypnoticks do acquire the name of Anodynes, Pacificks, and
Paregoricks, are generally asserted to derive from a Narcotick Sulphur,
condensing the Spirits, and fixing the Humors of any part of the Body. Admire a
little the absurdity of this Physic Cant. They tell you, The said Faculties
flow from the oily and inflammable part of the Opium, that condenseth the
Spirits, and fixes Humors: It is philosophical to say, because a thing is oily
or inflammable, or through its oiliness and inflammability it condenseth the
Spirits, that is to say, Opium in the quantity of one Grain, half a Grain, or a
quarter of a Grain, does make all the Spirits oily, and inflames them, and by
so being rendered oily and inflamed, they are condensed; by being condensed,
they are stupefied; and by being stupefied, all paints for that time are
removed, and the Humors fixed, that is hardened, so as to be wholly not fluid?
Were it not more pardonable, to say Opium does perform its effects through
occult qualities? As Fire, by being condensed in its particles, burns more
furiously; so the Spirits, by being condensed and contracted more close
together, must necessarily act more vigorously, and consequently occasion
wakefulness; and through greater activity, and quicker motion, render humors
much more fluid, and increase pains. Possibly what they mean by condensing, it
to be understood thus; viz. Opium by raising in the Body damps and vapors,
that crowding between the Spirits, place themselves in the little spaces
between them, and consequently may be said to condense, or incrassate them. But
to the contrary, this is a rarefaction, and a thinning of the spirits, and
humors. There is also another parcel of Physicians, who imagine Opium to be of
so extreme a cold nature (that is, as they term it, in the fourth degree) that
is congeals, or friezeth the spirits into a numbness, and humors into a
hardness. These exceed the others in extravagancy of Opinion, insomuch, that
generally speaking, it may be said, Physicians are very Irrational Animals, to
which the Proverb seems to allude; A man is a Physician, or a Fool; meaning all
Physicians are Fools, tho with this exception, that there are some in most
Countries, who are of as good sense and extraordinary parts, as any of other
Faculties.

6. Many convincing Reasons may be offered, to admit Opium into the list of
whole Poisons, when taken in a large Dose, in regard it does as certainly kill
as any other, by destroying the mixture, composition, and temperament of the
heart, brain, and spirits, through its most piercing, acute, and cutting
particles, or most subtle spirits, that (as most others) are contained, and
locked up in a sulphurous body; so that the sulphurous body of Opium through it
self is no more narcotick, than the body of Brimstone is corroding;
nevertheless in the unctuous body of Brimstone is contained the corrosive
spirit of Sulphur, as likewise in the unctuous body of Opium is the poisonous
narcotick spirit, and it is more easy entirely, or to what degree you please
to separate this narcotick spirit from the Opium, than the corrosive spirit
from the other, and that in less than an hours time, which done, a whole Ounce
of it shall contain less of the narcotick spirit, than the hundredth part of a
Grain of Opium and may be more safely taken; which is a clear evidence, that it
performs its narcotick effect only by its spirit, and not in the least by any
sulphurous condensing steams; for what proportion of sulphurous steams can
arise from half a Grain of crude Opium, sufficient to stupefy the Brain, and
condense or thicken all the animal spirits of the Body: It is most absurb, and
idle to imagine it.

7. For the most part poisonous spirits are locked up in unctuous sulphurous
bodies, which being less porous or pervious, and more clammy and glutinous than
others, are best fitted or adapted to contain the said most subtle piercing
spirits: For did you suppose them to be containable in other bodies, that are
not sulphurous or unctuous, it were impossible such subtle spirits should be
contained in them longer than a few weeks, months, or a year or two; whereas
being lodged in unctuous bodies, they scarce lose any part of their virtue,
that is, the poisonous spirits are but a little diminisht in fifty or a hundred
years.

8. Since then it is beyond all peradventure, that Opium is a sulphurous Body,
and the venom in it is a most subtle acute spirit, they are much in the wrong,
that pretend to correct that venom by obtusing the points of its particles by
Vinegar, juice of Quinces, spirit of Sulphur p. c. of vitriol, of Salt, or any
other acid; for besides that these are unfitted or incapable of entering any
sulphurous body, yet could you suppose they did, they would rather acuate, than
blunt the points of those narcotic spirits. 2. They are little less deceived,
that pretend by a dissolution of Opium in Sack, or spirit of Wine to correct
it, for by that means they can effect no more, than depurate the Opium from
some heterogeneous admixtures, and not in the least soften the venom. 3. The
best preparation or correction of Opium is certainly dissolving it in a
tincture of blue Salt of Tartar, digesting it for some days in a Sandbath, and
then either evaporating it to a mass (which must prove extremely brittle,
though easily corrected by adding some sort of Gum, or Balsam to it) or keeping
it in a liquid form. 4. The additions of Castor, the extract of Saffran, of
those hot Roots and Spices in the tincture of the species Diambrae, likewise of
Musc and Ambargryse twice over, with intention to correct the extreme coldness
of Opium (which without all dispute is hot) in the preparation of Laudanum
opiatum, savor of much ignorance and folly, and far more if the idle Doctrine
of Directives should prove true; for by those fob Cordials, and Cephalicks, the
poison of Opium, yet untamed and uncorrected, is directed, and conducted to the
Heart, and Brain; but that their madness should be continued in all those
variations of Opium in Philonium Mag. Roman. Persic. Pil. de cynoglos. de
styrace, and especially in Nepenthes opiatum, wherein over and above all the
rest, there is an addition of the Salts of Pearl and Coral to no purpose, is
very surprising. Now the Laudanum liquidum prepared, and truly corrected by the
tincture of blue Salt of tartar, or by another that is much better, which I
could tell you, exceeding all those now mentioned by a million of degrees,
ought to be solely substituted in their stead, and all other foolish
compositions of that kind entirely rejected.

9. Opium being administered in a just and very moderate Dose, is in the
Chapter of Poisons accounted only for a Demi-poison, that is, it does not kill,
but acts half the part of poison, by weakening all the Bowels and Spirits,
namely the natural vital, and most particularly the animal spirits, which
through its most subtle, cutting, and acute particles it does destroy, by
separating their mixture or composition; for though the spirits are constituent
parts of a more compound body, to wit, the juices, and all the parts of the
Body, yet in themselves they are a lesser compound. The animal spirits being in
such a proportion lessened, and extinguished or destroyed, as through their
paucity, or small number, to occasion, or suffer a subsiding of the Nerves at
their source, and in all the other parts of sense and motion, sleep according
to the abovementioned Hypothesis must necessarily follow. And sorasmuch as
many, if not most, upon the taking of an Hypnotick, or opiat Medicine (of which
kind, (though in a milder degree, all do assent Diacodium to be) do not sleep
fast, but are only impelled into a slumber (which is an imperfect sleep) and
sometimes only into a drowsiness, accompanied with continuated dreams, and now
and then with senseless talking, as if they were in a Delirium; all this is to
be imputed to the said subtle venenous opiat spirits, rarefying the glutinous
slimy nervous Juice (heretofore discoursed of) that they do in some small
measure expand, or lift up the subsiding Nerves, whereby the animal spirits not
being sufficiently locked in, are apt to continue in a small motion, and
exercise their function, though in a very imperfect, and confused manner.

10. That Opium does weaken all the Bowels, needs no other testimony, but those
that have frequently taken it, having lost their Appetite and Digestion,
looking pale and ghastly, being rendered extremely feeble in their Joints, and
all their Senses, both internal and external, viz. their Memory and
Understanding much impaired, their Sght dim, etc.

11. In Pains, Inflammations and Fevers, Opium does the office of Bleeding; for
as the latter performs what it is designed for, by lessening the Spirits
chiefly, though together with the Blood; so the former by lessening the Spirits
does suspend Pains, in the manner as you have been told, and must necessarily,
by abating the Spirits both animal and vital, but a stop to inflammations.

12. It is not to be doubted, but Opium, though per accidens, by substracting
or destroying the animal and vital Spirits, does cool beyond all Medicines, in
regard that violent motion being the cause of preternatural heat, and the
Spirits being subtracted, the motion of the remaining Spirits must be lessened
in proportion to the foresaid substraction. But Opium, in respect of its bitter
and inflammable sulphurous parts, must be accounted hot. From what has been
explained here, it plainly appears, how far the Ancients were in the right in
their observing, most, if not all Hypnoticks, and Narcoticks to be extremely
cooling, tho as to the true cause thereof, they were wholly in a mistake, and
all others after them.

13. There is only this difference between the taking of an Opiat and Bleeding,
that the latter lessens the spirits, together with their proportion of Humors
and Juices, and the former does diminish the spirits only, leaving that
proportion of humors, which they did actuate, as a load to the remaining
spirits, which possibly are insufficient to manage those humors they are
perfused in.

14. That Opiates do thicken, or condensate Rheums and Catarrhs, happens
likewise by extinguishing of the Spirits, that through their too brisk motion
attenuate and rarefy. Here it may be remarked, of how dangerous consequence an
Hypnotick may, and has often proved fatal to Asthmaticks, by thickning the
humors in their Lungs, which stagnating by too great an incrassation, must
necessarily suddenly choke and stifle the Patient.

15. In conclusion, by this Hypothesis you may easily resolve all doubts
concerning Hypnoticks, and be exactly guided, when, how often, to whom, and in
what cases to exhibit them, and without it it is impossible for any man to
prescribe it safely, but must more often kill than cure.

16. There is one material point remaining to be discussed, which is an
accidental property in Opiats of sometimes promoting sweat, happening through the
violent combat, strugglings and motion between the poisonous particles and the
spirits, the latter endeavoring by a furious sally to throw out the former
through the pores with the serum, attenuated and actua^ed by the violence of
their motion: What concerns their manner of stopping all other evacuations,
it is no-wife difficult to explain by what has been proposed already.

17. The application of the premised Discourse will soon inform you, how
pernicious, and indeed killing the continuated exhibition of Opiats must prove
in the Smallpox, and Measles, thereby impoverishing the spirits to that
degree, that it is impossible for them to make a proportional resistance against
the malign particles of the Smallpox, pressing toward the centrical parts;
and much less are they capable of driving them out to the Skin, or
circumference of the Body.

17. Nevertheless, Hypnoticks may be so managed, both in this Distemper, and in
many others, that being seasonably, and with the greatest caution imaginable
advised, they are capable of saving many a man's life, and relieving them in
the worst of miseries.

CHAP. XXI. Of the chief indication in the Smallpox, and of the Remedies and
Medicines answering to the said indication.
1. THE first and chief indication in the Smallpox is taken from the malignant
or venomous matter, which indicates, or shows, that it must be first
separated from the sound parts of the Blood; and secondly, being separated
indicates expulsion, or driving out.

2. The separation being performed by the ebullition of the blood, which in
Children generally proves easy enough, and forward, their blood not being
gross, or much glutinous, and their spirits lively, is therefore apt enough to
boil up; so that unless there should happen some extraordinary ill symptom, I
would advise all people to avoid sending for a Physician, lest the reflection
of his Honor striking upon his Fancy, should urge him not to stand with his
hands in his Pocket, and act some mischievous thing or other, on purpose to
deserve his Fee. The only safe way is to leave it to Nature, rather than trust
to a foolish idle Physician.

3. In case the ebullition should be too slow, or scarce rise at all, and the
Child complain of an extreme Headache, great oppression at his heart and
stomach, and scarce any warmth, that is not so much as usual in the time of
health, to be perceived in feeling his Forehead, or Wrist, the color of the
Face not high, and the Pulse slower than ordinary, then this Drink will be a
great relief.

4. Take of Chamomile Flowers, and Elder Flowers, of each half a handful
Otherwise called a Pugil, whereby Flowers are measured, being as much us you
can take up between your Thumb and two next Fingers.
, boil them in Posset, made with Smallbeer very little hopt, to a pint, and
strain it.

5. Hereof let him take a draught warmed, greater or lesser, according to his
Age, three or four times a day, especially at night, before the usual time of
rest. Instead hereof many will use a Drink of a few Figs, boiled in Small-beer,
and strained: But by the way, you are to take notice, that for the most part
the ebullition is too high, as appears by the extraordinary heat, violent pain
in the Back, high color in the Cheeks, beating of the Temples, etc. then to
bring it to a moderation, this following Drink will perform the work very well.

6. Take of Spanish Scorzonera roots cut small, of burnt Harts-born grossly
powdered or bruised, of each two ounces; boil them in two quarts of spring
water, to one quart; about a quarter of an hour before the drink is taken off
the fire, put to it half an ounce of English liquorish cut small, strain it; or
instead of the liquorish, the drink may be sweetened, for the taste sake, with
white sugar candy, or penide sugar. This may be drunk instead of Beer warmed,
or three or four draughts taken warm in a day.

7. Before I proceed further, it is necessary to make this Remark, being of the
greatest importance of any, that are relating to the Cure of the Smallpox,
viz. It is only a gentle and moderate ebullition of the Humors, that causes a
separation of the malign matter from the sound, whereas an high, violent, and
sharp ebullition, does confuse, entangle, and embroil the malign matter much
more, and as long as the ebullition continues in that degree of violence, it is
impossible the malign matter can be separated, and consequently expelled.

8. Hence the ignorance and killing Errors of most Physick-men appear, who
without considering the cause, or mistaking the cause and reason, why the
Smallpox are not readily expelled, immediately advise strong drivers out,
which not performing what is expected from them, and falsely judging that it
happens because they are not strong enough, they proceed from prescribing a
third or fourth part of Epidemic or Plague-water, mixed with two thirds, or
three fourths of simple cordial Waters (as they call'em) to half or two thirds,
or more of the Epidemic, in proportion to half or one third of the simple
cordial Waters, whereby the malignant matter is still more and more confused,
and embroiled with the sound Humors Likewise enforcing these with great numbers
of those fiery burning drops of spirits of Harts-born, and other inflaming
pernicious Compounds, as you will read in the following page.
; so that either the malignant Particles descending deeper to the centrical
parts, are not expelled at all, or some part which happened by great violence to
be expelled to the skin in the Smallpox, turns green, blue, brown or black,
and then they throw it upon the malignity of the distemper, which, in good
truth, ought to be imputed to the error and ignorance of the Prescriber. But
much greater is the mistake, when the spirit or tincture of Saffran is added to
the proportion abovementioned, also London or Venice Treacle, Mithridate,
Diascordium, or Spirit of Hartshorn; Since then, as is insinuated before, the
ebullition in the Smallpox is commonly too high, it ought rather to be reduced
to a moderation, wherein besides what is set down before, most testaceous
Powders are of singular virtue; as Simples, Crabs Eyes, Pearl, Coral, Bezoar
Stone, etc.

Bezoar Mineral will do very well, if exactly prepared, and fresh, and meets
with a constitution, that does not open the body of it too much. Compounds,
Pulvis e chelis cancrorum compositus, (which is the best of 'em.) Pulvis
granorum chermes comp. (leaving out the Cloves and Leaf-gold.) Pulvis cardiacus
magistr. (without the Citron-peel, Angelica, Zedoari, Ambargryse, and
Leaf-gold) Species de Hyacint. Any of these. either singly or compounded, may
be given to Children from two Scruples to four, in 24 hours; that is, the fourt
part every six hours; to wit, 10, 15, or 20 grains, according to their age,
every sixth hour in a spoonful or two of some convenient Vehicle; in persons
grown up, they may be taken from four Scruples to eight, or ten, or more, in a
day and night; that is, every six hours from one Scruple to two, or two and an
half. The Pulv. Bez. mag. must be exhibited in a less proportion, because of
the philonum magistrale. The Simples may be put together in this manner:

9. Ocul. cancr. pr. ij. marg. pr. j. coral. rubr. pr. ss. lap. Bez. or. gr.
xv. m. f. Pulv. Sumat a ss. ad j. in infantibus and pueris, sexta quaque hora,
and a j. ad ij. and ijss. in adultis iisdem horis in vehiculo idoneo, sc.
sequente vel simili.

10. Aq. lact. Alex. vj. Aq. Cinam. hordeat j. ocul. canr. pr. j. vel marg. pr.
j. sacchar. crystallin. vel sacchar. penid. q. s. ad gratum saporem.

M. f. Jul.

Capiat. cochl. iij. iiij. vel v. in lang. vel altern. aut tertia quaque hora.
In stead of the Aq. lact. may be substituted Aq. meliss. buglos. borr. etc. and
in the room of Aq. cinam. may be used Aq. scord. comp.

11. Though by how much the less a Prescription is compounded, the more it
ought to be esteemed, because you may easier know, which of the Components or
Ingredients performs the work, and you may more exactly and readily answer the
Indication or Scope you aim at; yet in regard the jumbling of Compopositions
seems to magnify the Art, and to raise an esteem of the Artist in the opinion
of the Patient and Apothecary, who not only finds his account in it, but is
thought by the Physician to be detained in greater subjection and ignorance by
such his mysterious confoundng of Medicines, the Composites may, without any
hazard or trouble, be thrown together thus:

12. Pulv. e chel. cancr. compos. granor. Cherm. comp. an j. pulv. Bez.
magistr. ss. corn. cerv. ust. vel nov. pr. j. lap. Bez. or. ss. M. f. Pulv.
Dividatur in singulos os vel duos os separatim in chartulas reponendos, and
sumat unam sexta quavis hora in cochl. j. vel ij. Jul. supra. script. superbib.
ejusdem Jul. cochl. iij. vel iiij.

13. An Hypnotic, where the ebullition rises too high, (if any where, or at
any time it be useful) does sometimes prove a singular help to abate it, and
reduce it to a moderation; and therefore a Bolus made out of those Powders,
Diascordium, and Conserve of buglos, or borrage flowers, or of succory flowers,
enforced with a few drops of laudanum liquidum tartarisatum; or by prescribing
a small draught to wash down the bolus, consisting of aq. paralys. ulmar.
papav. Rh. an. j. aq. scord. comp. ss. sir. de mecon. ij. iij. vel iiij. more
or less, according to the age, and other circumstances: But you are to observe,
that an Hypnotic is never to be used, where the Ebullition is too slow; and but
seldom, where it is too high. Two Particulars are chiefly to be observed in an
Ebullition of the Blood in the Smallpox, in respect of the Causes of it viz.
the disposition of the subject or matter that is to boil up, and the efficient
cause that excites the boiling up. In the former the Humors must be less
glutinous, cleaving, tenacious, or tough; but still there must be some
glutinosity or tenaciousness remaining, to congregate the subtle Particles that
cause the Ebullition, or otherwise they would evaporate through the pores of
the matter without causing any Ebullition, which appears in spring water, that
is nothing near so apt to boil up on the fire as milk, to which the glutinosity
that is in it by reason of its creamy and cheesy parts, and the forming of the
skin atop of it, contributes a disposition and a greater aptness to boil up,
than there is in water. On the other hand, if the matter be too glutinous and
tough, it will only be disposed to rise up into some few great bubbles, or
scarce any at all, as is evident in a thick syrup, therebinthing, or any other
thick, glutinous matter, that is set on the fire. However, where the matter is
thick, and very glutinous, if the subtle particles that are to cause the
Ebullition, be very numerous, or in a very large proportion sufficient to break
through and disunite the thick tough matter, and this must cause an exceeding
high and violent Ebullition; whence it is, that the Ebullition is much higher
in persons that are grown up, than in children. The efficient cause of the
Ebullition in the Smallpox being already discoursed of above, I shall pass it
by in this place.

14. Since then the Blood is much more apt to be impelled into high an
ebullition in Children, and a too strong and impetuous ebullition in those that
are grown up, having premised that short Theory in the next preceding
Paragraph, it will not be amiss to set down the Simples, that have a virtue to
allay or contemperate the said exorbitant Ebullitions, by smoothing of the
Blood, which in Children ought to be such, as are mucilaginous, and somewhat
glutinous, viz. Gum Lacca, Bdellium, Gum Arabic, Tragacantha, Hartshorn
shavings, Mashmallow roots, Spanish Sorzonera roots, China roots, Foenugrek and
linseeds etc. these may be compounded variously, but still adding a small
proportion of some expelling Ingredient, to hinder the malign particles from
intruding to the centrical parts.

. Rasur corn. cerv. jss. Ras eboris iij: Rad. Scorzoner. hisp. ij. Rad.
Vincetox. ss. coq. in Aq. font. lbjiii. ad medietatem. colatura edulcetur
saccharo althaeae, vel penidio M.f. Apoz.

Bibat saepius per diem tepide.

For a Child under four years you need to order but a Pint of the said
Decoction at a time, on purpose of having it fresh and fresh.

Or thus:

15.. Rad. Ath. vj. glycyr.angl. ss. gum. lac. ij. gum. Bdell. j. coq. in aq.
font. q. s. ad lbjss. m.s. Apoz. utatur haustu ter vel quater per diem.

The best, in my judgment, is the following Decoction.

16.. Rad. chin. in taleol. sect. ss. Ras. corn. cerv. vj. Rad. Scorzon. Hisp.
ij. caricar. ping. Par. ij. vel iij. coq. in Aq. font. lb.iij. ad medietat.
coletur, utatur modo ante dicto.

17. The China roots will serve for a second boiling; and the said Drink may be
as useful to those that are grown up, as to Children; and in case the former
should be affected with a putrid Fever in their Smallpox, I cannot tell what
you can better prescribe to them for their ordinary Drink, than the same
Decoction, with the addition of one ounce of burnt hartshorn, leaving the
figs, and substituting either liquorish, or some other ingredient to make it
palatable.

18. What has been hitherto offered, is in relation to keep, or reduce the
Humors to a moderate Ebullition, whereby nature may make the more easy
separation of the venomous Matter, which if expelled as easily, and mildy, and
in a daily due proportion of Pimples, that appear well qualified as to number,
color, softness, etc. I would not advise any body to give the least thing,
besides what has been proposed already, but leave it wholly to nature; and be
only observers, that care be taken, the Patient catches no cold, or is not
sulterd with too many Bed-cloaths, or too great a fire in the Room, or eats any
thing besides Water Gruel, Sugar-sops made with Small-beer that is very little
hopt, or the like, and in moderate quantity; and particularly to observe,
whether the expulsion is continued within the regular order of Nature: Of which
I shall offer more hereafter.

19. Here comes in the general mistake of Physic Doctors, and many others, who
no sooner see the appearance of half a score Pimples, but yawl out for a
Saffron-stay, more Coverlids, a bigger Fire, and with all speed for Pen, Ink,
and Paper; designing, with a countenance as grim as a Hedg-hog, to mark down
some strong Cordial to assist Nature potently, to drive out the Smallpox.

20. The common drivers out are these; viz. Most Alexipharmacks and
Sudorificks, as Roots Angelica, Fenil, Tormentil, Pentaphyl. Garden Valerian,
Dictamnum, Devilsbit, Carlina, contrajerva, Virginian Snakeweed, etc. Herbs,
Carduus Ben. Scabious, Maidenhair, Goats-rue, Water-germander. Flowers,
Chamomil, Elder, St. John's wort, Marigold and Saffron. Seeds, Millet, Carduus.
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Bezoarticum Minerale, item Solare, and Aurum
Diaphoreticum. The Compounds are Treacle water, Epidemic water, Aqua Scordij
composita, Aqua Protheriacalis, Aqua Bezoartica, Aqua Petasitidis composita,
Aqua Angelica composita, Theriaca Londinesis, Theriaca Andromachi,
Mithridatium, Diascordium, Lapis contrajervae; and lastly, the greatest and
most dangerous Cheat of them all is the Goa Stone. Besides these, there are
those that are called Expulsors or Outdrivers, which are specific only in the
Smallpox, some of them being used anciently by the Arabs, and continued down
to this day, as dried Figs, Lentils, Fenil Seeds and by others since (though in
colder Countries only) Gardencress Seeds, Turnip, Navet and Columbine Seeds.

21. The most famed Compound out of these, is that set together by Avicen, by
others of the Arab Physicians highly commended, and frequently used by the
Moderns with great success in those, that would have recovered without it, and
with none at all in as many, as have died after the use of it.

Caricar. ping. (large dried Figs) vij. lent. excort. (lentils peeled) iij.
gum. lac. ijss. g. tragac. (gum dragant) sem.foenic. d. (sweet fenil seeds) ana
(of each) ij. coq. (let these be boiled in aq. font. (spring water) lbjss. ad.
(to) lbss. hereof let two or three spoonfuls be given at a time. Rhasis adds to
it croci (saffran) gr. xv passul. (corinths) v.

22. The most celebrated Composition of the Moderns, is that of Francis Joel,
which he affirms to be his own singular expulsive Powder, and never gave it but
with happy success, for the expelling of Smallpox and Measles that were
hidden, and would not come out.

(Take) sem. nasturt. Aquileg. (of Garden cress and Columbine seed) ana (of
each) i. (one Dram) scob. unicorn. (unicorn raspt, or filed) aut loco ejus
scob. corn. cerv. in September. capt. (or instead thereof hartshorn taken in
September raspt or filed) ss (half a Dram) coral. rub. pr. marg. pr. (of red
coral and pearl prepared, that is grinded into most subtle powder, on a marble
or porphir grinding Stone, and in the grinding pouring to it now and then two
or three drops of Rosewater, to make it grind finer and smoother; which
afterward is to be dried in the shade, or in the Winter on the back of an Oven
when the Bread is drawn ana (of each) i (one scruple or twenty grains) si quis
addere velit scobem auri pretiosius redderetur medicamentum (if any body
pleases to add gold Powder, that is, filed very fine, or rather leaf gold, the
medicine would be rendered more precious) omnibus tenuiss, contritis
commisceantur (all these ingredients being very finely powdered, let them be
mixed together) and ejus i (and thereof one Scruple) infantulis, aut ss (or half
a Dram is to be given to little infants.) Adultis vero integra cum hydromel.
exhibeatur; but to those that are grown up, a whole Dram may be given in Mead.

This following is also a Drink mentioned by the same Author, and equally
approved of by most of his Successors; which to spare time I will give it you
in English.

23. Take large dry Figs fifteen in number, Corants one ounce, Gum Dragant two
drams, of Fenil and Columbine seeds, Saffron, whole and not bruised in a
Mortar, one scruple; boil them in three pints of Barley water in a close Pipkin
for two hours; of which a quarter of a pint may be given Morning and Evening.
And to young Children it will be sufficient to let them drink a Decoction of
Liquorish and Figs made in Whey of Goats Milk: Instead of Whey, Posset Drink
may be used.

Some prefer expelling Emulsions made out of Naphew, Garden-cress, Carduus, or
Columbine seeds, one or two sorts of them mixed with a third or equal parts of
Melon seeds, with a sufficient quantity of Milk water, Carduus, Elder, or
Scabious water, and sweetened with Pearl sugar, or the like.

24. Those that pretend to drive out per accidens, by abating the impetuous
Ebullition, through administering Juleps rendered acid by admixture of Spirit of
Sulphur, Vitriol, or Sea salt, must necessarily be much in the wrong, in regard
that they by their cutting acuities, or points, do not only wholly take away
that proportion of viscuousness or glutinosity, that is requisite in the Blood
to continue a moderate Ebullition; but they kill and extinguish the natural,
vital, and animal Spirits, that should cause the Ebullition, work the
separation and expulsion of the malignant Matter, and consequently must yield
and give way to the malign Particles, to immerse themselves, and crowd deeper
into the centrical Parts; these Physicians are fitter for Bethlem, than to be
trusted with such as are afflicted with the Smallpox, or Measles.

25. I do not conceive, that the mass of Blood is alike throughout its whole
extent, but that here and there some small portions of it may be more viscous
and tougher than the rest; neither is the malignant Matter, or venomous
Particles equally distributed throughout the mass, but here and there they are
immerst into the Blood in greater parcels; and some of those possibly of
greater malignity than the rest: From hence I infer, that the Ebullition is
mostly performed in three, four, or five days, and consequently is the
separation of the malign Matter; so that immediately after, it is expelled in
the space of a day or two, in its greatest proportion and number of Pox; but
then you must not imagine, that the Ebullition entirely cease, but continues
here and there in the mass, where those tougher portions of Blood are, and
probably loaded with parcels of malignanter Particles; I say continues for
several days, and thence it is, you have so often several days after the general
expulsion Smallpox daily appearing, and those of the biggest and worst sort.

26. The use of this Remark is, That though the general Ebullition seems to be
over, there still remaining Ebullitions in portions, you must have a care you
do not exhibit Medicines, that may extinguish or damp the said Ebullitions; and
in this particular in some cases a Physitian's skill is brought to a trial: For
sometimes though the Patient is full of Smallpox, and have kept their station
for several days, they may all strike in; or if they do not strike in, and seem
all to be come out, the Patient may die.

26. Another observation of importance is, That except by bleeding after the
Eruption, more are killed by strong Cordials, and driving out Juleps, than by
any other means whatsoever, which after my manner I shall easily make out to
you.

27. Those common Juleps owing their cordial and driving out Virtue to
Epidemick or Plague water, or any other of that kind, as Aq. Bezoart. Aq.
Gilberti, etc. which being no more than Spirit of Wine enforced in its heat,
and impregnated with abundance of hot ingredients; the greatest Cordiality that
can be abstracted from them, is from the Spirit of Wine, which is swallowed by
any in perfect health, in too great measure, will soon cause him to be burning
hot, mad, senseless, and extremely drowsy, so as to fall thence into a deep
snoring sleep, which Physicians attribute to a narcotick Sulphur, and which
they say, is in all Wine and winy Spirits, and confequently in all those
forementioned cordial Waters. Those drunken symptoms are to be imputed to those
adventitious Spirits, suddenly and impetuously rushing in great throngs to the
Heart and Brain, that put the Spirits into the greatest disorder and confusion
that is possible; by clashing and violent jumbling of the arterial Spirits,
they occasion that great burning; by impetuously joulting of the animal
Spirits, they force them into Madness; and by their great throngs having thrust
out, dispersed, and diminisht the animal Spirits, they cause that tottering and
weakness of Joints, and depravation of all the Senses; and through their
piercing subtilty, rarefying the viscous Juice of the source of the Nerves,
locking themselves up within them, impel the Drunkard into that deep sleep. Now
imagine a Patient weak in the third degree only (for I will suppose the
extremity of the fourth degree to be death) to take every two hours three
spoonfuls of this Cordial, viz. Four ounces of simple Waters, mixed only with
two ounces of Epidemick, Gilberts, or the like Water (but very often there are
three and four ounces, besides other inflamers, as Tincture or Spirit of
Saffron, Spirit of Hartshorn, Theriac. Land. And. Diascord. etc.) every two
hours; in every four and twenty hours he must have swallowed a quarter of a
pint of the scortching Cordial, which necessarily must put him into a violent
burning, a madness, and an excessive wakefulness, or deep sleep, which happening
upon this hot Cordial, the Physician out of Ignorance, not in the least
distrusting this driving out Medicine, ascribes and said burning heat to the
height of the putrid Fever; the Madness, (which he terms a Delirium) to the
malignity of the Smallpox; and the over-wakefulness, or deep sleep (by him
styled a coma vigil, or soporosum) to malign Vapors rising to the Brain;
whereas not only all this mischief is occasioned by his driving out Cordial;
but the Smallpox are either driven in again, or if remaining in the skin, are
there hardened and turned into blew or black, or those that were upon coming
out, are kept in.

28. Nothing a Physician is more blameable in, than in administering a Medicine,
of which he neither knows who prepared it, nor what it does consist of;
wherefore they that advise the use of the Goa-stone in the Small pox, ought to
be censured the worst of Empiricks: For considering it to be a jumble of Indian
Ingredients, what they are, whether beneficial or hurtful, whether poisonous or
salubrious, whether they are always compounded of the same materials, or now
and then some new thing put in; all which none can know, but the knavish Makers
and Traffickers of it, the Jesuits of Goa; and take the best of their cheating
Stones, sure I am, that an ounce of Gascon's Powder is worth a thousand of
them. As I do much suspect some of those Jesuitical Stones, I do much more
suspect any Physician that uses them, if he has been bred up among the Jesuits
in Spain or France, and studied at their charge, though afterward he may seem
to abjure their Religion upon a Dispensation; for whenever the Devil has once
got a Man in his clutches, he so ingages him, that he is not easily lost. Now
what great universal Mischief such a disguised Jesuitical Physician is capable
of performing against the greatest of Adversaries to Popery, is not easily
apprehended.

29. From the Smallpox attended with a simple Ebullition of the Blood,
effervescency, or fermentation (as they call it) which goes off in a great
measure in four or five days, I pass to that, which is accompanied with a
putrid, or malign Fever, and which always keeps even pace with the Small pox,
increasing, abating, or leaving the Patient for the most part, at the same time
that the venomous Distemper does.

As the indication taken from the simple Ebullition does refer us to Remedies,
that reduce it to moderation, so in this latter case the putrid Fever does
require such Remedies, that may abate it to a lower degree of a putrid
Ebullition, simple Ebullition, or to an Effervescency, yet so as not to take it
off wholly; for then the Small pox will either not come forth at all, or being
expelled they will most certainly turn in again, or grow blue or black;
wherefore all acid Medicines, that are wholly such, are to be industriously
avoided, and above all bleeding, unless you intend to kill the Patient.

30. The Indicata, or Remedies to perform this Work, being anciently cooling
Apozems and Juleps, framed out of some cooling simple Waters, and sweetened with
Syrups of the same quality, proving ineffectual, are totally rejected by the
latter Age, which ran a long while upon hot Sudorifics, with as little success,
until this last start of Physicians substituted a course of Jesuits Powder,
equalling the cooling and hot sudorific Medicines in the worst of success.
Wherefore to answer this last Indication, I never did arrive to the knwoledge
of more than two Medicines, though one is common enough, but uncommonly
prepared; the other was never known, or used by any but my self. I will not
descant upon their Success or Virtues further, than that I have found them to
exceed, what has been hitherto used; and probably other Physicians may detect
others beyond these, though as yet I have not perceived they have. However,
either of them will take up more room in their description and preparation,
than the short design of this Treatise will permit, wherefore shall refer it to
another opportunity. In the mean time I must also tell you, neither the one nor
the other is more infallible, than the best of Medicines; the one is prepared
out of Hartshorn, the other out of a Mineral, and a Vegetable.

Of those vulgar Prescriptions, a Decoction of Scorzonera Roots, and Burnt
Hearts horn, Testaceous Powders, and some of those small low Cordial Waters, (as
tehy term them) as Aq. Sambuci, Scabios. card. b. ulmar. etc. mixed with no
higher Compound than an Aq. Scordij comp.ij. in my opinion are to be preferred.
I do sometimes use Diascordium, though much varying in the composition and
preparation from the common of Fracastorius, which was particularly invented by
the said Author against Epidemic Loosnesses, and as ill put together out of
strong fermenting or inflaming Ingredients, as Pepper, Ginger, etc. as is
possible.

31. The Urgent Symptoms are by most particularly regarded, among which that of
a Haemorrhage, or violent Bleeding, requires the speediest Remedy; to which
purpose Henric ab Here mentions one in his Observations, that is most signally
effectual, viz. a Toad hung about the neck, or about that part that is nearest
to the vessels, that profuse this abundance of Blood; I do esteem a few Grains
of Camphor, mixed with a good Diascordium, far beyond it, which also is no less
effectual against an immoderate Flux of the Belly, and some other extraordinary
Symptoms.

32. The Smallpox when maturated, ought by no means to be perforated, in
regard that the nitrous Air entering, will cause so many sordid little Ulcers.
The best Medicine I have yet met with, is a Liniment of Oil of Ben, Sperma
Ceti, and Eggshells calcined, and grinded into an impalpable Powder on a
marble, adding to it for the smell's-sake, a drop or two of Ol. Rhodij.

33. Hitherto I have kept as near as I could, to Indications drawn from the
Smallpox, and its cause, according to the old Notion: As for such as I do
usually desume from the Phoenomenon I have set down in this Tract, are
differing, and will take up too much time to run over again; for which Reason I
think it convenient to come to a

FINIS.

