THE ENGLISH Schoolmaster Completed; Containing several Tables of Common
English Words, from One, to Six, Seven, and Eight Syllables, both whole and
divided, according to the Rules of true Spelling; with Prayers, and Graces both
before and after Meat, and Rules for Childrens Behavior at all times and
places, with several other necessaries suitable to the Capacities of Children
and Youth.

ALSO Brief and Easy Rules for the true and exact Spelling, Reading, and
Writing of English according to the present pronunciation thereof in the Famous
University of Oxford, and City of London.

To which is Added, An Appendix containing the Principles of Arithmetic, with
an Account of Coins, Weights, Measure, Time, etc. Copies of Letters, Titles of
Honor, suitable for Men of all Degrees, and Qualities, Bills of Parcels, Bills
of Exchange, Bills of Debt, Receipts, and several other Rules and Observations
fit for a Youths accomplishment in the way of Trade.

JOHN HAWKINS Schoolmaster at St. Georges Church in Southwark.

LONDON, Printed by A. and I. Dawks for the Company of STATIONERS. 1692.

^
THE Education of Children is (...) to be a thing of as weighty (...)
Commonwealth, as any other (...) ^amed, and by how much the greater (...)
greater ought to be the Care in the (...) the Principles and Elementary part of
(...) ^ess of a Child's Education, for if the first (...) the Superstructure
cannot be so firm and perfect as ((...) ^ight be otherwise expected, and as
Doctor Newton well (...) Elementary part of Learning being but weakly
performed, the ^rammatical does too generally fail, and yet (says be) it is
the Great DIANA of the EPHESIANS, all other Education of Children being if not
totally despised, yet too much neglected, when yt perhaps upon maturer
Consideration it will be found that that is most neglected, which can (in
truth) in the general be the worst sared; it is our Mother Tongue that is
likely in the practice to be most useful, nor is the preservation thereof in
its own purity to be esteemed a small part of our Countries Honor, since all
the parts of Philosophy, and Mathematics may be easily attained unto without
the help of Exotic Languages, which are not gained but with Excessive Pains,
and are quickly lost again without Continual Practice, it being a Vulgar Error
(as Mr. Perkes says in his Preface to the Art of Spelling) to think, that to
learn over the Grammar and some few Latin Books before a Boy goes to a Trade,
are things so very necessary to his reading or writing true English, such a
^attering of Latin being generally useless, and the time spent in it so much
(...) used (...) shall recommend (...), viz. It would (...), that the Master
^ad to the rest a Leaf or (...) and so leisurely that they may (...) ^hey have
done, he who read to (...) in each Paper before they (...) ^^uld bring Boys to
take heed of (...) Exercises (after a good founda^^^^ (...) Trades may be
brought to a (...) ^^^ding and writing.

(...) pains herein may redound to the profit of many, the wh^le (...) which is
humbly commended to the Blessing of God, by him who earnestly desires to serve
his Generation to the uttermost of his Ability.

St. Georges Southwark, June 6. 1692. John Hawkins.



(...) (...) (...) (...)

Chap 6. Examples of Monosyllables beginning with Three Consonants.
scr Scrap scrape scrall scribe scrip scrole scratch scrub. shr Shrank shred
shrew shril shrimp shrine shrink shrub shrug. spl Splay splatch splent splice
split splint spleen. spr Sprat sprang spread spring sprig spright sprout
spruce. str Strand struck strange strap strength stress stretch strew strickt
stride strise strike string strip stripe strive stroke strond strong strove
struck strung. thr Thrall thread thresh threw thrice thri^t thrive throat throb
throng throve through throw throws thrown thrums thrush thrust. thw Thwack
thwick thwart thwite.
Let the Teacher be very careful that the Scholar ^e perfect in Spelling the
foregoing Examples; it will likewise be necessary that he be well acquainted
with the double Consonants for the beginning of words, as in the two last
Chapters, viz. bl br ^l ^r etc. for it will be of great advantage to him when
he comes to divide the Syllables in the Tenth and Eleventh Chapters following.

Let him likewise be made very perfect in the sound of the Diphthongs in the
following Chapter; for whatsoever is to be learnt afterward will mostly depend
upon the knowledge of this and the foregoing Chapters.

Chap. 7. Of Diphthongs.
ai Pail bait hail nail pain rain gain wait rail sail quail pail trail train
strain sprain grain twain plain. ay Flay lay may nay pay ray say stay stray
gray spay splay. ei Height straight weight strein blein drein straight veil. ey
Hey key gray prey. au Paul saul baulk baud haunt caul cause caught draught
fault flaunt fraud fraught haunch hault malt naught paunch pause sauce. aw
Bawl brawl (...) claw craw crawl draw drawn sawn flaw haw jaw law lawn maw paw
pawn raw saw spaw spawl spawn straw. oi Boil bois blois broid broil coil coin
coit choice foil foin foist froise hoise noise joint loin moil poise soil
spoil. oy Join point toil boil clog foy hoy joy loyn moyl moist soil toy. eu ew
Feud lewd blew brew chew clew crew few flew glue grew hew jew jews lewd mew new
pew sew show slew spew stew stews screw strew. (...) ou Bounce bound bout count
chouse doubt fought found foul gout ground hound house hour loud mount mouth
noun pounce pound proud round rout sound slouch. ow Clown crown crowd down fowl
frown gown how howl now.
Improper Diphthongs.
ea Bead beat beast breach bread break breast breath clean cream dread dream
feast glean knead lead learn least mean stream. ee Bees beef beer bleed breech
breed creep deed deep feed feel free green greet keen keep leech leek leet meek
mere meet need near peep peer queen reed steed. ie Brief chief field friend
grief grieve liege pierce priest shield chief. eo Feoffe George. oa Boar boat
boa^t bloat broach broad coach coast coat cloak croak dote foal ^loat goat hoan
hoar hoarse host load loaf moat road roam roar roast shore. oo Book boom boot
blood bloom brook broom choose c^ok cool coop crook door droop food fool foot
floor good goose groom hood hook hoop hoot look loop loose mood moon moor nook
noon poop poor proof prove rood roof rook room root shoot sloop smooth spoon
stood stool stoop struck took tool tooth troop whoop wood wool woo. ui Bruise
bruit build built fruit guide guile guilt guire guise juice suit.
Chap. 8. Let the Scholar be here taught that e or es at the end of a word does
cause that Syllable to be pronounced long which without it would be short; as
in the following Examples.
A A Ac Ace ag age al ale ap ape ar are aps apes at ate B B Bab Babe bad bade
bal bale ban bane b^ns banes bar bare bars bares bas base bat bate bats bates
bid bide bids bides bil bile bills biles bit bite bits bites blad blade blads
blades blam blame blot blote bon bone bons bones bor bore brib bribe brid bride
brin brine C C Cag Cage came came can cane car care cars cares cas case chaf
chafe chap chape chid chide clos close cot cote col cole cor core con cone cran
crane crans cranes cur cure D D Dal Dale dals dales dam dame dams dames din
dine dot dote dots dotes dar dare dars dares F F Fad Fade fac face fam fame far
fare fin fine fins fines fill file fills files flam flame flams flames fom foam
fum fume fram frame frams frames G G Gap Gape gaps gapes gal gale gals gales
gat gate gats gates gor gore grac grace grap grape great grate grats grates grop
grope H H Hal Hale har hare hat hate have have her here hid hide hids hides her
hire hol hole hols holes hom home hop hope hops hopes hug huge I I Il I Will ils
isles ic ice K K Kin Kine kit kite knif knife L L Lac Lace lad lade lam lame
lanc lance lans lanes lat late lic lice lif life lim lime lin line lins lines
los lose M M Mad Made mac mace mal male mat mate met mete mit mite mir mire mol
mole mor more mot mote mul mule mus muse mals males mits mites mols moles muls
mules make make N N Nam Name nams names net nete nets netes nin nine non none
nos nose not note P P Pal Pale pals pales par pare pars pares pat pate pats
pates pin pine pins pines pip pipe pips pipes pil pile pills piles plac place
plan plane plans planes plat plate plats plates pol pole pols poles pride pride
prun prune pur pure purg purge R R Rac Race rag rage rang range rar rare ras
raze rat rate rid ride rip ripe ris rise rit rite rits rites rob robe robs
robes rop rope rops ropes ros rose rud rude rul rule ruls rules S S Saf Safe
sal sale sals sales sam same sat sat scal scale scals scales shad shade shads
shades scrap scrape scrib scribe scribs scribes sham shame shap shape shaps
shapes shar share shars shares shin shine shins shines shor shore shors shores
sid side sids sides slid slide smot smote snar snare snars snares sol sole sols
soles sop soap sor sore sors sores spit spite stal stale star stare stol stole
ston stone stons stones stor store stors stores strange strange strif strife
strip stripe strips stripes sur sure swin swine swar swear T T Tal Tale tals
tales tam tame tar tare there there thin thine those those thron throne til tile
tils tiles tir tire tor tore trad trade trads trades trip tripe trips tripes
truc truce twin twine trib tribe tribs tribes trap trape traps trapes V V Val
Vale vals vales vil vile vin vine vins vines urg urge us use W W Wad Wade war
ware whal whale whil while whit white whor whore whose whose wid wide wif wife
will wile wills wiles win wine wins wines wip wipe wis wise wips wipes writ write
wrote wrote

Chap. 9. Containing Examples of Words of Two Syllables having one Consonant in
the middle thereof, both whole and divided.
In this Chapter let the Scholar be taught that when a Consonant is in the
middle of a word between two Vowels, such Consonant ought in Spelling to be
joined to the latter Syllable, as in the following Examples.

A A A-base Abase a-bide abide a-bode abode a-bove above a-bound abound a-bout
about a-buse abuse a-far afar a-gain again a-gainst against a-ges ages a-gon
agon a-gue ague a-larm alarm a-las alas a-like alike a-live alive a-loft aloft
a-lone alone a-long along a-loof aloof a-loud aloud a-men amen a-mend amend
a-miss amiss a-mong among a-mongst amongst a-noint anoint a-right aright a-rise
arise a-rose arose a-side aside a-venge avenge a-verse averse a-void avoid
au-gust august a-wake awake a-ware aware a-way away au-tumn autumn a-maze amaze
a-vouch avouch a-board aboard apart apart B B Ba-bel Babel ba-ked baked ba-ker
baker ba-kers bakers ba-keth baketh ba-nish banish ba-ser baser ba-son basin
bea-con beacon bea-rer bearer beau-ty beauty be-came became be-come become
be-cause because be-fall befall be-fel befell be-fore before be-gan began be-get
beget be-gat begat be-got begot be-gin begin be-guile beguile be-gun begun
be-half behalf be-have behave be-held beheld be-hold behold be-hind behind
be-lieve believe be-lief belief be-long belong be-moan bemoan be-neath beneath
be-reave bereave be-seech beseech be-side beside be-sought besought be-times
betimes be-wail bewail be-ware beware be-yond beyond bla-med blamed bla-meth
blames ble-mish blemish bra-sen brazen broa-der broader broi-ler broiler
broi-led broiled bro-ken broken brui-s^d bruised brui-ses bruises brui-sing
bruising bru-tish brutish bu-sy busy C C Ca-mel Camel ca-mest came ce-dar
cedar cho-ler choler cho-sen chosen cau-ses causes cau-sest causest cau-sey
causey cau-sing causing cea-seth cease cha-sed chased cha-nel chanel che-rish
cherish chi-ding chiding choi-cest choicest ci-ty city cla-mour clamor clo-sed
closed clo-ser closer clo-set closet clou-dy cloudy clo-ven cloven clou-ted
clouted coa-ches coaches co-lour color co-meth comes co-mets comets co-ming
coming co-ver cover co-vers covers co-vet covet cou-rage courage cou-sin cousin
cu-bit cubit cu-bits cubits cu-red cured cu-reth cures D D Da-mage Damage
dau-bed daubed dau-bing daubing day-ly daily dea-con deacou de-bate debate
de-base debase de-cay decay de-ceit deceit de-ceive deceive de-cent decent
de-fame defame de-feat defeat de-fence defense de-fend defend de-fie defy
de-file defile de-lay delay de-light delight de-mand demand de-ny deny de-part
depart de-pose depose de-pend depend de-pute depute de-ride deride de-sart
desert de-serve deserve de-sire desire de-tain detain de-test detest de-vise
devise de-vote devote di-ned dined di-rect direct di-vers diverse di-vide divide
di-vine divine di-vorce divorce dra-gon dragon du-ty duty E E Ea-ger Eager
ea-sie easy e-lect elect e-nough enough e-qual equal e-rect erect e-vent event
e-ver ever e-vil evil eyesight eyesight F F Fa-ces Faces fa-deth fades
fa-mous famous fa-mine famine fa-vour favor fi-gure figure flou-rish flourish
fre-quent frequent fro-ward froward fee-ble feeble fe-lons felons fe-male
female fea-ver fever fi-gures figures fi-nish finish fi-ner finer fi-nest
finest fra-med framed fra-meth frames free-dom freedom free-ly freely freeman
freeman fre-quent frequent free will freewill fro-zen frozen fu-ry fury G G
Ga-vest Gave ga-zing gazing gi-ven given gi-ver giver gi-vest give gi-veth
gives glo-ry glory go-red gored go-vern govern gra-vel gravel gra-ven graven
gra-ving graving gray-hound grayhound gree-dy greedy grie-vance grievance
grie-veth grieveth grie-vous grievous gro-peth gropeth H H Hai-nous Heinous
ha-bit habit hai-ry hairy ha-sel hasel ha-ted hated ha-ters haters ha-test
hate ha-teth hates ha-ting hating ha-vock havoc hea-dy heady hea-ved heaved
hea-ven heaven hea-vens heavens hea-vy heavy hei-fer heifer he-rauld herald
hi-dest hidest hi-deth hides hi-ding hiding hi-red hired hi-rest hirest hoa-ry
hoary hoi-sed hoised ho-ly holy ho-nest honest hu-mour humor ho-ney honey
ho-ped hoped ho-ping hoping ho-nour honor hou-ses houses I I I-dol Idol i-mage
image joy-ful joyful jea-lous jealous ju-ror juror ju-rors jurors L L La-bour
Labor la-den laden la-ding lading la-dy lady la-ment lament la-tin latin
la-ver laver la-vish lavish le-per leper li-cense license li-ken liken li-king
liking li-nage lineage li-quor liquor li-ver liver lo-cust locust lo-cal local
lo-seth loses lo-sing losing lo-ver lover lo-vers lovers lo-ving loving
lo-vest love lo-veth loves li-zard lizard M M Ma-dest Made ma-ker maker
ma-kest make ma-king making ma-lice malice ma-son mason mea-sure measure
me-lon melon mo-ment moment mo-dest modest mo-ver mover mo-ving moving mu-sed
mused mu-sing musing mu-sick music N N Na-ked Naked na-med named na-tive
native na-ture nature na-vel navel na-vy navy nee-dy needy ne-ver never no-ble
noble noi-sed noised noi-som noisome no-ses noses nou-rish nourish O O O-bey
Obey o-dour odor o-dours odours o-live olive o-lives olives o-mer omer o-nix
onix o-pen open o-ven oven o-ver over P P Pa-ces Paces pa-per paper pa-ved
paved pe-ril peril pe-rish perish pi-lot pilot pi-ning pining pi-per piper
pi-ty pity pla-ces places pla-net planet plea-sant pleasant plea-sed pleased
plea-seth pleases plea-sing pleasing plea-sure pleasure plea-sures pleasures
poi-son poison prai-sed praised prai-seth praises prai-sing praising pra-ting
prating pre-cept precept pre-cepts precepts pre-fer prefer pre-pare prepare
pre-sence presence pre-sent present pre-sume presume pre-tence pretense
pre-vail prevail pre-vent prevent pri-son prison pri-vate private pro-ceed
proceed pro-cess process pro-cure procure pro-duce produce pro-fane profane
pro-fess profess pro-fit profit pro-found profound pro-long prolong pro-mise
promise pro-mote promote pro-nounce pronounce pro-per proper pro-test protest
pro-verb proverb pro-vide provide pro-vince province pro-voke provoke pru-dence
prudence pru-dent prudent pru-ned pruned pru-ning pruning pu-nish punish Q Q
Qua-king Quaking qua-keth quaketh qua-ked quaked qui-ver quiver que-ry query
qua-ver quaver R R Ra-ging Raging rai-ment raiment ra-vish ravish rea-dy ready
rea-son reason re-bel rebel re-buke rebuke re-ceive receive re-cord record
re-count recount re-deem redeem re-fine refine re-fuge refuge re-gard regard
re-ject reject re-joyce rejoice re-lease release re-lieve relieve re-ly rely re
main remain re-mit remit re-move remove re-new renew re-nounce renounce re-nown
renown re-pair repair re-peat repeat ^ent repent re-port report re-quest
request re-quire require re-quite requite re-sign resign re-serve reserve
re-sist resist re-sort resort re-solve resolve re-tain retain re-tire retire
re-turn return re-veal reveal re-venge revenge re-vile revile re-vive revive
re-volt revolt re-ward reward ri-der rider ri-gour rigor ri-ver river ro-man
roman ro-vers rovers ru-mour rumor ru-ler ruler S S Sa-tan Satan sa-lute
salute sa-tyr satyr sa-ving saving sa-vour savor scra-ping scraping sea-son
season se-duce seduce se-ver sever sha-dow shadow sha-dy shady sha-king shaking
she-riff sheriff si-lent silent si-new sinew so-ber sober so-journ sojourn
so-lace solace so-lemn solemn spo-ken spoken sta-tute statute sto-mach stomach
sto-ny stony sto-ry story T T Ta-lent Talent te-nour tenor ti-dings tidings
to-ken token tray-tor traitor tra-vel travel trea-son treason trea-sure
treasure tri-bute tribute trou-ble trouble tru-ly truly tu-mult tumult tu-tor
tutor twy-lights twylights ty-rant tyrant V V Va-lour Valor va-lue value
va-nish vanish ve-nom venom vi-per viper vi-sage visage vi-sit visit u-nite
unite vo-lume volume vo-mit vomit u-surp usurp use-ful useful W W Wa-fer Wafer
wa-ges wages wa-king waking wa-ter water wa-ver waver wea-pon weapon wea-ry
weary whore-dom whoredom wi-ping wiping whi-ter whiter whi-ting whiting wo-ful
woeful wo-man woman wa-gon wagon wea-sel weasel who-rish whorish wi-dow widow
wi-ser wiser wi-zard wizard wo-ven woven wri-ter writer wri-test writest
wri-teth writes wri-ting writing Y Y Yo-ked Yoked yo-king yoking yo-keth
yoketh Z Z Zea-lous Zealous zea-lot zealot

Chap. 10. Containing Examples of Words of Two Syllables having Two Consonants
at least in the middle thereof, which Consonants are such as may be placed in
the beginning of a Word, both whole and divided.
Let the Scholar be now taught that when two or three Consonants that can begin
a Word, are placed in the middle thereof between two Vowels, they must be
joined to the latter Syllable, as in the following Examples.

A A A-broad Abroad a-bridg abridg a-fraid afraid a-fresh afresh a-gree agree
a-pron apron a-scend ascend a-scribe ascribe a-sleep asleep a-stray astray
au-stere austere au-thor author B B Be-stead Bestead be-stir bestir be-stow
bestow be-think bethink be-tray betray be-tween between be-troth betroth
be-twixt betwixt be-wray bewray bi-shop bishop bre-thren brethren bro-ther
brother C C Cha-sten Chasten cha-stise chastise chry-stal crystal D D
Dayspring Dayspring day star daystar de-clare declare de-cline decline de-cree
decree de-creed decreed de-crees decrees de-fraud defraud de-fray defray
de-gree degree de-grees degrees de-prave deprave de-scend descend de-coy decoy
de-scribe describe de-scry descry de-spight despite de-stroy destroy dou-ble
double dry-shod dryshod E E Ea-gle Eagle ea-gles eagles ei-ther either e-phod
ephod e-scape escape e-schew eschew e-spy espy e-state estate e-states estates
eyebrows eyebrows F F Fa there Father fa-thers fathers fa-thom fathom fea-ther
feather fee-ble feeble fee-bler feebler firebrand firebrand free stone.
freestone G G Ga-ther Gather H H Ha-tred Hatred hea-then heathen hea thens
heathens he-brew hebrew hi-ther hither L L Lea-ther Leather lea thern leathern
le-prous le prous M M Ma-chine Machine ma ster master ma-sters masters ma-tron
matron ma trix matrix mo-ther mother mo-thers mothers N N Nei-ther Neither
ne-phew nephew ne-ther nether no ble noble no-stril nostril no-thing nothing O
O O there Other o-thers others ou-ches ouches P P Peo-ple People pine tree
pinetree pla-ster plaster pro-phet prophet pro-phets prophets pro-tract
protract R R Ra-ther Rather re-frain refrain re-fresh refresh re-proach
reproach re-proof reproof re-scue rescue re-store restore re-strain restrain
re-straint restraint re-trive retrive re-dress redress S S Sa-cred Sacred se
cret secret se-clude seclude sa-phire sapphire sta ble stable sta-blish stablish
T T Ta-blet Tablet ta bret tabret ta bring tabring te-trearch tetrearch
trou-bled troubled trou-bleth troubles trou-bler troubler trou-blest troublest
trou-bling troubling V V Va-prest Vaprest va-preth vapreth ve-sture vesture
vi-prous viprous W W Wa-treth Watreth wa-tring watring wea-ther weather
whe-ther whether whi-ther whither wi-ther wither

Chap. 11. Containing Words of Two Syllables having Two Consonants at least in
the middle thereof, which Consonants are such as cannot be in the beginning of
a Word, both whole and divided.
Let the Scholar now be Taught, that when such Consonants come in the middle of
a Word as cannot be in the beginning, they are to be divided, as also is a
double Consonant. Examples.

A A Ab-hor Abhor ab-ject abject ab-sence absence ab-stain abstain ac-cept
accept ac-cord accord ac-cess access ac-quit acquit ad-ded added ad-jure adjure
af-flict afflict af-firm affirm af-fairs affairs af-fect affect al-lure allure
al-mond almond al-most almost am-ber amber am-bush ambush an-cle ancle an-chor
anchor an-gry angry an-guish anguish an-swer answer an-vil anvil ap-peal appeal
ap-ply apply ap-point appoint ar-my army ar-mour armor as-sault assault
as-sure assure as-sist assist at-tain attain at-tend attend at-tire attire
aug-ment augment B B Backbone Backbone back-slide backslide back-ward backward
bad-ness badness bald-ness baldness ban-ded banded ban-ner banner ban-quet
banquet bap-tize baptize bar-ber barber bar-ley barley bar-red barred bar-rel
barrel bar-ren barren bas-ket basket bas-tard bastard bat-tel battle bat-ter
batter beck-ned beckned bed-stead bedstead beg-gar beggar bel-low bellow bel-ly
belly ber-ries berries bet-ter better bib-ber bibber bid-den bidden bil-lows
billows bit-ten bitten bit-ter bitter bles-sing blessing bles-sed blessed
blos-som blossom blot-ting blotting blot-teth blotteth bondman bondsman
bond-maid bondmaid bon-net bonnet bor-row borrow bot-tom bottom bran-dish
brandish braw-ler brawler braw-ling brawling bright-ness brightness brim-stone
brimstone bub-ble bubble buc-ket bucket buck-ler buckler bud-ded budded buf-fet
buffet bul-lock bullock bul-wark bulwark bur-den burden but-ter butter but-ler
butler but-tock buttock C C Cab-bin Cabin cal-dron caldron cal-led called
cam-phire camphire can-not cannot cap-tive captive car-kass carcass car-ping
car-ping car-nal car-nal cat-tel cattle cen-sure censure cer-tain certain
cham-ber chamber chan-ced chanced chan-ged changed chap-man chapman chap-pel
chapel char-ger charger chaf-fer chaffer chat-ter chatter cheek-bone cheekbone
clap-ping clapping clean-sed cleansed clear-ly clearly clus-ter cluster cof-fer
coffer cof-fin coffin col-lar collar col-ledge college col-lop collop com-mand
command com-mit commit com-pare compare com-pel compel com-plain complain
com-pound compound con-fer confer con-demn condemn con-cord concord con-clude
conclude con-duct conduct con-firm confirm con-flict conflict con-quer conquer
con-sent consent con-stant constant con-sume consume con-tain contain con-temn
contemn con-tempt contempt con-test contest con-trite contrite con-vert convert
con-verse converse con-vey convey con-voy convoy cop-per copper cor-ner corner
cor-net cornet cor-rect correct cor-rupt corrupt cost-ly costly cot-tage
cottage coun-sel counsel coun-cil council coun-try country crack-ling crackling
crim-son crimson cum-bred cumbred cun-ning cunning cur-tain curtain cus-tom
custom cut-teth cutteth cut-ting cutting cym-bal cymbal D D Dag-ger Dagger
dain-ty dainty dan-cing dancing dand-led dandled dan-ger danger dark-ness
darkness dar-ling darling daugh-ter daughter dear-ly dearly dif-fer differ
dig-geth diggeth dim-ness dimness dis-charge discharge dis-close disclose
dis-creet discreet dis-grace disgrace dis-guise disguise dis-patch dispatch
dis-please displease dis-pute dispute dis-solve dissolve dis-tant distant
dis-tress distress doc-tor doctor doc-trine doctrine doubt-ful doubtful
doubt-less doubtless down-ward downward dread-ful dreadful dres-ser dresser
drop-ped dropped drop-ping dropping drop-sy dropsy drun-kard drunkard drun-ken
drunken dung-hil dunghill dung-port dungport dwel-ler dweller dwel-ling dwelling
dwel-leth dwells dwel-lest dwell E E Eb-bing Ebbing eb-beth ebbeth ear-ly
early ear-nest earnest ef-fect ef-fect el-der elder el-dest eldest em-balm
embalm em-pire empire em-ber ember em-ploy employ emp-ty empty en-camp encamp
en-cline incline en-close enclose end-less endless en-joy enjoy en-joyn enjoin
en-large enlarge eng-land england en-ter enter en-tire entire en-tring entering
en-try entry en-trance entrance er-rand errand er-red erred er-rour error
ex-ceed exceed ex-cel excel ex-cept except ex-cess excess ex-change exchange
ex-clude exclude ex-pence expense ex-tream extreme ex-pound expound ex-ploit
exploit ex-hort exhort ex-pel expel ex-tinct extinct ex-tol extol ex-tream
extreme F F Fac-tor Factor faint-ness faintness faith-ful faithful faith-less
faithless fal-lest fallest fal-leth falls fals-ly falsely far-ther farther
far-thing farthing fas-ter faster far-thest farthest fat-ling fatling fat-ter
fatter fat-ted fatted fat-test fattest faul-ty faulty fear-ful fearful fel-ling
felling fel-low fellow fen-ced fenced fer-ret ferret fer-vent fervent fet-ters
fetters fif-teen fifteen fif-ty fifty fig tree figtree fil-led filled fil-leth
fills fid-ler fiddler fil-thy filthy fir-kin firkin fir tree firtree fir-wood
firwood fish-hook fishhook fish-pool fishpool fit-ly fitly fit-ted fitted
flat-ter flatter flesh-ly fleshly fleshpots fleshpots flin-ty flinty fol-low
follow fol-ly folly footman footman footsteps footsteps footstool footstool
for-bare forbear for-bid forbid for-born forborne for-ced forced for-cing
forcing for-get forget for-give forgive for-sake forsake for-sware forsware
forthwith forthwith for-ty forty for-ward forward foun-tain fountain four-teen
fourteen frag-ment fragment frank-ly frankly fret-ted fretted front-let
frontlet fruit-ful fruitful ful-fil fulfill ful-ler fuller ful-ness fullness
fur-long furlong fur-nace furnace fur-nish furnish fur-row furrow fur-ther
further fun-nel funnel fur-bish furbish G G Gad-ding Gadding gainsay gainsay
gal-lop gallop gar-den garden gar-lick garlic gar-ment garment gar-nish
garnish gen-tile gentile gent-ly gently get-ting getting glad-ly gladly
glad-ness gladness glas-ses glasses glis-ter glister glit-ter glitter glut-ton
glutton godhead godhead god-ly godly goldsmiths goldsmith good-ly goodly
good-ness goodness gos-pel gospel got-ten gotten great-ly greatly great-ness
greatness guil-ty guilty guilt-less guiltless gut-ter gutter gun-ner gunner
gul-let gullet gul-led gulled gul-ling gulling H H Hal-low Hallow ham-mer
hammer hand-ful handful hand-ling handling handmaid handmaid hap-pen happen
hap-ned happened hap-py happy hard-ned hardened har-lot harlot harm-less harmless
har-row harrow har-vest harvest has-ty hasty headlong headlong heark-ned
hearkened hem-lock hemlock high-ly highly high-ness highness him-self himself
hin-der hinder hid-den hidden his-sing hissing hol-low hollow host-ler hostler
hor-net hornet hor-ses horses hot-ly hotly hous-hold household hum-bly humbly
hun-dred hundred hun-ger hunger hun-ter hunter hun-ting hunting hun-gry hungry
hur-ling hurling hurt-ful hurtful hus-band husband hys-sop hyssop I I Jang-ling
Jangling jas-per jasper im-brace embrace im-part impart im-pose impose im-pute
impute in-cense incense in-crease increase in-fant infant in-flame inflame
in-form inform in-fer infer inside inside in-stant instant in-struct instruct
in-tend intend in-tent intent in-treat entreat in-vade invade in-vent invent
in-ward inward jour-ney journey judg-ment judgment jus-tice justice just-ly
justly K K Ker-nel Kernel kid-ney kidney kil-led killed kil-lest killest
kil-leth kills kind-led kindled kind-leth kindles kind-ly kindly kin-dred
kindred king-dom kingdom king-ly kingly kins-folk kinsfolk kins-man kinsman
kis-ses kisses kis-sed kissed kis-sing kissing know-ledge knowledge L L Lad-der
Ladder lan-ces lances lan-guage language lan-guish languish land-man landman
landmark landmark lap-ping lapping lap-wing lapwing large-ness largeness
lat-ter latter laugh-ter laughter law-ful lawful law-less lawless les-ser
lesser let-ter letter lewd-ness lewdness lewd-ly lewdly light-ly lightly
light-ning lightning light-ned lightened lil-ly lilly lil-lies lillies low-ly
lowly low-ring lowering lof-ty lofty lus-ty lusty M M Madman Madman mad-ness
madness main-tain maintain mal-low mallow mam-mon mammon man-ger manger man-ner
manner manhood manhood mankind mankind mar-ket market mar-row marrow mar-shal
marshal mar-tyr martyr mas-ter master mat-ter matter med-led meddled med-leth
medleth meek-ly meekly mem-ber member mer-chant merchant mer-cy mercy mer-ry
merry mes-sage message midnight midnight midwife midwife migh-ty mighty
mil-ler miller mil-stone millstone mind-ful mindful min-strel minstrel mis-chief
mischief min-gled mingled mis-sed missed mis-tress mistress mix-ture mixture
mol-ten molten month-ly monthly mon-ster monster moun-tain mountain mourn-ful
mournful muf-ler mufler mum-my mummy mur-der murder mur-mur murmur mur-rain
murrain mut-ter mutter myr-tle myrtle N N Nas-ty Nasty need-ful needful
neg-lect neglect neigh-bour neighbor network network new-ly newly new-ness
newness noonday noonday noontide noontide northward northward north-west
northwest nur-ture nurture num-ber number num-bring numbering nur-sed nursed O O
Ob-ject Object ob-scure obscure ob-struct obstruct of-fend offend of-fer offer
of-fice office offspring offspring of-ten often on-ward onward op-pose oppose
op-press oppress or-dain ordain or-gan organ or-der order out-ward outward P P
Pain-ful Painful pal-sie palsy par-cel parcel parch-ment parchment par-don
pardon par-lour parlour part-ly partly part-ner partner part-tridge partridge
pas-sage passage pas-sing passing pas-tor pastor pas-ture pasture Pat-tern
pattern Pen-ny penny Penknife penknife Per-form perform per-fume perfume
per-mit permit per-son person per-tain pertain per-vert pervert pic-ture
picture pil-grim pilgrim pil-lar pillar pil-low pillow plat-ted platted
plat-ter platter plen-ty plenty plot-ting plotting plow-men plowmen plum-met
plummet pow-der powder pop-lar poplar por-ter porter pos-sess possess pot-tage
pottage prin-ces princes pros-pect prospect pros-per prosper pros-trate
prostrate proud-ly proudly pub-lick public pub-lish publish puf-fed puffed
puf-fing puffing pul-pit pulpit pur-chase purchase pur-port purport pur-pose
purpose pur-ling purling pur-ses purses pur-sue pursue pur-suit pursuit
put-teth puts put-ting putting Q Q Quar-rel Quarrel quar-ter quarter
quick-ly quickly quick-ned quickened quick-neth quickneth quick-ning quickening
quick-sand quicksand quick-ness quickness R R Rab-bi Rabbi rainbow rainbow
ram-part rampart ran-som ransom ran-ger ranger ran-dom random rat-leth ratleth
rat-ling rattling rec-kon reckon ram-bling rambling rem-nant remnant ren-der
render ren-dred rendered res-pit respit red-ness redness rest-less restless
rib-bon ribbon right-ly rightly rob-ber robber rob-bing robbing rub-bing
rubbing rub-bers rubbers rub-bish rubbish rud-dy ruddy rum-bling rumbling
rum-mer rummer rus-ty rusty S S Sab-bath Sabbath sack-but sackbut sackcloth
sackcloth sad-led sadled sad-ly sadly sad-ness sadness saf-fron saffron
san-dals sandals scab-bed scabbed scaf-fold scaffold scep-ter scepter scorn-ful
scornful scour-ged scourged scour-ging scourging scrip-ture scripture scur-vy
scurvy scum-mer scummer sel-ler seller sen-ces senses sen-tence sentence
ser-pent serpent ser-vant servant ser-ved served ser-vice service ser-vile
servile set-ter setter set-ting setting sel-ler seller sel-ling selling set-led
settled sharp-ly sharply sharp-ness sharpness shed-ding shedding sheepskins
sheepskins shel-ter shelter shep-herd shepherd shewbread shewbread ship-man
shipman shipwreck shipwreck short-ly shortly shoul-der shoulder shut-ting
shutting sick-ly sickly sick-ness sickness sig-net signet sig-nal signal sil-ly
silly sin-ful sinful sin-ner sinner sin-ning sinning si-ster sister sit-ting
sitting six-teen sixteen six-ty sixty skil-ful skilful skip-ping skipping
slack-ness slackness slan-der slander sloth-ful slothful slug-gard sluggard
slum-ber slumber smel-led smelled smel-ling smelling smit-ten smitten snuf-fers
snuffers soc-ket socket sod-den sodden soft-ly softly sor-row sorrow sot-tish
sottish sound-ness soundness southward southward span-ning spanning spar-row
sparrow speech-less speechless spil-led spilled spit-ting spitting spot-ted
spotted sprink-led sprinkled stag-ger stagger step-ping stepping stil-led
stilled stif-fly stiffly stir-ring stirring stop-per stopper stor-my stormy
stout-ness stoutness stran-ger stranger strang-led strangled streng-then
strengthen stric-ken stricken strip-ling stripling strong-ly strongly stub-born
stubborn stum-bled stumbled sub-due subdue sub-ject subject sub-mit submit
sub-scribe subscribe sub-vert subvert suc-ceed succeed suc-cess success
suc-cour succor suck-ling suckling sud-den sudden suf-fer suffer sum-mer
summer sun-dry sundry sup-ped supped sup-per supper sup-ply supply sup-plant
supplant sup-pose suppose sus-tain sustain swad-ling swaddling swal-low swallow
swel-ling swelling swift-ly swiftly swim-ming swimming T T Tack-ling Tackling
tan-ner tanner tar-get target tap-ster tapster tar-dy tardy tar-ry tarry
tart-ly tartly tat-ling tatling tem-per temper tem-pest tempest ten-der tender
ter-rour terror thank-ful thankful them-selves themselves thick-ness thickness
third-ly thirdly thir-teen thirteen thir-ty thirty thir-sty thirsty threat-ning
threatening through-ly thoroughly thun-der thunder til-lage tillage til-led
tilled tim-ber timber tim-brel timbrel tor-ches torches tor-ment torment
tor-ture torture tos-sed tossed tos-sing tossing traf-fick traffic trans-gress
transgress tran-slate translate trem-bled trembled trem-bling trembling
tres-pass trespass trim-mer trimmer trim-meth trimmeth trum-pet trumpet twen-ty
twenty V V Vain-ly Vainly val-ley valley ven-ture venture ver-tue virtue
ves-sel vessel vil-lage village vil-lain villain vin-tage vintage vir-gin
virgin un-just unjust un-known unknown un-lade unlade un-less unless un-done
undone un-loose unloose un-ripe unripe un-til until un-true untrue un-wise
unwise up*braid upbraid up-hold uphold up-per upper up-right upright up-start
upstart up-roar uproar up-side upside up-ward upward ur-ged urged ur-gent
urgent ut-most utmost ut-ter utter vul-can vulcan vul-ture vulture vul-gar
vulgar W W Wal-low Wallow wan-der wander wan-ton wanton wardrobe wardrobe
war-ring warring wash-pot washpot watch-ful watchful watchman watchman
weak-ness weakness weal-thy wealthy wed-ding wedding wed-lock wedlock weigh-ty
weighty welfare welfare westward westward whirlwind whirlwind whis-per
whisper whol-some wholesome wic-ked wicked wil-ling willing wil-low willow
wil-ful wilful win-dy windy win-dow window win-ner winner win-ter winter
wis-dom wisdom wish-ful wishful withdraw withdraw withold withhold
with-stand withstand wit-ness witness wit-ty witty won-der wonder workman
workman wor-ship worship wor-thy worthy world-ly worldly wrap-ped wrapped
wrap-ping wrapping wrath-ful wrathful writ-ten written wrong-ful wrongful
wrest-ling wrestling Y Y Year-ly Yearly yel-low yellow yel-led yelled yon-der
yonder youth-ful youthful

Chap. 12. Containing Examples of Words which end with le or les after a
Consonant.
Let the Scholar here be taught to sound le or les in the end of a word coming
after a Consonant as if there were no e placed there at all. Examples.

A-ble Able nm-ble amble ad-dle addle an-gle angle ap-ple apple an-cle ancle
ba-ble babble bea-dle beadle bee-tle beetle bea-gle beagle bun-dle bundle
brin-dle brindle bot-tle bottle bri-dle bridle brit-tle brittle bris-tle
bristle buc-kle buckle can-dle candle cac-kle cackle ca-ble cable cas-tle
castle cau-dle caudle cir-cle circle coc-kle cockle cob-ble cobble cou-ple
couple crip-ple cripple dag-gle daggle dan-dle dandle da-zle dazzle dou-ble
double ea-gle eagle ea-gles eagles fa-ble fable fa-bles fables fee-ble feeble
gar-gle gargle gen-tle gentle gir-dle girdle gir-dles girdles gob-ble gobble
gog-gle goggle grum-ble grumble han-dle handle han-dles handles hig-gle higgle
hob-ble hobble hum-ble humble jan-gle jangle i-dle idle jus-tle justle ket-tle
kettle kin-dle kindle lit-tle little man-tle mantle man-tles mantles mar-ble
marble med-dles meddles mid-dle middle min-gle mingle muf-fle muffle muz-zle
muzzle myr-tle myrtle nee-dle needle no-ble noble net-tles nettles no-bles
nobles pad-dle paddle peo-ple people pur-ple purple pim-ple pimple pim-ples
pimples prat-tle prattle pud-dle puddle puz-zle puzzle rab-ble rabble rat-tle
rattle rid-dle riddle rum-ble rumble sa-ble sable sad-dle saddle sad-dles
saddles set-tle settle sham-ble shamble sham-bles shambles sim-ple simple
sin-gle single shac-kle shackle shac-kles shackles spin-dle spindle spit-tle
spittle sprin-kle sprinkle sta-ble stable sta-bles stables star-tle startle
stop-ple stopple stub-ble stubble stum-ble stumble sup-ple supple ta-ble table
ta-bles tables tat-tle tattle tem-ple temple this-tle thistle tin-gle tingle
ti-tle title tram-ple trample trem-ble tremble tric-kle trickle tic-kle tickle
tri-fle trifle trou-ble trouble trou-bles troubles truc-kle truckle tum-ble
tumble tur-tle turtle tur-tles turtles un-cle uncle wat-tle wattle wres-tle
wrestle wrin-kle wrinkle wrin-kles wrinkles

Chap. 13. Containing Examples of Words wherein ti is placed before a Vowel.
Let the Scholar be here taught that ti before a Vowel is pronouneed si, but
otherwise ty. Examples.

Ac-ti-on Action ad-di-ti-on addition a-dop-ti-on adoption af-fec-ti-on
affection af-flic-ti-on affliction at-ten-ti-on attention col-lec-ti-on
collection com-mo-ti-on commotion con-di-ti-on condition con-sump-ti-on
consumption con-ten-ti-on contention dam-na-ti-on damnation de-struc-ti-on
destruction de-vo-ti-on devotion di-rec-ti-on direction dis-trac-ti-on
distraction e-lec-ti-on election ex-tor-ti-on extortion foun-da-ti-on
foundation fac-ti-on faction in-struc-ti-on instruction in-ven-ti-on invention
mu-ni-ti-on munition na-ti-on nation ob-la-ti-on oblation o-ra-ti-on oration
par-ti-ti-on partition por-ti-on portion re-demp-ti-on redemption sal-va-ti-on
salvation sanc-ti-on sanction se-di-ti-on sedition tax-a-ti-on taxation
temp-ta-ti-on temptation vex-a-ti-on vexation vo-ca-ti-on vocation

Chap. 14. Containing Words of Three Syllables both whole and divided, wherein
the former directions are to be observed.
A A A-ban-don Abandon a-ba-ted abated ab-strac-ted abstracted a-bun-dance
abundance ab-hor-ring abhorring a-but-ting abutting a-bu-ses abuses ac-cep-ted
accepted ac-com-plish accomplish ac-cord-ing according ad-mo-nish admonish
ac-ti-ons actions ad-van-tage advantage ad-ven-ture adventure af-fir-med
affirmed af-fec-ted affected af-fright-ed affrighted af-ter-wards afterward
a-go-ny agony ag-gre-gate aggregate a-gree-ment agreement al-ledg-ed alleged
al-li-gate alligate al-ter-nate alternate am-bas-sage embassage an-ces-tors
ancestors an-ci-ent ancient an-ti-pode antipode an-swe-red answered a-no-ther
another a-po-stle apostle ap-ply-ed applied a-po-state apostate ap-pre-hend
apprehend ap-pro-ved approved a-ray-ed arrayed ar-ri-ved arrived ar-ti-fice
artifice ar-ti-choke artichoke ar-ti-cle article a-scen-ded ascended a-sha-med
ashamed as-sem-ble assemble as-su-rance assurance as-sun-der assunder
at-ten-tive attentive at-trac-tive attractive at-tri-bute attribute at-tai-ned
attained a-vai-leth avails a-vouch-ed avouched au-di-ence audience a-ver-ring
averring a-wa-ked awaked a-wa-king awaking B B Back-bi-ting Backbiting
back-sli-ding backsliding bal-lan-ced balanced ba-nish-ment banishment
ban-ter-ing bantering bar-ba-rous barbarous bar-ren-ness barrenness
bal-der-dash balderdash bat-tle-dore battledore but-te-ry buttery bat-tle-ment
battlement beau-ti-ful beautiful be-fore-hand beforehand be-got-ten begotten
be-gin-ning beginning be-gui-led beguiled be-ha-ved behaved be-hol-ding
beholding be-ho-ved behoved be-lo-ved beloved be-moa-ned bemoaned be-ne-fits
benefits be-tray-ed betrayed bet-ter-ed bettered be-way-led bewailed bit-ter-ly
bitterly bit-ter-ness bitterness blab-ber-ing blabbering ble-mish-ed blemished
bles-sed-ness blessedness blood-thir-sty bloodthirsty bom-ba-sted bombasted
bo-di-ly bodily bor-row-ed borrowed boi-ste-rous boisterous bond-wo-man
bondwoman bot-tom-less bottomless boun-ti-ful bountiful bra-ve-ry bravery
bran-dish-ing brandishing bri-be-ry bribery brick-lay-er bricklayer
bri-gan-tine brigantine broi-de-red broidered bro-ther-ly brotherly bru-tish-ly
brutishly bur-den-some burdensome bu-ri-al burial bu-si-ly busily bu-si-ness
business but-te-ry buttery C C Ca-ni-bal Canibal car-bun-cle carbuncle
ca-sti-gate castigate ca-te-chism catechism car-pen-ter carpenter car-ri-age
carriage car-nal-ly carnally ce-le-brate celebrate cer-tain-ly certainly
cer-ti-fie certify cham-ber-lain chamberlain cham-pi-on champion charge-a-ble
chargeable cheer-ful-ly cheerfully chur-lish-ly churlishly ci-vil-ly civilly
clou-di-ness cloudiness cla-mo-rous clamorous cle-men-cy clemency co-lo-ny
colony com-li-ness comeliness com-men-cing commencing com-mand-ing commanding
com-mit-ted committed com-mon-ly commonly com-pel-led compelled con-fes-sing
confessing con-fu-ted confuted con-gre-gate congregate con-ju-red conjured
con-stan-cy constancy con-stant-ly constantly con-tra-ry contrary con-tro-ler
controler con-ver-sant conversant con-vey-ance conveyance con-vin-ced convinced
cop-per-smith coppersmith cor-mo-rant cormorant cor-rup-ted corrupted
cost-li-ness costliness craf-ti-ly craftily craf-ti-ness craftiness cre-a-ted
created cre-a-ting creating cre-di-ble credible cre-di-tor creditor cru-ci-fie
crucify cru-di-ty crudity cru-el-ly cruelly cru-ci-ate cruciate cu-cum-ber
cucumber cus-to-med customed cus-to-mer customer cum-ber-land cumberland
cu-ri-ous curious cum-be-rance cumberance cu-sto-dy custody cur-sed-ly cursedly
cum-min-seed cumminseed D D Da-ma-ges Damages dam-na-ble damnable dan-ge-rous
dangerous dar-ken-ed darkened de-cay-ed decayed de-cay-ing decaying de-cla-red
declared de-di-cate dedicate de-fen-sive defensive de-for-med deformed
de-faul-ter defaulter de-gra-ded degraded de-lay-ing delaying de-lu-ding
deluding de-ter-mine determine de-trac-ting detracting di-ges-ted digested
di-mi-nish diminish di-rec-ted directed dif-fe-rence difference dig-ni-ty
dignity di-li-gence diligence di-sci-ple disciple dis-dain-ed disdained
dis-dain-ful disdainful dis-fi-gure disfigure dis-gui-sed disguised dis-sem-ble
dissemble dis-tur-bance disturbance dis-man-tle dismantle dis-char-ged
discharged di-vi-ding dividing di-vor-ced divorced do-me-stick domestic
doc-tri-nal doctrinal do-ci-ble docible doubt-ful-ly doubtfully drun-ken-ness
drunkenness drow-si-ly drowsily dread-ful-ly dreadfully dul-ci-mer dulcimer
du-ra-ble durable du-ti-ful dutiful dun-ge-on dungeon E E Ea-ger-ly Eagerly
e-di-fie edify e-mi-nent eminent ear-nest-ly earnestly e-lo-quent eloquent
em-bol-den embolden em-broi-der embroider em-ploy-ment employment e-ne-my enemy
en-mi-ty enmity en-gage-ment engagement en-gra-ver engraver en-ligh-ten
enlighten en-tice-ment enticement en-ter-tain entertain en-tan-gle entangle
en-ter-prize enterprise en-trap-ping entrapping en-vi-ous envious en-vi-ron
environ en-sna-red ensnared e-pis-tle epistle e-qual-ly equally e-qui-ty equity
e-qui-nox equinox e-sca-ped escaped e-stran-ged estranged e-sta-blish establish
e-spou-sed espoused e-sti-mate estimate e-ter-nal eternal e-ver-more evermore
e-ve-ry every e-ven-ly evenly e-ven-ing evening e-vi-dence evidence e-vi-dent
evident e-vil-ly evilly ex-ces-sive excessive ex-tream-ly extremely ex-al-ted
exalted ex-pel led expelled ex-am-ple example ex-pec ted expected ex-cel-lent
excellent ex-clu-ded excluded ex-cu sed excused ex-pen-ces expenses ex-pi red
expired ex-po-sed exposed ex-pres-sed expressed ex-ten-ded extended ex-tol-led
extolled ex-treamly extremely F F Fal-li-ble Fallible fa-mous-ly famously
fa-cul-ty faculty fa-m^-ly family faith ful-ly faithfully fa-ther-ly fatherly
fa vou-rite favorite fear-ful-ly fearfully fee-ble-ness feebleness
fel-low-ship fellowship fer-vent-ly fervently fer-men-ted fermented fil-thi-ly
filthily fir-ma-ment firmament flat-te-ry flattery fra-ter-nal fraternal
fra-grant-ly fragrantly f^a-gi-let f^agilet fruit-ful-ness fruitfulness for
sa-ken forsaken for-mer-ly formerly for-ci-ble forcible for-tu-nate fortunate
for-get-ful forgetful fur-mi-ty furmitive fu-gi-tive fugitive fur-ni-ture
furniture fu-ri-ous furious ful-fil-ling fulfilling fur ther-more furthermore
ful-mi-nate fulminate G G Gad-ding-ly Gaddingly gal-le-ry gallery gainsay ing
gainsaying gar-di-ner gardener gal-lant ly gallantly gau-di ly gaudily gar ri
son garrison ga sing stock gasingstock ge ne-ral general gen-tle-ness
gentleness ger-ma-ny germany glo-ri-ous glorious gloo-mi ness gloominess glo
ri-fie glorify glut-ton-ous gluttonous god-li-ness godliness good-li-ness
goodliness gor-ge-ous gorgeous go-vern-ment government go ver-nour governor
glut-to-ny gluttony gra-ci-o^s gracious gras-hop-per grasshopper gra-vi-ty
gravity gree di-ness greediness guil-ti-ness guiltiness guilt-les-ly guiltlesly
H H Hab-ber-dine Habberdine hal-low-ed hallowed har mo-ny harmony ha-sti-ly
hastily hand-ker-chief handkerchief hate-ful-ly hatefully har-bin-ger harbinger
hand mai-den handmaiden hap-pi-ness happiness haugh-ti-ly haughtily hand-som-ly
handsomely ha-zar-dous hazardous hear-ti-ly heartily hea-ven-ly heavenly
he-re-sie heresy her-mi-tage hermitage he-ri-tage heritage hea-vi-ness
heaviness ho-li-ness holiness ho-nou-red honored home-li-ness homeliness
hor-ri-ble horrible hum ble-ness humbleness hus-band-ry husbandry hy-po-crite
hypocrite I I I dle-ness Idleness ig-no-ble ignoble ig-no rant ignorant
i-ma-ges images i-ma-gine imagine im-po tent impotent im-bra cing embracing
im-pu-ting imputing in-gen-der engender in-cen sed incensed in-con-stant
inconstant in-jus-tice injustice in-ju-ry injury in-fa-mous infamous in-fer-nal
infernal in-te-stine intestine in-fi-nite infinite in-fla-ming inflaming
in-for-ming informing in-he-rit inherit in no cent innocent in-stant ly
instantly in struc ted instructed in-stru-ment instrument in-tan-gle entangle
in-trea ted entreated in-ter-pret interpret in-tru-ding intruding in-va-ding
invading in-vi-ted invited in-ward-ly inwardly jour-ney-ing journeying
ju-bi-lee jubilee ju-sti-fie justify joy-ful-ly joyfully i-vo-ry ivory K K
Kind-nes-ses Kindnesses kins-wo-man kinswoman kna-vish-ly knavishly know-ing-ly
knowingly L L La-bou-red Labored la-men-ted lamented la-bou-rer labourer
law-ful-ly lawfully lear-ned-ly learnedly le-pro-sie leprosy li-be-ral liberal
li-ber-ty liberty li-bel-ling libelling lu-sti-ness lustiness le-che-ry lechery
li-mi-ted limited lof-ti-ness loftiness low-li-ness lowliness loy-te-ring
loytering lu-na-cy lunacy lu-na-tick lunatic M M Mag-da-len Magdalen
mag-ni-fie magnify ma-je-sty majesty ma-ni-fest manifest ma-ni-fold manifold
mar-ri-age marriage ma-ter-nal maternal ma-ri-ner mariner ma-ster-less
masterless ma-scu-line masculine me-di-cine medicine mer-chan-dize merchandise
me-di-tate meditate me-mo-ry memory men-ti-on mention mi-ni-ster minister
migh-ti ly mightily mys-te-ry mystery mis-for tune misfortune mi-ra-cle miracle
mi-ti-gate mitigate mil-li ons millions mo-de-rate moderate mo-de-sty modesty
mo-nu-ment monument mor-tal-ly mortally mor-ti fie mortify mourn-ful-ly
mournfully mol-li-fie mollify mul-ti-tude multitude mul-ti ply multiply
mu-si-cal musical mut-te-ring muttering mu-tu-al mutual N N Na-ked-ness
Nakedness na-tu-ral natural na-ti-on nation na-vi-gate navigate naugh ti-ness
naughtiness na-sti-ness nastiness neg-li-gent negligent neigh-bour-ly
neighbourly ne-ther most nethermost nig-gard ly niggardly nim ble ness
nimbleness no mi nal nominal nor-ther-ly northerly nu-me-ral numeral nu-me-rous
numerous nur-se-ry nursery no-vel-ty novelty num-ber-ing numbering nu-tri-ment
nutriment O O O-bey-ed Obeyed o-bey-ing obeying ob-ser-ved observed ob-ser-ver
observer of-fen-sive offensive of-fe-ring offering ob-tai-ned obtained
of-fen-ded offended ob-sti-nate obstinate o-pen-ly openly o-pe-rate operate
of-ten-times oftentimes op-po sed opposed op-po-nent opponent op-pres-sor
oppressor o-ra-cle oracle or-na-ment ornament or-dai-ned ordained or-der-ly
orderly o-ver-come o^ercome o-ver-much overmuch o-ver-sight oversight
o-ver-take overtake o-ver-ture overture o-ver-turn overturn or-di-nance
ordinance out go-ing outgoing out-lan dish outlandish out-pas-sed outpassed
out-ward-ly outwarly P P Pa-ge-ant Pageant pa-la-ces palaces pa-ter-nal
paternal pa-ra-ble parable pa-ra-dice paradise pa-ra-mour paramour par-ta-ker
partaker par-ti-al partial pas-sa-ges passages pas-sen-ger passenger pa-sto-ral
pastoral pas-si-on passion pa-ti-ence patience pen-ti-on pention per-ti-nent
pertinent pes-ter-ing pestering pe-sti-lence pestilence pe-ril-lous perilous
per-for mance performance per-ma-nent permanent per-su-med persumed per-ju-ry
perjury per-se-cute perse^ute per-mit-ted permitted per-swa-ding persuading
pes-ti-lence pestilence phar-ma-cy pharmacy pi-e-ty piety pi-ti-ful pitiful
plen-ti-ful plentiful plea-sant-ly pleasantly pro vi-dent provident pro-phe-sie
prophecy pro-vi-dence providence pro-mul-gate promulgate pro-mi-sed promised
pro-se-lite proselite pro-sti-tute prostitute pro-ven-der provender pub-lick-ly
publicly pub-li-can publican pu-nish-ment punishment pur-cha-sed purchased
pu-ri fie purify pu-ri ty purity pur-po-sed purposed pur-su-ant pursuant Q Q
Qua li-ty Quality quan-ti-ty quantity quar-ter-ly quarterly qua-king-ly
quakingly qui-et-ness quietness qui-e-tude quietude que-sti-on question qui
ve-ring quivering quar-rel some quarrelsome qua-ve-ring quavering R R
Ram-ping-ly Rampingly ran-so-med ransomed ra-ve-nous ravenous ra-vi-shed
ravished ra pi er rapier re-bel-led rebelled re-bu-ked rebuked re-cei-ving
receiving re-cei-ver receiver re-com-mend recommend re-cor-der recorder
re-co-ver recover re-con-cile reconcile re-for-med reformed re-for-mer reformer
re-gi-on region re-gi-ster register re-gar-ded regarded re-hear-sal rehearsal
re-gi-ment regiment re joi-ced rejoiced re-lea-sed released re-man-ded remanded
re-mo-ved removed re mote-ly remotely re-mem-ber remember re-main-der remainder
re-me-dy remedy re-mit-ted remitted re-pu-ted reputed re-por-ted reported
re-pro-ved reproved re-pen-tance repentance re-ple-nish replenish re-pro-bate
reprobate re-si-due residue re-sem-blance resemblance re-ser-ved reserved
re-sol-ved resolved re-sto-red restored re-ti-red retired re-ven-ged revenged
re-ve-nue revenue re-ver-sed reversed re-ve-rence reverence re-vi-ling reviling
re-vi-ved revived re-vol-ted revolted ri-o-tous riotous ri-val-led rivalled
ring-lea-der ringleader rot-ten-ness rottenness roy-al-ly royally roy-al-ty
royalty ru-di-ments rudiments S S Sa-cra-ment Sacrament sa-cri-fice sacrifice
sanc-ti-fie sanctify sa-cri-ledge sacrilege sa-lu-ted saluted sa-tis-fie
satisfy sa-tur-day saturday sa-vi-our savior sa-vou-ry savoury se-du-lous
sedulous sen-si-ble sensible sen-si-tive sensitive se-ni-or senior scor-pi-on
scorpion se-du-ced seduced school-ma-ster schoolmaster se-na-tor senator
sen-ten-ces sentences se-pa-rate separate se-pul-chre sepulcher ser-ge-ant
sergeant ser-vi-tude servitude se-ven-ty seventy se-vere-ly severely se-ve-ral
several shame-les-ly shamelesly sick-nes-ses sicknesses sin-cere-ly sincerely
sin-gu-lar singular sin-cere-ness sincereness slan-de-rous slanderous
scan-da-lous scandalous scar-ri-fie scarrifie slip-pe-ry slippery sloth-ful-ly
slothfully slug-gish-ness sluggishness so-ber-ly soberly so-do-mite sodomite
so-lemn-ly solemnly sor-ce-ry sorcery sooth-say-ing soothsaying spa-ring-ly
sparingly spe-ci-fie specify spe-ci-al special spee-di-ly speedily sor-row-ful
sorrowful spite-ful-ly spitefully state-li-est stateliest sted-fast-ly
steadfastly sto-ma-cher stomacher sto-mach-ful stomachful stub-born-ly
stubbornly sub-du-ed subdued suc-cess-ful successful sub-mit-ted submitted
sub-mis-sive submissive sub-or-ned suborned sub-scri-bed subscribed
sub-sti-tute substitute sub-til-ly subtly sub-til-ty subtilty suc-ces-sive
successive sud-den-ly suddenly suf-fi-ceth suffices sul-len-ly sullenly
sul-phu-rous sulphurous sump-tu-ous sumptuous sup-per-less supperless
sup-pli-cate supplicate s^f-fo-cate snffocate sup-por-ted supported
su-ste-nance sustenance sy-ca-more sycamore sy-na-gogue synagogue T T Tar-ri-er
Tarrier ta-pi-stry tapistry task-ma-ster taskmaster tem-pe-rance temperance
tem-pe-rate temperate tem-po-ral temporal ten-der-ly tenderly ter-ri-ble
terrible ter-ri-fie terrify te-sta-ment testament te-sti-fie testify
te-sta-tor testator thank-ful-ly thankfully to-ge-ther together tor-men-tor
tormentor to-tal-ly totally thun-der-bolt thunderbolt tor-tu-red tortured
trans-fer-red transferred trans-mi-grate transmigrate trans-gres-sed
transgressed tran-spa-rent transparent tran-sla-ted translated tra-vel-ler
traveller trea-che-rous treacherous trea-su-ry treasury tres-pas-ses trespasses
tu-na-ble tunable ty-ran-ny tyranny tym-pa-ny tympany V V Va-ga-bond Vagabond
va-li-ant valiant va-ni-ty vanity va-ri-ance variance ve-he-ment vehement
ve-ne-mous venomous ve-ri-ty verity ver-tu-ous virtuous ve-ri-ly verily
ve-ni-son venison vic-to-ry victory vice-ge-rent vicegerent vi-li-fie vilify
vic-tu-als victuals vi-gi-lant vigilant vi-go-rous vigorous vil-la-ny villainy
vo-lu-ble voluble vi-ne-gar vinegar vi-o-lent violent vi-o-late violate
vir-ti-go virtigo vi-si-on vision vi-si-ble visible vi-si-ted visited
un-be-lief unbelief un-a-ble unable un-der-stand understand un-e-qual unequal
un-clean-ly uncleanly un-cer-tain uncertain un-come-ly uncomely un-co-ver
uncover un-faith-ful unfaithful un-fruit-ful unfruitful un-god-ly ungodly
un-ho-ly unholy u-ni-ted united un-just-ly unjustly un-sta-ble unstable
un-law-ful unlawful un-mind-ful unmindful un-ru-ly unruly un-thank-ful
unthankful un-time-ly untimely un-skil-ful unskilful un-seem-ly unseemly
un-wor-thy unworthy vo-mi-ting vomiting up-right-ly uprightly u-sur-per usurper
ut-ter-ly utterly W W Wal-low-ing Wallowing wan-ton-ness wantonness war-ri-our
warrior wa-ter-brooks waterbrooks wa-ter-course watercourse wa-ter-flood
waterflood wa-ter-house waterhouse wan-ton-ly wantonly wil-ling-ly willingly
wil-ful-ly wilfully wea-ri-ness weariness wea-ri-some wearisome whis-per-ing
whispering wic-ked-ness wickedness wil-der-ness wilderness wit-nes-ses
witnesses wit-nes-sing witnessing won-der-ful wonderful wo-ful-ly woefully
wor-ship-ping worshipping wor-ship-per worshipper wor-thi-ly worthily
wil-ling-ly willingly wil-ling-ness willingness wrath-ful-ly wrathfully
wrong-ful-ly wrongfully wret-ched-ness wretchedness wret-ched-ly wretchedly Y Y
Yes-ter-day Yesterday yes-ter-night yesternight yoke-fel-low yokefellow
youth-ful-ly youthfully youth-ful-ness youthfulness Z Z Zea-lous-ly Zealously

Chap. 15. Containing Words of Four Syllables, both whole and divided, wherein
the former Rules are to be observed.
A A A-ban-do-ned Abandoned a-bi-li-ty ability a-bo-li-shed abolished
a-bo-mi-nate abominate a-bun-dant-ly abundantly ac-cep-ta-ble acceptable
ac-com-plish-ed accomplished ac-cor-ding-ly accordingly ab-so-lute-ly
absolutely ac-cus-to-med accustomed ac-cep-ta-bly acceptably ac-ti-vi-ty
activity a-da-man-tine adamantine ad-di-ti-on addition ad-mi-ni-stred
administered a-dop-ti-on adoption ad-ver-sa-ry adversary ad-ven-tu-red
adventured ad-ver-si-ty adversity a-dul-te-ry adultery af-fec-ti-on affection
af-fi-ni-ty affinity af-flic-ti-on affliction ag-gre-ga-ted aggregated
al-le-go-ry allegory a-li-e-nate alienate al-to-ge-ther altogether
an-swe-ra-ble answerable a-mi-a-ble amiable an-ti-qui-ty antiquity an-ti-pa-thy
antipathy ap-pa-rent-ly apparently ap-per-tain-ed appertained ap-pa-rel-led
apparelled ap-pre-hen-ded apprehended ar-ro-gan-cy arrogance ar-ro-gant-ly
arrogantly ar-ti-fi-cer artificer ar-til-le-ry artillery as-su-red-ly assuredly
as-sump-ti-on assumption a-sto-ni-shed astonished a-sto-nish-ment astonishment
a-stro-lo-gy astrology a-stro-man-cy astromancy a-stro-no-my astronomy
at-ten-tive-ly attentively as-si-du-ous assiduous au-tho-ri-ty authority B B
Ba-by-lo-nish Babylonish bar-ba-ri-an barbarian bar-ri-ca-do barricado
ba-sti-na-do bastinado be-a-ti-tude beatitude be-ne-vo-lence benevolence
be-nig-ni-ty benignity boun-ti-ful-ly bountifully boun-ti-ful-ness
bountifulness C C Ca-la-mi-ty Calamity cap-ti-vi-ty captivity ca-sti-ga-ted
castigated ca-ter-pil-lar caterpillar ce-les-ti-al celestial ca-te-chi-sed
catechized ca-tas-tro-phe catastrophe ce-le-bra-ted celebrated cen-tu-ri-on
centurion ce-re-mo-nies ceremonies cer-ti-fi-cate certificate cha-ri-ta-ble
charitable cir-cum-ci-sed circumcised col-lec-ti-on collection col-le-gi-ate
collegiate col-la-te-ral collateral com-for-ta-bly comfortably com-mis-si-on
commission com-mu-ni-on communion com-pa-ni-on companion com-mi-se-rate
commiserate com-pas-si-on compassion con-ten-ted-ly contentedly con-cep-ti-on
conception con-clu-si-on conclusion con-di-ti-on condition con-fes-si-on
confession con-fe-de-rate confederate con-fu-si-on confusion con-fi-dent-ly
confidently con-gra-tu-late congratulate con-gre-ga-ted congregated
con-sump-ti-on consumption con-se-cra-ted consecrated con-si-de-rate
considerate con-spi-ra-cy conspiracy con-temp-ti-ble contemptible con-ten-ti-on
contention con-ti-nu-al continual con-ta-mi-nate contaminate con-tra-dic-ted
contradicted con-tra-ri-ly contrarily con-tro-ver-sie controversy con-tu-ma-cy
contumacy con-ve-ni-ent convenient con-ven-ti-on convention con-ver-si-on
conversion cor-rec-ti-on correction cor-rup-ti-on corruption co-ve-nan-ted
covenanted cru-di-li-ty crudility cur-te-ous-ly courteously cre-a-ti-on creation
cre-du-lous-ly credulously cri-ti-cal-ly critically cu-ri-ous-ly curiously
cru-ci-fi-ed crucified D D Dai-ry-wo-man Dairywoman dal-li-an-ces dalliances
da-mage-a-ble damageable dam-na-ti-on damnation dam-ni-fi-ed damnified
dan-de-li-on dandelion de-bi-li-tate debilitate de-ceit-ful-ness deceitfulness
de-di-ca-ted dedicated de-bate-ful-ly debatefully de-bo-nair-ly debonairly
de-ci-phe-ring deciphering de-clai-ming-ly declaimingly de-col-la-ted
decollated de-coc-ti-on decoction de-duc-ti-on deduction de-fa-ti-gate
defatigate de-fec-ti-on defection de-fen-so-ry defensory de-fi-ni-tive
definitive de-for-med-ly deformedly de-for-mi-ty deformity de-ge-ne-rate
degenerate de-gra-ding-ly degradingly de-jec-ted-ly dejectedly de-light-ful-ly
delightfully de-li-ne-ate delineate de-li-ve-red delivered de-mi-ca-non
demicanon de-mo-cra-cy democracy de-no-mi-nate denominate de-pen-den-cy
dependency de-po-pu-late depopulate de-po-si-ted deposited de-pres-si-on
depression de-ri-va-tive derivative de-ro-ga-ting derogating de-scrip-ti-on
description de-spai-ring-ly despairingly de-spite-ful-ly despitefully
de-ter-mi-nate determinate de-ter-mi-ned determined de-tri-men-tal detrimental
de-vi-a-ting deviating de-vi-lish-ly devilishly dex-te-ri-ty dexterity
di-a-me-ter diameter di-a-go-nal diagonal dif-fi-cul-ty difficulty
dif-fi-cult-ly difficultly di-ge-sti-on digestion dis-com-fi-ture discomfiture
dis-con-so-late disconsolate dis-cour-te-ous discourteous dis-ho-nou-red
dishonored dis-in-ga-ged disingaged dis-lo-ca-ted dislocated dis-tri-bu-ted
distributed di-ver-si-ty diversity dog-ma-ti-cal dogmatical do-mi-ni-on
dominion dor-mi-to-ry dormitory E E E-di-fi-ed Edified e-du-ca-ted educated
ef-fec-tu-al effectual ef-fe-mi-nate effeminate ef-fi-ca-cy efficacy
ef-fi-ci-ent efficient ef-fu-si-on effusion e-gre-gi-ous egregious e-gre-mo-ny
egremony e-la-bo-rate elaborate e-le-cam-pane elecampane e-lec-tor-ship
electorship e-le-gant-ly elegantly e-le-va-ted elevated e-li-za-beth elizabeth
e-lo-quent-ly eloquently e-ma-nu-el emanuel em-broi-de-rer embroiderer
e-mi-nent-ly eminently e-mu-la-ting emulating e-na-mou-red enamoured
en-cou-ra-ging encouraging en-da-ma-ged endamaged e-ner-va-ted enervated
en-ter-tai-ned entertained en-ve-no-med envenomed e-qua-li-zed equalized
e-qui-ta-ble equitable e-qui-vo-cate equivocate e-ra-di-cate eradicate
es-sen-ti-al essential e-sta-bli-shed established e-sti-ma-ted estimated
e-ver-la-sting everlasting e-vi-den-ces evidences eu-ro-pe-an european
e-va-cu-ate evacuate ex-a-mi-ned examined ex-a-spe-rate exasperate
ex-em-pli-fie exemplify ex-ces-sive-ly excessively ex-cee-ding-ly exceedingly
ex-cel-lent-ly excellently ex-cu-sa-ble excusable ex-e-cu-ted executed
ex-er-ci-sed exercised ex-hi-bi-ted exhibited ex-hi-le-rate exhilerate
ex-or-bi-tant exorbitant ex-pe-ri-ence experience ex-pe-ri-ment experiment
ex-po-stu-late expostulate ex-te-nu-ate extenuate ex-ter-mi-nate exterminate
ex-ter-nal-ly externally ex-pul-si-on expulsion ex-tir-pa-ted extirpated F F
Fa-bri-ca-ted Fabricated fac-ti-ous-ly factiously fal-la-ci-ous fallacious
fa-mi-li-ar familiar fan-ta-sti-cal fantastical fa-tal-li-ty fatallity
fa-ther-li-ness fatherliness fa-vou-ra-bly favorably fi-de-li-ty fidelity
flat-ter-ing-ly flatteringly for-ma-li-ty formality for-ti-fi-ed fortified
for-ni-ca-tor fornicator for-tu-nate-ly fortunately foun-da-ti-on foundation
fra-gi-li-ty fragility fra-ter-ni-ty fraternity fu-mi-ga-ted fumigated
fun-da-men-tal fundamental fu-ri-ous-ly furiously fu-mi-to-ry fumitory G G
Ge-ne-ra-ted Generated gen-ti-li-ty gentility ge-o-gra-phy geography
ge-o-me-try geometry gil-li-flow-er gilliflower glis-te-ring-ly glisteringly
glo-ri-fi-ed glorified glo-ri-ous-ly gloriously gor-ge-ous-ly gorgeously
gra-ci-ous-ly graciously gram-ma-ri-an grammarian gra-ti-fi-ed gratified H H
Hal-le-lu-jah Hallelujah har-mo-ni-ous harmonious ha-zar-dous-ly hazardously
he-re-ti-cal heretical hy-po-cri-sie hypocrisy his-to-ri-an historian
ho-nou-ra-ble honorable hor-ri-ble-ness horribleness ho-spi-ta-ble hospitable
ho-sti-li-ty hostility how-so-e-ver howsoever hu-ma-ni-ty humanity hu-mi-di-ty
humidity hu-mi-li-ty humility hy-po-cri-sie hypocrisy hy-po-the-sis hypothesis
I I Je-o-par-dy Jeopardy ig-no-mi-ny ignominy ig-no-rant-ly ignorantly
il-le-gal-ly illegally il-li-te-rate illiterate il-lu-mi-nate illuminate
i-mi-ta-ble imitable im-men-si-ty immensity im-mo-de-rate immoderate
im-per-ti-nent impertinent im-pe-ri-al imperial im-pi-ous-ly impiously
im-per-ti-nence impertinence im-pla-ca-ble implacable im-por-tu-nate
importunate im-pos-si-ble impossible im-pri-son-ing imprisoning im-pru-dent-ly
imprudently im-pu-ri-ty impurity in-ca-pa-ble incapable in-com-pas-sing
incompassing in-cu-ra-ble incurable in-dea-vou-red endeavored in-dem-ni-fie
indemnifie in-dif-fe-rent indifferent in-dig-ni-ty indignity in-du-ra-ble
indurable in-dus-tri-ous industrious in-fal-li-ble infallible in-fe-ri-our
inferior in-flic-ti-on infliction in-fi-nite-ly infinitely in-for-tu-nate
unfortunate in-ge-ni-ous ingenious in-glo-ri-ous inglorious in-gre-di-ent
ingredient in-ha-bi-tant inhabitant in-hu-mane-ly inhumanely in-ju-ri-ous
injurious in-no-cen-cy innocence in-qui-si-tor inquisitor in-sa-ti-ate
insatiate in-scrip-ti-on inscription in-so-len-cy insolency in-spec-ti-on
inspection in-struc-ti-on instruction in-ti-ma-ted intimated in-tri-ca-cy
intricacy in-tro-du-ced introduced in-va-si-on invasion in-ven-ti-on invention
in-ve-te-rate inveterate in-vin-ci-ble invincible in-vi-si-ble invisible
jo-vi-al-ly jovially ir-ra-di-cate irradicate ir-re-gu-lar irregular
ir-rup-ti-on irruption i-ta-li-an italian ju-di-ca-ture judicature ju-di-ci-al
judicial jus-ti-fi-ed justified L L La-bo-ri-ous Laborious la-men-ta-ble
lamentable la-men-ta-bly lamentably lan-gui-shed-ly languishedly la-sci-vi-ous
lascivious la-va-to-ry lavatory lea-che-rous-ly leacherously le-gi-ti-mate
legitimate le-thar-gi-cal lethargical le-vi-ti-cal levitical le-vi-a-than
leviathan li-be-ral-ly liberally li-bi-di-nous libidinous li-cen-ti-ate
licentiate li-co-rish-ness licorishness lo-qua-ci-ty loquacity lu-gu-bri-ous
lugubrious lu-shi-ous-ly lushiously M M Ma-ce-ra-ted Macerated ma-gi-ci-an
magician mag-ni-fi-ed magnified mag-ni-fi-cent magnificent mag-ni-fy-ing
mag-ni-fy-ing ma-la-pert-ly malapertly ma-le-vo-lence malevolence
ma-lig-nant-ly malignantly ma-le-fac-tor malefactor ma-ni-fest-ly manifestly
ma-nu-fac-ture manufacture mar-chi-o-ness marchioness mar-ti-a-list martialist
ma-tri-cu-late matriculate ma-tu-ri-ty maturity me-cha-ni-cal mechanical
me-di-ci-nal medicinal me-di-a-tor mediator me-di-ta-ting meditating
me-lan-cho-ly melancholy me-lo-di-ous melodious mer-ci-ful-ly mercifully
me-ri-di-an meridian me-tho-di-cal methodical mi-li-ta-ry military mi-li-ti-a
militia mi-no-ri-ty minority mi-ra-cu-lous miraculous mis-go-ver-ned
misgoverned mis-pri-si-on misprision mi-ti-ga-ted mitigated mo-de-rate-ly
moderately mol-li-fi-ed mollified mo-ra-li-zed moralized mor-ta-li-ty mortality
mul-ti-pli-ed multiplied mun-di-fy-ing mundifying mu-ni-ti-on munition N N
Nar-ra-ti-on Narration na-ti-vi-ty nativity na-tu-ral-ly naturally na-ti-o-nal
national na-vi-ga-ble navigable ne-ces-sa-ry necessary ne-ces-si-ty necessity
ne-cro-man-cy necromancy neg-li-gent-ly negligently ne-go-ti-ate negotiate
ne-gro-man-cer negromancer ne-ver-the-less nevertheless nig-gard-li-ness
niggardliness no-mi-na-ted nominated no-bi-li-ty nobility no-to-ri-ous
notorious no-ti-o-nal notional nu-me-ra-ry numerary nu-me-ra-ble numerable
nu-me-rous-ly numerously O O O-be-di-ence Obedience ob-jec-ti-on objection
ob-la-ti-on oblation ob-li-qui-ty obliquity ob-scu-ri-ty obscurity ob-vi-ous-ly
obviously oc-ca-si-on occasion o-di-ous-ly odiously of-fer-to-ry offertory
of-fi-ci-ous officious ob-sti-nate-ly obstinately om-ni-po-tent omnipotent
o-pe-ra-tor operator o-pi-ni-on opinion op-por-tune-ly opportunely
op-pres-si-on oppression o-pu-lent-ly opulently o-ra-ti-on oration or-di-na-ry
ordinary or-di-nan-ces ordinances or-tho-gra-phy orthography o-ver-char-ged
overcharged o-ver-thwart-ly overthwartly o-ver-co-ming overcoming
o-ver-flow-ing overflowing P P Pa-ci-fi-ed Pacified p^-la-ta-ble p^latable
par-ti-cu-lar particular par-ti-ti-on partition pa ro-chi al parochial
pa-ti-ent-ly patiently pas-si-o-nate passionate pa-tri-mo-ny patrimony
pas-tu-ra-ble pasturable pa-ter-nal ly paternally pa-ti ent-ly patiently
pa-the-ti call pathetical pe ti-ti-on petition pe-cu li-ar peculiar per-cep
ti-ble perceptible per-ti-nent-ly pertinently per-di-ti-on perdition per-so-nal
ly personally pe-ni-tent-ly penitently per-fec-ti-on perfection pen-si-o ner
pensioner per-mis-si-on permission pe-remp-to-ry peremptory per-pe-tu-al
perpetual per-ni-ci-ous pernicious per-se-cu-ted persecuted per-spi-cu-ous
perspicuous phy-si ci-an physician phi-lo-so-pher philosopher plen-ti-ful-ly
plentifully pi-ti ful-ly pitifully plen-te-ous-ness plenteousness pol-lu-ti-on
pollution po-pu-lar-ly popularly pos-ses-si-on possession po-ste-ri-ty
posterity po-ste ri our posteriour pre-de-sti-nate predestinate pre-ju-di-cate
prejudicate pre me-di-tate premeditate pre-ci-ous-ly preciously pre-sump-ti-on
presumption pre-cau-ti-on precaution pre-va-ri-cate prevaricate pre-ven-ti-on
prevention pro-fes-si-on profession pro-fi-ta-ble profitable pro-ces-si-on
procession pro-mo-ti on promotion pro phe-cy-ing prophesying pro-pri-e-ty
propriety pro-por-ti-on proportion pro spe-ri-ty prosperity pro-sti-tu-ting
prostituting pro-tec ti-on protection pro-ver-bi-al proverbial pro-vi-si-on
provision pu-is-sant-ly puissantly pu-ri-fi-ed purified pu-ni-sha-ble
punishable punc-tu-al-ly punctually pur-ga-to-ry purgatory pu-ri-fy-ing
purifying py-ra-mi dal pyramidal Q Q Qua-li-fi-ed Qualified quar-rel-som-ly
quarrelsomly que-sti-o-ned questioned que-sti-on-less questionless
quin-ti-li-an quintilian R R Ra-di-cal-ly Radically ra-pa-ci-ty rapacity ra-ri
fi-ed rarefied ra-sca-li-ty rascality re-bel-li-on rebellion rea so-na-ble
reasonable re-demp-ti-on redemption ra ti-o-nal rational re-co-ver-ing
recovering re-cre-a-ted recreated rec-ti-fi-ed rectified re-flec-ti-on
reflection re-fri-ge-rate refrigerate re-la-ti-on relation re-len ting-ly
relentingly re-li-gi-ous religious re-lin-quish-ed relinquished re-mem-ber-ing
remembering re-mu-ne-rate remunerate re-mis-si on remission re-mit-ta-ble
remittable re-no va-ted renovated re-pai-ra-ble repairable re-pen-ting-ly
repentingly re-pro-ba-ting reprobating re-pro-va-ble reprovable re-pu di ate
repudiate re-pug-nant-ly repugnantly re-sol ved-ly resolvedly re-so-lute-ly
resolutely re-spec-tive-ly respectively re-spon si-ble responsible re-sto-ra
tive restorative re-stric-ti-on restriction re-ti-red ly retiredly re
ti-red-ness retiredness re-trac-ti on retraction re-tri-bu-ted retributed
re-ver-be-rate reverberate re ve-rent-ly reverently re-ver-si-on reversion re
u-ni on reunion re-vi-ling-ly revilingly re-vo-ca-ble revocable re-vul-si-on
revulsion ri di-cu-lous ridiculous righ-te-ous-ly righteously ro-tun-di-ty
rotundity ruf-fi-an-ly ruffianly ru-mi-na-ting ruminating ru-sti-cal-ly
rustically ru-sti-ci-ty rusticity S S Sa-cer-do-tal Sacerdotal sa-cra-men-tal
sacramental sa-cri-fi-ced sacrificed sa-ga-ci-ous sagacious sa-git-ta-ry
sagittary sa-la-man-der salamander sal-va-ti-on salvation sanc-ti-fi-ed
sanctified sanc-tu-a-ry sanctuary san-gui-na-ry sanguinary sa-ti-a-ted satiated
sa-tis-fi-ed satisfied sa-ty-ri-cal satirical se-cu-ri-ty security se-di-ti-on
sedition scan-da-lous-ly scandalously sca-ri-fy-ing scarifying schis-ma-ti-cal
schismatical scho-las-ti-cal scholastical scru-pu-lous-ly scrupulously
se-du-li-ty sedulity se-mi-na-ry seminary sen-si-ble-ness sensibleness
sen-ten-ti-ous sententious se-pa-ra-ted separated se-ra-phi-cal seraphical
se-ri-ous-ly seriously se-ve-ri-ty severity ser-vice-a-ble serviceable
se-ve-ral-ly severally shame-fa-ced-ly shamefacedly sig-ni-fy-ing signifying
si-mi-li-tude similitude sim-pli-ci-ty simplicity sin-ce-ri-ty sincerity sin
gu-lar-ly singularly slan-de-rous-ly slanderously si-tu-a-ted situated so-bri-e
ty sobriety so-lem-ni ty solemnity so-li-ci-ted solicited so-li-ta-ry solitary
suf-fi-ci-ent sufficient sump-tu-ous-ly sumptuously T T To-bac-co-pipe
Tobaccopipe ta-ber-na-cle tabernacle tar-ta ri an tartarian tau-to-lo-gy
tautology tem-pe-rate-ly temperately tem-pe-stu-ous tempestuous te-me-ri-ty
temerity tem-po-ri-ser temporiser temp-ta-ti-on temptation ter-mi-na-ted
terminated ter-re-stri al terrestrial ter-ri-fi-ed terrified tes-ti-fi-ed
testified tes-ti-mo-ny testimony the-o-lo-gy theology ti-me-rous-ly timerously
to-le-ra-ble tolerable to-le-ra-bly tolerably to-ta-li-ty totality
to-ward-li-ness towardliness trac-ta-ble-ness tractableness tra-di-ti on
tradition tran-qui-li-ty tranquillity trans-ac-ti-on transaction tran scrip-tion
transcription trans-fi-gu-red transfigured trans-gres-si-on transgression
trans-la-ti-on translation tri bu-ta-ry tributary tri-um-phant-ly triumphantly
trou-ble-som-ly troublesomly tu-mul-tu-ous tumultuous tu-te-la-ry tutelary
ty-ran-nous-ly tyrannously V V Va-ca-ti-on Vacation va-cu-i-ty vacuity
vain-glo-ri-ous vainglorious va-li-ant-ly valiantly va-lu-a-ble valuable
va-ri-a-ble variable va-ri e-ty variety ve-ge-ta-ble vegetable ve-he-ment-ly
vehemently ve-ne-ra-ble venerable ve-ne-re-ous venereous ve-ne-mous-ly
venemously ven-tu-rous-ly venturously ver-tu-ous-ly virtuously vi-ci-ni-ty
vicinity vic-to-ri-ous victorious vi-gi-lan-cy vigilance vi-o-la-ted violated
vi-o-lent-ly violently vi-go-rous-ly vigorously vin-di-ca-ted vindicated
vir-gi-ni-ty virginity vi-ti ous-ly vitiously un-ac-cu-stom unaccustom
u-na-ni-mous unanimous un cer-tain-ty uncertainty un-ces-sant-ly uncessantly un
bu-ri-ed unburied un-ca-pa-ble incapable un-com-li-ness uncomliness
un-con-dem-ned uncondemned un-con-su-med unconsumed un-cor-rec-ted uncorrected
un-cor-rup-ted uncorrupted un-de-fi-led undefiled un-co-ve-red uncovered
un-der-mi-ned undermined un-der-ta-ken undertaken un-de-ser-ved undeserved
un-di-ge-sted undigested un-der-ta-king undertaking un-de-cei-ved undeceived
un-de-cei-ving undeceiving un-e-qual-ly unequally un-faith-ful-ly unfaithfully
un-fruit-ful-ly unfruitfully un-feign-ed-ly unfeignedly un-god-li-ness
ungodliness un-go-ver-ned ungoverned un-lea-ve-ned unleavened un-pu-ni-shed
unpunished un-wit-ting-ly unwittingly vo-ca-ti-on vocation vo-lun-ta-ry
voluntary vo-lup-tu ous voluptuous W W Wal-low-ing-ly Wallowingly
wa-te-rish-ness waterishness wa-ter-cour-ses watercourses wea-ri som-ness
wearisomness well-be-lo-ved wellbeloved what-so-e-ver whatsoever where-so-e-ver
wheresoever white-li-ve-red whitelivered whom-so-e-ver whomsoever who-so-e-ver
whosoever won-der-ful-ly wonderfully won-de-rous-ly wonderously wor-ship-ful ly
worshipfully

Chap. 16. Containing Words of Five Syllables, both whole and divided, wherein
the foregoing Rules are principally to be observed.
A A Ab-bre-vi-a-ted Abbreviated abo-mi-na-ble abominable a-bro ga-ti-on
abrogation ab so lu-ti-on absolution a-ca-de-mi-an academian ac-ci-den-tal-ly
accidentally ac-co-mo-da-ted accomodated ac-com-pa-ni-ed accompanied
ac-cu-mu-la-ted accumulated ac-cu-sa-ti-on accusation ac-cu-sto-med accustomed
ad-mi-ni stra-tor administrator af fa-bi-li-ty affability af fir-ma-ti-on
affirmation ag-gra-va-ti-on aggravation a-li-e-na ted alienated al-le-go-ri call
allegorical al-ter-na ti-on alternation am bi-gu-ous ly ambiguously
am-pu-ta-ti-on amputation am-mu-ni-ti-on ammunition a-ni-mo-si-ty animosity
an-ni-hi-la-ted annihilated a-po-sto-li-cal apostolical ap-pre-hen-sive-ly
apprehensively ar-bi-tra-ti-on arbitration a-rith-me-ti-cal arithmetical
as-sas-si-nate assassinate aug-men-ta-ti-on augmentation B B Bac-cha-na-li-an
Bacchanalian bar-ri-ca-do-ed barricadoed be-a-ti-fi-cal beatifical
be-ne-dic-ti-on benediction be-ne-fi-ci-al beneficial blas-phe-ma-to-ry
blasphematory brag-ga-do-chi-o braggadochio bre-vi-a-ti-on breviation C C
Ca-ba-li-sti-cal Cabalistical cal-ci-na-ti-on calcination ca-lum-ni-a-ted
calumniated ca-no-ni-cal-ly canonically ca-pi-tu-la-ting capitulating
ca-pri-ci-ous-ly capriciously ca-sti-ga-ti-on castigation ca-te-go-ri-cal
categorical ce-le-bra-ti-on celebration ce-re-mo-ni-al ceremonial
cha-rac-te-ri-zed characterized cho-ro-gra-phi-cal chorographical
chri-sti-a-ni-ty christianity chro-no-lo-gi-cal-ly chronologically
cir-cum-stan-ti-al circumstantial co-a-gu-la-ted coagulated co-es-sen-ti-al
coessential co-gi-ta-ti-on cogitation com-bi-na-ti-on combination
com-me-mo-ra-ble commemorable com-men-da-ti-on commendation com-mi-sera-ted
commiserated com-mo-di-ous-ly commodiously com-pas-si-o-nate compassionate
com-pre-hen-si-ble comprehensible con-fe-de-ra-cy confederacy con-fir-ma-ti-on
confirmation con-se-cra-ti-on consecration con-sum-ma-ti-on consummation
con-tra-dic-ti-on contradiction con-tu-ma-ci-ous contumacious con-ver-sa-ti-on
conversation co-ro-na-ti-on coronation cou-ra-gi-ous-ly courageously. D D
De-bi-li-ta-ted debilitated de-cla-ma-ti-on declamation de-cla-ra-ti-on
declaration de-fa-ti-ga-ting defatigating de-ge-ne-ra-ted degenerated
de-li-be-rate-ly deliberately de-li-ci-ous-ly deliciously de-mon-stra-ti-on
demonstration de-no-mi-na-ted denominated de-po-pu-la-ting depopulating
de-ro-ga-to-ry derogatory de-so-la-ti-on desolation de-ter-mi-nate-ly
determinately di-a-bo-li-cal diabolical dic-ti-o-na-ry dictionary
di-la-ce-ra-ting dilacerating di-mi-nu-ti-on diminution dis-ad-van-ta-gi-ous
disadvantagious dis-com-mo-di-ty discommodity dis-ho-nou-ra-ble dishonorable
dis-lo-ca-ti-on dislocation dis-pen-sa-ti-on dispensation dis-pro-por-ti-on
disproportion di-vi-na-ti-on divination do-me-sti-cal-ly domestically E E
E-bu-li-ti-on Ebulition e-du-ca-ti-on education ef-fec-tu-al-ly effectually
ef-fe-mi-na-cy effeminacy e-gre-gi-ous-ly egregiously e-lec-tu-a-ry electuary
e-le-men-ta-ry elementary e-le-va-ti-on elevation en-da-mage-a-ble endamageable
e-nig-ma-ti-cal enigmatical en-ter-change-a-ble enterchangeable e-pi-de-mi-cal
epidemical e-qui-la-te-ral equilateral e-qui-noc-ti-al equinoctial
e-qui-vo-ca-ting equivocating e-ra-di-ca-ted eradicated er-ro-ne-ous-ly
erroneously e-sti-ma-ti-on estimation e-thi-o-pi-an ethiopian e-ver-la-sting-ly
everlastingly ex-com-mu-ni-cate excommunicate ex-hor-ta-ti-on exhortation
ex-po-si-ti-on exposition ex-tra-va-gan-cy extravagancy F F Fa-bri-ca-ti-on
Fabrication fa-ce-ti-ous-ly facetiously fa-ci-li-ta-ted facilitated
fal-la-ci-ous-ly fallaciously fa-mi-li-ar-ly familiarly fan-ta-sti-cal-ly
fantastically fel-lo-ni-ous-ly felloniously fi-gu-ra-tive-ly figuratively
fer-men-ta-ti-on fermentation for-ni-ca-ti-on fornication ful-mi-na-to-ry
fulminatory fu-mi-ga-ti-on fumigation fun-da-men-tal-ly fundamentally G G
Ge-ne-a-lo-gy Genealogy ge-ne-ra-li-ty generality ge-ne-ra-ti-on generation
ge-ne-ro-si-ty generosity ge-o-gra-phi-cal geographical ge-o-me-tri-cal
geometrical gram-ma-ti-cal-ly grammatically gra-tu-la-ti-on gratulation H H
Ha-bi-ta-ti-on Habitation ha-bi-tu-al-ly habitually har-mo-ni-ous-ly
harmoniously he-re-di-ta-ry hereditary hi-e-ro-gly-phicks hieroglyphics
his-to-ri-cal-ly historically ho-mo-ge-ne-al homogeneal ho-mo-ge-ne-ous
homogeneous ho-spi-ta-li-ty hospitality hu-mec-ta-ti-on humectation
hy-dro-gra-phi-cal hydrographical hy-po-chon-dri-ack hypochondriack
hy-po-cri-ti-cal hypocritical hy-po-the-ti-cal hypothetical I I Ig-no-mi-ni-ous
Ignominious il-le-ga-li-ty illegality il-le-gi-ti-mate illegitimate
il-lu-mi-na-ted illuminated il-lu-stra-ti-on illustration im-me-di-ate-ly
immediately im-mo-de-rate-ly immoderately im-mor-ta-li-ty immortality
im-par-ti-al-ly impartially im-pe-ni-tra-ble impenitrable im-pe-ri-ous-ly
imperiously im-per-ti-nent-ly impertinently im-pe-tu-o-si-ty impetuosity
im-plan-ta-ti-on implantation im-por-tu-nate-ly importunately im-por-tu-ni-ty
importunity im-po-si-ti-on imposition im-po-stu-ma-ted impostumated
im-po-ve-rish-ment impoverishment im-pre-ca-ti-on imprecation im-pro-vi-dent-ly
improvidently im-pu-ta-ti-on imputation in-ad-ver-ten-cy inadvertency
in-ca-pa-ci-tate incapacitate in-car-na-ti-on incarnation in-com-pa-ra-ble
incomparable in-con-gru-i-ty incongruity in-con-si-de-rate inconsiderate
in-con-ti-nent-ly incontinently in-cor-rup-ti-ble incorruptible
in-cre-di-ble-ness incredibleness in-cre-du-li-ty incredulity in-de-cli-na-ble
indeclinable in-de-fi-nite-ly indefinitely in-dem-ni-fi-ed indemnified
in-dig-na-ti-on indignation in-di-vi-du-al individual in-du-stri-ous-ly
industriously in-e-sti-ma-ble inestimable in-ex-pli-ca-ble inexplicable
in-flam-ma-ti-on inflammation in-ge-nu-i-ty ingenuity in-ha-bi-ta-ble
inhabitable in-hu-ma-ni-ty inhumanity in-ju-ri-ous-ly injuriously
in-na-vi-ga-ble innavigable in-nu-me-ra-ble innumerable in-spi-ra-ti-on
inspiration in-sti-ga-ti-on instigation in-sti-tu-ti-on iustitution
in-suf-fi-ci-ent insufficient in-sur-rec-ti-on insurrection in-tel-lec-tu-al
intellectual in-tem-pe-rate-ly intemperately in-ter-ces-si-on intercession
in-ter-ro-ga-ted interrogated in-to-le-ra-bly intolerably in-tro-duc-ti-on
introduction in-vi-o-la-ble inviolable in-vi-ta-ti-on invitation i-ro-ni-cal-ly
ironically ir-re-gu-lar-ly irregularly ir-re-ve-rent-ly irreverently
ir-re-vo-ca-ble irrevocable ju-di-ci-al-ly judicially L L Las-ci-vi-ous-ly
Lasciviously la-men-ta-ti-on lamentation le-gi-ti-mate-ly legitimately
li-be-ra-li-ty liberality li-cen-ti-ous-ly licentiously lu-cu-bra-ti-on
lucubration lux-u-ri-ous-ly luxuriously M M Ma-ce-ra-ti-on Maceration
ma-chi-na-ti-on machination mag-na-ni-mi-ty magnanimity mag-ni-fi-cent-ly
magnificently ma-je-sti-cal-ly majestically ma-le-dic-ti-on malediction
ma-li-ci-ous-ly maliciously ma-nu-duc-ti-on manuduction mar-ri-age-a-ble
marriageable ma-the-ma-ti-cal mathematical ma-tri-mo-ni-al matrimonial
me-cha-ni-cal-ly mechanically me-di-ci-na-ble medicinable me-di-ta-ti-on
meditation me-lo-di-ous-ly melodiously me-ri-di-o-nal meridional
me-ri-to-ri-ous meritorious me-tho-di-cal-ly methodically mi-ni-stra-ti-on
ministration mi-ra-cu-lous-ly miraculously mi-ti-ga-ti-on mitigation
mo-de-ra-ti-on moderation mol-li-fi-a-ble mollifiable mul-ti-pli-ci-ty
multiplicity mun-di-fi-ca-tive mundificative my-ste-ri-ous-ly mysteriously N N
Na-tu-ra-li-zed Naturalized na-vi-ga-ti-on navigation ne-ces-sa-ri-ly
necessarily ne-ces-si-ta-ted necessitated ne-fa-ri-ous-ly nefariously
no-mi-na-ti-on nomination no-to-ri-ous-ly notoriously nun-cu-pa-to-ry
nuncupatory O O Ob-du-ra-ti-on Obduration o-be-di-ent-ly obediently
ob-jur-ga-ti-on objurgation ob-li-ga-ti-on obligation ob-li-te-ra-ted
obliterated oc-ca-si-o-nal occasional oc-cu-pa-ti-on occupation o-do-ri-fe-rous
odoriferous of-fi-ci-ous-ly officiously om-ni-po-ten-cy omnipotency
o-pe-ra-ti-on operation op-por-tu-ni-ty opportunity op-po-si-ti-on opposition
op-pug-na-ti-on oppugnation or-bi-cu-lar-ly orbicularly or-di-na-ti-on
ordination or-di-na-ri-ly ordinarily o-ri-gi-nal-ly originally o-ver-sha-dow-ed
overshadowed out-ra-gi-ous-ly outragiously P P Pal-pi-ta-ti-on Palpitation
par-ci-mo-ni-ous parcimonious par-ti-a-li-ty partiality par-ti-cu-lar-ly
particularly pas-si-o-nate-ly passionately pa-the-ti-cal-ly pathetically
pe-cu-li-ar-ly peculiarly pe-cu-ni-a-ry pecuniary pe-remp-to-ri-ly peremptorily
per-fi-di-ous-ly perfidiously per-fo-ra-ti-on perforation per-mu-ta-ti-on
permutation per-ni-ci-ous-ly perniciously per-pen-di-cu-lar perpendicular
per-pe-tu-al-ly perpetually per-se-cu-ti-on persecution per-spi-cu-i-ty
perspicuity per-tur-ba-ti-on perturbation phan-ta-sti-cal-ly phantastically
phy-si-og-no-my physiognomy pla-ca-bi-li-ty placability po-e-ti-cal-ly
poetically pon-ti-fi-ci-al pontificial po-pu-la-ri-ty popularity
po-stu-la-ti-on postulation pre-de-sti-na-ted predestined pre-ju-di-ci-al
prejudicial pre-me-di-ta-ting premeditating pre-pa-ra-ti-on preparation
pre-sen-ta-ti-on presentation pre-ser-va-ti-on preservation pre-sump-tu-ous-ly
presumptuously pro-cla-ma-ti-on proclamation pro-cre-a-ti-on procreation
pro-cu-ra-ti-on procuration pro-di-ga-li-ty prodigality pro-di-gi-ous-ly
prodigiously pro-mis-cu-ous-ly promiscuously pro-mul-ga-ti-on promulgation
pro-pa-ga-ti-on propagation pro-pha-na-ti-on profanation pro-por-ti-on-ed
proportioned pro-po-si-ti-on proposition pub-li-ca-ti-on publication
pu-tri-fac-ti-on putrefaction Q Q Qua-dran-gu-lar-ly Quadrangularly
qua-dri-par-tite-ly quadripartitely R R Ra-di-a-ti-on Radiation ra-pa-ci-ous-ly
rapaciously re-bel-li-ous-ly rebelliously re-can-ta-ti-on recantation
re-ci-pro-cal-ly reciprocally re-com-men-da-ble recommendable re-cre-a-ti-on
recreation re-e-sta-bli-shed reestablished re-for-ma-ti-on reformation
re-fu-ta-ti-on refutation re-ge-ne-ra-ted regenerated re-li-ga-ti-on religation
re-li-gi-ous-ly religiously re-no-va-ti-on renovation re-pa-ra-ti-on reparation
re-pe-ti-ti-on repetition re-po-si-to-ry repository re-pro-ba-ti-on reprobation
re-pu-ta-ti-on reputation re-qui-si-ti-on requisition re-ser-va-ti-on
reservation re-so-lu-ti-on resolution re-spi-ra-ti-on respiration
re-sti-tu-ti-on restitution re-sur-rec-ti-on resurrection re-tri-bu-ti-on
retribution re-vo-lu-ti-on revolution rhe-to-ri-ci-an rhetorician
ri-di-cu-lously ridiculously S S Sa-cra-men tal-ly Sacramentally
sa-cri-le-gi-ous sacrilegious sa-lu-ta-ti-on salutation sa-tis-fac-ti-on
satisfaction sa-ty-ri-cal-ly satyrically scho-la-sti-cal-ly scholastically
sea-so-na-ble-ness seasonableness se-con-da-ri-ly secondarily se-di-ti-ous-ly
seditiously sen-si-bi-li-ty sensibility se-pa-ra-ti-on separation
sig-ni-fi-cant-ly significantly si-tu-a-ti-on situation spe-cu-la-ti-on
speculation spi-ri-tu-al ly spiritually se-di-ti-ous-ly seditiously
sub-stan-ti-al-ly substantially sub-sti-tu-ti-on substitution suf-fo-ca-ti-on
suffocation suf-fi-ci-ent-ly sufficiently su-per-scrip-ti-on superscription
su-per-sti-ti-on superstition sup-pli-ca-ti on supplication T T Ta-ci-tur-ni-ty
Taciturnity tem-pe-stu-ous-ly tempestuously the-o-lo-gi-cal theological
ti-til-la-ti-on titillation to-le-ra-ti-on toleration trans-for-ma-ti-on
transformation trans-mi-gra-ti-on transmigration trans-mu-ta-ti-on
transmutation trans-pi-ra-ti-on transpiration trans-plan-ta-ti-on
transplantation trans-por-ta-ti-on transportation tre-pi-da-tion trepidation
tri-bu-la-ti-on tribulation V V Va-cil-la-ti-on Vacillation va le-dic-ti-on
valediction va-lu-a-ti-on valuation va-ri-a-ti on variation ve-gi-ta-ti-on
vegitation ve-ne-ra-ti-on veneration vic-to-ri-ous ly victoriously vin-di-ca-ti
on vindication vi-o-la-ti-on violation u-na-ni-mi-ty unanimity un cha-ri-ta-ble
uncharitable un-cir-cum-ci-sed uncircumcised un-cir-cum-spect-ly
uncircumspectly un-com-for-ta-ble uncomfortable un-com-mo-di-ous uncommodious
un-com-poun-ded-ness uncompoundedness un-con-cei-va-ble unconceivable un
con-que-ra-ble unconquerable un-con-se-quent-ly unconsequently un-con-ve-ni-ent
unconvenient un-cor-po-re-al uncorporeal u-ni-for-mi-ty uniformity
u-ni-ver-sal-ly universally u-ni-ver-si-ty university un-man-ner-li-ness
unmannerliness un-mea-su-ra-ble unmeasurable un-mer-ci-ful-ly unmercifully
un-na-tu-ral-ly unnaturally un-ne ces-sa-ry unnecessary un-pas-si-o nate
unpassionate un-per-cei-va-ble unperceivable un-pow-er-ful ly unpowerfully
un-pro-fi-ta-ble unprofitable un-pro-spe-rous-ly unprosperously
un-rea-so-na-ble unreasonable un-re-com-pen-sed unrecompensed un-re-mit-ta-ble
unremittable un-righ-te-ous-ly unrighteously un-re-tur-na-ble unreturnable
un-sa-ti-a-ble unsatiable un suf-fe-ra-ble unsufferable un-sup-por-ta-ble
unsupportable un-tem-pe-rate-ly untemperately un-trac-ta-ble-ness
untractableness un-va-ri-a-ble unvariable un-wea-ri-a ble unweariable
vo-lun-ta-ri-ly voluntarily vo-lup-tu-ous-ly voluptuously u-sur-pa-ti-on
usurpation W W What-man-so-e-ver Whatmansoever whi-ther-so-e-ver whithersoever

Chap. 17. Containing Words of Six, Seven and Eight Syllable^ both whole and
divided, wherein the foregoing Rules are principally to be observed.
A A A-bo-mi-na-ti-on Abomination ac-ce-le-ra-ti-on acceleration ac-com-mo
da-ti-on accommodation ac-cu-mu-la-ti on accumulation ac-cu-sto-ma-rily
accustomarily ad-mi-ni-stra-ti-on administration ad-van-ta-gi-ous-ly
advantagiously a-li-e-na-ti on alienation al-le-go-ri-cal-ly allegorically
am-pli-fi-ca-ti-on amplification a-na-the-ma-ti-zed anathematized
a-ni-mad-ver-si-on animadversion an-ni-hi-la-ti-on annihilation
an-nun-ci-a-ti-on annunciation an-ni-ver-sa-ri-ly anniversarily
a-po-sto-li-cal-ly apostolically a-rith-me-ti-cal-ly arithmetically a
rith-me-ti-ci-an arithmetician a-stro-no-mi-cal-ly astronomically
as-sas-si-na-ti-on assa ssination as-so-ci-a-ti-on association B B
Be-a-ti-fi-cal-ly Beatifically be-ne-fi-ci-a-ry beneficiary be-ne-fi ci-al-ly
beneficially C C Ca-no-ni-za-ti-on Canonization ca-pi-tu-la-ti-on capitulation
ca-te-go-ri-cal-ly categorically cau-te-ri-za-ti-on cauterization
ce-re-mo-ni-ous-ly ceremoniously cer-ti-fi-ca-ti-on certification
cir-cum-lo-cu-ti-on circumlocution cir-cum-stan-ti-al-ly circumstantially
cir-cum-vo-lu-ti-on circumvolution co-a-gu-la-ti-on coagulation
co-es-sen-ti-al-ly coessentially com-me-mo-ra-ti-on commemoration co-mi
se-ra-ti-on comiseration com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on communication com-pas-si-o-nate-ly
compassionately com-pa-ti-bi-li-ty compatibility con-ca-ti-na-ti-on
concatination con-fe-de-ra-ti on confederation con-gra-tu-la-ti-on
congratulation con-si-de-ra-ti-on consideration con so-li-da-ti-on
consolidation con-ta-mi-na-ti-on contamination con-tu-ma-ci-ous-ly
contumaciously cor-ro-be-ra ti-on corroberation D D De-fa-ti-ga-ti-on
Defatigation de-bi li ta-ti on debilitation de ge-ne-ra-ti-on degeneration
de-li-be-ra-ti-on deliberation de-no-mi-na-ti-on denomination de po-pu la-ti-on
depopulation de-ter-mi-na-ti-on determination di-a-bo-li-cal-ly diabolically di
la-ce-ra-ti-on dilaceration dis-ad van ta-gi ous-ly disadvantagiously
dis-com-men-da-ti-on discommendation dis-con-ti-nu-a ti-on discontinuation
dis-in-ge ni-ous-ly disingeniously dis-pro-por-ti-o-ned disproportioned dis
si-mu-la-ti-on dissimulation E E Ec-cle-si-a-sti-cal Ecclesiastical ec
cle-si-a-sti-cal-ly ecclesiastically e di-fi-ca-ti-on edification e-le-e-mo
sy-na-ry eleemosynary e-nig-ma-ti-cal-ly enigmatically e-nu-cle-a-ti-on
enucleation e-nu-me-ra-ti-on enumeration e qui-vo-ca-ti-on equivocation
e-ra-di-ca-ti-on eradication e-va-cu-a-tion evacuation e-va-po-ra-ti-on
evaporation ex-a-mi-na-ti-on examination ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on excommunication
ex-tra-or-di-na-ry extraordinary ex-tra-or-di-na-ri-ly extraordinarily
ex-o-ne-ra-ti-on exoneration ex-ter-mi-na-ti-on extermination F F
Fa-mi-li-a-ri-ty Familiarity for-ti-fi-ca-ti-on fortification
fruc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on fructification G G Gra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Gratification
ge-ne-ra-lis-si-mo generalissimo ge-o-gra-phi-cal-ly geographically
ge-o-me-tri-cal-ly geometrically glo-ri-fi-ca-ti-on glorification
gra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on gratification H H Hy-po-cri-ti-cal-ly Hypocritically
hu-mi-li-a-ti-on humiliation hy-po-chon-dri-a-cal hypochondriacal
hy-po-chon-dri-a-cal-ly hypochondriacally hy-po-cri-ti-cal-ly hypocritically I
I Ig-no-mi-ni-ous-ly Ignominiously il-le-gi-ti-mate-ly illegitimately
il-le-gi-ti-ma-ti-on illegitimation il-lu-mi-na-ti-on illumination
im-mo-de-ra-ti-on immoderation im-par-ti-a-li-ty impartiality
im-pos-si-bi-li-ty impossibility im-pro-ba-bi-li-ty improbability
im-pro-pri-a-ti-on impropriation in-au-gu-ra-ti-on inauguration
in-com-men-su-ra-ble incommensurable in-com-men-su-ra-bi-li-ty
incommensurability in-com-pas-si-o-nate incompassionate in-com-pas-si-o-nate-ly
incompassionately in-com-mo-di-ous-ly incommodiously in-com-mu-ni-ca-ble
incommunicable in-com-mu-ni-ca-bi-li-ty incommunicability
in-com-pre-hen-si-bi-li-ty incomprehensibility in-com-pre-hen-si-ble
incomprehensible in-com-pre-hen-si-ble-ness incomprehensibleness
in-com-pa-ti-bi-li-ty incompatibility in-con-si-de-rate-ly inconsiderately
in-con-si-de-rate-ness inconsiderateness in-con-ve-ni-ent-ly inconveniently
in-con-ve-ni-en-cy inconveniency in-cor-rup-ti-bi-li-ty incorruptibility
in-de-fa-ti-ga-ble indefatigable in-de-ter-mi-nate-ly indeterminately
in-dis-po-si-ti-on indisposition in-di-vi-du-al-ly individually
in-fal-li-bi-li-ty infallibility in-sa-ti-a-ble-ness insatiableness
in-suf-fi-ci-en-cy insufficiency in-suf-fi-ci-ent-ly insufficiently
in-ter-change-a-ble-ness interchangeableness in-ter-lo-cu-to-ry interlocutory
in-ter-me-di-ate-ly intermediately in-ter-pel-la-ti-on interpellation
in-ter-po-si-ti-on interposition in-ter-pre-ta-ti-on interpretation
in-ter-ro-ga-to-ry interrogatory in-vi-o-la-ble-ness inviolableness
ir-ra-di-a-ti-on irradiation ir-re-con-cile-a-ble irreconcilable
ir-re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on irreconciliation ir-re-gu-la-ri-ty irregularity
ir-re-pre-hen-si-ble irreprehensible ju-di-ci-a-ri-ly judiciarily L L
Le-gi-ti-ma-ti-on Legitimation M M Ma-the-ma-ti-cal-ly Mathematically
ma-the-ma-ti-ci-an mathematician me-di-ter-ra-ne-an mediterranean
me-ri-di-o-nal-ly meridionally me-ta-pho-ri-cal-ly metaphorically
mis-in-ter-pre-ta-ti-on misinterpretation mo-di-fi-ca-ti-on modification
mol-li-fi-ca-ti-on mollification mor-ti-fi-ca-ti-on mortification
mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on multiplication mun-di-fi-ca-ti-on mundification N N
Na-tu-ra-li-za-ti-on Naturalization ne-go-ti-a-ti-on negotiation
no-ti-fi-ca-ti-on notification O O Ob-li-te-ra-ti-on Obliteration
oc-ca-si-o-nal-ly occasionally o-pi-ni-o-na-tive-ly opinionatively P P
Pa-ci-fi-ca-ti-on Pacification par-ci-mo-ni-ous-ly parcimoniously
per-am-bu-la-ti-on perambulation pe-re-gri-na-ti-on peregrination
per-pen-di-cu-lar-ly perpendicularly per-pe-tu-a-ti-on perpetuation
phi-lo-so-phi-cal-ly philosophically pre-de-sti-na-ti-on predestination
pre-ju-di-ca-ti-on prejudication pre-me-di-ta-ti-on premeditation
pre-oc-cu-pa-ti-on preoccupation pro-ble-ma-ti-cal-ly problematically
pro-cra-sti-na-ti-on procrastination prog-no-sti-ca-ti-on prognostication
pro-nun-ci-a-ti-on pronunciation pro-pi-ti-a-ti-on propitiation
pro-por-ti-o-na-bly proportionably pu-ri-fi-ca-ti-on purification
pu-tri-fi-ca-ti-on putrification Q Q Qua-dru-pli-ca-ti-on Quadruplication
qua-li-fi-ca-ti-on qualification R R Ra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Ratification
ra-ti-o-ci-na-ti-on ratiocination re-ca-pi-tu-la-ti-on recapitulation
re-ci-pro-ca-ti-on reciprocation re-com-men-da-ti-on recommendation
re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on reconciliation rec-ti-fi-ca-ti-on rectification
re-fri-ge-ra-ti-on refrigeration re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on regeneration
re-i-te-ra-ti-on reiteration re-mu-ne-ra-ti-on remuneration re-pre-sen-ta-ti-on
representation re-ver-be-ra-ti-on reverberation S S Sa-cri-fi-ca-to-ry
Sacrificatory sa-cri-le-gi-ous-ly sacrilegiously sanc-ti-fi-ca-ti-on
sanctification sca-ri-fi-ca-ti-on scarification sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-on
signification so-lem-ni-za-ti-on solemnization stu-pi-fi-ca-ti-on stupification
sub-rep-ti-ti-ous-ly subreptitiously sub-si-di-a-ri-ly subsidiarily
su-per-nu-me-ra-ry supernumerary su-per-e-ro-ga-ti-on supererogation
su-per-fi-ci-al-ly superficially su-per-sti-ti-ous-ly superstitiously
sur-rep-ti-ti-ous-ly surreptitiously T T Ter-gi-ver-sa-ti-on Tergiversation
the-o-lo-gi-cal-ly theologically te-sti-fi-ca-ti-on testification
trans-fi-gu-ra-ti-on transfiguration tran-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on
transubstantiation V V Ve-ri-fi-ca-ti-on Verification un-ac-com-pa-ni-a-ble
unaccompaniable un-ac-cu-sto-med-ness unaccustomedness un-a-li-e-na-ble
unalienable un-cir-cum-ci-si-on uncircumcision un-com-for-ta-ble-ness
uncomfortableness un-com-mo-di-ous-ly uncommodiously un-com-mu-ni-ca-ble
uncommunicable un-com-pa-ni-a-ble uncompaniable un-con-sci-o-na-ble
unconscionable un-con-cei-va-ble-ness unconceivableness un-con-ta-mi-na-ted
uncontaminated un-i-ma-gi-na-ble unimaginable u-ni-ver-sa-li-ty universality
un-pas-si-o-nate-ly unpassionately un-pre-me-di-ta-ted unpremeditated
un-pro-fi-ta-ble-ness unprofitableness un-que-sti-o-na-ble unquestionable
un-rea-son-a-ble-ness unreasonableness un-re-me-di-a-ble unremediable
un-sa-ti-a-ble-ness unsatiableness un-sea-son-a-ble-ness unseasonableness
vo-ci-fe-ra-ti-on vociferation

Chap. 18. The Learner being perfect in Spelling the Examples contained in the
several Tables of the foregoing Chapters, let him now learn to read and say by
heart the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, as follow.
The LORD'S PRAYER.
OUR Father which art in Heaven. Hallowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done on ^rth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day, our daily Bread. And
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the glory for Ever and Ever.

Amen.
The CREED.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Faith: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the
Virgin Mary (...) under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried he
descended into Hell; the third day he rose again from the (...), he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the Right Hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come (...) Judge both the Quick and the Dead I Believe in the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church; the Communion of (...) the Forgiveness
of Sins: the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting.

Amen.
The Ten COMMANDMENTS.
GOD spoke these words and said, I am the Lord thy (...) which brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, out of (...) House of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

II. Thou shall (...) (...) to thy self any Graven Image, nor the Likeness of
any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters
under the Earth; Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the
Lord thy God am a Jealous God, visiting the Sins of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the Third and Fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show
Mercy un^o Thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day; six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God; in it thou shall do no manner of Work, thou, and thy Son, and thy
Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maid servant, thy Cattle, and the Stranger
that is within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no Murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not Covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Servant; nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Chap. 19. Prayers and Graces fit for Children to get by Heart.
A Prayer for the Morning.
O Most Glorious Lord God, in whom I live, move, and have my Being, thou wast
pleased to take me from the Womb wherein I was Conceived, and have ever since
preserved me to this very day; ever blessed and praised be thy Name, O God, for
all thy Mercies bestowed upon me; for securing and preserving me from the
perils (...) dangers of the Night past; and suffering me to enjoy the Glorious
Light of another Day, protect me (I beseech thee) this day, and all the days of
my Life by thy Holy Spirit, from all Sin and Wickedness, and let me be so armed
with Faith in Jesus Christ, that I may powerfully resist the Temptations of the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; let thy Blessing be upon my Endeavors this
day, that I may profit both in Religion and Learning, bless my Parents,
Friends, and Relations, and be a comfort to all in distress, and grant that
when this Mortal Life shall have an end, I may joyfully hear my Blessed Savior
say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Grant
these my Requests for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose Name and Words thou have
taught me to pray, saying* Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
EVer Blessed and Glorious Lord God, I a poor Sinner most humbly prostrate my
self before the Throne of thy Divine Majesty this Evening, beseeching thee to
pardon all my Sins and Iniquities, which are many and very great, preserve me,
O God, from Evil this Night, watch over me, and bless me this Night, let me lie
down in thy fear, and rise in thy favor, bless my Parents and Friends that
they may instruct me in thy Truth, so that I may not be taken in the Snares and
Temptations of Satan; these and whatever else I may stand in need of, I humbly
beg for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose Name and Words thou have taught me to
pray, saying. Our Father, etc.

A Family Prayer for the Morning.
O Most Merciful and Glorious Lord God, we bless and praise thy Holy Name for
all the benefits of this Life, and heartily thank thee for the Comfortable Rest
which thou had been pleased to give us in the Night past, for saving and
defending us from all dangers of our Enemies both ghostly and bodily, and that
thou have been Graciously pleased to let us see the Glorious Light of another
Day, grant we beseech thee, that we may dedicate this, and all the rest of the
days of our Lives to thy Service, and give us Grace so to walk warily among the
Snares of our Mortal Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, that all our
Thoughts, Words, an^ Deeds may redound to the Honor and Glory of thy Hol^
Name, and the Good and Comfort of our Precious and Immortal Souls; and as thou
have been Graciously pleased to preserve and keep us under thy mighty
protection from the beginning of our Lives unto this day, so we beseech thee to
receive us this and all the remainder of our Lives into thy tuition, ruling and
governing of us by thy Holy Spirit, to the utter destruction of Sin in us. We
confess that we have every minute of our Lives committed great and manifold
Sins against thy Divine Majesty, therefore we humbly beseech thee through Jesus
Christ our Savior, and for his Sake to forgive us, and let our Consciences be
certified of the remission and forgiveness thereof, by thy Holy Spirit. Grant
we beseech thee these our Prayers, and whatsoever else we stand in need of
either relating to this Life, or the Life to come, for Jesus Christ his Sake,
who has taught us to pray, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Family Prayer for the Evening.
O Eternal and Glorious Lord God, we beseech thee look down from Heaven thy
Dwelling place, upon us poor sinful Creatures, Dust and Ashes, and visit us
with thy Mercy, Grace, and Salvation, we confess thy Fatherly Goodness toward
us through the whole Course and Progress of our Lives, and therefore we bless
and praise thy Holy Name. We beseech thee, O Lord, to continue thy Mercies unto
us, bless us in our down lying and in our up rising, let thy Holy Angels pitch
their Tents about us to save and deferd us this Night and ever hereafter from
all our Enemies both ghostly and bodily, give our Bodies rest and quietness,
but let our Souls be continually watching unto, and waiting, and thinking upon
thee, and thy Holy Commandments, that whenever our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ shall come he may find us like wise Virgins with Oil in our Lamps, ready
prepared to receive him; bless us with the Light of thy Countenance in the
joyful appearance of another Day, that we being whole both in Body and Soul may
rise again with thankful Hearts unto thee our God, and diligently walk in our
Vocations to our own Comfort, and the Praise, and Glory of thy most Holy Name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, who has taught us when we Pray to
^y, Our Father, etc.

Grace before Meat.
MOst Glorious Lord God* we beseech thee to look upon us with an Eye (...), and
forgive us all our Sins, sanctify these thy good Creatures to our use, make
them healthful for our nourishment, and us truly thankful to thee for these and
all other thy Mercies for Jesus Christ his sake,

Amen.
Grace after Meat.
THE God of all Majesty, Power, and Glory, who has Created, Redeemed, and at
this time plentifully fed us, his most Holy Name be blessed and praised both
now and for evermore.

Amen.
Grace before Meat.
O Eternal and Glorious Lord God, we beseech thee bless these thy good
Creatures which thou have been pleased to provide for us, and help us by thine
especial Grace so to improve every Mercy that we receive from thee, as that all
may be to the Praise and Glory of thy Holy Name through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Grace after Meat.
MOst Glorious Lord God, we bless and praise thy Holy Name for all the Mercies
which thou have been pleased to bestow upon us, especially for feeding our weak
and frail Bodies at this time with thy good Creatures. Lord teach us so to make
use of thy Mercies, that they may be to the Eternal Comfort and Salvation of
our Souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
God sa^e his Church, the King and Queen's Majesty's, and thi^ Realm, and send
us Peace through Jesus Christ.
Amen.
Chap. 20. Directions for a Child's Behavior at all Times and Places.
FIrst in the Morning when thou do awake
To God for his Grace thy Petition make,
Some Heavenly Prayer use daily to sa^*
And the God of Heaven will (...) (...) (...).
And when ^ou have prayed to God for his Grace,
Observe these Directions in every place.
Down from thy Chamber when as thou shall go,
Thy Parents salute and the Household also.
Thy Hands see thou wash, thy Head also comb,
Keep clean thy Apparel both abroad and at home.
This done, thy Satchel, and thy Books take,
And unto the School see that thou haste make.
In thy going to School.
IN going your way and passing the Street,
Thy Hat being off, Salute those you meet.
When unto the School that thou do resort,
Thy Master Salute I do thee exhort:
Thy Fellows also in token of Love,
Lest of unkindness they do thee reprove.
Learn now in thy Youth for it is too true,
It will be too late when Age does ensue.
If somewhat thou doubt, desire to be told,
To learn is no shame, be thou never so old.
And when from the School thou take the way,
Make haste to thy home, and stay not to play.
Then entering the House in Parents presence,
Them humbly Salute with due Reverence.
At the Table.
WHen down to the Table thy Parents shall sit,
Be ready in place for purpose most fit.
Be meek in thy Carriage, stare none in the Face,
First hold up thy Hands, and then say thy Grace.
The Grace being said if able thou be,
To serve at the Table it will become thee.
If thou can not wait presume in no case,
But in sitting down to Betters give place.
Then suffer each Man first served to. be,
For it is a point of great Courtesy.
Thy Tongue suffer not at Table to walk,
And do not of any thing jangle or talk;
For Cato does say that in old and young,
The first step to Virtue is bridling the Tongue.
In the Church.
When unto the Church thou shall take the way*
Kneeling or standing to God humbly pray.
A Heart that is Contrite he will not despise,
But does account it a sweet Sacrifice.
Unto him thy Sins see that thou confess,
For them asking pardon and forgiveness.
Then ask thou in Faith not doubting to have,
And thou shall receive what e're thou do crave.
He is fuller of Mercy than Tongue can express,
The Author and Giver of Grace and Goodness.
Thy self in the Church most comely behave,
Sober in Carriage, with Countenance grave.
The Lord does it call the House of Prayer,
And must not be used like Market or Fair.
Chap. 21. Solomon's Precepts.
MY Son hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother, Prove. ^. 8. My Son for get not the Law; but let thine Heart keep my
Commandments, Prove. 3. 1. Hear ye Children the Instruction of a ^er, and attend
to know understanding, Prove. 4. ^. Hear O my Son and receive my sayings: And
the years of thy Life shall be many, Prove. ^. 10. Hear me now therefore O ye
Children, and depart not from the words of my Mouth, Prove. ^ 7. A wise Son
makes a glad Father; but a foolish Son is the heaviness of his Mother, Prove.
10. 1. A wise Son hears his Fathers Instruction, but a Scorner hears not
Rebuke, Prove. 13. 1. He that spares his Rod hates his Son: But he that loves
him ^hasteneth him betimes, Prove. 1. 2. A Fool despises his Fathers
Instruction, but he that regards reproof is prudent, Prove. 15. A wise Son
makes a glad Father: But a foolish Man despises his Mother, Prove. 1* 20. A
wise Servant shall have rule over a Son that causes shame; and shall have part
of the Inheritance among the Brethren, Prove. 17. 2. A foolish Son is a grief to
his Father, and bitterness to her that bare him, Prove. ^7. 25. A foolish Son is
the Calamity of his Father, Prove. 19. 13. Cease my Son, to hear the instruction
that causes to err from the words of Knowledge, Prove. 1. 27. Even a Child is
known by his doing, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right, Prove.
20. 11. Whosoever Curses his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in
obscur e darkness, Prove. 20* 2. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and
when he is old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 2. 6. Withhold not Correction
from the Child: for if thou beatest him with the Rod he shall not die. Thou
shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from Hell, Prove. 23.
13, 14. Hearken unto thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother
when she is old, Prove. 2. 22. Thy Father and thy Mother shall be glad, and she
that bare thee shall rejoice, Prove. 23. 25. My Son fear thou the Lord and the
King; and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove* 24. 21. The Rod
and Reproof give wisdom, but a Child left to himself, brings his Mother to
shame, Prove. 29* 15. Correct thy Son and he shall give thee rest: yea he shall
give delight unto thy Soul, Prove. 29. 17. The Eye that mocketh at his Father,
and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out,
and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30. 17. Better is a poor and wise
Child, than an old and foolish King, Eccles. ^. 13. Rejoice O young Man, in thy
youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: But know thou that for all
these things, God will bring thee into Judgment, Eccl. 11. 9.
Chap. 2. English Proverbs Alphabetically placed*
A
A Cat may look on a King. A Fools bolt is soon shot. A Friend is not known but
in time of need. A good Tale is spoiled by ill telling. A good beginning makes
a good ending. A groaning Horse and a grunting Wife never fail their Master. A
Fool and his Money is soon parted. After Dinner sit a while, after Supper walk
a Mile. A Lark is better than a Kite. After a Storm comes a Calm. After Meat
comes Mustard. A little Pot is soon hot. A living Dog is better than a dead
Lion. A long Harvest of a little Corn. A low Hedge is easily leaped over. All
is not Gold that glisters. An hasty Man never wants woe. All covet all lose. A
proud Horse that will not bear his own provender. A short Horse is soon
curried. A Traveller may lie with Authority. A wonder lasts but nine days.
All is well that ends well. An ill Cook that cannot lick his own Fingers. An
Inch breaks no square. As good play for nothing as work for nothing. Ask my
Companion if I be a Thief. As they Brew so let them Bake.
B
Batchellors Wives and Maids Children are well taught. Be it better, be it
worse, be ruled by him that bears the Purse. Beggars must not he chusers.
Better be envied than pitied. Better Eye out than always ache. Better fed than
taught. Better sit still than rise and fall. Better half a Loaf than no Bread.
Better late than never. Better leave than lack. Better to bend than break.
Better unborn than untaught. Between two Stools the Breech goes to the ground.
Birds of a Feather flock together. Blind Men must not judge of Colors. Better
at the end of a Feast than the beginning of a fray. Burnt Child dreads the
Fire. Buy not a Pig in a poke*
C
CAT after kind. Change of Pasture makes fat Calves. Children and Fools tell
truth. Christmas comes but once a year. Cursed Cows have short Horns. Cut your
Coat according to your Cloth.
D
DEar bought and far fetched are good for Ladies. Dinner cannot be long where
Dainties want. Do well, and have well.
E
ENough is as good as a Feast. Ever drunk, ever a dry. Even Reckoning makes
long Friends. Every Cock will crow on his own Dunghill. Every one as he likes,
quoth the Man when he kissed his Cow. Every Man can rule a Shrew but he that has
her. Every Man for himself and God for us all. Every little makes a mickle.
F
FAint Heart never won fair Lady. Fair and softly goes far. Fast bind fast
find. Few words to the wise are sufficient. Fine Feathers make fine Birds.
First come first served. Fools have ^ortune. Fools are pleased with fair words.
Foul Water will quench Fire as soon as fair. Fore-warned fore-arm'd.
G
GOD never sends Mouths but he sends Meat. Good Wine needs no Bush. Good to
have two strings to a Bow. Good to be merry and wise. Great boast, small roast.
Great cry and little wool.
H
HAste makes waste. He must needs go if the Devil drives. He goes far that
never turns. He that fears every Grass must not piss in a Meadow. He must needs
Swim that is held up by the Chin. He that has an ill Name is half hanged. He
that is Born to be hanged shall never be drowned. He that kills a Man when he
is drunk must be hanged when he is sober. He that will not when he may, when he
will he shall have nay. Hold fast when vou have it. Home is home though never
so homely. Hope well and have well. Hot Love is soon cold. How should the Foal
amble, when the Horse and Mare trot. Hunger will break Stone Walls. Hungry Dogs
will eat dirty Puddings.
I
IF every Man would mend one, all would soon be mended. Ill gotten Goods never
prosper. Ill Weeds grow apace. In space comes Grace. It is an ill Bird that
bewrays his own Nest. It is an ill Wind that blows no body profit. It is a
good Horse that never stumbles. It is better to kiss a Knave than be troubled
with him. It is good Fishing in troubled Waters. It is good to beware of other
Men's harms. It is good to be merry and wise. It is good sleeping in a whole
Skin. It is hard halting before a Cripple. It is hard striving against the
Stream. It is better coming at the end of a Feast than the beginning of a Fray.
It is merry in Hall, when Beards wag all. It is merry when Knaves meet. It must
needs be true that every Man says. Ill News comes too soon. Joan is as good as
my Lady in the dark.
K
KA me and I will ka thee. Kissing goes by Favor. Kill two Birds with one
Stone. Kind as a Kite.
L
LEave is light. Learn to creep before you go. Let him Laugh that wins. Light
Gains makes a heavy Purse. Like to like quoth the Devil to the Collier. Little
Pot soon hot. Look ere you Leap. Like Master like Man. Look not too high left a
chip fall in thine Eye. Love comes in at the Windows and goes out at the Door.
Love is blind. Love me little, and Love me long. Love me and Love my Dog. Love
will creep where it cannot go.
M
MAny Hands make light work. Many Kinsfolk, few Friends. Many Kiss the Child,
for the Nurses sake. Many stumble at a Straw and leap over a block. Might
overcomes Right. More afraid than hurt. Money makes the Mare to go. Make Hay
while the Sun shines. Most haste the worst speed.
N
NAught is never in danger. Necessity has no Law. Need makes the old Wife trot.
Never pleasure without repentance. No Man loves his Fetters though made of
Gold. No Penny no Pater Noster. Nothing has no savor. Nothing venture nothing
have. No longer Pipe no longer Dance. Nothing so certain as Death. New Lords
new Laws. None so proud as an enricht Beggar. No Carrion will kill a Crow.
O.
ONE scabby Sheep will infect a whole Flock. One Swallow makes no Summer. One
Bird in Hand is worth two in the Bush. One ill word begets another. One good
turn deserves another. Out of sight out of mind. Out of Gods Blessing into the
warm Sun. Out of Debt out of danger. One may see day through a little hole.
P
PEnny wise pound foolish. Poor and proud, fie, fie. Pride will have a fall.
Pride goes before and shame comes after. Proffered service stinks. Prove thy
Friend before thou have need. Put not a Sword into a mad Man's Hand.
Q
QUality not quantity bears the Bell. Quick at Meat quick at Work.
R
RIches have Wings. Reckon not without your Host. Rome was not Built on a day.
Rob Peter to pay Paul.
S.
SAying and doing are two things. Seldom comes a better. Seldom seen soon
forgotten. Self do self have. Set a Knave to catch a Knave. Shameful asking
must have shameful nay. Set a Beggar on Horseback and he will soon ride him out
of Breath. Small Pitchers have wide Ears. Soft Fire makes sweet Malt. Something
is better than nothing. Soon gotten soon spent. Soon hot soon cold. Soon ripe
soon rotten. Spare to speak spare to speed. Store is no sore. Such a Father
such a Son. Strike while the Iron is hot. Sue a Beggar and get a Louse. Such a
Carpenter such Chips. Sweet Meat must have sour Sauce. Still Sow eats all the
Draff.
T
TAles of Robin Hood are fit for Fools. Teach your Grandam to suck Eggs. That
which one will not another will. That the Eye sees not, the Heart never
grieveth at. The Beggar may sing before the Thief. The best is best cheap. The
Blind eat many a Fly. The Blind lead the Blind, and both fall into the Ditch.
The Cat would eat Fish but dares not wet his Feet. The Crow thinks her own
Birds the fairest: Tell truth and shame the Devil. The more the merrier the
fewer the better cheer. The Fox fa^es well when he is cursed. The greatest
Talkers are the least Doers. The highest Tree has the greatest fall. The best
may mend. The Keys hang not all at one Man's Girdle. The longest East the
shortest West. The longest day will have an end. The more Knave the better
luck. The Masters Eye makes the Horse fat. The more haste the worst speed. The
more you stir a Turd the worse it will slink. The Eye is bigger than the Belly.
The new Broom sweeps clean. The nearer the Church the farther from God. The old
Woman would not have looked in the Oven for her Daughter if she had not been
there her self. The Priest forgets that ever he was Clark. The Pitcher goes
not so often to the Well but it comes home broken at last. Take Pepper in the
Nose. The rouling Stone gathers no Moss. They that are bound must obey. The
Stable robs more than a Thief. Time and Tide stays for no Man. Threatened Folks
live long. Too much familiarity breeds contempt. The young Cock croweth after
the old one. There are more ways to the Wood than one. There is difference
between staring and stark mad. There is no Fool like the old one. There is no
Smoke but some Fire. The weakest goes to the Wall. Three may keep Counsel if
two be away. Time past cannot be recalled. Touch a galled Horse on the Back and
he will wince* Tread on a Worm and he will turn again. Trim tram like Master like
Man. Two Heads are better than one. Two hungry Meals make the third a Glutton.
V
Virtue never waxes old. Under the Rose be it spoken.
W
WE can have no more of a Cat than her Skin. What is gotten over the Devils
Back is spent under his Belly. When the Fox preaches beware of the Geese. When
the Belly is full the Bones would be at rest. What is bred in the Bone will
never out of the Flesh. When the Sky falls we shall catch Larks. When the Steed
is stolen shut the Stable Door. Were it not for hope the Heart would break.
When thy Neighbors House is on Fire take care of thine own. When Thieves fall
out true Men hear of their Goods. Where nothing is to be had the King must lose
his Right. While the Grass grows the Steed starves. Who is worse shod than the
Shoemakers Wife. Who so deaf as he that will not hear. Who wait for dead Men's
Shoes may go barefoot. Wishers and Woulders are no good Householders* Wit is
never good till it is bought.
Y
YOU cannot hide an Eel in a Sack* Young Saint old Devil. You cannot fare well
but you must cry Roast-meat. You cannot see the Wood for Trees. You cannot eat
your Cake and have your Cake. You must not look a given Horse in the Mouth.
Chap. 23. Some few Examples of Gods Punishment upon Sinners for breach of the
several Commandments.
OUR Duty toward God, is to beli^ in him, to fear him, and to love him with
all our Hearts, (...) our Minds, with all our Souls, and with all our strength;
to worship him, and him only, to give him thanks, to put our whole tr^st in
hi^, to call upon him, to honor his holy Name and his Word, and to serve him
truly all the days of ^ur Lives.

Therefore is Atheism, the worshipping of false Gods* or the want of a true
Knowledge, Faith, Fear, and Love of the true God a Breach of this Commandment.

Many Examples we have in Scripture of Gods vengeance upon those who have
worshipped strange Gods.

Nadab and Abihu the Sons of Aaron for Offering strange Fire before the Lord in
the Wilderness, contrary to his express Commandment, were miserably consumed by
Fire from Heaven, Lev. 10. 1, 2.

The Children of Israel being enticed by the Moabites, to offer Sacrifice to
their Gods, joined themselves to Baal Peor, and therefore the anger of the Lord
being kindled against them, their Princes were hanged, and twenty four Thousand
Men were slain, amongst whom were Zimri and Cosbi, Numb 25. and many other
Examples of the like Nature there are in Scripture.

Pherecydes a Philosopher boasted impudently amongst his Scholars, of his
Prosperity, Learning and Wisdom, saying, That though he served not God, yet he
led a more quiet and prosperous Life than those that were addicted to Religion,
and therefore he passed not for any such Vanity, but soon after his Impiety was
justly punished, for the Lord struck* him with such a strong Disease, that out
of his Body issued such a slimy and filthy Sweat, and engendered such a number
of Lice and Worms, that his Bowels being consumed by them, he most miserably
Died.

Idolatry the Breach of the Second Commandment.
AMongst the many Examples we have in Scripture of Gods punishment upon Sinners
for Idolatrous worship take these two, viz.

About three Thousand of the Israelites were slain in the Wilderness for making
to themselves, and Idolizing the Golden Calf which Aaron made, Exodus 32.

Ahaziah the Son of Ahab King of Israel for serving and worshipping of
Baalzebub the God of Ekron was made an Example of Gods wrath, and died,
according to the Word of the Lord by the Prophet Elijah, 2 Kings 1.

Many other such Examples there are in the Books of the Kings, and the
Chronicles.

For as a King will not suffer another to bear the Title in his Realm, so God
will not permit any other in the World to be honored but himself only.

Per^ury the Breach of the Third Commandment.
THE Eternal God has commanded that we should so bridle and govern our Tongue,
that whatsoever we speak may be to his Honor and Glory, and not that we should
rashly bind our selves by his most holy Name with Oaths and Execrations, or
abuse him by any other imp^ous means in va^ M^tters, for he has threatened
condign punishment to thos^ that shall so profane his most holy Name.

The Son of Shelomith the Israelitish Woman, when he had Blasphemed the Name of
the Lord with Oaths and Curses, was by all the people, and by the immediate
command of God stoned to death. Whosoever Curses his God shall bear his sin,
and he that Blasphemeth the Name of the Lord* he shall surely be put to death,
and all the Congregation shall certainly stone him; as well the stranger, as he
that is Born in the Land, when he Blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall be
put to death, Levit. 24. See Matthew. 5. 33, etc.

A certain Nobleman being at a Market Town at play, and having lost a great Sum
of Money, in great Passion commands his Servant to get the Horses ready in
order to go out of Town, in the mean time bel^hing out most horrible and
abominable Oaths, and Execrations, his Servant disswades him from going Home,
telling him that it would be dangerous Traveling in the Night, because of the
uncouthness of the way, and the dangerous Waters that they must pass by; but he
fell into a greater Passion, Swearing and Cursing more and more, and commanded
his Servant to be obedient to what he said, the Servant obeys, and having
mounted their Horses, they depart the ^own, being in all three of them* they
had not gone far, but a great Company of Horsemen being Hellish Apparitions,
came to them, and making a most horrible noise seized upon the said Nobleman in
the middle of them, and flung him violently from his Horse, being senseless,
but there being with him (besides his Servant)* a young Man of very great
Courage, relying upon God and the Integrity of his own good Conscience, run
Courageously into the midst of this Devilis^ Cavalry and rescued his Lord,
setting him again upon his Horse, but having lost their way they wandered up and
down all Night, and still as they rode along they could hear the troublesome
noise of these Infernal Troopers, but God preserved the said young Man that
they had no power to hurt him* and in the Morning they brought the Nobleman to
a Monastery, where he languished three days and died.

Such is the end of those that profane the Holy Name of God by horrible Oaths
and Imprecations.

There was a Ten years Truce concluded between Ladislaus King of Hungary, and
Amurath the Emperor of the Turks, which was confirmed by an Oath between them;
but Ladislaus having a fair opportunity, by the Instigation of Pope Eugenius,
breaks the League, thereby violating his Oath, and raises a great Army against
Amurath, and with very great speed marches through Walachia, and Bulgaria, to a
Town called Varna where Amurath met and engaged him, the Battle was very fierce
and doubtful, none perceiving for a great while which way it would incline; at
last Amurath finding the Battle like to go against him* lift up his Hands and
Eyes toward Heaven, and said, Behold O Jesus Christ! These are the Articles
which thy Christians have made with me, Swearing by thy Name to observe and
keep them, and by this their Perjury they deny thee to be their God, wherefore
if thou art a God as they say thou art, revenge this Injury done to me, and to
thy Holy Name; and immediately the Scale turned, Amurath gained the Victory,
Ladislaus is slain, and with him Eleven Thousand Christians.

Sabbath-breaking a Breach of the Fourth Commandment.
GOD has commanded to set apart a time for his more public Worship, though our
whole Life should be a serving of him, yet some time is requisite to be set
apart, and observed, for an unanimous, solemn, and public serving, and this
time must be a set time, and a seventh part of our time, which we call the
Sabbath; and God has threatened vengeance to those that by their Impiety shall
violate this his Holy Commandment.

Verily, says the Lord, my Sabhath ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me
and you throughout your Generations, that you may know that I am the Lord that
sanctifies you.

Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you, every one that
defiles it shall be surely put to death, for whosoever does any Work therein,
that Soul shall be cut off from amongst his people, Exodus 31. 13, 14.

A sad Example of Gods displeasure for the Breach of this Commandment we have
in the fifteenth of Numbers, where an (...) being found gathering of Sticks
upon the Sabbath day* was by the immediate Command of God stoned to Death by
the people. The History of the Kings of Judah and Israel contain many Examples
of the Almighties Punishment upon those who have not feared, to contemn his
Word, and to profane his Holy Sabbath.

And the Histories of latter Times are not wanting in their Examples of Gods
Punishment of Sabbath Breakers.

In the year of our Salvation 1553. in a City in Switzerland about three Miles
distant from Lucerne, three Gamesters playing at Dice upon a Bench in the
Fields near the Walls of the City upon a Sabbath day, whereof one when he had
lost a considerable Sum of Money, while he was yet provoking the Almighty with
Oaths and Curses he chanced to have a fortunate throw according to his wish,
and being thereat encouraged, he Swore that if the Dice run against him again
he would fling or strike his Dagger as far as he could into the very Body of
God. The Dice fail him, and forthwith he draws his Dagger, and taking it by the
point he throws it with all his might toward Heaven; the Dagger vanished in
the Air, and was never more seen, and five drops of Blood fell upon the Bench
where they were playing, and immediately the Devil seized upon him, and carried
him away with that violence and noise that it affrighted the whole City into a
Tumult. The other two were extremely affrighted, and endeavored to wipe the
Blood from off the Bench, but in vain, for the more they endeavored to clean
it, the more plain did the Purple Color of the Blood appear; the whole City
being filled with the noise of this Wickedness, and every own crowds toward
the place, where they find the two Players that were left, endeavoring in vain
to clean the Bench of the said five drops of Blood with Water; and being
Examined, the Magistrates decree them to be immediately bound, and cast under
the Walls of the City, and as they were carrying them through the Gate, one of
them fell down, being deprived of Strength, and such a company of Worms and
Lice came from him, that they devoured him, and he died in that very place, a
foul and miserable Death; which the people seeing, without any more ado
immediately destroyed the other. That part of the Bench whereon the Blood sell,
was cut off, and remains to this day a Testimony and Monument of this great and
abominable (...).

Disobedience to Parents a Breach of the Fifth Commandment.
THIS is the first Commandment that has a promise annexed to it, whereby the
Eternal God promises to those that are obedient thereunto Benediction,
Prosperity, and long Life. And the Scripture is very plentiful of Examples of
Gods Punishments upon those that have been guilty of the Breach thereof.

Ham the youngest Son of Noah, seeing his Fathers Nakedness when he was
overcome with Wine, called to his Brethren that were without and told them
thereof* scoffing, and making a Laughing Stock of his Father, insulting over
his Vice and Imbecility, for which he and his Posterity were accursed, and
became a Servant of Servants to his Brethren, Genesis 9.

Absalom being in Rebellion against his Father King David, and pursued by his
Fathers Servants, was taken from his Mule by the Boughs of an Oak under which
he rode, and was hanged to Death, 2 Samuel 18. 9.

A poor and Ancient Man being grievously oppressed with Poverty, went to his
Son who was very Opulent, and Wealthy, praying him not to despise his Poverty,
but to relieve him in his great Necessity, but the Son thinking it would be a
great disgrace to him, to have it publicly known that he was dedescended of
such Poor Parentage, and therefore ordered his Servants to give him harsh and
threatening Language, and set him gone, the poor old Man departs grieving, and
weeping extremely at the unkindness, and undutifulness of his Son. But behold
the Justice of God overtook him, for the old Man was no sooner gone but his Son
fell mad, and so died.

Murder the Breach of the Sixth Commandment.
CAIN the first Murderer that ever was, run headlong into extreme desperation,
having no certain place of Abode, wandering up and down upon the Earth, having
his Head and Heart filled with Fear and despair.

And the Lord said unto Cain, what have thou done? The voice of thy Brothers
Blood cries unto me from the Ground, now therefore art thou Cursed from the
Earth, which has opened her Mouth to r^ceive thy Brothers Blood, from thy
hand. When thou Tillest the Ground it shall not henceforth vield unto thee her
strength; a Fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou be in the Earth, Genesis 4.

A Bakers Servant at V^enna in Austria knowing his Master to be very Rich,
having good store of Money by him, left his Service, not without a design to
come another time and rob him, and a few days afterward he breaks privily (in
the Night time) into the House, and finding that he had disturbed the
Manservant, lays wait for him, and kills him, and after that the Maidservant
likewise, and being now fully resolved to destroy all the Family, enters with
this Bloody Resolution into the Bakers Lodging Chamber, and Murdered him and
his Wife in their Beds, and not being satisfied with the Blood of these four,
must needs Murder a little Girl which was their Daughter, the Child seeing his
Intentions, or at least fearing that he would serve her as he had her Father
and Mother, cried out, O Paul, Paul, save me, and I will give you all my
Play-things, but he would not hear the little Child, but Murdered it. And when
he had done all this, he broke open the Chest wherein the Money was, took it
out, and went away with his Booty, and made his escape to Ratisbon. The
Neighbors admiring to see the Shop shut up all the next day, at last by
Authority broke open the Doors, where they found the Murdered Bodies to their
great Horror and Amazement.

The Murderer was in a short time after taken at Ratisbon, and brought from
thence to Vienna, where he took his Trial, and he confessed his Charge, and was
Condemned to be Hanged Alive in Chains, which was accordingly performed; he
said nothing troubled him more than the cries of the Child, offering him her
Play-things to save her Life, which he said, he continually heard, and could by
no means put it out of his Mind.

The bloody and* deceitful Men shall not live out half their day^ Psalm. 55. 23.
Adultery the Breach of the Seventh Commandment.
THE Punishment of David for his committing of Adultery with Bathsheba the Wife
of Uriah, was very great, as also was his Repentance, 2 Samuel 1^. 12.

The Wife of a certain Nobleman having more than ordinary Familiarity with
another besides her Husband, her Lord being absent, she having written two
Letters at one time, the one to her Husband, and the other to her Familiar
Friend, she chanced to superscribe them both wrong; viz. that which was for her
Husband, to her sweet Heart, and that which was for her Sweetheart she
superscribed to her Husband, by which he discovered her unfaithfulness to his
Bed, and went home and killed her with his own Hand.

An Honest Citizen of Ulm in Germany having a very Lewd Wife, had often
admonished her to mend her sinful Course of Life, but in vain; and at last
being resolved to make a positive proof of her Chastity* he gave out that he
would take a Journey into the Country for two days at least, and away he went
in the Morning, but returned at Night, and (undiscovered by his Wife) got into
the House, and hid himself in some convenient place where he might easily
perceive how passages were, and found the Servants (who were privy to their
Mistresses Lewd Course of Life,) making great Preparations for a Splendid
Entertainment, by and by in comes the Adulterer, who was kindly received, and
made very welcome; the good Man observing what passed, was highly provoked, but
yet bore all very patiently; soon after Supper was ended they go to Bed, which
the good Man perceiving, run in great Passion from the place where he lay
undiscovered, and first ki^ed the Adulterer, and then his Wife; for this he was
called to Answer, but the Magistrate thinking his Provocation great, and
Revenge just, exempted him from Punishment.

Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4.
Theft the Breach of the Eighth Commandment.
WE have many Examples both in Sacred Writ and other Histories, of Almighty
Gods high Resentment of the Breach of this Commandment. But amongst them none
more Famous than that of Achan the Son of Carmi, of the Tribe of Judah, who was
found guilty of the accursed thing, in privily Stealing a Babylonish Garment,
two hundred Shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold of fifty Shekels, and hid
them in the Earth in the midst of his Tent, but the Lord discovered his Theft,
and brought him to Condign Punishment, for he was stoned to Death, and his
Sons, and his Daughters, his Oxen, and his Asses, his Sheep, his Tent, and all
that he had were Burnt with Fire, Josh. 7.

It is Recorded by Martin Luther, that a very wicked but young Thief, was taken
in the Town of Belkig in Germany, where being Tried for his Life, he was found
guilty; but in consideration of his Youth, and in Hopes, and by his Promise, of
a Reformation for the future, he was pardoned and set at Liberty; but in a very
little time he fell to his old Trade of Thieving and Stealing, and professed
himself an utter Enemy to the said Town of Belkig, and set it on Fire, and
Burnt several Houses in it, at length he was taken again by the
Brandenburghers, and being asked how he durst be so wicked as to set Fire to
that Town that had been so kind to him as to give him his Life? he answered,
(and no other Answer could they get from him, but) that he had there received
an unjust Sentence for his Thievery, for they ought not to have let him go, but
to have Hanged him.

No less Famous is Gods Vengeance upon Urracha Queen of Spain, for her
Sacrilege, for being necessitated for Money in her Wars which she had with her
Son Alphonsus, she went into the Church of St. Isidore, and Commanded her
Soldiers to seize upon the Riches thereof, but they being fearful to lay Hands
on the Holy Treasure, refused to obey her, wherefore she pulled it to pieces
with her own Hand, but behold the Justice of God overtook her immediately, for
as she was going out of the Church she was struck dead in the very place.

Hell and Destruction are never full, so the Eyes of Man are never satisfied.
False-witness a Breach of the Ninth Commandment.
WE have many Examples of Gods Judgment upon Sinners for the Breach of this
Commandment; one of thae most Famous in Holy Writ is that of Ahab and Iezabel,
for procuring False Witness against Naboth, and thereby taking away his Life,
on purpose that Ahab might have his Vineyard which he had long coveted, 1 Kings
21.

It is Recorded in the Chronicles of Scotland how that one Campbel a Friar by
falsely accusing of one Hamilton, caused him to be Burnt to Death, but Hamilton
being in the Fire ready to be Executed, Cited or Summoned the said Friar to
appear (betwixt that and such a day which he then named) before the most high
God, the Righteous Judge of all Men, to Answer to the Innocence of his Death,
and whether his Accusation were just or not; now behold the just Hand of God,
for before the day nominated by the said Hamilton came, the Friar died
miserably without any Remorse of Conscience.

These six things does the Lord hate; yea seven are an Abomination unto him: A
Proud Look, a Lying Tongue, and Hands that shed Innocent Blood, an Heart that
devises Wicked Imaginations, Feet that be swift in running to Mischief, a
False Witness that speaks Lies, and him that sows Discord among Brethren,
Prove. 6. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Covetousness a Breach of the Tenth Commandment.
THE Jews when they had forsaken the Law of the Lord, were miserably afflicted,
for there were slain of Judah in one day, by Pe^ah the Son of Ramaliah an
Hundred and Twenty Thousand; and afterward the Children of Israel took of
their Brethren of the House of Judah Two Hundred Thousand Women, Sons and
Daughters, and a vast deal of Treasure, and carried it to Samaria, but they
were severely reproved by the Prophet Obed, who denounced the heavy Anger of
the Lord against them, and they returned their Captives and Prey into Judea. As
you may see at large, 2 Chronicles. 28.

King Zedekiah is reprehended as a Violator of this Commandment, for grievously
oppressing his Subjects, by Building Stately and Magnificent Structures, at the
Charge and Labor of the Poor; as you may see in Ierem. 22.

The Sons of Samuel being Covetously minded took Bribes, and perverted
Judgment, which made the Children of Israel desirous to change their present
Government into a Kingdom, 1 Samuel 8.

King Ahab coveting Naboth's Vineyard, and being Naboth would not sell it him
because it was the Inheritance of his Fathers; by the counsel, advice, or
instigation of his Wife Iezabel Witnesses are Suborned falsely to accuse him,
and Naboth is stoned to Death, so that now Ahab may have the Vineyard at his
pleasure; but behold the Hand of God in revenging his Covetousness and false
Accusation, fell upon all his Posterity, 1 Kings 21.

W^ to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their Beds: When the
Morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hands.
And they covet Fields, and take them by violence; and Houses, and take them
away: So they oppress a Man and his House evon a Man and his Heritage.
Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold against this Family do I devise an evil,
from which ye shall not remove your Necks, neither shall ye go haughtily: for
this time is Evil. Chap. 24. The Names and Order of the Books of the Old and
New Testament, with the Number of Chapters contained in each of them.
The Books of the Old Testament.
Genesis has Chapters 50 Exodus 40 Leviticus 27 Numbers 36 Deuteronomy 34
Joshua 24 Judges 21 Ruth 4 I Samuel 31 II Samuel 24 I Kings 22 II Kings 25 I
Chronicles 29 II Chronicles 36 Ezra 10 Nehemiah 13 Esther 1 Job 42 Psalms 150
Proverbs 31 Ecclesiasies 12 The Song of Solomon 8 Isaiah 66 Jeremiah 52
Lamentations 5 Ezekiel 48 Daniel 12 Hosea 14 Joel 3 Amos 9 Obadiah 1 Jonah 4
Micah 7 Nahum 3 Habakkuk 3 Zephaniah 3 Haggai 2 Zechariah 14 Malachi 4 The
Books of the New Testament.
Matthew has Chapters 28 Mark 16 Luke 24 Iohu 21 The Acts of the Apostles 28
The Epistle to the Romans 16 I Corinthians 16 II Corinthians 13 Galatians (...)
Ephesians 6 Philippians 4 Colossians 4 I Thessalonians 5 II Thessalonians 3 I
Timothy 6 II Timothy 4 Titus 3 Philemon 1 To the Hebrews 13 The Epistle of
James 5 I Peter 5 II Peter 3 I John 5 II John 1 III John 1 Jude 1 Revelations
22

Chap. 25. The Penmen of the Holy Scriptures.
Of the Old Testament.
MOses the Son of Amram, the Son of Levi, when he was full Forty years old, was
called of God to be the Leader of the Children of Israel: He wrote the Book of
Genesis, about Eight Hundred years after the Flood: He spoke by a large measure
of Gods Spirit, of sundry things that were done Two Thousand Four Hundred and
Fourteen Years before he was Born: He also wrote the Books of Exodus,
Leviticus, Num^ and Deuteronomy.

Joshua and Eleazer the High Priest, are supposed to have penned the Book of
Joshua, who governed Israel Victoriously Seventeen years, and died in the
Hundred and Tenth year of his Age.

Samuel is supposed to have penned the Books of Judges and Ruth.

The first and second Books of Samuel were written by Samuel the Seer.

The first and second Books of Kings, were penned by Nathan the Prophet, Ahiah
the Shilonite, Iddo the Seer, Iehu the Prophet, and Semeia.

The Book of Ezra, was written by Ezra the Priest.

He also wrote the Book of Nehemiah, and therefore in the Hebrew they are put
both together.

The Book of Esther was written by the Chronicler of King Ahasue^us, and it was
taken out of the Records of the Medes and Persians.

Job was of Kin to Abraham, and outlived Moses, for he lived one Hundred and
Forty years, after his Temptation. But the Penman of the Book of Job is not
exactly Recorded.

The Psalms were penned by diverse, as David, Moses, Asaph, and others, and they
were collected by Esdras.

The Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Solomon's Song, were written by Solomon, after
his Conversion.

Isaiah the Son of Amos, prophesied in the days of Uzziah, Iotham, Ahaz,
Hezekiah, and Manasses.

Jeremiah the Son of Hilkiah the Priest, prophesied in the days of Josias,
Iehojakim, and Zedekiah.

Ezekiel was a Priest in Babylon five years of Iehojakims Captivity.

Daniel was a Captive in Babylon, and prophesied under Nebuchadnezzar, Evil
Meroduck, and Belshazzer.

Hosea prophesied in the days of Uzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of
Judah.

Joel prophesied in the days of Uzziah, and Jeroboam.

Amos was a poor simple Shepherd, and prophesied at the same time with Joel.

Obadiah prophesied against Edom, at that time the Palace of the Temple, and
City was set on Fire.

Jonah prophesied in the days of Amaziah and Jeroboam.

Micah Prophesied in the days of ^otham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of Judah.

Nahum prophesied in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, Uzziah King of Israel,
and of Salmanazer King of Assyria.

Habakkuk prophesied about the same time.

Zephaniah prophesied in the days of Josiah the Son of Amon.

Haggai, Zachariah, and Malachi the Prophets were appointed after the Captivity
to comfort the people, and wrote all about the same time.

Of the New Testament.
St. Matthew wrote his Gospel Eight years after Christ's Ascension.

St. Mark wrote Ten years after Christ's Ascension.

St. Luke wrote Fifteen years after Christ's Ascension.

St. John wrote Thirty Two years after Christ's Ascension.

The Acts of the Apostles were written by St. Luke.

The Epistle to the Romans was written by St. Paul, as also the two to the
Corinthians, and those to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
Timothy, Titus, Philemon, and the Hebrews, as the Learned do generally allow.

^ames the Son of Alpheus, the Brother of Jude, called also the Brother of our
Lord, wrote his Epistle.

St. Peter one of the chief of the Apostles wrote two Epistles.

St. John, the Son of Zebedee, Beloved of Christ, wrote three Epistles, and the
Revelation.

St. Jude one of the Apostles wrote his Epistle.

Chap. 26. Directions for true Spelling and Writing of English.
ALL Speech or Language is composed of Words, and every Word is composed of
Syllables, except it be a Monosyllable, and every Syllable is composed of one
or more Letters.

The Letters are in number twenty four, as follows, viz. a b c d e f g h i k
l m n o p q r s t u w x y z, to which may be added j and v which make up the
number twenty six.

These Letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants.

The Vowels are a e i o u and y after a Consonant.

The Consonants are b c d f g h k l m n p q r s t w x z and y when it comes
before a Vowel in the same Syllable, as in youth, young, yonder, also j and v
are Consonants wherever found.

No Syllable can be spelt without a Vowel, and sometimes the Vowels alone make
a Syllable, as a-gainst, e-ve-ry, i-vory, o-ver, usury.

And as no Syllable can be without a Vowel, so no Syllable has more than one
Vowel, as di-vi-si-on, except when two have one sound, which we call Dipthongs,
as au-tho-ri-ty, soon, pro-ceed, neu-ter. And e or es in the end of a word,
which for distinction sake may aptly be called e final, as hence, since,
con-fute, names, bones. Or in Compound Words, as safeguard, not sa-fe-guard,
there-fore, not the-refore, etc.

Wherefore when any word is given to be divided into Syllables, consider how
many Vowels and Dipthongs are therein, so many Syllables must there be, except
as before excepted. And to divide your Syllables exactly take the following
Rules.

I. When two Vowels come together in a word, being no Diphthong, but having
each his full sound, then must they in Spelling be divided as mu-tu-al,
tri-umph, tri-en-ni-al. II. When a double Consonant is in the middle of a word,
then is it likewise in Spelling to be divided, as war-rant, common; spel-ling,
ne-ces-sa-ry. III. When a Consonant is in the middle of a word between two
Vowels or Dipthongs, then must that Consonant be joined to the latter Vowel or
Dipthong, as di-li-gent, re-ve-la-tion, de-li-ve-rance, sau-ci-ly, co-ve-tous.
IV. When two or more Consonants, being such as can begin a word follow a Vowel,
such Consonants must generally be joined to the latter Syllable, as mi-ni
stra-ti-on, mi-ni ster, de-tract, de-spise, de-clare. See more Examples of this
Rule in the 10th Chapter. V. When two or more Consonants being such as cannot
begin a word, come between two Vowels then must they be divided, one to the
former, and the other to the latter Vowel, as ab-sence, a^-ter, al-mond,
con-tra-ry, con-strain, where note that when three or four Consonants are in
the middle of a word between two Vowels, such of them as can begin a word must
be joined to the latter Syllable, as con-tra-ry, where you see ntr cannot begin
a word, but tr may, wherefore is n joined to the first, and tr to the latter
Syllable. So in con strain, ^str cannot begin a word but str may, etc.
From the foregoing general Rules there are these following Exceptions, viz.

From the third Rule there are two Exceptions.

1. When x follows a Vowel it must be always joined with the Vowel before it,
as wax eth, fix-ed, ex am-ple, not wa-xeth, fi-xed, e xam p e, for the Letter x
has the sound of two Consonants, viz. c and s, which cannot begin a word, but
if instead of x you would use c and s, then it would come under the fifth Rule,
as for wax-eth, wac-seth, etc. 2 When e is in the end of a word you ought not
to stop at the Vowel before it, as lame, not la-me, con-sume, not consu-me,
etc.
From the third and fourth Rules are excepted all words that begin with these
Prepositions, viz. abs, ob, in, un, dis, mis, per, sub, and such as end with
these terminations, ly, less, ness, ler, as ab-la-tive, ob-la-ti-on,
in-a-bi-li-ty, in-au gu-rate, un-able, dis-a-ble, dis-trust, mis-place,
mis-take, per am-bu-late, suborn, sub-lime, ug-ly, help-less, co ve-tous-ness,
bab-ler. For these prepositions and terminations must have their full sound,
and pronunciation.

A Syllable is either long or short.

A Syllable is said to be long when it is pronounced by a longer time than
ordinary, and a Syllable is said to be short, when it is pronounced by a short
time.

There are three things which make a Syllable long, viz. 1. When e is placed at
the end of a word, it always makes the last Syllable long, as made, bare, cane,
note, tune, whereas if the e were neglected, it would be sounded short, as mad,
bar, etc.

2. Secondly a Dipthong makes a Syllable long, as train, cool, caul, feel,
etc. where note that e ought never to be written at the end of a word if the
last Syllable have a Diphthong in it, as con-strain, un seen, not con strain,
unseene. Except when s follows the Diphthong, soft th, and c and g, as hoise,
noise, sees, voice, choice, siege.

3. Thirdly, gh after a Vowel in the end of a word makes the Syllable long, as
high, night, thigh, sight.

There are likewise three things which make a Syllable short.

1. First many Consonants joined together, as first, durst, distrust,
contemptible. 2. Secondly, the doubling of a Consonant, as pil-low, billow,
stag-ger, stam-mer. 3. Thirdly, when e is left out at the end of a word, as if
from fare, bare, mate, you take away e the Syllable will be short, as far, bar,
mat, also bed, quit, knit, etc.
Words of one short Syllable need never have the last Consonant doubled, to
shorten its sound, as met, trip, flip, at, top, gut, except in some few words
where custom has prevailed to make a distinction from other words of the same
sound but of different significations, as Ann, cann, butt, inn, interr.

Chap. 27. Some Observations of the several Letters of the Alphabet.
A
A being placed before l and after a Consonant, is sounded broad and long like
the Diphthong au, as call, shall, ball, bald, shall, s^ald, malt, mall.

Therefore when the Diphthong au is sounded before l, it is most commonly
written with an a only, except in Paul, brawl, caul, assault, fault, bawl.

A is seldom or never sounded after e or o in the same Syllable, that is in the
improper Diphthongs ea and oa, as goat, great, re peal, gr^an, except in heart,
hear-ken, where the e loses its sound, also the A is scarce sounded in
marri-age, car-ri-age, par-li a-ment, these words being sounded marridg,
carridg, parliment.

Likewise in some words taken from the Hebrew, where it is either placed before
its self or before o, as in Isaac, Canaan, Pharaoh, etc. which words are
sounded Isac, Canan, Pharo.

B
B loses its sound when it happens in the end of a word after m, or before t,
as in womb, climb, thumb, dumb, lamb, limb, doubt, doubtful, debt, subtle, etc.

C
C is sounded like K when it comes before a, o, and u, as camp, come, count,
cool, cure, except in some words taken from the Latin where e follows it,
thereby making the Latin Diphthong ae or ae as Caesar or Caesar. And C being
placed before e, i, and y, is sounded like s, as in place, ice, mice, city,
certain, cypress, exceed.

Likewise when C comes before l or r, it is always sounded like K, as clout,
cream, clear, crowd.

Ch in words which are purely English has a peculiar sound, whether placed
before or after a Vowel, first before a Vowel, as child, chance, cheap, choose,
chosen, churl; secondly after a Vowel, as reach, teach, such, touch, preach,
breech, rich, roch.

But where you find Ch, in some few words that are of an Hebrew, or Greek
derivation, it is for the most part sounded like K, as Christ, Christopher,
Chorus, Character, Achan, Lachish, Malchus. And when s is written before it, as
Scheme, Scholar, etc. Except when a Consonant follows C^, as in Archbishop,
Archdeacon, etc.

C when written between a Vowel and K is not at all pronounced, as black,
stick, sick, thick, beck, block, suck.

Also when sc comes before e or i, then C loses its sound, as Science,
descent, conscience. But before a, o, or u, it keeps its sound, as scarce,
score, fourscore, scul, scumin.

And here note by the way that C is never placed between n and k, as thank,
think, brink, not thanck, thinck, brinck, etc.

D
In all words where g follows d, there is d very scarcely if at all sounded, as
badge, badger, bedge, bridge, dodge, budge.

E
When an e is found in the end of a pure English word it is very seldom
sounded, only it serves either to prolong the Syllable, as bare, care, fare
spare, cure, cole, which without e would be short, as bar, car, far, spar, cur,
col. Also when s follows it in the end of a word it serves to prolong the last
Syllable, as sumes, consumes, names, robes. Except me, ye, he, be, we, the.

Or when it follows c, or g, it serves to soften their pronunciation, as rage,
race, stage, scarce.

When it follows l, or r, it is to be sounded deeply as if it went rather
before them, as cable, able, noble, candle, acre, tygre.

E loses its sound in George, Tuesday, Scrivener, Beauty.

Also it is generally added for beauties sake in the end of words after o, and
u, as roe, due.

And here note that e must never be written at the end of a short Syllable, as
art, defend, convert, not art, defend, converte.

Except in a few short Syllables which are customarily written with an e after
them, as come, some, done, gone, behove, shove, glove, live, love, give, above,
move.

Also e must never be written at the end of a word after a double Consonant, as
bless, goodness, not bless, goodness; except when another Syllable is thereby
added to the word, as (...).

Likewise when a Syllable is added to a word that ends in (...), then shall e
be left out, as grace, gracious, shame, shaming, blame, blaming.

Except the Syllable added thereto begins with a Consonant, for then must e
be continued, as grace, graceful, not gracful, shame, shameful, not shamful.

Except also when ge, and ce, come before the termination able, as charge,
chargeable, not chargable, peace, peaceable, not ^acable.

Except likewise words that are compounded of there, here, where, as therein,
therefore, hereafter, heretofore, wherein, wherefore.

E is commonly sounded in the end of such words as are derived from the Greek
or Latin, as Phebe, Epitome, praemunire, etc.

Also many English words that have the sound of e in the end thereof, are
written with ey, as country, valley, barley, parsley.

F is always sounded or pronounced alike.

G
G is never sounded when it precedes m or n in the same Syllable, as phl^gm,
sign, reign, design, sovereign, gnaw.

G before e, i, and y, is commonly sounded soft, as ge-nera-ti-on, gi-ant,
gyp-sie, spun-gy.

Except give, gift, to-ge-ther, be-gin, gir-dle, gird, girl, girt, tar-get,
Gil-bert.

G before a, (...), and u, or before its self or any Consonant in the same
Syllable is always sounded, or pronounced hard, as gave, go-vern, gum, glass,
grass, dig-geth, big-ness.

When n goes before g, it is likewise pronounced hard, as ^ang, sing, ring,
long, fin-ger, an-ger. Except e follows g in the same Syllable, as range,
singe, etc.

The sound of gh is various, as,

1. If it be in the beginning of a word is sounded like g hard, as Ghost,
ghostly, etc. 2. When gh is found in the end of many words it is pronounced
like f, as laugh, enough, cough, tough, rough, hough, etc. 3. In some words it
is not sounded at all, but only serves to make the Syllable long, as through,
dough, night, might, sight. 4. But when two Syllables are parted according to
rule between g, and h, then is g sounded hard, as hog-beard, etc.
H
H is generally defined to be no Letter but only a note of ^spiration, or
breathing.

H in the beginning of words after g, or r, is not at all sounded, as ghost,
ghostly, rheum, Rhe-to-rick, Rhe-nish, Thomas, Scholar, Scheme.

I
I is not sounded many times when it follows u in the same Syllable, as juice,
fruit, bruit, suit, bruise, re-cruit. Likewise its sound is neglected in the
improper Diphthong ei, either, neighbor, neither, etc. Also in adieu, cousin,
fashion.

When i comes before r, it is commonly sounded like (...), as frst, thirst,
irk-some, third, fir, bird, thir-ty sir, firm.

Except when it begins a word, as ir-ra-ti-o-nal, ir-re-verent, etc. Or when e
follows it at the end of a word, as con-spire, de-sire, fire.

K
When c hard is pronounced hefore e, i, or n, that word must be written with k,
as ken-nel, kill, know, knowledge, etc. But when c hard is sounded before a, o,
and u, that word must be written with c, and not with k, as co-ver, can-dle,
custom; not kover, kandle, kustome.

L
L very often loses its sound when it comes between a and f, and a and k, as
calf, half, stalk, walk, balk.

Also it loses its sound in balm, calm, salve, alms, Sal-mon, fal-con,
Lin-coln, Bris-tol, Hol-born, folks.

When a Monosyllable ends with l, it is commonly doubled, as call, shall, bill,
shell, well, will; except a Diphthong precede it, as boil, fail; but if a
Consonant be added to the end, then it loses an l, as shall, wilt, etc.

And if a word of more than one Syllable ends with l, it must never be double,
as gospel, not gospel, principal, not principal.

M
In what word soever m is found, it is never neglected, but always pronounced.

N
When n follows m at the end of a word it is seldom or never sounded, as
condemn, contemn, solemn, Autumn, hymn, limn*

O
O is variously sounded, viz. sometimes short, as not, got, s^t; and sometimes
long, as know, tow, bestow, go, to^, woe, so, etc sometimes like u, as smother,
brother.

And in some words it is not sounded at all, as youth, courage, courtesy,
double, trouble, dou^let, people.

And many times it must be written before n in the end of (...) word, when it
is not pronounced, as Apron, Iron, etc.

P
Ph whether it is in the beginning, middle, or end of a word, is sounded like
f, as Phi-lo so pher, Phi lip, Or-phan, Tri-umph. Except in some few words
where the Syllables are divided between p, and h, as Shep-herd, up-hold,
Clap-ha^.

When p comes between m and t in the end of a word, then p loses its sound, as
contempt, exempt; also in Symptom, redemption; also in psalm, psaltery, etc.

Q
Q is never written without u, as queen, quill, que-sti-on, quar-rel.

Sometimes qu is sounded like k, as ob-lique, pub-lique, relic, ex-che-quer,
liquor, etc.

R
R is always sounded, but never variously wheresoever it is found; as fa-ther,
ra-ther, etc.

S
The Letter S is either long or short, which are always to be observed in their
places, viz.

Long s must be always written in the beginning and the middle of words, as
such, some, con-sume, con-spire. And short s or little s is always in the end
of a word, as sins, sons, hands. Also if there be a double ss, the last ought
to be a short s, as assurance, sessions, good-ness.

S is sometimes pronounced hard, and sometimes soft, hard, as con-se-quence,
se-date, con-sume, and soft like z, as bars, sons, sins.

In some words it is not sounded at all, as Isle, Viscount, Island, which are
to be read I Will, Vicount, Island.

T
Ti before a Vowel is generally sounded like si, as in redemption, nation,
salvation, satiate, patience.

Except s, r, or n, go before it, as question, christian, combustion, courtier,
voluntier, frontier, Antioch.

Except also when a Syllable beginning with a Vowel is annexed to a word ending
in ty, then shall ty be changed into ti keeping its sound, as mighty, mightier,
lusty, lustier, (...), pitious, lofty, loftier.

U
U is sounded sometimes short, as full, dull, but, and sometimes long, as
ru-ral, bu ri al, and sometimes it is sounded like w, as an-guish, lan-guish,
lan-guage.

When u comes between g and another Vowel, it is seldom or never sounded, as
plague, tongue, guide, guard, gui^t, catalogue, prologue, etc.

Note that u is never in the end of a word except e be after it, as ver-tue,
is-sue, con-strue.

W
W after o, is not sounded, as in grow, sha dow, win-dow; except in vow, bow,
sow, cow, etc.

Also when w comes before r in the beginning of words, as wrath, wrought,
wre-st^e, wretch, write, wran-gle, etc.

X
X is a Letter compounded of c and s, and like them it is always sounded
wherever it is found, as wax, like wacs, ax, like acs, etc.

Y
Y before a Vowel is a Consonant, and is to be sounded, as yet, you, youth,
yon-der, york.

But when it follows a Consonant then it is accounted a Vowel, as migh-ty,
lof-ty, beau-ty.

Z
Z is generally pronounced like soft s, as zeal, zi-on, a-zimuth, etc.

J
When j Consonant comes before a Vowel, as it always does, then it is
pronounced like soft g when it comes before e, i, or y, as jea-lous, joy-ful,
joy, judge, E-li-jah, etc. and wheresoever it is found it is to be so
pronounced, and its shape as well as pronounciation differs from i Vowel, being
always writted thus j.

V
V Consonant is always placed before a Vowel, and has a sound peculiar to its
self, as in virtue, vile, vain, verily, vice, Savior; Likewise v Consonant
differs in shape from ^ Vowel, as well as in sound, it being always made thus
v. Concerning the Diphthongs read the seventh Chapter.

Chap. 28. Of the use of Great Letters, commonly called Capitals.
THE Capitals in writing are of very great use, and are to be used according to
the followng directions.

I. All proper Names, whether of Men or Women, as Adam, James, John, Mary, and
also the Sirnames of Men. Likewise the proper Names of Countries, Cities,
Towns, Arts, Sciences, Dignities, Titles of Honor, Offices, Days, Months,
Winds, Places, Heathenish Gods, and Goddesses, ^ivers and Islands.

II. Every Sentence beginning after a period is to be begin with a Capital, and
in Poetry every Verse or Line must begin with a Capital. Also every Book,
Chapter, Verse, Paragraph, and Section.

III. When the words of another is quoted, they ought to begin with a great
Letter, as Matthew. 2. 8. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search
diligently for the young Child, etc.

IV. The Titles of Books, as THE HOLY BIBLE, and many times very remarkable
Sentences are written with great Letters, as Rev. 17. 5. And upon her Forehead
was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Also the Numeral Letters are written with Great
Letters, as the date of the present year is MDCXCII.

Chap. 29. Of the Points, or Pauses, and Marks.
IN reading or writing you are always to observe the Points or Stops, for they
give great Life, and Light to the understanding in Reading. And they be these
which follow, viz. A Comma marked thus (,) a Semicolon thus (;) a Colon thus
(:) a Period or full stop thus (.) an Interrogation noted thus (?) and a note
of Exclamation or Admiration noted thus (!) and a Parenthesis which is noted
thus () with two Semicircles.

A Comma is a stop of the smallest time, and requires but very little
breathing; as for Example,

But ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People, etc.

A Semicolon is of somewhat longer time than a Comma; as in this Example, His
very Countenance begat in me a trembling; his Words were terrible as thunder;
his Rage is sufficient to complete my ruin.

A Colon is a middle pause between a Comma and a Period, and is generally in
the middle of a Sentence.

Example, If I hold my Tongue, I can expect no relief: And if I speak, I fear I
shall be rejected: Unless by some powerful Expressions, I can make her really
sensible of what I truly feel.

A Period is the longest pause, or breathing time, and is always put at the end
of a complete Sentence.

Example, Eternity is an undeterminable Circle, wherein the persons of all
Ages, shall be encompassed in endless weal or woe.

An Interrogation or Interrogative point is always placed after a question.
Example,

Whither can I fly for redress? Or to whom shall I apply myself for relief?

A note of Admiration is always put after a Sentence wherein something is
exclaimed against or admired at; as,

Oh the vain pleasures of the World! Oh that ever Man should be charged with
the guilt of his own ruin!

A Parenthesis is when a Sentence is inserted in the middle of another Sentence
between two Semicircles, which if wholly neglected or omitted, the sense would
not be spoiled. As,

I shall in a few words (because many would be too tedious) give you an
information of the whole matter.

Here if these words because many would be too tedious, were left out, yet the
sense would be perfect.

There are also many other marks which you will meet with in Reading, as
sometimes when a Vowel is left out in a word, you will find this mark over its
place, viz. (') which is called Ap^strophus, as the intent for the intent,
consumed for consumed, I Will for I will, etc.

In compound words you shall find a short Line made between them, which is
called an Hyphen, as Self-denial, Timeservers, Will Worship; and likewise when
you have not room to write the whole word in the Line, you ought to make the
same mark at the end, to signify the rest of the word to be in the other Line.

And you will find such marks as these in the Bible and other Books, viz. (*)
() and () which are called notes of reference, and do serve to refer or direct
the Readers to look for some proof, note, or observation, which you will find
at the same mark in the Margin. And sometimes the Letters of the Alphabet are
inserted in a smaller Character for the same purpose.

When another Author is quoted in his own words, commonly the beginning of each
Line of the same is distinguished from the rest by a double Comma reversed, thus
(")

When in writing any Word or Sentence is forgotten, then must it be written
over the Line, and this mark () called a Caret must be made under the Line
pointing between the words where the said word or sentence must come in.

Likewise at the beginning of a new Head or Section, there is by most Authors
set this mark.

An Appendix to the English Schoolmaster completed, containing the Principles
of Arithmetic, with an Account of Coins, Weights and Measures, Time, etc.
Copies of Letters, and Titles of Honor, suitable for Men of all Degrees and
Qualities, Bills of Parcels* Bills of Exchange, Bills of Debt, Receipts, and
several other Rules and Observations fi^ for a Youths Accomplishment in the way
of Trade

The Principles of Arithmetic.
ALL number is expressed by Nine Figures and a Cipher, which are thus
Charactered, viz. 1 one, 2 two, 3 three, 4 four, 5 five, 6 six, ^ seven, 8
eight, 9 nine, 0 a Cipher

When any number is given whose value you would know, you are to consider that
the first figure to the Right Hand signifies but its own single value, the
second is ten times its value, as if it be 4 it signifies forty; the third is
an hundred times its own value, as if it be 4 it signifies four hundred,
according to the following Table.

First place 1 Units. Second place 2 Tens. Third place 3 Hundreds. Fourth place
4 Thousands. Fifth place 5 X of Thousands. Sixth place 6 C of Thousands.
Seventh place 7 Millions. Eighth place 8 X of Millions. Ninth place 9 C of
Millions.

To value this or any other number, begin at the 1 saying, Units, Tens,
Hundreds, Thousands, etc.

But to read it you must begin at the 9 saying, Nine Hundred Eighty Seven
Millions, Six Hundred Fifty Four Thousand, Three Hundred Twenty One.

In like manner this number, viz. 507 is five hundred and seven, and 3426 is
three thousand four hundred twenty six.

ADDITION of Integers.
ADdition teaches to add diverse numbers together, and to bring them to one
total Sum.

When two or more numbers are given to be added together you are to place them
units under units, tens under tens, hundreds under hundreds, etc.

Then add up the first row in the place of units, and if they be under ten set
down what they come to, but if it come to ten, or more than ten, or twenty, or
thirty, etc. then set down the excess; and for every ten carry an unite to the
next row, and proceed in the same manner with every row till you come to the
last, and whatever that comes to you must set it all down.

Example, Let it be required to find the Sum of 234 and 341 and 923; first I
put them one under another as follows.

234 341 923 1498 Sum.

Then I begin at the units, saying 3 and 1 and 4 make 8, which I put under the
Line, then to the next row, saying 2 and 4 and 3 make 9, which I also set down
under its row, then to the next row, saying 9 and 3 and 2 make 1^, which I set
down, and the work is done, and I find the Sum of these three numbers to be 1^9.

Again let it be required to find the Sum of 796, ^87, 479, and 316; first I
set them down in order, as you see in the Margent.

796 587 479 316 2178 Sum.

Then I begin with the row of units, and find it to come to 28, wherefore I
place the 8 under the Line, and carry 2 to the next row for the two tens, and I
find that row to come to 27, wherefore I put the 7 under the Line and carry 2
to the next row, then I add up the third row and find it to come to 21, all
which I set down because it is the last row, and so I find the Sum of these 4
given numbers to be 2178.

More Examples for Exercise follow.

6548 57432 4246 5807 3721 438 372 2134 4063 7962 486 369 792 431 592 481 413
876 34 234 576 43 7 75 16113 67182 5737 9100

Addition of Money.
NOte that 4 farthings is one penny, 12 pence is on^ shilling, and 20 shillings
is a pound Sterling, or English Money. The Character of pounds is l. of
shillings is ^. of pence d. and of farthings q.

When it is required to add pounds, shillings, pence and farthings together,
you are to place them in rows one under another, viz pounds under pounds,
shillings under shillings, pence under pence, and farthings under farthings,
and under all draw a Line.

Then begin at the least denomination, as in the following example at the
farthings, and for every 4 farthings you may make a dot with your pen till you
have done the row, then set down the odd farthings under the Line, and for
every dot or penny that you found in the farthings carry one to the row of
pence, and in the row of pence make a dot at every 12 that it comes to, setting
down the odd pence under the Line, then tell how many dots or shillings you
found in the pence, and carry so many to the shillings, and add up that row,
making a dot at every 20, then put the odd shillings under the Line, and for
every dot or 20 you made in the shillings carry one to the pounds, then add up
the pounds as you were taught in the foregoing examples.

Example, let it be required to add these two Sums of Money together, viz. 195
l. 17 s. 10 d. 3 q. and 86 l. 15 s. 09 d. 2 q.

First I place the given Sums one under the other and draw a Line, as you see
in the Margent.

l. s. d. q. 195 17. 10. 3. 86 15 09 2 2^2 13 08 1

Then I begin with the farthings, saying 2 and 3 is 5 farthings, which is 1
penny and a farthing, wherefore I make a dot at the ^ for the penny, and put the
1 farthing under the Line, then I go to the row of pence, saying 1 that I carry
and 9 is 10 and 10 is 20 pence, which is 1 shilling 8 pence, wherefore I put a
dot at 10 for the shilling, and put the 8 pence under the Line, and carry 1 for
the dot to the shillings, and say 1 that I carry and 15 is 16 and 17 is 33
shillings, which is 1 pound 13 shillings, wherefore I make a dot at the 17 for
the 1 pound, and put the 13 shillings under the Line, then I proceed to add up
the pounds, saying 1 that I carry and 6 is 7, and 5 is 12, wherefore I put down
2 and carry 1 to the next row, etc. so that I find the Sum to be 282 l. 13 s.
08 d. 1 q.

Other Examples for Exercise follow.

l. s. d. q. 374 17. 09. ^. 297 16. 10 3 3^2 14 1 1. 462 1^. 04. 2 695 12. 08
3. 83 11 10. 2 2257 12 07 1 l. s. d. q. 892 12 04 1 437 16. 10. 3. 198 09 11. 1
^76 12. 07. 0 358 10. 09 3. 84 14 11. 2 2^18 17 06 2

The like is to be understood in all additions, whether of Measure, Weight,
Time, etc. observing how many of the lesser denominations go to make one of the
greater.

Subtraction of Integers.
SUbtraction teaches to take a lesser number from a greater, and gives the
remainder or difference.

Example. Let it be required to subtract 2234 from 4678, here must I place the
lesser number under the greater in such manner as if they were to be added
together, and draw a Line under them, as you see in the Margent.

4678 2234 2444 Rem.

Then I begin at the units, saying 4 out of 8 and there remains 4, which I
place under the Line, and go to the next, saying 3 out of 7 and there rests 4,
which I also put under the Line, and go to the next, saying 2 out of 6 and
there rests 4, which I also put under the Line, and proceed to the next, saying
2 out of 4 and there remains 2, which I put also under the Line, and the work
is done, and I find the remainder to be 2^44.

But if in the work of this nature, the undermost figure chance to be greater
than that which you are to subtract it from, which is the uppermost, then must
you borrow 10 and add to the uppermost, and subtract the undermost from their
Sum, but then for what you borrowed, you must remember to add 1 to the next
lowermost figure, as in this Example, let it be required to subtract 3578 from
8495, first I place them as is before directed, and as you see in the Margent
with a Line drawn under them, then I begin at the place of units, saying 8 from
^ I cannot, wherefore I add 10 to the ^, and it makes 1^, wherefore I say 8
from 1^ and there remains ^, which I put under the Line, then I proceed to the
next figure, saying ^ that I borrowed and 7 is 8 out of 9 and there rests 1
which I put down, and proceed, saying 5 out of 4 I cannot, but 5 out of 14 and
there remains 9, which I put under the Line, and proceed, saying 1 that I
borrowed and 3 is 4 out of 8 and there remains 4, which I put under the Line in
its place, and the work is done, and I find the remainder to be 49^7. The like
is to be understood of any other.

8495 3578 4917

Examples for Exercise follow.

4735 304^ 9706 576418 918 5^8 3907 82443 3^17 2524 5799 49^975

Subtraction of Money.
YOU must place the given numbers one under the other as you were directed in
Addition, but with this caution, in Subtraction put always the lesser number
undermost, and under all draw a little Line, and begin your Subtraction at the
right hand, with the least denomination.

But if the lower number of any denomination is greater than the uppermost,
then borrow 1 of the next greater denomination, and from that subtract the
lowermost, and what remains add to the uppermost, and set their Sum under the
Line, and for that you borrowed add 1 to the next denomination, and proceed,
etc.

Example. Let it be required to subtract 346 l. 08 s. 07 d. 2 q. from 723 l. 4
s. 10 d. 1 q. first I set them down as you see in the Margent, and begin at the
farthings, saying 2 farthings from 1 I cannot, wherefore I borrow 1 penny of the
next denomination which is 4 farthings, and say 2 from 4 and there remains 2,
which I add to the 1 farthing and they make 3, wherefore I put 3 under the Line
in the place of farthings, then I proceed to the pence, saying 1 that I
borrowed and 7 is 8, from 10 and there remains 2, which I put under the Line,
and proceed to the shillings, saying 8 from ^ I cannot, wherefore I borrow 1 of
the next denomination which is 20 shillings, and say 8 from 20 and there
remains 12, which being added to the uppermost figure 4 makes 16, which I put
under the Line, and proceed, saying 1 that I carried and 6 is 7, out of 3 I
cannot, but 7 out of 13 and there remains 6, etc. so when the work is finished
I find the remainder to be 35 l. 16 s. 02 d 3 q. and the like is to be
understood of any other.

l. s. d. q. ^23 04 10 1* 36^ 0^ 07 2 35^ ^6 ^2 3

Examples for further Exercise follow.

l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. From 794 13 08 0 462 15 00 1 Subtract 84 17 10 2 75 11
07 3 Remains 709 15 09 2 387 ^3 04 2

If there be a Sum of Money lent, and part thereof received at several
payments, and you would know how much remains unpaid; add the several payments
into one Sum, which must be subtracted from the Sum lent, and the remainder
will give you what remains due. As in the following Example.

l. s. d. q. Borrowed 7.0 00 00 0 124 17 09. 2 48 16. 11. 0 Paid at several
Times 34 0^. 09 ^. 68 14 10. 1 38 12. 05. 2. 97 09 08 2 Paid in all 412 19 06 2
Rests due 287 00 05 2

The like is to be understood of other denominations, as Weight, Measure, Time,
etc.

I might proceed to the other Rules of Arithmetic, but that being more fit for
a large Volume than this small Treatise, I shall therefore wave it, and content
my self with giving you the several Tables of Coins, Weights, Measure, Time,
etc.

A Table of English Coin.
4 farthings a Penny. 4 pence a Groat. 12 pence a Shilling. 2 Shillings six
pence half a Crown. 5 Shillings make a Crown. 6 Shillings eight pence a Noble.
2 Nobles or 13 s. 4 d. a Mark. 3 Nobles or 20 Shillings a Pound Sterling.

Troy Weight.
THE Original Weight used in England is deduced from: Grain of Wheat gathered
out of the middle of the Ear and well dried, and this Weight is called a Grain,
from whence is deduced the following Table.

2^ Grains a Penny weight. 20 Penny weight make an Ounce. 12 Ounces a Pound.

With the foregoing Weights are weighed Bread, Gold, Silver, Jewels, and
Electuaries.

Apothecaries Weights.
THE Weights used by Apothecaries are no other than Troy Weight, only the Pound
is otherwise subdivided, according to the following Table.

20 Grains a Scruple 3 Scruples make a Dram thus marked 8 Drams an Ounce 12
Ounces a Pound lb

Averdupois Weight.
16 Drams an Ounce. 16 Ounces a Pound. 28 Pounds make a Quarter of an Hundred.
4 Quarters an 100 weight, consisting of 112 l. 20 Hundred a Tun Weight.

By this Weight is weighed all Grocery Wares, Butter, Cheese, Flesh, Wax,
Pitch, Rosin, Tallow, Hemp, Lead, Iron, Copper, Tin, and all other Commodities
from whence there may issue a waste.

All Measure whether of Longitude or Capacity are deduced from a Barley Corn,
whence comes the following Table.

Of Long Measure.
3 Barley-Corns an Inch. 12 Inches a Foot. ^ Foot a Yard. 3 Foot 9 Inches make
an Ell English. 6 Foot a Fathom 5 yards and an half a Pole or Perch. (...)
Poles or Perches a Furlong. 8 Furlongs an English Mile.

By the foregoing Table you may understand that 5 yards and an half, which is
16 foot and an half make a Pole or Perch, from whence is deduced the following
Table.

Of Land Measure.
4^ square Perches or Poles make a Rood, or quarter of an Acre. 4 Roods an Acre
of Land.

Liquid Measure, (by which is sold Beer, Ale, and other Liquors,) i^ by the
Statute in this manner settled, viz. The Beer Gallon to contain 282 Cubick
Inches, each Inch being a solid like a Dye, each side of which is an Inch in
length, viz. its length, breadth and thickness an Inch. And the Gallon is
customarily subdivided into Pottles, Quarts and Pints, whence is deduced the
following Table.

Of Liquid Measure.
2 Pints a Quart. 2 Quarts a Pottle. 2 Pottles a Gallon of 282 solid Inches. 8
Gallons make a Firkin of Ale, Soap, Herring* 9 Gallons a Firkin of Beer. 10
Gallons and an half a Firkin of Salmon, or Eels, 2 Firkins a Kilderkin. 2
Kilderkins a Barrel of Beer or Ale.

But Wine Measure has by the same Statute 231 Cubick Inches to the Gallon,
which is likewise subdivided into Pottles, Quarts, and Pints, as Beer Measure
is, from whence comes the following Table.

Of Wine Measure.
2 Pints a Quart. 2 Quarts a Pottle. 2 Pottles a Gal. of 23^ solid Inches* 42
Gallons make a Tierce of Wine. 63 Gallons a Hogshead. 2 Hogsheads or 3 Tierces
a Pipe or Butt. 2 Pipes, or Butts, or 6 Tierces A Tun of Wine.

Wheat, Barley, and other Grain, Salt, Coals, Sand, all dry Goods, and such as
have substance in them are measure* by dry measure, the least of which is a
Pint, according to the following Table.

Of Dry Measure.
2 Pints a Quart. 2 Quarts a Pottle. 2 Pottles a Gall. 2 Gallons a Peck. 4
Pecks make a Bushel Land Measure. 5 Pecks a Bushel Water Measure. 8 Bushels a
Quarter 4 Quarters a Chaldron. 5 Quarters a Weigh.

Of Time.
The Original measure of Time is a year, which is the time where in the Sun
performs his natural Motion or Course, through the Ecliptic, beginning at
Aries, and so going through the 12 Signs of the Zodiac, till he return again
to the first scruple of Aries, which he performs in 365 days, and almost 6
hours, and the 6 hours are reckoned only every fourth year, and then there is a
day extraordinary added to the year making in all 366 days, which day is added
to February, and that year is called Leap-year; and according to the foresaid
measure is the year divided and subdivided, as in the following

Table of Time.
60 Seconds a Minute. 60 Minutes an Hour. 24 Hours a Day natural. 7 Days make a
Week. 4 Weeks a Month. 13 Months, 1 Day and 6 Hours a Year.

But the Year is most commonly divided into 12 unequal Calendar Months, whose
Names and the number of days contained in each take as follows.

days January 31 February 28 March 31 April 30 May 31 June 30 July 31 August 31
September 30 October 31 November 30 December 31

But they are more briefly sum'd up for the Memory in the four following old
Verses.

Thirty days has September,
April, June, and November,
But February* has twenty eight alone,
And all the rest have thirty one.
Titles of Honor for Superscription, or Appellations in Letters.
TO the King, Sir, or may it please your Majesty, Sacred Sir, Dread Sovereign.

To the Queen, Madam, or may it please your Majesty.

To the Princess, Madam, or may it please your Royal Highness.

To a Duke, My Lord, or may it please your Grace.

To a Duchess, Madam, or may it please your Grace.

To a Marquess, My Lord, or may it please your Lordship.

To a Marchioness, Madam, or may it please your Ladyship.

To an Earl, My Lord, or Right Honorable.

To a Countess, Madam, or Right Honorable.

The same to a Viscount, or Viscountess.

To a Baron. My Lord, or may it please your Lordship.

To a Baroness, Madam, or may it please your Ladyship.

To all Ladies and Gentlewomen indifferently, Madam.

To a Baronet, or Knight, Sir, or Right Worshipful.

To an Esquire, May it please your Worship.

To a Gentleman, Sir, or much Honored.

To the ^lergy, Reverend Sir, the Archbishop of Canterbury* having the Style of
Grace, and the other Bishops the Style of Right Reverend.

Several Examples of Letters, Bills of Exchange, Bills, of Parcels, Receipts,
etc.
A Letter from a Youth at the Writing School in London, to his Father in the
Country.
Honored Father, London, March 11. 1692.
MY Humble Duty presented to you, and to my Mother, and I Return you hearty
thanks for all your kindnesses showed to me; I make bold to present you with
these few Lines, being the first fruits of my Endeavors in this kind, and I
hope you will please to pardon the imperfections of my performance, and I doubt
not but in a short time to ^e so well accomplished as to give you a Better
Account of the Expense of your Money, and my own Time, wherefore at present let
me crave your acceptance of this from.

To his Honored Father Mr. Gardner at Southampton. These Your Dutiful Son
Thomas Gardner.

A Letter from one lately gone from School to his School-fellow there.
Loving School-fellow, London, May 12. 1692.
I Return you many thanks for all the kindnesses which you have been pleased
formerly to show me, and I now heartily wish when too lat^, that while I had
the opportunity which you now enjoy, I had made a better Improvement of those
precious moments, which I then too much slighted and neglected, therefore I
advise you as a Friend, to beware of that harm which I am now too sensible of,
and know that the greatest time you can spend in Learning will be too little to
gain Perfection in those most Exquisite Arts which you are now Laboring after;
your parents are in Health, as are all other Friends who desire to be Remembered
to you, I pray as you proceed let me have now and then a Line or two from you,
and you will much oblige

To his Loving Friend Mr. Thomas Swingler. These Your Loving School fellow John
Clark.

A Letter from a young Man newly out of his Apprenticeship, to his Friend for
Correspondence.
Respected Sir, London, May 10th. 1692.
I Have now finished my seven years Apprenticeship, and am by the assistance of
God and my Friends, just entering into the World for an Employment, and being
conscious to my self that my Trade depends upon Acquaintance, makes me thus
bold to renew our former intimacy; Sir, if it lies in your power to be
serviceable to me in the way of my Trade, either by your self or other Friends,
I shall not only thankfully acknowledge your kindness, but to the uttermost of
my power approve my self as I am,

To Mr. Lucas at Lambeth. These Your Friend and Servant James Dendy.

A Letter from a Shopkeeper to another for Goods which he wants.
Sir, Whitchurch, March 12. 1692.
I Am credibly informed by a Friend, both of yours and mine, that you are very
well provided and stockt with sundry parcels of Wares, such as I have at
present some occasion for, wherefore I am willing to essay a Trade with you,
and would pray you for the present to send me about Ten Pounds worth for a
sample, and if I find they are for my turn, I shall immediately give you order
for Forty or Fifty Pounds worth more, send them, and the lowest price of them
by the first opportunity, and I shall be punctual in making payment according
to order, in the mean time I remain

To Mr. Sherbrook in London. These. Yours to command Tho. Wickstead.

The Answer.
Sir, London, March 20. 1692.
YOurs of the 12th Inst^nt I received, and according to your order have sent
you (by John Jones the Carrier) a parcel of Goods, which come to 10 l. 7 s. 6
d. The particulars whereof, together with their prizes are inserted in a Bill
of Parcels herein enclosed, for the payment whereof, I shall give d^ order in
my next, in the mean time I hope they will prove to your satisfaction, and be
the foundation of a further Acquaintance and Dealing with you, and assur^ your
self, that whatsoever you shall entrust to my charge shall be performed and
managed with the greatest Candor and Fidelity imaginable, and if there happen
any miscarriage in packing or ordering of Wares before they come to your hands,
upon notice given thereof it shall be amended or allowed for, to your own
content, in the mean time I take leave, and subscribe my self

To Mr. Tho. Wickstead at Whitchurch These. Your Friend and Servant Tho.
Sherbroo^*

A Servants Letter to his Master.
Sir, Taunton, April 4th 1692
YOurs of the 28th past I received, and shall be as careful in the management
of your Affairs as if they were immediately my ow^ Concerns, my diligence shall
always supply your Room in your absence I have discoursed Mr. Gilbert
concerning your Affair, and he seem very inclinable to have an accommodation
therein, and intends speedily to write to you himself concerning it; as for
those Goods which (...) ordered me to send you, I find them not for your turn;
but Mr. Burgi^ has some excellent Perpetuana's, which if you approve of, I
shall send you by the first opportunity after Order; I have enclosed some
Samples with their prices: Thus with my humble Service to yourself, etc. I
remain

Your faithful Servant to my power John Patteso^

Forms of Bills of Exchange.
A Copy of an Inland Bill.
London, March 14th. 1692.
AT 10 days sight of this my only Bill of Exchange, pay to Mr. John Brewer of
Salop, or his Order, the Sum of Fifty Pounds, current Money, for the value
Received here of Joseph Pebworth, make good payment, and place it to the
Account of

To Mr. William Compton of Salop This. Your obliged Friend William Costin*


When the Bill is accepted, and day of payment comes, the Receiver gives a
Discharge for the same on the out side of the Bill, as follows.

March 27* 16. 2.
REceived then the full contents of the within written Bill of Exchange; I say
Received by me

John Brewer.


A Copy of an Out-land Bill, the First.
London, March 14, 1692. for 3^ l. Sterling, at 3^ Shillings 8 d. Flemish.
AT Double usance, pay this my first Bill of Exchange unto Hendrick Coopman, or
Order, Three hundred pound Sterling, at Thirty four Shillings Eight pe^ce
Flemish per l. Sterling, for the value of John Pennington, and place it to the
Account, as per advice from

Yours James Goodman.

To Mr. Tho. Corbet Merchant in Amsterdam.
A Copy of the Second Out-land Bill.
London, March 14. 1692. for 300 l. Sterling, at 34 Shillings 8 Pence Flemish.
AT Double usance pay this my second Bill of Exchange, my first not paid, unto
Hendrick Coopman, or Order, Three hundred Pounds Sterling, at Thirty four
Shillings Eight Pence Flemish per l. Sterling, for the value of John
Pennington, and place it to Account, as per advice from

Yours James Goodman.

For Mr. Tho. Corbet Merchant in Amsterdam.
A Copy of the Third Bill of Exchange.
London, March 14. 1692. for 300 l. Sterling, at 34 Shillings 8 Pence Flemish.
AT Double usance pay this my third Bill of Exchange, my first and second not
being paid, unto Hendrick Coopman, or Order, Three hundred Pounds Sterling, at
Thirty four Shillings Eight Pence Flemish per l. Sterling, for the value of
John Pennington, and place it to the Account, as per advice from

Yours James Goodman.

For Mr. Tho. Corbett Merchant in Amsterdam.
It is Customary with Merchants and others, when they have sold Goods to the
Shopkeeper upon delivery thereof to give in a Bill of Parcels, the Form
whereof take as follows.

A Bill of Parcels. Sold May 14. 1692. to Tho. Gardner per John Burgis, viz.
l. s. d. 164 Else of Holland Cloth at 4 s. 4 d. 35 09 08 236 Pieces of Fine
Lawns at 11 s. 6 d. 135 1^ 00 286 Else of Green Bays at 2 s. 4 d. 33 07 04 41^
Else of Linen Cloth at 2 s. 9 d. 57 04 0^ 518 Else of Dyed Canvas at 1 s. 4 d.
34 10 08 358 Pieces of Dyed Fus^ians at 18 s. 6 d. 331 03 00 290 Pieces of
white Ditto at 17 s. 246 10 00 Total Sum 873 18 08

A Shopkeepers Bill Sold to Robert Carpenter of Horsham.
l. s. d* March 27. 2 Barrels of Raisons 06 06 08 April 10. a Box of Cinnamon 07
09 0^ May 8. 120 l. of Pepper at 2 s. 12 00 00 20. 144 l. of Tobacco at 20 d.
12 00 00 June 12. A Box of Sugar Candy 64 l. 3 07 06 30. A Box of Fine Sugar
240 l. at 6 d. 6 00 00 Total Sum 47 03 04

Workmens Bills.
When any Bill is paid it is customary to give a Receipt for the same on the
backside of the Bill, viz.

July 20. 1692. Received the full contents of the within written Bill, per me

l. s. d. 47 03 04

John Burgis.

A Carpenters Bill. Mr. Thompson his Bill for Work and Materials.
l. s. d. For 20 Load of Oak at 44 s. per Load 44 00 00 For 30 Load of Firr at
36 s per Load 54 00 00 For 360 Foot of Oak Plank at 3 d. 04 10 00 For 20
Thousand 10 d. Nails at 6 s. the Thous. 06 00 00 For ^5 Thousand 6 d. Nails at
4 s. 4 d. per Thous. 0^ 08 04 For 9 Thousand of double Tens at 10 s. 04 10 00
For 40 l. of Large Spikes at 4 d. per l. 00 13 04 For 10^0 of Deals at 6 l. 10
s. per Hundred 65 00 00 For 94 days work for my self at 3 s. ^4 02 00 For 116
days work for my Man at 2 s. 6 d. 14 10 00 For 64 days for another Servant at 2
s. 6 d. 08 00 00 Total Sum 220 13 08

A Bricklayers Bill. Mr. Johnson his Bill for Work and Materials.
l. s. d. For 8 Thousand Bricks at 13 s. a Thousand 05 04 00 For 10 Thousand of
Tyles at 17 s. a Thousand 06 10 00 For 4 Thousand of Pan Tyles at 20 s. a
Thous. 04 00 00 For 800 of 10 Inch Tyles at 12 s. a Hundred 04 16 00 For 160
Ridg Tyles at 2 d. per Tyle 01 06 08 For 18 Hundred of Lime at 14 s. 6 d. 13 01
00 For 14 Load of Sand at 4 s. 10 d. 03 07 08 For 28 days for my self at 3 s.
04 04 00 For 34 days for my Man at 2 s. 6 d. 04 0^ 00 For a Labourer 30 days at
20 d. 02 10 00 Total Sum 49 04 04

A Receipt in part of a Bill.
REceived the 17th of March 1692. in part of the within written Bill the Sum of
Twenty nine Pounds four Shillings and four Pence; I say Received

l. s. d. 29 04 0^

per me Jeremiah Platton

A Receipt in part for Rent.
REceived July 26. 1692. of James Thompson the Sum of Four Pounds Ten Shillings
in part of a Quarters Rent for his dwelling House due at Midsummer last, I say
Received

l. s. d* 04 10 0^

per me Theophilus Johnson

An Acq^ittance from one that Receives Rent by virtue of an Order from the
Landlord.
REceived the 14th of April 1692. of Richard Powel the Sum of Eight Pounds Five
Shillings for a Quarters Rent for his dwelling House, due at Lady Day last,
Isa^ Received for the use and by the special Order and Appointment of my
Master, John Robinson Esquire.

l. s. d* 03 05 0^

per me Stephen Steward.

A Copy of a full Discharge.
REceived the ^th of December 1692. of Mr. James Farringdon the Sum of twenty
six pounds, fourteen shillings, and ten pence, being so much due upon Account,
and is in full of all Reckonings, Dues, Debts, Accounts, Claims and Demands
what soever, to the day of the date hereof, I say Received

l. s. (...) 26 14 1^

per me Thomas Trumplin.

Or thus.
May 18th 1692.
REceived then of Henry Halfgood the Sum of thirty four pounds, seven
shillings, and six ^ence, being for Goods sold him at sundry times, and is in
full of all Accounts, Reckonings, Bonds, Bills, Debts, Dues, Claims, and
demands whatsoever to the day of the date hereof, I say Received

l. s. d* 34 07 06

per me Thomas Mercer.

A Copy of a General Release.
KNow all Men by these presents, that I Jonathan Webster of Bridgnorth in the
County of Salop, Mercer, have Remised, Released, and for ever quit Claim, and
by these presents do, for me, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, Remise,
Release, and for ever absolutely quit Claim unto Jonathan Hawley of Claverley
in the County aforesaid, Shoemaker, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
all, and all manner of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings Obligatory,
Debts, Dues, Duties, Accounts, Sum, and Sums of Money, Judgments, Executions,
Extents, Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever
both in Law and Equity, or otherwise howsoever which against the said Jonathan
Hawley I ever had, now have, or which I, my Heirs, Executors, or Administrators
shall, or may have, Claim, Challenge, or Demand, for, or by Reason of any
Matter, Cause, or Thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the World unto the
day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof I have here unto set my
Hand and Seal

this twentieth day of June, Anno Domini 1692. Jonathan Webster.
Sealed and Delivered in the presence of

Simon Howland, John Thornton.



A short Bill of Debt.
REceived and Borrowed the 24th of June 1692. of Mr. Edward Eveling the Sum of
Twenty Pounds of Lawful Money of England, which I promise to pay upon demand.
Witness my Hand and Seal the day and year above written.

John Jones
Test George Lovelace.
Another of the same.
KNow all Men by these presents that I Nehemiah Nonesuch of Kingston in the
County of Surry, Tailor, do Owe, and am firmly indebted to Nathaniel Nameless
of London, Mercer, in the Sum of Forty Pounds, of Lawful Money of England; all
which I promise to pay to him or his Order on the twenty fourth day of August
next ensuing the date hereof; In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand
and Seal this seventeenth day of May, Anno Domini 1692.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of James Careless, John Hunt. Nehemiah
Non such.

A Bill of Debt with a Penalty.
KNow all Men by these presents that I Nehemiah Nonesuch of Kingston in the
County of Surry, Tailor, do Owe, and am firmly Indebted to Nathanael Nameless
Citizen and Mercer of London in the Sum of Forty Pounds of Lawful Money of
England; all which I promise to pay to him or his Order on the twenty fourth
day of August next ensuing the date hereof; and that the same may be well and
truly paid, I bind me, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, in the penal
Sum of Eighty Pounds of the like Lawful Money of England. In witness whereof I
have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this seventeenth day of May, Anno Domini
1692.

Sealed and Delivered in the presence of James Careless, John Hunt. Nehemiah
Nonesuch.

A Bond for the same Sum in English.
KNow all Men by these presents that I Nehemiah Nonesuch of Kingston in the
Count^ of Surry, Tailor, am holden, and firmly do stand bound unto Nathanael
Nameless Citizen and Mercer of London, in the Sum of Eighty Pounds of good and
Lawful Money of England, to be paid unto the said Nathanael Nameless, or to his
certain Attorney, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns. To the
which payment well and truly to be made I bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrator^ firmly by these presents. Sealed with my Seal, dated the
seventeenth day of May in the fourth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
and Lady William and Mary, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini 1692.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the abovebounden Nehemiah
Nonesuch, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of them do well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Nathanael Nameless, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the just Sum of Forty Pounds of
like Lawful Money of England upon or before the four and twentieth day of
August next ensuing the date hereof, without fraud or further delay, that then
this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, but otherwise to be and
remain in full power, force and virtue.

Sealed and Delivered in the presenc^ of James Careless, John Hunt. Nehemiah
Nonesuch.
O
A Table of some Words as are alike in sound but different in signification.
A
Abel, Adams Son. A Bell, that rings. Able, sufficient. Accidence, Introduction
to Grammar. Accidents, Chances. Account, Reckoning. Account, esteem. Aims, he
levels at. Alms, given to the poor. Ale, Drink made of Malt. Ail, as what ails
you.
B
Bail, Surety. (...) bale, a pack. Bair, Cloth so called. Bays, of the
Bay Tree. Bacon, Swines flesh. Beacon, on a Hill. Beckon, to nod at one. ^all,
to play with. ^aal, an Idol. ^awl, to make a noise.
C
^all, to name, or call any one. ^aul, that covers the Bowels. ^aul, for the
Head. ^arrier, one that carries. ^ariere, full speed. ^ease, to leave off.
^eize, to lay hold on. ^ize, bigness, or to Gild with. ^hair, to sit in.
D
Dam, to stop water. Damn, to condemn. Dame, a Mistress. Dear, Beloved, of
great price. Deer, Venison. Defer, to put off. Differ, to vary.
E
Ear, that you hear with. Year, twelve months. E^re, before. Farly, betimes.
Yearly, year by year. Earn, to deserve. Yearn, to compassionate: Yarn, Woollen
thread.
F
Fain, to have a mind to. Feign, to counterfeit. Fair, Beautiful. Fare, to
feed. Fear, trouble. Felon, a Thief. Fellon, a sore on the Finger.
G
Garden, where Herbs grow. Guardian, a Trustee. Gentle, mild. Gentile, like a
Gentleman. Gentiles, Heathens. Gentles, Maggots. Grass, that grows. Grase, to
eat Grass.
H
Hair, on the Head. Hare, a wild Beast. Are, as we are, ye are. Air, the
Element so called. Heir, to an Estate.
I
Idle, Lazy. Idol, a false God. Imply, to signify. Employ, Business. Incite,
to stir up. Infight, understanding.
K
Keel, the bottom of a Ship. Kill, to bereave of Life. Kiln, to put Fire under.
Kin, related. Ken, within sight. Keen, sharp.
L
Latin, speech. Latten, Tin. Lines, in writing. Loins, part of the Body.
League, a Covenant. Leg, that you stand on.
M
Male, the he Creature. Mail, a Coat of Mail. Major, a Field Officer. Mayor, of
a City, or Town. Manure, to till ground. Manor, a Lordship,
N
Naught, bad, Naught, nothing. Nether, lower. Neither, none of them.
O
Oar, to row with. Ore, unrefined Metal. Our, belonging to us. ^our, of time.
P
Pail, a Vessel. Pale, Color, or wa^. Pale, bounds. Pare, to cut off. Pair, a
couple.
Q
Queen, the Kings Wife. Queen, a base Woman. Quarry, of Glass. Query, a
Question. Quench, to put out fire, or thirst Quince, a Fruit so called.
R
Raze, to demolish, blot out. Race, strife in running. Raise, to lift up. Rays,
of the Sun. Rake, to scrape together. Wrack, ruin.
S
Sale, to be sold. Sail, of a Ship. Salve, for Wounds. Save, to preserve or
defend. Same, the same thing. Psalm, a Spiritual Song.
T
Tail of a Beast. Tale of Robin Hood. Time of the day. Thyme, the Herb so
called. Tears of the Eyes. Tares, a sort of Grain.
V
Vacation, time of leisure. Vocation, Employment. Vain, to no end. Vane on the
main Topmast.
W
Walls of a Garrison. Wales of a Ship. Wait, to attend. Weight, heavy.
Usual Christian Names of Men with their Original Significations.
A
Aaron, a Teacher. Adam, Man Earthly. Alexander, helper of Man. Ambrose,
Divine, Immortal. Andrew, Manly. Anthony, flourishing. Arthur, a Bear.
Augustine, Majestical.
B
Barnabas, Son of Comfort. Bartholomew, Son of the Wanes. Benjamin, Son of the
Right Hand. Brian, shril voice. Bernard, Lord of many Children.
C
Charles, Courageous. Christopher, Christ Carrier. Cornelius, an Horn.
Constantine, fast, firm.
D
David, Beloved of God. Daniel, the Judgment of God. Dennis, Divine Mind.
E
Edmond, Blessed, Pure. Edward, happy keeper. Enoch, taught or dedicated.
Ezekiel, seeking the Lord.
F
Ferdinando, pure peace. Francis, free. Frederick, peaceable Reign. George,
Husbandman. Gervas, all sure and firm. Gerrard, well reported. Gilbert, bright
pledge. Gregory, watching. Guy, Guide or Leader.
H
Henry, Rich Lord, Hier^me, Holy Name. Hugh, Comfort.
I
Jacob, a Supplanter. James, a Maintainer. John, gracious. Joseph, increase of
the Lord. Joshua, a Savior. Josiah, Fire of the Lord. Isaac, Laughter.
K
Kenhelm, defense of his Kindred.
L
Leonard, Lion-like Disposition. Lawrence, flourishing. Lewis, Refuge of the
People. Lodowick, Famous Warrior.
M
Mark, High. Matthew, Gods Gift. Michael, who is like God. Maurice, Moor.
N
Nathanael, the Gift of God. Nehemiah, Comfort of the Lord. Nicholas, Conqueror
of the People.
O
Oliver, the Peace bringing Olive. Owen, Noble, well-born.
P
Paul, little, humble. Peter, a Stone, or Rock. Philip, a Lover of Horses.
R
Ralph, help. Randal, fair help. Richard, Rich Lord. Robert, Famous in Counsel.
Roger, strong Counsel.
S
Sampson, there the second time. Simon, obedien^, listening. Solomon,
peaceable. Stephen, a Crown.
T
Theodore, Gods Gift. Theophilus, a Lover of God. Thomas, bottomless deep o^
twin. Timothy, honoring God.
V
Vincent, Victorious.
W
Walter, a Pilgrim, or General. William, Defense to many.
Z.
Zachary, the Memory of the Lord.
Usual Christian Names of Women with their Original Significations.
A
Abigail, the Fathers. Alice, Noble. Agnes, Chaste.
B
Barbara, strange. Beatrix, Blessed. Blanch, white, fair.
C
Catherine, Pure, Chaste. Constance, constant, firm. Cicely, gray-ey'd.
D
Dousabel, sweet, fair. Dido, a Man-like Woman. Dorothy, the Gift of God.
E
Elianor, Pitiful. Elizabith, Peace of the Lord. Emme, a good Nurse.
F
Frances, free.
G
Gertrude, all true, amiable.
H
Helena, pitiful.
I
Jane, Gracious. Joan, Gracious. Judith, praising, confessing.
M
Magdalen, Majestical. Margaret, Pearl, Precious. Mary, Exalted.
P
Phebe, clear, bright. Priscilla, Ancient.
R
Rachel, a Sheep. Rebecka, fat and full.
S
Sarah, Lady, Dame. Susannab, Lilly, or Rose.
U
Ursula, a little Bear.
W
Winifred, Win, get Peace.
FINIS.

