Morbus Anglicus: OR, THE ANATOMY OF CONSUMPTIONS. CONTAINING The Nature,
Causes, Subject, Progress, Change, Signs, Prognostics, Preservatives; and
several Methods of Curing all Consumptions Coughs, and Spitting of Blood. With
Remarkable Observations touching the same DISEASES. To which are Added, Some
brief Discourses of Melancholy, Madness, and Distraction occasioned by Love.
Together with certain new Remarques touching the Scurvy and Ulcers of the Lungs.

The like never before published.

By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhil. 1666.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
LEst my Reader's Fancy should be distempered with that common brain-disease
of Jealousy, in calling to account the design of the Author, or the contents,
and Phrase of his discourse, I shall do him a kindness, and my self right, in
praeinforming his judgment to anticipate those too frequent injust censure,
both of the one and the other; I mean of Author and Treatize. What concerns
the design; it is universally known, that many write out of an itching, or
affectation of seeing their names in Print; others out of an interest, or
expectation of Praise, preferment, or profit; and but few out of a single and
ingenuous intent, to benefit the public, and promote Learning. That vain scope
of the first rank is manifestly apparent in the texture of what they expose to
view, being tracts, Translated, or Compiled out of several Collections, which
at the best deserve no other denomination, than patcht or botcht pieces Neither
can they easily palliate their sordid drift, that disperse Books for their
profit, which contain little else, than a rude and imperfect description of
what the Title promises, taking only an occasion thence to inform their Reader
with one half, and to prompt em to repair to the Author to buy the other half;
this we see is the ordinary design of many of those Physic Authors, that have
of late years thronged into the stage. But being conscious of the sincerity of
my own thoughts in that particular, I am very apt believe, there is no ingenious
person but will upon the least survey of these Medical remarques construe them
designed for public advantage; or else should sooner devote'em to the flame,
than his lecture. And to render this Discourse more universal, and accommodated
to the meaner capacities, I was desired to explain every hard word and term of
Art; whereto I readily yielded, by joining another vulgar word to it in
Italique Letters, included in a Parenthesis; which method is only observed in
the former part, where the Reader must acquant himself with the said terms and
obsoure words to understand the latter. To those of a more polished intellect
that pains will seem needless; and the explications nauseous; However they may
without regret pass it by, since in the bulk of the work I have chiefly
endevour'd to gratify them with matters of greater importance, and have
omitted such insertions, which generally in other tracts are far more
displeasing. In the first place whatever any of the whole Catalogue of Authors
Ancient or Modern have writ concerning Consumptions, they will find it plainly
digested in a third part only of this Treatise; the remainder I have filled up
with very remarkable observations, both Theoretick, and Practical, which I had
abstracted from the Diseases of many hundreds in several parts of Europe.
Moreover I imagine, I have detected several errors many have and do still
harbor touching the nature and Causes of a Consumption; which I have likewise
dissected into all its possible kinds or Species. I have been very frank in
giving you my own Sentiment of the essence and the various causes of the
Disease; and thereunto added the solution of several very necessary queries;
and at last set down the most approved methods for preservation and cure, used
in Italy, Germany, and France, by the most famous of Hermetical and Dogmatical
Physicians. Besides this general dissertation, I have made particular
reflections throughout the whole on that sort of Consumption, that is so
Endemick to this City; and strictly inquired into those external causes, viz.
diet, motion, air, etc. which latter I find to act the greatest part in this
Morbifique aggression; as my self can particularly witness; for having passed
but a few months within the Walls, I soon apprehended an oppression on my
Lungs, which then for my health's sake gave me occasion to make search for the
best air about Town, which after a serious consult with my thoughts I concluded
to be in Hatton-Garden, whither I immediately transported my self, and do find
it the purest and most serene Air that is about the City. This by the way, to
give you an instance of the benefit redounding from the change of air, though
but to a small distance. Moreover touching the contents of this following
Tract, you will meet with some no vulgar observations on Women's Diseases, which
since plainly delineated, may bring my modesty into question among such as are
unacquainted with discourses (...) that nature. To these I have nothing more to
say, than that I move within my own Sphere, and have rendered my self in
expressions familiar to Physicians. But one point more I must prevent your
probable censure in, that having declared the evils of a Spermatick Plethory,
my drift is not to exhort any to incontinency, that monster of vice, but to
prevent the danger of it by a spare Diet, Devout Lise, or (for the lust and
desperate remedy) by Marriage.

THE ANATOMY OF CONSUMPTIONS.
The Proem.
COntingent ( accidental) Death seems to be the sole adaequate ( justly
fitting) object of popular Courage; but a necessary and unavoidable coffin
strikes paleness into the stoutest heart, and beyond all other swifter
terribles, the lazy but sure paces of a Consumption, which we observe often
willingly inclines those to embrace vain pity, whose resolution Fire nor Sword
can relaxe. This so mortal an Enemy to humane life does the more earnestly
implore succor from Charitable Physicians, the ambition to which Character
has wrested these Medical ( Physical) pages ( leaves) from our lucubrations (
night Studies.)

CHAP. I. Of the Original, Contagion, and frequency of Consumptions.
It Is a great chance we find, to arrive to ones grave in this English Climate,
without a smack of a Consumption, Death's direct door to most English hard
Students, Divines, Physicians, Philosophers, deep Lovers, Zelots in Religion,
etc. London's Weekly Bills number deep in Consumptions; the same likewise
proving inseparable accidents ( attendants) to most of the other Diseases;
which instances do evidently bring a Consumption under the notion of a
Pandemick, or Endemick, or rather a Vernacular Disease (a disease always
reigning in a Country) to England; that is a common disease owing its rise to
some common external and perennal (lasting all the year) cause of a Country;
as a Consumptive Air, or a Consumptive Diet. viz. eating much Flesh, drinking
Hopt drink, etc. And beyond this denomination the disease may not improperly be
styled Epidemick (popular,) that is, surprising many at a certain season of the
year; as we may observe Consumptions to be most raging about the Spring and
Fall, according to the dictate of the Divine old man (Hippocrates,) Malum ver
tabidis, itemque autumnus. that is, the Spring is bad for Consumptives, and so
is the Fall. And considering withal its malignity and catching nature, it may
be connumerated (numbered) with the worst of Epidemicks ( popular diseases,)
since next to the Plague, Pox, and Leprosy, it yields to none in point of
Contagion ( catching;) for it is no rare observation here in England, to see a
fresh colored lusty young man yoked to a Consumptive Female (Wife,) and him
soon after attending her to the Grave. Moreover nothing we find taints sound
Lungs sooner, than inspiring ( drawing in) the breath of putrid ( stinking and
beginning to rot) ulcer'd, or consumptive Lungs; many having fallen into
Consumptions only by smelling the breath or spittle of Consumptives, others by
drinking after them; and what is more, by wearing the Clothes of Consumptives,
though two years after they were left off.

The disease descending frequently from Consumptive Parents to their Children,
speaks it Hereditary ( gotten as it were by inheritance from ones Parents,)
insomuch that whole Families, sourcing ( descended from tabefyed ( consumed and
dried away) progenitors (ancestors,) have all made their Exits (dyed) through
Consumptions; and in that order and Sympathy of consanguinity (near Relation,)
that I have heard of six Brothers Parisians ( Inhabitants of Paris) all expired
of Consumptions exactly six months one after another. Besides, I have known
several, Father and Son, Mother and Daughter, tabefyed (consumed) within Twelve
months one of the other.

Most contagious Maladies (catching diseases) have their Original recorded, the
Leprosy in the primitive generation of the Jews, the Pox in the year 1494. the
Scurvy in 1495; but the Consumption o'retops them all in antiquity, that
questionless being the primitive disease before all others, which in all
probability put a period (end) to our Protoplasts (first formed) Adam and Eve's
days; for they being disseised ( turned out) of their most happy seat Paradise,
and so far discarded ( cast out) out of Gods favor, could not but fall into a
most dismal, sad, and melancholique drooping, for the loss of their happiness,
the occasional cause and forerunner of a Marcour, or drying and withering of
their flesh and radical moisture ( the deep oily moisture of the parts,) or
otherwise they might have Spun the thread of their lives much longer, their
principles of life being created in them to extend to an Eval duration (
lasting without end.)

CHAP. II. Of the various acceptions of Consumptions.
THe common chink, through which errors and erroneous opinions do and have
slipped into the Scholastique republique, to the endangering and enfoncing
(drowning) of truth, is the too frequent misapprehension of the name of a
thing, which being understood in one sense by me, and in another by you, must
necessarily occasion us to discrepate ( disagree) in the thing it self; and
this certainly is the great cause of so many controversies and disputes between
the Learned, and such others as are equally balanced in right reason: now were
not the misconception of the name various between them, being considered really
rational, they could not but agree in the thing it self, or otherwise they
could not be estimated both rational. When my self was a Student in the
Universities, and often being desired to oppose ex tempore, did no more than
wilfully misapprehend the names of things contained in the question, and upon
those false nominal mis-consceptions, could with the greatest ease imaginable
perform that task as long as I pleased, and so may you, or any man else. Being
now conscious of the great errors and dangers, that may result out of a
mis-conception of the names of things, shall so much the more apply my
endeavors to a distinct explanation ( explaining) of the names of my Subject,
which usually are variously understood. Physicians in their Physical
discourses, make use of several names, which are all translated into this one
word of a Consumption, as if they bore no different significations; such are
Phthisis Phthoe, Pie, Tabes, Morbus tabificus, Marcor, Marasmus, a Marcid
Fever, an Hectic Fever, and an Atrophia.

The first denomination, to wit Phthisis, an Athenian word, is generally taken
for any kind of an universal diminution ( lessening) and colliquation (
melting) of the body, which acception its Etymology ( derivation) (...), to
consume, implies; but some are of opinion the word (...) ought to be written
(...) with an v, deriving it from (...) to spit.

Hippocrates 7. Aph. 16. by Phthisis (Consumption) intends only such a
diminution or shrinking of the Body, as follows incurable Ulcers of the Lungs,
that are accompanied with a small Fever. Cornelius Celsus applied the word
Phthisis to these three Diseases. 1. to an Atrophia, and in that signification
did Aristotle also take it, when he wrote in 28. Probl. 1. that Dionysius dyed
of a Phthisis. 2. To an Ulcer of the Lungs. 3. To a Cachexia, or ill habit of
body; but the Greek Physicians were wont to call any one (...); i. e.
Phthisicus, who was either grown lean only, or who was taken with a proper
Phthisis, and consumed away; or who was naturally inclined to a proper
Phthisis, namely by having a long Neck, a narrow Chest or Breast, Shoulders
sticking out like wings, (whence they named such a one (...), that is, winged)
a weak Brain, apt to send down Rheums or Catarrhs, and weak Lungs, that are
disposed to receive Rheums and humors from the Brain. Lastly, Phthisis is
properly and strictly taken according to Hipp. for a Consumption of the Body,
following an incurable Ulcer of the Lungs, and attended with an Hectic Fever.

Phthoe is likewise an Athenian word, importing a proper Consumption,
occasioned by an Ulcer of the Lungs; but Galen 5. Met. 15. by Phthoe intends
the spitting of blood.

Pie is by Aretaeus (lib. 1. de cause. and sign. diut.) used for a proper
Consumption.

Tabes is the Latin word responding (answering) to Phthisis, and implies the
same proper and improper significations. Hippocrates makes mention of six sorts
of Tabes, or proper Consumptions. viz. first libr. 2. de Morb. he affirms that
the body often wastes by reason of a thick Phlegm, being retained within the
Lungs, and there putrefying; according to which sense he writes, that a
Distillation in the Lungs is suppurated ( turned to matter) in twenty days. 7.
Aph. 38. The second he terms a Consumption of the Kidneys. Thirdly, the word
Tabes is often understood by him for a Consumption of the Lungs without being
ulcerated, and depending upon a hot and dry Distemper of the Lungs, or an
Hectic Fever. Fourthly, by Tabes he does also conceive a Consumption of the
Lungs with an Ulcer and Hectic Fever. Fifthly, lib. 2. de Morb. he inserts
another kind of Tabes, which he calls a Tabes Dorsalis, or Consumption of the
back. Sixthly, 3. Aph. 10. and 13. he proposes two kinds of Tabes or
Consumptions, the one being a wasting of the body, occasioned by any internal
cause, the other happening through some Ulcer in the Lungs. Morbus tabisicus is
a term expressed by Hippocrates, denoting any kind of Extenuation or
Consumption.

Marcor, five ex aegritudine Senectus, seu ex Morbo Senium, is an extreme
diminution or Consumption of the body, following the extinction (quenching) of
the Innate (born and bred in us) heat, much like to a tree, that is withered or
dried away by excess of heat, or length of time. The said Marcour may likewise
be caused by Famine or over abstinence from food. Read Galen lib. de Marcore.

A Marasmus, imports three significations, viz. 1. A Consumption following a
Fever. 2. A Consumption or withering of the body by reason of a natural
extinction of the native heat, which commonly happens in those that dye of old
Age. 3. An extenuation of the body, caused through an immoderate heat and
dryness of the parts, which sort is common to young and old folks. A Marasmus
is otherwise distinguished into true and false. The former is an equal
diminution of all the parts of the body; the latter is an extenuation (
shrinking) of a single part only; as, the Stomach and Liver are often observed to
be consumed or withered in those, that dye of an Hectic Fever; the like
extenuation does frequently happen to the breast, Mesentery (a thick Skin of
the Belly that ties the Guts) Colon, Iejunum, (both names of Guts) and Kidnesy;
but the Diaphragma (the Midriffe, being a thick Musculous Skin that separates
the breast from the Belly) is only exempted from a Marasmus, or withering,
because that would necessarily intercept the breath, or occasion a Frenzy,
before it could arrive to such a dryness. Lastly, a Marcour is either
imperfect, tending to a greater withering, which is cureable; or perfect, that
is an entire wasting of the body, excluding all means of Cure.

Febris Marasmodes, seu febris marcida, according to Galen lib. de Marcore cap.
5. is an equal withering or drying up of all the parts of the body, it is
ordinarily a consequent of a burning colliquative ( melting) Fever, whereby
the humors, grease, fat, and flesh of the body are melted, and afterward slow
into the capacity ( hollow) of the Belly: The softer and moister parts being
thus melted away, the Febril ( Feverish) heat continuing its adustion (
burning) upon the dryer fleshy parts, changes into a Marcid Fever, which said
parts wasting gradually through an insensible evaporation of their subtiler
particles, are at length dried up into the hardness and toughness of Leather.

An Hectic Fever implies a twofold sense. 1. It Is taken for any confirmed,
fixed, and durable Fever, admitting of no easy cure, or rather a Fever
that is grown habitual, in opposition to a Schetical (superficial or moveable)
Fever, which being but lately arrived is easily expelled, as a Diary or Putrid
Fever. 2. It Is more generally understood for a Fever in the solid parts, into
whose Penetrails (depth) and essential principles insinuating, is there as it
were planted or rooted, and consequently proves the most stubborn to Cure of
all other Diseases. What is meant by the solid parts and the Essential
principles you may know in the next Chapter.

An Atrophy is by some taken for a diminution of the body, for want of good and
laudable nutriment (food,) which being rejected by the parts, must necessarily
shrink for want of better nutriture. By others it is understood for a
Consumption of the parts of the body, weakly, or depravately ( wrongly,) or not
at all attracting nutriment, whether it be good or bad, or insufficient in
quantity. Lastly, it implies a diminution of the body, happening by reason of
some fault in the Excretive (expelling) faculty of the parts, excerning or
evacuating more than necessary. Peruse Galen de Sympt. differ. cap. 4. The said
Consumption may also be supposed to arrive through fault of the Retentive
(retaining) faculty of the parts, not retaining the nutritive ( nourishing)
humors long enough. Thus much for differencing those terms, which otherwise
might erroneously be taken for one and the same kind of Consumption.

CHAP. III. Of the Fundamental Principles, or Balsamic Mixture.
BEfore we make a further inroad into this Treatise, it will be material to
acquaint my Reader with the sense of these terms, which we have familiarly made
use of throughout this discourse, namely Fundamental or Essential Principles,
Essential or Balsamic mixture, Innate heat and Radical or Balsamic moisture:
all these though differing in words, import the same signification, as we shall
now discover to you. In order to this, you are to take notice, that an Infant
in the Womb principally receives its first constitution or generation from the
Sperm ( or Seed) of its Father, injected (cast into) into the Womb of its
Mother, which (to wit the Womb) contributes little else to it, than the earth
to the Seed, that is shed or sown in her, namely keeps the Seed close together,
that the Spirits may not evaporate (fly out in vapors,) cherishes it by her
own Innate (rooted and fixed) and Influent (sent from the heart) heat and
spirits, thereby stirring, strengthening, and assisting the spirits of the Seed
in the Womb, in forming the parts of the Infant intended; and lastly, transmits
blood to the Seed to give the parts so formed an increase. The Seed consisting
of a glutinous ( glewy) or Balsamic ( thick and cleaving like to a Balsam)
moisture, and a turgency (fullness) of Spirits, displays it self (being now thus
enclosed and stirred in the Womb) into several parts of various ( different)
figures and shapes, as, into a Heart, Brain, Liver, Spleen, Arms, Legs, etc.
These parts being of a very small proportion, as formed out of a small quantity
of Seed, are no more than Foundation Piles of the ensuing body; which are
afterward to be increased and raised to a greater bulk, by the affluent (
flowing to) blood, that is transmitted ( sent down) out of the Mothers body
through proper Veins and Arteries into the Womb, where it is glewed fast to
those said foundation (rather fundamental) parts, and soon after assimilated or
converted into flesh, and other similar substances, whereby I say every part
grows bigger.

The Ihfant being thus arrived to a competent Mole ( bigness,) makes its sally
out of the Womb, that is now grown too little to give it any longer harbor; and
having thus passed the Streights, it is tossed into the wide world, where it has
got room enough to grow into its full dimension (measure,) which is performed
by the daily ingestion ( swallowing down) of milk and other food, that is in a
short time after digested into blood which being diffused ( spread abroad)
through the Arteries and Veins to all the parts of the body, is, as we
instanced before, agglutinated ( glewed) to those upper parts, that were
immediately agglutinated to the foundation parts in the Womb: and thus you see
the Infant grows bigger out of the Womb, by agglutinating one affllux of blood
to another. Upon this premitted illustration it is no hard task to express to
you the meaning of Fundamental or Essential Principles, which imply nothing
else than the forementioned Foundation parts. So likewise the Essential or
Balsamic mixture denotes nothing but the Sperm or Seed, whereof the
fundamental parts consist; and it is called Balsamic mixture, because it is a
glewy spumous matter, mixed with a great quantity of Plastic spirits (or
spirits of the Sperm, that form the shape of the parts in the Womb) into the
consistence of a Balsam, and may not improperly be named Essential, from its
constituting the essence of the parts. The said Plastic spirits are
concomitated ( attended) with a powerful heat, which is therefore denominated (
named) the Innate heat (or heat born in us,) because its rooted and fixed in
the fundamental parts, and is inseparable from them during life. The Balsamic
moisture expresses the glewy spumous matter of the Sperm, which is termed
Radical, or the root moisture, because it is the root and foundation of all the
parts of the body.

Finding you thus conducted through a smooth way, we'll instantly open a door,
to give you passage to a more abstruse ( hidden,) but pleasant speculation,
viz. the manner of a proper and improper Consumption, together with the reason
of the incurability of the former, and facil ( easy) cure of the other. The
Sanguin parts, that are superstructed ( built) upon the said Spermatick (
seedy,) or rather Fundamental parts, out of the continual afflux ( flowing to)
of blood to them, may per-chance be wasted or diminish one day for want of
materials, namely blood, or by reason of some indisposition or fault in the
blood; the next day possibly those defects of the blood may be supplied by a
copious ( plentiful) afflux of good blood, whereby the preceding diminished
parts happen to reincrease. Which ebbing and flowing of the parts may in no
wise be censured a Consumption, improper or proper. But supposing the
forementioned Consumption should prove so durable, as to absorb ( dry up) and
extenuate ( diminish) the said Sanguin parts to an extreme degree, it is
evident, that the Fundamental parts must necessarily come into danger; which
being once attaqued ( forcibly entered upon,) and considerably consumed, the
superstructure ( or the whole body, that is built upon the Fundamental parts,)
must unavoidably fall and come to ruin; which degree of Consumption we term a
proper Consumption, as obtaining its seat in the foundation of the body, and
admitting for the most part of no cure, or at least a very difficult one. We
may appositely ( to our purpose) compare this discourse of a proper and
improper Consumption to a decaying house, which though decaying or falling away
by losing a roof, or a wall, comes in no great danger; but if neglected, the
house begins to totter, and continuates its rupture ( breach) to the very
foundation, which once wasted or endammaged, the house must necessarily fall;
and so the case stands with a superficial or improper, and a fundamental or
proper Consumption of the body. So that as you will read in the next ensuing
Chapter, it is not every over-fasting, or over-labouring, or Physicking, that
renders a man lean, and extenuates his parts, comes within the Sphere of a
Consumption, since such an impair is soon rectifyed again; but as I inserted in
the 4. Chapter, it is a durable and somewhat an habitual extenuation ( or
wasting) of the Sanguin or Fleshy parts, that are not easily reduced to their
pristine ( old) constitution, by reason of some habitual fault or disease of an
Entrail, moving directly to the Fundamental parts, where it may effect a
perfect Consumption.

CHAP. IV. Of the nature of a Consumption in general.
THe word Consumption being applicable to a proper and improper, or true and
Bastard Consumption, requires from us a Generical ( general) description,
quadrate ( fitting) to both. So that a Consumption in that respect, is a
counter-natural ( against nature) Hectic ( deeply fixed) latent ( hidden) and
equal diminution, extenuation, or rather a wasting of all the parts of the
body, notwithstanding the daily ingestion ( taking) of food with appetite.
Whence appears, that the diminution or wasting of ones flesh in Fevers, is not
to be termed a Consumption, because that extenuation is acute, and Schetical (
superficial,) that is violently quick, not lasting, and of no difficult cure;
whereas in a Consumption the diminution is slow, durable, fixed or habitual,
and yiedling to no easy cure. Neither can it be reputed a Consumption, where
the body is suddenly extenuated by fasting, that being rather a disease of the
mind, refusing a timely supply of food to the body. Moreover it is requisite the
extenuation ( wasting) should be universal, and not of some parts only, as in a
Dropsy, where the upper alone do undergo a diminution, and the lower an
increase ( or swelling;) nor of a single part, in which case it is styled an
Atrophy, or withering of a part; as an Atrophy of an Arm, Leg, Toe, or Finger.
Lastly, the diminution of parts must be latent ( hidden,) not caused by an
overlabouring, or want of sleep, or by being over liberal in satisfying Women's
impertinences, the causes whereof as they are externally obvious, so they imply
no Consumption; though indeed there be a manifest shrinking of the slesh,
especially in the last instance, viz. excess of Amors ^enereal ^ports.
(lust) which in many we may observe to cause the appearance of a perfect
Consumptive, or Hippocratical face, as hollow Eyes, a sharp Nose, shrunk
Visage, etc. Insomuch that it is impossible to distinguish them from the last
degree of Consumptives, but by their having a livid circle about their Eyes, (a
peculiar sign of a goatish extenuation) their Schetical ( sudden) leanness, and
the absence of an Hectic Fever.

Many through their extenuation by a course of Physic do often put a fallacy
upon peoples fancies, that judge them Consumptive, and particularly those that
are Physic for a Clap, whose specific ( particular) disposition of body at
that time is in a fortnights Physicking to be reduced to an Hippocratean
(shrunck Consumptive) Visage, in such sort, that their acquaintance do usually
give them up for lost; but herein their state is differenced from a proper
Consumption, that upon their entrance into a course of Physic, they are apt in
a very short time to lose their flesh, so as to counterfeit Anatomies, and
afterward upon the least intermission of their Medicines to impinguate ( grow
fat) to admiration; besides their facil ( easy) support of churlish Remedies,
which none but Pockifyed Patients could sustain with so small an impair of
strength.

CHAP. V. Of the nature of a Proper and True Consumption.
IN the preceding Chapter, we have set down a description of a Consumption in
general, comprehending a Proper or True, and Improper or False Consumption. Our
present purpose is to begin with the first, and give you a brief, but plain,
explanation thereof. Wherefore note, that Physicians when terming a Disease,
(but in their sense it is rather a Symptom) a Consumption, do for the most part
intend a Proper Consumption, which we do here describe, To be an habitual (or
hectic, confirmed or radicated) slow extenuation against nature; or rather a
devouring of the Fleshy and Spermatick parts of the body, through an immediate
slow corruption of the Essential mixture, viz. the Radical moisture, and the
Innate heat. Whence you may deduct, that ordinary extenuations of a Month or
two, more or less, are not to be nominated Proper Consumptions, which relating
to the profound Balsamic mixture speak great danger of death, difficulty of
cure, and implicitly a long space of time before any such offense against
nature can be offered, because of the deep latency (hidden situation) of the
substantial principles.

Consumptive extenuations must be against nature, to exclude natural ones,
occasioned through want of food, required to fill up the vacuities (empty
spaces between the Pores) of the parts, that happen through their daily
dissipation (or dissolution;) but it is rather an Absorbing (sucking up) or
devouring of the parts by Corrupting their Fundamentals, whereby every part
does not only shrink, but grows sensibly less in its substance, so as the
parts, as far as they are consumed, can never be recovered, or made greater, by
reason of the dissolution and corruption of their Fundamental mixture, and the
return of their substantial principles into their first elements; unless it
were possible to infuse new substantials into them, which to imagine faisible,
portends a man to want a grain of his right Reason; and certainly none but
such, as pretend to be mere Chemists, would assert, that Potable Gold (aurum
potabile, or Gold Chymically reduced to a liquor, or a thin oil, thereby being
rendered potable, or sit to be dranck) contains a virtue of recruiting or
augmenting Natures Essentials; which if possible, it is requisite the said
Potable Gold should be endued with a capacity of being agglutinated (glewed,)
and assimilated (converted into a likeness)* to the Innate heat and Radical
moisture; or at least be virtuated with a power of generating the said
essentials out of the humors within the Vessels. The former of these instanced
ways is rejected, because it is impossible a mineral (as Gold is) that is
inanimate, (dead) and incapable of receiving life, and of another genus (kind,)
should be converted into the highest and purest degree of an animate substance,
as the Spermatick essentials are; for if minerals are not convertible into
another Species, though of the same Genus, much less can they be surmised
reducible into a Species of another Genus. Certainly what can not be expected
from animated plants, yea Animals (living moving Creatures,) which though
belonging to the same Genus are only convertible into flesh and other
dissipable parts, but not into Spermatick ones) it is a vanity to look far in
dead minerals. Touching the vain effects of Aurum potabile you may read more at
large in the second part of my Philosophy Book 1. Chap. 1. Par. 5. In summa,
unless it were imaginable to infuse the same animate living Sperm into the
substance and penetrails (depth) of the parts, it is ridiculous to expect
reparation from any other means; which makes it apparent, that it is more easy
to generate a new man, than to repair one, that is partly consumed in his
substantials. This by the way; but to return to the explanation of the
forestated description: Putrid Fevers depend upon the putrefaction (or a
tendance to Corruption) of the blood, whose immediate effect is the corruption
of the said nutritive (nourishing) humors, but mediately and swiftly (if
tending to death) corrupting the essential principles of the parts; where as in
a Proper Consumption the corruption is immediate, and slow. Likewise other
Diseases, as Dropsies, Jaundises, Ptisicks, etc. to arrive to the period of
life, must necessarily cause a corruption of the essentials, though slow, yet
not immediately, but mediately by corrupting the blood.

Not to be desicient in any thing, that may add to the illustration of the
subject of this Chapter, we shall annex Galen's definition of a Simple Tabes,
or perfect Consumption; lib. de Tabe. A Consumption is the dying of a living
Creature through dryness. This description is generical, extensible to
Consumptions of Ulcerated Lungs, and those that attend simple Hectic Fevers;
and so far it is agreeing to ours, that it confirms the latter branch, viz. that
it is a devouring corruption of the essential mixture, which consisting chiefly
of an oily moisture is corruptible through dissipation, or being dried away,
which Galen here intends by dryness, to wit the drying away of the Balsamic
moisture. Moreover Galen's Commentators make mention of a two fold dryness, the
one concomitated with a heat, which they call a Torrid Tabes; the other with a
coldness, termed Ex morbo Senium, when the parts are consumed through
extinction of their native heat, and dissipation of their Radical moisture Gal.
in the forecited Book subjects all the parts of the body to a simple
Consumption or Tabes, excepting the Lungs, which being of a moist and soft
temperature seem not at all disposed to suscept any dryness. But on the
contrary, it is ordinary for Smiths, Cooks, and others, whose employment is
conversant about the Fire, to incur such an extreme dryness of their Lungs,
that in the dissection of their Carcasses, they appear liker Spunges than moist
Lungs; the like observation you will read below touching the withered Lungs of one
Pendarves.

CHAP. VI. Of the nature and kinds of Bastard Consumptions.
IMproper or Bastard Consumptions are only slow growing extenuations (or
wastings) of the fleshy parts, directly moving to a True and Proper
Consumption, by reason of some indisposition of the intern parts, humors, and
insluent spirits. In proper Consumptions there is a devouring of the Spermatick
parts, and essentials, here only of the flesh and humors. So that a Bastard
Consumption is curable with ease, because it is no more than a superficial and
growing malady, relating to the consumed fleshy parts; but the other implies a
very difficult cure, not by restoring the Spermatick parts, (which as we showed
in the preceding Chapter is impossible;) but only by stenting and removing the
corruption of the forementioned essentials.

A Bastard Consumption chiefly comprehends these following. 1. An
Hypochondriack Consumption. 2. A Scorbuick Consumption. 3. An Amourous
Consumption. 4. A Consumption of Grief. 5. A Studious Consumption. 6. An
Apostematick Consumption. 7. A Cancerous Consumption. 8. An Ulcerous
Consumption. 9. A Dolorous Consumption. 10. An Aguish Consumption. 11. A Febril
Consumption. 12. A Cachectick Consumption. 13. A Verminous Consumption. 14. A
Consumption of the Rickets. 15. A Pockie Consumption. 16. A Poisonous
Consumption. 17. A Bewitched Consumption. 18. A Consumption of the Back. 19. A
Consumption of the Kidneys. 20. A Consumption of the Lungs.

All these tending to a True Consumption, unless anticipated (prevented) by a
mortal acute Disease, do justly come under the notion of Bastard, or growing
Consumptions. Neither is it our purpose to treat farther of of these Diseases,
than relating to Consumptions, the manner whereof, how they may be conceived to
cause such extenuations, we shall succinctly (in short) set down in particular
Chapt.

CHAP. VII. Of an Hypochondriack Consumption.
AN Hypochondriack Consumption is an extenuation of the fleshy parts,
occasioned by an infarction ( clogging and over filling,) and obstruction of
the Spleen, pnrcreas, mesaraick, and Stomachick Vessels, through melancholy,
or gross, dreggish, tartarous humors; whereby it happens, the blood is not
sufficiently defaecated, or clarifyed, but remains muddy, and ditchy, which
stagnating ( standing still without motion) thus for a while turns saltish and
acrimonious, offending and perverting the Stomach, Spleen, and Liver in their
Offices, a necessary precedent of vitiated ( foul) blood, which being rejected
by the parts, the body must needs fall away for want of better nutriture (
nourishment.) This salin sap of the Vessels for being refused reception of the
parts, indues daily a greater ferocity (fierceness,) and declares it self in a
more hostile (like an Enemy) manner, by insinuating (peircing) into the
profundity (depth) of the parts, and so drying, absorbing (sucking up,) and
consuming the Radical moisture and Innate heat, arrives to a Proper
Consumption. Add hereunto the continual vigilies (overwaking, or want of
sleep,) melancholique, sorry, dull, lingering passions, the said Hypochondriack
patient is praecipitated (forced) into, whereby the spirits being rendered dull,
stupid, languid ( fainting), and suppressed, are deserted ( left) incapable of
ventilating (breathing) and purifying the blood, and debilitated ( weakened) in
attracting ( drawing) nutriment for the parts, which consequently must wither
and shrink. It Is no wonder therefore so many Melancholicks do daily drop into
perfect Consumptions, since their praevious (foregoing) indisposition does so
directly tend to an absolute marcour (dryness.

Among the rest of the Entrails, we have inserted the Spleen the chief seat of
this Hypochondriack evil, against which assertion may be objected; that the
Spleen rather seems to be superadded for some use, than any public function of
defaecating ( clarifying,) or engendring blood. The use allotted for it, may be
to fill up that empty space, that would be, if the Spleen were wanting, or to
transmit heat to the Stomach for to promote digestion, or to serve for a
supporter to the Veins and Arteries, that pass through it to several parts of
the body. That its not destined for any absolute necessary function of
generating or clarifying the blood, is inferred from that ancient custom,
Plautus, Haliabbas and Pliny lib. 11. cap. 37. speak of, where they were wont
to burn the Spleen of their foot coursers, that used to run for sport or
wagers, and some they would quite cut out their Spleen, to make them run
lighter, and render them long winded; because the Spleen is otherwise apt to
weigh down the Diaphragma (Midriff,) which is a chief instrument of
Respiration. Ro^saeus in his Treatise de Part. Caes. Sect. 4. cap. 5. inserts
an observation of several, whose Spleen were cut out; and of another, whose
Spleen was quite worn or dried away, and nothing remaining but the outward
skin. We do easily admit of the possibility of the foresaid practice, since I
have seen a trial made of it upon a Dog, but with this consequence, that it
certainly shortens life, and renders the remaining course implexed with sundry
troubles and diseases. In the mean time that office, which we allow the Spleen,
is performed by the Liver, Pancreas, and other parts, though with some
difficulty, because they are overtask'd; for doubtless in that case the grosser
part of the blood is evacuated by the Haemorrhoids, as it is usual in other
accidents, when the body is mutilated (deprived) of an Arm or Leg. So that it
appears, the Office of the Spleen is of great importance, though it may be
supplied by other parts in case it be diseased, obstructed, or exected ( cut
out.) The same exception might be started against the Liver; for were it not
for the effusion of blood of those great veins, that have their root in it, (or
according to others terminate there,) which would necessarily follow an
exection, the Liver might not only be exected, but it is Office likewise
supplied by the Spleen and the other parts. Since I have drawn my Reader a
little out of the way by this objection, I shall conduct him back to the
remainder of this Chapter, which is a brief inventory of the Signs of an
Hypochondriack Consumption, that so he may not be surprised with the fate of
it. 1. There is a frequent rumbling noise under the Stomach, thwarting from the
right side to the left, and thence back again. 2 Pinching pains about the
Stomach, as if they would girt a man's body close together. 3. Glowing heats
under the short Ribs. 4. Frequent belchings, that smell sour, or stink. 5. A
windiness and puffing up of their Stomach, especially after dinner, and in the
morning after they wake. 6. Much spitting. 7. Vomiting, or at least an
inclination to Vomit. 8. If upon these Signs you find a wasting of your flesh,
than look about you, especially if troubled with a Cough.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Scorbutic Consumption.
THe Scurvy is discovered a Melancholique Disease through its dreggish
tartarous Eruptions, as course boils, pustles, etc. wherein it is differenced
from Hypochondriack melancholy, whose tartar (melancholy) is retained within
the body, and for that reason proves by far more incommodious (as appears by
those doleful passions,) which if it were propelled ( cast forth,) in Boils,
Botches, or Ulcers, as in the Scurvy, would rather conduce to health, those
sharp scorbutic dregs imitating the nature of yist, in causing the blood to
ferment or work out into those eruptions ( breakings out,) whereby the blood is
wonderfully clarifyed and purged. Hence it is, that many Melancholiques and
Splenetick persons are of an exceeding merry and cheerful disposition; by
reason their melancholy by causing their blood to work, does so much clarify
it, whereout the spirits must needs afterward be generated very clear, lucid,
( light) and lively.

But of this I have discoursed more at large in Venus unmasked, Book. 1. Art.
37. Par. 134, 135. however though the Scurvy proves so healthful during its
commencement ( beginning) and augment ( increase,) yet being once advanced to a
state, is found to have endued a more disobliging and corroding nature, (as
appears by those arthritick ( gowty) night pains, and Phagedenick ( raw) Ulcers
it causes: Read my Vener. Discovery Book 1. Art. 9. Par. 39.) through the
permutation ( change) of its Nitrous and Vitriolat salt into an Armoniack,
which partaking of so penetrating and corrosive a nature, does soon attaque the
fleshy, and immediately after make, toward the corrupting of the Fundamental
parts.

A Scorbutic Consumption is easily discerned by observing a lingering wasting
of ones flesh upon a praevious ( foregoing) Scurvy, attended with a Cough; the
Signs of a Scurvy I have set down in Venus Unmasked.

CHAP. IX. Of an Amorous Consumption.
OF all Bastard Consumptions none does more rapidly ( swiftly) occasion an
extenuation of the flesh, than an Amorous Condition, which where it does
fasten, immediately causes a very sensible falling of the countenance; whence
it is a common objection, when Maids do suddenly grow thin-jawed and
hallow-eyed, they are certainly in Love. Neither is there cause wanting for so
subitous ( sudden) an alteration, where there is such a lingering, sighthing,
sobbing, and looking after the return of the absent object, the thoughts so
fixed, that they are employed upon nothing but the past Vision; and the mind
all that while so disturbed and perplexed with hopes, doubts, fears,
possibilities, and improbabilities, that the heart strikes five hundred sorts
of Pulses in an hour; and hunted into such continual palpitations through
anxiety ( oppression) and distraction, that (as the saying is) fain would it
break if it could. By means of all which alterations, violent motions, frights,
fears, and other passions, the Animal ( spirits of the brain) and Vital ( of
the heart) spirits suffer such losses and dispersions, that we see its ordinary
for young Wenches to be reduced to faintings, sownings, and extreme weaknesses,
to the admiration of their parents, whence such subitous and effrayable (
frightful) symptoms should source ( take their rise.) Galen among the rest of
his remarques ( lib. de pracogn. ad Posthum. cap. 6.) tells us of a Woman
patient of his, whom he found very weak in bed, continually tossing and
tumbling from one side to the other, and totally deprived of her rest. No
extern or intern cause could he discover of this malady, neither would she
contribut: any thing of her own confession, though he often required it of her,
which kind of mute ( dumb) deportment gave him suspicion of some melancholy, or
love business the woman was troubled with; however he repeated his visits the
second and third time, though with as little satisfaction as before; but at
last it happened one came to visit her, and told her she had been at the
Theater, where she had seen Pylades (one of the Players) dance, whereupon Galen
observed her to change her countenance, and immediately feeling her pulse,
found it to beat very various and disturbed, a sign of some trouble of the
mind, and so perceiving the same disturbance of her pulse, as often as Pylades
was discoursed of, was confirmed in his opinion, that all those symptoms were a
product ( effect) of her love. Aretaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. instances likewise a
young man, involved in the same passion, and surprised with the worst of
symptoms. And beyond all this Valor. Max. lib. 5. cap. 7. records Antiochus the
only Son of the King Seleucus, deeply fallen in love with Stratonica his
Mother-in-law, who piously dissembling his burning passion, praecipitated
himself into a most dangerous Consumption, the cause whereof his Physician
Erasistratus could in no-ways descry, before such time as Stratonica entering
the room, moved a blushy color in his face, and rendered his aspect vivacious (
lively,) but deserting him, he soon relapsed to the same paleness and languor (
faintness;) which ebbing and flowing of his countenance with the uncertainty of
his pulse, certifyed Erasistratus, of some love wound his Mother had struck
upon his heart; and declaring this accident to the King his Father, almost cast
down with grief for his Son, now even stricken with his last fate, he soon
yielded his dearest wife for a remedy to Antiochus, considering it was chance,
striving with his unparalled modesty and bashfulness, had reduced him to that
extremity. Hippocrates showed himself no less skilful in discerning the
discriminous ( dangerous) state of Perdiccas King of Macedonia, occasioned by
the doting love he harbored in his breast for Phila, one of his Fathers
Concubines, whose presence at any time excited a great alteration of his pulse.
But these passages that resent so much of natures impressions, do in no wise
merit to be admired at, when brutish dotings prove so efficacious in impelling
bodies into a marcour ( extreme leanness;) as Historians verify of a rich
Athonian, and indifferently descended, who spying a marble Statue erected in a
public place of Athens, and very curiously wrought, grew so passionate upon
it, that he spent whole nights in embracing it, at last desirous to impropriate
this object to himself, wooed the Senate to part with it, offering to lay down a
treble value; but they censuring it impious, to make Merchandise of what
belonged to the public, denied his importune request, whereupon he increased
in fondness, and bestowed a Golden Crown upon it, Clothing it also with rich
and costly Apparel, adored, and often prostrated himself before it, which the
Senate judging indecent, forbad him making any more addresses to their Statue.
The young Athenian finding himself deprived of his joy and delight, fell into a
Consumption, and before that could limit the course of his life, he cut his own
throat. This passion was not so ridiculous, but it was exceeded by the King
Xerxes, whom many Authors affirm to have been strangely inamoured upon an Oak,
which he would often hug and kiss, as if it had been some pretty Woman. Many more
modern instances we could produce to illustrate the force of this sort of
passion upon bodies, which we refer to another place. These commotions of the
mind and body do after a short continuance menace ( threaten) a Consumption, by
oppressing the heart and its vital spirits with such throngs of blood and
spirits, that are impelled and propt into its Ventricles, ( small hollow rooms
within the heart) whereby the heart is choked and obstructed in its pulsation
( beating,) and consequently hindered from transmitting vital blood to the
parts, which for want thereof must necessarily wither and dry away; moreover in
that case the blood grows thick and muddy for want of motion, and so acquires
an ill quality, and causes obstructions, as we have expressed in the preceding
Chapter; besides the spirits growing dull and stupid do not perform their
office in drawing the blood to the several parts, which must necessarily add
very much to the wasting of the body. Lastly, if those love frights prove very
violent, the blood and spirits returning in great streams to the heart, may not
only suddenly choke it, but also extinguish its Innate spirits, and so that
doting passion happens to terminate (end) into a mortal Syncope (swoun;) thus
Euryalus a Knight belonging to the Emperor Sigismund, taking leave of his
Mistress Lucretia of Siena, praecipitated her into such a Love fit, that within
a few hours after she Ghosted; which course Euryalus was like to have steered,
upon the news of that sad accident, had his passion not been diverted, by some
recreation his friends gave him. The like fate befell a Dutch Gentlewoman, upon
the sudden death of her Puppy dog, which she doted upon beyond imagination, as
the Scene afterward attested.

But young blossomed Girls seem to be troubled with another Divil within 'em,
to augment ( increase) the fire of their doting hell, and that is their Mother,
which must ever and anon be a fuming up to their throats upon the least
disturbance of their Amors (love,) as I have often been a Spectator of several,
that fell into most terrible fits of the Mother, five or six in a day, upon a
rupture of Marriage. I shall finish this Chapter with a short observation of
the Prognostics ( foresayings) of this Amorous Consumption, Young wenches once
thoroughly smitten with Love darts, seldom or never lose that first
impression, though they may be diverted by their parents, in showing them an
imparity ( unsutableness) in their Fortunes, Families, Persons, etc. and
therefore must be compelled to marry such others, as their Parents please,
perhaps being persuaded by some Bawdy-Broaker, who (according to the ancient
custom) takes ten in the hundred for so much portion he Procures, and so much
Jointure answerable to the current rate of the market, much after the form Cows
are sold in Smithfield, according to the goodness of their Hides and Tallow. In
the mean while these poor Lasses droop away, between a lingering after their
first Loves, and a certain chastity that forbids 'em eating Fish and Flesh in
one day. The only prevention of this great mischief is, to imitate the Jewish
custom, to pen up their Daughters, and let them be acquainted with none, but
such as they certainly intend for their Husbands; for beyond contradiction
their first Love stands against all opposition of imparities of fortunes,
families, or any thing whatsoever, as this narrative witnesses of a Princess of
France, who walking melancholique alone in the field, fell in discourse with a
Flemish Shepherds, and finding his person, talk, gesture, and tone of speech
quite different from the Court Company, began to admire him, and grew so much
enamored upon him, that before their parting, they designed their secret
transportation into Flanders; to which purpose she put her self into the Garb
of a Shepherdess, and in that disguise lived many years; but discovering her
self a little before her death, did profess her self the happiest person alive,
not for her condition, but in enjoying him she first loved, and that she would
rather ten Thousand times choose to live a Shepherdess (notwithstanding the
hardness and vileness that attend so despicable a life) in the contentment and
satisfaction of her Shepherd, than the glorious life of a Princess. If upon
this you require a censure, I can but say, it was the humor of a Woman.
Neither do I find men less estranged to extravagancies in this particular;
Lucius Vitellius, the Father of Vitellius the Roman Emperor, a Sage and
Prudent person, was so affectionately taken with a common Strumpet, that he
would never suffer her to spit on the ground, but always saved her spittle in
a golden Vessel he carried about with him for the same purpose, whereunto he
added so much Honey as would make it into a Sytup, which he was wont to lick
with the greatest delight imaginable. This relation does not so much savor of
folly, as that of Galeazo (Duke of Mantua) of madness, he whilst so journing at
Padua had so enslaved himself to a fond passion upon a Wench, that upon her
commanding him to drown himself, he immediately gave Spur to his Horse, and so
plunged himself headlong into the River. The great Charlemain, who was master
of the better part of Europe, yet could not Master the passion he bore to a
Gentlewoman, whom after she was dead, he would not suffer to be removed out of
his Bedchamber in order to her Funeral, and though she stunk like a Carrion,
yet sented to him like a Violet. What treachery men harbor within their breast
to betray em to their greatest Enemy, Death! what a strange enchantment, that
renders men thus wilfully sottish, melancholique, mad, and desperate! Certainly
this must be some kind of curse intailed upon mankind, for having originally
grossly transgressed in that particular. But what remedy to resist so great an
evil? Women in this case require the precedence of cure, as being the first
occasion of that sin, and first cause of the curse, witness else their mother
Eve, who could she but have passed by that sinful curiosity, God Almighty in
his wisdom had reserved a more noble way of man's propagation, in lieu, that
whereas man is now begotten in the burning Sin of lust like a beast, and born
creeping out of his mothers belly downwards toward the earth with shame, he
would have been begotten in a more spiritual manner, and have been born
gloriously, making his first ascension toward the heavens to salute his
Creator. But to our dooms we do still find the daughters of Eve persisting in
their mothers curiosity, in alluring the poor Sons of Adam to all manner of
lasciviousness and debauchery; and to that purpose they plaster their faces
with patches, rub their skin with white Lead, and go naked to the very Paps
(and they are like they say in France, to fall into the Amazones mode of waring
short coats to reach no farther than their knees;) and in this posture will
they be leaning out of their Balcones and Windows, frisking and gigling, that
they would even tempt a Saint;

Ten teems of Oxen draw much less
Than one hair of a Woman's tress.
But all this is but speculation or dumb lechery; the practick part consists in
their goatish discourses, winking at Church, going to Dancing-Schools, Plays,
Spring-Gardens, Taverns, and where not.

Kissing though repeated hundred times over, is a piece of their Dancing-School
breeding, that is not to be refused; and what says the Italian to this, Donna
basciata e mezzo guadagnata, a woman kissed is half conquered. How these
creatures may be reformed, has been the study of many ages, though as we see to
little purpose.

Thus far they all agree, women ought to keep within and seldom stir out; and
when they go forth, the Italians will have them to have neither eyes nor ears;
that is, they must not stair men in the face like bucks, nor listen after idle
talk. Neither do they think it necessary for 'em to go to Church, imagining a
Woman does very well merit her salvation, in doing penance of keeping her self
honest at home; besides, in imitation of Ovid's dictate, Otia si tollas periere
cupidinis arcus, they would have them employed twenty hours a day in Spinning,
Knitting, etc. the rest of the time in eating and sleeping.

In short, these three Devises are necessary to make an honest Woman;
Retiredness, Religion, and Employment. On the contrary, where a Woman is used
to Company, and little regards Religion, and is less employed, there is you know
what.

However, notwithstanding all these divertisements, they will now and then take
an occasion to fall in Love, though it be but by hearsay, as Guyon writes in
his diverse Lecons 1. part fol. 365. of three Gentlewomen, that fell strangely
in love with one and the same person. The Story runs thus: It happened that a
Waiting-Gentlewoman to the Duchess of Urbin, took a great liking to a
Gentleman, belonging to the same Court; but her modesty being such, as would
not suffer her to declare her affection immediately to him, advised with
another Gentlewoman a friend of hers about it, to whom she opened her breast,
expressing likewise the merits and personage of the Gentleman; whose Characters
agreeing so well with her own Fancy, she (namely the second Gentlewoman) grew
furiously enamored upon the party described, and thereupon in stead of
soliciting for her friend, she put Pen to Paper and wrote a most passionate
Letter for her self, and addressed it to the foresaid Gentleman; this letter
fell accidently into the hands of a third Gentlewoman, who upon the reading
thereof was inflamed in Love to the same person, beyond any of the others, and
began to push hard for herself: But fortune proved so just to them all, that
because of their rash indiscreet passions, they lost their pains, and went all
without him. Voilent Bruchus a Spaniard relates a passage not unlike this, of a
Duchess of Savoy, who fell desperately in Love with a Knight of the Family of
Mendoza, only by hearing his Sister say, Would to God this Princess were
Married to my Brother, and they would make the most glorious couple in the
world, for perfection and beauty. This succeeded so happily, that some time
after (as the common saying is) they had one another. These two Narratives
afford us another moral to be added as a fourth to the three forementioned
devises, to wit a young Maid must not only be kept in a perpetual retirement,
devotion, and constant employment, but must not so much as be entertained with
a discourse of love, or young men, for fear of raising that evil spirit, which
afterward would not be easily allayed.

Now, though a sole rectification of Women's corrupt passions (they by their
allurements, gesticulations ( wanton actions) sleering looks, and lascivious
discourses, being the prime movents, and inciters of this cursed inclination)
were a means efficacious enough to prevent men's sortish affections, yet we will
appose an instance or two, whereby you may observe how easily men are checked
in their amorous appetites.

Raimundus Lullius, a great proficient in Chemical Philosophy, chanced to be
furiously taken with the beauty of a certain young Woman, and being impatient
of his Love flames, did vehemently importune her to allay his passion;
whereupon she prefixed a day, which Raimund in no wise forgot to pass by, but
presented himself at the very moment: The fair Lady, like a Goddess of
chastity, in stead of gratifying his beastly lust, suddenly flung open her
bosom, and offered a most filthy, stinking, ulcer'd Cancer of her Breast to
his view, in design to relax, or rather break the strings of his Satyrick
passion, which took so good an effect, that Raimund now bore greater respects
to her for her chastity, than ever he did for her beauty. But because a sole
example is so scant an illustration, I shall not think it much to contribute
another no less remarkable than the former. Hypatia the Phoenix of her time,
both for her incomparable wit, and excellent beauty, had the fortune of being
most fondly doated upon by a young Scholar; the force of whose inclinations was
so puissant ( strong,) that it was like to impell him into a distraction: the
unparallel chastity of this virtuous Female could in no kind be prevailed with
to favor him in what he so passionately aimed at, though her compassion,
sensible of the torment he endured in that amourous hell, would have complied
in whatever had been consistent with the nature of modesty. At length she
discovered to her self an ingenious cure, to remedy the poor Scholar of his
menaced insany ( madness,) in order whereunto, knowing him to be master of a
great deal of reason, she mustered a great bundle of her menstruous rags
together (as the wise man calls them, and spread them all open before him;
saying, you men that do so admire at the Elegant shape, and Nitourous
Complexion of Women's upper parts, behold now, O Scholar! the constitution of
their lower, the object of all your Lascivious Loves; what a filthy, nasty,
detestable sight is here? whereat the ingenuous Scholar took such a regret,
having been hither to deluded, in crediting this dictate of Hermes, Quod est
superius, est sicut inferius. That is, whatever is above is like to what is
below; that ever after he abhorred the sight of a Woman. If arguments of this
kind, drawn from the false appearance of Women, would take with the generality
of men, there is enough to be said to fling 'em all out of favor. But enough of
this.

CHAP. IX. Of a Consumption of Grief.
GRief protracted to some space of time, does inevitably ( unavoidably) absorb
( suck up) the fleshy parts of the body, and strait-way hasten to a perfect
Consumption. Grief is a pain of the soul for the absence of some good thing, or
the presence of an evil thing. Now, as far as the soul o'retops the body, so
far its pains, or rather mournful sensations, exceed those of the Carcasle; A
Gowt, a Colic, the cutting off of an Arm or Leg, or searing the Flesh with an
hot Iron, are but Fleabits to the grieving pains of the Soul; for she being
only cheerful, does as easily conquer, as endure them. But it is otherwise with
the body, that immediately shrinks under the least pain of the Soul.

Among the varieties of Grief, the controversy of the greatest, is solely
depending between Grief taken for a disgrace, and Grief for the loss of a
Relation: And both these are such, as will attaque ( fall upon) and conquer the
wisest and most courageous of either Sex; Reason in either of these cases can
produce no other, than trifling arguments to suppress 'em. All ranks of Nobles
and Ignobles are observed, to yield to the fury of these Soul-pains. Bajazed
the Turkish Emperor, and Tamerian's Prisoner, rather than to sustain the
disgrace of being carried about in an Iron cage, chose death, by running his
head against the Grates.

Senca's Wife preferred dying with her Husband, before she would survive to
grieve for his death.

Cecinna Petus being sentenced to death, but with a reservation, that he might
make choice of his own way of dying, Arrion his Wife came to him, though full
of grief, and in his sight drew a Dagger, and stabbed her self, crying out, the
wound I have made does not pain me, but the wound that thou will make, O Pete!
pains me.

To give you an Emblem of a more Chronical ( of a longer time) operation of
grief, we will commend a Narrative or two more to your Reading.

One Captain Munck a Dane, famous for the Expedition he performed to the North,
to discover a nearer passage to the Indies, after a most dangerous
Winterquarter returned home, to give an account of his Voyage to the King of
Danemark his Master; who being dis-satisfied at his deportment, thrusted the
said Captain from him with his Cane, whereupon he took his leave, and went
home, but with such a resentment of the disgrace, that some few days after he
put forward to another world.

The like Scene we observe in Don Olivares the great Favorite of Spain, who
soon rendered his life to the conquest of grief he took or the disgrace of being
deposed of all his Offices and Dignities.

Fates not much differing from this befell also Cardinal Woolsey, and many
other Grandees, upon the like occasions.

In fine, it is a common observation among the Spanish Politicians, that the
surest Stratagem, to be quite rid of a Statesman, that stands in the way, and
besides to avoid popular clamours and censures, is to depose him of all his
dignities, and imprison him, where without question the apprehension of his
disgrace, or the pernicious air of a Prison, will soon set a period to the
course of his days, or at least put him upon some revengeful attempt, whereby
he may be rendered a riper object for a public Scene.

This by the way, to illustrate to you the danger of a pain in the Soul, and
the near sympathy there is between her and the body.

Touching the manner of causality, whereby grief effects such fierce symptoms,
viz. a sudden Death, and a lingering Consumption, may be collected out of the
preceding discourse upon an Amorous Consumption, to wit, the former is caused,
through a full and sudden irruption ( breaking in) of thick Melancholique blood
into the Ventricles ( narrow rooms) of the heart, thereby choking the vital
spirits, and putting a stop to the hearts pulsation, which if intermitted but
three or four Pulses, portends a certain death. The latter is achieved by a
gradual suppression of the vital spirits, through heavy tartarous ( dreggish)
blood, which (namely the spirits) defecting, must necessarily cause an
extinction of the innate heat and spirits, for whose nutrition they are
designed, and so consequently a perfect Consumption must be the ultimate issue.
Add hereto the restlesness and intermission from sleep grieved persons are
molested with, whereby the blood is much dried, the spirits consumed, and
melancholy increased.

Moreover, as melancholic blood does so much suppress the vital spirits, so
it is very unapt for ministering matter for new spirits, or being converted into
flesh, because of its grosseness and crudity. Neither does that blood continue
long so, as I said before, but acquires an acrimony, whereby it is much intended
( heightened) in its devouring and consuming quality.

CHAP. X. Of a Studious Consumption.
MOderate labor of the body is universally experienced to conduce to the
preservation of health, and curing many initial ( beginning) Diseases; but on
the contrary, the toil of the mind, to destroy health and generate Maladies,
by attracting the spirits out of the entire body from their task of Concoction,
Distribution, and Excretion, to the brain, whither they carry along with them
clouds of vapors and excrementitious humors of the whole, thereby excessively
annoying the brain and its faculties, impelling it into various Diseases, as
Catarrhs, ( defluxions of humors,) stupors, ( numness,) imminution (
lessening) of the memory and imagination; impairs of the external senses, as
dullness of hearing or seeing, imbecility ( weakness) in stirring or walking,
etc. Likewise the other parts of the body, being deprived of their spirits,
sustain very considerable damages; as, the Stomach happens to be weakened in
its Concoction, whence crudities and loss of appetit; the Spleen and Liver in
their Offices of defaecation, whence vicious, melancholic, dreggish,
sulphurous blood, and obstructions of the Bowels and Vessels; the Heart in its
distributing the blood to all the parts of the body, and strength of pulsation,
whence an Atrophia, or want of nutriment in the parts, the immediate cause of a
Studious Fastard Consumption. Add hereto a sedentary ( sitting) life,
appropriate to all Students, crushing the bowels, and for want of stirring the
body, suffers the spirits to lie dormant and dull, whence costiveness,
dispersing malign putrid fumes out of the Guts and Mesentery ( a thick double
skin that ties the Guts together) into all parts of the body, occasioning
headache, flushing of the blood to the head, fevers, loss of appetit, and
disturbance of Concoction.

It is beyond imagination to conceive the sudden destructive effects of a
Studious life; some eight or ten years since there dyed at Abington one
Pendarves, an incomparable hard Student, and Minister of that Town, who being
dissected, his Lungs were found to be withered and dried up into an exact
resemblance of an ordinary Sponge in point of substance and bigness.

The like Emblems we find frequently in Universities, where Scholars daily drop
away of Consumptions.

Neither is it an extraordinary observation, to see Consumptions in the Faces
of hundreds of the late Preaching Divines; witness else their thin Jaws and
number of Caps.

CHAP. XI. Of an Apostematick Consumption.
APostems, although internal, do rarely cause Consumptions before they break,
unless seated amongst the Glandules in the Mesentery, where I have observed
them to occasion a very discernable extenuation; which Symptom seems very
strange in that case, since a Physician can scarce find any sensible cause of
so visible an evil, the principal intrails giving no sign of the least
distemper, and the appetit consisting as formerly. In such a case many would
impute the foresaid Consumption to obstructions, no other cause, disease, or
part appearing suspicious; for a deep latent Apostem in the Mesentery if of no
great mole ( bigness,) cannot be sensibly discovered, but by conjecture only;
since the touch cannot penetrate so deep as to reach it, because of its deep
situation, neither can the relation be expected from the Patient, because the
part affected is inseusible.

In the Hospital at Leiden some twelve or fourteen years ago, I observed the
like accident in a boy, who perceiving his flesh to shrink every day more and
more, although without the least sense of any disease that should cause it,
applied himself to a Physician of the Town, where he then lived, who imputed
the cause of his Consumption to obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, (a
trodden Sanctuary for hidden diseases,) and prescribed him a Deoppilative (
opening) and Purgative Apozem, not questioning his Cure. The youth finding no
benefit, doubted his Doctor had mistaken the Disease; upon this resolves to go
to the University to see what the Professors could make of it, who all cried
out against Hypochondriack Obstructions, except Prof. Lindanus, who conjectured
it might be some hidden abscess in the Mesentery, which breaking some few days
after was discovered to be an Apostem of the Mesentery, by the evacuation of
the matter by stool.

How an Apostem in the Mesentery breaking, causes a Consumption of the parts,
is apparent, viz. by immitting purulent fumes into the Arteries, and Veins,
corrupting and affecting the blood with a malign quality, which proving very
offensive to the parts, in subverting and poisoning their innate temperature,
is rejected by 'em, whereby they are forced to wither for want of nutriment.
The said purulent vapors crowding into the substances of the principal and
sub-principal parts, viz. the Heart, Brain, Spleen, and Liver, do likewise so
infect, poison, and destroy their Innate temperaments, that they immediately
begin to languish in their offices, to the great prejudice of all the body. But
it is not so manifest by what means an Apostem in the Mesentery should occasion
a Consumption before its maturation, or breaking, since no purulent fumes can
be supposed to be transmitted throughout the body before a maturation, nor
after, unless the humor break, because the said fumes cannot transude ( sweat)
through the bag of an Imposthum.

In my opinion the parts happen to be consumed for want of nourishment, that is
intercepted from them through the Apostems tumid compression and coarctation of
the Mesaraick and Lacteal (milky) veins, whereby the transmission of Chyle ( a
white juice all our Victuals is turned into in the Stomach) and blood is
obstructed.

CHAP. XI. Of a Scirrous Consumption.
It Is requisite I should first tell you, what a Scirrus is, namely a hard
tumor without pain, feeling to the touch like a stone, caused through a
concretion of melancholic extravasate ( shed out of the veins or arteries)
Blood. Setting aside the enumeration of compound Scirrous tumors, viz. Scirrous
and Oedematique, Scirrous and Phlegmonique, Scirrous and Erysipelous, I shall
only insert the kinds of generation of a simple Scirrus; either it is primarly
generated out of the effusion of melancholic blood, or secundarily out of the
dregs and remainder of a Phlegmonous or Oedematick tumor. Either of these
befalling the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Mesentery, or any other important
entrail, may cause an extenuation of the Flesh, by compressing the vital and
nutritive Channals, and so intercepting the course of the blood and vital
spirits in their afflux (flowing to) to the parts. 2. By vitiating ( altering
to worse) the substance and temperament of the said Entrails, whereby the blood
is not justly prepared for nourishing of the parts.

CHAP. XII. Of a Cancerous Consumption.
CAncers invading any internal part of the body do in some space of time
through an Arsenical Sulphur and Armoniack Salt (Ven. read unmaskt, fol. 65.
and 67.) their constituent causes, corrode the flesh, and soon after corrupt
the Essential mixture, which done renders them absolutely incurable, unless
extirpated (rooted out) by exection or amputation (cutting off;) which within
the body takes no place.

Hereupon the blood is soon vitiated with a malign quality, and its Course
obstructed, which proves the immediate cause of an improper Consumption.

CHAP. XIII. Of an Ulcerous Consumption.
It Is needless to premit the description of an Ulcer, since its generally
known; I shall only observe their difference; some to be external, others
internal; and some to depend upon the intemperament of the part Ulcerated,
others upon the continual afflux of lacerative ( taring) humors; and lastly,
some to be irrigated ( moistened) with a more malign pus ( matter,) than others.
Of these its certain both extern and intern do often cause a gradual maceration (
wasting) of the Flesh; but of externals only such, whose pus ( matter) is
virulent (venomous and malign, the steems whereof regurgitating (flowing back)
into the Vessels, do sensibly infect the blood and the temperament of the chief
intern members, where the parts happen to be extenuated in such manner, as we
have once or twice illustrated to you already. 2. Extern Ulcers depending upon
the transmission of vitiate (foul) humors out from within the body, do
occasion an extenuation of the parts, by attracting and depriving them of their
nutriment, as I once observed in a youth in the Charity Hospital at Paris, who
through the daily and copious efflux ( evacuation) of matter through the
Orifice (mouth) of a deep Ulcer in his Thigh, was reduced to a Skeleton, (skin
and bones,) and so within a while after dyed of a perfect Consumption.

Intern Ulcers impell the parts into Consumptions through their purulent fumes,
thereby poisoning and infecting the blood that should nourish them.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Dolorous Consumption.
VIolent pains are only apt to cause inflammations and acute Fevers, which
terminating to a good or evil Crisis, are not likely to occasion Consumptions;
so that it is only lingering, soft, durable pains, do dispose patients to them,
by often attracting the spirits from other parts, and spending them; for nothing
does wast the spirits swifter than pains; so that pains for spending of the
spirits of all other accidents comes nearest to the copious and swift loss of
spirits by Phlebotomy (opening of a Vein:) Now how the diminution of spirits
causes a Consumption we have set down before in the preceding Chapters.

Add hereto the interception of sleep that pains occasion, which does very much
increase the dispersing and depopulating of the said spirits.

Next to these lingering durable pains, short intermittent, or swift recurrent
pains do precipitate patients into Consumptions; as lingering pains of the
Stone, recurrent pains of the Stomach, Meagrims, and other sorts of recurrent
headaches do frequently macerate (make lean) the parts, and render their looks
Consumptive and pining.

CHAP. XV. Of an Aguish Consumption.
AGues if deeply radicated (rooted) do frequently impell (force) bodies into
Consumptions, by vitiating (altering) the Liver and Spleen, and perverting
their Offices.

Among these, Quartans and Tertians of a long continuance do most menace (
threaten) this Symptom; the former as depending upon a corrupt incinerated
(burned) melancholy, and the latter upon an adust ( burned) Stibial or
Aeruginous Sulphur: both these being very active in devouring the fleshy parts,
and intrenching upon the fundamental mixture.

A true and simple Tertian, terminating according to the ordinary observation,
in seven returns or Paroxysms, is now and then succeeded by an Hectic Fever,
a fellow Symptom to a true Consumption, by reason of its swift termination,
leaving some deep relics of its cause (viz. Stibial Sulphur) in some of the
chief parts, where it lies closely impacted ( propt in) and is not easily
extermined (removed.)

Now, had the said Tertian been of a more slow and gradual pace, it would
gradually have expelled those Relics; so that you may know how dangerous it
proves, for an Ague to disappear without taking Physic for it.

CHAP. XVI. Of a Febril Consumption.
WE have often observed, that malign continual peracute ( very sharp and violent)
Fevers do after most dangerous and doubtful attaques suddenly remit into a
sensible abatement of the ardent (burning) heat, insufferable thirsts, immanous
( raging) Headaches and Phrensies; besides a change of their low quick inequal
Pulles, into more ordinate ones, and a mutation of their red fiery Urin into a
thick milky color and curdle settling; by all which appearances hundreds of
young Physicians have been deceived, and thereupon confidently asserted their
Patients free from all danger; but much to their shame; for these be certain
signs of an Hectic Fever, and a true or perfect Consumption, as appears by
their weak and languishing condition, without any sense of pain or heat, or
perversion of their reason, which may continnue so with them for two or three
weeks, and then they expire like a wasted candle.

Moreover it is attested by many Physicians, that a Continent Fever, or a
Synochos imputris does sometimes migrate ( change) into an Hectic Fever.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Uerminous Consumption.
PHysicians do ordinarily observe three sorts of Worms, engendered within the
body of man, viz. ordinary Gut Worms ( Lumbrici sive vermes teretes) of a long
and slender shape like ordinary Earth Worms* being generated out of a slimy
matter, colliquated from the Mesaraick Glandules and adhering to the intern
tumicks (skins) of the thin Guts, which as soon as vivifyed ( grown live)
through a vital spirit enclosed within that slimy matter, as it were in a bag,
and so shaped into Worms, loosen and slide off from the intern tunick ( coat)
of the Guts, and frequently creep into the Stomach for nutriment, being
attracted thither by the sweet chyle ( the white juice of the Stomach,) whence
they are called Stomach or Mawworms. These being most usually engendered in
Children, do commonly cause them to look hollow-eyed with a lived ( of a lead
Color) Circle about the under eyelids, sharp nosed, thin jawed, and
incommoded with a slimy mattery Cough, stink of Breath, and an Erratick Fever;
all Symptoms very near a kin to those of a True Consumption, and if not
prevented in time render their Subjects incurable.

The cause of the foresaid extenuation of body and hollow-look, is imputed to
the defect of nutriment, arriving through the chyle's ( the white juice of the
Stomach) being absorbed by the Worms, and the bloods vitiation ( alteration) by
malign putrid vapors, smoking throughout the Vessels out of a putrefyed slime
of the Guts, and so consequently rendered unapt of being apposed ( joined) to
the parts.

The said putrid vapors through exciting a Fever do colliquate the Phlegmatic
humors of the body and brain, which transuding ( sweating through) or
distilling to the Lungs, cause their mattery Cough.

The stink of breath is caused through steems, rising from the corrupted chyle
of the Stomach.

There is a second sort of Worms, commonly resembled to a Woman's hair-lace or
fillet, thence called Taenia or Tinea, generated likewise in the Guts. The
shape of these Worms is flat, small, and round, like to Gourd Seeds, which
being linked together to the breadth and length of an ordinary hair-lace, seem
to be united into one entire Worm, which sometime is found to be of an
incredible length, it may be of five or six yards, as Tulpius records in his
observations. Iacobus Oethaeus lib. Observe. Med. attests to have seen three
Worms evacuated by a Woman, the longest whereof did equal Eighteen yards.
Alexander Camerarius recites one of twenty yards long. Platerus reports a view
of several Worms, that were at least forty foot long. The breadth of this
Verment is sometime an inch, othertimes half an inch broad. It appears usually
of an Ash color, marked with black spots, or cross lines going a thwart,
dividing it into thousands of small bodies like Gourds. Motion it has none, so
that it can scarce be termed a moving creature, neither does it live, because
it does not increase internally like living creatures, but by apposition. So
that it is called a Worm only from it is external shape, and appearance, the head
is small and long, and the tail short.

Persons thus vermifyed ( troubled with Worms) seldom go to stool without
avoiding a great quantity of those verminous ( wormy) seeds, and are often
incommoded with gnawing griping pains round about the Navil, oftimes extending
to the Hip-bone; which gnawing pains are apt to increase upon the least
emptiness of Stomach, so that the patient is ever obliged to fill his Gut with
an immoderate proportion of food, not only for to nourish his body, but also to
appease that ravenous Verment, which notwithstanding does defraude the body of
its nutriment, and infects the spirits with malign steems, which in some space
of time must necessarily produce a very sensible extenuation of the parts.

The material cause of this Worm is a vicious slimy chyle adured by a strong
heat, that dryes it up into such numerous bodies.

Ascarides are a small sort of Worms like Magots, bred in the intestinum
rectum, or Gut of the Fundament, exciting an incommodious itching of the
Fundament, with frequent desires of going to Stool. They are usually discovered
by the excrements being perfused with them. This sort of verment, immitting
putrid fumes into the Vessels does sometimes cause faints, and Convulsion Fits,
as Iessenus witnesses to have seen such accidents in several. They may also by
the same malign smoaks occasion a decay of the parts, though more rarely than
Maw-worms or a Tinea.

These Ascarides do now and then creep into the Thighs and other parts.

Worms are likewise generated in most other parts of the body, though very
infrequently. Bauhinus (if I mistake not) speaks of a Worm generated in one of
the Ventricles of the Heart, the patient dying of a Consumption. Hollerius
reports a Worm discovered in a man's Brain. Duretus remarks another generated in
the Kidneys, and evacuated by Urin. Several make mention of Worms engendered in
the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, etc. all perducing their subjects into Consumptions.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Pockie Consumption.
THe ordinary back door the Pox goes out at, when it commits its subject to
the custody of its first Mother Earth, is a Pockie Consumption, occasioned
through the dispersion of virulent steems out of the hearth of those
Phagedenick Ulcers; by immanous ( outrageous) arthritick ( of the joints)
pains, and continual vigilies ( intermission from sleep.) But since I have
discoursed of this in my Venereal discovery fol. 167. and 168. I shall insist
no farther upon it.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Bewitched Consumption.
I Shall not here undertake the task of discussing the possibility of fascinous
( bewitched) Diseases farther, than refer your censures to such experimental
instances as are produced for it. But whether those experimental remarques may
be credited; and if so, whether to be imputed to Witchcraft, therein lies the
point of controversy. Now these three Specific notes will easily resolve the
query.

1. The Symptoms of Witchcraft must transcend the dependence on natural causes,
as Vomiting Pins, pieces of Nails, etc.

2. There must be several credible witness, that assert the sight of those
supernatural Symptoms.

3. The said Symptoms, as they are supernatural, so they must be only curable
by supernatural means, namely by Devout Prayers, or Diabolical imprecations (
cursings) and exorcisms, by the same or other Witches. Several there have been,
that attested the sight of persons, that vomited Pins, Hair, Pieces of Nails,
Feathers, etc. these certainly are supernatural Symptoms, if true; but those
witnesses being such, as their testimonies might well be doubted of, infer no
conclusion.

3. it is certain some there have been that have vomited up the foresaid bodies,
but they were such, as to get money from the Spectators, had swallowed up thick
short blunt Pins, or Feathers, and vomited them up again voluntarily, as having
a power to force themselves a vomiting at their pleasures by straining, or by
other means in taking Vomitories privately.

These two Symptoms are generally asserted fascinous. ( bewitched) viz.

1. A Lingering Consumption without a sensible internal or external cause, and
yielding to no kind of Physical Cure.

2. Effrayable and supervulgar Convulsion Fits, distorting the patients Neck
and Back in a manner, that it is a Thousand wonders they are not broken, or
dislocated, turning their eyes even round within their heads, deluding their
Phansies with strange frightful visions, speaking strange languages, etc. an
emblem of the first we have in the relation of King James the 4. or 5. of
Scotland, who falling away in his flesh more and more every day, without the
precedence of any Procatarctick cause that should occasion it, as Melancholy,
ill Diet, etc. and notwithstanding the helps of Physic against any intern
cause or Disease, that might be rationally conjectured, at last was suddenly
cured by decharming the Witchcraft, that that had long been suspected, and at
length discovered in Danemark, which was an Image of Wax exactly resembling the
said King, (whereby it was also known) and pierced through in several parts of
the body with pins, and particularly in those parts, where the the King felt
his pains, which as they were taken out of such parts, so his pains ceased
likewise at the same instant in the same parts; and being all drawn out, felt
himself entirely cured, and suddenly grew fat again. In reference to the
decision of this instance; there can be only this objected, that had the King
taken no Physic, his Disease might more probably have been suspected
fascinous; but since he had made use of the best Medical helps the Art of man
could afford, which continued for a long space do often at last perform
marvailous cures; the Kings subitous recovery ought rather to be attributed to
the Skill of his Physicians. Likewise Children are very apt to fall suddenly
into a wasting of their flesh, which happening as the other instance without
any visible cause, is frequently termed a Bewitched Disease; but questionless
that Symptom must depend upon some obstruction of the Entrails, or Verminous
disposition of body; and therefore a meet hallucination (error) of the Vulgar.

The second particular is exemplifyed in Hysteric ( troubled with Fits of the
Mother) Women, especially Maids, the rarity of whose Symptoms does often strike
such an atonement into Spectators, that they confidently report them possessed
with the Devil. In the year 1661. there lived one Mary Wait of the Society of
Free-willing Baptists, at Horly in the County of Oxon, who was frequently
troubled with miserable gripes in her Guts, pinchings at her heart, choking at
her throat, suppression of her breath, blows on her head, ejaculations from her
seat, and sometimes off of the Horses back whereon she rid, now and then was
struck dumb, deaf, and blind, often entertained with Angelick Visions, and
reduced to a very low ebb of Strength, etc. all which extravagant Symptoms her
Visiters were pleased to term Sufferings and Buffetings of Satan, and
accordingly, to the intent of turning this evil one out of possession, they
spent near upon a Twelvemonth with her in Prayer, but to little purpose, until
such time that one of her Visions revealed to her, that she should feed upon
bread and water, boild to a Panada, and drink nothing but Spring water; whereby
she soon grew rid of her Devil, and entirely recovered. Now observe, to this
day cannot that people be persuaded, but that the foresaid Mary was possessed
with the Devil, and ascribe her deliverance to their implorations ( prayers;)
so that judging the nature of the Disease by the remedy ( a juvantibus,) if we
believe she was delivered from those Fits by Prayers of the Godly, we cannot
deny the Disease to be Diabolical ( of the Devil:) But since the case appears
quite in another dress to the eye of a Physician, who can soon produce parallel
Symptoms, if not worse, issuing from ordinary Diseases, we may justly doubt of
the rise of this.

It Is not rare to see young Amorous Girls through the fury of an Hysteric (Fit
of the Mother) Paroxysme cast into a Trance for an hour or two, and all that
while under a resemblance to the features of death; and possibly diverted with
some merry Phansies or rare Visions of their Sweet-hearts, or of Kings,
Princes, etc. and it may be some a Courting or Embracing of them, which makes
'em now and then burst out into a strange Fit of laughing, to the amazement of
their Visiters.

Others again of a more zealous frame during their Trance seem to converse with
nothing but Angels or Devils, as this foresaid Mary, who according to the
Narrative seems to have had several interviews and discourses with Angels and
Devils, the contents whereof she afterward recited to her Brethren, who
faithfully recorded them upon Parchment, as some new Revelations.

But those of a more trist (sad) and melancholique composure, their Hysteric
Trances proving Tragic perspectives to them, perhaps of beholding the murder
or execution of some of their dearest Relations, or those they bear an
affection to, are incident into sudden cries and howling tears.

And lastly, the Fits of others seems most Energick in their tongues, in
occasioning them to speak strange Languages, and Sentences like Oracles; to
which latter some of this age have given an equal credit, with that of the
Ancients to the Oracles of Delph.

It Is inserted in Histories that a Maid of Liege, whilst detained with one of
her Uterin Passions, expressed her self very fluently in the Greek Tongue,
although when released of her Fit, she was utterly ignorant of the said
Language.

Another Italian Lass Peter Messiah, (...) Camerarius makes mention of in his
Ho^ Succ. who proving Phrentick through the extremity of a Fever, spoke very
good French, without ever having been known to be experienced in that Tongue.
But to return to Mary, wherein I do willingly retard my self somewhat the
longer, since a^ entire tract has been published by her Brethren to delude the
world with their miraculous casting out of a Devil; which all the while proved
to be no other than an Hysteric Passion; and if that may be termed Devil, then
many an Hysteric Woman has a Devil more in her than she had before.

To render the point more clear; (...) choking in her Throat, griping, and
pinching of the heart, (Cardiaca passio) he^ trancing, imaginary beating of her
head, (which is no other than a sudden Convulsion of the Dura matter) her being
cast off her Seat or Horses back, an effect of a strong Convulsion violently
and swiftly retracting all the Muscels of the body one way, which must needs be
forcible enough to cast the body to a great distance; for a man voluntarily can
cast his body a great way by leaping* through the natural impulse of some of
his Muscels, much more when they are all violently moved one way by a strong
Convulsive motion; her strange visions and imaginations, etc. are all genuine
Symptoms of an Hysteric Passion, or Fit of the Mother, fuming up in malign and
poisonous clouds to her Guts, and there causing a griping, thence to the mouth
of the Stomach, and there occasions that seeming pinching at her heart; thence
to her Heart, where it caused a Deliquium (fainting) and Syncope, (sowning) so
up to the Lungs, whence her choking; and thence to the Brain, the occasion of
all her depravate ( false) visions; or sometimes those venomous fumes might
directly have tended to the brain, and spring of the seven pair of Nerves; and
thence down the back, where they may impell all the Nerves and Muscels into a
Convulsion. Add hereto her cure by Panada, and drinking of Spring water,
(argumentum a juvantibus) singularly conducing to the repelling of those uterin
fumes, (smoaks of the Mother) and coarctating ( shrinking) the passages,
whereby the said fumes must necessarily be intercepted, and in time absolutely
cure her.

However this one Symptom seems the strangest of all, that as she rid on
Horseback she saw the Devil twice making to her in the shape of a black Angel.
As to this I am very apt to believe her; and the manner thus: her Imagination
being depraved with those black Hysteric smoaks, and accustomed to receive an
impression of a Devil, from those black clouds forming themselves into such a
shape within the Cells of the Brain, possibly just at the termination of the
Optic nerves, (the Sinews of the sight,) they might easily return to the same
shape and impression; besides, those clouds so shaped might as well make an
impression upon the roots of the Optic Nerves within, which continuated to the
eye, especially if hebetated ( rendered dull or dozed,) cause the same
perception, as a wind within the head, when the brain is distempered by a cold,
beating against the root of the auditory Nerve (the finew of the hearing) and
protracted to the Tympanum (a little Skin within the Ear) causes the sensation
of a noise, as if it were heard from without, though it is not; or in short,
why should not the Eye be subject to be deceived by an object from within, as
well as the Ear by an internal noise, or the Tongue by a taste from within? that
it is so, is apparent in Phrenticks, who do really imagine, they see that
without, which their imagination is affected with within.

CHAP. XX. Of a Consumption of the Back.
A Consumption of the Back here implies little more than a sensible gradual
diminution of the strength in the back, arriving through a counter-natural
proflux ( flowing) of Sperm (Seed.)

Common experience is a suffrage (vote) to Galen's Dictate, that a natural and
moderate evacuation of Sperm through Venereal Embraces, does greatly conduce to
the preservation of health; disposes a man to fetch his breath more freely, and
renders the body light and sprightful; and that not only in men, but other
Animals; a Cock has no sooner pleased a Hen, but presently after he Crows; a
tone that corresponds to singing, attesting his mirth and spritefulness: the
reason is because Omne nimium est Naturae inimicum, whatever is overmuch is
offensive to nature, as oppressing the spirits; which burden being diminished,
or taken off from them, must needs render them more lively and lusty. Now the
more noble and excellent that is, which is abounding, the greater damage it
imports; and therefore blood when abounding, causes acute putrid Fevers,
inflammations of the Bowels, that often inevitably tend to the ruin of the
whole: but of a far more dangerous importance is an over plenitude of the
Spirits, as being of a more noble and excellent degree; whence it is, that a
retention of the Seed proves of so calamitous a consequence, because of its
turgency with spirits: in Women we see it effects such effrayable Hysteric
Symptoms, (as appears in the Narrative of Mary Wait) as no other Disease can
Parallel: in men it occasions inflammations of the Testicles or Cods, (commonly
terminating into grangrenes, incurable Ulcers,) a continual melancholic dull
heavy posture of body, difficulty of respiration, ( breathing) palpitation (
beating) of the heart, a durable tinning noise and pains in the head, and worse
then all these a Spermatick (seedy) Fever, in malignity and putrefaction
transcending all others. By the way, this sort of Fever is not mentioned by
any Author, because it is comprehended under continual humoral Fevers, but
certainly for want of observation, whose Urins if heedfully perspected, appear
full of white filaments ( threads) or Spermatick Hairs, which Physicians have
hitherto erroneously judged adust ( burned) hairs expelled from the Kidneys.
Another most ridiculous (though not without great danger) Symptom the said
Spermatick Plethory, or retention of Seed produces in Women, is a Madness of
the Mother, ( furor uterinus,) impelling them to all manner of Lascivious
looks, Bawdy discourses, and enticing gestures, to such a degree, that they often
take up their Coats, and beg men to humor them, as if they begged for an Alms.
Hereto corresponds a Madness of the Father, which we find so extravagant in
some men, that they cannot forbear, but must bend all their discourses looks,
and actions, to wantonness; neither can this or that in Women be sentenced
vice, because occasioned by a Disease, which the Apostle himself could term no
other than Burning, (whereby we see he compared it to the greatest pain in the
world,) and therefore to prevent the growth of so dangerous an accident, he
advised all rather to Marry than to Burn. However in these days that Symptom
seldom arrives to that height of Madness in Men, since they can easily find the
way to a Bawdy House to prevent it; yet this does not exclude but that its as
possible in them, as in Women, whose chastity worn into them by a strict
education, rather than by the dictates of their seeble reason, diverts them
from taking the same course of prevention. Neither is this all the mischief of
a Spermatick Plethory, of times transmitting hot putrid steems of Sperm to the
brain, (which is not strange, there being that Sympathy and intercourse between
the brain and the natural parts, that the least Fancy of a pleasing object
puts them into posture,) which insinuating into its substance, engender a
Bedlam madness. And what makes so many hundreds of Women run Mad, but that
which they call Love? by often stirring of those inflamed and putrefyed
Spermatick fumes, which not being vented through their natural passages, are
preternaturally forced up into the pores of the brain, whereby its temperament
is subverted, and a venene ( venomous) quality subsequent to it, depraves the
Fancy into a Madness. Now had these females not been interrupted with Wooers,
those parts would have remained dormant, and consequently not attracted or
generated such a quantity of Sperm, which otherwise abounding and being often
stirred with their love visions without evacuation, must necessarily putrefie.
So that we may hence plainly collect, the first inconvenience Women fall into
through rupture of Love, which had hitherto occasioned that plethory and
commotion of Sperm, must be Fits of the Mother; because the Seed being
augmented, moved, and not vented, must putrefie, and so cause those Fits. 2.
The next inconvenience is a Bedlam madness ( mania,) produced through a
stronger passion of Love, occasioning a greater Plethory ( abundance) of Sperm
and a stronger commotion, which not being vented, because of the Woman's
frustration in her Love, inflames and turns to a more malign venene
putrefaction, whose fumes do easily intoxicate ( poison) the Brain.
Notwithstanding though all sorts of madness imply so difficult a cure, because
of the deep latency of a venene cause in a noble part, yet this kind of madness
that is occasioned by Love, in the commencement yields to the easiest cure, viz.
by slackning the bridle of chastity, whereby vent is given to the putrefying
Sperm, and the ascending malign Spermatick fumes revell'd ( drawn back:) And by
that sort of cure I have heard of several Women reduced to their perfect wits;
and of two or three Maniacks ( Mad-mer,) who although impelled into that
distemper through an adust malign Hypochondriack Melancholy, were set to rights
again by the kindness of their Mistresses; for which cure there can no other
reason be given, than that Venereal evacuations do potently revell (or draw)
from the head, (whereby the said Melancholic fumes are retracted downward,)
and refrigerate ( cool) the adust humors that inflame the Brain; and lastly,
abate that over plenitude of raging spirits. Moreover, we may observe that
Italians, though extremely disposed to a Maniack Madness, through their adust
Melancholic temperature and studious course of life, yet it is a very rare
thing to hear of any Maniacks among them, and that certainly for no other
reason, than their frequent use of Women, which the indulgence of their
Religion has made Universal: on the contrary in those Countries, where the
severity of their Laws does strictly enjoin chastity upon the Inhabitants, as
in Holland, though the coldness of the Climat and their cold Diet does
oppositely resist Maniack Madness, yet there is not a Town so small, but is
provided with a Bedlam, for to secure those numbers of Maniacks both Men and
Women. Neither is the benefit of this sort of evacuation so particular, as to
relate only to individuals, but that the public also partakes of it, as in
Turkey, Italy, and Spain, and other Countries, where Polygamy (having many
Wives) and Scortation ( Whoring) are tolerated, they find it renders their
Subjects both Men and Women more tractable, and obedient to Government, and
seldom are known to rebel; questionless, by subtracting great quantities of
spirits, which are so copious in the Sperm, the Plethory whereof would
otherwise render them ( viz. the Spirits) turbulent and furious.

On the other side where that kind of liberty is restrained, their Subjects do
often fall into furies and rebellions against the Magistrate, as appears too
often in these Septentrional ( northern) climats: the reason is as before,
because the said Plethory, and retention of Sperm renders the Spirits furious
and mad.

This premissory discourse does not infer so great a damage from an
over-repletion of Sperm, but that the detriment of an overevacuation may be
equal, or rather surmount it. Henricus ab Here in his observations relates the
Cure of one of his Patients, whom finding suddenly reduced to the lowest ebb of
weakness, could suspect no other cause, but his over-pleasing his Wife; in
which surmisal, the Patients Urin replenished with whitish Spermatick
Filaments, and his confession after he had recovered his Speech, confirmed him.
This doubtful Cure gave a sufficient testimony of the danger, he was
precipitated into through that Venereal Syncope.

Neither is this the sole Disease those furious Goats arrive to, but are often
stricken with tremblings of the joints, Palsies, Gouts, and other neuritick (
Sinewy) Diseases. Two years ago, I had a Flemmen in Cure at London, his Disease
was a Ptisick in a dangerous degree, or Asthma often excurring to an Orthopnoea
(a Ptisick in the worst degree;) the cause a Metastasis or translation of
tartarous humors from his joints to his Lungs; for it seems his preceding
Disease was the Gout, which was droven inwards through the unskilfulness of his
Physician into his breast. Hereupon I inquired into the first occasion of this
Arthritick ( of the joints) malady, whether it was Hereditary, or acquired by
ill Diet, or by what other external cause; to this he gave me a full
satisfaction, ingeniously confessing, that when a young man and married to a
lusty Frow he had so travailed himself off his Legs, in yielding to his Wifes
insatiableness, that about a year after he fell into an Universal tremor (
trembling) of all his joints, that when going his Legs trembled under him, and
was no sooner recovered of that, but Arthritick pains succeeded, which
afterward exchanged into an incurable Ptisick. Several other evils this kind
of excess produces, but most frequently a Consumption of the Back, which
Hippocrates styles a Tabes Dorsalis, appropriating it most to youngmen,
surfeiting themselves with the first tastes of their Nuptial ( wedding) delights.

The immediate cause of this Consumption is an insupportable loss of Animal
spirits ( those that move the joints), engendered by the Medulla Spinalis ( or
Marrow of the Back) and the Brain, which said loss of spirits must necessarily
occasion a great weakness of the Back and Brain, and consequently of all those
parts that depend on them, viz. the joints, as the Legs, Arms, etc. 2. The
Brain and Back suffering so great a draught of Animal spirits, must necessarily
draw a great proportion of Vital blood to recruit themselves, and furnish the
other parts, that do so immoderately draw from them, whereby the fleshy and
other parts being deprived of their nutriment, must consequently be extenuated,
and if continued, reduced to a perfect Consumption.

That an excessive evacuation of Sperm does subtract such a large quantity of
spirits i^ plain to those, that conceive the generation and constitution of it;
viz. it is constituted and generated out of a copious ( plentiful) conflux (
flowing) of Animal spirits, transmitted ( sent) from the Brain and Marrow of
the Back, through proper chanals, leading into the Testicles, ( Cods) whose
office is to abstract the purest part of them, and so to knit and unite them
into a thick fluid body. Whence taking our Calculation from the essence of wine
abstracted from its first body, it appears probable, that the Sperm being an
essence abstracted from a great quantity of Animal spirits, (which again are
essences abstracted from a large proportion of Vital blood) does in the
quantity of a dram contain as many Animal spirits, as are contained in an ounce
within the Nerves, which ounce of spirits can be abstracted from no less than
eight ounces of Vital blood; if so, you may easily apprehend what damage the
body must suffer by a small loss of Sperm. That Sperm is ultimately abstracted
from Animal spirits is evident, in regard the Brain and Back do so immediately
partake of the Symptoms of an immoderate evacuation, viz. a great weakness and
pain of the Back, a contracting pain of the Sinews in the Neck, and all the
Muscles of the Body, and obtusion ( dullness) of the senses, both internal and
external, etc. I could insert many other arguments, clearly demonstrating that
assertion, but that my compendious design will scarce permit.

To conclude, I shall only add two ways of immoderate evacuation of Sperm, viz.
by over-frequent converses with Women; and by a Running of the Reins.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Consumption of the Kidneys.
THe bare words of a Consumption of the Kidneys, do plainly declare their
proper intendment, and therefore shall spare my pains of proposing a
Description; that which falls most in consideration, is the causes thereof,
which may be conceived to work that Symptom various ways, viz. by starving of
the Kidneys; by colliquation; ( melting) by devoration or corrosion ( gnawing)
of their substance; or by dissolving of their fundamental mixture. In reference
to the first; they may be starved through obstruction of the Emulgent Vessels,
that should transport their nutriment to them; or through a compression and
coarctation ( shrinking) of their substrance by reason of some compressing
tumor within their slesh, as a Scirrus, Oedema, or an Apostem, or quantity of
Gravel generated within their Parenchyma (substance,) or from a compressing
cause from without, yet within their capacity or Pelvis, as a Stone, etc.

2. The humors and Fat of the Kidneys are apt to be colliquated ( melted)
through a great heat from within, as an Ardent ( burning) colliquative (
melting) Fever, or an inflammation of their flesh; or through an excessive
heat from without; as through over-riding, running, going, sitting with the
back against a Fire, or against the hot Sun.

3. Mordicant excrementitions Gall, and Armoniack tartar ablegated ( sent)
thither with the Urine, do inflame, corrode, and Ulcerate their flesh, whereby
it is converted into matter: or Gravel and Stone, generated within their
capacity do often grind away their flesh, and effuse their blood, apparent in a
Sanguine Emiction ( making water.) 4. Sometimes a malign humor insinuates into
their substance, causing an immediate dissolution of their Balsamic
principles, which happens now and then in malign Fevers; and by taking of
poisons, as Cantharides, the Herb Dipsacus, etc. Through these kinds of
Consumptions the Kidneys have been observed some to be eaten away by an Ulcer
to the ambient ( cirrounding) Skin, others to be dried into a friable (
brittle) substance.

Each sort of these Consumptions is detected by its proper Signs, viz. a
colliquative Consumption by a great heat in the upper part of the Loins, a high
colored Urin with a number of small streeks of fat, swimming a top in the form
of a Cobweb. An Ulcer of the Kidneys is known by a grating pain in the Loins,
and excretion of matter, descending to the bottom of the Urinal. The other
sorts are likewise distinguished by particular signs.

CHAP. XXII. Of a Consumption of the Lungs.
A Consumption of the Lungs may import two significations; the one, a
considerable wasting of the Lungs themselves; the other, their occasioning the
entire body to consume without any great loss of their own substance. We shall
relate our discourse to both.

Reflecting upon the particular substance of the Lungs, their situation, and
connection, ( fastening) we shall discover them to be very much exposed to extern
and intern injuries, and no less capable of injuring the Noble parts, whereby
the whole by reason of its absolute dependence on them must likewise receive a
great prejudice. Anatomy exhibits the Lungs to be of a laxe, porous, light, or
spungy texture of substance, which wise Nature has so formed, for to answer
her scope, in a continual motion of inspiring and expiring the Air, whereunto a
weighty body would otherwise prove very disobedient, and unless porous and
pervious ( full of holes) like to a Sponge unfit to imbibe and transcolate
(strain) the Air; for in effect the office of the Lungs is only to serve the
heart in the capacity of Aereal strainers, to strain the air and separate it
from gross, or other offensive inherents it may carry with it. Wherefore since
the Lungs by reason of their office are obliged to a perpetual commerce with
the Air, (which is subject to momentary alterations, now cold, hot, dry, or
moist, then thick, thin, foggy, rymy, stinking, poisonous,) they must
necessarily lie open to great yea irreparable damages, especially where their
bodies are so unapt to resist or sustain them, because of their thin, and
lacerable ( easily to be tared) composure.

To these inspirable hurts we may annumerate those they sustain from their
expiration of all sort of noxious ( offensive) and fuliginous ( sooty) steems,
and stinking putrid breaths, and besides all that being constantly employed in
motion without acquiring a moments rest. Their situation is within the breast,
hung perpendicular under the Brain, and near to the heart, whose wings they
represent, whereunto they are connected by the Arteria Venosa and Vena
Arteriosa; by means of which situation they are exposed to receive all the
droppings from the Brain, whence Coughs, Ptisicks, Ulcers; besides the ill
humors the Vena Arteriosa conveighs thither, which together with those
distillations from the Brain, finding them a very fit Cistern, because of their
Sponginess, do often force them into such a swelling, as may justly be termed a
Dropsy of the Lungs. Next considering their coherence with the heart, are
thereby rendered more capable of doing the greatest mischiefs.

By the precedence you may now observe, how facil it is to drop into a
Consumption of the Lungs, a Disease that is so fatal to Londons Inhabitants;
and no wonder, but a greater wonder any can steal away into their Graves
without a Consumption, considering the pernicious air of the City, the
weaknesses of Lungs people inherit from their Parents, and their exposal to
those injuries, we have just now instanced.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the kinds of Pulmonique Consumptions.
A Consumption of the Lungs is either without, or with an Ulceration. That
without arrives through a Scirrosity, Apostem, Putrefaction of humors within
its pores, or a Crude tubercle (a small hard swelling.) 1. The Lungs often
imbibing Phlegmatique and Melancholique humors, (that are distilled from the
Brain, or conveyed thither through its pores and chanals,) are now and then
deprehended Scirrous ( of a stony hardness) by dissipation ( dispersion) of the
subtiler parts, and lapidification ( conversion into a stony substance) of the
grosser that remain, or they may be left indurated ( hardened) through the gross
relics of a Peripneumonia, or inflammation of the Lungs. 2. By Disfection of
expired Pulmonicks, ( diseased in their Lungs) their Lungs have often appeared
full of small hard Imposthums. 3. Excrementitious humors, such as are
expectorated by a Cough after a Cold, or in an Asthma (Ptisick) Peripneumonia,
or Pleurisy, are very apt to putrefie and corrupt in the Lungs, (as appears by
the stinking breath of such that are so indisposed,) whereby their accessory
nutriment being vitiated, ( rendered faulty) and rejected by the Lungs, they are
occasioned to wast. 4. A Crude Tubercle obstructing the inspiration of fresh
air, and expiration of the fuliginous steems of the heart, does thereby
extremely inflame and dry the Lungs, the continuation whereof does at last
reduce them to an absolute withering.

How these kinds of Consumptions propagate their evil to the whole body, may
easily be collected from the former discourse.

CHAP. XXIV. Of an Ulcerous Pulmonique Consumption
HEre I must make my Reader familiar with the Traditional notions, young
Students in Physic derive from their Hackney Authors, upon an Ulcerous
Consumption of the Lungs. And to be more methodical, it is not unnecessary to
digest their documents into several classes.

1. Let Us make a disquisition of what they make of it. Pulverinus, Godofred.
Steeghius fol. 447. and Sennert. 305. define it a Disease of a diminished bulk,
( diminuta magnitudo.) Hollerius, Duretus, Forest. Nic. Piso, etc. state it a
Disease of a discontinuated Unity, ( Soluta Unitas,) because it sourceth from
an Ulcer in the Lungs. Platerus passes it by, though Mercurial subtly spies
three sorts of Diseases in it, viz. a diminished quantity, a discontinuated
unity, and a hot distemper. But Capivao. comments it chiefly to be an hot
distemper, there being a continual heat of the parts, and an inflammation of
the Lungs, always conspicuous in that Disease. What to assert among these once
great Rabbis seems at first sight difficult, but upon a little pausing upon
the matter you will find it a clear case. Those that infer a discontinuated Unity,
namely the Ulcer in the Lungs for the Disease, mistake the Disease for its
cause, the Ulcer being the chief cause of the Consumption. Neither can they be
thought orthodox that fling in their verdits for a diminuted magnitude, that
rather appearing to be an effect, or symptom of the Ulcer in the Lungs, and so
is the heat of the parts; so that none of 'em can hit one another in the teeth,
that they are in the wrong. But should I insist longer upon these triffles, I
am like to make my self a participant of their ridiculous discourses, and
therefore shall step over to give you a brief of the causes, they allow to the
foresaid Consumption; though indeed I ought to have touched, what part they
generally conclude the place affected; which some will have the Lungs, others
the heart, and many the whole body. The Author of that Treatise entitled De
Definit. Medic. brings in likewise the breast, ( thorax,) throat, and aspera
arteria (windpipe) being affected with a malign Ulcer, for seats of an
Ulcerous Consumption.

Touching the internal causes of this sort of Consumption, Dogmatists do
universally state an Ulcer of the Lungs to be the immediate cause, which
happens sometime in the Parenchyma or flesh of the Lobes of the Lungs;
othertimes in their pipes, ( bronchia.

This Ulcer in the Lungs may be occasioned by several mediate causes, viz.

1. Sharp bilious (choleric) corrosive (gnawing) humors, issuing out at the
pores or lips of the veins, into the spongy substance of the Lungs, whose flesh
they afterward devour and corrupt, soon making a putrid hole or cavern, which
is then termed an Ulcer of the Lungs.

2. Hippocrates assigns a ferin (wild and taring) Catarrh falling into the
Lungs, for another antecedent cause of a Pulmonique Ulcer: a ferin Catarrh is
an hot, thin, and sharp distillation of Rheum, which streaming to the Lungs,
gnaws their veins and flesh, and so effects an Ulcer.

3. Gross Phlegm stagnating ( lying still) in the Lungs, in process of time
putrefies, and acquires a gnawing quality, thereby making prey of the substance
of the Lungs.

4. The rupture ( breaking) of a vein in the Lungs, effusing blood into their
pores, where it immediately putrefies and Ulcerates.

The Ulcer these causes produce in the Lungs, Hippocrates calls a ferin (wild)
Ulcer, because the Nails of those, whose Lungs are Ulcerated, are recurvated or
turned back like the claws of wild beasts, that is, when they begin to draw
near to their long home.

Moreover this sort of Ulcer is ever cirrounded with an inflammation, which
being digested into matter, renders the Ulcer so much the more sordid.

To these we will add two more, namely a Pleurisy, which by expectorating (
spitting out humors by coughing) sharp putrid matter through the Lungs, may now
and then occasion an Ulcer.

Lastly, an Empyema or a collection of purulent matter in the capacity (hallow)
of the breast, if not suddenly cured, does undoubtedly impel the Patient into a
Phthisical Consumption.

Chemists impute the cause to a corrosive salt, that is divorced from the
Sulphur and Mercury of the blood, and afterward dissolved in those liquors,
that distill into the Lungs.

CHAP. XXV. Containing a disquisition upon the causes praecited.
THe indexterity and worse success of the most famous of our Consumption
Curers, do evidently demonstrate their dimness in beholding its causes; and
upon that account we may justly prye into the mysteries they involve them in,
and unravel what is so strongly knit in every Physicians pericranium* To this
purpose we are to gaze each limb of that Doctrine by it self under the aspect
of these ensuing Queries.

1. What kind of Choler this is that prove^ so ravenous upon the Lungs?

So careless are Authors in this particular, that they imagine the cause of a
Consumption sufficiently delared in their scripts, by imputing it to
excrementitious choler; but whether they denote the ordinary yellow gall, (
bilis flava) vitellin, green, red, or adust black choler, is left as a bone for
every Readers discretion to knabble at: if we should commit the first of these,
namely yellow, or vitellin choler to the test, common observation in yellow
Jaundises, and other Diseases excuses them from such an Ulcerous acrimony (
sharpness,) wherein though very copious and rampant, injure the body no other
way than by deforming it with a citrinous (yellowish) discoloration.

In the next place, yellow gall is so familiar with the substance of the Lungs,
that they seem to thirst chiefly after the more yellowish or choleric part of
the blood for their nutriture.

Green gall the Institutists would persuade us, to be an effect of an over-hot
Stomach, produced out of the hotter proportion of the chyle, ( the white juice
of the Stomach,) which varies in deepness of color, according to the
intenseness of the heat of the Stomach, some being of a lighter green like
Verdegrease, thence called Aeruginous gall ( Bilis Aeruginosa,) other of a
deeper stain, or of a dark brownish green, like boiled Calwort leaves, or woad,
thence termed Bilis Glastea; another of a green, different from both like to a
leek, therefore denominated Bilis Porracea, i. e. Leeky gall. Neither is it
their judgment, that any of these greens should be capacitated of damnifying
the Lungs, because of the remoteness of their harth; and was their Spring of a
nearer situation, they cannot well tell how from a corrosive gall to derive the
other Symptoms, that usually attend Pulmonique Consumptives, as moist
Phlegmatique coughs, frequent spittings, drowsiness, and dullness of the senses;
which rather declare their dependence on a cold Phlegmatic humor, than a
sharp choleric one. Whence we may deduct a second and third Query. viz. 2. How
chance such cold Symptoms in Consumptions to issue from an hot cause? 3. Upon
surmisal that Aeruginous gall should gnaw Ulcers in the Lungs, is it
transmitted to them from the brain (whether it may be supposed to be sublimed
from the Stomach) by distillation, or through the Vena arteriosa? If either
way, why should it pass through the principal parts, as the Heart, or the
Brain, without annoying either, which seem of a more tender disposition than
the Lungs, that are hardened with the weather, or extern air they inspire? 4.
It Is wonder Authors never summoned blew gall for the cause of Consumptions,
which the expectorated (spit out by Cough) matter often appears tincted with; and
beyond that, the Lungs of expired Consumptives do not seldom appear full of
those blew kind of Spots, which instance together with the eruption of blew
spots (exant hemata livida) in malign Fever, are a certain attest of blew
gall. This the Institutists have so little noted, that they never thought of
putting it in their Institutes. However not questioning whether Green, Blew, or
Black be the mischief, supposing it to be any of them, and situated near or
about the Stomach, why should it prove more Anarrhopous, (flowing upwards) so
as to attaque the Lungs, than Catarrhapous, (flowing downwards,) as it does in
a Dysentery (bloody flux) pains of the Haemorrhoids, inflammation of any of the
lower parts, Diabetes (a continual pissing) or a hot Dysury (difficulty of
making water.) 5. In what part of the body is the true spring, or source, where
this corrosive choler is engendered? 6. Whether a Pulmonique Consumption never
happens but upon spitting or coughing up blood? 7. By what power or quality
does fleam stagnating in the Lungs cause a Consumption? 8. Whether that
consuming fleam is harbored in the Pipes, or substance of the Lungs within
their Pores? 9. Whether the foreinstanced fleam distills from the head* or be
imported through the Vessels? 10. Whether an Hectic Fever be a cause of a
Consumption, or a symptom of the cause of a Consumption, or symptom of the
Consumption it self? 11. Whether a Pulmonique Consumption cannot happen without
the concomitance of an Hectic Fever? 12. Whether there be no other sort of
true, perfect, or proper Consumptions, than a Pulmonique (of the Lungs)
Consumption? These and many other problems being passed by, not only for
stating of them, but resolving, do impeach Physicians of their sloth, and
absolute insufficiency of curing Consumptions, which unless determined is a
pregnant testimony, they manage their office in that Disease with as little
Skill as Conscience. Neither is the reader to behave himself so strict and
precise as to be contented with no less clear a solution than a demonstration,
our notions in Physic being of that scantness, as seldom reach beyond a
rational conjecture; which if I engaged to remonstrate here in this Chapter,
should in order of discourse be obliged to make use of the terms and principles
inserted in this and the preceding Chapter, and that with the same
disadvantage other assertions have hitherto so obscurely been proved. Wherefore
I shall refer you to the next ensuing Chapter, where I do expect a grain's or
two allowance, which all men have granted them in attempting a solution of
doubts by themselves stated.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a more apparent cause of a Pulmonique Consumption.
THe passage to this abstuse (hidden) speculation is like a Labyrinth (maze)
divided into several stops, turnings or windings, where at each division we
must halt, to advise what way lies most direct whither we are designed; for the
truth of causes steps so lightly through men's imaginations, that they must use
great subtility to track its vestiges (footsteps,) which we find now adays so
obliterated (blotted out) with their course searches, that it seems almost
barricado'd from any intellectual approach. In pursuit of this precept we will
advert you of several stops or windings, being necessary positions, whose light
will lead you to that so obscure cause of a Consumption of the Lungs.

Thesis 1.
Symptoms impressed by corrosion point at corrosive bodies for their causes. In
Pulmonique Consumptions the preternatural concomitants (attendants) viz. an
universal heat of the body, an Hectic Fever, a torminous diarrhe, (griping
looseness) acre (sharp) and hot distillations, etc. have all a stamp of a
Corrosive (gnawing) quality, and consequently are introduced by a corrosive
humor.

Thesis 2.
There are but two sorts of corrosive humors engendered within the body of man,
namely, Choler and Melancholy; And between these the impute of a Consumptive
cause will lie. Touching Fleam, and that they single for pure blood, neither
can be imagined participant of acrimony, but rather demulcers, and qualifyers
of it. Which of the two abovementioned corrosives is the chief actor here, the
following positions will resolve you.

Thesis 3.
Choler is the lightest, and most inflammable part of the blood. Whence namely
from its inflammability its resembled to, and called a Sulphur. This position
informs us of a vulgar error, terming the gall bitter, as their proverb more
peremptorily implies, it is as bitter as Gall; whereas in effect, there is
nothing gustable, sweeter; for what is most inflammable must be most unctuous,
fat and oily, nothing being apter to take flame than Oil, Fat, Butter, and
other unctuous bodies; and what is most oily and unctuous must needs partake of
a sweet savor, namely, of a fat sweetness, which Physicians term Pingue dulce,
or a fat sweet; and of that gust is the Gall or Choler, being the flower and
butter of the Blood. This appears more evident in milk, which is nothing but
blood turned white, by being diluted (watered) with a greater quantity of Serum
or whey, (that is a certain waterish liquor floating in the Vessels) in the
Glandules (Kernels) of the breast; now milk being charned in a Tub vomits up
it is butter, which is that light and inflammable part reduced to its native
color, and above termed Gall.

Thesis 4.
Choler is in it self resistent of having any kind of bitterness extracted, or
produced out of it; no, not by any kind of inflammation. If any force will
impress such a bitterness, as is thought to be in choler, it must be by
adustion (burning) or putting it into a flame, which is so far from admitting
an Empyreume (burning,) or conceiving any bitter ashes, that consisting of a
pure oily nature, when set in flame, it burns clear away without leaving any
cindars or adust matter, to attest its latent ( hidden) bitterness; as does
more plainly appear in Butter, Tallow, or Oil, burning away in a Lamp, without
leaving any thing bitter behind them.

Thesis 5.
What amaritude (bitterness) or acrimony (sharpness) is deprehended in Choler,
it acquires from a commixture of Melancholy, or extern malign bodies imported
with the air. This Thesis is a necessary consequence of the next preceding; for
if gall cannot be rendered acrimonious (sharp) or bitter of it self, nor by
inflammation; than necessarily whatever acrimony or amaritude at any time
redounds in it, must be derived from the admixture of another sharp bitter
substance, which among the humors can be no other than Melancholy; Phlegm and
pure blood, being reputed allayers of acrimony, and upon that account Avicen
countermands letting blood in choleric bodies, because he esteems the blood
(which he chiefly here intends pure blood and Phlegm) a fraenum bilis, or a
bridle of the Gall, obtunding (dulling) its acrimony and fierceness.

Thesis 6.
Choler being set in fire, and acting upon Melancholy, or rather calcining it
into small acuated (sharp pointed) minimal bodies, is by their incorporation
with it self, rendered acrimonious and bitter; whence I conclude Choler
accidentaly bitter and acrimonious, but not in it self.

This bitterness and acrimony varies in intenseness and remisness, according to
the degree of calcination of Melancholy, and proportion of Choler it is admixt
to.

Thesis 7.
Choler by the premises is evidenced of being capable only of flaming and
kindling a Fever in the body; and consequently Melancholy calcined by the
flames of Choler must remain the sole cause of acrimony, and corrosion, and
inclusively of occasioning Ulcers both within and without the body.

Thesis 8.
The heart beating vigorously and strong, does together with its Sulphurous
flames expel the foresaid calcined melancholy to the circumference, especially
if the said humor be but diluted (watered) with the serosity (waterish liquor)
of the blood. Neither is this sole vital faculty sufficient to exterminate
(turn out) noxious humors to the periphery or outward parts, unless the animal
faculty be concurrent with it, to supply the Fibers with Animal Spirits, which
do not only render them strong to expel, but sensible of feeling the least
sting of any offensive humor, whence they are immediately pricked or spurred
to contract themselves, and by means of that contraction to expel. If on the
contrary the heart beats weak, and the animal faculty be found faintish, the
foresaid acrimonious humor remains within and causes internal erosions.

Moreover, notwithstanding the strength of both faculties, the humors expelled
to the circumference, are apt now and then to regurgitate (flow back,) by
reason of obstructions in the capillar (very small like hairs) veins,
terminating in the extremeties.

Hitherto we have discoursed of the same causes, how they happen to engender
several Diseases, though in the same bodies, but at different times.

That which falls next in consideration, is an answer to the fourth Query of
the Chapter preceding, viz. Why the same corrosive humor should sometimes
prove Anarrhopous (flowing upwards,) and generate Diseases in the upper parts;
and otherwhiles Catarrhopous (flowing downwards,) impressing maladies upon the
lower.

The occasion of the various diversion of the foresaid humor is situate partly
in the disposition of the part Mandant; the strength and weakness of the vital
and animal faculty; the parts transmitting, or giving passage; the disposition
of the part recipient ( receiving;) and the qualification of the humor
transmitted.

The part Mandant ( sending or expelling) is here chiefly intended for the
place, where this acrimonous humor is generated, and harth or spring, whence
it sourceth and crupts.

The place is, where the acrimonious ( nourishing) humors are primarly (
first) concocted, or receive the form of humors, and where they are afterward
further wrought, purifyed and clarifyed. This assertion probably will accuse
many parts more, than what ordinarily Physicians have their eye upon.

The Stomach is a part that primarly digests, and converts Victuals transmitted
thither, into a whitish or cineritious ( like ashes) humor, called the Chyle,
which if it be not exactly dissolved into an even thorough melted juice, must
necessarily abound with thick and gross admixtures. Now, it is a current saying
among us, that the fault of the first concoction or digesture is not amended in
the second, ( vitium primae coctionis non corrigitur in secunda;) wherefore the
chyle being transmitted crude and gross into the Vessels, and arriving in the
Spleen and Liver, sticks in the capillar veins, and keeps in the heat or hot
steems that should arise out of their Parenchymae (or fleshy substance) to
ferment attenuate, and defaecate ( clarify) the blood. The heat of those
entrails being thus enclosed and pend up, redoubles, and gradually after it
has extremely dried and scorched, burns and calcines them into a kind of fixed
Salt, which according to the nature of the Victuals, (whence they received
their constitution) and the intension of heat, proves a Nitrous, Vitriolat, or
Armoniack Salt. The Spleen in this case is found to contain a Mine more
frequently producing an Armoniack, and Vitriolat Salt, with a small admixture
of a coagulated Sulphur.

The Liver is the more fertile parturient of Nitrous* and sometimes of a
Vitriolat and Armoniack tartar, but with so copious a commixture of coagulated
( thickened) choler or Sulphur, that it ought rather to be named a Cinnabrin or
Aeruginous Sulphur, from the greater proportion of Sulphur to a far smaller of
Salt. The heart we conceive to be the sole mine of Arsenical Sulphur, whose
pernicious steems insulting upon the Vital Spirits, produce malign and spotted
Fevers.

The Stomach is likewise often stuffed between its tunicks ( coats,) and in the
smaller branches of Vessels, that are inserted into its body, with the dregs of
obstructive crude chyle, whereout such Salts and Sulphurs are calcined and
extracted, as in acrimony and corrosion prove no wise inferior to those
engendered in the Spleen or Liver, since produced with so intense a heat as is
required for the first solution of the hardest food; and probably a stronger
heat, being raised to a higher pitch by obstructions, and the ebullition of
some of those acrimonious bodies already engendered.

That the Stomach is so common a spring of Consumptive sublimations and
distillations, needs no other proof, than the sense of the Patient, attesting a
great clog and oppression at his Stomach, often crying out, if that were removed,
he should be well; besides his nauseousness, vomiting, and difficulty of
digesture, he finds his gullet all along very sore, rough, and stuffed with
humors, subliming upwards, which sometimes may not reach so high as his brain,
but are imbibed by the tonsils and other Glanduls about the Throat, where in
like manner aforesaid, they are dissolved into an oil, and so distill between
the Membranes of the Aspera arteria into the Lungs. To this the remedies
(argumentum a juvantibus) add an unquestionable verdit; Vomitives being twice
or thrice exhibited in the beginning or augment, do often eradicate the mineral
cause of a Consumption. Likewise Lohocks, and Syrups that are so usually
prescribed, do immediately seem to abate and demulce the hoarseness and
violence of a Cough, by mollifying the* ruggedness of the intern tunick of the
Gullet, and thickning or rendering the matter of the Cough, that ascends upwards
between the tunicks of the foresaid Oesophogus, more glib or slippery. So that
we must not imagine, that Syrups or other expectoratives do adadvantage in
Coughs, by slipping down between the Epiglottis; for as I instanced before,
that must necessarily occasion a greater Cough, and difficulty of respiration.
Neither is it probable they circulate about to the heart and Vena arteriosa, to
arrive to the Lungs; for before that time their sweetness whereby they are
supposed to lenifye a Cough, and other virtues, would be obtused and altered
into other qualities; or if we should admit that supposal, they could not be
thought to auxiliate the Cough in so short a space as they do.

Having now given you a divertisement in declaring the parts Mandant, we are to
proceed in illustrating, whence the said salin and sulphurous productions
receive their direction or first motion, that renders them Anarrhopous, not
passing by to indigitate ( point) at the parts Transmittent* We Will suppose the
Spleen the chiefer of the two harths, or parts Mandant, and principally
obstructed in its lower parts and Splenick branch, whence a potent heat
breaking forth causes the Orgasmus (a swelling fermentation) to boil or tend
upwards, or rather sublimes the forementioned calcined Salts through the
Arteries up into the right Ventricle of the Heart, where having passed another
reverberation are propelled into the Lungs through the Vena arteriosa.

Moreover we must likewise allow a small commixture of Sulphur to the Salts,
which does not only contribute a force to the calcination, but a facility to
the sublimation. This fixed Vitriolat or sometimes Armoniack Salt being impelled
into the pores of the Spungy flesh of the Lungs, meets there with a serosity,
or waterish kind of moisture, dissolving it immediately into an Oleum per
Deliquium, (an oily liquor) like other calcined Salts are apt to do, when they
arrive to any waterish moisture, as being put in a Cellar, or placed over warm
water. The salt now turned into a corrosive liquor or oil, is rendered capable
of penetrating (piercing) into the smallest and deepest pores of the Lungs,
whose flesh it soon dilacerates (tares) and gnaws into an Ulcer; and not only
so, but being endued with a quality, all other calcined Salts are (as you may
experience by holding Allom or Saltpeter in your mouth) of attracting and
raising fleam and moisture out of the Lungs and other parts adjacent, does
continually incite the Lungs, to avoid great quantities of spittle, sleam, and
other sharp stinking matter by Cough.

Lastly, the Stomach as it first sowed the Seeds of this evil, so it continues
likewise to foment them, and act the part of another chief Mandant; and in some
it is found to be sole and principal; which as I expressed before, being stuffed
in its tunicks, obstructed in the inserted Vessels, and clogged round about
with a weight of acrimonious humors, does likewise glow with a strong heat,
whereby the said salin accumulations (gatherings or heaps) are sublimed,
according to the length and direction of the intern and extern membranes of the
Oesophagus (or gullet*) to the brain, by whose waterish moisture it is likewise
dissolved into an oleum per Deliquium, (or liquor like oil,) which through its
attractiing and raising of liquor, does overwhelm the brain with sleam and
moisture, whence because of its weight and pricking, it is continually
praecipitated into the Lungs, viz. according to the direction and longitude of
the membranes, down into the aspera arteria (windpipe,) that is between its
membranes, not through the epyglott is (the grisly cover of the windpipe,) for
that would immediately set the patient a Coughing. Thus a ferin Catarrh
happens, which through its corrosive ( gnawing) quality often Ulcerates the
Lungs; especially if seconded by those Salin sublimations from the Spleen.

Neither is the Liver always excusable, now and then transmitting a cinabrin
Sulphur, through the Vena cava to the Brain, or Heart, and thence to the Lungs,
being likewise generated by a reduplicated heat, occasioned through the
obstructions of its Capillars (small veins like hairs,) and branches that tend
to the Gall Bladder. So that hereby the Spleen more frequently and principally,
next the Stomach, then the Liver, do demonstratively appear to the parts
Mandant; the Brain, Heart, Thymus, Glandules of the Gullet, and Tonsils the
parts transmitting, or only giving passage to the humors forced up thither
from other parts.

Here you may take notice of a grand error among Practitioners, opinionating
the Brain the chief part Mandant, when distempered with a cold humorous
intemperament, and distilling into the Lungs: and of this finister sentiment
are they so confidently possessed, that they bend all their prescripts and
devises to dry up this fountain of Rheum, to which purpose Crato's Amber Pills,
Fonseca's Decoction of Sanders, Erastus his Diet Drink of Guaiacum and Salsa,
absorbing Emplasters to be applied to the head, Fontanels ( Issues,) Ven^oses (
Cupping-glasses,) Vesicatories ( Emplasters to draw Blasters,) and Phlebotomy (
opening a Vein) are all summoned in as Herculean auxiliaries ( helps,) to dry
the Brain, but rather the purse.

Another opinion they are very fond of, is, that the internal part of the
Aspera arteria (windpipe) is the part transmittent, an absurdity every drop
that goes down the wrong way will confute. What other ridiculous tenants they
foment touching Catarrhs, were a shame to recite to such as know better things.

How the Vital and Animal faculties prove accidental occasions of this evil,
through their faintness, whereby they are incapacitated of propelling those
noxious ( offensive) sublimates downwards, is apodictically expressed in the
beginning of the eight Thesis, (position) and therefore we will supersede the
needless pains of a repetition, only we will add the positive concurrence of the
Animal and Vital Spirits in directing and derivating ( drawing) the foresaid
sublimates to the heart and brain; namely, encountering with each annoying and
pernicious effumations ( smoaks,) are compelled to a retreat to their Spring
head, whither they do likewise conduct those Salin steems along with them. The
Recipient part is the Lungs, who are partly passive in being forced to receive,
and partly active in attracting such corrosive Salts. Their situation and
connection obliges them to receive the precipitates from the Brain, Heart, and
Stomach; their acts of expiration ( breathing out) attract potently from the
Veins, Arteries, and other parts, as appears in those fuliginous ( sooty)
smoaks, and putrid steems they expire. What does further dispose them to a
necessity of receiving those salts, and other malign humors, a repeated Survey
of Chap. 22. will abundantly satisfy you.

The qualification requisite in the humor transmitted ( viz. the destilled
liquor) may easily be deduced from the premises; namely, a degree of acrimony
wrought into a tartarous humor by calcination, reaching at least to the ascent
of a Vitriolat, if not an Armoniack Salt.

By the way take this for none of the least important remarques, that this
liquor, that is produced out of the solution of a Vitriolat Salt sublimed to the
Brain, if accidently it should penetrate into the concave of the Nerves, (as it
would easily do, since consisting of a sharp salin thin insinuating substance,
were it not diverted by being precipitated into distillations,) it ordinarily
causes Convulsions and Epilepsies ( the Falling Sickness.)

The Second, Third, and Fifth Problems being all resolved in the contents of
the solution of this fourth, we will step over to the sixth; Whether a Pulmonique
Consumption never happens but upon spitting or coughing up blood? Galen and
his Cotemporaries did commonly observe Pulmonique Consumptions to follow a
spitting of blood, whence many of his Sectators do still persist in the same
tenent, not considering, that what was usual in Galen's time may be less common
now; for Pulmonique Consumptions do as frequently appear among us here, that
are molested only with an acrimonious moist kind of Cough, as those, that have
fallen into that evil upon spitting of blood, happening upon a rupture, or
corrosion of a vein in the Lungs.

Besides my own sentiment, I Will insert the observations of Argenterius and
Fernelius; The former in his Comment. 3. in Art. Medic. Gal. gives a relation
of four women, that dyed all of exquisite Ulcerous Pulmonique Consumptions,
none whereof coughed up blood. And Fernelius writes thus: Some upon the
spitting only of a liquid and yellowish humor, being taken with a small
Fever, have begun to consume, and a long time after did spit a little blood
mixed with matter; but I have likewise observed a many that dyed Consumptive,
in whom there was not not the least appearance of blood throughout their whole
sickness.

Moreover, observe there is an Ulcerous disposition of the Lungs, and an Ulcer
of the Lungs; And both these may be appositely termed causes of a Pulmonique
Consumption, or Consumption of the Lungs. By an Ulcerous disposition of the
Lungs, I intend a perfusion of acrimonious salin liquors (such as I instanced
before) throughout the body of the Lungs, insensibly drying, gnawing, and
absorbing their flesh, and likewise insensibly dissipating it into vapors and
exhalations through the pores of the Parenchyma, and ambient Membrane; which
latter though Galen denies to be pervious with a number of small holes, is
found to be so by Aristotle's and others experience.

Thus the Lungs of many deceased Consumptives have been discovered quite
consumed, nothing remaining but the ambient ( cirrounding) Membrane ( skin,)
and a number of withered veins and filaments ( threads,) without the precedence
of spitting of blood or matter.

Moreover as I observed in Chap. 23. a Consumption of the Lungs may also arrive
upon a scirrosity, hard Apostems, (as At heroms, Steotoms, etc.) putrefaction
of humors within its pores, and a crude tubercle, or drying scorching
fuliginous steems continually fuming from the heart, without the least
appearance of expectorated blood. In this particular I remember one of our
elderly Oxford Physicians proved disappointed of his Prognostics, or rather
Diagnosticks. A Scholar applying himself to him for information, whether he
were in a Consumption, was answered with a question, whether he spitted blood?
whereat the Scholar replied negatively; than said he, it is but a Ptisick Cough,
and I Will warrant you from a Consumption, though three months after he left a
Skeleton behind him, to witness what he dyed of.

The Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Query you will find solved by what is declared
already.

The Tenth is, Whether an Hectic Fever be a cause of a Consumption, or a
symptom of the cause (Symptoma causae) of a Consumption, or a Symptom of the
Consumption it self, (symptoma symptomatis?) Certainly it is a symptom of the
cause, and a fellow symptom with the Consumption of the entire body.

The Eleventh demand is, Whether a Pulmonique Consumption may not happen
without the concomitance of an Hectic Fever? This I may safely conclude,
there is many a Pulmonique Consumption without the evident signs of an Hectic
Fever, viz. a sharp equal heat over the whole body, a glowing of the
extremities an hour or two after meat, a quick low pulse, etc. without which I
can attest, I have found several Consumptives, though for what I knew, there
might very probably have been a latent ( hidden) Hectic. However for the most
part there is a sensible Hectic attending Consumptives. But out of this
discourse there may be a very important question started, Whether that Hectic
Fever be a Morbus in esse (a Disease already generated,) or a Morbus in fieri
(a Disease in engendring? If we suppose it a Morbus in esse, than though the
Ulcer were dried up and cured, the Hectic would remain, as being a Fire
kindled out of the Innate heat and Radical moisture into an actual flame, and
depending upon no fuel but its self, which would continue burning until the
radical moisture were burned away. On the other hand, if we consider it as a
Morbus in fieri, than it must have its dependence upon putulent steems
dispersed from the heart together with the blood to the parts, where arriving
they cause a kind of heat and glowing in the substantial principles, whereby
they are set in fire, until the purulent acrimonious steems are dissipated. The
symptoms make this appear very probable, viz. a glowing heat being a new
fermentation two hours after victuals, excited through the appelling purulent
corrosive steems, transported thither with the blood. 2. The Pulses confirm the
same inference, changing quick, hot, and acre ( biting to the touch) at the
advent ( coming) of the foresaid steems; and after a while when they are
consumed and expelled by transpiration, they return to a more moderate motion,
until the next flood of fermenting matter. 3. Were this assertion not admitted,
that the foresaid Pulmonick Hectic is a Morbus in fleri, than necessarily an
Hectic once kindled would impell the patient into a Marcour, though the Ulcer
in the Lungs were cicatrized; the contrary whereof has been discovered in
several; so that you may rest certain, that the Ulcer being cured, the Hectic
vanishes with it. Hence you may extract, what I intend by an Hectic Fever,
namely the Innate heat kindled into a destructive fire, violently absorbing the
oily Radical moisture, through the appulse of salin steems, which through their
contrariety to the Balsamic mixture excite a fervent fermentation in this
latter, like oil of Vitriol, powered upon oil of tartar, or water upon lime.

Lastly, we will conclude Ulcers that succeed the bursting of a Vein in the
Lungs, and some others induced by other causes, to depend for a considerable
time, before they can attain to that height of exciting an Hectic Fever; for
we cannot suppose the Heart to consist of so small a force, as not to be able
to resist those purulent fumes for a while, and divert them from the other
parts, into whose Penetrails ( depth) to insinuate, some proportion of time
must be allowed.

The Twelfth and last Interrogatory is, Whether there be any other sort of
true, perfect, exquisite, or proper (for those terms are reciprocately used by
Authors) Consumptions, besides a Pulmonique Consumption? This Query implies
rather a controversy about words, than the thing it* self; for if they resolve
to term no other an exquisite or proper Consumption, but a Consumption of the
Lungs, (words being to be understood, ex intention imponent is, from the
intention of him that imposes the word,) then the case needs no debate; but if
the words are to be taken ( ex apprehensione intelligent is) from the
apprehension of those that understand, or whom they are spoken to, then the
register of Consumptions will be much enlarged. Now so it is, that the common
intendment states a proper Consumption, a dissolution or corruption of the
Balsamic principles; and consequently if differencing perfect Consumptions by
the variety of their causes, and seats of those said causes, we must infer many
more, as an Hypochondriack, Amorous, Ulcerous, Cancerous, Renal, Dorsal, and
many other sorts of Consumptions before commented upon.

If probably I have not proposed resolves to these Queries, that are enough
seasoned for every Readers palate, I must beg his excuse upon pretense, it is but
the first rough draft, which upon a second attempt may be rendered better
polish't: However such as they be, they will prove a more luminous and sovereign
Directory for the Conservative, Preservative, and Curative part of a
Consumption, than any hitherto offered to view.

CHAP. XXVII. Of some less frequent and rarer causes of a Pulmonique and other
sorts of Consumptions.
TO decline confusion of causes we have reserved these* being of a more rare
emergency, for a particular remarque. This distinction of Consumptions is
universally observed, that some are moist, others dry. A moist Consumption
receives its nomenclature ( name) from a moist sputation ( spitting) or
expectoration that attends it; a dry one is known by its dry Cough: This
latter, besides the ordinary praecited causes, is sometimes occasioned by
various accidents of the Heart, as Wounds, Ulcers, Bones, Stones, and Worms,
that are bred in it, and particularly by a Marcour, or a Hectic of the Heart,
which together with the Lungs, as Melangthon witnesses ( lib. 1* de Anima) were
found to be as dry as a Baked Pear, in the expired body of Casimir Marquess of
Brandenburgh. Thus likewise Telesius reports the heart (and consequently the
Lungs) of a noble Roman dried away by an immoderate heat, to nothing but the
skin. Fernelius in his Pathol. lib. 5. cap. 12. tells us of one that dyed
Consumptive, whose heart was afterward discovered to be corroded into three
large Ulcers, the steems of whose matter must needs have infected the Lungs.
Bauhinus among his observations registers this following; that he dissected a
Corpse, wherein he found the Lungs consumed; the capacity of the breast to be
full of putrid and concreased blood, the Pericardium (a skin wherein the heart
lies enclosed as in a bag) to contain above a quart of white matter ( pus,) and
the heart extremely extenuated and consumed about the surface. The symptoms
that molested the party, were a Cough, a pain in his Breast, difficulty of
respiration, and an Hectic Fever. The Pericardium is likewise summoned by
Petr. Salius de our* Morb. c. 7. for an apparent cause of a Tabes or Marcour,
if anywise affected, as suppose inflammed, or pustulated. This may seem
strange, that an ignoble part should bring the whole body in danger; but then
considering its near situation to the heart, the cause is obvious enough,
whence to derive its Consumptive symptoms.

Some might rather imagine, that the drying up of the waterish humors
contained in the Pericardium, (supposed by most modern Anatomists to be
distined for to moisten and cool the heart) may now and then impell a man into
a Consumption, for want of which water, the heart dryes away and shrinks,
whereunto the other parts are obliged to sympathize. But in my opinion it is
questionable, whether any such waterish liquor be floating in the Pericardium,
whilst a man is yet living; for in Beasts, as Dogs or Cats, whose breast has
been pierced alive, to discover, whether the said Membrane the heart is wrapped
up in, be moistened with that kind of serosity, no such thing was deprehended,
in whom notwithstanding there appeared the same necessity for a cooler, as in
men, whose languishing heart probably whilst a dying, may seem faintly to sweat
such kind of moist drops into its bag. 2. There have been some, that were born
destitute of a Pericardium, witness Columbus lib. 15. Anat. where he recites
the Anatomy of a Scholar at Rome, whom he found wanting of a Pericardium; so
Galen lib. 7. cap. 13. Administ. Anat. does likewise instance a Boy, whose
heart lay visible, because the breast bone was part cut out, and the
Pericardium partly putrefyed.

A dry Consumption may likewise chance upon a Vomica or a tumor of humors
turned into matter and enclosed in a bag, (whereby Authors would have it
differenced from an Apostem) in the Lungs, which before it breaks causes a
stertour (or noise in the Throat) in breathing, and a very troublesome Asthma.

A Pulmonique Consumption does sometimes happen upon a Varix, or vein swelled
in the Lungs, which in length of time does burst, whence an effusion of blood,
and soon after a congestion of purulent matter.

Hippocrates in coac. praed. makes mention of a kind of suppuration, that
survenes Lethargies, which does commonly terminate into a Consumption. viz.
quicunque vero servantur ex Lethargicis ut plurimum suppurati fiunt: those that
recover of a Lethargy, for the most part become suppurated. But lib. 1. de
Morb. he relates five kinds of Pectoral suppurations more, that tend to the
same period, unless according to 15. Aphor. lib. 5. they expectorate the matter
in 40. days. viz. First, there is a suppuration of fleam distilling from the
head into the hallow of the breast. The second follows a Pleurisy not
expectorated. The third happens upon the bursting of a vein in the breast. The
fourth upon a Phlegmatique Pleurisy. The fifth succeeds a varix in the breast
bursted, or sweating out ( per Diapedesin) blood.

But those that are curious to be further satisfied touching the manner of
Pectoral or Pulmonique suppurations, let them peruse Hipp. lib. 1. de Morb.
where he does most incomparably illustrate that subject. Here may be
questioned, Whether Phleam according to Hippocrates his dictate is suppurable,
or disposed to be converted into matter? Pure Phleam certainly is not, but
being mixed with other humors is experienced to be suppurable.

Hippocrates lib. de Glandul. describes a Sciatique Consumption ( Tabes
coxendica;) Alius morbus oritur ex desluxione capit is per venas in Spinalem
Medullam, inde autem in Sacrum os impetum facit, and in coxendicum acetabula,
sive juncturas deponit, and si tabem fecerit homo marceseit; atque hoc modo,
contabescit and vivere non expetit. i. e. Another Disease takes its beginning
from a defluxion of the head through the Veins into the Marrow of the Back;
thence forces to the os sacrum, and expels (to wit the distilled humor) into
the Hip joints.

The Lungs do sometimes though very rarely grow fast to the Pleura (the skin
that lines the breast within,) whence such as are detained with that accident
are Lung-grown: The symptoms attending, are a heavy pain in the breast, a
difficulty of respiration ( breathing,) faintness, etc. which continuing do
advance their subjects to a Consumption. This sort of Consumption might be
annumerated to an Asthmatick Consumption, as Mercatus and others are pleased to
term it, since the symptoms appear not different from those in an Asthma,
saving there is only a Cough wanting to make up the train. The cause of this
Lung-growth is imputed to a superficial sanious or ichorous exulceration, whose
matter being somewhat glutinous, cleaves to the foresaid Pleura, and dryes up
to it, whereby it is fastened. The truth hereof is evidenced in the dissected
bodies of those, that were Lung-grown, whose Lungs are ever found ichorous and
mattery near the place of adhaesion, witness the dissected bodies of Ferdinand
the Emperor, and Francis the French King, whose Lungs, according to the
Testimonies of Gesner, and Holtzach, were not only deprehended fastened to the
sides of the breast, but in a great part putrefied and sanious. But whether
those filaments (threads,) that serve in lieu of ligaments to tie the Lungs to
the Pleura, being shortened by a strain, or imbibition of humors, may not
produce a Consumption, seems not improbable; an Asthma it is certain they do,
and consequently may attract humors to the Lungs, and prove an accidental
cause of overheating and overdrying the heart, for not expiring the fuliginous
steems, that issue thence, and not inspiring fresh air sufficient to cool and
moisten it. on the other hand, these said filaments being overmuch relaxed, or
broken, do induce that accident which may be properly styled the Rising of the
Lights. Some other infrequent ( rare) Consumptions may happen, but such as
scarce appear among ten thousand Consumptives, and therefore shall forbear
their insertion, committing their narrow search to Physicians their proper
industry.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Procatarctick or external causes of Pulmonique
Consumptions.
THose Procatarcticks that required a larger comment, as love, grief, etc. we
have discoursed of in particular Chapt. others that are limited in a narrower
extent of speculation, and particularly such, as promote English Bodies beyond
those of other Nations into Consumptions, we intend to treat of here.

To begin with these latter, it is not improbable the causes must be inherent in
those non naturals, whose quality, and our use of them differing from other
Nations, transport our bodies beyond theirs into extenuations and Marcours.

1. We differ extremely from all others in our diet. Flemmings and Germans buy
flesh meat by the pound, and eat it by ounces; we buy meat by whole joints, and
eat it by pounds.

2. They usually boil and roast their meat, until it falls almost off from the
bones, but we love it half raw, with the blood trickling down from it,
delicately terming it the Gravy, which in truth looks more like an ichorous or
raw bloody matter. 3. Flesh once a week is a variety to their great ones, once
a month a delicacy to their Burgers ( Citizen's,) and once a year a feast to
the rabble, and that at their Kermisses or Fairs only. But their thriving diet
the hogs has taught 'em, viz. Cabbage, Turnips, Salates, Butter-milk, Whey,
etc. Which renders them alike not only in fatness, but in manner of humor,
witness their Brawny Necks, Fat Trype Guts, and grunting hoggish deportments.
But here on the other hand great and small, rabble and all, must have their
Bellyes stuffed with flesh meat every day, and on Sundays cramb their guts up
to the crop with pudding.

4. Neither is the difference only in the eating part, but drinking, they
overwhelming their panch daily with a kind of flat Scarbier, or Rotgut; we with
a bitter dreggish small liquor, that savours of little else than hops and muddy
water. The wine they so much debauch themselves with, is a kind of crude dull
stumd Bordeaux; we with Canary. Thus we have paralleled the dyets of two
Nations, in order to a further examination of their different effects, rendering
those of a squabbish lardy habit of body; us of a thinner though more fleshy
appearance, and some who by their stronger natures, exercise, or labor, are
equally matched to digest and subdue that mass of flesh they daily devour,
acquire a double strength to what those Hermits receive from their Herbage.

But since we experience that sort of feeding, does scarce improve our
carcasses beyond a lean habit, and the contrary diet to stuff the hides of our
Neighbors with a large proportion of Grease and Tallow, gives us argument, to
impute to it a great part of the occasion, that inclines us so much to
Consumptions. We Will insist a little further upon the matter; first, touching
our so greedy devouring of flesh, especially Beef, and Mutton, whereof there is
a greater quantity consumed in England, than in all Spain, France, Holland,
Zealand, and Flanders, as I can demonstratively make appear to you by this sole
instance: you will grant there are more gloves worn here, then in all Holland,
Zealand, and Flanders besides, for from the highest to the lowest they usually
go with their hands in their Pockets in the Summer, and in the Winter hold'em
to their Noses to blow'em warm. Next, we wear out more Shoes here by two
thirds than all France, where it is universally known, the paysantry goes
barefoot, and the middle sort throughout all that Kingdom makes use of Wooden
Clogs. Now this considered, that notwithstanding the great number of gloves and
shoes worn out here, besides millions of pairs that are transported hence to
the Barbado's, Virginia, and many other Plantations, we abound so much with
Hides, Gloves, Sheeps and Neats Leather, that we furnish the better part of all
Christendom with them; which is a certain sign there must be an incredible
number of Sheep and Oxen killed, whose flesh since we make no foreign
Merchandise of, (saving only of their Skins and Hides,) must necessarily be all
consumed among us. But to declare to you the great mischiefs (which is my chief
business) this flesh greediness heaps upon us: a Plethory (fullness of blood)
both ad vasa and vires, is the first and immediate effect; the next, a Plethora
ad vasa (an over fullness of the Veins and Arteries with blood) does easily upon
a small commotion or heat of body, fall, or other accidents, burst a Vein in
the Lungs, whereupon commonly follows an Ulcer, and soon after a Pulmonique
Consumption.

Moreover, note that a Plethory produced by immoderate eating of flesh is more
impetuous and turgent, and therefore so much disposed to burst a Vein; whereas
any other Plethory engendered of Fish, Milk, or Herbs, being less turgent, and
diluted with waterish humors seldom swells to that height.

The Plethora ad vires (a fullness of blood, that oppresses the strength) is the
evident cause, that renders us universally lean, by suppressing our spirits and
hebetating ( dulling) their vigor, whereby they are not only incapacitated of
digesting the alimonious humors into flesh, but of attracting blood to the
parts to nourish them; which defect reduces the body to a leanness, and if
continued to a Consumption.

Lastly, know, that flesh meat being so nutritive, and likewise hard of
digesture, does abound with the most and worst dregs of any other kind of meat,
especially if not totally digested, as seldom it is by those that glut down
such immeasurable proportions of flesh. These dregs immediately perfuse the
blood with melancholy, cause obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, and stick in
the capillar insertions of the Stomach, being soon incinerated and calcined
into such Salts as we premitted in the preceding Chapter: which after a short
interlapse of time produce Coughs, Ptisicks, and at last a Pulmonique
Consumption.

For a further proof hereof we will add a dictate or two of Hippocrates. lib. de
veter. Med. he says, that Meat eaten in greater quantity than what is
convenient, tabefyes (consumes) the body. And lib. de loc. in homine; he speaks
thus, If the body conquers the meat it eats, it flourishes; but if it be
overcome, and yields, the body grows lean.

Now let us pass to the other part of your Diet, that so much admired Mistress
of your fond Palats, Canary, to whose debauchery a far greater number of
Murders may be imputed, than to the fury of the Sword. What malignant Fevers,
Dysenteries, pernicious Consumptions, does it impell English bodies into? Sack
drinkers that sometimes have over balasted their panch with that liquor, do by
their beastly return of it present their Spectators with a view, what a most
filthy corrosive greenish oil its converted into, by the preternatural heat of
their Stomach, which in length of time being congested in some considerable
quantity, and floating in a violent stream through the Vessels, is the cause of
so many malign Fevers, as generally reign here toward the latter end of the
Summer. This is the the account of its acute ( quick and violent) effects; it is
Chronical ( of a longer protraction) ones are, a vehement drying and
inflammation of the bowels and humors, whereby great and obstinate
obstructions are engendered, by drying away and absorbing the subtiler and more
waterish part of the humors, and leaving the grosser behind, which soon turns
to an adust melancholy, the further effects whereof have been sufficiently
declared already.

Neither are the meaner sort of people destitute of their Ambrosia, who must
needs every day after Sunset bestow three pence out of their groat, in Strong
Beer, a liquor that attributes the better half of its ill qualities to the
Hops, being an inland drugg, conconsisting of an acrimonious fiery nature,
setting the blood upon the least Cacochymy ( vicious humors) into an Orgasmus
(a violent working,) by an ill ferment it yields to the Stomach, Liver, and
Spleen, which does likewise render the humors fiery, adust, and melancholique.
Small Beer, though it partakes less of the Hops, yet according to their
proportion, corresponds in offensive and insalubrious ( unwholesome) qualities;
whence we may observe, that Patients in Fevers and many other distempers,
receive a sensible prejudice from that rot-gut, though the quantity of Hops be
less; by the foresaid Orgasmus it excites. By this you may judge, since small
Beer at the best proves so unwholesome a drink, what it does at worst, perhaps
being brewed with a thick muddy and clayish water, which the Brewers covet the
rather, because of adding a body or substance to the drink, which the dead
remainder and small quantity of Malt can in no wise contribute to it: now to
give a strong taste to this dreggish liquor, they fling in an incredible deal of
Broom, or Hops, whereby small beer is rendered equal in mischief to strong.

The third Endemick cause, whence we derive our extenuating diseases, is the
Air, which as I have expressed to you before in Chapt. o. obtains a more
particular and immediate power from its continual commerce with our Lungs and
Vital spirits, of committing violence upon them and the Vitals. There is none,
who has traversed the least tract of ground beyond his native Soil, but can
attest the strange alterations the Air produces upon bodies, especially if
diseased: The Air o'th Alps subjects the Inhabitants there to distillations to
their throat, which congested do in a short space swell into a huge mole; the
Indian Air disposes Northern bodies to Dysenteries; the Spanish Air engenders
the Kings evil; that of Padua a blindness, where I remember I took notice of
several blind folks, but whether the Air of that place had produced that
accident in them, or whether they came from other places thither to be cured by
stroaking their eyelids over Saint Antonio di Padua's Tomb, by which means
great numbers (as they told me) have been reduced to their perfect sights, I
inquired not. The Air at Rome is likewise very pernicious, especially all the
Summer, at which time, as I was informed there, no person will hazard to travel
toward Naples; for fear of incurring that dangerous frenzy and burning
Fever, which the change of Air unavoidably brings upon them, especially upon
those that return from Naples to Rome, among whom scarce one in a hundred
escapes, though they use the extremest remedies, as actual cauteries and
scarifications for their recovery. What calamitous effects the Air of this City
wrought upon us the last year, you may read in my Discourse of the Plague. In
fine, there is no cause of questioning, but that the Air does evidently concur
to the production of several Diseases, and particularly of this English
Endemick; but through what means or disposition, it is that I am about, to
illustrate to you. The situation of this Island is such, as disposes it to a
continual clowdiness, which in the Summer renders the Air cooler, and in the
Winter warmer. The matter whereout those perennal clouds are raised, is the Sea
that cirrounds us, which clouds so attracted, the westerly winds, blowing three
fourths of the year, do continually blow upon us; in lieu whereof, if eastern
winds did perflate our clime more frequently, would not only blow away those
misty clouds, but exceedingly clarify and refresh our Air. These clouds, as
they are raised out of the Sea, so they still partake of the salin (saltish)
bodies, they drew up with them thence, which descending upon us by degrees, and
being perfused through the Air, do through their salin acrimony corrode our
weak Lungs, and with their thick foggy substance obstruct the Bronchia
Pulmonum, or Lung-pipes. This Pulmonique indisposition of the Air, is very much
heightened in great Cities, especially where a great quantity of Sea-coal is
burned, as here in London, where the number of Brew-houses, Cooks, and Smiths
Shops, besides all other Private houses, Brick and Lime Kills about the City,
makes smoke, that at a distance London appears in a morning as if it were
drowned in a black cloud, and all the day after smothered with a smoaky fog,
the consequence whereo^ proves very offensive to the Lungs in two respects. 1.
By means of those Sulphurous coal smoaks the Lungs are as it were stifled and
extremely oppressed, whereby they are forced to inspire and expire the Air with
difficulty, in comparison to the facility (...) inspiring and expiring the Air
in the Country, as people immediately perceive upon their change of Air; which
difficulty, oppression, and stopping must needs at length wast the Lungs, and
weaken them in the function. 2. Those fuliginous smoaks partly consisting of
salin corrosive steems, seem to partake of the nature of Salt armoniack,
whereby they gnaw and in time Ulcerate the tender substance and small veins of
the Lungs. That coal smoke is of so corrosive a quality is easily experienced
by those, that are beset with smoke in a room, whose eyes it bites and gnaws
that it forces 'em to water, and by pricking their Throat and Lungs puts them
into a dry Cough. These salin corrosive steems are very much intended by the
addition of those, that exhale from Houses of Office, Pissing places, and other
nasty stinks and fumes great Cities are ever pestered with.

Another great cause of the frequency of Consumptions among us, and especially
about the City, is a continuated descent of weak Pulmonique Children from
Consumptive Parents, who propagate and transfuse their Pulmonique Seminaries to
their whole subsequent generation; which occasions so many hundreds to drop
hence every year to the Country for fresh air.

Hitherto we have insisted upon those causes, that effect Consumptions Endemick
to this Island; there remains a citation of such others, as indifferently may
produce that malady in any other Country. Immoderate feeding upon Powdered
Beef, Bacon, Salt Fish, Pickled Meats, Anchiovi, and debauching with Brandy,
Sack, and other strong Wines and Spirits, do inflame and acuate the blood,
whereby it is capacitated to corrode the tender veins of the Lungs, whereupon
follows spitting and coughing up of blood. A fall, (and according to
Hippocrates lib. 2. de Morb.) vehement exercise or labor, violent vomiting, a
blow upon the breast, calling a loud, do oftimes occasion a vein to burst in
the Lungs. Catching cold on the breast, by going cool in the morning or
evening, (as many do by leaving their Doublets unbuttoned, or women by running
up and down in their Smock sleeves, or lying naked with their breast in the
night) does impell the blood suddenly into the Lung-veins, whereby being
overfilled, burst into an effusion of blood. Those that are naturally
destitute, or have lost their Uvula, (palate) are likewise very incident into a
rupture of a Lung vein, in admitting the cold air, without that previous
alteration, the Columella (palate) contributed, by hindering the cold air to
irrupt suddenly into the Lungs. The eating of a Sea hare is thought to corrode
the Lungs by a Specific property. Pliny lib. 7. 2. writes, that there is a
certain people in Aethiopia, whose sweat precipitates any into a Consumption
whom it touches.

Consumptions do frequently arrive upon a sudden suppression of the
Haemorrhoids ( piles,) witness Hippocrates 6. Aph. 12. If upon curing of
Haemorrhoids that have ran long, you do'nt leave one, there is danger of a
Dropsy, or Consumption; because nature was wont to evacuate its burden of
vicious Melancholique and Choleric blood out at those veins, which passage
being stopped, it is forced to regurgitate upwards to the Lungs; the like happens
upon the stoppage of Women's courses, which if not suddenly looked to, sets them
undoubtedly into a Consumption, Dropsy, or some other dangerous Disease, as
Hippocrates lib. 2, de Morb. also observes. viz. Si virgo ex suppressione
mensium in tabem deveniat, etc. What constitution of the year is most like to
engender Consumptions, Hip. tells us: First, for moist Consumptions that
survene distillations of sharp putrid fleam, a moist and southerly Autum upon a
dry and Northern Summer, is apt to produce them. 3. Aphor. 13. Secondly dry
Consumptions generally appear upon a long continuation of hot and dry weather.
2. Aphor. 16. per squalores vero tabes, etc. The season or time of year for
Consumptions is the Autum. 3. Aphor. Autumno invadunt Febres, Hydropes, tabes,
etc.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Signs of a beginning or growing Consumption.
THe surest cure for a Pulmonique Consumption, is to prevent it in those, that
are naturally inclined to that evil, or have but lately conceived the Seeds of
it, and are just a budding. But because the preventive part is frequently
neglected, upon hopes of waring it out, or by changing the air, or for want of
knowing the state they are in, (which to discern in the commencement is
difficult even to Physicians themselves, who are not seldom mistaken in that
point,) the impending danger where of requires a mature caution, I shall
delineate such natural and adventitious dispositions, as appear suspicious. 1.
To descend from Phthisical Parents, or such as were Pulmonique, that is,
affected with any kind of trouble in their Lungs, be it a Cough, difficulty of
breathing, Asthma, or a Pulmonique Consumption, is a great argument, since it is
observed that Consumptions prove so hereditary, and that sometimes in a strange
manner; viz. some deriving their extenuating Diseases from their Grandfather,
though their immediate Parents did not seem troubled with the least kind of
distemper in their Lungs. The reason is, because those hereditary seeds
remained dormant in their Parents, and never were reduced in actum, which never
the less were transfused into their Children, in whom they might be raised to
growth. 2. Brothers or Sisters taking their passage through that Disease to
their Graves, leave an ill omen to the remainder of their kin. 3. Whom nature
has shaped with a great head, long neck, narrow breast, and shoulders sticking
out like wings, and a lean habit of body, seem very much inclined to a
Consumption. 4. Such as are subject to thin sharp Coughs, itching of the Eyes,
a tickling in their Throat, pains of their Sides, and do not thrive upon a good
diet, are prepared for a Consumption. 5. To omit letting blood at certain
seasons that the body is accustomed to, or to escape bleeding at the Nose, or
avoiding blood by the Haemorrhoids if usual, or for women to be obstructed in
their courses, argues danger. 6. Especially at the fall, and in persons aged
from Eighteen to Thirty five years. 7. To be apt to spit blood often, though it
distills from the head, or is expressed out of the terminations of veins in the
Throat, signifies a Phthisical inclination, and is dangerous; because it is a
sign, the blood is sharp and thin, and may upon a small provocation vent its
fury upon the Lung veins.

8. And lastly, any of the Procatarcktick causes mentioned in the Chapter
preceding, or the beginning of this Treatise, or any other Disease, producing a
durable leanness and dryness of body, with a short, dry, or moist Cough,
portends an ill consequence, as you may observe out of Hipp. 2. Aph. 3. in all
Diseases it is better for the belly to be thick; on the contrary, when the belly
is very thin, and very much consumed it is dangerous.

CHAP. XXX. Of Signs, Diagnostick and Prognostic, of the several kinds of
spitting of Blood.
SInce spitting of blood (haimoptysis) does so frequently forerun Ulcers in the
Lungs, it is requisite I should tell you what kind of spitting of blood
forespeaks danger of a Consumption. Wherefore know, that blood evacuated at the
mouth with the spittle, may either distill from the brain, or palate, or be
expressed out of the Throat, or Gullet, or forced out of the Stomach, Breast,
Mediastinum, Diaphragma, Lungs, or Windpipe. Among these, blood forced out of
the Lungs gives the worst appearance, and does seldom vanish without leaving an
Ulcer behind it.

Moreover there is a very considerable difference in respect of danger, in
blood that issues out of the Lung veins, which are apt to shed their humors
upon these four occasions.

1. Upon a rupture or bursting, among the Greeks called (...).

2. Upon the corrosion of a vein, that is, when it is eaten through by sharp
gnawing blood, in Greek termed (...).

3. A vein gaping or its lips being forced open by a Plethory, is apt to effuse
a quantity of blood, in Greek called (...).

4. When the Tunicks of the veins are grown thin, and the blood is likewise
rendered subtle and piercing, it is apt to sweat through, which is nominated a
(...).

This latter is often cured, and therefore of a more hopeful aspect; but the two
former for the most part contemn all remedies. The bursting or corrosion of a
Vein in the Pleura succeeds these former in a malicious Omen. Any of these
bloody sputations being too suddenly cured, often changes into a tragic Scene.
The like happens upon external applications of restringent medicines to the
breast, or in case internal restrictives be exhibited without dissolvents, to
dissolve the crumbs of blood, that usually concrease out of the extravasated
humors, which otherwise would occasion a suffocation. A bloody sputation,
whether proceeding from the Lungs, or Stomach, intimates less danger in Women,
whose obstructed courses were the cause of it; because these being carried down
do seldom miss a cure of the former, as Hippocrates does likewise
aphoristically tell us; A Woman vomiting blood, her courses breaking forth puts
a stop to her vomiting; but this is to be understood, in case a Vein gapes or
is forced open by a Plethory, not if a Vein be bursted or corroded.

The same reason holds good in men, surprised with a sanguin sputation upon a
sudden cohibition of their Haemorrhoids, which being recalled do frequently
stent the other Symptom; but if their Haemorrhoids have disappeared for a
considerable time, than such a sputation survening upon it proves more perilous
than otherwise.

Spitting of blood is more curable in Plethoricks, and young folks, than in
others of a thinner habit of body, and old people, because as Hippocrates
implies in 2. Aph. 34. They are less endangered in Diseases, whose Disease
suits with their nature, age, and habit of body, and time, than those whose
Disease is in no part agreeable.

In summa; any kind of spitting of blood imports a very discriminous state,
unless it happens as I said before upon the gaping of a Vein, or being opened,
(but not bursted or corroded) by a Plethory, in which case it is a great help to
nature, being over burdened with blood; and it usually stops of it self. Thus I
have known several women vomit up great quantities of blood, possibly a pint or
two, without any prejudice. Some I have heard of, that have coughed up a
quantity not much less, no kind of detriment following upon it. A Vein bursted
or corroded in the Lungs, is looked upon to be for the most part incurable
(though some do escape,) because of the continual motion and Coughing of the
Lungs, taring the gap wider, and hindering the conglutination and cicatrization
of the vein; besides their remote distance from the Stomach, the virtues of
Medicines, being quite spent before they can arrive thither. Spitting of blood
being complicated with other chronical Diseases, as great obstructions of the
Bowels, Asthma, etc. is rendered less capable of cure than otherwise. A varix or
a sweld vein in the Lungs does often a good while after burst out into a sudden
spitting of blood, the patient not dreaming of the least Disease his body
should be subjected to; for the Lungs being insensible within, cannot advert
him of any tumor or swelling. This accident usually happens, when a man has
had a fall, or bruise upon his breast, whereby the grosser part of the blood
was suddenly impelled into a Vein of the Lungs, where it causes that swelling,
which possibly may burst a month or six weeks after, for want of taking
something at the beginning to dissolve the impulsed blood.

A broken Vein conglutinated, or a corroded one cicatrized, is very apt upon a
small irritation, as a cough, vomit, fall, etc. to burst again, or return to an
Ulcer, because the cicatrize, or agglutination is performed by a dissolvable,
or sometime friable kind of humor, that is easily colliquated, or rent asunder
by the continual motion of the Lungs, and especially if rendered violent by a
Cough, or other accident. Wherefore persons that have been so indisposed, ought
to refrain from taking Vomits, or moving their bodies violently; and timely to
remedy any kind of Cough, or other Pulmonique Diseases.

We have given you a large comment of the Prognostics of spitting blood; the
remainder of this Chapter we will employ in the Diagnosticks. Blood that is
evacuated from the Lungs is forced up with a Cough without any pain, and if a
Lung-vein be bursted, generally at the first gush a great quantity is cough'd
up, which afterward comes up in smaller proportions.

The blood that is evacuated at first, appears thin, pure, and florid, with a
little yellowish froth upon it; that which is afterward evacuated, shows
paler, and watered, with a few bubles on it; at last it is expectorated mixed
with fleam. That which sweats through the veins, comes up diluted (pale and
watered) in small quantities mixed with fleam, spittle, or some of the serum of
the blood.

If a Lung Vein be corroded, the blood at first comes up in a smaller quantity;
afterward in fuller streams. Physicians do vary much in the color of
Pulmonique blood that is evacuated, some will have it a purple, others a florid,
yellow, or natural red. As to that, Lung-blood generally appears somewhat
lighter than a natural red, because its conceived to be rendered more aereous by
the Lungs. Nevertheless it varies according to the constitution of bodies; for
in some it may be purple, in others yellow, or red. Another dispute that is
moved among Authors is, whether Lung-blood is always evacuated with a Scum or
froth upon it, according to Hippoc. 5. Aph. 13. Those that spit out frothy
blood with coughing, it comes from the Lungs. For to decide this controversy;
you must note, there is a fourfold substance concurring to the constitution of
the Lungs.

1. The Grisly substance of the Lung-pipes.

2. The tough substance of the Ligaments, that tie the great Vessels to the
Lungs, and join the pipes together.

3. The Parenchyma or flesh of the Lungs.

4. That which the small veins and arteries consist of. This considered,
observe that the blood that is evacuated out of the pores of the corroded
Parenc. of the Lungs, is ever frothy, because it is forced through a number of
small holes or pores in the Lungs, whereby it is rarefyed and rendered frothy.
But the blood that is cast out of the greater Vessels is not always thoroughly
frothy, but only a top, which is caused by it is being mingled with the Air in
the coughing it up; and for that reason blood that is vomited up, may also
appear frothy, as Hippocrates lib. de Coacis, tells us, those that spit up
(vomit up) frothy blood, and are troubled with their right side) they spit it
from the Liver, and commonly dye. Thus likewise we see that blood evacuated in
a Dysentery is frothy a top. So Avicen does witness, the blood to be frothy,
that is propel'd out of a Vein of the Breast; and Paulus writes the blood out of
the Throat to be frothy. Last of all you must distinguish between pure blood,
which usually is expectorated less frothy, than that which is mixed with windy
fleam and melancholy, or only windiness.

This simple bloody sputation of the Lungs is differenced from that, which
concomitates a pleurisy, or a Peripneumonia (inflammation of the Lungs;)
because these two latter are ever painful, to wit a pleurisy is attended with
a stitch, the other with a heavy pain of the breast, besides other Diagnostick
symptoms; whereas a simple blood spitting arrives without any pain or fever.
Blood that is cast out of the throat or windpipe, is spit out with a hawking,
or a small cough, and that in small quantities or streaks; that out of the Gums
is spit out without hawking, coughing, or vomiting; that out of the breast is
expelled with a difficult cough, and shows lived and full of crumbs; but blood
that distills from the head, since it may be ejected by cough, vomit, hawking,
or spiting, may easily delude both Patient and Physician, unless there be a
narrow inspection made, for sometimes a small vein bursting in the head will
trickle down (but with a tickling in the Throat) in great streams into the
windpipe or stomach, whence it is returned by cough, or vomit; the usual way to
find out the spring of this flood, is to cause the Patient to gargle twice or
thrice a sharp Oxycrate, which will either stop the cough, or appear with a
deep tincture.

Another way for trial is, that the Patient is to hold his mouth full of water,
and blow his Nose hard, by which means if there be a vein burst in the head,
some blood will come forth at the Nostrils. Moreover the Physician is to
enquire into the Procatarctick causes, whether the party be troubled with a
Headache, or has had a fall, or taken cold, and is enrheumed, or the face be
high colored.

Blood that is ejected by vomit, no doubt but comes out of the Stomach-veins,
but whether it be blood that is destined for its nourishment, or whether sent
from the Spleen or Liver, and effused into the Stomach through the Splenick
branch, or Gastrick vein, is also nicely searched into by Practick Authors.

If the evacuated blood be florid it is Stomach-blood, if black and in great
quantity, it is Splenetick; if red and copious, it is Hepatick. Moreover, if the
blood be Splenetick, signs appear of an affected Spleen; if Hepatick, of the
Liver.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Diagnostick signs of a confirmed Consumptionof the Lungs.
YOu must appeal to your memory to have read in the foregoing part of this
Treatise the distinction of Proper and Improper Consumptions; this latter we
have diffected into its several kinds, among which I am only to tell you, that
an Improper Pulmonique Consumption is deciphered with nothing but a kind of a
Pulmonique Disease, be it a Cough, Dyspnaea, Asthma, etc. and a discernable
wasting of the flesh, protracted to some continuance, which does certainly
menace the sudden consequence of a Proper Ulcerous Pulmonique Consumption.

As to the evidencing a confirmed Consumption of the Lungs, the signs are these.

1. There is an old Cough, contracted possibly at the latter end of the fall,
or in the winter, or the first approach of the Spring, and continuing for three,
six, or nine months, without spitting blood the whole time.

2. Observe that such a cough* that proves so durable, does not always
continue at the same stand, but is far more urgent sometimes than othersome,
and somewhiles again returns to that remission, that it seems to be quite gone,
until the patient relapses of his own accord, without any provocation of an
external cause or error, into the same or rather worse state than before.

3. The matter expectorated is thick, tough, glewy, frothy, uneven, bubbly,
graish; or thin, liquid, crude; or thin and mixed with thick, clotty, bluish,
yellow, greenish or blackish fleam, or streaks only.

4. A difficulty of breathing, with a kind of a whiesing noise.

5. Violent stitches up and down the breast, and back, below the shoulders,
which for a while are moveable; afterward fix either under the shoulders or
paps, which then give a strong presumption of a confirmed Phthisis.

6. The face looks deadish, and livid, with a dark bluish or brown circle
about the under eyelids, the eyes appear hollow, flat, and shrunk, without
their natural gloss.

7. All this while the appetit is wanting, and is bent to nothing more than to
a draught of stale strong Beer, though that be as bad as rots-bane for 'em: and
this is a very usual attendant.

8. The body is sometimes loose, and sometimes bound; or in some it is generally
loose, and in others contrary.

9. They sleep unquietly, and disturbed with fiery or melancholique dreams, and
feel hot and glowing at their waking, being likewise much disposed to sweat
about their breast, neck, and head. Their limbs do often feel sore and weary. For
the most part they are drowsy and lumpish all day. By this time an Hectic
Fever begins to show it self, by a quick, soft, low, and unequal pulse; a
small glowing of the palms of the hands and feet after meat, etc.

This is the first degree of a confirmed Pulmonique Consumption, from which the
second degree differs in the intension of the forementioned Symptoms; namely,

1. The Cough sounds more hollow and deep; continues longer before any matter
is brought up; and is more urgent in the night than the day.

2. The humors or fleam that are expectorated, are turned into a thick matter
(pus.)

3. The body is consumed to nothing but skin and bones; the flesh of the
Muscels being withered into dry tough strings, the skin feeling rough and dry
like Leather: And the face changed into an Hippocratean visage, otherwise
called a Mortiferous face, and deciphered 1. progn* 7. viz. a sharp Nose;
hollow Eyes; the Temples fallen and retch'd; the Ears cold and contracted, and
their fibers turned; the skin about the forehead hard, retch'd, and shrunk; the
color of the Face is Greenish or Blackish.

4. At this degree the Legs and Belly usually swell, and sometimes burst out at
the toes into a water.

5. The appetit is quite lost.

6. A sensible Hectic Fever, ever growing higher in the night then in the
day, because the cold of the night stops the pores; it is known by a quick,
hard, low, uneven in motion and fortitude, Acre or stinging Pulse, and a
glowing heat of their body an hour or two after Victuals.

7. It Is ordinary for Consumptives in this degreeto entertain their visiters
with strange rambling discourses, of their intent of going here and there, or
doing this and that, as if they did in no wise expect to change their dwellings
into a grave.

8. They are extremely fretful and peevish; never well at rest, but always
calling for this or that, or changing their seats or posture of lying or
sitting.

9. They are incident to Convulsions in their Necks, and Gripes in their
Bellies.

10. They are very subject to Nocturnal pollutions (or evacuations of the Sperm
without Fancy,) the reason whereof Aristotle gives 5. Probl. 53. because
sharp colliquations falling to the spermatick parts, excite the excretive
faculty,

11. Aristotle among his Problems does likewise write, that Consumptives are
very apt to breed Lice, which probably are engendered out of their clammy sweat,
by a putredinal heat that attends them.

12. Their Cheeks appear often of a rosy red color, especially after meat.

13. At last they spit out pieces of their Lungs, it may be small grisly bits,
that are eaten off from the Lung pipes, or small light uneven pieces of spungy
flesh.

14. If you desire a particular remarque whereby to know which of the parts are
most apt to consume first, that so you may be forewarned in time, I Will resolve
you: A Consumption is no where so visible as at the fingers ends, whose flesh
commonly shrinks before any other part of the body, and that for two reasons.
1. Because it is the finest, tenderest, and most delicate kind of flesh,
consisting of a most exact temperature, whereby it is the better disposed for
the touch, no part of the body feeling so exactly; which tender consistence
renders it the more colliquable and consumptive.

2. Because the heat of the body reflecting at the fingers ends, redoubles, and
is more intense than in any other part, as does more evidently appear in
Fevers.

The last and third degree foretell the nearness of their fate, which for the
most part follows within three or four days upon the appearance of these
signs, which Hippocrates does orderly digest in 5 Aphor. 14. and 7. Aphor. 72.
After the evacuating of blood upwards follow a Tabes, ( an exquisite
Consumption,) and evacuation of matter upwards; after a Tabes a defluxion from
the head; after a defluxion a looseness and a stoppage of the expectoration; and
after the stoppage, death. To be more particular. 1. There is a looseness,
whereby the matter that should be evacuated upwards by Cough, is drawn
downwards, or rather fixed in the Lungs; not only so, but the Spirits, that
should actuate the Lungs in the expectoration, are consumed, dispersed, and
drawn downwards, whereby the Lungs are rendered unable of Coughing up the
purulent matter, which remaining causes a stoppage, that does suddenly choke
the heart. 2. A shedding of the hair is another fatal sign, happening only at
last, when the body is quite dried up, and contains not so much excrementitious
moisture, as to nourish the hair, read 5. Aphor. 12. Quibuscunque tabidis
capilli fluunt, etc. 3. A stinking breath, a sign the purulent matter is
affected with the worst degree of putrefaction, the immediate effect whereof is
a faetor or stink. 4. The Nails of the Fingers and Toes bending, or turning
crooked like the claws of a Beast. This arrives because the flesh underneath is
consumed, whereupon they are dried into a crooked round shape like horns, that
bend crooked by being over dried by lying in the Sun, or before the Fire. 4.
Frequent sweats, especially on their breast. 5. Rhases lib. 4. Con. writes,
that Consumptives, when they are near death, grow light headed. This sign holds
true in some, but not in others, many dying with their perfect understanding
and memory. Yet this is frequent, that their sight grows dim, and therefore
can not see at that distance they could before, which makes them often imagine
they see strange things, which they don't. Their hearing is also grown very
dull upon a sudden; for otherwise Consumptives in the first and second degree
have a very sharp hearing. 6. their voice is very hoarse. 7. The spittle of
Consumptives being powered upon burning coals, stinks very strong. 5. Aphor. 11.
Cum tabi implicitis, quod tussiendo excluditur sputum, graviter oleat, dum
carbonibus ardentibus infunditur, capillique defluant, funestum. 8. they fetch
their breath at last very easily, yet not without the sense of a great clogg at
their Stomach; and a whiesing or whisling in their Windpipe. 9. Their Pulse is
intermittent every sixth or eighth Pulsation, in others it is caprizans, myurus,
or formicans. 10. Their Feet and Legs dye first; which commonly are cold and
dead a quarter of an hour or more before the other parts.

Thus we have delineated the whole History of a Consumption, that absolves its
course without spitting of blood. There remains only an observation or two upon
that, which is attended with a bloody sputation, which either happens at the
beginning, whereupon necessarily follows the spitting of matter, according to
that Aphorism, Post sanguinis sputum, pur is sputum, etc. Whether the matter
expectorated be fleam, or pus (matter that is bred in an ulcer*) is known by
stirring it with a stick; if it be fleam, it will cleave and stick; if pus, it
will divide and separate; or thus, being dropped into a Bazon of Salt Water, if
it descends to the bottom in a grayish powder like flower, it is purulent
matter; if it swims, its' a fleam; if it partly swims and partly sinks, it is a
mixed substance: If the Ulcer in the Lungs be deep in the Parenchyma, it is
discovered by a hard Cough; and if almost reaching to the Ambient Membrane,
then there is a sore kind of pain with a hard cough; but if the cough be
painful and the matter comes up easy, it is a sign the Ulcer is in the
windpipe, as the expectorated cartilaginous particles do further declare. The
Patient having for a while cough'd up purulent matter, is ever and anon upon a
fit of coughing, fretting, or anger, or any other commotion of humors apt to
expectorate small quantities of diluted blood with fleam.

We Will put an Epilogue to this Chapter, inserting only the signs of matter
expectorated through the Lungs from a suppuration of the breast. The proper
signs of a suppuration are comprehensively mentioned by Hippocrates lib. de
coac. praenot. 49. Those that are grown suppurated especially upon a Pleurisy,
and Peripneumonia, (which is also to be supposed upon a Squinsie, the
suppuration whereof is more dangerous than any other) are troubled with small
heats in the day, but violent in the night, and do spit nothing out, that is
worth taking notice of; they sweat about the neck and shouldors, and their eyes
grow hollow; and their cheeks are red; but the extremities of their fingers are
worse hot and rough. Their Nails are turned crooked, and grow cold; and there
arise tumors about their legs, and pustules about their bodies; they have an
aversion from Victuals. Besides these, 1. there preceded a distillation of
Rheum from their head, or a Pleurisy, Squinsie, or Inflammation of the Lungs.
2. A Fever, according to 2. Aphor. 47. Whilst matter is engendring, pains and
fevers arise, etc. 3. Beating or aching pains. 4. Great shiverings and
difficulty of breathing, near the time of the tumor breaking; which being
broke, the Fever and pains abate, and the matter (if not expectorated) is
propell'd into the capacity of the breast, where upon the Patients stirring or
turning himself abed from one side to another, it makes a fluctuating kind of
noise, like the ^umbling of water in a Cask. After a while it corrodes the
ambient membrane of the Lungs, and is expectorated with a hard deep or hollow
cough.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Prognostics of a Pulmoniqne Consumption.
AS the kinds of Pulmonique Consumptions are various, so are their
Prognostics, wherefore we must instance these latter in the connumeration of
the former. First, touching the Sex, and Ages a Consumption is harbored in.
Children caeteris paribus are more frequently cured than those of riper years;
next Women, who as they are less disposed to the surprise of Consumptions, by
reason of their courses carrying those acrimonious humors away, before they
can attain to make any head; so for the same reason, their cure, when at any
time illapsed into that Disease, is easier performed than in men; among whom
old men that are Consumptive, are the least capable of help, because naturally
they abound so much with salt fleam, that heightens and irritates the continent
cause of their malady. Before we deviate from this particular of the Sex, take
in this observation; that women whilst a breeding, are now and then allarum'd
at the second month with Consumptive symptoms, that are caused through the
return of their courses (being intercepted) to their Lungs.

Among these many dye tabefyed before the full expiration of their time; others
that have the good fortune of miscarrying, or being delivered, escape by means
of their floods, revelling the humors from their Lungs. Some again through
their straining, pressing, impatient cries, and commotion of their bodies, at
the time of their labor, do sometimes break a vein in their Lungs or Breast,
or cause a varix, or corrosion of a Vein, whereupon a Consumption following
speaks a very hazardous case: or if a Consumption surprises a Childbed woman,
that has not been well laid, or has not been well purged after delivery,
foretells an equal danger.

The procatarctick causes render the Disease more or less curable: a
Consumption of grief, as it moves more slowly than others, so its malign
effects are impressed with a more certain and irresistible force; wherefore
unless prevented in the bud, takes an ineradicable root. Next hereunto for
obstinacy of cure are an Hypochondriack, Amorous, and a Studious Consumption.
As for a Cachectick and Aguish Consumption they admit usually of an easier cure
than others. A Poisonous, Ulcerous, Renal, Dorsal, Verminous, Bewitched,
Dolorous, Apostematick, and Pockie Consumptions are more or less curable, or
incurable, according to the Age, Sex, Climat, Season of the year, Habit,
Temperament, Part affected, Duration, and other ill symptoms attending the
Disease.

Having but cursorily proposed to you a declaration of the presages of Bastard
Consumptions, we will employ the more time and paper in relating the Prognostic
signs of Pulmonique Consumptions, according to the several degrees observed in
the preceding Chapter.

A Consumption of the Lungs in the beginning is very curable, but herein
differs from all other curable Diseases, that it is not to be worn away by
change of diet, or moderate exercise of body, or a cheerful spirit, whereby
many other maladies have been dislodged; but in stead of being demulced by
counterpoising preservatives of the Patient, goes on its way, until it has
made an absolute conquest of the body; and notwithstanding though remedies be
used at its first appearance, unless they are prescribed by a dexterous hand,
so as to hit the humor of the Disease, and temperament of the Patient, like a
Cancer is rather irritated and eats deeper into the parts. So that
Consumptives, though their case appears not with so discriminous an aspect,
ought not only to be sollicitous for remedies against their evil, but to be
assured of their skill that apply 'em; for a fault committed in the cure at
first, admits of no appeal afterward.

The first degree of a Pulmonique Consumption implies a difficult and long
cure; and may easily upon neglect of the patient, or usage of improper
Medicines be rendered incurable.

The second degree is formidable; and but few of this rank recover, and many
more are turned over into the Empiricks pit. However we will add some notes out
of Hippocrates to discern the curables from the incurables. 1. Their spittle
must be tried, if it stinks being poured upon the coals; or sinks as it is cast
into a Basin of salt water; or being spit upon the ground, if it shows with
round clear specks like glass spectacles, signifies a desperate and
irrecoverable condition. The like presage read in a gray, blew, yellow, green,
black, mixed, and uneven spittle. Take a survey of Aret. lib. de sig. and cause.
Morb. diut. cap. 8. If on the other hand the spittle appears first sanious,
afterward mattery, white, smooth, even, and without stink, there is some hopes.
2. If the Patient be free from a putrid Fever, that increases in the night, is
another hopeful sign. 3. They must be free from drought, which confirms the
absense of a putrid Fever, otherwise frequently affecting Consumptives in the
beginning and first degree. 4. The flood of humors, that used to distill into
the Lungs, must be diverted (or rather derivated) through the Nostrils. 5. It Is
also supposed, the party be not reduced to the greatest extenuation. 6. His
ordure must be rather hard, than soft, for a looseness is generally very
prejudicial. 7. It Is required the Party should have a square, fleshy, and hairy
breast, and not very bony, which signifies a competent strength of nature in
the Patient. If the contrary signs appear, you must look for nothing but death.
The case is the same with those who feel a great oppression upon their breast,
speak hoarse, and seem to have a stiff neck, (or at least is not very
flexible,) and the joints and knuckles of their Fingers show big, and their
bones small: Add hereunto the symptoms of the third degree, which bring death
along with them.

You are also to make distinction of the part affected; for an Ulcer of the
breast is of a less difficult cure than one in the windpipe, and that in the
vessels of the Lungs worse than it; but an Ulcer in the substance of the Lungs
is the most deplorable of any, which the University of Physicians declare
absolutely incurable, though Hippocrates seems to assert some curable, namely
in whom the seven forementioned conditions are deprehended. Which sentiment we
find likewise confirmed by the experience of several reputed Authors; Cardan
in his Treatise de Cur. Admirand. No. 2. 4. 5. 6. 7. 10. recites many
Consumptives by his care and skill perfectly restored; among which number were
several of the second and third degree; but I doubt he quack't a little
sometimes: however Erastus exceeds him in asserting cures much more incredible.
Says he, in his Disp. Paracels. part. 1. page 210. I Will tell you some thing,
that is hard to be believed: God has restored some Consumptives, that made use
of my help, who it was clearly apparent, scarce beheld the half of their Lungs.
And in another place he vaunts to have cured many Consumptives in the
beginning, and some that were absolutely desperate. Ingrassias in Consil. pro
fist. pect. Franc. Arcaeus de febr. cap. 8. Valleriola lib. 2. Observe. 3. lib.
3. Obs. 6. and lib. 5. Obs. 5. 6. Haelidaeus. lib. 3. Cons. 7. Beniven. de Abd.
c. 44. Forest. lib. 16. Obs. 58. Crato Cons. 152. Poterius cent. 3. cap. 19,
20, 21. and among the Ancients Avicen. lib. 3. Sen. 10. Tract. 5. cap. 5. Rases
4. cont. Valesc. de taranta lib. 3. cap. 2. Abynzoar. lib. 1. Theysir. tract.
11. cap. 2. Mesues cap. de Phthisi, besides many others, do bring in perfect
cures of Consumptives of all degrees; but questionless performed with great
difficulty, because of the continual motion and coughing of the Lungs, (thereby
taring the Ulcer wider) and their remote distance; and at last the Ulcer is
only covered with a limber callus, that easily falls off, upon any commotion of
body, cough, or cold taken in the breast, and so forces patients into an
incurable state.

An Hereditary Consumption, likewise one that is engendered by malign arsenical
fumes under ground (whereunto those that dig in Mines and Coal pits are much
subjected) are incapable of any sort of cure.

A spitting of blood that happens upon the bursting of a Lung-Vein, unless it
be stopped or conglutinated in three or four days at farthest, either
occasions a Phlegmone or inflammation of the Lungs, which suppurating turns to
an incurable Ulcer, and a Proper Consumption; or by evacuating an insupportable
measure of blood kills the Patient by inducing a Syncope (Swoun;) or suffocates
him by coagulating in the Lung-pipes.

An Ulcer in the left lobes is more perilous than in the right, because it is
nearer to the heart. The same reason makes a suppuration contained on the right
side of the Mediastinum more dangerous than on the left.

A Consumption ensuing upon a spitting of blood is of quicker termination, than
one that is occasioned by an Ulcerous disposition of the Lungs, and fomented by
salin distillations from the brain, which may be protracted to some years.
Avicen and Erotian write of a Woman that was Consumptive three and twenty years
together. Iul. Alexandrinus and Mat. de Grad. cap. 54. com. in 9. lib. Rasis
speak of another woman that lived Consumptive eight and twenty years. Forestus
knew another woman that strove eight years with a Consumption. Neither is this
case very rare in this City, there being many, I can attest of, that have been
lingering for many years, though affected with a Chronical cough, difficulty of
respiration, and an extreme lean habit of body. The reason of this prorogation
is imputed to a certain absorbing salin distillation, which being imbibed by
the Lungs, is not so corrosive as to gnaw Ulcers into the Lungs, but does only
absorb their nutriment, and insensibly diminish their Parenchyma, whereunto the
whole body sympathizing, is also insensibly emaciated. But that which is far
rarer is, that Ulcerous Consumptions of the Lungs should extend to so long
space, as Arculanus reports of two that spitted matter four years together.

We have reserved this insertion touching the Prognostics of this Disease by
the Urin for the Epilogue of the Chapter, which usually is various throughout
the whole course of the Disease: in the first degree it is thick and turbid,
with a pretty deal of settling; at the second it appears thin and obscure
without any sediment, or very little, and of a pale straw color, and a
greenish circle a top; though in some I have observed it bloody and obscure,
like water, where raw flesh has been washed in; in others it is thin and
blackish. At last it is evacuated clear like water, and in a small quantity; yet
this is not Universal.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Therapeutick for Consumptions.
It Is a double misery to be pursued by a lingering Disease, whose nature and
cause are disguised under a cloud of various symptoms, which if otherwise
appeared in a more visible dress, would it self betray what remedies were most
likely to remove it: since therefore Consumptions assault us in that obscure
manner, I have engaged my study and industry, to procure you in the preceding
discourse a most ample Narrative of that malady, comprizing the total of all
observations thereunto relating, that so that intestine enemy being discovered
might with more certainty be aggressed, according to the implicit meaning of
that trite saying, a Disease once known is half cured. So that the greater
pains I have taken in the speculative will very much alleviate me in describing
the Practick or Therapeutick, whose office is distributed into three parts,
viz. the Conservative, Preservative, and Curative. The Conservative part in
this Treatise is chiefly concerned in preserving a healthful body in the same
state against all external causes, that may dispose or force it into a
Consumption; Such are the six non naturals, viz. a Consumptive Air, and
emaciating Diet, Motion and Rest, the Excretions and Retentions, Sleep and
Restlesseness, and the Passions of the mind.

If you find your self obliged to live in a Consumptive Air as this of London,
make choice of the more open, high, dry, and gravelly part of it, where the
houses are built East and West, shunning those close, low, nasty, dirty and
stinking Allies, and Lanes near the Thames side, where the Air being damp, and
replenished with putrid and stinking vapors, is penned up, and obstructed from
being ventilated by the winds, or its one free motion. 2. Once a day at least
take a walk in the Fields, to refresh your self with the open Air, which
inspired fresh does exceedingly recreate the Lungs, Heart, and the Vital
spirits, and through its tenuity opens the Lung-pipes, and purges them from all
those thick sooty steems; Moreover, opens all the pores of the body, and gives
vent to those excrementious evaporations. 3. Retreat some times into the
Country for a day, three or four to feast your Lungs with that pure clear air,
and to purge them from the smoke of London.

Touching your diet observe these Rules: 1. Never tie your self to a constant
diet, as always to eat meats of easy digesture, as Veal, Pullets,
Sweatbreads, etc. refusing this because it is obstructive, as Beef, Venison,
Bacon, etc. or that because hard of digesture as Pork, Geese, Ducks, hard
Cheese, Biscuit, etc. or because it is loosening, as Cabbage, Spinach, etc. or
raw and windy as Salats, Cherries, Apples, etc. for if every objection against
this, or that sort of meat, will cause you to refrain, than you must resolve to
live without Victuals, there being no meat in the world, but what may be
excepted against, in saying this is windy, and that is stopping, etc.

Neither would I have you to be too strict in the quantity of your meals; as
always to leave off with an appetite, or to forbear eating Suppers upon the
account, that it may hinder your rest.

Neither is it overwholsome to feed constantly upon flesh, refusing fish, and
other victuals, as pease, beans, etc. arguing as some simply do, that flesh
breeds flesh.

Likewise for drink; be not so scrupulous as to refuse a glass of Wine, upon
pretense that it is inflaming, neither estrange your self from small Beer, as
some Drunkards do, fearing it will bring 'em into a Dropsy. But on the
contrary keep a loose diet, feed sometimes upon fish, pease, salats, spoon
meat; other times upon flesh, eggs, roast, boiled or fried meats. Sometimes eat
liberally, othertimes sparingly; drink sometimes small beer, sometimes strong,
or wine. Sometimes eat Suppers, othertimes fast.

However mistake me not, I tell you once more, that a loose and inconstant diet
is the most wholesome to those that are healthful, according to that adage,
Sanis omnia sana. The arguments for this assertion are these. 1. God Almighty
having created that variety of creatures for man's food, we are no^ to doubt but
they are wholesome, because he has created them for our sustentation; not our
destruction. 2. We may observe in the new Testament, that Christ sometimes fed
upon fish, othertimes upon flesh; sometimes drank water, sometimes wine;
sometimes he prayed and fed sparingly, othertimes frequented feasts, where he
met with varieties. And in the Old Testament the Patriarchs fed promiscuously
upon herbs, most sorts of flesh and fish, whom we cannot question but were most
skilful in dyets, as their long protracted ages attested. 4. If God had thought
flesh meat only best for us, he would never have provided all these other
creatures, as fish, and herbs, for man's food (all things being created for
him,) unless necessary to be eaten with other Victuals; for flesh or fish
single would otherwise have been sufficient; besides, God and Nature do nothing
in vain. 5. The eagerness of the appetite is a sign of the proneness and
readiness of the Spirits in and about the Stomach to digest; but the appetite
being generally more eager after variety of meats, it is a sign the spirits are
more prone and ready to digest them. On the other hand, one being tied to a
single and constant dish, his Stomach does not much long for Dinner or Supper;
and as he eats without appetite, so he digests it heavily, which must
necessarily contract crudities and ill humors. 6. The spirits of the Stomach
growing familiar with the Victuals daily ingested, do not only digest them
imperfectly, but are slug in their excretive faculty in evacuating the
excrementitious humors; which is more apparent in this instance, a man that
does feed upon one dish at a Meal, shall nothing near evacuate (or in plain
English, go to stool) so quick or readily as one that dines upon two or more;
because there is generally a contrariety between several meats, which does not
only augment the fermentation in the Stomach, but excites and stirs the
digesting spirits, and afterward prompts them to a ready evacuation. Lastly,
one that dyets upon variety, has this convenience, that what is deficient in
one Meal is supplied by another, or what is faulty in one, is corrected by the
other; if one day you have engendered obstructions by eating too much pudding,
rice, bread, and c. eat the more Spoon meat next day, and so you are right
again; or if you have drank too much small beer at dinner, and thereby
oppressed your Stomach with crudities, drink wine at supper. Or if you have
exceeded in quantity at one time, eat or drink less at another. In summa,
accustom your self to no kind of victuals or drink, neither to time or
quantity; but follow these Rules. 1. Eat flesh meat four or five times a week;
and fish twice or thrice, whereby you will qualify the dryer and overstrong juice
of flesh, by tempering it with the moister and weaker of the fish.

2. Never make a meal of flesh alone, but have some other meat with it of less
nutriture, as in the Summer, Pease, Beans, Artichoaks, Salats, and c. in the
Winter Buttered Wheat, Milk Pottage, Broaths, or Souppes. 3. A small excess
committed now and then is no wise hurtful, through means whereof the
supervacaneous humors are stirred* and nature prompted to evacuate them by
stool or vomit; but if neither follows (as in a clear body it may not) balance
your excess next day with fasting, or a proportionable abstinence. This rule
was very strictly observed by the Ancients, who thought it a great preventive
to drink strong Wine once a month to that excess, as should force nature to
return it both ways; whereby they found that the subtle heat of the Wine did
colliquate their superfluous humors, and ^^serate obstructions, and its
impetuous spirits evacuate the said humors with the Wine; whereupon usually
followed a copious sweat, that procured a free transpiration; which rule is to
this day still kept in use among the Germans. However I can in no wise approve
of so dangerous a preservative, that does so often impell Drunkards into Fevers,
bursting of a vein by vomiting, and inflammations of the Entrails.

The next of the non naturals is Motion and Rest; in which particular I would
advise you to walk moderately ( ad Ruborem non sudorem) until you be thorough
hot, but not force your self into a sweat; above all you must be careful you
come not in the Summer from the Country out of that thin air into our thick
mist in a great sweat, and open pores, into which our thick air intruding, may
stop the pores, and occasion great Fevers, which too many are precipitated
into, by their unadvised posting to Town in a sweat; This I suppose may be the
reason, why those that return from Naples to Rome in the Summer, do undoubtedly
fall into a Fever.

In reference to their excretions, they must be sure to exonerate at least once
a day; and if the dryness of their Guts be an obstacle in some hot and dry
constitutions, they may remedy that by drinking a good draught of fresh small
beer, or whey in a in a morning, and feed upon laxative and moistning herbs, as
boiled Spinnage, Lettice, Endive, and c.

What concerns their proportion of sleep, every one knows what his nature
requires. But avoid sleeping after Dinner, or immediately after Supper; because
it fills the head with fumes and vapors, and occasions Catarrhs.

In relation to the passions of the mind, take this ancient rule; Been age, and
laetare, i. e. Do well, and be cheerful. Avoid all occasions of anger,
fretting, and peevishness, which disturb the blood, and enrage the corrosive
humors. Thus much for the Non Naturals. We Will include one rule more;
considering that it is impossible, but the healthfullest person living in such
an air, and following the City mode in his Kitchen, must engender acrimonious
humors, and obstructions, and be subject to a constipation of the pores, it
will prove very advantageous to open a Vein every Spring in case he be
Plethorick, and purge; or if only Cacochymick, to clarify his blood with a
laxative; and drink whey for a month or three weeks, to qualify the heat and
sharpness of his humors.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Preservative for Consumptives.
THe Preservative part relates to the preventing of a Consumption in those that
are inclined, or have lately conceived the seminaries of a Consumption. Who
they are that are thus inclined, or are just entering the threshold of a
Consumption, the foregoing discourse of Chap. 29. will acquaint you. In the
interim take notice, that the same means we intend to prescribe for a cure, are
likewise excellent preservatives, requiring only a moderation, according to the
age of the Disease, time of year, and other circumstances.

The Indications taken from the Non naturals, which probably have made a great
part of the first occasion of that Consumptive disposition, point at a mature
change and rational correction of them.

1. The air appearing so malicious in this Morbifique conspiracy, exacts a more
particular regard. Wherefore it is of absolute necessity for Initiate
Consumptives, to change that air how bad or good soever it may be reputed,
wherein they have conceived or bred their consuming Seminaries; if bad, as
thick, foggy misty, smoaky, moist, putrid, clowdy, or salin and acrimonious,
they must make choice of a serene, thin, dry, temperate, sweet, and pleasant
air; thus Galen. lib. 5. Meth. Med. advised all tabefyed persons, and such as
were only disposed to a Phihisis, to remove to Tabiae, a hilly place situated
between Surrentum and Naples, whose temperature and dryness of air, produced by
the Sulphurous smoaks of the Mount Vesuvius that is hard by to it, concurred to
cure many a desperate Consumptive.

2. Though the air be generally experienced good, notwithstanding the Patient
having contracted his evil there, possibly by reason of some hidden contrariety
that air harbors against his temperament, is a sufficient indication for his
changing the air, and that for a considerable time, it may be a year, or two.
For a moist Consumption the middle of England, as Worcestershire, Gloucester, or
Oxfordshire, seems to be enriched with an air propitious for their recovery;
however I imagine that some places of Languedock one of the South Provinces of
France, may for air excel that, or Galen's Tabiae. For dry Consumptions a
moister air is more proper.

Neither is it only the change of air, that proves so sovereign to Consumptives,
but the change of Bread, Beer, Flesh, Company and other circumstances, do very
much conduce thereunto.

2. What advantage a loose diet imports to a healthful constitution, the same
detriment it contributes to a declining or crazy one; wherefore since every
small distemper assumes so easy a growth from the least disorder of diet, how
much the more may a Consumptive disposition, the worst of distempers; which
certainly is an argument of the necessity of a strict diet, now here prescribed
to you in these rules.

1. Abstain from all obstructive, melancholique, and dreggish Victuals; as
Beef, Pork, Geese, Ducks, Cheese, Crusts of Breed, Pyecrust, Pudding, Salt
fish, hard boiled or fried Eggs, or any kind of fried Meat. Likewise from hot
Spices, as Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, etc. and pickled meats, as Anchiovy, Pickled
Oysters, or Herrings, Pickled Cowcumbers, etc.

2. Feed only upon meats of easy digesture, and inclining somewhat to a moist
temperature; as Veal, Chickens, Poulets, Mutton, Lamb, Sweetbreads, Potch'd
Eggs, etc. and among the sorts of Fish, Soals, Whitings, Perch, etc. among
Herbs, Lettice, Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Porcelain, Chervil, etc. but note that
they must be boiled.

3. Neither are you to allow your self flesh meat too liberally, because
according to 2. Aphor. 11. impure bodies the more you feed them, the more you
hurt them; and 1. Aphor. 17. When nourishment is taken beyond nature, it breeds
a Disease; because nature being oppressed and distempered, cannot concoct the
meats it assumes into that temperate juice it does when it is in better temper;
but rather converts them all into ill humors, which must necessarily give an
addition to those Consumptive salin corpuscles; and beyond all others flesh
meat, as I have intimated before.

4. Diet most upon Spoon meats, as Veal or Cock Broaths prepared with French
Barley, Succory, Maiden hair, Agrimony, Grass roots, Sweet Fennil, and Persly
roots, Raisons and Dates.

Buttermilk affords a most Medicinal and Sovereign food in this disease. I
remember I once knew a young Fellow at the Hague, who was fallen into an
Ulcerous Consumption upon spitting of blood, and notwithstanding the danger of
his Disease required the most potent Remedies, refused all help, and wholly
devoted himself to Buttermilk, by which sole diet he recovered beyond the
expectation of all that saw him: whence you may deduce of what consequence a
strict diet is.

5. Refrain from flesh meat at supper, in lieu whereof you may now and then
entertain your self with a Pippin roasted with Saffron, and sweetened with Sugar
of Roses, and carui Confects.

6. Drink no kind of strong Ale or Beer, or any liquor that contains Hops or
Broom for its ingredients: but make use of small Ale brewed, out of an
indifferent proportion of Malt, and a sufficient quantity of brown Suggar, in
new river water, which excells that of the Thames. This makes the pleasantest
and most delicate small liquor, proving very agreeable to the Palate and
Stomach, and preventing Diseases. Most wines seem noxious, yet Rhenish Wines (I
mean those small Wines, Bachrach and Deal) does accidentally impinguate by
helping the digesture, removing obstructions, and rendering the blood fluid and
digestible. This is verifyed by the corpulent and fat habits of body of the
Inhabitants of the Rhine, whom I observed all a long, in descending that river
from Bazil in Switzerland as far as Collen, to be universally very fleshy, fat,
and healthful; and my self, though entering into Germany in a lean case, was so
much improved, before I left the Rhine, that in respect of corpulency and
fatness I differed little from any of them; which I could impute to nothing but
their wine.

For motion observe these rules. 1. Walk daily in a pleasant, airy, and
umbragious Garden, Park, or Field. 2. Gentle travel in a Coach or on Horseback
through a healthful and divertising country, does often conquer an initial
Consumption. What concerns the Excretions and Retentions, and Passions of the
mind, regulate your self according to former instructions. These prescripts
being thus observed, we are to reflect upon indications drawn from internal
causes of growing extenuations; viz. the substraction of salin corrosive
humors, engendered by the Spleen, and sublimed upwards by reason of its
obstructions. In this case the opening of the left Median in Plethoricks;
afterward the application of Leeches to the Haemorrhoids; and hereupon a
prescription of a laxative and deoppilative whey, will answer all indications;
and for particular derivatives, issues, and senitive Glysters contribute great
relief.

CHAP. XXXV. The curative part for spitting of blood out of the Lungs.
HEre you are to distinguish, whether the Lung-vein be burst; or corroded; or
sweats out blood; or gapes. The first of these indicates a sudden evacuation of
blood by Phlebotomy, for depletion and revulsion; and afterward requires
conglutination. The second indicates likewise a subtraction of blood in the
beginning, for to revel and draw from the Lungs, and demulce the acrimony of
the blood; and thereupon make use of conglutinating Medicines. The two latter
indicate Phlebotomy for revulsion* restringents to stench, and incrassatives to
thicken the blood.

Wherefore at the first budding of this Symptom, especially if a vein be
bursted, and the spitting of blood copious, immediately evacuate as large a
quantity of blood out of the arm, as the Patient can bear without Swouning; for
the greater and more sudden the evacuation is, the sooner the blood spitting
stops; in which case expedition is very necessary, for otherwise the continual
coughing would attract a greater stream of blood, and create a more difficult
cure. So that Practick Authors advise ill, for subtracting blood in smaller
proportions out of several veins at several times; which method, if the Patient
cannot suffer the other, may notwithstanding be used, and seconded by
Cupping-glasses applied from below the shoulders downwards; likewise glysters,
rubbing and tying of the extremities. Purgatives during the violence of the
symptom are to be refrained; but afterward, for to prevent its return, may be
prescribed, and those only senitives mixed with restringent purgatives, as
Myrobalans, Rhubarb, etc. The other indications are to be answered out of these
several classes.

Classis 1. Of ordinary conglutinatives and Emplasticks, Cinquefoile,
Tormentil, Millfoile, Cumpry, Willow weed, etc. Syrup of Cumphry of Fernelius.
The Emplasticks are Bole armene, Terra sigillata Sanguis Draconis, spodium, gum
Arabic, Dragant, Amylum (or the finest kind of flower, where they make starch
of) Mastick, Franckincense, etc. Pyrola, Shepherds purse, Sanicle, Golden Rod.

Cl. 2. Of Restringents. Sumach, Plantain, Houseleek, Knotgrass, Mouse ear,
Porcelain, young Oak Leaves, Vervaine, Horsetail, Ladies Bedstraw, Bramble bush
Leaves, Speedwel, Acorn Caps, Pomgranat-shells, Red Roses, Wild
Pomgranatflowers, White Poppy seeds, Henbane Seeds, Myrtle Berries, Sumach
Seeds, Coral, Blood Stone, Crabs shells burned, Rhubarb tosted brown, Acacia,
Hypocistis, Crocus Martis, burned milk, Syrups of Dry Roses, Quinces, Myrtles,
Porcelain, Poppies, old conserve of Roses, etc. Out of these Physicians may
form Electuaries, Trochisces, Sublingual Pills, Apozems, and distilled waters,
according to their best thinking. To these we will subnect such as are more
specifically recommended by famous Authors.

Trallianus lib. 7. cap. 1. does beyond all others, and that justly extol
these following specifiques. 1. The juices of Leeks and Netles, with a small
quantity of Vinegar, do most egregiously stop the blood of a bursted Vein. 2.
He tells us, that the juice of Porcelain being drunk, is a most excellent and
powerful remedy. 3. The decoction of Cumfry root is very much commended by him.
4. The juice of Knotgrass, does singularly conduce to any kind of spitting of
blood. The same virtue he attributes to the juice of young Mastick leaves; and
particularly expresses an esteem for Sumach. And beyond these formentioned
Specificks he attributes an incomparable quality of cohibiting the most
desperate kind of bloody sputation, to a Boodstone, grinded upon a Porphyr to
an impalpable powder, and exhibited in a dose of Knotgrass juice.

Galen 7. de Comp. Med. prefers white Henbane Seeds; but Amatus Lus. Cent 6.
car. 4. speaks wonders of the juice of the greater sort of Nettles. Hollerius
lib. 1. cap. 27. Sets a great esteem upon Knotgrass. Duretus writes a great
praise of the Distilled water of those tails that hang upon Willow Trees. He
puts likewise a great confidence in Trochisci e carabe. Valetius upon Hol.
exerc. 27. recites a cure of one that spitted blood, who had tried all the
famous Physicians he could hear of, and at last was cured by Scaliger, who
prescribed him this powder.

R. Spod, ros. rub. bol. arm. ter. sigil. haemat. a^ v. coral. rub. carab.
margarit. non perfor. a^ ij ss. gum. Arab. tragac. a^. ij. Sem. papav. portul.
sem. ros. rub. sem. Arnoglos. corn. cerv. ust. a^ iij. Acac. suc. Barb. hirc.
suc. glycyr. a^ ij. amyl. torrefact. j. M. f. Pulv. Dos. iij. in aq. pluvial.

The same prescription he found afterward extant in Serap. cap. 25. ^r. 2.
except that here is an addition of coral. ^ar. and Marg.

Sir. e symphyt. fernel. and Sir. coral. Quercet. are likewise in great
request. Platerus writes he cured a Woman with Trochis. Alkekengi cum opio
taken in Goats milk. Quercetan's Aq. ad Haemoptysin is much commended. Chemists
exhibit 9 or 10 drops of Oil of Vitriol in the juice of Knotgrass; they
likewise make use of Tincture, and Salt of coral, crocus Mart is, ol. mart.
tinct. Smaragd. ol. succin. etc. But beyond all these I prefer Cerus. Antimon.
prepared with Spirits of Vitriol, especially where there is suspicion of
coagulated extravasate blood, which may be conjectured by the Fever, faints,
difficulty of respiration, and excretion of crumbs of blood; in which case the
Physician must look to his business, or else loses his Patient.

Galen prescribed oxycrate to dissolve the said coagulated blood. Others
commend Pulv. carb. tiliae, coagul. hoedi, cervi, leporis, sanguis hoedi non
concretus, rad. rub. tinct. camphora, sperm. caeti, mumi^, ocul. cancror.
cicer. rub. pulv. and Aq. cherefol. Diaph. in peracut. Spir dulc. Merc. essent.
Bellid. etc. But Mouse-dung taken from one Scruple to half a dram in chervil
water excells them all.

To return to the remainder of this Chapter; Those praecited Medicines proving
defective in stenching that internal bleeding take your refuge to narcoticks,
among which that of Haelidaeus is most famous, whereby he cured many in
desperate cases, viz.

R. Sem. Hyoseyam. papav. alb. a^ x. terr. Sigil. coral. rubr. a^ v. Sacchar.
ros. vet. q. s. m. f. Elect. Dos. j. ad j ss Mane and sero. This composition
Crato 5. Epist. f. 377. asserts to be excerpted out of Rhases his Cont.
Laudanum opiatum, pil. cynoglos. 'Diacod. Pil. e styrace, Philon. romans may also
be brought into use here. In cases of that importance, I would advise
Physicians not to lose their time and opportunity in giving slight remedies,
but ascend to those more effectual Medicines. The breast may be anointed with
cool and mild restrictives, as Oil of Roses, Violets, Myrtles, etc. Camphor
dissolved in Oxycrate wherein clouts or rags being steeped and applied about
the Testicles, and sometimes about the waste, are very helpful. Issues in the
Legs are most effective in revelling the corrosive humors.

Galen supposing that sometimes a distillation of sharp humors might corrode
an Ulcer into the Lungs, advised a Consumptive Woman to shave off her hair, and
apply an Emplaster of Piggeons dung, or Thapsia, to extract, absorb, and divert
those humors in the Brain; (others make an issue on the head at the sutura
coronalis for the same purpose,) which kind of practice must necessarily rather
add to the Disease in attracting a greater quantity of humors out of the whole
to the head, afterward falling down upon the removal of the Emplaster in
fuller streams to the Lungs than before; besides such a kind of rough Medicine
being very dissonant to the dignity and temperature of a noble part, might
infer irreparable damages. But since we have made it visible, that the brain
is only a part transmittent, and that humors often are precipitated to the
Lungs, before they arrive to that height of the brain, there can no kind of
benefit be expected from so irrational an application. On the other hand those
subliming humors ought rather to be intercepted before they are mounted to the
head, by sublingual Pills, Trochisces, adstringent and incrassating Syrups,
Loochs Electuaries, etc. To the same intent Celsus lib. 3. c. 23. approves of
exulcerations made under the Chin, on the Shoulders, Breast, or Neck; Hildanus
writes he cured several initial Consumptions chiefly by drawing a Seton through
the Neck. When all is done, they do nothing, until they bend their design and
force to the Part Mandant, and eradicate the root of the Disease; which done,
there remains nothing more.

The Patient is obliged to abstain from flesh; and diet upon Panada, Rice Milk,
Boiled Porcelain, Lettice, Potcht Eggs, etc. some commend Pork, upon the answer
of the Oracle, that advised Dumninus the Philosopher to Hogs flesh, whereof as
often as he eated, his spitting of blood stopped; and leaving it off, returned;
possibly because the juice of this sort of flesh is glutinous; for the same
reason others approve of Eels, Muscels, Cockles, Crabs, Lobsters, etc.
Damocrates the Physician cured a Roman Woman only with Goats milk fed with
Mastick-leaves. Trallianus relates, he cured several with Milk only.

His drink ought to be a decoction of steel dust, burned Hearts horn, red
Sanders, or Knotgrass, and sweetened with Sugar of Roses, dissolving in it
besides a convenient quantity of Sal Prunellae; or an Emulsion made of the four
greater cold seeds, white Poppy seeds, and spirits of Vitriol. He must forbear
much talk, walking, and all violent motions, and passions.

I Will only add an observation of a very speedy cure; one Mr. S. D. a Merchant,
who through a violent vomit brake a Lungvein; I caused immediately a large
quantity of blood to be drawn out of his right Arm; and thereupon gave him this
following

R. Dulced. Mart. Spec. Haemop. a^ gr. 4. Opij Spag. praep. gr. ss Aq. urtic.
Maj. ij. m. f. pot. capiat mane and sero.

This he took thrice and was perfectly cured. The like effect it performed in
one W. S. a Tailor.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Cure of a Pulmonique Consumption.
THe Indications in the first degree point at suitable preparatives, to prepare
those corrosive salin humors, and remove the forementioned obstructions of the
Spleen, Stomach and Liver; which is to be performed by Agrimony, fumitory,
Succory, Scabious, Borrage, Buglos, Endive, Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue,
Spleenwort, Cuscuta, Burnet, Grass roots, ditch Dock roots, the five opening
Roots, the four greater cold Seeds, Sir. e 5 rad. bizant. de cichor. cum Rh.
Some of these or all you may make use of in Whey, whereby having prepared those
adust humors, it is necessary they should be purged by gentle purgatives and
laxatives; as Polypod. sem cartham. Manna, cassia, tamar. Sir. ros. sol. de
Cichor. cum Rh. ros. sol. cum Agar. de pom mag. de Epithym. Senna, Rhab. agar.
crem. tart. Tart. vitriol etc. out of these you may compose Apozems, to prepare
the humors and at the same time purge them; but by degrees ( per Epicrasin;)
after this if there was a small quantity of blood evacuated at the Haemorrhoids
by Leeches would be very advantageous. The cough in the mean while must be
remedied with Syrups, and Loochs, sublingual Pills and Trochisces to
expectorate the humors out of the Lung-pipes. If the matter be tough thick and
cleaving, it must be cut, attenuated and deterged; if thin, it must be thickened
by incrassatives, as Sir. Nymph. jujub. looch e Papav. portul. etc. This kind
of short cough in the first degree is that which Physicians call a Tussis
Vulpina, a Foxcough. Touching the curative of the second degree, where we meet
either with an Ulcer in Lungs, or an Ulcerous disposition; the former, namely
the Ulcer, must be cleansed or deterged, and afterward cicatrized or
consolidated. The first is performed by hot and dry Medicines; the latter by
cold and dry. Moreover, there must be a particular respect had to the urgent
symptoms of this degree, viz. the Hectic Fever and Consumption of the parts.
Having first subtracted a part of the vicious humors, by a laxative as Manna,
cassia, Sir. ros. sol. etc. it is generally agreed upon by the most famous*
ancient and modern* Physicians, that milk is the only Medicine and food, that
will answer all indications; for by its wheyish part it cleanses and deterges;
by it is cheesy it conglutinates; by its buttery part it restores and nourishes
the consumed parts; And by its unctuosity promotes expectoration. But since
there are several sorts of milk, you are to make distinction of them. Woman's
milk is most nourishing, but less detergent; Asses milk is more cleansing, and
less restorative; but Goats milk is between both; that is, it is more nourishing
and less cleansing than Asses milk, and more cleansing and less nourishing than
Woman's milk. But because the cleansing faculty is most requisite, Asses milk is
universally preferred; and to render it the more effectual, it is advisable to
seed the Ass with restringent and detergent herbs, as Yarrow, Plantain, Vine
leaves, Knotgrass, Bramble-bush leaves, etc. Platerus records several cured by
Woman's milk sucked warm out of the Breast; and among the rest there was one,
that throve so well with his Wives milk, that he purposely got her with child
again to prevent his want of milk for the future. Chamels milk is a degree
beyond Asses for cleansing. In stead of Woman's milk, Sheeps or Cows milk may be
used. Likewise Mairs milk alone, or Cows milk being diluted with Whey, may be
substituted in stead of Asses or Chamels. Touching the use of milk, you must
observe the quantity, time, and correction of it; for the quantity, you must
accustom your self to it by degrees, beginning from a quarter of a pint, and
ascending to a pint or a little more; according to the parties appetite, and
strength of digesture. The time must be in the Mornings and Afternoons, taking
your dose always five or six hours before and after meat, warm from the Cow or
Ass, and besure to refrain sleeping upon it, for otherwise it would fume up to
the head. Lastly, because milk is so apt to sour in a weak Stomach, you must
sweeten it with Sugar of Roses, or clarified Honey. Some boil it with yolks of
Eggs, to make it more nutritive; others quench steel in it to render it the
more conglutinating.

But after all these Encomia, know that a milk diet in many cases proves
hurtful, particularly, 1. When the body is affected with a putrid slow
erratick, (discernable, or sometimes latent) Fever, as generally it is. 2.
Consumptives are very subject to evaporations and fumes flying to the Brain,
obstructions of the Bowels, and disposition to engender hot Choleric and Salin
humors; all which evils milk is very apt to increase, nothing being more
vaporous than it, nothing more Feverish, nothing more obstructive, by reason
of its cheesy parts, and nothing more convertible into hot choleric humors
than it is buttery parts, as appears in Children, whom it does so extremely fill
with green and yellow gall, and fleam; and disposes them to Catarrhs,
Consumptions, Fevers, Loosenesses, etc. 3. Most Physicians forbid milk to
those, that are troubled with weak Stomachs, sour Belchings, Grumblings in
their Guts ( Borborygmi) Loosenesses, all which Consumptives are seldom free
from. 4. Many passages of Hip. do also disuade 2. Aphor. 11. and 17. and lib.
de vet. Med. Meat eaten in too great a quantity tabefies the body, and lib. de.
loc. in hom. If the body does not digest the meat it eats, it is rendered lean;
besides several other places, which would prove too tedious to recite.
Wherefore you must be very careful, you do not exceed in your milk diet; but
the surest way is not to meddle with it without a Physicians advice. Moreover
take away the root and cause of the Consumption, and the body will soon thrive
upon it.

For these reasons I do attribute much more to a Whey diet, which I have
advised to many* with the greatest success imaginable, enjoining them to drink
nothing but white Whey sweetened with Sugar or old Conserve of Roses; to Dine
and Sup upon Buttermilk, boiled with French Barley beaten in a Mortar, or
Oat-meal, and afterward sweetened with Sugar of Roses, and colored yellow with
English Saffron. But lest they should be clyed with that, they may gratify
their Palats with variety of Broaths, and especially with Broth made of an old
Cock, with the addition of aperitive and pulmonique herbs, which together with
the use of some laxatives only, is in great vogue among the Italian Physicians
for the cure of Consumptions. Some advise their Patients to diet upon Crabs,
Lobsters, Oysters, Cockles, Muscels, Frogs, etc. but against reason, those
meats being of too hard a digesture for weak Stomachs; nevertheless the juices
expressed out of them, or liquors distilled from them, are experienced very
proficuous. Others prescribe milk boiled with flower, thick ptisan, confections
out of Capons, Partridge, and Tortises flesh, Crabs, Lobsters, Sweet Almonds,
Pistaches, White poppy seeds, the four greater cold Seeds, etc. For their
ordinary drink, they approve of Barley Water, Small Meetheglin, the decoction of
Hartshorn, or the Small Ale described in Chap. 34. But beware of stale Beer.

The Air ought to be dry and temperate; witness the story of that old Woman,
that was preserved many years by the dry Air of the Bakers Oven, where she was
used to work. Aretaeus commends a Sea Air, and therefore the Ancient Physicians
were wont to send their Patients to Alexandria, for to have the benefit of the
Salt Air during the Voyage, which being of a drying nature, they conceived
might conduce to the drying up of the Ulcer in the Lungs. But in my opinion the
Sea Air being nauseous, moving one to Vomit, and stirring the humors of the
body, should rather prove offensive. Pliny does highly esteem the Air of
Forests, where pitch is collected.

The detersives for the Ulcer are composed out of Vulneraries, agglutinatives,
and pectorals; viz. Burnet, Centaury, Betony, Agrimony, Vervain, Mouse-ear,
Avens, Ladies Mantle, Arsmart, Periwincle, Bugle, Lilly of the Valley,
Solomon's Seal, Serpentine, Snakeweed, Aristol. rot. Cicer. rubr. Isop, Water
Germander, Coltsfoot, Card. Benedict. Lung-wort, Maiden hair, Scabious,
Pennyroyal, Ground Ivy, Cudweed, Ros solis, Origan, Horehound, Oak of
Jerusalem, Calamint, St. Iohns-wort, Elicampaine, Squils, Orris, Myrrh,
Terebinthin, Fox Lungs, Spec. diaireos, Diacalaminthe, Looch San. and expert. e
pulm. vulp. Sir. nicot. ^ ped. cat. etc. The agglutinatives we have set down in
the Chapter preceding, and are to be made use of when the Ulcer is sufficiently
cleansed. The experience of famous Practitioners recommends to us several
Specifiques. 1. Ros solis is extold above most other Pulmonicks by several. 2.
Speed-well is likewise very frequently used against Ulcers in the Lungs, an
Herb certainly without comparison. 3. Camerarius speaks much in the praise of
Oak of Jerusalem; which also makes the basis of Sir. Botryos, described in the
Land. disp. 4. The generality of Physicians attest Spotted Lungwort to be a
most egregious Pulmonique, both for deterging and conglutinating an Ulcer in
the Lungs. 5. An ingenious Physician at Padua told me this following for a
great secret in an Ulcerous Consumption of the Lungs. Masterwortroot boiled in
Metheglin, and afterward mixed with a third part of aq. Sperm ranar. 6. Langius
and others make use of Ground Ivy, for the last and extreme remedy. You may
take it either destilled, in the Juice, or Syrup; dissolving only in them some
Conserve or Suggar of Roses. 7. Saffron is commonly-stiled the soul of the
Lungs, which when they are ready to be stifled and choked with thick tough
fleam and purulent matter, have been miraculously recovered by a dose of
Saffron in wine; wherefore no prescription for Pulmoniques ought to pass
without some grains of Saffron in it. 8. Millepedae or Palmers have for many
Ages been reputed the greatest detersives and cleansers of the Lungs, a
quantity of them being tied in a fine Linen rag, and steeped in Metheglin or
Whey, and so used; or being burned to ashes in an oven and mixed with old
Conserve of Roses. 9. Avicen. lib. 3. Fen. 10. Tract. 5. cap. 5. mesues. cap.
de Phthisi. Valleriola lib. 5. Obs. 5. Forest. libr. 16. Obs. 58. Montan. in
Cons. 152. do all bring in unquestionable Testimonies of several, by them
particularly mentioned, desperate Consumptives, perfectly cured of deep and
sordid Ulcers in the Lungs, by the sole means of Suggar of Roses; but of at
least a year old, and devoured in great quantities several times in a day, and
so continued for some weeks. 10. Fonseca consult. 58. tom. 1. sets a great
value upon the Decoction of yellow Sanders. 11. Arcaeus lib. de Febr. Erastus
lib. 3. Cons. 8. Fracast. lib. 3. de morb. contag. cap 8. Ingrassias in
consult. pro fist. pect. Stabelius in Disput* and several others, recite a
great number of Phthisical cures, and those desperate ones, performed by a
Decoction of Guaiacum wood. 12. Trallianus lib* 7. c. 1. speaks wonders of the
use of Bloodstone. Cardan writes no less of the Decoction of Crabs Legs and
Tails; Fern. of the Syrup of Cumphry, others of the Syrup of St. Iohnswort
flowers, and Syrup of Tobacco. 12. For Compositions, this following powder of
Haly Abbas is by Valescus, Forestus, Rondeletius, and all others received for a
singular Medicine, whereby the three former cured some Consumptives, beyond
their own expectation. R. Sem. pap. alb. x. gum. arab. amyl. a^ iij sem portul.
malv. al^h a^ v. sem cucurb. cucum. citrul. cydon. a^ vij. Spod. glycyr. gum.
tragac. a^ iij. m. f. Pulv. 13. This of Trallianus I esteem equal with the best
composition that ever was prescribed by any. R. Suc. s^mpervivi. passi cretici,
mel. attic. a^. cyath. 2. sem. urtic. cucum. sativ. cup^es. a^ j. ^oq. ad
Consump. med. part. Colat. add pic. liq. cyath. and coq. ad consist. mellis;
huic admisce nard. syriac. j. thuris iij. Croci* pip. alb a^ ij. m. f. Elect.

Here I have registered to you the most efficacious Medicines of this and the
former ages, which unless applied by a dexterous hand, may sooner kill than
cure. Moreover note these detersives may be mixed with the restringents,
consolidatives, and incrassatives of the preceding Chapter, according as the
Patients condition shall require.

For external means, drying suffumiges or smoaks are often prescribed with good
success. They are usually composed out of Frankincense, Myrrh, Pitch, Olibanum,
Benzoin, Styrax. Gum. hederae, Amber, Rose leaves, Coltsfoot dried, Sanders,
lign. Aloes, etc. but the fume of Sandaracha is particularly commended.
Emollient and temperate Oils and Liniments seem to facilitate respiration,
which the Physician must always have an eye to, and therefore it is necessary
he should ever mix some lenient pectorals with his other Medicines: Issues in
the lower parts do also divert.

Hermetical Physicians go another way to work; they begin with a galliard
vomit, and so proceed to detersives and agglutinatives; viz. Flowers of
Brimstone, Balsam and milk of Sulphur, Elixir proprietat is, crystal mart.
Extract. Aristol. rot. spir. salis dulc. Ol. vitriol. ol. mercur. dulce, spir.
sulphuris per camp* ol. succin. magist. ocul. cancror. magist. perlar. tinct.
sal. and magist. coral. rub sacchar. saturn. Mynsighti. antimon. diaphor.

To Dogmatists this Chemical practice seems suspicious; in regard that vomits
do violently conquassate the Lungs, and tare the Ulcer wider. Moreover Hip. 4.
Aph. 8. does very much condemn vomits in such, as are only disposed to a
Phthisis, much more in those that are already tabefyed. Hereunto may be
replied, that vomits though they infer some small detriment to the Lungs, yet
they import a far greater benefit by working immediately upon the parts
mandant; and Hip. himself lib. 2. de Morb. did frequently exhibit Hellebor to
Consumptives, which is experienced to be a very churlish Medicine.

On the other hand Chemists quarrel with Dogmatists for letting blood in
Consumptions, where nature is already so much defrauded of its Genius, and
consequently rather hungers for a greater supply of nutriture: this objection
they easily answer, in asserting that in many Consumptives there is a Plethora
ad vires, (though in no wise ad vasa) a great acrimony in their blood, and an
impetuous afflux of humors to their Lungs, which do very urgently indicate
Phlebotomy; whereby Hipp. 5. Epid. 6. recovered a Consumptive, whose disease
contemned all other remedies; and Galen 6. Epid. cured a Woman of a Phthisis by
the same means. Several other Authors likewise observe many rescued from
imminent Consumptions by detracting small proportions of blood. No doubt but
Phlebotomy and Vomits have their use in this malady; but the Temperament, Age,
Sex, and Idiosyncrasia of the Patient, degree of the Disease, and other urgent
or contraindicating symptoms must be exquisitely observed.

It Is time I should take leave of my Reader, which the urgency of my affairs
does now prompt me to; However for his last farewell we will entertain him with
some few observations of mixed cures, namely partly spagyrical, and partly
dogmatical.

Obs. 1. One G. T. a Merchant's Apprentice, upon a continuated debauch, was
surprised with a tedious Cough, often expectorating small quantities of blood,
whereupon he soon dropped into a proper Consumption, but was in a short time
recovered by these means; I advised him to the Country, where by my appointment
a proportion of blood was extracted twice out of the Haemorrhoids by Leeches.
Before and afterward was several times purged with this bol^. R. extract. rec.
cass. ss pulp. tamarind. man. calabr. a^ ij. crystal tart. j. Rhab e^. pulv.
agar. rec. troch. a^ ss spic. nard. gr. 4. cum sacchar.

M. F. Bol. for sixteen days he took this Elect. mornings and evenings,
drinking upon it a draught of Decoct. of red Sanders sweetened with Sugar of
Roses, and acuated with a drop or two of Spir. Sulphur. per camp. R. Magist.
stypt. Specif. Hect. croc. angl. a^ gr. 4. Conserv. ros. vet. j.

M. F. Bol. His ordinary drink was white Whey; his diet broaths altered with
herbs, and oftimes Buttermilk.

Obs. 2. A young woman aged 24, spitting blood and matter upon the stoppage of
her courses, was let blood out of the foot, and often purged with Diaprunum
lenit. ss Merc. dulc. gr. 15. crem. tart. j. She drank a decoct. of Sarsa with
Veron. agrimon. heder. ter. Dates, Corrents, and Liquorish for 21 days, at the
expiration of which term she was cured of her Cough, and there appeared a show
of her flowers. I advised her also to Looch. Papap. and e Pulm. vulp. ana. and
to make an Issue in her left Leg.

Obs. 3. A Child aged 3. deformed with the Rickets, and consumed to skin and
bones, was cured in a month by the Tincture of tartar, taking two drops twice
or thrice a day in Whey.

Obs. 4. I have seen many thousands of Diseased in the Hospitals of France,
Germany, Italy, Holland, Flanders, and other parts, but never observed so many
great Diseases complicated in one body, as not long since in one of my
Patients; the party had been seized of a latent venereal malady two or three
years together, and newly again surprised with a Green virulent Conorrhe, a
constant excretion of purulent matter; an immitigable Cough, a confirmed
Dropsy, a most forbid Ulcer in the Kidneys, evacuatting constantly a great
quantity of blood and Pus (matter) with his Urin, a perfect Consumption, great
obstructions of his Bowels, and many other most urgent Symptoms. Whence I could
observe the strange force of nature, though in a body naturally weak, to
support such a number of great Diseases; and that which to me appeared more
strange, was an intermission of at least two pulsations in nine or ten,
continuing that type for several hours, I am confident, if not days.

Obs. 5. A Smith that had expectorated putrid, thick, ugly matter for at least
two months, I cured out of charity; I gave him two doses of Antimon. resuscit.
the preparation whereof I have divulged to you in Venus Unmasked; and advised
him to drink twice a day a small draught of Spring water being rendered bitter
with soot burned out of wood, and sweetened again with brown Sugar, which in a
month perfectly cured him. I thought to have presented you with several other
remarques; but that the Bulk of this Treatise being already swelled beyond my
purpose, obliges me to come to an

END.
The Table of Contents.
CHAP. I. OF the Original, Contagion, and frequency of Consumptions. p. 2.
CHAP. II. Of the various acceptions of Consumptions. p. 6. CHAP. III. Of the
Fundamental Principles, or Balsamic mixture. p. 14. CHAP. IV. Of the nature of
a Consumption in general. p. 21. CHAP. V. Of the nature of a Proper and True
Consumption. p. 24. CHAP. VI. Of the nature and kinds of Bastard Consumptions.
p. 30. CHAP. VII. Of an Hypochondriack Consumption. p. 32. CHAP. VIII. Of a
Scorbutic Consumption. p. 37. CHAP. IX. Of an Amorous Consumption. p. 39. Of a
Consumption of Grief. p. 56.
CHAP. X. Of a Studious Consumption. p. 61. CHAP. XI. Of an Apostematick
Consumption. p. 63. Of a Scirrous Consumption. p. 67.
CHAP. XII. Of a Cancerous Consumption. p. 68. CHAP. XIII. Of an Ulcerous
Consumption. p. 69. CHAP. XIV. Of a Dolorous Consumption. p. 71. CHAP. XV. Of
an Aguish Consumption. p. 72. CHAP. XVI. Of a Febril Consumption. p. 74. CHAP.
XVII. Of a Uerminous Consumption. p. 75. CHAP. XVIII. Of a Pockie Consumption.
p. 80. CHAP. XIX. Of a Bewitched Consumption. p. 81. CHAP. XX. Of a Consumption
of the Back. p. 91. CHAP. XXI. Of a Consumption of the Kidneys. p. 103. CHAP.
XXII. Of a Consumption of the Lungs. p. 106. CHAP. XXIII. Of the kinds of
Pulmonique Consumptions. p. 109. CHAP. XXIV. Of an Ulcerous Pulmonique
Consumption. p. 111. CHAP. XXV. Containing a disquisition upon the causes
praecited. p. 115. CHAP. XXVI. Of a more apparent cause of a Pulmonique
Consumption. p. 121. CHAP. XXVII. Of some less frequent and rarer causes of a
Pulmonique and other sorts of Consumptions. p. 147. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the
Procatarctick or external causes of Pulmonique Consumptions. p. 155. CHAP.
XXIX. Of the Signs of a beginning or growing Consumption. p. 170. CHAP. XXX. Of
Signs, Diagnostick and Pragnostick, of the several kinds of spitting of Blood.
p. 173. CHAP. XXXI. Of the Diagnostick signs of a confirmed Consumption of the
Lungs. p. 184. CHAP. XXXII. Of the Prognostics of a Pulmonique Consumption. p.
195. CHAP. XXXIII. The Therapentick for Consumptions. p. 206. CHAP. XXXIV. The
Preservative for Consumptives. p. 216. CHAP. XXXV. The curative part for
spitting of blood out of the Lungs. p. 223. CHAP. XXXVI. The Cure of a
Pulmonique Consumption. p. 233.
FINIS.

