A SERMON Preached before the KING, AT His Majesty's Chapel IN WINDSOR-CASTLE,
NOVEMBER. 10. 1695.

By GREG. HASCARD, D. D. Dean of Windsor, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Bible and Swan without Temple Bar, M
DC XC VI.

ACTS XVI. part of the 30, 31 Verses. -- Sirs, What shall I do to be saved? And
they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy
house.


THE Conversion of the Jailer here, is an effect of the precedent Miracle, v.
26. which was wrought by the Power of God, not only to reclaim the Pagan World
from Idolatry and Superstition, but to vindicate the Persons also of Paul and
Silas; who through some covetous Masters, who were angry that their Servant a
Damsel, who brought so much gain unto them by Sooth-saying, by these Apostles
was now dispossessed of her divining Spirit. So much did Covetousness outweigh
their Charity and Religion, v. 19. and by the giddy Multitude, who under
pretense of aged Customs and Superstition is soon fired into Cruelties, Riots,
and Disorder, v. 21, 22. And through the Magistrates here, who were perhaps
forced to comply, from the Clamor and Noise of the Herd, which many times
grows the louder from commanding Silence; these two innocent Persons are
condemned to the Rods and Prison; and the busy Jailer, to please his Masters
and the Rabble, bestows upon them the darkest Room in his Jayl, v. 24. where
these two Saints did not warm their Heads to contrive Revenge, nor whine at,
and bewail the Severity of the Judge, or the madness of the People, nor sink
into despair for fear of further Punishment, Axes, or Rods, that might attend
them; but flaming with Devotion, like Souls upon the Wing, Spiritual and
Divine, truly Citizens of another World, merrily and loudly send up their
Prayers, and tune their Praises unto God, who soon heard, and by a miraculous
Change in Nature, the shaking of the Earth, the moving of the Foundation of the
Prison, the Bands and Shackles of the Captives flying off, owned the Faith and
Creed that Paul and Silas taught, evidenced the vigor of a fervent Prayer,
righted the Innocence of their Persons, and baptized the Jailer into the
Religion of his Prisoners. For seeing these mighty Wonders, his Soul, that
hitherto was kept in straiter Bonds, and a darker Dungeon than ever St. Paul
lay in, looked now like the Prison that he kept, from a clear Conviction upon
his Mind, that he was a gross Sinner, and that Paul and Silas's Religion
brought Salvation with it, and was very true; full of fears and agonies of
Mind, astonishment and confusion of Spirit, comes trembling and falls down to
them that he had whipped before, begging their charitable Advice in this great
concern, Sirs, etc.

In which words these two Parts are to be considered, I. The Question of great
importance that is asked here, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? II. A plain
and sufficient Answer given to it; Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou
shall be saved, and thy house.


The State of the Jailer here is the condition of all Mankind, who from the
natural Light that shines within, and divine Discovery from above, sent into
the World, clear up an immortal State with infinite Sorrows, or eternal Joys to
attend their different Actions, which puts the Souls of Men upon the Search,
and Passion, Fears and Hopes, Jealousies and Desires, to fly from the Flames
which burn under their Feet, and to attain the Crown of Glory which hangs over
their Head. There is no Man of so seared or cauteriz'd a Confcience; there is
no Man of so bold and daring a Spirit, but some time or other shivers and waxes
Pale to think that either he must take an eternal Sleep in the Grave, and never
be again, or else be lashed and scourged for his Follies if he does survive. No
Man's Blood is so warm and feverish with the pleasures and joys of this Life,
but has its cool intermission when Conscience and Reason debate the Case and
ask him, What will be the issue of all these things? What will be the result
and conclusion of all my Lusts and Vices? Live I cannot, Dye I dare not; Where
shall I fly? What Spirits shall I be company for? As the Apparation said to
Saul, I e're long must be with them. Such is my dismal Straight and Condition,
What must I do to be saved? No Man's Methods and Arts are so fly and cunning,
to extinguish the notion of a God, to pull down Heaven and put out the Fires
below, to smother the cries of Conscience, and draw the Curtain upon the light
of Reason; but some time or other, either when Afflictions or Troubles arrest
him, and stop him in the full career of his vicious Pleasures, or when
Sickness, Disappointments, or a Dying Bed seize his Passions, then he cries
out, like the Sorcerer, Oh! let me dye the death of the righteous; and whatever
my life was in the beginning, let my latter end be like his. Call a Confessor
and a Guide, for I am a going I know not whither, and Hell and Despair begin to
appear; And what shall I do? This is the Language of all Mankind, of the
Timorous and Inquisitive, the Young and Aged, the Melancholy and the Gay, the
Sensual and Vicious, the Pagan and Christian, the Question in every Man's
Breast. God has been so kind, by the Gospel, to give us a plain and sufficient
Answer to this important Question, telling us what we were, what we are, and
what we must be; pointing out our Joys, discovering our Dangers, describing our
Country, and the Inhabitants above, giving us wise Counsel and wholesome
Directions, how we must walk and arrive there. In short, only thus; to believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ. And which Words may be discoursed on by this Method.

1. To consider who the Persons are, who can properly ask this Question. 2.
What is the Nature of this Belief, or Faith that will save us? 3. To evidence
that, this Answer is plain and sufficient. 4. Some Conclusions from the whole.
1. It Is the Question of a Pagan to a Christian; and it is the Case of the
Jailer here, who sadly complains that his Notions and Evidences for Immortality
were very uncertain and obscure; and that the most Learned among them, and the
best of their Guides did confess this. Seneca therefore acknowledges upon what
Grounds his Hopes of another Life was founded. I did believe, says he, the
Opinions of our great Men about the blessed State for departed Souls, not for
the sake of their Arguments, but the Persuasion was Pleasant, and I could wish
that it was True. And Socrates coming to dye, after he had made his fine
Oration about the Soul and Virtue, and the Blessed Mansions above, said, Upon
this account I could dye Ten thousand Deaths; but concludes, whether this be so
or no, only the Gods above do know. And the Reasonings of their great
Antoninus, as famous for his Philosophy as for his Empire, and several others
about the Nature of the Soul, and the Justice of Providence, whatever strength
they have in them (as a great deal they have) yet are above the ordinary level
of Mankind, and the Rules and Maxims of their Philosophers for a Virtuous Life,
as the way to Heaven were many times above, sometimes below, and some parts of
their Religion unworthy of their Practice; that they were distracted and
confounded among themselves about the best end of Life, and the chiefest Good;
that they drew but imperfect Notions, and Features of the first Mover, or
Supreme Deity; and therefore served him by the rude Addresses of the Dii
Medioxumi, their intermediate Gods and Saints, derogatory to his Honor and
Greatness. And the vulgar World was so enslaved in their Lusts and
Apprehensions, that they not only adored the Sun or Stars, a Lion or an Oak,
things that were Great, Generous and Useful; but like the Sottish Egyptians,
below their Nature, Crocodiles and Monkies, Leeks and Onions, of which they
might have a new Crop of young Gods and Goddesses every Year. And besides all
this, the Pagan had an active Reason, and a busy Conscience within, and a
lively impression of God enstamp'd upon his Soul, which he had much abused,
though he could no more utterly deface, than put out the Sun, and that he
should survive this Life, and be lashed and scourged, crowned or rewarded in
the other World: And therefore he cries, Allay my Fears, and support my Hopes,
and tell me What must I do to be saved? The Christian can prescribe him that
Physic which cured his own Disease, and is approved by the Testimony of
numerous Converts, Believe in the Lord Jesus, etc. But that he may not wink and
swallow this down, and cure himself only by a warm Fancy, thinking he is well,
and have no reason for the Prescription; the Jailer here had the mighty
Argument of Miracles for his Conversion, and all Mankind justly challenge some
reason for their Persuasion. And therefore the Christian Guide tells the Pagan,
That the Christian Religion or way of Salvation, has the clearest Evidence on
its side, being confirmed by greater and more Miracles than any other
Persuasion. That its Doctrines are suitable to the reason and dictates of
humane Nature, highly serviceable to the true Interests of Men here in all
Capacities and Relations, and an endless Life hereafter. That its Author Jesus
had a stupendous Birth; his Person, Offices and Actions, Prophesied of long
before, and exactly fulfilled in all their due Circumstances. A Person he was
of an unsullied Life, and without any design of secular Interest or Popularity,
hugely Generous and Charitable to all sorts and degrees of Men, who signed his
Discoveries and Truths with the smartest Agonies and Effusion of his Blood, and
Crowned and Confirmed all his Laws by a greater Wonder, his Resurrection from
the Grave: Who continued the Arguments for our Faith in the Mission of his
Spirit, by the miraculous Gift of Tongues upon his Apostles; Men of the
greatest Sincerity and Integrity, who with the succeeding Ages, without any
sinister Design, conveyed in an undoubted way the History of this Religion to
this present Age, a way equivalent to the hearing of our Ears, and seeing of
our Eyes; a faithful Tradition supplying our Senses. These and many more are
the Arguments of our Christian Faith, and fit to prevail upon an honest and
unprejudiced Mind. What shall the Pagan, the Atheist, or the doubting Christian
(who is always for laying the Foundation again, but never building up the
Superstructure of an holy Life, by reason of some particular Vices that he is
loath to part withal) do to be saved? Let them weigh and consider, try and
examine; for the Christian Religion, by such Reasons as these has prevailed
upon the Great and Learned, upon all Tempers and Professions of Men; and if
they will let their Passions and Prepossessions submit to their Judgment, they
will find Arguments sufficient to believe in the Lord Jesus, and to be baptized
into the Christian Faith.

2. It Is the Question of a Christian, troubled with the Divisions of
Christendom, not knowing to what Church to adhere, The honest Christian sadly
finding Religion torn into so many Parts and Pieces, and every Division and
Sect of Christians confining Christ, with all his Privileges and Promises, to
their private Sect; small Fraternities, and Cloisters, single Families, and
particular Persons, have bestowed upon themselves the great Names of the only
Church and Household of Faith; and Sentenced all the World for Reprobates, not
within their narrow Bounds and Pale; and have chained, as the Tyrians did their
gods, to their City, Providence and Religion, Heaven and Eternity, only to
their own side, and every one with a Damnamus fixed unto their Creeds: The Seed
of Isaac, in this, too much like that of Ishmael, he against every Man, and
every Man against him, discharging Censures and Excommunications one against
another. The plain Christian that thinks a Soul and God, infinite Rewards or
Miseries, are too great to be played withal, and frighted with the confident
pretenses of some, and acted upon by the sly Methods of others, begins to be
wavering in his Faith, uncertain in his Hopes and Profession, and like a
bewildred Pilgrim standing where variety of Ways do meet, surrounded with Woods
and Waters, and hearing different Voices, crying, Come hither, and here is
Christ; go thither, and there is Jesus; and pointing yonder, Lo, there lys the
way that leads to Sion; He begins to tremble, and begs of some charitable Guide
to lead him by the Hand to the House where Christ dwells; asks him the way how
we may walk securely. What must be do to be saved? He is the safest and most
faithful Guide that tells him this, Believe in the Lord Jesus; he is the way,
the truth, and the lise. For this is the Summary of the Gospel, the Epitome of
all true Religion, wherein all Christians do agree, and a general prospect of
that new and living way alone whereby we must be saved, manifest to Men in the
Schools, and at the Plow, the Learned and Illiterate, Faith to whatever God
has revealed in Holy Writ, and a Life conformable to his Laws. Which
Compendium of our Faith, when Men of Wit and Interest drew out into longer and
smaller Threads, and multiplied Fundamentals, defining obscure Notions for
Divine-Light and Evident Truth, by an Authority more dark than they; they
sour'd Religion, made it a fardle of Perplexities, and an indigested heap of
Speculations. The Apostle forseeing this, 2 Timothy 1.13.
reminds his Son Timothy to keep close to the form of sound words, which was
this belief on Jesus, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness. Which
when Men of Fancy and nice Conception, mixed with Secular Designs slighted and
contemned, they ruined that Faith that was once delivered unto the Saints. And
when the great Commission was signed unto the Apostles to go and preach to, and
baptize all Nations, they received an Abridgment of that Religion which they
were to teach, which was only this, That Jesus was the Christ; and this became
the Character of a true Christian; and 'twas the brand of the Man of Sin,
whosoever and wheresoever he is, that either directly, or by natural
Consequence he should deny, That Jesus was come in the flesh; that the Son of
God had taken upon him Humane Nature. 1 John 4.2, 3.
And 'twas the Wisdom of the first Planters of Religion, to prevent the Cavils
of the Gnostics, and other peevish Disputants, whose Heats are most kindled by
Straw and Stubble laid upon the Foundation. 1 Cor. 3.11, 12.
Variety of Phrases, and changing of Syllables to reduce all the Fundamentals
of Religion, and comprize them under shorter Forms, called our Creeds; which
when after Ages drew into thin and invisible Surfaces, our Faith turned into
Faction and sophistical Niceties, the easiness of Religion, its true Honor,
was confounded, the Commandments of Men, the Institutes of the Schools,
Aristotle Canonized, the Prejudices and Craft of the Age brought into the
Temple, and called the Holy of holies. Christian, What shall you do to be
saved? You are safe and secure in this Church, that preserves this Faith entire
as its Author did deliver it, neither wresting its Articles from their natural
Sense, not adding any, pretending a Divine Commission, nor diminishing the
number of them, whose Doctrine is Apostolical, Discipline primitive, and
Ceremonies few and decent, all leading to an holy Life, the solemn end of all
Religion. As for those Controversies that are not of his Foundation, which warm
the Heads of the Learned and Studious, and stir up the Blood of the Angry and
Peevish, if the unhappiness of your Education, the privacy of your Living, or
greatness of your Employment, will not permit you to state and determine their
Truth, the Spirit of God will either lead you into it, or else your industry,
probity, and sincerity of Mind will excuse your Ignorance, which in such
matters will never hazard your Salvation.

3. It Is the Question of a Vicious Christian to his Spiritual Guide, who having
been baptized into this most Holy Faith, made his solemn Vows for a Virtuous
Life, and by entertaining the hopes of a blessed Eternity, listed himself under
the Banner of Christianity, yet notwithstanding all this he has foully
apostatized and run from his Colors, betraying his Faith and his Conscience,
his Resolution and his Reason into Lewdness and grosser Follies, and
prostituting all Holy Things, crucified the Lord of Life again; whereby he has
degraded his Nature, wounded Religion, stained his Family, damnified his Prince
and Country, scandalized all that are good and wise, and abused his God; and
now being and Aged and Gray headed Sinner, laboring under Infirmities of Body,
the Punishment of his Greener Days, and a distempered Conscience within, and
now taking a view of all his Pleasures and Follies that are past, giving this
sad account, That he began them in Fancy, carried them on in Labor, and now
end in Dissatisfaction and Disdain, and this sorrowful Question here, after a
Life so ill spent, What shall he do to be saved? Sinner, What shall you do to
be saved? Renew your Vows, repeat your Resolution, abhor and detest your
Follies that are past, and take the Propher's Advice to the Tyrant, Break off
your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor,
and it may be a lengthning of your Tranquillity, your Possessions will be
enjoyed with a more easy mind, and your lawful Pleasures will taste the
sweeter; for this is believing on the Lord Jesus; Faith being a complexive
term, signifying not only our Assent, but our Obedience too, our Creed and
Practice. So to Believe, as to Repent; so to Repent, as to bring forth fruits
meet for repentance: So to Believe, as to change your ill habits, to reform
your Manners, to restrain your Passions and vain Desires, and put a final
conclusion to all your Lusts and Follies; and the time past of your life may
suffice you to have wrought the will of the Gentiles. If you have been guilty
of Violence and Oppression, Restitution must be made, a large and Heroic
Charity must be exercised, and Satisfaction made in all Capacities. You must
run counter to, and unraffle all the Ill Customs you have contracted, recant
and unsay wherein you have deceived, by a Virtuous Example, Discourse, and
Behavior; allure unto Piety, where by your Vicious Actions, you have seduced;
in time to come use mortification and self denial; Go, and sin no more, lest a
worse thing happen unto you; and now be more Brave and Generous, and like St.
Paul, because once a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, upon his
Conversion he labored more abundantly, and his faith wrought and was perfected
by love. The Sinner so believing, and so acting, let his former Crimes be of
never so deep a dye, never so many, of a long continuance, and clothed with
all their aggravating Circumstances, is heavy laden, yet has his Pardon sealed
in Heaven, Remission of Sins by Christ being as certainly true, as Jesus is the
Christ. This is the Plank after Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, by
which we may swim to Shore. This is the way to redeem time that is misspent and
fled away; to call Life back and act it over again. The Sinner thus sincere and
resolved, is accepted into Favor, treated like a righteous Person, his Debts
cancelled, no former Miscarriages to upbraid him, but looked upon as a Saint
and a Friend of God, his Question Answered, and he eternally saved through
Christ on whom he did believe.

4. It Is the Question of an honest Christian, troubled in Mind, whose wounded
and timorous Spirit viewing a large Catalogue of black and crying Sins, though
now repented of, fancies them beyong the Divine Mercy and Reprieve. Sometimes
an Hypocondriacal Passion, the effects of his Constitution, over-clouds his
Soul, which he calls the Anger of God, the withdrawing of his Spirit, and the
doom of Heaven: To day he is disappointed, and some Calamity of Life, Fire or
Mildew blasts his Hopes: he measuring his Assurance in God, by Success and
Sunshine, thinks Heaven is gone, and Eternity will Miscarry. His pensive
Thoughts grime every Frailty for an habitual Sin, and swells every Error into
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, unpardonable, and dye he must. Sometimes his
Thoughts are confused about another World, and has dismal Apprehemsions about
eternal Decrees; and some severe Men have denounced Damnation against him,
because he is not of their Party and Division, and because of some
unintelligible Characters which Enthusiasts have set for Men to judge by,
whether they shall be saved or no, and overaw'd by the greatness of Eternity
and God; and the sly Deceiver who first tempts Men to presumption, and then to
despair, improving Scruples into Despondency. David's roaring for the
Disquietness of his Mind, and the Jaylor's Question here, Miserable man that I
am, What shall I do to be saved? The only Balm for this wounded Spirit, is such
a Faith as this; it being the Condition of the New Covenant and our Salvation,
and the sum of all our Duties and Labor. All those other Conceits being Errors
and Misapprehensions of the Divine Goodness, and Methods of the Gospel. For
it is plain to all, that whoever believes, shall be saved; and that Man
certainly believes, who refrains from his vicious Inclinations, because Christ
commands, and can easily judge whether he does so or no; and if he shoul'd
mistake in judging too severely of his Condition, so long as he has done his
Duty, his Mistake may be his Vexation here, but never his Damnation hereafter.
For it is harsh to conceive of the Divine Clemency, that if the Christian has
discharged all his Duties, and is perfect by an Evangelical Allowance, that yet
he should be Damned, because his fear of God may border a little upon
Superstition, and Scruples and Objections may gnaw upon him, not his Pleasure
but his greatest Pain. Had you Servant faithfully discharged all your Commands,
and paid his Reverence, yet was fearful lest he had omitted any thing, or done
amiss, and therefore began to despair of your Favor and Reward; Would it not
look very cruel to deny him the Reputation of, Well done good and faithful
servant, enter into your masters joy? Shall not the Judge of heaven and earth
do right? Who will try Men at the last Bar, not for their invincible Errors,
Misprisions, mortal Fears and Suspicions, which are far better than Confidence
and Presumption, but by Principles and Practice, wilful Ignorance and habitual
Vices; these and these alone will Sentence them into eternal Despair. Our
merciful High Priest knows and pities our Mold and Frame, and the sad
Circumstances of humane Life, and the Covenant of Grace and its Messiah are
Prophesied of, Not to quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed. The
Justice of our Judge, Isa 42.3.
and the Goodness of our Advocate will not suffer us to lose our Possession of
Heaven, though we understand not the nature of the Title, and procedures of the
Court, when by Faith and Repentance it is made out, and in it self, and to those
knowing and righteous Persons it appears very true. Divine Providence many time
permitting these Doubts and Scruples in the best of men, to make them the more
to stand upon their guard, to quicken their motions, to inflame their Prayers
and Zeal, and other excellent Purposes. And tho they may, like Lazarus with his
Rags and Sores, die in some Errors and Infirmities of Life, and in Clouds and
uncertainties pass by the Gates of Hell, yet they shall not stay there, but
certainly arrive at Heaven.

2. What sort of Faith this is, that will save us. It Is such a Faith as is
productive of good Works, Mercy, and Charity, change of Manners, newness of
Life, mixed with Modesty and Humilty, without pretending Merit, or challenging
of Heaven. We cannot obey except we believe, and we do not believe except we
obey. Faith and Obedience in Scripture Language being put one for the other,
both made necessary to Salvation, without an idle dispute about the preference.
Faith is the Radix and Foundation of all Christian Virtues, and when these are
built upon it, it receives its Complement and Perfection, without which Faith
turns into Romance and Story, and will no more avail us to gain Heaven, than a
Winter Nights Tale. Such a belief as rests only in Speculation, would
contradict the great End of Christ's coming into the World; which was to pull
down the strong holds of Sin, and overturn the Dominions of the Devil; this is
the way to make them stronger still, and enlarge his Power, if such a Faith is
sound and saving, only to believe that Christ has done so much for us, there
is nothing left for us to do, but only strongly to believe it, and admire it,
and so pass in a full Gale of our own Fancy into another World. True Faith
operates upon the Believer's mind, to abate his Conceit and Pride, his
Passions, and his Lusts, to make a surrender of himself to the Government of
Jesus, to be guided and directed by him, to take his Revelations or Pleasure in
their whole Compass and Latitude, his Precepts and Promises, his Commands and
Predictions, and set an equal value upon all, except we think that Christ is in
earnest only with some parts of his Gospel, and others are only for Scene and
Show. A natural Religion in some degree obliges Men to Virtue and Goodness, and
Christ's revealed Religion heightened those Virtues to an higher pitch by reason
of greater Rewards, and the clearer discovery of them; and never intended to
put bare belief into their place, which was the was to make us less Men by
being Christians, and turn the Royal Law and Liberty into Licentiousness. We
are to believe under the pain of Eternal Damnation, the Divinity of the Son of
God, Jesues with all his Offices and Undertaking for Makind; but as such Truths
are very apt and fit to correct our Nature, and keep us to our Duties; so if
they do not attain that end, as well to make us live righteously, as to think
aright; to purify our hearts, as to clear our heads, our Faith will turn into
dream, our Grace will prove fantastic, and our Hopes of Heaven are
ill-bottom'd; And to our faith be as strong as to remove mountains, yet it will
be counted only the tinkling cymbal, to make a noise and disturb the World; and
when we knock at Heaven Gates with a great deal of passion, crying, Lord, Lord,
open unto us; the Answer will be, Be gone, I know you not.

3. To evidence, that this is a plain and sufficient Answer to this important
Question, What shall I do to be saved?

This will appear very true and clear, if we consider what the Gospel says,
our only Judge and Oracle in this matter. If we search the Divine Records, we
shall easily find, that such a Faith as this is laid down as the only necessary
Condition of our Salvation. And it is indifferently expressed, That if we expectto
be saved, sometimes we must believe, sometimes we must obey, both for the same
design and purpose, to tell all men their duty. When Christ was therefore
asked, What was the Condition of Eternal Life, his Answer was to some, That
they must believe on him the Promised Messiah; to others, That they must keep
the Commands; both of them inseparable Duties. And when Christ asked his
Disciples, Matt. 16.16, 17, 18.
Whom say ye that I am? St. Peter answered, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
Living God. Christ replies, and tells them, Upon this rock, upon this
Confession, I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: This Faith shall somewhere or other last, and be the Condition of
men's Salvation to the end of the world. This was the good Confession that
Christ himself witnessed before Pontius Pilate: 1 Timothy 6.13.
This was Mary's Creed: And this was that the doubting Disciple made upon his
Conviction, My Lord, and my God: Joh. 20.20, 28.
And all this naturally producing Charity and Meekness, and such excellent
Virtues. And the belove Disciple tells us, this was the Character of one that
is born of God, That he should believe that Jesus was come in the flesh. And
the great Apostle makes this the Sum of all Religion, Charity out of a pure
heart, 1 Timothy 1.5.
a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. And when the rest of the Apostles and
Apostolical men laid down the several Notes for men to judge by, whether they
should be saved or no, as Grace and Spirit, Decrees and Church, and the like,
they all center here, tho expressed by different Names, Faith, Sanctification,
Regeneration, purifying and cleansing; and all Prayers and Sacraments, Temples
and Altars, Discipline and Ceremonies, aim at this, to guard this short Creed,
and an honest Conversation. That no Age nor Sex, Interest nor Party of men
might call themselves the People of God, except they wrought Righteousness,
changed their Manners, and by Evangelical allowance became perfect and holy, as
their supposed Heavenly Father was. And such a Religion as this, and this
alone, is pure and undefiled.

The Conclusions that follow from this whole Discourse are these Two.

1. That if such a Faith as this will save us, we are safe and secure in this
Church fo England, notwithstanding the Damnation that some men denounce against
us, and the Anger of others that separate from us: For this is the Creed of our
Church, this we firmly and sincerely believe. And if these early Christians
could be undoubtedly saved by the Confession of such a Faith, why not we, who
believe this in the same sense that Christ and his Apostles delivered it, and
in a more diffused and explained manner, as the Christians about the first 300
years taught us in their Three most famous and celebrated Creeds; and also what
is necessarily presupposed or implied in this short Creed, or by natural
Consequences deduced from it. But those things that have no dependence upon, or
relation to this Creed, or endeavored to be derived from it only by dark or
remote Implications, and rather seem destructive of it, we cannot Christen
Articles of Faith, or Fundamentals in Religion. How comes it to pass that those
First Christians could be saved by this Faith, and nor we upon whom the ends of
the World are come? Are there Articles of Faith necessary for one Age of the
Christian World, and not for another? Or was there any other Authority given to
stamp new Articles for the urgent Necessities of the Church? Or how come these
new Necessities? And why must the narrow way be made narrower still? Those that
do dissent from our Church, could never justly charge any Rules or Doctrines
upon it, leading to Ill Manners, or Impiety; but that it reaches universal
Justice and Charity toward all, and especially all Humble Deportment and Duty
to our Superiors. And we are sure, upon the Word of an Apostle, That our Creed
is full and firm. And if he that believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of
God, we are sure then that we are the Sons of God. And with Peace and Security
to our Minds and Consciences, we may say of our Church, which is nothing else
but Old Christianity, as the Disciples did of its Author, the Blessed Jesus,
Thou art He, and we look for no other.

2. Let us consider the Nature of the Faith that we rely upon for our
Salvation. For many are so fond of and dear to their own Persons, as to call
themselves Saints, and Favorites of Heaven, who are violent in their false
hopes, and by force storm Heaven, with no other Title than the Mad man of
Athens had to the Ships coming into that Port, his Fancy or his Frenzy. Give a
reason therefore of your Hopes and Expectations. You, perhaps, believe, That
Jesus is the Christ; his Person Innocent, and his Doctrine Pure; but if this be
all, if it reach not your Lives, it is but the Creed of the Spirits in despair,
who, perhaps, do more than you, both believe and tremble too. Your Passions
sometimes are warm, and you magnify the Atchivements of your dying Lord, extol
his Charity, court and admire his Promises, and the Purchase he has made for
you; but will this heat of Devotion alone serve the turn, then Hypocrites and
other Vicious Persons can be lovers at an equal rate, who cannot but admire
Jesus, who has secured Heaven for them, and given them a dispensation for
their Vices at the same time. You Pray and Communicate, you Vow and Resolve,
and once in a Year you give your Souls a little Physic in the Spring, and keep
a Lenten Fast; it is well run hitherto; but if your Devotion be out of breath,
not to outstrip and leave your Sins, it is Road and Custom, Popular Fame, or
Slavish Fear; but no true Principle or Ground of Hope. You Sin and Repent to
give your Mind a little ease, but you go not forward, for you Sin and Repent
again, and you are got into a Circle, and such a round as this will make you
giddy, that at length by Custom you will scarce know which is Virtue, and which
is Vice. And it is hard to conceive, that Men are fully persuaded that the
Flames burn under their Feet, and yet make from them only by such dull Paces;
or that Heaven and a Soul are of that moment, yet put them both upon perhaps
and peradventures. In short, no Man's Faith is true, no Man's Hope is
well-grounded, no Man can truly call himself a Son of God, except he be
baptized into, and live in the Jaylor's Faith. What is that? To make Confession
of his Faith and Sins together, the Commands and Creed to be equally reverenced
to make him a true Christian, a better and braver Man than the common Lump and
Mass of Mankind, and to reduce his extravagant Passions to the Regal Authority
of Christ. Such a Faith this must be, that chooses Christ to be his King, as
well as his Priest, to become his Sacrifice, or his Prophet, only to tell him
Futurities. That when Interest and Pleasure come in Competition and rival his
Religion and Innocence, he can shake Hands with all those, and stick fast to
his Conscience and his God. Such a Faith this is, that believes the Incarnation
of Christ to condemn Sin in the Flesh. Such as believes his Circumcision in
order to Mortification and Purity. Such as believes his Resurrection, not only
to ascertain us of Glory, but to remind us also of newness of Life. Such which
makes the solemn Design of the Gospel, all the Mysteries of the Blessed Jesus,
with Prayers, Praises, and Sacraments, and the whole Frame of his Religion, not
only to assure us of Imortality, and to carry our Burdens, but to be Arguments
and Inducements also for our Obedience here, and Preparations for that Divine
State we call Heaven hereafter. Such that are so minded in their Faith, there
will be Peace and Salvation upon them, and the whole Israel of God, and their
Hopes will be well founded, that when Christ the Author of their Life, and
their Religion too, shall appear, they all may appear with him in Glory. To
whom be all Honor, Glory, and Praise, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

