Little Venus Unmasked: Or, a perfect DISCOVERY OF THE FRENCH POX. Comprising,
The Opinions of most Ancient and Modern Physicians, with the Author's Judgment
and Observations upon the Rise, Nature, Subject, Causes, Kinds, Signs, and
Prognostics of the said Disease.

Together, With several nice Questions, and Twelve different Ways and Methods
of Curing that Disease, and the Running of the Reins.

The Second Edition. With large Additions of new matter, and of a new Tract of
a Scorbutic Pox, a second Tract of a Mangy Pox, and an Appendix of an Hectic
Pox, together with their several Cures.

By Gideon Harvey, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for William Thackeray in Duck-lane, 1670.

INTRODUCTION.
Reader,
THe acceptance which many have been pleased to show to my Venus Unmasked, in
pur hasing it at a treb^e price, to what it was said for at first, has obliged
me to gratify them with this Little Venus, being a refined abridgement of the
f^rmer, and consisting of the choicest matter the other contained. Those
n^tions that were wrapped up in hard words, and obscure descriptions, I have here
unchained, and set free, so that the youngest Novices in practice may easily
apprehend them. Moreover, the copious additions of Theoretick, and and especial
Practical Observations have now rendered this small Volum so compl^at, that I
may speak out of the mouths of others, ( Absit jactantia dictis) it may serve
Practitioners instead of a Map to discover the innumerable differences of
Venereal Diseases, and to ste^r a right course in curing them. And I must tell
you, turn over all the Authors, that have writ upon this Disease, and the m^st
voluminous of them, you shall not read any thing material there, but what is
succinctly proposed to you here, and much more than ever they dreamed of; for
it is undeniable, that the Pox at this present is more propagated in one day,
than a hundred years ago it was in a month, and consequently the number of
Venereal Patients so multiplied, that the variety of their several cases must
needs give occasion to Physicians to be far more knowing and experienced in it,
than those of the foregoing Ages. And as for the variety of this French
Disease, there is nothing more strange, since among Ten Thousand you shall not
meet with two that are diseased alike. Neither does this evil vary more in
bodies, than it does in Climates; In Italy, and e^p^cially at Venice and Rome,
I found the Pox to c^ntin^e for the most part hidden in bodies for some years,
which afterward would suddenly discover it self in rotten bones. In France, I
perceived the evil to run most upon sc^bby Ulcers, and Botches; In Holland upon
Night-pains, Gums, and Nodes. What it is in Germany I know not, since I only
passed through the Country without making any great stay. The Cure is no less
variable; for what remedieth one, shall render another worse; and indeed if a
patient have a wrong cure applied, it often leaves him incurable. In the South
parts of France the Disease is easily cured, though far easi^r in Italy,
especially at Florence, and Padua; but a Dutch Pox ^is the m^st ^^ffical^ to
Cu^e (...) all others, and next to it an English ^ne. What this sm^ll Volum^
^urther contains, the first P^ge will inform you. The number of this Impression
is very sma^l, b^ing unwilling it should fall unto vulgar hands, on^y in^ending
to d^stri^u^e them am^ng such as may employ the advantage they reap then^e to
public g^^d; to the some intent, I am employing that little time I have over
and above my business in abbreviating my Anatomy of English Consumptions, and
my Book of Fevers, both which I ^urpose to adorn with the choicest of my
Observations and Cures.

Farewell. From my House in S Dunstans Court in Fl^^tstr^^t.
Advertisement of the Bookseller to the Reader.
WELL knowing several Impressions of Venus Unmasked have been sold in a short
time, and notwithstanding there being daily inquiry made for the Book, I have
for your greater satisfaction, procured the Author to make large Additions of
new matter, which was neither contained in the greater Venus, nor the lesser,
as you may observe by the Addition of several new Tracts, hitherto not
discoursed on by any author: I doubt not but they will gratify your pai^s in
the reading, which is what is chiefly aimed at

By your Friend, W. T.

THere is a book lately Printed called, the Accomplished Physician, the Honest
Apothecary, and the Skillful Surgeon.

There is also in the Press a new Treatise of Consumptions, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy, written by Dr. Gid^^n Harv^y.

Both are to be sold by William Thackeray in Ducklane.

LITTLE VENUS UNMASKED.
ARTICLE I. Touching the Names, and supposed rise of the Pox.
1 TO give you a clear and ample Description of the Pox, I shall follow this
Method. 1. Register all its Names, 2. Give you an ample Relation of its first
rise or original. 3. Set down the causes of it. 4. Exactly define its nature or
essence. 5. Tell you the differences, or several kinds, sorts, stages, and
degrees of the Pox. 6. Relate the signs and prognostics. 7. Propose several
nice and curious questions, with their answers upon the Pox, and those that are
pockified. 8. Describe twelve different ways or methods of curing the Pox.

2. In Latin its called Variolae magnae, thence in Italian Varole gross, and
in French la gr^sse verole, all signifying the great, or gross Pox. The French
do also particularly name it, Le mal de Naples, or the evil of Naples, because
it had its first rise among the Spaniards at Naples, in the Year, 1494. being
besieged by the French; though the Spaniards say, the French bred it at that
very time, and therefore do call it I^ man France^e, or the French Evil; the
truth of this you will read below. Among our Latin Authors its termed the Ind^an
evil, the Indian Tetter, the Venereal Infection, the Tetter of the Privities,
the New Campane Disease, the French Leprosy, the Spanish Itch, the French
Disease, the Court Disease, the Disease a-la-mode, Job's manginess, the Dise^se
of St. M^viu^ (whence the Germans to this day call it Meviu^) St. Roches
Disease, the Evil of St. Evagrius a Ierus^lem Friar, and S. Se^ents Disease.
The Dutch call it the Spanish Pox, the Indians Las ^ua^, Patursa and Pu^. What
it is named in Eng^^sh is vulgarly enough known.

3. Doctors have for a long time blazed into Heraldry for the Coat of the Pox,
to discover its first extraction, and antiquity of that great Family; at length
it was held by a general vote, that its first descent was from the Neapolitan
Spaniards, some of whom having been lately abroad with Columbus, in the Year
1492, upon the first discovery of the new World, or West Indies, after two
Years absence, arrived back to their native Country, with a number of new
pretty curious fangles, and among the rest, was this new pocky toy, which they
soon made present of to several of their dearest Iulietta's at Naples; for
immediately upon their arrival in Spain, they were hurried away to Naples, to
reinforce that Garrison, then in possession of A^phonso, King of Arragon, and
blocked up by 80000. French under command of Charles the Eighth of France. The
besieged being straightened of Provisions, were forced to dismiss their
Mistresses, (already sufficiently rubbed with the Indian Loadstone,) into the
Enemies Camp, where they met with very good quarters among those hungry
Mushroms, almost starved for want of Women's fles^^ which they found so well
seasoned and daubed with Mustard, that in few Weeks it took them all by the
Nose. By this you observe, it is supposed the S^aniards first brought the Pox
from the West Indies, where they said it was as natural to the Inhabitants, as
the small Pox is elsewhere. F^^ravan^i denies that the Spaniards brought it
from the West Indies, but affirms, the French being almost fami^h'd, first got
the Pox, at the foresaid siege of Naples, by eating dead Men's Carcasses,
which he further makes proof of, by feeding a Sow with Sows flesh, likewise an
Owl and a Whelp with flesh of their own kind, which he found afterwardsmarkt
with spots, botches, and pimples, like those of the Pox. Par^celsus says, this
Disease was bred between a French Leper, and a Neap^l^^an Whore, whilst she had
her courses upon her. Astrologers write, the Pox was caused by an unlucky
meeting of some of the Planets: though others again say, it was caused by Greek
Wine, dashed with Le^ers blood, which the French drank, being purposely left
for them at Sum^ by the Sp^n^a^d^. Some report a Leper of Valentia in S^ain
first gave a noble Whore this disease, who since dispersed it among many
others. Divines impute the rise of it to Gods Judgment upon Adulterers and
Fornicators.

After all this many will have it, that the Pox reigned in the World long
before the Year 1494. and therefore say, that Hippocrates makes mention of
some, that lost their Hair, and were troubled with malignant Ulcers about their
Privities. Likewise Valescus, Salicetus, and Gordonius, (who lived 800. years
before the siege of Naples,) wrote of Ulcers and Botches, contracted through
the immoderate use of Women. Its likewise discoursed, that the Ethi^pians have
for some hundred years been subject to a filthy Disease about their Groin and
Privities, which they got by an over-wanton le^hery; the same is also confirmed
by Agatharcides. Avicenna writes of a Sehaphatum or scabby Head, with many
other accidents attending it, not unlike the Pox. Others say, the Pox is
nothing but a kind of Leprosy, a St. Antonies Fire, or a kind of Plague.

4. Those that conceive Job, St. Mivus, St. Evagrius, St. R^che, or St. Sement,
to have been tormented with the Pox, or that the Pox had a being in
Hippacrates, Avicen, V^lescus, Salic^tus, or Gordonius their times, some
hundred years before the foresaid siege of Naples, must needs find their
mistake, in comparing the symptoms of those holy men, or those mentioned by the
Authors before-written, with the symptoms of the Pox. Neither can any
rationally suppose, the Pox to be a kind of Leprosy, since they do altogether
differ from one another in symptoms, and manner of Infection. Neither can I
believe, the Spaniards brought the Pox first from the West Indies because a
West India Pox is no Epidemick, but an Endemick Disease, which is caused by a
particular disposition of the Air, and their putrid diet; and therefore is
equivalent to a Scurvy. Nevertheless its most certain the Pox was first bred
among those Spaniards, that were arrived from the West Indies at Naples, and
the French that besieged the Town, though in another manner than is generally
reported, as this following History of the Nativity of the Pox will confirm to
you, being collected by me from several circumstances; that attended it at its
birth.

ART. II. Containing the true History of the Pox, with the Auth^rs discovery of
its rise and causes.
5. THe French with their entailed mangin^ss marching into Ital^ in the Year
1493. under Charles the VIII. of France, against Alphonso King of Arragon, did
daily fret, and promote their evil by drinking gross Italian Wines, eating salt
Meats, and broyling under a hotter Sun; and as their Wines grew stronger,
Victuals salter, and Sun hotter, by their deeper in-road into the Country, so
their disease accrew'd in greater scabs and malignity. At last being come to
their Journeys end, and seated before Naples, they felt themselves encompassed
with a more scorching Air, and feeding upon powdered Boars flesh, they were
pressed to gorge down Rivers of Wine, hotter and stronger than before; all
which had sublimed (or heightened) their Disease to so extreme an high pitch of
manginess, that consisting in inflamed itching scurf, and damnable infection,
it was communicated to their inward parts, in as furious a degree, as to their
outward. This inward and outward itching brined and pickled diet, meeting with
a dust (or burnt) melancholy tempers, could not but kick and spur some of them
into a most detestable rage of letchery, who encountering with rank Jades,
(being pernicious through their menstruous steems, and disgraced with the worst
degrees of Scurvy, crept in upon them by their ill Diet within the surrounded
City,) fell foul of the handsomest, that probably had been over-ridden, galled,
inflamed, and set on Fire by their Comrades before. In this sharp conflict
showrs of morbisick emissaries (or diseased steems) darted from each party,
confronted, united, embraced, and were knitted together into entire compound
minimal (or very small) Bodies, which were the flower, soul, and abridgement of
the whole clot, whereout they were sublimed (or forced) and consequently did
partake of the worst of their qualities and symptoms, which now are become the
genuine (or true) pocky ones.

6. The truth of this Narra^ive depends upon the proof of ^hese four
circumstances. 1. That ^he French army was at that tim^ troubled with the
scabby Itch. 2. That the Itch can be sublimed, or raised to a higher pitch, in
manner aforesaid. 3. That the Neapolitan Curtizans were troubled with the
Scurvy. 4. That the Pox was begotten by a mangy Frenchman and a Ne^politan
Whore, that was troubled with the Scurvy; or in short, that the Pox is caused
by a commixture of a scabby itch, and an inveterate Scurvy.

7. In relation to the first, it is most certainly known, that a Frenchman upon
the least change of Air, ever contracts the Itch; or if it should fail him
Spring, or Fall, immediately doubts of his health; more-over where any one is
accustomed to Wine, and a sharp hot Diet, as peppered, Onion, Anchovy, and
Garlic Sawces, and is slovenish in his Linen, living besides in a hot
Climate, its impossible he should escape the Itch, much less in an Army, where
they are all slovens in their Linen, and Clothes, in the highest degree, and
one infects the other, and feeds the D^^^ase with a brined and pickled Diet. In
fine, ^ever did a French Army pass a Campane, without being tormented with
theItch in the worst degree; what pickl the French Army used to be in Flanders,
where the Air is far more temperate than in I^aly, my self have been an
eyewitness. As to the second, it is generally observed, that by continuation of
a hot Diet, and not shifting of Linen, a small Itch, with little black h^^ds,
will change into red mattery pimples, and those into s^aling scabs, which at
length will turn into great broad scurf, like a Leprosi^. To the third, as most
Towns that are situated upon the Sea, are subject to some endemick Disease or
other, so Nap^es has ever been disposed to an imperfect Scurvy, which being
besieged, and the Inhabitants penned up in Rooms, using no exercise, and
di^ting upon course dreggish powdered Boars flesh, old hard moldy Biscuit, and
slimy musty Water, (for their Fountains were filled with dirt, and the Air with
stinks of Carrions, dead Carcasses, and putrid saltish vapors of the Sea,)
they must unavoidably have been forced into a very deep. Scurvy; for the
adequate cause being put into action, the effect must necessarily follow. The
fourth is, that the Pox is begotten, between a mangy Frenchman and a Neapolitan
Whore, that was troubled with the Scurvy; or to speak more plain, the Pox is a
complicated, mixed, or compounded Disease, that is engendered, bred, and knitted
together out of a deep Scurvy, and a fiery malignant manginess. That it is a
mixed Disease, is discovered by the mixed signs, symptoms, (or accidents) some
^ssuing from the scabby Itch, others from the Scurvy. First, I Will demonstrate
the Pox to be a true Scurvy. 2ly. That it is also a perfect manginess. 3ly. That
it is neither a Scurvy nor manginess singly by themselves, but a Disease that
is engendered or bred out of a Scurvy and manginess, being complicated and knit
together. 4. That the Scurvy, whereof the Pox does consist, is not such a
common Endemick Scurvy, as the Air does breed here in England; but an Epidemick
Scurvy, much differing from the other. As to the first, that the Pox is a true
Scurvy, may rationally be granted, because the time and place of the rise, or
beginning, growth, height, ending, signs, or symptoms, properties, causes, and
cure of the Scurvy and Pox are the same, as will appear to you in every
particular. The Pox it is agreed by most Authors had its birth at Naples, and so
had the Scurvy; for before the year 1495. it was never heard of, nor mentioned
by any, but is recorded by several to have received its birth and name at
Naples in the Year aforesaid. It was then called Scorno-Bo^ca, or foul mouth,
(from Scorno a foul or shameful thing, and bocca mouth,) and from thence the
other names Scorbutum and Sc^rbeck were derived. The next year after, it was
observed to be spread among the Hollanders, and Flemmings, being transported
thither by the Spanish Soldiers, that were sent from Naples to Garrison among
them, who from the Italian named it Scorbeck. The P^x generally begins with a
lassitude or soreness of ones Limbs, weakness of the Knees and Legs, with a
small pain about the Shins, and oppression about the middle, blossoms into
Pinck-colour spots like fleabites, etc. Even so begins the Scurvy. The P^x in
its growth buds into red, yellow, or duskish pimples, especially about the
forehead, and appears with a great change of the complexion, and a deep
melancholy, and so does the Scurvy. Being arrived to its height, it is attended
with foul Ulcers scattered over the Body, and flying retching pains, racking
the Body most in the night, etc. Exactly so does the Scurvy appear in its
height. At last the Pox ends into fistules, rottenness of the Bones, torturing
fixed pains, Dropsies, Consumptions, Fevers, etc. Into which likewise the Scurvy
makes its ending. In short, there is no sign, or symptom in the Pox, but it is
observed to be in the Scurvy, so likewise there is scarce a sign in the Scurvy,
but its discerned in the Pox, which is the reason why Physicians do daily
mistake, in judging some to be troubled with the Pox, that are troubled with
the Scurvy; and others to be diseased with the Scurvy, that are infected with
the Pox. Moreover it is a property of the Pox never to appear with the same
signs in two Bodies, but in one Body is attended with such signs, in another
quite different; which is also proper to the Scurvy. Lastly, the Pox is often
cured with Vegetables, that are of a biting stinging nature, and contain a
great deal of mordicant volatile Salt, as Guaiacum, Soapwort, Persic^ria, etc.
which are also proper remedies for the Scurvy. To the second, that it is a
manginess, is evidently discovered by its itching, running scabs, and scurf,
besides Pocky Ulcers are generally covered with mangy scabs. To the third,
though the Pox and the Scurvy be so very like, it is visible enough, they be not
the same, but differ in malignity or fierceness of symptoms; for though the
Pox and Scurvy are both featured with pimples, borches, and Ulces, yet those in
the Scurvy are less painful, and less inflamed, and better colored. 2. In
infection, the Pox being far more infectious than the Scurvy. 3. In itching
scabs, and crusty Ulcers, which are not discovered in the Scurvy. So that you
may plainly discern the Scurvy to be a kind of mild Pox, and wants nothing but
malignity of symptoms, a stronger sting of infection and itching scabs and
scurff; all which the beforementioned manginess does contribute to it; and so
consequently out of their union and coalescence the Pox must necessarily
result. Furthermore, that manginess is so near a kin to the Pox, the cure does
plainly confirm Mercury being a known and experienced remedy for them both,
besides the Night pains and crusty pustles and Ulcers, that attend manginess,
do fully demonstrate it. Lastly, do but observe the mangy symptoms recorded by
Hugo Senensis, Consti. 73. de cu^. inf. and Gasper Torrel. Cons. 5. adv. pud.
And you must necessarily grant a malignant manginess to be Pocky, as those do
that call the Pox ^eb's manginess. St. Lazarus, or St. Sement's disease. But
those that are curious to be better resolved upon that point, let them
endeavor to procure my great Venus unmasked. Here you may be resolved, why the
Pox proves so infectious by copulation, viz. because it is engendered out of two
very infectious Diseases, and conveyed by the Seed, which as it is the spirits
contracted, and flower of all the blood of the Body, so must it likewise
consist of the spirits contracted, and flower of all the infection, or infected
blood of the whole Body. To the 4th Note, 1. There are two sorts of Scurvy, one
Endemick that is engendered by the Air, and constitution of the place where it
reigns, as this here in Englan^, and that of Lisbon, or Holland. The other is
Epidemick, and is by far more malignant, durable, and of a more difficult cure,
and is only propagated or dispersed by infection, which is that Scurvy, which
was engendered at Naples, and is commonly left in the Body after the sting of
the Pox is taken off. This Scurvy is very common also here in England, and
being mistaken for the other kind of Scurvy by our Hackney-Physicians, is the
cause why many are left incurable. This is that deep Scurvy, that was engendered
at Naples, by their most putrid feeding, stinking Air, and particular
constellation at that time, which then proved to be the Mother of the Pox.

ART. III. Of the nature and kinds of the Pox.
7. MY fourth particular puts me in mind of the definition of the Pox, which
Ferrerius defines to be a putrefaction of humors, contracted for the most part
through infection by copulation, by communicating venomous exhalations and
infected Spirits. Steeghius describes the Pox to be a venomous quality, which
for the most part is taken by a venereal contract, causing several kinds of
pimples, Ulcers, pains, and other accidents, Mercurial says, it is a
disposition against Nature, injuring the Natural Operations, through unknown
means. The generality of Physicians define the Pox to be a hidden Disease,
contracted by malignant vapors, that are communicated from a pocky Body. These
definitions being partly false, and very imperfect, shall set down one that is
more full and plain, though not so perfect, as that I proposed in my greater
Venus Unm^sk'd, that being framed only for Scholars. I say then, The Pox is an
universal moveable Disease, caused by venemo^s infectious ste^ms, and attended
with the worst and mildest, most and fe^rest, changeable and uncertain sympt^ms
of all ^inds. The sense of this description I Will further explain to you. The Pox
is an universal Disease, i. ^. in respect of the parts where it is seated, for
sometimes it is seated in the Liver, and then it is attended with spots, pimples,
and Ulcers; sometimes in the brain, and then it is accompanied with pocky rheums
and defluxions, Nightpains, Ulcers in the Palate, and Nose; other-times it is
seated about the privities only, or about the breast, or any other part. 2. The
Pox is an universal disease, in regard it comprehends all kinds of diseases;
for sometimes it is a hot disease, witness the heat of Urine in the Running of
the R^ins, hot botches, pimples, bu^oes, rubi^s of the forehead, and pocky
Fevers; othertimes, it is cold, as appears by those cold pocky Night-pains, and
cold hard swellings; it is likewise a moist Disease, as you may observe by it is
Ulcers, pocky Gouts, rheums, or defluxions. It Is not seldom found to be a dry
Disease, namely, when it turns into a pocky hectic. Lastly, levelled Noses,
devoured Palats, and Limbs put out of joint by pocky nodes conclude the Pox to
be a Disease of conformation, number, magnitude, situation, and discontinuated
unity. In short, the Pox is a Monarch, all other Diseases are its subjects, for
there is no Disease, but one time or other is noted to accompany it. The Pox is
movable in three particulars. 1. It Is movable, skipping like a Grass-hopper,
from one part to another, to wit, from the part that was first infected to the
Liver, thence to the brain, and so patroules round, till it has made an entry
and seisin upon the entire manor of the body. 2. In moving out of one disease
into another, from a hot, to a cold Distemper, from an inflammation into an
Ulcer, from an Ulcer into a carnosity, thence into a constirpation or stoppage.
3. It moves from one symptom to another, from a scalding Urin, into the Running
of the Reins, thence to pocky spots and pimples, and thence to Ulcers and
Night-pains, and thence again into consumptions and hectic Fevers. I said the
Pox was attended with the ^orst and mildest, m^st and fe^est symptoms, that is,
sometimes the Pox is ushered with very malignant torturing accidents or
symptoms, as racking Night-pains, and filthy Ulcers or running sores, other
times again it is accompanied with very mild accidents, as spots only or
pimples, or some slight joint-pains; sometimes again the Pox has a great many
followers; often times very few, it may be a pimple, two or three, or a botch
three or four only, etc. Lastly, the symptoms of the Pox are very changeable
and uncertain; for among five thousand pocky bodies* you shall scarce find two
troubled alike with the same accidents.

8. The Pox is usually distinguished into a slighter, and worser sort, the
slightest sort of all is, when only the hair of the head and beard sheds, and
then the venom consists in a vapor, that is flown to the roots of the hair: The
second kind is somewhat worse, wherein the whole skin is marked with red yellow
spots, and there the venom sits in the thinnest of the blood. The third sort is
yet worse, and is the true Pox, where red and yellow pimples do (...) brea^ out
about the forehead and temples, and near the ears, afterward on the head, and
over the whole body: they are round and dry without matter, which afterward
are cov^^ed with a dry scab, and of^ turn into foul running sores. Here the
venom is in the Liver, and the whole mass of blood. The fourth and last degree,
is, when the Pox gets into the bones and sinews.

9. The Pox is also distinguished into a ne^r or fresh Pox, when it is not of
above a years standing; into ro^ted or confirmed, which is from a year or two
or three years; and into an inveterate Pox, when it is above three years old.

10. My practical observations upon the motion of the Pox, have discovered to
me a far more proper distinction. (...) The Pox like a Pilgrim on his road
makes four stages. The infection being yet seated in the outward part that was
first assaulted, namely, the jaw, the lips, groin, tets, etc. may properly be
called a Liminary P^x, because it is set as it were in the threshold or entrance
of the Body. The second stage is at the fleshly membrane, ( Membrana carn^sa)
where encountering with another stand, it is constrained to halt for a while;
hitherto we may term it the Frontier Pox, because it is yet tracing the
frontiers or confines of the body; thence passing through the flesh of the
muscles, and other membranes, makes a third halt at the proper membranes (or
skins) of the entrails; here meeting the Pox at midway, we may properly style
it the M^d^ay P^x. Thence it gallops strait-way to the depth of the entrails,
where with an authority it is proclaimed a ^ho^ou P^x. In this manner you may be
assured the Pox moves, having traced its motion exactly in some hundreds of
bodies.

11. The Pox is sometimes styled mi^d, when possibly it begins with a dozen of
pimples, a glancing pain of the thighs, or shins, a small gleetnig at the Yard,
etc. Other ^^^es it is termed rough, and malignant, assaulting the Patient with
a green running of the Reins, two Buboes, and a Crystallin, raging Shankers, a
burning S^^^ngury, and a Fever through fierceness of the pain, in the increase,
start up foul eating Ulcers, racking Night-pains.

12. Some sorts of Pox are more infectious, others less. Sometimes it is
hereditary, or got from ones Parents in the Womb; other-times it is got by
infection. Some kind of Pox is visible and evident; other kind lies hidden for
some years, before it breaks out. Ho^st^us writes of one, that got the Pox in
his youth, and did not appear before he was grown old. (...) speaks of another,
who was troubled with a hidden Pox, and got two sound Children, but the third
proved infected with a rank Pox. The Mother of those Children enjoyed her
health very well, until she was delivered of that last pocky Child, and then
her Lips and Breast bursted out into the Pox. This pocky Boy was put to Nurse,
who in few days was infected, and thereupon infected her Husband, and two
Children more, that she gave suck to. These Children were no sooner taken home,
but infected their Mothers; in short, no less than Nine were infected in a
Months time. When I lived at Paris, I knew a whole Family, that was in the
like manner infected by a pocky Nurse. Here in London, I have likewise taken
notice of several Children, that died at Nurse of the Pox, and therefore People
ought to be well-advised, to whom they put out their Children.

ART. IV. Containing a further confirmation of the causes of the Pox.
13. MY next business is to treat of the cause of the Pox. I have made it
appear to you already, that the Pox was not brought from the West Indies
hither; neither was it engendered out of Man's flesh, for the Cannibals, and
others, that feed altogether upon Man's flesh, are seldom troubled with that
evil. I have likewise proved, the Pox was not begotten by a French Leper,
because of the vast difference there is between the Leprosy, and the Pox.

Many affirm, the Pox was kindled by a malignant constellation of the Planets;
b^t let me tell you, had the ma^gy French crew been diverted from coming to
N^ples, the Pox would have continued among the Planets. Others impute the cause
of the Pox to the common trade whores drove with several Nations, whose seed
being forced and gathered together in one Womb, might occasion a kind of a
rotten Disease in the privities, like several sorts of Meat, cause a corruption
in the stomach. But this seems improbable, because there having been whores
from the beginning of the World, who drove a common Trade, they would
necessarily have bred the Pox long before the siege of Naples. It was the
opinion of some, that the Pox was sent into the French Camp by a Neapo^it^n
Witch, whose House they had robbed; but this seems ridiculous to those, that
believe now Miracles are ceased, there be no Witches more in Nature.

Leonicenus believed, the Pox took its rise from a great overflowing of the
river ^yber. which vomited up a deal of stinking rotten bodies, into a tract of
the Air, that drove toward Naples, where it soon kindled the Pox. This is
unlikely, since the same River had overflown many times before, without causing
such a contagious Disease.

The (...) were of opinion, that feeding too often upon Pease and B^con might
bre^d the Pox, and therefore their Magistrates forbad the selling of all sorts
of Pease. This opinion is so unreasonable, that it need^ no confutation.

3. After the recital of all these opinions, touching the outward cause, or the
first occasion of the Pox, it is time I should bend my discourse to a discovery
of the inward cause, which by the generality of modern Physicians is concluded
to be a hidden malignant cause, or certain malignant steems, that pass from one
body into another, effecting such pocky accidents (or symptoms,) by hidden
means. But our modern Authors and Physicians are very full of their hidden
causes and hidden diseases, which to me signifies no more than ^^, fa; and
therefore shall proceed to give my Reader a plainer and more satisfactory
resolve. I have already clearly proved to you, that the Pox had its first rise
from a complication of a Scurvy, with a mangy Itch, and a commixture of both
their causes; so that sh^wing the inward causes of a manginess and Scurvy, you
may thence collect the inward cause of the Pox. The inward cause of a Scurvy is
thick dreggish blood, that begins to fret, and grows fiery salt and gnawing;
the inward cause of manginess is a burnt red gall, or rather adust blood
volatilized, which through its fieriness renders the blood fiery, salt, and
itching. Now suppose a Frenchman, that is troubled with an extreme fiery
itching manginess, by reason of the fieriness of his blood, and acting the part
of a furious Goat, with a fretted Neap^li^^n Whore, that is troubled with a deep
fiery Scurvy, the very essence of this Salt, fiery and itching blood flies out
in steems into the body of the Ne^p^litan Whore, where meeting with the steems
of her fiery gnawing scorbutic blood, do unite and knit together into perfect
little steemy bodies, or atoms, which you must necessarily conceive to be very
malignant, ulcering, gnawing, and fiery, so that the next that converses with
this Whore must needs draw these ulcering steems into his body, where through
their gnawing malignant and ulcerous quality, they cause a Running of the
Reins, or Ulcers in the Yard, or other pocky accidents. Next, suppose these
little pocky steemy bodies being drawn into the body, have a power of breeding
and multiplying into other pocky little bodies of their own kind, and so having
filled the veins and arteries with such pocky gnawing steems, they cause
scurffy pimples, gnawing pains and Ulcers all over the body. So now I have in
few words and very plainly unfolded the causes of the Pox, and all its
symptoms, which possibly has not been performed before; and if this short
Discourse will not satisfy, read my greater Venus Unmasked, and that very
probably may.

ART. V. Of the Signs, Symptoms, and Prognostics of the P^x, Running of the
Reins, B^boes, and Shanckers.
14. TO describe the signs and symptoms, or accidents of the Pox; it will be
expedient, First, to set down what pickle a man finds himself in presently
after he has conversed with a pocky Wench, namely a sharpness of Urine, and
pressing to m^ke water, though he made water but just before; a heat in his
Yard, which soon after o^^^si^ns an erection, and consequently a desire to
repeat his former action, and so having finished hi^ complement once more, he
immediately begins to dribble hot and sharp Urin by little and little, or
sometimes by drops only; the next day he finds himself sore all about his
Limbs, dull, heavy, and melancholy, and a little gleeting at his Yard,
especially if he squeese it out hard with his hand; two, or three, or four days
after, he may squeese out a greasy yellow matter; some eight, ten, twelve, or
fourteen days after, (in some sooner, and in others longer,) it begins to drop
yellow and greenish, and stain his shirt, which dropping is called a Viru^ent
Ghonorrhee, or a Pocky Running of the Reins.

15. This Pocky Running of the Reins is sometimes accompanied with a terrible
hot pricking and smarting Urin, and an often erection of the Yard, feeling
hard, and knotty like a Cord, and therefore it is called a Cordee, which Cord^^
is extremely pricking and painful, insomuch that one cannot endure to touch
himself, nor suffer any thing else to touch him; besides the extremity of the
pain causes the head of the Yard to turn downward, and seem crooked.

16. This is the common case men find themselves in, though some again may
trade with the same Wench, that gave others a Running of the Reins, and may get
off with heat and sharpness of Urin, a few slight flying pains of the Shins,
Thighs, and Arms, without any thing else. Others again escape the Running of
the Reins, and sharpness of Urin, and some seven or eight Days after, or
longer, get an eating Ulcer, or sore upon the head of the Yard, or the Skin
that covers it, or in the passage they make their water through; This sort of
eating Ulcer is called a Shanker, which often proves so malignant, that in few
days it will rot and eat off the whole Yard. Sometimes when there is a
Shanker, or eating sore in the Vrethra, or passage of the Urin, there will be
apt to grow proud flesh out of it, which causes one to piss in double streams,
and in time does quite stop up the passage, and so hinder one from making
Water; this is called a C^runcle. Some upon a pocky adventure escape these
forementioned accidents, but instead of 'em, they get a painful little button
in their groi^, which is named a Poula^n; this in few days will grow bigger,
red, and inflamed; sometimes to the b^gness of a Pigeons or Hens Egg, and then
it is termed a Bub^, feeling full of pain, looks very red and angry, and for the
most part the party has a Fever with it, and a scalding Urin. Other times
there will appear a blain or blister upon the Glans or head of the Yard,
commonly called a Crystallin. Venereal, or Pocky Whar^s generally grow about
the Prepuce, (or the top of the Skin, that covers the Yard,) and upon the
glans, and sometimes all over the Yard, Pocky grandoes are little hard knots,
of the bigness of a Pea, appearing in the same places pocky Wharts do. Women
are troubled with the same accidents, and some others, viz. virulent Courses,
that look yellow or deep red, and are very hot and smarting. Likewise Virulent
Whites, being thick streeky, and sometimes thin, sharp, and gnawing. These are
most of the accidents or symptoms of a Liminary Pox. Before I proceed further,
I will tell you the different opinions of Physicians upon a Running of the
Reins. Most do judge the running to proceed from Ulcers of the Prostats, being
small bladders lying at the root of the Yard, that are made for little Cisterns
to keep the Seed in. This certainly is erroneous, for if those Prostats, being
spermatick, should be Ulcer'd, and in part eaten away, they could never be
healed up, and so consequently a man would be troubled with the running for
ever. Others are of Opinion, the running proceeds from a weakness of the said
spermatick, or seedy Vessels, and so are rendered incapable of retaining the
Seed. Here they suppose the matter, that drops out at the Yard, to gleet from
the Pr^stat^* if so, then necessarily they would be ulcered by the gnawing
quality of the infected Seed, and so consequently as I showed before, be
rendered incurable. But after all, it is certain, that the matter that drops out
at the Yard, is neither Seed nor seedy; for Seed be it never so much altered,
hot, yellow, or green, yet it will keep its clamminess, and be ropy, so that it
may be drawn from one another between ones fingers; whereas that which gleets
in the Running of the Reins, is not at all clammy or ropy, nor can it be drawn
between the fingers, but falls all into small drops, and is perfect matter,
such as is bred in Ulcers. Besides, should all that dropping in a pocky running
be Seed, it would wast a Man to nothing; moreover, it is common for Men, that
have a pocky running upon them, to beget such Children; which is a sign the
Seed is free from infection for some time. Wherefore I conclude the pocky
Running of the Reins to be an Ulcer of all the whole Yard, where the infection
turns its clammy blood into perfect matter (or Pus,) which gnaws its way out,
through the Urethra, or passage of the Urin: that this is so, is evident. 1. In
a Gonorrhee the Yard is generally swelled all over. 2. The Yard is hot, and
full of pain all over, by reason of the gnawing pocky matter it contains within
the pores of its spungy flesh. 3. That that virulent or pocky matter does sweat
through, or gnaw its way through into the Urethra, does appear hence, that if
one press the Yard close about the middle, so that no matter may pass from the
root, (where the Pr^stats are supposed to be,) and with his other hand gently
squeese it near the Glans, or the top, he shall in so doing press out a great
quantity of matter out of the body of the Virge, which cannot be supposed to
come from the Pr^sta^s, because this other hand intercepts or keeps that in,
which otherwise might be thought to proceed thence. Besides there is a pricking
pain all along in the Vrethra, which is nothing but the gnawing biting matter,
that bores through, out of the body of the Yard into the Uret^ra. Lastly,
observe that though for a long time this matt^^ is not seedy, yet afterward it
grows seedy, by reason the Pocky steems do at length so weaken the Prostats,
that they are apt to shed Seed, which is also the cause, why the gleeting
proves seedy at last, when a running of the Reins is almost Cured.

To these I Will add a new symptom of a Liminary Pox, former Ages have not been
subject unto, viz. A retraction or Contraction of the Virge: Which in some
appears so much retracted in the body as it were, that scarce any part else
remains visible b^t the Glans. This symptom has seldom any other accompanying
it than a sharpness and heat of Urine, and a frequent desire to make water. The
cure hereof is very difficult, which not being performed according to Art,
turns into a more malignant Pox.

Likewise all about the neck of the Matrix in women.

ART. VI. Comprehending the Signs of a Frontier, Midway, and Ther^n-Pox.
17. THe Signs of a Frontier Pox, or the beginning of a true French Pox, are,
when the Skin is flourished with red or yellow spots, like Flea-bites;
sometimes the forehead only is disgraced with round hard pimples, like
Mulberries, a little crusty a top, and marked with black specks, some being dry,
others moist, and are often dispersed to the Ears, thence to the Neck, Arms,
Shoulders, Breast, but chiefly to the Groin and Perinae^^. These Pimples do often
vanish, and suddenly appear again, or sometimes change into adust (or burnt)
Ulcers. They are likewise subject to an universal itc^ing of the Body, and a
certain feeling, as if their whole Skin were pricked with Nettles. Some grow
bald on their Head, others beardless and browless. They are often troubled with
lassitude, or sore Limbs, (especially at waking from sleep,) and a bloated
Face, or sometimes a shrunck Visage; their Eyes looking one time hollow, other
times swelled.

18. The signs of a Midway Pox are a strange changeable soreness of the Gums,
sometimes feeling loose, as if the Teeth would fall out, other times bound or
pincht; an itching, red, yellow, or bluish swelling of the Gums, a walking or
twingeing Jaw-ach, and Chin-ach; a pain of the Head a little above the Nape of
the Neck, a swiming of the Brain, a continual tinning noise in the ears,
aptness to be deaf and hard of hearing; sharp defluxions into the throat,
(whence proceed those Pocky hoarsnesses, and loss of the Palate) Nose, and other
parts; a filthy dand^^f of the Head, Beard, and Brows, a yellow or bluish
circle about the Eyes; thinness of the upper and under Eyelids; swellings and
botches of all colors; rotten or straining cough; a hot belching of the
Stomach; a rotten, stinking breath, stinking sweats in the Night; a drabby
white Urin, with few or no contents; quick, low, soft, Pulses. Their blood
after bleeding looks bluish, or like Ashes. Heats rising from the Loins to the
Stomach, Breast, Shoulders, up the Head; aptness to be Feverish every day; some
grow very lean with the Pox, others grow fat with it, but their fat is
yellowish, greenish, or waterish; their looks are very changeable, sometimes
for a day, three or four, they will look very well, afterward* again they look
with an unwholsom color, it may be yellow, greenish, bluish, or swarthy;
Ulcers that are foul, hard, and c^llous, or overcrusted with a blackish scurf,
the flesh being raw and deep red. Walking pains between the Joints; deep, hard
fissures in the Plants of the Feet, Palms of the Hands, Te^^, Fund^ment, Lip^,
and P^erygomata; thick, sore, inflamed Lips, gleeting a thin sharp water,
covered sometime with a black Skin, or thin limber scurf, that easily peels
off; broad, dry uneven scabs; straggling about the body; outward crusty Ulcers
of the Nose, and rotten eating Ulcers within it, a rottenness of the bones of
the Nose; a malignant Polypus, or purpre piece of flesh growing within the
Nose; malignant Fistula's or issues about the Eyes; Pocky painful Piles,
malignant swellings and fistula's of the Fundament; eating Ulcers and
inflammations of the Pal^t, and Almonds under the Ears, a Cancer'd creeping
thrush, scabby Eyelids, a malignant inflammation of the Eye, a bleer dimness of
the Eyes, the Whites whereof often turn yellow, reddish, or bluish, great ugly
Warts about the Hands, Lips, and Face; Tetters of the Face, Breast, Belly, and
Privities.

19. The signs (...) T^o^om-Pox, are furious Night-pains in the Joints, fixed
insufferable headaches, gnawing worse in the Night; immovable, bruising,
retching, and pricking Shin-pains, shoulder and wrist pains; deep gnawing,
devouring gangrenous Ulcers, and deep rottennesses of the Bones; inward Ulcers
of the spleen, kidneys, bladder, and liver; a pocky P^isick, or a pocky
consumption and hectic Fever; a Pocky blindness, Tophes or hard knots about
the Joints, nodes or bumps about the Head and Joints; gums or soft broad
swellings of the bigness of an Egg, or sometimes of a penny Loaf, bursting out
into a white glaw, others are flat hardnesses, as those that grow to the Shins,
Skull, and, ^^m-bones. Imposthums of (...), etc.

20. (...) gets the Pox ofttimes from a Pocky Nurse, by sucking her Breasts,
and then it appears in eating scabs, and purple blains at the Lips, likewise
small, red b^rning Pimples about the Lips, Ring-worms about the Chin,
inflammations of the Lips and inside of the Mouth, a m^lignant fiery Thrush.

21. The some signs appear, when a Man gets the Pox by kissing pocky Lips. The
signs of a pocky N^rse, are creeping p^rple Pimples about the Nipple, with
black spots upon 'em; the Nipple infl^mes, and is apt to be cloven. After all
this take notice, that seldom or never all the signs do meet in one body, but
only such as are agreeing with the complexion; as those of a sanguin
complexion, are troubled with red spots, pimples about their forehead, and
over their whole body; others of a phleg^^^tick constitution, with Night-p^ins,
and hard swellings. Pocky Ulcers commonly attend choleric Bodies. Some again
are marked with a great number of signs, others with two or three only. Lastly
observe, that many of these forementioned signs do accompany other Diseases,
as Pimples, Ulcers, and Night-pains, wherefore I Will instruct you how to
distinguish them. 1. If Pimples, Ulcers, or pains do appear after a Man has
had to do with a common Woman, it is very probable they are pocky. 2. If a Man
be troubled with Pimples, Ulcers, or pains, upon a running of the Reins,
swelling in the groin or eating sore of the Yard, they are likewise pocky. 3.
Pocky pimples generally have a black speck a top, which peels off like scur^.
Pocky Night-pains are for the most part felt in the m^^^dle of a Limb, between
the two Joints, deep in the flesh, and next to the bone. They begin to rage in
the Evening, and cease in the Morning at Sunrising.

Women are troubled with the same symptoms Men are, viz. being clapped, their
Urin is hot, pricking, and smarting, carries a strong stinck with it when it is
made, and is full of whitish sands and darkish hairs; they more-over feel
themselves so sore in those parts, that they cannot endure the least touch
without a wry face. They are likewise often troubled with a running of the Reins,
in every particular resembling that in men, which they often find themselves
mistaken in, judging it another accident, which they term the Whites. They are
likewise subject to Bu^oes, Sha^ckers, Cordees of the Clitoris, Wharts,
Pastles, Ulcers, and Night-pains.

ART. VII. A true e Chronology of the P^x.
22. THe Pox at it^ first birth in the Camp at N^pl^, was far rougher than now
it is; for then where it seized, it instantly lamed the Patient in all his
limbs, dozed his intellectuals, and cast him into a continual sleeping posture,
frights, fears, melancholy, and an estranged countenance. Often times they were
surprised with an eating Shancker, which in a day or two at most would ^at off
the whole Yard; soon after their eyes, nose, lips, and Palate of the Mouth,
would be rotted off, whereupon followed a hoarsness, some spoke whis^^ring,
others quite lost their speech, and all their Teeth, after this they would
break out into cancerous eating (...) or sores, all their Bodies over, that
would rot the bone in few hours, more-over they were wrackt with most raging
Headaches, and pain^ about their bones, that never suffered them to sleep, b^t
slumber, and then they were apt to be frighted with most horrid dreams and
visions; their sweat stunck at a great distance, all which in few days guided
the Patient to his Tomb. This f^ry the Pox continued for Thirty y^^rs, and then
grew somewhat milder, not rotting the Eyes, Nose, nor Teeth; decreased in
pimples, and appeared most in gums and pains. Some Thirty Years after that, the
Pox did not show it self in any pimples, but decreased in pains, Ulcers, and
Tumors. Thirty Years after that again, the Pox appeared with four new symptoms;
the first was a shedding of the (...) of the Head, Brows, Eye-li^s, and Beard.
The second new commer was a running of the Reins. The third was the loss of the
Nails; and the fourth a tinning noise in the Ears. About this time the Eyes and
the Teeth began to suffer again. In what particulars its changed since, you may
easily gather from the foregoing Discourse.

ART. VIII. Comprising the Prognostick^ of the P^x.
23. What state and danger misfortuned Patients are placed in, ought to be set
down next: a Venereal scalding of the Urin if neglected, changes into an
excoriation of the ^ret^ra, thence unto eating Ulcers, which often devour great
pieces of flesh, and bore holes quite through, through which the Urin often
passes, as they make it. Those sores or Ulcers afterward tend to incurable
Fistules, or else grow out into proud flesh, thence called a Caruncle, which
immediately causes a stoppage of Urin, a symptom of very dangerous importance.
A Venereal scalding of the Urin and a dribbling, otherwise called a Sir^ngury,
do often through their neighborhood turn into an Ulcer of the Bladder, which for
the most part proves incurable, if in the membranous part; though in the fleshy
part admits sometimes of a difficult cure. A Shanck^r if neglected, threats to
devour the whole Member. A Shancker not being exquisitely cured, turns into a
callosity, which afterward proves of a very difficult cure. These callosities
sometimes appear in the shape of a hard pustle; oth^rtimes grow flat and are
subject to vary in colo^r. A (...) returning into the Body, foretells a Pox; if
hard and diffi^^lt to ripen signifies a strong infection. A Running of the
Reins after ^ight Months proves obstinate. A second G^norrhee upon a former,
though cured, is often of a worse consequence than a single Frontier Pox without
a Gonorrhee. A third Gonorrhee after a tedious Cure sometimes leaves an
incurable gleeting behind it. A Gonorr^ee issuing immediately in a yellow or
greenish matter, is instantly attended with a Cord^e, and foretells a long cure.
A Gonorrhe^ that did not burst out before ten, fifteen, or twenty days* after
the infection, proves to be of a difficult cure. A yellowish G^unorrhee upon
amendment turns white and thick, thence white and thin. A Gonorrhee that's stopped
by adstringent medicines immediately b^rsts out into joint pains, B^bies, or
inflammations of the Cods. A Ghonorrhee grows much worse upon frequent converses
with Wenches before a Cure. Some inveterated G^n^rrhees are absolutely
incurable, since proceeding from a total devoration and corrosion of the
Prostats, whence necessarily the Sperm must continually distill down as fast as
it is conveyed through the Vasa deferentia, not being retained by the Prostats.
A necessary consequence of this accident is a Consumptio (...) salis, and can
be no otherwise prevented than by erecting the testicles. Sometimes a G^norrhee
will stop of it self, and then commonly bursts out again more violently, it may
be a Month after, and sometimes eight, ten, or twelve months after; as I have
observed in several, without the least renewing of their accident: The same
happens now and then if a Gonorrhee be stopped by adstringents. I have known the
cure of an ordinary virulent Gonorrhee continued a whole year together, and
that with as much exactness as experience and the Rules of Art could prescribe,
though to little purpose; Which notwithstanding I have cured by frequent
bleedings, two or three Bol^sses of Cassia and Manna, with a Decoction of
Mallows and Plantain, and the addition of the mucillage of Gum Arabic. So that
you are to suppose that the virulency was extinguished by the former cure; and
the flux of acrimonious and torrid humors diverted by the bleedings and
purges; and the Acrimony obtused by the Decoction, whereupon the spermatick
parts soon recovered their former temperament, together with their retentive
faculty. A Confirmed Pox succeeding a pustulous French Pox, proves of an easy
Cure. A Pox upon a Bubo that is hard, or is struck inwards, turns to a Night
Headache, Nades, Gums, and Ulcers of the Palate, and stoops to no slight Cure; a
Pox upon a Running of the Reins turns to Pustles, and straggling Ulcers, and is
easier Cured than the former; upon a scalding of the Urin it turns to some few
pus^uls of an easy Cure; upon a Shancker, changes into Nocturnal Nightpains,
and those stubborn. In general, a Liminary Pox, as a Gonorrhee, Shancker, etc.
are easily Cured. A Frontier, and a Midway Pox being chronical are of an
indifferent submission to remedies; but a Thor^^ Pox is incurable. A Maiden Pox
promises an easy Cure, but a relapst Pox, or a Pox upon a former Pox is
difficult. Rough venereal pains, or Gums, Tophes, or gnawing Ulcers without the
foregoing or attendance of Pustles, threaten more mischief, than if they were
attended with them. Joint-pains without Ulcers, or malign Ulcers without pains
increase the evil. Malignant symptoms, as many devouring sores, furious pains,
Tophes, Gums, Nodes, rottenness of the Nose, a devoured Palate, etc. argue an
ill business; and so the case differs, according to the fierceness of symptoms,
the age of the Disease, strength and temperament of the Patient. The breaking
out of many red Pustles, not painful, and easily ripening, likewise soft tumors
require no tedious Cure.

The Pox of it self kills no man, but after a long travail fixes at last upon
one symptom, as a Pocky hectic, Ulcer of the Kidney or Bladder, Consumption of
the Lungs, Meagrim, Node, Tophe, Dropsy, Night-pains, etc. Which seldom leave
the Patient on this side the grave. A Tinning within the Ears, deafness,
blindness, and loss of speech are unrecoverable. Boys or Girls as they are more
exposed to infection, so their Cure is easier. Old folks are in less danger of
a blast, but once stormed by an infection, seldom or never are rescued. A Man
is easier infected, and easier cured than a Woman. An Hereditary Pox is more
refractory, than an infection by drinking, kissing, or sucking, and that is
worse than an infection by copulation. Pocky hecticks, Dropsies, Gouts, are
much easier mollified, than if occasioned by other causes. Lastly, any sort of
Pox, unless it be dexterously cured, is apt to leave an incurable Scurvy behind
it.

ART. IX. Containing some nice Questions relating to venereal Infection.
24. IN what part of the Body is the principal Seat of Pocky Inf^ction?

A. In the Spleen certainly, that consisting of a thick course substance, and a
strong sharp ferment, seems the more disposed to engender such salin armoniack
steems, that cause the Pox.

25. Why are the outward parts being remote, more liable to P^ckie Ulcers,
pains, and tumors, than the Entrails, as the Liver, Spleen, etc. which are
proclaimed by m^st Authors to be harths, or springs of Pockie steems, and yet
themselves remain free for a long time from those Pockie accidents?

A. Because the Pox first seizing the Body from without, does the easier injure
the outward parts, being weaker than the inward ones, which are furnished with
strong spirits to keep out the Infection.

26. What part is apt to receive the strongest Infection?

A. The secret parts, which consisting of a loose, open, thin flesh, do easily
admit infectious steems.

27. How many ways does the Pox distribute its Infection?

A. By kissing, fucking, lying in the same Bed, and copulation; that is thus,
if ones Mouth, or Breast be set with pocky pimples, or Ulcers, then they are
capable of infecting, but not if sound though the Body were never so Pocky in
the other parts.

28. To what distance is the Pox infectious?

A. As far as the Pocky steems can be transmitted hot, which at farthest is not
above a Hand breadth or two.

29. Two, three, or more, successively mounting a pocky Saddle, why should
sometimes the first alone come off galled, or why other-times the second only,
and the rest come off clear?

A. Because in some Women of a cold complexion the venom lies deep, and
therefore the first not heating his Whore enough to extract the venom, comes
off clear, leaving the second to keep the Iron hot, who carries away the pocky
prize. But if the pocky Wench be of a hot complexion, then the first is only in
danger of a blast, leaving her in a colder temper to deal with his comrads, who
therefore come off without any damage.

30. When i^'t, that a Man disgraced with an inveterate Pox, his Wife is
nevertheless guarded from the Infection?

A. It Is possible for a Man to have had the Pox in his lower parts, and be
cured of it, though notwithstunding may have a relick in other parts of his
body, and therefore may converse with his Wife without doing her the least
wrong.

31. Whether is Mankind only subject to this Pockie infection?

A. The Disease is also common to Dogs; for my self have seen a little Curr in
Holland, that had a virulent Running of the Reins, with several crusty Ulcers
upon his body. Likewise in It^^ many refrain eating Turkeys because a great
number of 'em are infected with the Pox.

32. Whether a Man that is troubled with a venereal Running of the Reins, does
not render his accident worse, by conversing with comm^n W^men?

A. Doubtless he must, for heating himself in so high a degree, and thereby
opening the pores, must necessarily let in the venom deeper into his body.

33. Whether a Wom^n tied to a P^k^e Husband, can escape the Infection her
self, and yet give it to another?

A. It Is possible, and it has happened, though it be a chance among a million.

34. Whether over-frequent embraces between a married couple can produce the
least spice of the P^x?

A. It Is vulgarly believed it may, many having contracted a yellow or greenish
Running of the Reins, by being too liberal to their Wives; but this is a clear
mistake, the foresaid running being in no wise virulent; neither is it possible
it can ever grow such, being only occasioned by weakening the spermatick
Vissels, and thereby disposed to receive sharp humors, that cause the foresaid
running by irritation.

35. Whether one that is clapped, does diminish his infection by conversing with a
sound Curtiz^n?

A. On the contrary, he rather increases his accident; the reason extract out
of Par. 30.

36. Whether it be p^ssible for a Man to enjoy his health perfectly, so as to
eat, drink, and sleep well, and yet carry a hidden Pox about him?

A. It Is common for Men to look better, and have a sharper appetite than ever,
for six, eight, t^^, and sometimes twelve months, yet walk about with a green
virulent Gonorrhee, that being instead of an issue, serving to evacuate and
drain all the superfluous humors of the body, whereby the complexion must
needs for a time be rendered clearer, and the appetite edged. 2 l^. I have
known some, that vaunted to have run the greatest Pocky hazards imaginable,
without perceiving the least hurt for some Years, who notwithstanding after so
long a time of perfect health, have unexpectly sneezed several small pieces of
bone out at their Nose, being parts of the Os Ethm^eldes, or Crista galli, that
was insensibly cariated or rotted by subtle pocky steems flying up to the head.
3. About a twelvemonth since, I cured a Gentleman, that had a most violent
pain on one small part of the Bregma, excurring no farther than the breadth of a
sixpence, being that kind of Headache, which Physicians usually call Clavus, a
species of a Cephalaea; though Galen, as I remember, lib de occul. terms ^lavus
a disease of the eye. This torturing headache my Patient had patiently endured
for three Months without having received the least benefit from any Physician,
he had applied himself unto; But at last fortune having conducted him to me,
did make a narrow search, and found a small rising on his head, not unlike a
Node, wh^reupon I strictly enquired, whether he had not lately, or within a
Year or two, conversed with some suspicious Woman; he answered, that about four
Years ago he had contracted a Running of the Reins, but had been so well cured
of it, that from that time until the arrival of this pain, he had possessed his
health better than ever. In short, having caused my Chyrurgeon to open the part
affected with a po^e^tial cau^ery, found the Cranium cari^ated, ruggid and
blackish, which having ordered to be plained with a Scalprum, cured him with my
Antivenereal. Whence it appears he carried this hidden Pox almost four years
about him. 4. I have had several Women patients, that had cherished a hidden
Pox for five or six Years, without discovering any sensible Disease all that
time.

ARTICLE X. Touching the Preparative Cure.
37. A Venereal Patient in whatever degree, if his body be either full or foul,
first requires bleeding, and purging, because of making way for other specific
Medicines. 2. Before the Patient may be purged, it is requisite his humors
should be prepared with a Pocki^ Digestiu^; as this following, which I have often
prescribed with great success. Take shavings of Guaiac* wood lb ss.
Spring Water 3. qts. Bordeaux Wine s^arpened with ij. of Sal Tart. 2. qts. Boil
it to the consumption of half, adding thereunto Polyp. q. Cartham. seeds ij.
E^ithym. ss. Liq^orish and Fennil Seeds of each an Ounce. Raisins ij. boil it a
little longer, and strain it. The Dose is from iv. to viij. Mornings and
Evenings, for three days. This is also a Decoction of excellent virtue against
a catarrhous Consumption; as you may read in my Anatomy o^ English Consumptions.

The Body being thus prepared, you may proceed with any of the following
Methods.

ART. XI. The Primitive Cure.
38. THe Primitive, or the first invented Method of Curing the Pox, consisted
in purging the Patient with the decoction of Sen^, and anointing his joints in
a hot Room for 30. days together, with a drying Ointment, composed chiefly out
of Alom, Nitre, Brimstone, etc. The Unguen^ Saracenis. described by Villa Nova,
was in great esteem among them. Observation. The Pox in its primitive partaking
more of a scabby Itch, than a Scurvy, was properly enough, and with good
success, cured with a drying Oynment, especially when they began to mix Mercury
with it; But now the Pox rather more resembling the features of its Mother
Scurvy, than those of its Father Manginess, requires a C^re much different from
the former.

ART. XII. The Hermaphroditick Cure.
39. THe Hermaphroditick Cure is so called from the commixture of Heterogeneus
Minerals. Viz. Antimony and Mercury, used in manner following.

Take Antimony received from gr. 4. to gr. 8. or 10. Sublim* Dull. from gr. 15.
to 25. Conserve of Roses as much as will make it to a Bole. This is to be taken
every other day, for three times. The following four days these Pills are to
be taken. A^tim. ter de^on. a gr. 15. ad gr. 30. Cerus. Ant. a gr. 5. ad 10.
Sublim. Diaphor. a gr. 7. ad 15. Fl^r. Sulphur. a gr. 6. ad 10. Ol. juni^. a
gut. 2. ad 4. sir. meli^. q.s. M.f. Pil. 3. prouna dosi. After that, the
Patient is to take the forementioned Bole over again, and then to repeat the
sweating Pills for four or five days. And last of all to take the Bole once
over again.

Observe. With this sort of cure I have remedied many a Frontier Pox; Though in
a Midway, and Th^row Pox prevails little, and therefore its no wonder many
have fallen short in imitating me in this Cure; since it is impossible for any
but an experienced Physician, ^^ther to prepare the Medicines exactly, or being
prepared to apply 'em to the right degree of the Disease.

ART. XIII. The Herculean Cure.
40. THe Herculean Cure handles the Disease with great force, by raising a
fluent salivation, being performed by taking this Bole 4, 5, 6, or 7. times.
Mer. dull. a j. ad ij. Agar. ^. ^rochise. a gr. 6. a^ 12. Thereb. ven. q. s. m.
f. Bol. or make use of this following, being somewhat stronger. Praec. alb. d.
a gr. 5. ad 15. Antim. Diaph. a gr. 4. ad 10. Thereb. ven. q. s. m. f. Bol.
Another, Take Subl. Corr. abstract from it once or twice Aq. Reg. Put to this
as much crude merc. and grind them well together in a Gl^ss-mortar, and
dulcifie it.

Take of this M^r. sibl. d. from gr. 6. to 12. Fl^r. Mer^. Argent. from gr. 1.
to 2. Bezaart. mint. from gr. 3. to 6. Sir. A^th. enough to make it into a Pill
or two. Another, Take Praec. rub. d. from gr. ^ to 6. Turb. Mind. Land. from
g^. 2. to 4. Conserve of Ro^es, enough to make it into a Bole. This, if too
weak, may be rendered stronger by adding half a grain, or a grain or two grains
at most of Prae^: Corr. to a Dose.

Observe. No Cure is attended ^ith greater danger, than that which is
endeavou^ed by s^livation, and yet none mo^^ practiced by Chyrarg^ons, and some
^^sh Physicians too. Some eight Years ago my Apothecary, that lived in Basin
Lane, brought to me an elderly Man, who upon an impure copulation g^t a large
Bu^o, which I ordered should be brought to sup^uration, and prescribed him a
Dose of Pills, to expel the venom out of the inward parts. The next Day
neglecting my course, was advised by a friend to a Chyrurgeon, who immediately
puts him into a salivation, which on the eight Day carried him off. Likewise a
certain Woman I saw in Holborn, (...) in the midst of her salivation b^d her
friends good night. It Is also publicly known, that a Physician not long after
the Plague-Year was Indi^ed at the Sessions, to give a reas^n of his Patients
miscarriage in the middle of his salivation. In short, I m^st tell you, that
hundreds have been sh^ffled out of their lives here in London by this sort of
cure, and that for neglecting to praepare the Patients body, and the want of
skill to prepare their Medicines: Though of late many have made use of my Bole
prescribed in this Art: and find a small quantity of Agarick does much obtund
the malignity of the Mercury, and cause an easy fluent salivation. Yet
notwithstanding all this, all venereal Diseases will not be cured by
salivation, but are ( like Cancers) sometimes rendered worse, and unfit for
other cures. In the Year 66. A very worthy Gentl^m^n applied h^mse^f to me for
cure, h^ving been s^livated four times, and last of all with the unction; his
Nig^t-pai^s were r^ther increased, and the Ulcer he had in his P^lat grown
larger. Finding his body to be extremely dried and exhausted, advising him to a
nourishing moist breath for a Month, and afterward I cured him with ease in
five Weeks. On the other side, there are some bodies, and some kinds of Pox,
that are easily cured by Salivation, (provided it be p^rformed by a judicious
^and*) and will not stoop to any other sort of Cure. What bodies and kinds of
infection those are is the greatest mystery to discover.

ART. XIV. The Gigantean Cure.
41. THE Gigantean Cure is only proper for such bodies as cannot be salivated
by the l^st forementioned, and therefore must steer the course prescribed here.
viz. Anointing the Wrists, Palms of the Hands, and Feet, Shins, Shoulders,
Elbowes, and sometimes the Backbone, once a Day, and sometimes twice, for
three, four, five, or six days but preparing the body before, by purging with
Confectio Hamech, our before mentioned Antivenereal Bole, Mercurius vitae, etc.
and bleeding, if necessary. The form of the Unguent, which I have sometimes
prescribed to Soldiers, that were brought to the Hospital I was Physician to,
is as follows. Take Mercury being well washed with Vinegar, an^ ex^inguisht
with spittle, Juice of Lemons, or Turpentine, from three Ounces to six,
Antimony crude from one Ounce to an Ounce and half; Hogs grease ten Ounces, Oil
of B^yes^ (...) Ounces; make it up into an oinment. This is to be rubbed into
the parts aforesaid, from half an ounce, to an ounce and half.

Observe. This Cure carries much more danger with it than the foregoing, and
therefore is not to be thought upon, without the advice of an experienced
Physician, several having miscarried in it. And indeed a Patient had better
half hang himself than undergo this Cure, there being nothing compara^le to the
pain in their mouth, anguish about their heart and sides, and the extreme
thirst they endure, having like Tantalus their Mouth full of Water, and yet
ready to perish for want of drink. Neither is this all, some growing phrenetick
in the Cure, others paralytick, and ap^plectick. Further, I have known several,
who before their salivation had their Nose and Palate sound, and afterward lost
part of ^oth by the stream of malignant humors, (...) were conveyed thither by
salivation.

ART. XV. The Vulcanous Cure.
42. THe Vulcanous Cure is only applied to cours^ Bodies, affected with a
difficult Pox. It Is performed smoking the Patient into a salivation with
trochisces made after this form. Take of the best Vermission from one ounce to
ten drams, Benzoin, gum guaiac. Frankincense of each one ounce, liquid storax
enough to make it into trochisces of half an ounce weight.

Observe. This Cure is a kin t^ the former, but overtops it in danger, and
causing ill symptoms, though notwithstanding has its use in some cases.

ART. XVI. The Cure a Posta.
43. THe Cure a Posta concerns only curing a fresh Maiden Pox, in six or seven
days, by offering the Patient a just dose of Arc. Coral. from gr. 3. to 6.
Praec. Penoti from gr. 2. to 4. Turb. m. Paracelsi, not that of London, from
gr. 2. to 4, or 5. three or four days together, or every other day. Upon this
he is to drink a Decoction of Lign. Sanct. for a fortnight.

Observe. The Tools of this Cure have a very sharp edge, and therefore he that
uses 'em, ought to know the nature of 'em, and where they are made. An English
Gentleman at Venice, having stained his Skin with some Pocki^ spots, took a
Dose of Praecip. from a Surgeon, which having wrought well, took another
Dose with the same success; but being desirous to clear his body beyond all
suspicion, ventured upon a third Dose, which blowed him up to the Planets. The
same fate befell a Trooper at Westminster upon the taking a Dose of the same
from a great Army-Surgeon.

ART. XVII. The Grand Diet.
44. THE Grand Diet is so called from the strict Diet Patients are enjoined to,
viz. to Dine upon Meat rotten roasted, and sup upon Biscuit and Raisins. After
the body is well prepared in a manner before mentioned, the Patient is to take
a Decoction (made of Lign. Guaiac. Sarsa, and Antimony crude tied in a rag)
twice a Day, sweating upon it for an hour, and drinking no other Liquor for his
ordinary Drink than a second decoction. As for China Root, I have wittingly
omitted, containing no more virtue than Saw-dust.

Observe. This Cure is no less tedious, than the foregoing are dangerous, six
Weeks being the ordinary time Patients are confined to in their Chambers; and
perhaps after they have been thoroughly roasted in their Tub^, they come ^ut as
rotten as they went in; and therefore in Venice the Physicians to make sure
work, pr^tract their Grand Diet to three months, by which means I remember,
several have been dried into Hectic Fevers, and soon after into their Tombs.

ART. XVIII. The Indian Cure.
45. THE Indian Cure is most successfully performed in St. I^hn's Island, where
such as cannot be cured in Europe, are certainly remedied in a Fortnight, with
a Decoction of fresh twigs of Guaiacum, and a particular Diet upon Serpents,
Frogs, and Toads roasted.

ART. XIX. The Negligent Cure.
46. THE Negligent Cure is so called, because it does not require so strict an
observance of Rules, but may be performed without keeping the House, by taking
Pills framed out of Crude Mercury, for 30. days in form following. Arg. viv.
suc. lim. extinct. gum. guaiac. an^ ij. Diagryd. j. ol. Iunip. ^ut. 15. Thereb.
ven. q. s. m. f. Mass. pil. Dos. a gr. 15. ad 25.

Observe. I have known several that have been frustrated by this Cure, though
they had continued it for six, and some to ^ight Weeks, whom afterward I cured
in less than three. Moreover crude Mercury partaking of a great part of lead is
very poisonous, and therefore no wonder, if be, that essayed to take Pil.
Barbar. at first, fell down dead upon the the Bridge of Avenion.

Observe. 2. It Is within a few days of my remembrance, that a Gentleman
demanded my sentiment upon his misfortune, which was no other than a Callosity
upon the Glans, being the remainder of an Empirical cure of a Liminary Pox,
performed by an unskilful Chyrurgeon. The apprehension of the danger that might
ensue, was more discommo^ious than the pa^^ (which was little or nothing,) or
any other exorbitancy of that symptom. This proved a moving cause of rendering
himself to the hazardous cure of several Empiricks, but particularly to one,
who treated him with the Blew Pill, vulgarly so called from the blew tincture,
the crude Mercury contributes to the Mass; otherwise it is called Pil.
Barbarossee from the inventor; The Basis or principal ingredient being
Quicksilver. Three Weeks use of this Pill, deprived the party forementioned of
a great part of his hearing and speech; and by conducting the ^^rrent of his
infected humors to the throat, had occasioned two Ulcers there. For the
rem^dying of this his tragical state of body, was put into a symptomatick Cure
by an able Physician and a noted Chyrurge^^s (and therefore refused to receive
him into my care) but I advised him he should require ^is Doct^r, to prescribe
him a sud^rifick course with a confinement, that being the necessary and the
only effectual means to remove the m^lignant impression of the Mercury, with
the remainder of his preceding disease. But since those miscreant and
effroyable accidents are necessary consequents of this negligent cure, and
notwithstanding all that is undergone, for its convenience of being performed
without a confinement, and therefore is a most egregious veil for the
shamefaced Mounsieur, I will set down a negligent course, which has proved no
less succesful to many, than secure from all danger. For the preparation of the
Blew Pill; the Crude Mercury must be exactly cleansed from all dust and mineral
recrements, by running it through a Shammey leather two or three times;
afterward must be as often washed in good Wine vinegar, to free it from those
leaden particles, generally united with it, as appears by the ^aeses, when the
Vinegar is separated by exhalation from the black. Thirdly, it must be forced
twice through a Retort from Calx vive; which serves to amortize those arsenical
mixtures, all Crude Mercury does so frequently exert its malignity through.
After all these various tormentations of the Mercury, your sight shall discover
to you, that for purity, splendour, fluidity and renuity, it is the Mineral that
may be reputed the materia of Gold and Silver, and in respect of security and
immunity from danger, may as confidently be offered to many bodies, as Manna.
Of this refined Mercury take what proportion you please, and amortize it with a
small quantity of Venice Turpentine, by grinding them together in a Marble
Mortar with a wooden Pestle; by this means you will find, the Acid spirits
that are latent in the Turpentine, have opened the body of the Mercury, and by
coagulation detained its volatile and fugitive spirits, whereby its capacitated
to work gently upon the malignities of infected bodies, and through the
sulphurous unctuousness, or mollifying ol^aginosity of the Turpentine, the
sensible parts, as stomach, guts and nerves, are wonderfully defended from the
corrosive spirits of the Mercury. Whence I conclude this, the safest of all
mercurial extinctions, since what is extinguished by juice of Limons and other
Acids, is not void of corrosion. Take of Mercury thus refined and amortized one
dram, Extract of Guaiac. two scruples, B^zoard. Mineral. half a dragm. Volatile
Salt of Succinum fifteen grains, Extract e duobus half a dragm, Venice
Turpentine as much as suffices to make them into a Mass. The Dose is from half
a scruple to half a dragm.

For the Method of this Cure observe these rules. First, cleanse the body of
all its excrements and abounding humors, with a Dose of Mercurius vitae, from
two grains to six. But note, I do not mean that preparation in the London
Dispensatory, being in most a fatal one. The next or the second day after,
extract a proportionable quantity of blood out of the right arm. The third day
present the Patient with a Dose of those Blew Pills, and half an hour after,
cause him to drink a Dose of our Antivenereal Decoction, prescribed in the last
Article; repeating the same decoction at four in the afternoon, and at eight.
This I can assure you is the safest and the most effectual method of all
negligent Cures, that have hitherto been discovered, and now from a Charitable
disposition is presented to you, to prevent those various disasters the daily
practice of Chyrurgeons and Apothecaries do occasion. Read my greater Venus,
where you will meet with other Methods of the negligent Cure.

ART. XX: The Pety. Cure.
47. THe Pety Cure relates only to a slight Infection, as a pocky scalding of
the U^in, commonly cured with an Emulsion of the greater cold seeds, a Purge
two or three of Cassia, R^^barb and Cream of Tartar. A G^norrhee, or Running of
the Reins is vulgarly cured, with a Purge two or three of Cassia; A Bole of
Turpentine, Rhubarb, and Gum G^ajac. for 30.40. or sometimes 50. days. Some do
much commend Quere^^ans Water of T^erebint. Others prefer green Precipitate for
8. or 10. days. It Is a secret among some Physicians beyond Sea, to use the
Infusion of Cantharides. A B^^o is cured by purging the blood with an
Antivenereal, and bringing it to maturation or discussion.

Observe. A Gonorrbee being situated in a remote part of the body, is not very
easy of cure; ordinary Medicines fainting in their virtue before they can
arrive thither. However, if it be not exactly cured, it does most certainly
first or last, ( like all other Liminary infections do,) turn to the Pox.
Moreover, it is not to be doubted, but few are well cured, because so many
hundred: do fall into that contagious Lake. I could here insert some very
remarkable cures of most inveterate Gonorrbees, did not my design of brevity
countermand.

ART. XVI. The Symptomatick Cure.
48. THE Symptom^tick Cure directs Medicines for curing urgent Pocky symptoms;
Viz. Ulcers, Nodes, G^ms, etc. for which this following is most excellent.
Merc. Subl. cor. vj. Praec. rub. cor. ij. Spir. vi^. rec. lb ss. f. Digest, per
bo^^ 24. dein decant. liq. With this you must but just wet the Ulcers, or
Fissures, and afterward apply tents or pledgets, that have soakt in the same
Liquor, and are dried again. For Nodes, and Gums, I never found any thing more
excellent than my Emplaster of Cinabar^, described in my other V^n^^ Vnm^^k'd.

Observe. 1. Shun applying any unctuous ter occasions that horrible deformity of
a flat N^s^. Here take notice, that nothing is a more frequent cause of a
Cancerous Ulcer ^f the Palate, than a S^livation by Mercury, conveying all the
malignity of the body to the Palate and Nose, where in very few days it devours
both. Neither have I ever seen in any Country so many levelled Noses, and
devoured Palats, as here in England, and all caused by Mercurial Salivations.
Therefore observe this at a strict rule, if the least malignity appear abaut
the Palate, Tonsils, or Nose, to refrain salivations beyond all remedies, and
rather endeavor to expel the ven^m downwards, or through the P^r^s, or els^
certainly you will for ever disg^^ce (...) Patient. M^r^^l over, strive to
binder the fr^tting of the malignity in those par^^by the unctuous Medicines,
(as O^ls, Liniments, or Unguents,) to venereal Ulcers, since they are apt to
dispose 'em to rot.

Observe. 2. It Is not the smallest dexterity in Physic t^ appease the urgent
symptoms of the Venereal evil, which chiefly are, 1. N^cturnal pains. 2. That
ravenous Vicer of the Palate. 3. The Caries or rottenness of the bone of the
Nose. 4. A Pockie Hectic, or Consumption. These four symtomes threatening
either a miserable death, or an abiding disgrace, require immediate help, and
that before the Cure of the dis^ase. Nocturnal pains are solaged, with an
Antivenereal Anodyne. The Ulcer of the Palate ought to be stented with all
possible speed, or else the steems that fume thence to the Nose, will
immediately rot the bones, which soon after the speediest means. As for po^kie
H^cticks, their help is chi^fly situated in Medicines that are moderately
moistning and apt to oppose the Disease.

Lastly observe, that all Diseases, whe^ber Fever, Gout, Headache, Pi^sick,
I^undies, etc. b^pning in bodies that have been formerly troubled with any
venereal in^ection, though then cured, are to be remedied with having a
particular regard to the foregoing infection. Therefore it is very necessary in
such Fevers, to use quantities of Bezoard. Mineral. In Gouts, Sassasras, etc.

I have now imparted to you the surest and most choice Methods of curing the
Pox, whereby I have formerly cured some hundreds; but having of late years
found a Method more easy, certain, and far quicker for curing Liminary, and
inveterate Infections, I make no further use of 'em: Though I must once again
tell you, that some of 'em are most excellent methods, and far better than any
the vulgar makes use of.

A TREATISE OF THE Scorbutic Pox.
CHAP. I. Comprizing the Description of a Scorbutic Pox, and a necessary
division thereof.
IN Article 2. and 4. the Parentage of the Pox has been manifestly declared to
you, and if this Pocky' darling be more resembling its mother Scurvy than
Manginess, you may thence conclude; it emulates her nature in sluggishness,
obstinacy. and other malign qualities; For as the Scurvy is observed to move
slow in its symptoms, which are not very fierce, but sufferable, though very
importune, and of a most radicated fixation, so is a Scorbutic Pox. On the
other hand a Mangy Pox appearing in Scabs, and crusty Ulcers, being more
masculine, is a more ruggid guest, and a quick traveller, that gives smart
spurs to its fiery nag, and therefore gallops post through the body, which
consequently must soon jade the Patient. From this discourse you may deduce a
most necessary distinction, viz. That the Pox is either a Scorb^tick Pox, or a
Mangy Pox, or a Scorbutick-Mangy Pox partaking of both. The use of this
division is such, that unless well understood, it is impossible any one should
dexterously cure that disease. Wherefore when a venereal Patient recommends
himself to your cure, you will show your self a^ Artist in making the
forementioned distinction; for concluding it is a Scorbutic Pox, you must
apply a method distinct, from what cures a mangy one.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes and Dragnostick signs of the Scorbutic Pox.
2. IN this Part I am to give you my Observations on the Scorbutic Pox, which
I shall extract from several of my Venereal Patients, and set down those
prescriptions, which for your further satisfaction you may find on several
Apothecaries files in London.

By a Scorbutic Pox, in a large acception, may be understood a Scurvy, gotten
by a Venereal infection, and of such I have treated more than a few; but
strictly it is a Pox, whose chief symptom is a sort of fugitive flying pains,
that sometimes cause a distension in the musculous parts of the arms, other
times in the legs, breast, head, belly especially, and sides. Hereof I have
observed two degrees. The first is, small tinckling pains in the parts
aforesaid, running sometimes to the toes, and fingers ends. Those of the second
degree, are more evident, and very offensive pains; they are distinguished from
Venereal nightpains, by their appearance at all times of the day or night, but
especially at the Patients awaking from sleep; upon the least course of Physic
they disappear, but certainly return after a short intermission. Their
immediate cause is a virulent wind, distending and corroding the membranes of
the muscles. Touching their previous and remote causes take these Observations.
First, those that are subject to a Scorbutic Pox are chiefly such, whose
Parents were pockified, and but imperfectly cured at the time they were
begotten, so that here is an hereditary pocky disposition in all their parts,
spermatick and sanguine, whence receiving a new infection, immediately
penetrates into the substantials, and unites with their very principles of
nature, where it lies so firmly entrenched, that the Art of man can scarce
dislodge it. Some months since, a disastered Patient applied himself to me for
cure, his symptoms were only fugitive, distending inordinate pains, flying
promiscuously into all parts, and at all times: Upon inquiry made into the
occasion of this ill adventure, I found he had contracted it by one single
converse with an hired woman, with whom also several of his comrades had
negotiated, though but with small gains, it may be of a small Gonorrhee or
Shancker, both which he had escaped. A month after he was put in mind of his
transgression by wild inordinate pains, running through his body, as if spirits
had bee^ hunting one another in a Wilderness. For the removing of this, he was
put into a salivation twice, each flux lasting three Weeks; but these means
proving ineffectual, he was advised to essay the virtue of a Sudorifick course,
which recompensed his pains as little as the former. It was in the Winter when
he desired my help, a season not very propitious for so difficult a work,
however I put him into a very strict Method, at the termination whereof, ho
found himself free from all pains and symptoms. In this case it is not to be
doubted but this was a Scorbutic Pox, occasioned by virulent steems soon
passing the spermatick parts, and in a short time penetrating and lodging
themselves in the most retired seats of his body, where they were readily
admitted into a previous hereditary pocky disposition, whereas had there bin no
such previous disposition, the foresaid virulent fumes would have been
intercepted by the spermatick parts, where they would have occasioned a
Gonorrhee, Shancker, or some other Liminary infection, as they did in his
Comrades. A second Observation is, that a Scorbutic Pox is also engendered in
those, who were s^orbutick before, and had received their infection from a
Scorbutic hired woman. A third is, that most scorbutic Venereal Diseases are
occasioned, when the infected steems are received into the body, without
engendring a Liminary Pox.

CHAP. III. Of the Prognostic signs of a Scorbutic Pox.
THE Prognostic of a Scorbutic Pox implies in the general, it is the most
difficult of all other kinds of Pox. In particular, a Scorbutic hereditary
Pox, is for the most part incurable, in some few it is palliable, and in very
few curable.

A simple Scorbutic Pox does not admit of an easy cure, but requires both
skill and dexterity; and therefore is not to be attempted by every Emperick.

Lastly observe, that scar^^ any sort of a Scorbutic Pox is curable by a
single course, but requires a second, and sometimes third repetition of the
same course, whereby it is gradually oppugned, and at length totally expelled.

CHAP. IV. The true Method for curing a Scorbutic Pex.
THE directions for curing this obstinate disease, comprehend strict rules for
Diet, preparative digestions, deplenishing the vessels of some part of their
humors to make way for specificks, and lastly the manner of administering the
said specificks; the Diet must for the beginning be moderate in relation to
quantity, and inclining to dryness. In the process of the cure must be spare
and drying, at last must be very drying.

First prescribe the Patient a Dose of Mercurius vi^ae, from gr. 2. to 6. or
give him a just Dose of Antimon. rediv. and Merc. Dule. either of these are
incomparable in this case. The next day, or after a days intermission, extract
some blood out of the right arm. Next morning recommend to him this following
digestive Apozem, to be used mornings, afternoons, and evenings, for three
days.

Rasur. lign Gu^iac. lb ss. Rad. maiv ij. Sal. tart. j. Aq. Sont. lb viij. seq.
a.l consumpt. il nius 3. sub ^i^. adde^do Pol^pod. a. sem. Car^ham. con^. ^^
ij. ^pithim. j. Glyc^r. ras. sem. fan. dule a j. ss. Uvar. P^ssar iij. cole^r.
M. f. Ap^z. Dos. lb ss.


The Humors being now partly digested, are to be evacuated with another Dose
of Mercur. vitae, or our black Pill, which effected, is to be succeeded by
this, or the like Antivenereal Decoction.

Scob. lign. Guaiac. viij. C^rt. ejusd. contus. iiij. Lign. Sassafr. minu^.
council. ij. Post debit. digest. ^n Aq. fen^. lb xiiij. Spir. Gaaiac. acid. j.
ss. Coq. ad consum^t. mediet. Sub fin. addendo R^d. Bardan. Petasit. a iij.
Rad. Al^h. j. Colet. and reservet. in amp. vi^^. Resid. affun^. cand. quant.
aq. decoq. ad 2^ 31 sub fin. addend Uvar p^ss. iiij. sem. corland^ ss. coletr.
pro* pot. ordinar Tinct. Antimon.
A^^m^^. Di^^^or. iij. S^l^tar^a^. j. Spir. vin. se^il^rectif. lb j. F. digest.
per 4. dies in aren drin f^^r. per* chart. empo^ affundatur (...) tinctur.
decoct. supr^script. primar. cujus com^ix^^ sit. Dos. lb ss. Ter. p^^ diem
boris medicis. per boram mane supersudando.


Once a Week instead of the Decoction take a Dose of Mere. vitae.

This course being continued five or six Weeks, performs a cure beyond the
expectation of the Patient; but if in a very inveterated Scorbutic Pox this
should fail in that happy success you propose to your self, then after a months
or six Weeks intermission, repeat the same Method, and then you need not doubt
of the effect. In an obstinate cure, I use to add to each Dose 20. drops of my
spir. antile^l. 10. grains of my Magister. nigr. and 5. grains of my Magister.
alb.

Upon the preceding prescription, the Reader may possibly be so curious, as to
demand, why Sarsaparil, a drug so no^ed for its efficacy against venereal
pains, is omitted. I resolve you; because for the generality the Sarsa our
Druggists expose to sale, is so rotten, that the worth of it scarce answers the
tenth part of what it is sold for, especially at this time, since what is
tolerable, namely large, white and mealy, is not to be purchased under ten or
a dozen shillings the pound, and that probably is such, as has been kept two
or three years in their Warehouses for a dear year; whence considering its
chief virtues to consist in volatile sulphurous particles, you may justly
conclude, it may very well be passed by, having wholly evaporated its virtue;
especially since I can assure you, I have observed effects more admirable in
those two hedge-roots, But^erbur and Burdock, being taken up fresh in the
Autumn, and dried in the shadow, than ever I did in Sarsa. Notwithstanding, if
you suppose your self skilful enough to discern the goodness of Sarsa, you may
purchase a quantity of the Druggist, and send three or four ounces of it sliced
to the Apothecary, to be added to the aforesaid Decoction, and question not,
but it will recompense your pains by a successful cure. But on the other hand,
should you commit it to the honesty of the^ Apothecary, believe certainly he
will either wholly omit it, and yet not forget to place it down particularly to
the account, or put in that of three and six pence the pound, a kind of Sarsa,
that is black, rusty, small and rotten, serving for no other use, than for
extinguishing the virtue of the other ingredients. Concerning these sorts of
refined Cheats, and other gross ones, you may abundantly satisfy your self in,
by perusing a Treatise, called, The Accomplished Physician, and the Honest
Apothecary, which will render you wise enough to expostulate the case with your
Apothecary, if he appears too peremptory in his accounts. Of those Tracts, if
there be any to be had, I believe its in DuckLane.

A Second TREATISE OF THE Mangy Pox.
AS a Scorbutic Pox is that sort our experienced Monsieurs entitle a Dutch
Pox, so this Mangy Pox is that, which may most properly be styled the (...)
Pox, that sort being most popular among 'em.

That it is a venereal disease, discovering it self chiefly in scabs and scurf,
you may easily understand by what it is her (...). I shall not judge it a (...)
lost, if I relate to you the several kinds and differences of Venereal scabs
and scurf.

Venereal scabs take their rise from malignant deep inflamed pustules, that
feel sore, and immediately conceive a black or duskish speck on the head of
'em, which in a very short time is converted into a rough scab of the same
extent the pustule was off, and peeling it off with your hand (for of it self
it does not easily come off) you shall find a sordid matter or puss, that has
corroded the flesh very uneven, which in less than a night is dried up into
another variegated scab.

Instead of those pustules, nature does at length expel the venomous matter in
greater bumps of (...) color, which after (...) have contracted a large scab,
the virulent moisture underneath corrodes into a deep Ulcer; or often times two
or three of those pustules meeting, and communicating their virulency, are
converted into ichorous malignant Ulcers, or moist running sores.

Venereal scurf is a plain broad scab, even with the skin, or sometimes deeper
in the flesh, so as the skin appears higher than it, taking its original from a
large extent of a great number of small eruptions like red gum, which
communicating their venom, are converted into a large scab of a very ill
color, without any elevation above the skin. This skurf i^ rising on the head
in thin limber scales, is called a Venereal dandrif, which is usually a
forerunner of a malignanter scurf, that is soon like to follow.

Both Venereal scabs and scurf do most frequent the head, forehead, temples
(especially scurf) face and neck, not long after they overrun the whole body,
and particularly the back.

The difference between simple scabs, and those that are Venereal is, that
those latter never itch unless when they are almost cured, and then they begin
to exercise the nails a little.

What concerns the cause of a Mangy Pox, it is certain those scabs and scurfare
occasioned by steems, that consist of a more armoniack, or an alcalized ^^ery
and venenous principle; Which being also very volatile and alcolized, renders
them apt to disperse themselves to the circumference of the body, and conveying
with them a part of the adust humors of the Vessels, appear in other shapes of
scabs, scurf, and dandrif.

For the Prognostic of this sort of evil, you may confidently assure the
patient, it is easier cured than any other Pox, and therefore it is no wonder,
the French Physicians have the repute of excelling others in the curing that
distemper, since those Venereal diseases that reign in France, are generally
Mangy, and consequently yield to a facile cure; but if at any time they meet
with an Hectic Pox, or a Scorbutic, or any other mi^t Pox, they are much to
seek, and commonly render the disease worse.

A Mangy Pox does not hide itself long, but appears within a few Months after
the infection, and moves quick and violent, insomuch that if it be not suddenly
checked, it shows it self in corroding and Phagedenick Ulcers, which contracting
a glutinous sordid matter, are apt to corrupt a whole member in a short time.

Gallick scabs growing blackish, turn Cancerous, and signify a difficult cure;
those scabs or scurf if they are apt to fall off of themselves, or are easily
pulled off, it is a sign, your case is in no manner despe^at: but supposing they
stick on fast, are painful, and cover a dilacerated corroded flesh, signifies
an ill case. Likewise from the matter you may take your Prognostic, which the
nearer it comes to a perfect Pu^s, the more curable your disease is. From the
color, hardness, and deepness of the scabs, you may also take your dimension
of the difficulty or facility of the Cure.

The Cure of a Mangy Pox.
It Is universally known, that any sort of venom being admitted into the body,
it usually takes it is seat or root in those humors, that most partake of its
own nature, wherefore we are to look for those mangy seminaries in the adust or
rather saline alculized fluidities of the Vessels; Whence you may deduce this
Indication, that they are to be expelled out of the body, by purging those
foresaid fluors, wherein they are chiefly inherent. To this intent we must
pitch upon such purgers, experience assures us to be most effectual; and in
that case I must recommend to you our Black Pill, which I shall exactly
describe to you here.

Take a sufficient proportion of Hungarian glittering Antimony, add thereunto
an anatick quantity of S^l Armoniack: grind them well together in a mortar; put
the mixture into a Sublimatory, and sublime it into red' and yellow flowers.
These convey into a Bolls head, and affuse upon them Acet. dist^^. ad emin^nt.
palm. uniu^; after digestion in B. abstract the liquor by distill. or eva^or.
grind the whitish residue, and edulcorate it with warm water, whereby its
ultimately reduced to its pristine color; and so having left behind its
ferocity, malignity and venom, results a most gentle vomitory and dejectory,
accomodated to all ages, sexes, and climes, radically curing all oppilations,
jaundises, severs, dropsies, Asthma's initial P^^bises, Convulsions in
Children; but more particularly I have removed with it several agues in
children, obstructions of Me^str^a in women, and many incipient Consumptions in
men. Insumma Cr^cus metal. or vitr. Ant. are poisons in comparison to this
preparation, which I call Antimonium Resuscitatum. For the composition of this
black Pill, take of this Antimon. Resusc. from gr. 4. to 8. Praetip. alb. dulc.
from gr. 3. to 6. with a drop or two of sir. ros. to mix into a black Pill. The
effect hereof is generally a copious and large evacuation downwards without
vomit, unless in some few that are disposed. In stead of the white Pr^cip* you
may substitute Merc. subl. dulc. from gr. 15. to 30. but then it usually
vomits. In reference to the method, you are to present the said black Pill four
times to your mangy Patient, that is to say every other day, with confinement
that day he takes it.

No less success you may expect from four Doses of Tur^ith Mineral, but not of
that crude preparation described in Pharm^co^. Land. but of the prescription of
Paracelsus. But because examples are the best demonstrations, I shall insert
one out of many of a very speedy cure of a Mangy Pox. A Wine-Cooper of a
Carnous habit of body, of temperament sanguine and melancholy, aged 27. and
robust; likewise in the internal constitution of his bowels sound and
healthful; was disgraced with a number of most loathsome scabs in his face, and
down his back. A practizing Apothecary had entitled his disease a surfeit,
against which according to the Rules of Trap he had ordained him a course for
two months, but to no purpose. Applying himself to me, I gave it the name of a
Mangy Pox, a tone that sounded a note above Ela in my Patients ears; but
assuring him of a perfect cure in eight days, was harmonically enough
understood. In order thereunto, ^ tried his body with a Dose of the black Pill,
viz. Eight gr. of A^^m. Resus^. mixed with fix gr. of Praecip. alb. dul^. this
pleasured him with eight or nine good motions downwards. ^ intermitted one day,
and then recommended the same Pill to him, with the addition of one grain to
each ingredient; the effect hereof consisted in the same number of motions.
According to the same order I ascended one grain each time, which maintained
his motions much in the same tenor. Upon the second exhibition of the pill,
his scabs scaled, and the ulcerous skin underneath dried up; so that before the
expiration of the time he found himself perfectly cured, and so has continued.

Furthermore you are to observe, though this cure is potent enough against a
milder sort of a Mangy Pox, those kinds that partake of a greater malignity are
to be cured by Salivation, or other peculiar medicines; for in these cases
Guaiacum or Salsa do rather render the disease worse; likewise on the other
hand a Scorbutic Pox is not to be attacqued by any Mercurial medicine, unless
there be a complication of Manginess.

An Appendix of an H^ctick Pox.
THis is that sort of Pox, that for the most part puts a stop to the
recreations of the debauched Gallant; and therefore will prove a charitable
work, to give him some insight into his case for a warning, that so he may draw
stakes, and give over his game in time.

By a Hecktick Pox, if you suppose a Venereal disease, which is radicated and
habitual, in opposition to a schetical Pox that is easily cured, you will
misapprehend me, but my meaning points at a pocky indisposition, that has
corrupted the innate temperament of the heart, and brain, occasioning a faetid
and impure vital sulphur in the former, and a most acrimonious* H^midum
cerebrosum in the latter, whence consequently follows a quick inordinate
pulsation, and a great weakness in all the nervous and locomotive parts, a
stinking sweat all over the body, especially in the night^ likewise a short
vulpin cough, indigestion, want of appetite, extreme dryness of parts, etc.

An Hectic Po^ often comes at the heels of a Venereal disease, that has been
frequently repeted, and imperfectly cured. Likewise it is a consequent of a
Scorbutic Pox in a Scorbutic body, of a Mangy Pox in a sulphurous hot
constitution, and of a Scorbutic hereditary Pox. Moreover, a Pox that lurks in
the body, without giving the least notice through malignant symptoms, does
certainly tend to an Hectic Pox.

How to foreknow an Hectic Pox is difficult, neither can a dexterity in the
prognostic of that evil be acquired by any other means, than by frequent
observations of such as are Hectically pockified. Such was the case of the
forementioned Coopers wife, no symptoms appeared neither external, nor
internal, to suspect her otherwise than perfectly disposed. Notwithstanding I
endeavored to persuade her to a course, or else in the space of three months
she would be advanced beyond all humane cure; But feeling her self so well in
health made her slight this advice. The time I had prognosticated was no sooner
determined, but the unfortunate woman grew indisposed, her aspect turned
cadaverous, and the mole of her body shrunk extremely, being also incommoded by
a short cough. This sudden change compelled her to implore my assistance; but
it was too late. I advised her to prepare for another retreat, for nothing was
more certain, than that she would finish her course in very few months.
Dismissing her without any other advice, applies her self to another Physician,
who promises her cure in a fortnight; to that purpose orders her to bleed out
of the foot, and prescribes a pectoral decoction; this rendering her worse, goes
into the Country for air, where in the very month I had predicted she expires.
Several of these instances I could produce, but time and the limits of a
Compendium prevent me; wherefore shall conclude with this dictate, that the
best c^re of a Hectic Pox is by prevention.

The Cure of an Hectic Pox.
SInce the degrees of an Hectict Pox are not easily discerned, and that some,
namely in the beginning and growth; admit of a cure, as besides the records of
several Treatises, my self can produce some instances of Pockie Hecticks
restored to their health, it is a sufficient argument, to encourage Physicians,
to attempt some course or other to recover their disastered patients, or at
least to advise something to palliate, and prolong their days. In this case
the generality of Authors frame two indications, the one, and which in the cure
is preferred, is* to moisten the withered and tabefied parts; the other is, to
expel and extinguish the virulent venom of the Pox. The for^^ost of these is
accomplished, or at least endeavored, by a nutritive and humecting diet, and
other medicines of the same faculty; namely by Cock-broath wherein is boiled
French B^rley, Bugloss or Borrage roots, liquorish, the four cordial flowers,
Dates, Jujubees, Sebesten, Currants, the four greater cold Seeds, and sometimes
a small proportion of Poppie-seeds, all which besides the liquorish is to be
sweetened with Rose sugar, if the party be Rhumatick, or if not, with sugar of
Marshmallows. From a fortnights continuance hereof, three or four times a day,
it is expected the Patient should be somewhat incarn'd, moistened, and
strengthened, which commemorates the Physician of his latter indication of
resisting and oppugning the venom, to which purpose he prescrib^s a proportion
of C^ina r^ot and Sa^, to be added to the broth forementioned. I^ upon another
fortnights use of this the Patient seems to mend, and appears less cadaverous
in his aspect; he begins to think of steering another course* and so either
wholly casts off the broth, or at least diminishes the use of it, and prescribes
a formal decoction of Gu^^^acum, Salsa, and Chini, others omit the former of
these three, being suspicious it is too h^t and drying, and so might precipitate
the Gallican to his form^r emaciated habit. This is to be diligently drunk for
six weeks or two months, the length of time being supposed to recompense the
omission of those violent sweats, which are ordinarily enjoined upon an
antivenereal decoction; though in this method some short gentle sweats are
advised. That the r^sult of this sort of cure has been a perfect recovery of
confirmed pockie Hecticks, many Autho^s do confidently assert in their Volumes,
as Poterius, R^verius, F^nseca and others, though I am more than certain, that
their patients were only emacerated, but not Hectically. However it is apparent
by the testimonies of these so reputed Physicians, C^in^ root obtains a most
energick virtue, for restoring Emaciated pocky Hecticks, which the Reader
possibly may observe, I have more than once contradicted in this Treatize.
Besides, that its virtue is not exhaled, though transported through such hot
climes, and kept seven, eight, or ten years before it is called into use, seems
evidently demonstrated by the sanguine tincture it contributes to the liquor in
a decoction or broth, which doubtless must be derived from a potent Sulphur
that is deeply latent in the ro^t, and by a long continuated ^bullition is only
extracted, and consequently is not exposed to exhalation. Moreover it might be
argued, that the chief energy of oppugning this virulent venom, is not inherent
in the volatile parts of antivenereal drugs, but rather in their fixed salts,
which a long ebullition does melt and extract, as may be instanced in Guaiacum,
which its age is universally imagined does render fitter for use and exalted to
a more puissant faculty, as if length of time were requisite to concoct its
parts, and perduce its l^t^nt Sulphur to maturity. My answer to th^se
objections imports, that the antivener^^l virtue, which is attributed to C^in^
and Sa^s^, is chiefly lodged in its volatile saline particles, the I^di^ns
sca^ce reposing any confidence of virtue in the former, unless fresh taken out
of the ground, experience convincing them, that few owe their cure to it, after
it has been exposed ^ or 10 dais to the air. Moreover the evident manner,
which is conceived that drug does exert its activity through against the Pox is
by sweat, which I could never detect in a sole decoction of Chin^. Neither can
any manifest qualities be discovered in its fixed particles, which by a long
dec^ction are aimed to be extracted, whereby it should melt and attenuate
humors, and so profuse a sweat, and with it the venomous miasms; if so, there
is little certainty of its antigallick virtue, unless reposed in its hidden
powers, which few now a days can confide in. On the other hand Guaiacum
declares its virtue by its manifest qualities, residing in its fixed salin and
sulphurous particles, or an acid salt, and a potent expansive su^phur, as the
Anatomy of (...) parts by sire does evidently represent to you, by the acid
spirit, and a strong sulphurous oil it yields, through the former attenuating
and penetrating into those humors, that harbor the infection, and through the
latter deterging, colliquating, diffusing and propelling the said humors out at
the pores, together with the virulent miasms, Moreover it must not be doubted,
but the oldest and longest cut G^^acum is most prevalent for a podkie purpose,
time seeming to concoct its ^ pour and exalt its particles to a greater
energie, or rather time opening the pores of that hard wood, and disuniting the
sulphurous parts from the salin, (whose ^idum and close connection is the cause
of the hardness of the said wood) whereby it afterward results more apt and
capable of rendering its sulphurous and salin particles to any liquor, by a far
shorter ebullition, than if the said wood were ^^wer. That time does so
considerably exalt and sublime the virtues of bodies, will be plainly attested
to you by the volatization of the spirit of Vitriol, which I imagine few can
show besides my self, having the possession of a spirit so volatile, that it
diffuses it self to a very great, distance, not without a pleasant scent to the
olfactive organ, and a most subtle insinuation into the remotest effuges of the
brain, and being dropped into a liquor, proves diaphoretick, which is accounted
an excellent virtue when accompanying an acidity. The manner it is prepared is
thus, calcine your Vitriol to a Colcother, and place it in a Garret, leaving it
there 2 or 3 years, afterward distill it after the usual way, and you shall
collect a deep yellow volatile spir^ of Vitriol, as is here described Which
confirms my assertion, tha^ time does maturate, volatilize, an^ exalt the
sulphurous particles, an^ renders them apt for sequestration^ from its more
drossie and feculen^ parts. This by the way. And re^turning to my former
subject, I (...) once more assert, Guaiacum the only certain and manifest
vegetabl^ for curing the Pox. The metho^ I have sometimes prescribed is the
following. Take a young Co^^ and bruise it well, add to it thre^ ounces of the
shavings of old Guaiacum wood, four handfuls of Mallow leaves, two ounces of
the for greater cold seeds, one ounce ^ sweet Almonds blanched, 20 Dates and
two ounces of blew Currant^ spring water four quarts, boil i^ gently two hours
in a diet potstrain and keep it (...) glass cl^s^ stopped. Hereof let the Patient
drink a quarter of a pint four times a day. In stead of water in some cases, I
have ordained the same quantity of Whey, or water distild of Milk, or Mallow
water. After ten days continuance of this Anti-hectick broth, it is requisite
to add two ounces of excellent new Sarsaparil, or if such is scarce to be
procured, the like quantity of Burdock roots. If upon twenty days use hereof,
the Patient seemed somewhat incarn'd, I judged it convenient to purge him
gently with Di^sen^^ and Mercur. subl. ^ulc. and so exhort him to two or three
small sweats a week. By degrees I detracted those moistning ingredients, until
I arrived to the use of of my two Magisteria. Furthermore I have now and then
observed some Gallicks surprised with particular A (...) of some o^ their
members, in that case I a^ vised three ounces of Red worm^ taken out of a
horses dunghill, an^ well-washt in white Wine to b^ added to the nutritive
decoction^ Likewise I perceived that a score of well cleansed Vineyard Snails
added to the broth aforesaid, di^ very much contribute to its nutritive
faculty. After that, the Patient being reduced to a more florid aspect, and
somewhat impinguated, you may proceed with such a method, as his present
symptoms may indicate, according to those observations I have lately
communicated to you.

FINIS.

