A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET's
WESTMINSTER, Jannary the 30th, 1695/6.

By GREGORY HASCARD, D. D. Dean of Windsor, Rector of St. Clements Danes, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Bible and Swan without Temple Bar.
MDCXCVI.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Commons, On January the 30th, 1695/6.
etc.
MICAH VII. 2. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they bunt every man his
neighbor with a net.


THese words are the cause of the Prophet's sorrow, expressed ver. 1. so deep a
concern it was, that the words (Woe is me) may signify not only mourning, but
howling; which did not arise from a melancholy temper, or discontent against
the Government, disappointments, peevishness, or contradiction, but from a
serious and sad consideration of the scarcity of men truly good: So rare they
were in the Land of Palestine, as not to be found in Clusters, in numerous
Families, and large Societies, but in thin and hungry Gleanings after the
Vintage was over, v. 1. When the Prophet had taken an impartial view of the
several Ranks and Orders in the Jewish Nation, the Princes, Priests and People,
good men, were reckoned up; not like the musters in St. John of the Tribe of
Judah twelve thousand, or silver in the days of Solomon, but as hard to be
found as the mouths of Nile, or Jewels among dirt and rubbish. Notwithstanding
the Law and Temple, which they professed and admired, the mighty wonders that
were done of old, and they believed, the peculiar care and tenderness of Divine
Providence over the Jewish Nation; faith God, I have carried them upon Eagles
wings; Signal Judgments upon men of Vice, the Admonitions and Alarms of the
Prophets, and other kind methods inviting to Goodness and true Religion, yet
they were so degenerate and vicious, that when the Prophet came to search for
the fruits of Religion, and find a number of good men, he makes this sad
return, The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright
among men; they all lie in wait for blood, etc. Such as passion as this for the
want of good men, became the Prophet in all capacities, as a Man, as a Subject,
and as a Prophet. As a Man, whose essence is as much to be good and religious,
as'tis to be rational; and therefore could not but be concerned, to see a
Nation of men so strangely changed and degenerated by Vice and Luxury into
Brutes, that nothing was left of the Image of God and Manhood, beside shape and
laughter. As a Subject, well foreseeing, and with grief considering, what
misery would suddenly betide the Nation, for want of Goodness and Religion. As
a Prophet, that notwithstanding the Messages he brought from God, and the clear
Predictions he made them, what sad Events in a short time would happen to them,
for want of Goodness and Repentance, yet they slighted his Errand, and were
sturdy and resolute in their Vices.

I am afraid we have too great reason from the consideration of this day, for
the Prophet's Sorrow and Exclamation. When a truly good and most excellent
Prince fell by the bloody hands of his Rebellious Subjects, and with him our
Laws and Liberties, our Apostolical Church, and Ancient Government, and great
was the fall thereof; to the Grief of our Friends, the Joy of our Enemies, and
the Scandal of Religion. A Murder it was of the deepest Die, committed upon a
most tender Father, by Sons making high Pretenses to the Spirit of God, Zeal
for Christianity, the Public Good, to Purity and Reformation arrayed in the
finest Dress and Colors, yet deeply stained by this foul Action, to the
Triumph of Rome, the Laughter of the Atheist, the Sport of the Vicious and
Lewd, but to the Sorrow of all Loyal and Good Subjects, all Honest and Sincere
Christians. To spend time in magnifying the Virtues and Sufferings of our
Martyred Sovereign, which were so bright, and known so well, outshining the
Jewels of his Crown, would be gross Impertinency to this great Auditory; they
speak aloud like Abel's blood, though their great Master is dead, not for
Vengeance, but Imitation. I shall therefore only touch upon them, as they fall
in with the end and intention of these words, The good man is perished out of
the earth; and my following Discourse upon them very suitable, I hope, to the
Devotion of this day, which I shall pursue by this method.

(1.) Let us consider wherein the goodness of this good man, the Prophet
mentions, did express it self. (2.) What prevailed or grew up in the Prophet's
time, in the place of true Religion and Goodness. (3.) What particular
Considerations may move us to bewail the want of true Goodness.
It could be wished that this dearth of Goodness had been only under the Jewish
Religion, and peculiar only to the Land of Palestine; but the Christian Church,
as well as the Prophet, may justly bewail het barren Christians, and the
scarcity of Men truly good, notwithstanding her Laws so Excellent, so Divine.
We all affirm indeed, That our Religion by the hand of Jesus came from God, but
our Conversation says, it is only a new device and fashion to wear a broad, and
throw off at home. With great solemnity of Words and Looks we repeat our
Creeds; with confidence and a keen Passion we break the Commands. We pray and
communicate with Sighs and Appearances, befitting the strictest Penitent, and
the greatest Saint; yet our Lives say, our Prayers are but formal Orations unto
God, and the Table of the Lord is common. We flame with Zeal for Religion, but
our practice puts out the Fire, and in the bottom of the Ashes lie Revenge and
Interest, Faction and a Party, which with a little breath blowing off the
disguize, appear in their natural Colors. We call our selves Saints and Elect,
but where is the Patience, the Temper, and the Spirit of them? We follow Jesus
and wear his Livery, but underneath is the Passion of a Judas, and the fond and
carnal Expectation of a Jew; and is this the Coat of thy Son Joseph? Some there
were, who murdered their Sovereign, yet talked loud, and disputed warmly, and
cast themselves into Sides and Divisions, and all must be set at Stake for the
Cause of God, by which they drive on their barbarous Design; but yet I am
afraid, and could wish the Fear was idle, for the sake of Christianity. What
was the black Charge of Pagan Corinth, may in the greatest part be laid against
them, who were adulterers, effeminate, thieves, covetous, revilers,
extortioners, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. And I wish I could say such were only some of
them, but they are washed, but they are sanctified; but the same Vices, or
others, in so many still do live and thrive, maintaining their old lewd
Principles, as tho they endeavored to fulfill the Prophecy, telling us what
should betide Christianity in the latter days, That men should be lovers of
themselves, proud, boasters, traitors, unthankful, false accusers, and a
strange rabble of sinners are reckoned up, having the form of godliness, but
denying the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.2., 3, 4. but what avails all that form, so
long as Mordecai the Jew lives? what signifies a good Religion in a bad Man's
breast? But I am not here, besure, to libel Christianity, or any of its
Disciples, who are truly Penitent; it is a great part of that Religion to be
Charitable, and cover Errors. But thus much I may venture to say, let our
Religion be never so Primitive and Apostolical, let it be English or Italian,
Reformed or Popish, except it makes us really good, it is but wrangling
Hypocrisy and Noise, not being serviceable to the great Design, the saving of
our Souls. That we may not therefore again be deceived by Names and Pretenses,
'twill be prudent to consider, wherein true Goodness does consist; and omitting
other particulars, I shall insist upon only these four, for which our Martyr
was very Eminent, and the Authors of this Murder were so notoriously guilty of
the contrary Vices.

(1.) True Goodness does express it self in plainness and sincerity in all our
respective Dealings with Men. When the Primitive Christian did advise, or
treat, answer or determine, he did it with uprightness or simplicity, being
mindful of his Master's command, bidding him be as gentle and harmless as a
Dove, and allowed him the prudence, but not the false and speckled Skin of the
Serpent to conceal his Sting and Poison. But the Modern Christian leaving his
King and Master's Highway of Truth and Plainness, and leaping common Bounds of
Truth and Justice, by windings, and turnings, and indirect Courses, thinks to
arrive at his Journeys end. Ask him counsel, he directs to your Temper and
Inclination to scratch and please; and tells you your House is strong, when
it is on Fire about your ears. If you deal and contract with him, plain Sense is
wrackt, words are perverted, and Shrugs, Looks, Silence, Postures and Signs,
must all carry on his Intriegue and End; and Lying, and Hypocrisy,
Equivocation, and Reserves, and perjuryat a pinch, must be sanctified to the
same purpose, and you treat with an Apparition parition, one that is not what
he seems to appear; Falsehood he calls Prudence, Treachery is good management,
his own Contrivance is Discovery, and Trains and Schemes of Tricks and Frauds
are good Foresight and excellent Judgment; this is to lie in wait, to hunt,
spread nets with all sly Arts of deceit and fraud, to catch the simple and
plain. And had its Apostles and early Christians, either in their civil
Conversation, or in their Propagation of their Religion been insincere and
false, it had been confined to a narrower compass than now it is, and they
whipped for Vagrants, and mark for Cheats and Impostors. Such are but the little
Spirits, and low Souls, who wanting solid Judgment, and true Prudence, which
are generous and brave, fly to Tricks and Falsehood like other small Animals,
because weak, Nature has supplied with craft. As tho God had so ordered all
Humane Affairs, that our just Interests could not be carried on by the Rules of
Honesty, Plainness, and Uprightness, except we call in Deceit and Fraud to our
assistance. It Is only fit for a bad Cause to be managed by suitable methods,
which as often miss the desired end as attain it, in being as easy to discover
and countermine, as to contrive the Design, which often concludes in Scorn and
Disappointment, all not being Fools, as the man of Tricks intends they should
be. This Temper is most destructive to the ease and quiet of Humane Societies,
which will always be in fits of Jealousies and Suspicions, having heen so often
tricked, they are afraid they embrace a shadow, or anchor upon Quicksands; and
whereas before they were credulous and believed everything, they now believe
nothing; Words have lost their use, Oaths are made common Air; we know not when
our business is at an end; Niceties are infinite, there are still some sly
Quirks, Fetches, and Distinctions behind, which melt the Glue and Cement of
Conversation, and the sacred Bonds of Friendship. Frauds and Flatteries spring
from fear and a servile temper, and many times end ingloriously. The Punick
Faith is more a Brand, then Valor, the Renown of that Ancient Nation. And poor
Regulus's Honesty carries more Fame with it than Caesar's Consulship. And many
times the Doom of an Achitophel, and Herod that Fox, and other Men of tricks,
has been very severe. Like Boniface the 8th, who came in like a Fox, ruled
like a Lion, and died like a Dog. Yet, notwhichstanding all this, fince our
martyr is perished, may we not justly complain, it becoming this mournful Day,
that Faith and Truth are departed from Men? May we not suspect when our great
Master comes again, whether, in this sense, he will find Faith and Uprightness
on Earth? I with King David's times be not our own, if they be, I am sure we
ought to use his Prayer, Psalm. 12. 1, 2. Help, Lord, for the good man cease;
and the faithful fail from among the children of men.

(2.) Goodness expresses it self in the exercise of good Nature, and
Charitable Allowances for the Errors of other. Such is the State and Condition
of the Christian World, that her public Soeieties and private Persons, her
Saints in some degree as well as common Mortals, may be guilty sometimes of a
wilful Offense, often of Frailties, Errors, Surprises, and Miscarriages. The
good Man, like his gentle Master, knowing the sad Circumstances of Humane Life,
our Mold, Frame, and Company, sometimes conceals, always judges heartily,
interprets fairly, and by soft and easy Methods endeavors a cure. The Man of
cesure, of greater Vices, and more ill Nature, spreads and inflames, wrests and
aggravates, and pours in Vinegar instead of Oil to make the Wound easily
curable, desperate and mortal, and advances himself upon the dead Body. Such
Men do not heartily mourn for the want of Virtue and Religion, but are in
wardly pleased that there are mistakes and errors in the World, which afford
them the pleasure of Murmuring and Complaining; and like Beelzebub, that Prince
of Flies, delight in, and feasts upon Wounds and Sores; and are made
serviceable to their Hypocrisy, and Steps to their Interest and Ambition.
Disorders and Abuses which might have been redrest by gentle Treatments and
moderate Prosecuitions, turn into Confusion and Ruin by utmost Rigors and
Severities; which makes Men desperate, and that makes them formidable, and
sometimes prevailing; as tho Justice and Peace, Laws and Liberties, might not
be secured but by Extremity and Cruelty. The good Man knows how to reform, but
not to extirpate, to pardon Crimes that are past, yet to prevent them in time
to come; who is just in the use of Law and Right, but not severe and vexatious,
and like that God above, who by Mercy and Reprieves preserves the Reputation of
his Justice, and governs the sturdy World as well as by utter Destructions and
Executions. And when Men are styled Just in Holy Writ, as Neah, and Foseph,
Cornalius, and Christ himself; their Justice did not consis only in doing no
wrong, and in keeping close to the Law, but in Abatement and Remission of
Ringts and Liberties, in Goodness, Charity, Clemency, and Humanity. And as they
were ready to cover and pardon faults, so never quick and passionate to
upbraid; and therefore we never read when the misunderstanding was between the
two Saints, Peter and Paul, that the one reminded the other of his former
Rersecution of the Church, or St. Paul upbraided St. Peter of his denying of
his Master; or either of them Mary Magdalen with her former Unchastity; 'twas
sufficient to them their Repentance was sincere. But the Authors of this Bloody
Day would give no allowance for the few and small Errors in their Prince, in
the hard Circimstances of his Life and Government, but like that accursed Cain,
took pleasure to discover the Nakedness of a most tender Father of his Country,
yet granted large Patents to themselve to Sin securely by, and made his
Concessions for Peace sake, COnfessions of his Mistakes, and those they made
unpardonable. Men that prerend most to Persection and Infallibility, are many
times guilty of as gross Mistakes and Follies as others, and evermore
ill-natured, as great a fault as any. The good Man makes the best Ruler,
Subject, Neighbor, and Friend, and has most of the Spirit of God, and the
Temper of Jesus in him. And if all the World was wanting of this Goodness, the
Earth would be but Confusion and a Slaughterhouse. Such are the Errors of all
Mankind, necessarily calling for Favor and Charity; yet notwithstanding the
ease of Mankind depends on this good Temper, and it is a principal Branch of our
Religion: The concern of the Prophet may be justly our own, That the righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away;
'twas then a Calamity, Isa, 57.1. and the Language of the Psalmist may fit the
Christian, There is none that does good, no, not one; but adding to the heap
of common Sins, and then exclaiming against them.

(3.) The good Man is of a Spirit truly public, whose happiness is not only to
hug himself, and to be well at home; but his Care and Affection looks abroad;
and his King and Country, his Relatives and Neighbors, are his common concern,
who being placed in those Communities and Bodies, like a compassionate Member,
is sick when the Head does ache; is exposed to danger, when it is unsecure; who
mourns and is poor; who is weak and cast down, when his common Parent or
Fellow-being is distressed and languisheth; who is diligent and active to
preserve the Fame to allay the Fears, to prevent the Dangers of a Kingdom, to
reconcile Divisions and Parties in it, making its Greatness and Safety his own:
Caesar and his Fortunes embarked together in one common Bottom. This is not
only the good Man's Interest and Safety, and therefore is as prudent as he is
good, but it is his Fame and Reputation to be brave and generous, for this gave
the Characters of Renown and Greatness to the Men of Ancient Times, who easily
sacrificed their Pleasures and Fortunes when they came in Conpetition with the
Public Good; who had none of those stingy and mean Principles, to turn Church
and State into a Flame to warm their Hands, or gratify Revenge; who had none of
those low and little Spirits, only to weather the Storm for their own Lives,
and that Peace might be only in their days, tho their ease and softness (like
great Calms portending Storms and Thunder) brought heavier Calamities upon
Posterity, and the Entail was not to be cut off. They did not think the Word,
and all its good things were created solely upon their a account, and were to
center in their little selves, or that they and the World were to dye together.
Let the Wind blow, and let the Ship of Government strike upon a Rock, yet they
have provided a private Plank to swim to Shore. Esther's Beauty will keep her
safe in Ahasuerus's Court, and she need not put her self upon that hazard for
the sake of her Nation, if I perish, I perish; nor idly wish she had been
born in some other Age, when she could have been more securely kind unto her
Country; but probably thought she was born for such a time as this. And Daniel
might have thought that his Gift of unfolding Dreams and Visions, might have
made him great and safe, and he need not run the venture for his Religion, of
the Lyon's Den. These men scorned Ease and Danger, Interest and Pleasure, to
serve their Generation, and King, and Country, Laws and Religion, withoutmaking
them terms of Division and Peevishness, were Father and Mother, Sister and
Brother, and their dear Selves too. These things indeed are written for our
Example, upon whom the ends of the World are come; but alas, the Apostle tells
us, Men should then be levers of themselves. There are not now so many Jehu's
left, Come, see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts; except we call Pride and
Ambition two mighty Virtues. And where is the Lot now, that is vexed with the
unclean Conversation of the wicked? The Psalmist is long since dead, and few
eyes like his gush out with tears, because men keep not his Laws. Disobedience
to them, and Vice, being counted only natural Freedoms and lawful Liberties.
Poor Uriah is slain, and will not rise again in this Age; the Ark, and Israel,
and Judah, abide in Tents, and shall I go down to my House to eat and drink?
And it is the Scandal of Religion, that having so good a Master, who went about
doing good, and made the benefit of Mankind, who so little deserved it, his
proper Business; that there should be so many Workers of Iniquity found among
his Disciples. Had this narrow Principle governed our Martyr, he had reigned
longer, and gone later to Heaven; or had it prevailed in our Forefathers, who
planted and toiled for their Posterity, Hospitals and Public Buildings, Arts
and useful Employment, had been as rare as good Men; and the present Age would
have had less Plenty and more Labor, and exposed like the Ostrich's Egg; and
instead of Statues and Monuments erected to them, they would have had Anger and
Reproach, and all Generations should have called them Evil.

(4.) The good Man takes up Religion only to serve a spiritual Purpose. He
looks into the other World, and firmly concludes, doubtless there is a God,
doubtlest there is a Reward for the Righteous; he reflects upon himself in
this, and finds, he is not yet fitted and pre-qualify'd for that Divine State;
he therefore enters into Religion to serve these two mighty ends; every day to
confirm his Faith about the Being of God, the Immortality of the Soul, the day
of Account and Retribution, to believe whatever Christ has promised or
discovered; and certainly thinks these things in Religion are very true. This
Persuasion makes him depending upon, and resign to God; quiets his Actions,
expels his Fears, supports his Hopes, makes him more humble and charitable,
just and true; keeps him in a continual Sense and Reverence of God, and in
universal Love with all Mankind. This is truly a good Man, whose Religion is
pure and undefiled, and carries a respect only to another World. All other
Religion without this good Purpose, is only Fashion or Faction, Hypocrisy and
Formality, Superstition or Interest, whereby he honors and serves only
himself, but disgraces his God. Such Men have made Religion, this or that, so
various, that you may as well define the thing that Men call Wit, as what
Religion means. Sometimes it is Temper, changeable by Weather and Company;
sometimes it is Discontent arising from Disappointment of one Party, and now the
Man is resolved to strike in with another; sometimes it is Design; and Creed,
Sacraments, and Prayers, are good Engines and Trains to gain it. As tho the Son
of God came with all the greatness of his Miracles, and suffered all those
Sorrows and Indignities upon Earth, only to set up a new Model of Government,
to erect some new Schemes of Trade; and the great Contention should be, whether
the Monopoly of it should be at Rome; or elsewhere; and in the modern Phrase, a
rich and a thriving Man should be called a good Man. For Religion without real
Goodness, is Scene and Pageantry, Noise and Humor, and any thing but what it
pretends to be. Without plain Obedience to the Laws of God and Reformation of
Manners, Religion is but Flattery and Bribes for Divine Justice. To seem to be
Religious, and not to bridle our Tongues; to pretend to Faith, and show no good
Works; to boast of the Spirit of Christ, without his Temper, the Love of God,
without Duty and Submission; and to be a Christian, and yet without Virtue, is
a Contradiction, and in effect is to be called Good without Goodness, or
Christians without Christianity. For if you look to the Laws and Design of
Christ, his Example and Miracles in Confirmation of it, the whole Constitution
and Frame of his Religion, you will find it only this, to make Men better here,
and to save them hereafter, and so essential to Christianity, that you may as
soon call a Man, a Man, without Spirit or Soul; or the Hypocrites Trumpet, a
Victory, as men Religious without Honesty and Goodness; and Prayers and
Sacraments, Temples and Altars, and all the Externals of Religion, Minister
unto that great Design; and the discovery of Christ, called our Creeds, are not
to tell us fine Notions and Curiosities about God and that other State, but to
influence our Lives, and give us good Hopes of Heaven. Here our Religion
Centers, and this alone will do us good. To hear Men talk loudly, and dispute
angerly about Religion, and yet want Goodness, is equal to the folly of
quarrelling about the Possessions of the Moon; they worship, and are warm about
they know not what; something that will not belong to them; to fight for that
which they intend never to use, that is to say, to correct their Follies and
Lewdness; it is to expose their Quiet and Lives sor Riddles, and the unknown
Land. And without this great end, Men may as well lay aside the Profession of
it, and give themselves, and the World less Trouble, and there would be less
Censures and Rigors in the World. For let us deal impartially with our selves,
and others, Who were the Causes of this Bloody Fact, and yet most unjustly
charged Popery upon our Martyr; Whose is the best Religion? his, who fetches a
Dispensation for his Vice from Rome: Or his, who gives himself a License to
Sin? His, who condemns the Half Communion? Or he that never receives at all,
except it be for an Office or a Vote. His, who believes the Pains of Purgatory?
Or his, who laughs at that Doctrine, yet lives as tho there was neither
Purgatory nor Hell, but painted Fires in both. The Consistory is not more Holy
than the Conclave, if the same Vices be in both; there is little difference
between him that shall take away one of the commands, and him that shall
constantly break another. The Doctrines of the Church of Rome naturally lead to
Vice, the worst Religion in the Christian World, because they do so; and the
Constitution of our own directly leads to Virtue, one of the best Notes to know
the best Church by. Yet if our Lives be equally wicked, it is no great matter
who is in the purest Church. It Is fit that the best constituted Church in the
whole World, such is this of the Church of England, should have the best Men in
it; and all its Members may be so if they please, and seek for no other, but
gracing it with works of Goodness and Discipline, are themselves an honest and
upright Conversation. This is the good Man we want so much, this is the
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. This is a true Disciple of Christ, and
such that are so minded, there will be Peace upon them, and the whole Israel of
God.

(2.) What grew up and prevailed in the Prophet's time, in the place of true
Religion or Goodness.

(1.) Superstition and false Religion, which naturally produces trouble and
disquiet in all Governments. Worthy Conceptions of God and Christ, and
Obedience to his plain Laws, are so far from clashing with Authority, that they
give it greater strength and value; Obedience in such a Religion being a mighty
Duty. But Superstition, which entertains such course Notions of God, making him
False and Cruel, Peevish and Humoursome, Sour and Uncertain; makes its
Disciples of the same Temper, thinking it excellent Religion to imitate such a
God, which must necessarily disturb Societies, and be troublesome to all
Mankind. What strange Subjects, Neigbours, and Friends must those be, who are
always sullen and melancholy, fearful and discontented; these cannot but weaken
and allay the pleasure and safety of Neighbourhoods and Communities? Let us
draw the black Catalogue of all the Cruelties and Butcheries, Confusions and
Ruins, that have betided the World, and you shall find most of them owing their
Original to Superstition of false Religion; it being the nature of these two,
to call Humor and Flesh, Interest or Fashion, Design or Education, Cloudy-days
and Ambition, and the like, the working of the Spirit, the Church of God,
Decrees of Heaven, Christian Liberty, Fundamentals of Religion, and Conditions
of Salvation. And if they fancy these to be opposed and totter, Violence and
Fraud, Blood and Disorder, must all club together for their Support and
Reputation. Superstition and blind Zeal, like AEneas with his Father and his
false gods upon his Back; and Sampson with his Eyes put out, will pass through
Flames, and pull the Government about their Ears, and make a Common Grave for
themselves and Enemies. And all the dear Relations of Prince and Subjects,
Friends and Allies, (which tie Mankind together) have been snapt in sunder,
when Superstition has been in its raving fits and freaks; witness the Valley
of Hinnom, the Romish Massacres, and this mournful Day. The Prophet had reason
to cry out, Woe is me, when he saw Religion dwindle into Superstition, and no
real Goodness left. He could not but foresee how this would affect the civil
Part of Jerusalem; and when the Temple was made a den of Thieves instead of
Israelites indeed, there would be violence and complaining in the Street; so
necessary a Connection there is between Peace and true Religion, and Disorders
and Superstition. For when once true Religion is hair'd and frighted out of its
Wits, it grows giddy and foams, is quarrelsome and clamorous, and calls every
thing Christianity, but what really is so, Faith upon God, and Universal
Charity. These two Essential Parts, the Soul and Body of Religion, make Men
meek and peaceable, goodnatur'd and obliging, which are fruits of the Spirit,
and the great Pleasure and Security of Kingdoms and Conversation. And whereas
Christianity is first pure, and then peaceable; Superstition, which wears its
Colors, is earthly and vexatious, made up of whimsy and vapor, is contentious
and fierce, implacable and revengeful, enough to make the compassionate Prophet
use this Exclamation, when true Goodness was gone out of the World, and only
Superstition left, Woe is me.

(2.) Wicked Lives in the Professors of the true Religion, which will certainly
cause Misery and Ruin in a Nation, which so comes to pass, not only by Divine
Decrees passing Sentence upon a wicked and profligate People, but from the
natural tendency of Vice, which is as much the direct Cause of Misery, as
Poison is of Death. We curiously inquire and ask the question, why the Strength
and Reputation, the Riches and Courage of a Nation are gone? And we ascribe it
either to the hand of Providence, determining the Fates and Periods of
Kingdoms, the Influences of the Heavens, or such more secret Causes; or we
answer as our present Fancy, Peevishness, or Faction do suggest; but forget the
nature of Vice and Wickedness, which do as fatally destroy, as the Devil and the
Stars, the Sword and Enemy, and in Conjunction. Secret Fires and a raging
Pestilence, the Blasts of Heaven, and unexpected Defeats, are many times sent
by the invisible Hand of Providence, by the just Provocation of our Follies;
yet as ill Effects as they, are conceived in the natural Womb of Vice. The
genuine Issue of Pride and Lust, Ambition and Revenge, Idleness and Injustice,
and other Vices, are so deformed and monstrous, that they would create an
horror to describe and view them. From whence come Wars, but from your. Lusts?
St. James does hint to us to ask the questions a little further, From whence
generally come Poverty and Contempt, weak Bodies and weaker Heads, Divisions
and Treacheries, Cowardice and Meanness, and other sad effects, but from the
Spawn of Vice, it robbing Subjects of that just Temper and Qualification, which
alone make a Kingdom to flourish. And if we look back upon the Calamities of
all Ages past, the Miseries and Troubles that now vex the present, you will
find the chief Spring and Original, to be profane and vicious Living. Real
Goodness and Religion being Prudence and true Policy, Strength and Courage, and
every thing that gives Luster and Security to a Nation And when the Wise and
Ingenious have drawn their Schemes and Projects for advance of Trade and Power,
the Honor and Interest of a Nation, they always supposed Virtue and Religion
to be the first step; otherwise they began at the wrong end. And what can we
expect from the Justice of God, (if we be real Christian, as we pretend to be)
but that if we profane his Temple, he will blast our Vineyards. And it has
been looked upon by all wise and good Men, as sure a sign, as a Voice in the
Jewish Temple, Let us be gone; and more certain than a blazing Comet, or a
monstrous Birth, that the ruins of Kingdoms and Families then drew on, when
Religion by ill living was contemned, and no real Goodness left. And therefore
when the Historian describes the Causes of the Destruction of our Ancient
Britains, he tells us, They were Proud and Luxurious, haters of a plain Truth,
and lovers of an handsome Lie, and indifferently concerned for what pleased or
displeased God; and then concludes, Non igitur mirandum est tales degeneres
parriam suam a mittere quam predicto modo maculabant. It Is no wonder that such
degenerate Britains, who nothing of their brave Ancestors in them, but their
Name, should lose that Country which they defiled in such a manner, and now
spued them out. Our Prophet therefore seeing Vice to thrive, and grow fashio
able; and some Sins to be esteemed good Breeding and Education, it is no wonder
he cries out, Woe is me, as tho from his Tower he saw Armies and the Plague,
Wild Beasts and Inundations to invade and destroy the Land. So dismal are the
fruits of Vice, or want of real Goodness.

( Lastly,) Atheistical Persuasions prevailed, or there was no Religion at all.
As Vice naturally leads ot Atheism, and Superstition often concludes in it, so
Atheism is very kind to Vice again, and often ends in Superstition; such dear
Relations are these three to one another; and such a circle do men make when
once they are giddy, and out of the way of this substantial Religion. And what
greater Calamity can betide Mankind than a contempt of Providence, and that
folly, to imagine that there is not a Being we call a God; but that all things
tumble up and down in great uncertainty and darkness; and the thing we worship
is only a Creature of Fear and Custom, Policy or Fiction: Government and
Friendship, Relations and Trust, and other great things which make Mankind
happy, have lost their vital Spirits, because Reverence of a God, checks of
Conscience, and the hopes and fears of Rewards and Punishments in the other
World are gone. And public Laws are too scanty to recompense the loss of real
Goodness and Religion; and Fame and Honor to keep Men in due Bounds, will
prove but airy things, when respect to God and Virtue is laid aside. The Man of
Revenge may assassinate his Neighbor, if it can be but a work of darkness,
with security; and may defraud and cozen, if by Privacy and Art he can keep his
Fame and Reputation; he fears no Punishment in the other World for all this
Villainy, and it is his safe Interest and Pleasure in this. It Is the Imperfection
of Humane Societies in making Laws not to be able to reach many private Sins,
and such is the skill of men to baffle the plainest Laws; if there was not the
dread of an higher Hand, Laws would lose their Edge, and Mankind would be in a
state of War. For tho the force of Religion does not prevail upon every Man,
yet it does upon many; upon most in some degree, and is apt and fit to gain
upon all. And therefore Men of Contrivance and Policy, if themselves had no
real Persuasion of Religion, yet ever thought it necessary to infuse the belief
of it into those they had to manage; supposing that all other Methods to rule
the World, were only Formalities and Entreaties. And it is plain, what they acted
upon the account of Statecraft, is really so. A Land without Religion, is a
World without a Sun, producing Horror and Confusion, and the Prophets Woe. And
the belief of a God Without real Goodness, is to say, there is no God at all.

(3.) What particular Reasons may move us to bewail the want of real Goodness.

(1.) The want of it is the principal Cause of our Distractions about Religion.
Men of Wisdom and Sobriety cannot but be pleased to have the methods of
Salvation plain, and the Characters easy, whereby they may judge, whether they
shall be saved or no; but it sometimes happens that good Men live and walk,
where different ways are chalked out, and several Voices are heard to say, Lo
here, and lo there lies the road to Jerusalem; their Opinions are numerous,
their Arguings warm, their Censures severe, every one pretending Heaven and
true Religion is only with them. How must the good Man carry himself here, when
his Birth, Privacy, Employment, and other Circumstances of Life will not permit
him to consider and conclude, who has the greatest truth on his side. The only
Gound among these Quicksands, Waves, and Winds, variety of Opinions as ill as
they, to anchor on, is real Goodness, This being the best evidence that our
Faith is true, our Spirit Divine, Decrers irreversible, the great preparative
to Heaven, to which all other parts in Religion do minister, in which most
Persuasions (tho sometimes they mistake the means to it) do agree, most
suitable to natural Reason; the design of Christ's coming, and the solemn end
of all Religion. If this good Man mistakes, yet so long as his Error touches
not upon the great Article of Faith, nor Goodness, he has a merciful
High Priest at God's right hand, who will accept his Sacrifice, and pardon the
blemish of it. He is safe and secure, and is a Israclite indeed, tho he has
not the Phylacteries and Fringes of a nicer Rabbi; tho he cannot call over all
the Points of the Compass, and understand all the Sailer's terms, yet he is in
the Channel to Sion, not having made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.
And tho this Church of England, which our Martyr so heartily defended with his
Pen and his Blood, be charged by some with Heresy, and others with Superstition
and Secular Interest, yet being sure that her Faith is Primitive, her
Discipline, Ceremonies, Collects, Homilles, and whole Constitution, are modeled
for, and directly lead to a good Conversation, we may fix in her, and not grow
giddy by turning round in all Religions. Nothing giving more satisfaction to
the Mind in a divided Age, that we shall not miscarry in our hopes of Heaven,
that when our purposes in Religion are honest, to make us better Men than the
common Lump and Mass of Mankind; that we are now designing only to be good, and
to have our Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

(2) Real Goodness is the best way to unite us among our selves. Religion upon
any other account than the hopes of Heaven above, and real Goodness below, is
changeable; being only Fashion, Interest, or Humor, which will dwindle into as
many Divisions as there are in the World. Religion that aims not at Goodness,
is nice and clamorous, worldly and uncertain, which naturally produce Factions
and Dissentions. Religion or Wisdom from above is gentle and easy to be
entreated, plain and substantial, which easily beget Unity and Charity, great
parts of Christianity, and as great Blessings of Mankind. Real Goodness purges
our Judgment, removes our Prejudices; then we easily discern what is Notion,
and Opinion, and Speculation, and what is solid and practical Truth; what is
probable, and what is plain, what may be parred with for peace-sake, and what
is to be retained; what is Soul and and Heaven, and what is Flesh and Blood.
The great occasion of Differences that have vexed the Christian World, and been
its Scandal, has sprung from the Ambition and Peevishness, idle Disputes,
Contests of Power and Gain. For tho must in their religious Heats pretend Faith
and Goodness, and entitle other things with those excellent Na^es, yet they
confute themselves in the Prosecution of them, being guily of Cruelty,
Hypocrisy, and falsehood, things directly contrary to the Christian faith. They
kill Jesus, to save Christ; disgrace Religion, in so maintaining of it. And
would Men be in earnest in this pretense, the great Contentions would draw to
an end. For let us but leave things controverted and dark to the Schools; for
Discipline, Order, and things of indifferency submit to the Wisdom of our
Governors; and let not Factories and Changes mix with our Churches, and call
Interest Christianity, and strip our selves of Passion and hopes of Victory;
there would be only left Faith and a good Life, necessary to Salvation; such as
Christ and his Apostles taught, the Primitive Christians practiced, and were
saved by, plain and manifest to all. And then the only Contention would be
Honest and truly Christian, who should be the best Men; and some men's Zeal
would therefore cool, the flaming Bigot not always having this good design, to
receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, in simplicity and goodness to
grow thereby. It being easy to observe, that an Age full of Contention about
Religion was not always the best; and when the Church, as in the first Three
hundred years was truly good, it had most Unity within its Pale. Vice directly
stirring up Wars and Feuds, and Virtue Peace and Love; and to reform men's
Lives, is the best method to bring them into truth; and if our Conversation be
in Heaven, we shall be exercising and singing Peace of Earth, Duty to our King,
Good will to all men; the short and easy Method to bring us to the place where
the Sold of our Blessed Martyr dwells, that with him, and the Spirits of Just
Men made perfect, we may sing Praises and Hallelujahs to the Lamb, and him that
sits upon the Throne, blessed for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Sermon preached before the King, at His Majesty's Chapel in Windso-Castle,
November 10. 1695. By Gregory Hascard, D. D. Dean of Windsor, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty. Published by his Majesty's Speci^l Command Printed for
Daniel Brown, at the Bible and Swan without Temple Bar.


