A DISCOURSE OF THE Plague.

Containing The Nature, Causes, Signs, and Presages of the Pestilence in
general.

Together with the state of the present Contagion.

Also most rational Preservatives for Families, and choice Curative Medicines
both for Rich and Poor.

With several ways for purifying the air in houses, streets, etc.

Published for the benefit of this Great City of London, and Suburbs,

By Gideon Harvey M.D.

printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange* 1665.

Advice against the Plague.
The Preface.
PHysicians can never discharge their Duty with greater Applause, than by
contributing their aid to popular Diseases, which at this season is the prime
movent of these Meditations. I might justly vacate from this task, having so
lately amused my self about a Tract of the French Contagion; but since doing a
thing opportunely is twice doing, renders me more willing to Oblige the World
with a Proposal of my sentiment upon this accruing Pest, and advice of
Preservatives, Curatives, and Extinguishers of what ever Pestilent seminaries
might be conceived in the Air.

Distinction I. Comparisons of Plagues.
PLagues do ordinarily survene great Inundations, Stinks of Rivers, unburied
Carcases, Mortality of Cattle, Withering of Trees, Extinction of Plants, an
extraordinary multiplication of Froggs, Toads, Mice, Flies, or other Insects
and Reptils, a moist and moderate Winter, a warm and ^ moist Spring and Summer,
fiery Meteors, as falling Stars, Comets, fiery Pillars, Lightnings, etc. A
ready putrefaction of Meats, speedy Moulding of Bread, briefness of the Small
Pox and Measles, etc. Hence it may appear somewhat strange this Pest should
visit us upon such disguised Forerunners, at other times consequents and signs
of a late extinct Pestilence, yea potent Causes in amortising that Contagion,
viz. a preceding rude, cold and dry Winter and Spring, a dry Summer, no
appearance of fiery Meteors, except those Comets of the last Winter, which
seemed not to be imminent over this Region, or to direct their rays hither:
Meats retaining their usual sweetness as at other seasons, the Measles or Small
Pox less Predominant than in other years, no Inundations, no stincks of Air, no
extraordinary increase of Reptils or Insects, etc.

Distinction II. The Nature of the Plague.
THe Plague is a most Malignant and Contagious Fever, caused through
Pestilential Miasms, insinuating into the humoral and consistent parts of the
Body; first speedily putrefying, then corrupting the fluors, afterward the
solid parts, whereupon a great ebullition or fermentation ensuing between the
Venene Corpuscles and the Vital Spirits, causes that sense of burning heat and
dryness, etc.

Distinction III. Signs of the Plague.
THe highest pitch or degrees of Malignity and Contagion accompanying a Fever,
are the essential properties, that distinguish the Plague from all other
Diseases; so that where we find a Fever is most Malign and most Contagious,
there we are not to doubt of the birth of a Plague.

That the said Pestilence is a most Malign and Contagious Fever, is evidenced
by these signatures; particularly that superlative degree of Malignity is known
by an universal Lassitude, or Subitous soreness of all ones Limbs, as if
bruised or beaten; sometimes a Diary Fever, but immediately changing into a
putrid, and that soon after into a most Malign Fever; or a Putrid Fever at
first, suddenly accrescing to a most Malign or Pestilent Fever; or a most
Malign Fever at the first attaque, a great burning heat within and without,
sometimes the heat is moderate or scarce sensible without, but within melting
and burning; other times the heat is not very intense either without or within,
continual vigilies, or a perpetual restlesness, with anguishing jactitations,
or throwing ones self from one part of the bed to the other; a raging pain of
the Head, a sudden and raving Frenzy; a loss of appetite, with a loathing of
all Victuals, an insatiable drought, frequent and anguishing Vomitings; a
Dysentery or griping Looseness in some, in others a Costiveness. The Pulses
beat according to the nature of the Pestilence, viz. in a Pestilent Diary great
and quick; in a putrid Pest inequal in motion and strength, but quick; in a
Malign Pestilent Fever, thick, low; languid, inequal in motion and strength,
quavering and intercident. The Urine varies likewise accordingly: and observe
that both Urine and Pulses are very fallacious in Pestilentials, many expiring
after strong Pulses and good Urines. Spots and Blotches of several colors and
figures straggling over the Body; some are red like fleabits, but livid about;
others yellow, livid, or black. A pricking of the entire skin, as if stung with
Nettles: Risings like blisters, or small tumors and pushes, some red, others
yellow or blackish: Carbuncles, or red, purple or blackish Boyls or
inflammations about the groin, under the ears or armpits, which if they break,
contain a black crust or coal within them.

The single presence of these Signs are no certain Diagnosticks or
Determinations of a Plague, unless the said Fever prove Infectious, as two or
three dying in one house, or several in a Neighborhood, of one and the same
kind of Fever, is no small argument.

Distinction IV. Causes of a Pestilent Fever or Plague.
DIseases are caused through some innate, or adventitious weakness of the
Intrails; or vitiate quality and effect of some or all the Non-naturals, viz.
victuals and drink, air, passions, etc. or by reason of some external errors,
or intemperance, or ill government in the use of the said Non-naturals; or
mischances, as falls, poisons, etc.

The first sort of these Causes evades all suspicion, since strong Bodies and
the best Complexions are equally exposed to the said Contagion with the worst.
Neither is the second accusable, most persons varying in the use and election
of all the Non-naturals, except the air, which all Inhabitants of a City or
Country seeming to inspire alike or in common, must likewise be the occasion of
a common Disease.

The air to be capable of engendring a venomous and malign Disease, must be
first venenated or rendered poisonous it self, for if distempered only generates
no other than hot or cold, dry or moist Distempers: But 1. What this venom is?
2. Where out? 3. Through what? 4. Whence this venenosity in the air arrives?
are intricate Queries, that merit studious Solutions.

What is this Pestilential venom? Pestilential symptoms declare nothing a
proportionate efficient of their effrajable and miscreant nature, but Arsenical
fumes, which imitating the nature of Arsenick, result into a most pernicious
poison; for Arsenick ingested within the Body in a course thick substance,
immediately effects enormous Vomits, Dysenteries, burning Fevers, raging
Headaches, etc. Much more such subtle Arsenical fumes, that aggress the Body
from all parts.

Where or in what place are the said Arsenical fumes generated? The Earth can
only be supposed the Womb of such venene fumes, which imbibing all sorts of
stinking or putrid Bodies, embraces them within her close recesses, coagulates
and kindles them into Pestilential Arsenical flames; so that all manner of
stinks or rotten Bodies expiring into the air, are returned by moderate Rains,
and so sucked in by the Earth; likewise all filth and dirt thrown into standing
Waters, Pools, Sinks, Gutters, or Ditches, are also imbibed by the Earth, or by
its clammy mud, and there coagulated into venene Miasms. Whence its apparent
that nastiness and filth of Kitchins, and several nasty Trades, as
Tallow-Chandlers, Butchers, Poulterers, Fishmongers, Dyers, etc. neglect of
cleansing Gutters, Sinks or Ditches, ^a^^ng the Streets, burying the dead,
removing Carrions and dead Carcases, are great occasions of a Plague.

Further observe, that to the production of Pestilential atoms, the concurrence
of these conditions is requisite: 1. That those Pestilential fumes be first
embryonately or preparatively formed in a close thick or standing air, (that is
not much ventilated) and close places, viz. by harboring great quantities of
stinks and corruptions, and returning them to the earth or mud of standing
Waters, Ditches, Gutters, or dirt of the streets, to be coagulated into venene
fumes, which stinks participating of a sulphurous inflamable nature, do soon
kindle and are converted into flaming atoms, by being coagulated in close
places, as the pores of the earth or mud. 2. A want of great showers of Rain,
which otherwise would prevent a Pestilence, by washing away all stinks and mud,
clear the Gutters and Sinks, cool the Earth, and extinguish those late
concepted venoms. 3. Small Rains to open the pores of the Earth, and to
conveigh those corruptions in the air into her bosom. 4. A dry and hot season
following the moist, whereby the mud of the earth is seared up, and the
foresaid malign coagulations are kindled into flaming atoms. 5. The said
Arsenical bodies being now coagulated and kindled into flaming atoms, require
either a very dry and warm, or subtiliating air, to melt and open the surface
of the Earth, for to disincarcerate the said venene bodies, or to attract and
evocate them thence: Or small Rains to unglue and relax the earth to give vent
to the inflamed atoms. 6. These expiring require a thick and dull air to
support, preserve and feed them, otherwise if subtle and thin, they would soon
be amortised, dissolved, or expelled by the thin quick and moveable air.

But since Plagues often reign in places where the air seems clear, and freed
from all stinks or corruptions, its an argument, there must be some other sort
of pestiferous matter, viz. Mineral arsenical fumes, engendered within the
bowels of the Earth; for its probable, the Earth being an universal Parent of
various mixed bodies, as Vegetables, Stones, and Minerals, must necessarily
abound with excrements, that are sequestered from all those Bodies she concocts,
and remain unapt of being converted into them, which she expels to the surface,
and thence into the air; But if it happens the Pores of the surface should be
constipated, and occasion a preternatural retention of the said excrements,
probably the more sulphurous parts of them do putrefie and inflame, in the same
manner of retained excrementitious humors within the Microcosm, and so assume
a venene nature, which expiring infect and venenate the air. The Earth may also
happen to be constipated upon great Frosts, and so we see many Plagues derive
their original from a rude Winter, or by great Rains converting her surface
into a tough thick mud.

Distinction V. How the said Venenosities cause the Plague.
THe said flaming Arsenical corpuscles floating in the air, are attracted into
the Body, by Inspiration through the Lungs and Nostrils; or otherwise they
pierce through ones clothes, and so penetrate into the pores of the entire
Body. The said Miasms entering the Body are not so Energick as to venenate the
entire mass of blood in an instant, (for in that case no preservatives would
avail, and any Person that had but inspired the least breath of contagious air
would be struck with death immediately) but by degrees, gradually corrupting the
blood, and converting its parts into bodies of their own nature. The blood
being afterward rendered so turgid with a daily access of new Pestilential
atoms from without, and increase of others within, Nature finds her self
incapable of resisting any longer, and yields; whereupon the concepted fiery
atoms unite, and excite a Pestilential fermentation, the genuine cause of all
those ensuing symptoms. Vid. Venus Unmaskt, Par. 81.

Distinction VI. Whence the Durability and great Contagion of the Pest.
WE cannot rationally imagine, that the Earth should be so turgid, as to
supply the air with such quantities of Pestilential fumes, as to protract a
Pestilence to a Year or two: Wherefore its very probable, those flaming
malignities obtain a power of kindling and converting other sulphurous
exhalations the air is at such times filled with, into Pestilent atoms; you may
read more of this in my Venereal Discovery, Art. 6. Par. 25. The cause of their
duration we ascribe to their analogick animation and nutrition, or attraction
of fuel; But upon this I have already discoursed at large in Venus Unmaskt,
Art. 19. Par 95.

Distinction VII. Why are some Bodies more exposed to the Contagion than others?
BEcause of their passive disposition of Body and Humors to receive the
Infection, and of being vitiated by it; to wit, by foulness of their bodies,
abundance of blood, oppression of the Spirits, aperture of their pores,
thinness of texture of body, intemperance, promiscuous converse with all sorts
of people, whence the contagion often lights in Taverns, Alehouses, etc.

Whence is it the Plague is so scattering at present? Because Pestilent
Seminaries chance to expire and be kindled in several places.

Distinction VIII. Why does the Plague haunt one place more than another?
BEcause one place is closer, nastier, and more putrid than others, by being
environed with ditches, stinking gutters, and sinks; houses built upon a clay
and foggy ground are more subject to conceive pestilent Seminaries. Lastly,
some sorts of earth being more sulphurous than others, are more disposed to
expire venenous fumes.

Distinction IX. How is the Pestilent Contagion propagated?
TWo ways: Immediately, by conversing with infected persons; or Mediately, by
Pestilent Seminaries, propagated through the air by continuation; or by those
dense bodies, that easily incarcerate the infected air, as woollen clothes,
beds, furniture, in which the Contagion may be preserved several years, as
Fracastorius relates.

Distinction X. The state of this present Plague.
THis Contagion might have been presaged upon consideration of its precursors,
viz. a rude Winter, want of great showers of rain, a thick, close, sulphurous,
and fiery air, stinks of ditches, and neglect of cleansing the gutters, sinks,
and paring the streets. Whence we may collect, this Pestilence derives from
expiring Mineral and adventitious Arsenical exhalations. The differences of
Plagues are specified by the degree, qualification, or modus substantiae of the
Pestilent Seminaries, which according to their grosseness or subtility,
activity, or hebetude, cause more or less truculent plagues, some partaking of
such a pernicious degree of malignity, that in the manner of a most
presentaneous poison, they enecate in two or three hours, suddenly corrupting
or extinguishing the vital spirits; others at their first appulse excite a
Per-per-acute malign Fever; and some begin with a putrid fever, swiftly
changing into a malign one, which nature this present Pest seems to have
assumed, gradually encroaching upon us, as we have already expressed.

The Pestilence, in respect of its Seminaries, peragrates the four ordinary
times: to wit, first, the Commencement, when those fiery Miasms are but newly
kindled, and begin to expire into the air, and but few dye. Secondly, The
Augment, when the said pestilent exhalations exhale in greater quantities, and
kindle other Seminaries in the air. Thirdly, The state, when they burst out in
a full stream, and have kindled most part of the fiery contents of the air, at
which time people dye thickest, and fewest escape. Fourthly, The Declination,
when they begin to be extinguished, and the number of burials decreases.

Distinction XI. Prognostics of the Plague.
THis Pestilence, balancing the qualification of its causes and precursors,
with the number of the infected, (which, considering the numerosity of the
people, are but few,) and the degree of its malignity (specifying a milder sort
of Plague;) portends no great mortality. At present it is in the Augment, and
likely to attain to a state about the latter end of August or September,
according to observations of preceding Plagues that have began at the same time
and season.

Note, that most exitial fevers, although not concomitated with the Tokens, (
Exan^hemata,) Anthraces, or Carbuncles, are to be censured pestilential, and
contagious; and therefore, although such houses are not shut up, it is every
ones concernment to forbear making visits to any persons supposed to be
dangerously ill.

Strong bodies, and good complexions, that have been temperate in their Diet,
kept their bodies clean, and used Preservatives for a considerable time, are
likely to escape, if they should be surprised in the Augment.

Distinction XII. The Preservative Cure.
THe Preservative part seems the best, easiest, and surest cure of the Plague,
for if once attaqued, it is great odds whether you escape, and therefore shall
principally incline my endeavors to propose the best and most certain
Preservatives.

We have illustrated to you, this Plague works upon us gradually by vitiating
and corrupting our humors through the malign air, against which we are to
preserve our bodies and humors in their natural state, and defend our selves
against the injuries of the air.

1. Our bodies and humors are best preserved by feeding moderately upon meats
of easy digesture, and of a dry temperature, as Mutton, Veal, Hens, Capons,
etc. but dry roasted. By being temperate in drink, avoiding French Wines, Sack,
Strong Alc, and especially musty Beer. Coffee is commended against the
Contagion; likewise moderate exercise; be sure to prevent costiveness, and
violent passions; Sleep moderately, and after you are up uncover your bed, and
open the curtains to air it, and have the bed well shaken when it is made; for
damps are very dangerous.

Abstain from all moist victuals, as fish, and moist fruits, especially from
Cowcumbers, Lettuce, Spinnage, Plumbs, Peaches, etc. Oranges and Lemmons are
judged very good against Infection; likewise Vinegar.

To go forth with an empty or hungry stomach is unwholsom, because the spirits
tending from the circumference to the stomach and intrails to attract
nutriment, their deserted vacuities in the extremities are filled up with the
infectious air.

The best breakfast against the Contagion is Bisquit and Raisins.

2. Plethory or abundance of blood oppressing the spirits, that are already
engaged by the malign air, oppugning them from without, is very apt to
putrefie, and to be converted into malignity: and therefore Phlebotomy or
opening a vein is of absolute necessity, whereby the vessels are rendered more
loose and free for the spirits to work in.

3. Likewise foulness of body, or excrementitious humors lodging in hidden
recesses, being disposed to putrefaction, and oppressing the spirits, ought to
be exquisitely purged away.

4. These internal disorders or apparent intestine hostilities being thus
prevented, you are to provide against the injuries of the venene air, which
assaults us two ways: 1. Through the nostrils and lungs by Inspiration. 2.
Through the pores of the body, especially where the skin is thinnest, and the
Arteries most detected, (for the vital spirits seem to attract the air potently
through the Arteries,) as about the wrists, temples, Jugulars, groin, and under
the arm pits. The Indicata relating to those Indicantia are: 1. Perfumes to
smell to, correcting and purifying the air before it is attracted by the Lungs,
or rather antipestilential unguents and oils to anoint the nostrils with; for
it is tedious to be always obliged to hold a perfume to ones nose; besides, I
observe most people that carry those perfumed boxes about with them, imagine
them sufficient preservatories, as if the Infection were only taken by
inspiration through the Nostrils; but that is a great mistake, since the
Contagion does more ordinarily penetrate into the body through the pores of the
Arteries. 2. Lavatories to wash the temples, hands, wrists, and Jugulars, do
potently profligate and keep off the venom: But I should rather advise
Antipestilential Emplasters to be applied to the wrists, temples, groin, and
armpits, which is a most excellent and commodious way of preserving, because
those Lavatories are easily dried up.

3. Since it is impossible, that those that are encompassed with a pestilential
air can so preserve themselves, but at one time or other the Contagion will
enter into this or that part, it is advisable we should continually fortify
our spirits with internal Antidotes, to expel those Venenosities, as fast as
they crowd in. The Antidotes ought to be so qualified as in a single Doss to
retain the blood in a continual mild fermentation for 24 hours, (known by a
small glowing of the body and extremities,) whereby the insidiating corpuscles
are expulsed, and the advenient ones kept off: and such are only gross
Diaphoreticks given in substance, that scarce exhale out of the body in less
time than a natural day. Hence appears the vulgar vanity, reposing an indubious
confidence in a spoonful or two of those ordinary Antipestilential spirits, (as
that of Sir Walter Rawleigh, the Lord Bacon, Mithridate, Treacle, and a
thousand more, that are composed out of the same sudorifick ingredients) which
because of their subtle parts and exiguous Dose, are consumed and evaporated in
less than two hours time, and so the body is deserted without defense for the
remainder of the day; besides they are apt to inflame the body, enrage the
Gall, and engender pernicious humors. Neither, as we may universally observe,
is the Plague more shie in attaquing those that are armed with the said
Antipestilentials, than others that slight all Preservatives.

But the greatest levity and imprudence is, that people should so
preposterously addict themselves to tippling of the fore-instanced spirits,
which encountering with foul bodies, and Plethories, and exciting a fermentation
of those vitiate humors, must necessarily precipitate them into putrid and
malign Fevers, especially where the air is so propitious for them. Moreover,
they must also cause obstructions and constipations, by dissipating and
absorbing the subtiler parts of the fluors, and leaving the courser behind.
Now, to evidence the necessity of Phlebotomy and Catharticks; the long rude
Winter and cold Spring occasioning great appetites have extremely provoked
people to gourmandizing and debauchery, whence bodies result Plethorick, and
Cacochymick, add thereunto the vitiate disposition of the air, sensibly
contributing to the generation of depravate blood; thus far touching the
Indications.

Distinction XIII. Caveats against the Plague.
1. SHun all public meetings, where people promiscuously conversing with one
another, do readily propagate the infection: besides nothing subministrates
apter matter to be converted into pestilent Seminaries than peoples steams and
breaths, especially of nasty folks, as beggars, and others: whence those houses
happen to be soonest infected, that are crowded with multiplicity of lodgers
and nasty families.

2. Avoid passing close, dirty, stinking, and infected places, as Alleys, dark
Lanes, Churchyards, Chandlers shops, common Alehouses, Shambles, Poultries, or
any places where old household stuff is kept, as musty beddings and hangings,
for it is experienced, nothing breeds or retains Pestilent Atoms more than
woollen, and feathers.

3. Those that have occasion to go by water to Gravesend, let them rather
prefer lying upon the boords, than on musty infectious straw: Likewise
Travelers in their Inns had better lie on the floar, or upon Chairs, than in
those common nasty beds*

4. The best Caveat, and surest Preservative is to change the air, according to
that trite Distich: Haec tria pestiferam pellunt adverbia tabem,
Mox, Long, and Tarde, Cede, Recede, Redi.


i.e. Flee quick, Go far, and Slow return.

Distinction XIV. Preservatives for the Rich.
1. FOr those that are Plethorick or full of blood, it is necessary they should
be let blood.

2. It is of great concernment to have their bodies well purged, and
obstructions removed, to procure the blood and spirits a free course,
ventilation, and transpiration, by suitable purges and Ecphractick Medicines.

3. The body ought to be maintained in its daily excretions, and its
superfluous humors subtracted at several times, to hinder all excrementitious
accumulations, by such means as are Eccoprotick, and do particularly oppugn the
malignity, for which purpose Pilulae Ruffi sive Pestilentiales are much cried
up, taking a half drachme or a drachme mornings, once or twice a week; or these
following:

Al. Succot. Nutrit. Suc. Absinth, ij. Gum. Ammon. Sol. in Acet. Squil. j.
Tart. Vitriol. Sal. Absinth. an. ss. Sal. Vitriol. j. Croc. Angl. gr. 15. Ol.
Succin. gut. 20. Sir. Veton. q.s. M. F. Mass. Pil. Das. a. j. ad ij. Mane
duabus horis ante cibum.

This being premitted, I Will commend to you this following Antidote.

Pulv. Lign. Guaiac. ss. Flor. Sulphur. ij. Antimon. Diaphor. j. Flor. Benz.
ij. Sal. Centaur. Min. ss. Myrr. rub. j. gr. 5. Camphor. j. Croc. Angl ss. Ol.
Succin. gut. 15. Ol. Vitr. gut. 10. Mel. Iunip. q. s. M. F. Elect. Dos. a ss.
ad j ss. vel. ij.

This mixture contains all the properties that can be desired in a most
excellent Pestilential Antidote; The ingredients being prescribed in their
substance do not suddenly exhale or depose their virtues, but maintain the
blood in a gentle fermentation for a whole day and night, actuate the spirits,
absorbe the intestinal superfluities, reclude oppilations, mundifie the blood,
oppugn putrefaction, gently expel and work out all contagious Seminaries
through the pores, and all this without inflaming the body, which makes it
suitable to all temperaments. I could here recite five hundred very select
antipestilentials, but judging this to answer all Indications, shall therefore
supersede that needless pains.

The Dose hereof is about the bigness of a small Walnut, or more, every
Morning, drinking upon it a draught of wormwood Rhenish, and an hour or two
after you may breakfast upon biscuit and raisins.

It is also very proficuous to take a good large dose once a week, and sweat
moderately upon it a bed.

This following we have composed out of the chiefest Alexipharms, but most for
Phlegmatic temperaments.

Conserv. Salv. Ros. Vet. an. j. Elect. de Ovo, Diascord. Frac. an. ss. Flor.
Sulphur. ij. Rad. Zedoar. Dictam. Carlin. Scorzon. Angel. Ostrut. Gentian.
Tormentil. an. ss. Myr. Suc. Alb. Thur. Camph. an. j. Extr. Iunip. j Tinct.
Croc ij. Ol. Angel. Spir. Vitriol. an. gut. 15. Sir. Acet. Citr. q s. M. F.
Elect. Dos. a j ad ij.

Children and bigbellied women require Antidotes somewhat more grateful to the
Palate, and less hot; as these tablets.

Sp^^. e Chel. Cancr. Coru. Cer. Nov. Prap. Terr. Sigil. Succin. Alb. an j. Ol
^ont. Citr. gut. 10. Sacchar. Alb^ q.s. Sol. in Aq. Ros. M. F. Rotul. Poud. ij.

Having now proposed to you the choicest internals, it is requisite to add some
external defenses, to keep off the air from entering, viz. Emplasters to be
applied to the wrists, temples, and groin.

Mithrid. Opt. Vet. j. Cinab. Factit. j. Vitriol. Roman. ij. Pic. Liq. iij.
Cer. Alb. q.s. M, F. Empl. Extend. Super. Alut. vel Pan. Seris.

This Emplaster, I can assure you, is of that force and virtue, that you would
detract from its worth in using any thing else to second it, since it performs
the same effects of intrinsic Alexipharms; besides it perfumes ones clothes,
purifies the air, attracts the venom outward, and gently keeps the vital
spirits in play.

Cordial Bags worn next ones breast over the heart, likewise Pestilential
stomachick Emplasters applied to the stomach, do potently resist the Infection,
and preserve the entrails.

The Cordial sweet-bag.
Rad. Calam. arom. Angel Zedoar. an j ss. Flor. Anth. Salv. Ros. an. P. j. Sum.
Rut. pull. Benz. Styr. Myrr. an. j. Santal. Citr. Nuc. Muscat. Cinam. an. ss.
Camphor. j. Pulveriz. M, F. Saccul.

The Stomach Emplaster.
Emplastr. Stomach. j. Myrrh j. Zedoar. ij. Extract. Rut. Angel. an. j. Ol.
Succin. ss. Ol. Laurin. q.s. M. F. Empl. sentiform. applicand. stomach.

The Nostrils and the jugular Arteries ought to be anointed every morning with
this following liniment or Balsom.

Ol Stillat. Angel. Rutae. Succin. an j. Caphur gr. 5. Cerae Alb. q.s. M. F.
Balsam. inungant. intern. nar. and Art. jug.

Some do also commend Balsame of Sulphur to anoint the Nostrils with; but
erroneously, because its sent is suffocating and very offensive to the Lungs.

The face and hands may be defended with this single wash.

Take half a drachme of Camphor, dissolve it in two ounces of wine Vinegar, and
mix it with four ounces of Rose water.

The brain should likewise be shielded with a Cucupha, or spice cap, made with
the same species prescribed for the cordial sweet bag.

It will not be amiss to insert a word or two touching their clothes. Nothing
seems more preservative than cleanliness and often shifting of Linen, because
the steams of a man's body inhering in dirty linen are very apt to putrefie
into malignity; it is likewise very commendable to change clothes once or twice
a week, for the reason alleged. At nights have a fire kindled in your Chamber,
which does very much conduce to purify the air, and consume all noxious damps;
and after you are a bed cause your clothes to be hung before the fire, whereby
the venene air that possibly may be latent in the wool is potently extracted;
Next morning perfume your clothes with these following Trochisces.

Rad Angel. Zedoar. an. iiij. Gum Iunip. Myrr Styr. Call. an j Sem Rut flor.
Lavend an ss. Arsen. Pel. j Excip. Thereb. M. F. Trochis. Pond. ij.

What concerns the election of clothes, it is probable Hairs Stuff, as
Camelots, or Grograins, are least disposed to harbor infection, their density
denying passage to the thick contagious air, easily glancing or slipping off
their glib surface, whereas woollen and woosted do easily retain infection.

Since we have hitherto instructed you how to preserve your self abroad, it
falls in course to propose such means, as may conspire your preservation
within. Above all keep your house very dry with fires, for dampness, as I have
illustrated in my Philosophy, Part 2. Book 1. Chap. 24. Par. 5. is a great
cause of the Plague. Next prefer neatness and cleanliness in your Kitchen,
Buttrey, Sinks, etc. be sure to have the upper corners of your Rooms well
swept, and that often; cause your Room where you most abide in to be often washed
with water and Vinegar: flash Gunpowder in it twice or thrice a day, or burn
frequently pitch and brimstone, or the before written Trochisces; perfume your
sheets likewise by burning the said Trochisces in a warming pan. Put away your
Cats and Dogs, for they are not only apt to transport the contagion from other
places, but do also emit stinking fumes or steams, that are readily converted
into malignity.

Distinction XV. Preservatives for the Poor.
CAcochymies or fowl bodies of the Vulgar, contracted through course and
dreggish feeding do require strong Purges, or rather vomits once or twice
repeated, among which for its cheapness and excellency in evacuating,
deoppilating, and expelling all malignity, we prefer this following:

. Vitr. Antimon. a gr. 2. ad 4. Diascord. Frac. a j. ad ij. M. F. Bol. Caplat
mane cum regimine.

In Plethories opening a vein proves a great Preservative.

Hereupon they are to take a draught of this antipestilential Tincture or
Infusion every morning, repeating the foresaid Vomit once a month.

Take Juniper berries one ounce, Gentian root, Zedoary, Myrrh, of each two
drachmes, Rue tops half a handful, bruise them all in a mortar, and being put
into a clean earthen pot, pour upon them Wine Vinegar and Brandy, of each the
same proportion, as much as will swim three fingers atop; stop the pot very
close, and set it for 24 hours on the hot Cindars; then strain it, and dissolve
in it Camphor, and sal Prunella, of each half a Drachme.

A spoonful hereof, or two at most, taken Mornings and Evenings is so potent a
defense and Preservative, that scarce any Pestilence is poisonous enough to
infringe its force.

An hour or two after, they may breakfast with bread and butter, and Sage, Rue,
or Garlic; and wormwood Rhenish.

To smoke Tobacco often, especially Mornings and Evenings seems an excellent
Preservative.

Its judged by many, that Issues conduce to divert the malignity; but chiefly
in Children and moist Constitutions.

Amulets are commended by some, and disproved by others.

We do also commend to them our Pestilential Emplasters, prescribed in the
preceding Distinction, to be applied to the same parts, viz. wrists, temples,
groin, and under the armpits.

Touching fumes to correct the air, they will find this following very
efficacious: Take Rue and steep it in Vinegar, and pour some of it twice or
thrice a day upon a hot Iron: or pour Vinegar and water upon unquencht Lime.

Above all let them study cleanliness.

Distinction XVI. The Pestilential Cure.
IF on a sudden you are surprised with a great headache, anguish, and soreness
or pains of all your limbs, you may with reason suspect your condition; and
therefore lay aside all business immediately, betake your self to this ensuing
Antidote, composing your self to a copious sweat in bed.

. Bezoart. Min. a gr. 6. ad 12. Spir. Corn. Cerv. a gut. 4. ad 8. Caphur. a gr.
2. ad 4. Diascord. j. M. F. Bol. Deauret.

Continue the sweat for an hour; afterward in case of too great a Laps of
spirits, take a spoonful or two of the below mentioned Cordial restorative.
The symptoms disappearing upon the sweat, it is a sign there was no infection;
if otherwise, six hours after be let blood to a small quantity of 5, 6, 7, or
eight ounces, and within a quarter of an hour after, sweat again upon the
repetition of the prescribed Bole.

In case the Sickness attaques you with more certain and evident Symptoms,
immediately exhaust a convenient proportion of blood, and within a quarter of
an hour assume the Pestilential Bole, or this annexed Tincture, and sweat
copiously upon it.

Rad. Carlin. Angel. imperat. Zedoar. Tormen. an. vj. Rad. Contrayer. ss.
Diascord. Frac. iiij. Myrr. ij. Croc. Orient. vj. Camphor. ij. Superfan. Spir.
Vin. Rect. Spir. Sulphur. per Camp. j. Acuat. lb j ss. diger. p^r dies 8. Dein
Cole^r. per Chart. Empor. M. F. Tinct. Dos. ab ss. ad j.

1. We judge Vegetables more commodiously given in infusion than substance,
because of their quicker operation. 2. We do also prefer Tinctures before
distilled liquors; because these are nothing but abstracted menstruums,
impregnated with a nauseous phlegm, or light cariared dusts of Vegetables,
whereas the virtues of the ingredients are chiefly latent in their salts, that
are left in the bottom of the Still: Whence it is, that Treacle Water is so
feeble, and of so faint a taste, far different from the strong faculties and
sent of Treacle in substance. Neither are Treacle or Mithridate in substance
proper Medicines against the Plague, because consisting of a great many
Aromata, or gross aduring Spices, they impress an Empyreume upon the intrails
for want of subtle dissipative parts. Whence you may readily apprehend the
excellency of the prescribed Tincture, being extracted from few, but most
experienced and select ingredients.

Having passed your sweat, relieve your spirits with a spoonful or two of this
Analeptick.

Take a Pollet or Capon, cut it into small pieces, and put them into a diet
pot, affuse upon them black Cherry, Burnet, Borrage, and Rose water, of each
four ounces, let them simper four hours upon a gentle fire, afterward express
the liquor, and mix with it Cinnamon water comp. an ounce and half, gely of
Quinces, and Currants of each one ounce and half, syrup of Citrons one ounce,
Saffron, twenty grains.

Some six or eight hours after repeat the said sudorifick, and thereupon the
Refective Cordial. The Contagion being very malign indicates the commixture of
some Narcotick with the sudorifick; as a grain or two of Laudanum Opiatum, to
allay the violence of the Fermentation. If the malignity be only obtunded by
the fore-instanced Diaphoreticks, a third Dose will prove necessary. Inject
also lenitive and detergent glysters between times.

To extinguish the great heat, and abate the Patients immoderate thirst, this
Julep is thought very excellent.

Take the shavings of Hearts horn one ounce, affuse a quart of water, and boil
it for half an hour or less, strain it, and dissolve in it three ounces of
syrup of Popies, one drachme and a half of Sal. Prunellae, one Scruple of Spir.
of Vitr.

This may be enforced by admixing two or three ounces of Aq. Sperm. Ranar. to
it,

Against restlesness or immoderate vigilies we use to prescribe this following
in malign fevers.

. Aq. bor. Nymph. Pap. Rh. an j ss. Diascord. Frac. j. Sir. Pap. Rh. j ss.
This, if frustraneous, is fortified with Diascord. or Laudan. Op.

Anoint the Temples, Nostrils, and Jugulars with Ung. Pop. Alabast. an. j ss.
Op. Theb. dissol. in spir. Vin. gr. 9. Camphor. gr. 3. M. F. Lin.

Against the adustion of the tongue and mouth use Plantain water four ounces,
two ounces of Rose Vinegar, one ounce of Syrup of Mulberries, one drachme of
Sal Prunellae.

If upon the first shock of the Contagion the stomach is vitiated in its
retention, so as it vomit up whatever is ingested, exhibit a Dose of salt of
Vitriol, which besides its speedy evacuation by vomit without enervating the
body, does singularly infringe the malignity: An hour or two after its
operation assume a Dose of the Antipestilential Tincture, which repeat as often
as necessary.

If the Patient is surprised with a Lipothymous anguor, jactitation, or great
oppression about the stomach and Hypochonders, expect no relief from Cordials
in that case, although usually prescribed, but take a Dose of salt of Vitriol.

A raging headache is only appeased with soporiferous Liniments, and internal
Narcoticks.

A Dysentery is stopped by a Detersive mixed with a Narcotick, viz. Diascord. ad
j. Laudan. Opiat. ad. gr. 2. vel 3.

Distinction XVII. The Cure of Carbuncles.
CArbuncles the more they break forth in number, and the farther from the
heart, so much the better, which if soft, and easily perduced to a laudable
maturation with the sequel of the imminution or mitigation of symptoms,
portend a happy event, if otherwise, the contrary.

Since Nature does disburden her self of the venom by those kinds of tumors,
we are to give them vent as speedily as possible, by applying strong acre and
attracting Maturatives; as this following:

Take sharp Leaven one ounce, Garlicks roasted number two, Mithridate half an
ounce, Mustard seed bruised two drachmes, oil of Rue Per. infusion. two ounces,
make it to a Poultis.

The said tumors being but imperfectly maturated, known by their softness, are
to be opened with a Canstick, and a milder Poultis to remain on until the
crust falls off, then to be mundified with honey of Roses an ounce, Mithridate
a dram, dissolved in spirits of Wine; this to be imbibed by stoupes and
applied, imposing upon them an Empl. Diachyl.

Distinction XVIII. Whether Phlebotomy ought to be celebrated in the Cure of
the Plague?
IT is generally thought Phlebotomy retracting the blood from the Circumference
to the Center, does also convey the concepted Contagion with it, and so impact
it deeper into the body; for which reason it is disapproved by those that know
no better; but this supposed, it is no prejudice as long as the Contagion being
still in motion is immediately after expelled with a double force, by taking a
sudorifick upon it; for by letting blood in the beginning after that manner, we
take the greatest advantages imaginable: 1. We detract some part of the burden
from the spirits, that are too much oppressed already by the malignity. 2.
Thereby by we remove obstructions of the vessels, and relax the constipation of
the pores toward a ventilation and transpiration, which otherwise does deny
passage to the malignity Nature endeavors to expel by sweat. 3. The spirits
being embroyled with the malignity, and drowned in the blood, (not only
abounding, but also turgent and tumisied by the Febril fermentation,) and so
tied up from expelling the venosity are by Phlebotomy relieved, set free and
loose, abstracted from the fermentation, whence afterward uniting together do
forcibly expel the venom by transpiration, (whence it is most persons are
easily incident into sweats after Phlebotomy,) especially if moved by a
Diaphoretick, although but gentle. Wherefore you may now believe nothing more
proficuous against the Plague (but in the commencement only,) than Phlebotomy,
seconded with Diaphoreticks: read the same question in my Vener. Discov. Book,
Art. 5. P. 14.

Distinction XIX. Whether the Plague cannot be generally prevented by purifying
the Air, and extinguishing the Pest^lent Seminaries therein floating?
IT is recorded Hippocrates cured his Island, being infected with a Deleterious
Pestilence, by setting in fire a great Wood, which attracted all the Venene
Seminaries, and so consumed and amortifed them: but it is observed he did so,
when the Plague was declining. But it is not as the Vulgar imagines, the
Pestilent Seminaries must not only be extinguished, but all the sulphurous
matter of the air, whereout the said Venenosities are kindled, be consumed: And
lastly, not only so, but the Earth must also have vented all her malign fumes;
for know, that a Pestilence generally derives its origin from a Crisis of the
Earth, whereby it purges it self by expiring those Arsenical fumes, that have
been retained so long in her bowels; now before a Pestilence can cease, the
Earth must have purged it self through those transpirations, which continue
longer or shorter, according as the heat of the Sun does assist her by
attracting the said fumes, or small Rains open her pores by relaxing her
surface; whence we may now weekly observe, the more small Rains there fall, the
more the present mortality increases. So that you may now collect a Pestilence
to be originally nothing but a Critical sweat of the earth.

The air may be purified by burning great fires of pitch barrels, especially in
close places; by discharging of great Guns into infectious Streets; by burning
of Stinck pots, or Stinckers, as they call them, in Contagious Lanes; besides
many other ways which at present time and paper denies us a recital of:
Otherwise I should have inserted many other very considerable Secrets for
Preservation and Cure, but I content my self to have served the Public, by
divulging the most apposite methods, and choicest Medicines that can be
composed or thought upon.

FINIS.

