SMITH Mayor,
Martis, 28 die Aprilis 1685. Annoque Regis JacobiSecundi, Angliae, etc. primo.
THis Court does desire Dr. Hascard, Dean of Windsor, to print his Sermon
preached at the Parish Church of St. Botolph Aldgate, before the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of this City, and Governors of the Hospitals, on Tuesday in Easter
week last.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, Sir JAMES SMITH,
The Right Worshipful the Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of LONDON, and the
Governors of the Hospitals, on Tuesday in Easter week last; at the
Parish Church of St. Botolph Aldgate.

By Greg. Hascard, Dean of Windsor, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
near Devereux-Court. 1685.

EPHESIANS 4. 32. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you.


THis Apostle of the Gentiles, having converted many of these Ephesians to the
Christian Faith, draws an Argument from thence, to persuade these new Disciples
to leave their old Vices, ver. 17. While they were Gentiles, to be slaves to
their Lusts and Follies, might come from the Lewdness of their Pagan Religion,
which many times did allow them, and sometimes made them parts of their
Devotion; or from the darkness of their minds about the nature of God, and the
Rewards and Punishments after death, ver. 18.19. For when the great Diana was
their Goddess, they thought it pure Religion to imitate her actions, though
they were nothing else but folly and lewdness, and deemed it true Devotion to
draw her Pictures, and make Shrines for them; but now, says the Apostle, chapter
2. ver. 13. you have left the foppish and Idolatrous Service of Diana's Temple,
and are baptized into the Christian Religion, which is plainly evidenc't to be
Divine, her Precepts to be wise and good, and Rewards infinite: for you to live
the lives of Pagans still, to change your Temples but not your Minds, is like
the madness of Diana's rout, the greatest part knew not for what end they were
met together; notwithstanding your zeal and noise for Christianity, you know
not what that Religion means, and therefore the Apostle, ver. 20. tells his
Christian Disciples, that they had not so learned Christ, that they had been
well instructed that his Religion was Spiritual and Divine, that it taught and
persuaded a change of their vicious nature, and the renovation of their mind
and temper, and, contrary to the Follies that hitherto they were guilty of,
they must now follow Truth and Honesty, Meekness and Charity, all sorts of
Virtue and Goodness, which would far outshine Diana and her Temples in all
their glory; these Graces being the perfection of their nature, hugely
beneficial to mankind, the Image of God enstamp't upon them, and the proper
qualifications for the Divine state of Heaven; and, among the rest, he
principally recommends the Virtues in my Text, which are the ease of Humane
nature, the glue of Societies and Conversation, the best imitation of God and
Christ, and the finest Livery and Ornament of a Christian, And be ye kind one
to another, etc. Wherein,

1. Three great Duties or Virtues are commanded; 1. Kindness. 2.
Tender-heartedness. 3. Readiness to forgive.


2. The Pattern to do all this by, and the reason of it, even as God, etc.

Though these three Duties are many times promiscuously used, and put one for
another, yet they have different relations and respects, and may be fairly
distinguished one from another, and seem to be ranged and set in opposition to
the contrary Vices of Anger and Wrath, Bitterness and Clamor, evil Speaking
and Malice, ver. 31. As therefore Kindness is contrary to Bitterness or ill
nature, it may express it self in these following particulars.

1. In pleasantness and easiness of Conversation, in sweetness of Disposition,
and a courteous and obliging temper. The true Christian is not morose and
sullen, but if any indifferent Custom or Usage of Life will please his
Neighbor, he is ready to comply: if Age, or Temper, or other circumstance of
Life, will not permit him in some things to do as his fellow Christian does,
yet he is not censorious, calling that a mortal Sin, which God has allowed for
a liberty of Life: if he loves Retirement, yet he condemns not Society, and a
more open Conversation, for a Vice: if he be not gay, he is not peevish, if of
a grave deportment, yet not rough and sour, and has been better taught, than
to call that common and unclean which God has cleans'd, and infringe the
freedom of Mankind. He is of so generous a temper, as to become all things to
all men in the natural liberties of Life, so as to pluck up the Briars and
Thorns which Adam sowed, ease the common burdens of this World, and sweeten
the bitter thoughts of men arising from the condition of mortal Life; that man
is not always religious when he is sullen or Melancholy. Christianity never bid
its Disciples to dwell, like the; Spirit in the Gospel, always among the Tombs;
This is Superstition only, which is no mote true Religion, than to be out of
our Wits is to be Wise, and a false conception of God, that thinks him a sullen
and peevish Being, and makes his Servants such, thinking it Perfection to
imitate such a God, as though he was displeased and angry with the little
diversions and pleasures of Humane Life, I Cor. 10.26.
when the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. So kind, so bountiful a
Being do we Christians serve, who planted us in a Paradise, not a Desert, and
therefore to live thankfully to him, and with ease to our selves. When we have
made our Sacrifice of Faith and Love, our Prayers and Devotion unto God, he
then is pleased, and has left all the World with its variety besides, to be
enjoyed by the discreet and sober Christian: the best men have the greatest
reason to be cheerful and pleasant. Our Savior denied not his presence to the
Solemnity of a Marriage Feast; and Socrates upon his Reed is not so fantastical
a sight, as is the sullen and morose Christian, who frights men from Religion,
thinking, that when they must become good, they must leave all the little
diversions of Life, and ever after be black and melancholy in their minds. Thus
to be kind, is not only our Convenience, but our Duty, we being obliged by our
Religion to go out of our selves, and do all those things which may better the
condition of the World, and make men more happy. And what does more promote
that, than such a temper as this, which knows how innocently to yield, and
comply in the natural Liberties and lawful Freedoms of Life. The contrary
Disposition usually carries with it the Spiritual sins of Uncharitableness,
Arrogance and Pride. There was more pride in the Cynick's trampling upon the
Philosopher's Carpets, than the Learned and Good man had in the Use of them;
while the kind man in this sense is humble and charitable, the salt and delight
of all Society: and when Christ taught his Disciples the Christian Religion, he
did not destroy Humanity, but made it a great Duty in it; and men that are ever
sullen and morose, have as little Religion as they have Manhood in them.

2. In a generous temper, ready and free to do good. Such a man knows, he is
not born for himself, that his Strength, Riches, Wisdom, and other Abilities
and Endowments of Nature, are not only to serve their Master; but his King,
Country, Parents, Friends, Neighbors, and all Mankind may justly challenge a
share in them. He is not to be a dark Lanthorn, and only shine to himself, his
Counsel is to direct the Paths of the Simple, his Power to relieve the
oppressed, and his Abundance to supply the Poor, he being only a Trustee of God
and Nature's Gifts; and if he use them not to the Benefit of others, is not
only uncharitable, but Unjust. The man that is thus kind, perfects his own
Nature, creates himself Pleasures beyond those of an Epicure, and lays the
greatest Obligations upon others, (his former goodness being his store) against
all the sad changes of Times and Fortune. If Magistrates are called Gods for
their Authority and Power, good men may merit more that Title, nothing
representing that infinite Being better, than a Soul universally bent to do
good. It Is the delight of that immense Being, the joy of Angels, and the great
Ingredient to the Happiness of glorified Souls above. It seems to be the top
and Sum of all the great Characters of our dear Lord, that he went about doing
good. Acts. 10.38.
It Is a sad account that some of his pretended Servants are to make when they
come to dye, only to tell the number of their merry Meetings, what Possessions
they leave behind by their Care and Industry; not what naked Bodies they have
clothed, what hungry Jaws they have fed, what Differences they have composed,
what public Dangers and Broils they have prevented, what Errors they have
reclaimed; but they ate and drank; and as they came, so now they are describing
a Circle, and returning to their Mother Earth again; and because they hid their
Talent in the Earth, used the Goodness of God only to their own sensual
Interest, deserve to be condemned thither to sleep for ever; and 'twas well if
so, but a severer doom follows them, passed by their Lord and Judge, Begone
into eternal misery, ye workers of iniquity; for I know you not. If Antoninus
told the Senate right, that he had lost a day when he had done no good, many,
in the sense of that Noble Heathen, have lived, only to lose their Lives; they
have existed only, the Christian Life not being measured by number of years,
but by Virtue and Goodness that does attend it, and he ill merits the name of
Christian, who only pleases himself with the Title and Privileges, the cheap
and easy parts of Christianity, but displays it not in solid and substantial
Acts, in doing good. The true Christian is not stingy and narrow, confining his
kindness to his Friends, and his Party, but, like his God, makes his Sun to
shine, and his Rain to fall upon the Just and Unjust, though especially the
Household of Faith, yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from his Table,
those that are in the right, and those that are out of the way, Jew and
Gentile, in some degree all mankind taste of his Goodness.

3. In abstaining from rigours, and refusing advantages, which Humane Laws may
give him. In making of Laws, principal regard is had unto the Community, and
many times particular Persons suffer by the Public Interest. The good man will
not entertain that advantage which the rigor of such Laws do give him, but
charitably considers, that it is beside the intention of the Lawmakers, and
proceeds from the imperfection of Laws, and circumstances of Humane Affairs.
The Intention of the Law may be otherwise, yet Fraud, Ignorance, an imperfect
judgment of things to come, Accidents, and breach of Confidence, may pervert
it. The kind man therefore sets up a Chancery in his own Breast, and desires to
be called not only Just but Good, and thinks Joseph an excellent Pattern for
his imitation, who, being a good man, merciful, full of humanity and clemency,
would not, as the Law gave him leave, make a public Example of the holy Mary,
suspected by him to be unfaithful to her Vow, but only designed a private
dismission; and knows that this is the best Character of the best of men, Enoch
and Noah, Job and Cornelius, and Christ himself. And a signal Favor and Reward
many times attends him, that whereas for a righteous man, a man of Legal
Justice only, few or none will venture death to serve him, but for a good man,
Romans 3.7.
some will even dare to dye. This obligation to Goodness and Equity, was
antecedent to any right that Humane Laws could give him, being commanded by
God, and enstamp'd upon his Nature when he was born; and if the Law will
absolve him from Injustice, yet it will not from Unequitableness and
Inhumanity. The man of rigor and severity is pleased with advantages that the
Law may give him, having a color to violate the eternal Laws of Nature, under
the protection of a Temporary Law of Man, which was only short-sighted, and
when it aimed at a common good, never designed a particular mischief; but when
that happened beyond the meaning of that Law, it supposed the Laws of Nature
and Christianity in every man's breast would relieve his fellow Christian.

The second Duty in the Text is Tender-heartedness, which consists of these
following particulars.

1. In being extremely sensible of the common troubles and miseries of our
Christian Brethren; this is the spring and original, the proper Source and
cause of our Charity and Meekness, our Love and Relief of our fellow Beings.
When our tempers are soft and sensible, and easily receive impressions from the
Sufferings of others, we are pained within, and to ease our selves, we are
ready to succor them, and then Nature discharging her Burden and Oppression,
creates both her own pleasure and satisfaction, and performs her Duty. The
multitude of miserable Persons will not upon this account produce a continued
trouble in your breast, for if the generality of mankind had this
fellow-feeling, it would lessen the number; and as it is, the pleasure of doing
good far surpasses the pain in pitying, which is the objection against
commiseration: if I may call it pain, or rather the natural delight of a good
and generous mind; for there is pity and compassion in Heaven, in the breast of
the blessed Jesus toward his distressed Members here, yet where no pain can
dwell: this Temper is therefore to imitate the best of Natures above,
consistent with our happiness, or is part of it there, and the Ornament and
Beauty of our Soul here, founded in Nature, and perfected by the Divine Spirit,
and may justly be called one of its chiefest Graces, and he that wants it,
cease to be a man and a Christian at the same time. 1 Pet. 3.8, 9.
When therefore Nebuchadnezzar had put off his Humanity and pity, showing no
mercy to the distressed, he suitably put on the shape of that without, which he
was within, being degraded from a Man and King, and, like a Beast, grazed so
long, till he acknowledged, Dan. 4.27.
that the Heavens did rule, and showed mercy to the Poor, that he so cruelly
had oppressed. The Priest and the Levite who boasted of their Knowledge, their
Oracles, and Temple at Jerusalem, yet passd by, and disregarded the stripped and
wounded Stranger in their way, showed their Religion was but Faction and
Hypocrisy, Luke 10.34.
while the good Samaritan, who pitty'd and poured in Oil, though he had not so
good a Temple, had more of God. Many times God sends Calamities upon men, to
soften their hard temper, that by experience they might learn to succor others
in their distress. And very often severe, yet suitable Judgments have pursued
the cruel and unmerciful. It Was the fate of Agag, because his Sword had made
women childless, 1 Samuel 14.33.
his Mother now should be so by his Death; and because he never gave, he should
receive no mercy. It Is one great thing to the making of a Devil, Beelzebub,
that Prince of Flys, who is so far from pitying, he laughs at, and feasts upon
the sores, the miseries of Mankind. Such that have hearts rejoicing in
mischief, surpassing the hardness of Rocks, who can stand at shore and with
pleasure see others wrack't, and drowned by storms and tempests, who can warm
their hands at their Neighbors fires, and be as pleasant, as Nero was, upon
the same occasion, who from smaller beginnings of cruelty, in being delighted
to rip up, and see the panting hearts of Leverets, came at last to do the same
unto his Mother. This is to be a Fiend, and to such perfection of Vice may men
arrive. God, to keep this Vice at the greatest distance, forbad David to build
his Temple, because he had been concerned in Wars and Blood: and the Jews, for
the same reason, would not permit an Executioner to offer any thing to the
Sanctuary. Ham. in Mat. 27.
And we Christians have thus learned Christ, he having taught us, that when
upon occasion our fellow Christians shall be full of tears and sorrow for the
crosses and sad accidents of Life, that we should put on a suitable temper,
having a fellow-feeling, to weep with them that weep, and mourn with them that
mourn, that we may help them in their misery and distress.

2. In being ready to help them out of these troubles, by all the just means we
can. Without this, our former pity is but an idle passion, and serves only to
upbraid their misery, and disturb our selves. To view the naked and the
destitute with Tears only, and fruitless wishes, that some kind hand would
bestow a Raiment upon them, serves only to distinguish a dead from a living
Faith. For such men there are, whose Nature and Religion prompts them to pity
and commiseration, yet Covetousness or expensive Vanities check the good
inclination. When Sports or Pastimes, and the instruments of them, an Horse, or
a Dog, shall have the preference of an honest Christian, and he shall searce
live, while the other is pampered; when in the times of Dearth and Scarceness,
the plump Epicure feasts and surfeits within, while the poor Christian for want
dies in the common Streets, at best, in common with his Dogs; he gives him only
a few crumbs from his Table, to ease himself, the pityable object disturbing
his Pleasure. The Covetous, whose Barns are full, and Stores plentiful, out of
an unjust suspicion of Providence, that some time or other he shall want these,
or from an unaccountable and silly fancy of having much, and dying rich, keeps
this abundance only to serve Rust and Mice, while his fellow Christian groans
for want, and dies unreliev'd. When Schisms rend the Church, and Factions the
State, when Neighbourhoods and Societies are torn in pieces by strifes and
Contentions, yet the jolly Gallio cares for none of these. Fear in some,
Covetousness in others, hopes of Advantage, and Idleness and Softness in many
more, make these sad things look as indifferent and little, as the buzzings and
quarrels of Wasps and Bees about a Flower. A melting passion for other men's
misery, is no discharge of our Duty, till real Actions follow, and we become
eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, give our counsel to the simple, our
strength to the oppressed, our purse to the indigent, and we become the common
Granaries and supplies to the poor and weak: who can challenge these good
things of us by the right of Nature, the Obligations of Religion, the Design of
our Plenty; but when we simply pity but not relieve, the sincerity of our Faith
is justly questioned. When we hate our Brethren whom we have seen, (for that is
hatred of them with God, to deny them Relief when we can give it) with whom we
are joined in the common necessities of Nature, and a more familiar
Conversation, and only magnify God, 1 John 4.20.
whom we have not seen^, pretending deeper mystery and knowledge of him, and
passion for him, our Love and Religion toward him turns into Hypocrisy and
Falseness, Enthusiasm or Carnality.

3. In Gentleness when we punish. The sturdy nature of men, not to be drawn by
the bands of Love, has made Punishments absolutely necessary to Rule and
Government, without which, Laws would be but Formalities and Entreaties: and
therefore God himself, and the wisest Governors, have armed their Laws with
the greatest terrors, to affright the refractory into Obedience; not only to
be Scarecrows of Power, but to be really inflicted by the hands of Justice,
where Mercy will not take place; but where abatements of punishment will serve
the end, viz. preserve Government, and cause Repentance, God and good men have
never used utmost severity and destruction, which are due only to the
refractory and impenitent, and are rarely executed; yet sometimes they are, to
make wholesome Presidents and Examples to terrify, and are good Landmarks to
keep others from splitting upon the same Rocks, and destroying themselves.
Utmost rigors many times lose the end of Punishment, making men desperate;
always scourging drives away Modesty, begets a brawny and a senseless temper,
which will run away with its Rider, and contemns its unmerciful Governor; who,
while he endeavors to reform some sort of Vice in others, by such severe
Methods, he begets and cherishes another sort of Vice in himself,
Unmercifulness being as great a Vice as any. Far unlike to the temper of Jesus,
whose Person and Authority, the Jews so maliciously contemned and perfecuted,
who would have accepted of their Repentance for their Blasphemy and
Disobedience, and given them a Reprieve; and when their sturdy Malice against
him fore'd him to a sentence, he did it like the good Emperor, (only in an
higher degree) with Tears, and felt those Pains and Sorrows for them, which
they would not feel for themselves. Justice it self only there takes place,
where Mercy could not; much less must rigorous Execution be used, when lighter
Chastisements and softer Proceedings will reclaim the Offender. As Magistrates
are called Gods, so in this they must be like God, who, when he goes to take
Vengeance of his Enemies, (the Divine Government calling for a particular
instance of severity) is said to rise out of his place, and do a Work strange
to his Nature, Na. 26.21.28.21.
Mercy and Forgiveness, Lenity and Longanimity being his delight, and essential
to him.

4. In the distribution of Charity and Alms, and providing for the necessities
of the Poor, tender-heartedness being the natural Spring from whence it does
arise. Of all the Duties in the Christian Religion, none carry so many
Arguments with them to enforce their Practice, as this. It Is a Duty of an easy
performance, Charity not being confined to the building of Churches and
Hospitals, and other expensive Instances, but expresses it self, in good
Counsel, devout Prayers, good Reports, and the like, which the great and rich
in Honor may receive, and the poor can, and ought to give. Charity is but
reverence which we owe to our common Nature, the Poor having Caesar's Image and
Superscription enstamp'd upon them, and we may say of them as Seneca did of
Servants; Servi sunt, imo homines, servi sunt, imo contubernales, servi sunt,
imo humiles amici, servi sunt, imo conservi: in such near relation they stand
to the God of Heaven, our common Parent. It Is a debt that we owe them, and when
we pay it not, we are unrighteous and unjust. Under the rigid Law of Moses, and
among the Jews, a People given to Covetousness and Exaction, how careful, how
bountiful, was Divine Providence, when he gave them Laws, to provide for the
distressed and poor. And under the new Dispensation to recommend the Duty. The
(...) is the (...), the charitable is the perfect man. To make the Duty
honorable and great, God takes the Charity done to one of his poor as done to
himself; and as he is pleased to accept it, we are put in a capacity of
obliging him, who gave us all that we enjoy. Upon this account, we more
eminently lay up Treasure in Heaven, and by filling the poor man's Box here, we
become Heirs to the many Mansions in our Fathers house. In nothing more we
imitate that mighty Being above, to whom, all Creatures, clothed in their
different Liveries, put up their cries and groans for the Pensions and Charity
of Heaven, and God's the Almoner there; then in being Stewards to his good
things, the plenty of Earth, we freely make distribution of them to relieve the
wants of others. Otherwise we forfeit the great end of Temporal Blessings,
having an happy opportunity of doing good to others, and to procure a Blessing
upon our selves. For besides the Rewards above, and the Provisions we make to
our selves here from the grateful poor, who are many times advanced to a better
condition, when the Changes and Revolutions in the World may wheel us about
into lower and meaner circumstances of Life, what strange Deliverances and
unexpected Supplies, new Friends and secret Helps, in a silent and invisible
way, have followed our former Charity. But what need I? I must not urge any
more Arguments to enforce the practice of this mighty Duty to this Auditory,
which has so often heard them upon this occasion, and so well have practiced
them. The Charity that this Ancient and Renowned City, and the generous Members
of it, have shown, in various instances, and numerous expressions of it, has
told the Pagan World, what a beneficial thing true Christianity is to mankind,
confuted the Scandal cast upon our Reformed Church of England by her
Adversaries, that our Religion consists only in Faith and Profession, but doing
no good Works; it has added luster to your Names and City; you have wiped away
the Tears, and stilled the Groans of the poor and destitute, changed their
Curses into Prayers, and all Generations shall call you blessed. And therefore
I do not so much exhort as praise, and give our saviors blessing to you,
Matthew. 24.46.
Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. And
therefore, not for ostentation but encouragement, I will give you a true report
of the great number of poor Children and other People maintained in the several
Hospitals, under the pious Care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of
the City of London, the year last past.

Children put forth Apprentices, and discharged out of Christ's Hospital -- 86.
Still remaining under the Care and Charge of the said Hospital -- 772. There
have been cured in the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, of wounded, sick, and
diseased Persons -- 1735. Persons remaining under Cure in the said Hospital --
258. In the Hospital of St. Thomas, cured the last year -- 1595. Still under
Cure -- 242. Vagrants and indigent Persons received into the Hospital of
Bridewel, relieved and sent by Passes into their Native Countries -- 1279.
Maintained and brought up in diverse Arts and Trades -- 133. Besides the
Hospital of Bethlem, which is of excellent Use and great necessity, for the
keeping and curing of Distracted Persons. There have been brought into that
Hospital the last year, distracted Men and Women -- 59. Cured of the Lunacy,
and discharged thence -- 35. Now remaining under their care, and provided with
Physic and other Relief at the Hospitals Charge -- 119.
Notwithstanding the great Losses all these Hospitals have sustained by the
late dreadful Fire in September 1666. and other Fires which have happened in
and about the City of London.

There can be no more powerful Argument used to provoke you unto such good
Works as these, than what our Savior has laid down, to excite our affections
and care toward the Maimed the Lame and the Blind. Luke 14.14. And thou shall
be Blessed, for they cannot recompense thee, for thou shall be recompensed at
the Resurrection of the Just.

The third Duty in the Text is readiness to forgive; which may express it self
in these following particulars.

1. Though we be the offended, yet to seek peace with the offending Party; a
Principle of Peace and Charity will be naturally acting, and travels with pain
to it self, till it bring forth the fruits of Love and Reconciliation; such
good nature is not at ease and quiet with it self, not because it has received
an Injury, but because the pleasant exercise of mutual Love and Friendship is
stopped, and therefore labors first, to remove the dirt and rubbish that damm'd
it up, that it might flow again in its gentle stream; To seek Peace, is far
from being a sign of a mean and Abject Spirit, that it is imitating the
greatest, most infinite Being, God, who entreats his Enemies to be reconciled,
and when the prodigal Sons of Adam, who scorned their Father and his House
before, are at distance, he runs out, meets them in their return, and prevents
them with his Pardon and Love: And many times the brave and the generous, the
Prince and the Conqueror have sent out their Pardons, before the Rebel has
laid down his Arms. The offending Party sometimes out of ignorance of your good
Nature, or because he is an ill man, thinks no injured Person can be heartily
reconciled, but is smoothed over only for a time, while it is his Interest and
better Opportunity of Revenge (which is a strange imputation to Humane Nature
and Christian Religion) and therefore out of despair of Peace, continues in a
State of War with you; by seeking Peace, you undeceive his Error, you heap
Coals of Fire upon his Head, melting him down into softness and repentance, he
is more ashamed and confounded at his Fault and mistake; you humble him more by
your Mercy than Severity, your kindness takes Revenge, your Reputation is the
fairer, and it is your Interest, you gaining that by this easy Method, which
might possibly have been lost by a more tedious and troublesome way of Pride
and Rigor: there are indeed cross Tempers in the World, which grow harder by
your yielding, and run backwards, because you are coming on, but for the
respect of Mankind, I hope these are not many, and the worst of them are
mollified in some degree, those that are not, ill deserve the name and shape
they bear, and will not excuse in the general this Duty of being forward and
zealous to forgive, and make Peace, which is our Honor and Christianity.

2. We must not stick upon too difficult terms of Reconciliation, either above
the Merit of the Fault, or always equal to it. Satisfaction by way of
Punishment above the Merit of the Crime, shows us rigid and unjust, and exceeds
the Severity of the Mosaick-Law, which allowed only a Tooth for a Tooth but not
an Eye for a Tooth, or an Head for an Eye in Compensation by way of payment or
profit, above the Nature of the Fault, shows the Exactor of it is Coveteous and
Cruel, and for Interest sake rejoices in Evil, and is pleased with Offenses
because of advantage, and would unchristianly and meanly prostitute-his Fame
and Religion too, so he might gain by it; always to stick upon equal
satisfactions, to have the Injury and Atonement weighed in nice Balances, to
come to Granes and Scruples, is far from being a good or benign Man, a merciful
or Charitable Person, far from the Evangelical Temper, which rests not in a dry
and sullen Justice, but softens into Clemency and Grace. Government it self and
points of Honor exceed not the bounds of Justice; in resenting Injuries,
always, as near, as decently they can, they regard Charity and Mercy, much more
private Persons in their Circumstances and Condition ought to do. Men of Rigor
know not, or forget the Constitution of Mankind, who are transgressing one
against another, and if Forgiveness or abatement of Punishment and Satisfaction
did not take place, the World must turn into Confusion, or nothing heard of,
besides Judges and Tribunals. Such a man is not always the wisest, demanding
Retaliation for Injuries, and to retreive his Fame by the smartest Penalties,
he provokes but the World to Wrath for the time of his offending; and if he
clear his Reputation by such hard Methods, he foyls it at the same time,
meriting the Title of severe and Cruel, as great a reproach as any: while easy
Conditions would gain his end as well. viz. Keep his Fame and advance it
higher, giving him the Title of good and gracious, that God himself is pleased
with; nothing being more inhumane, then, when Life or a plentiful way of
living, a Christians Fortune and his Peace are to be given in Camposition to
any implacable Person of private Circumstances, for a trivial loss, undecent
carriage, or angry and passionate words.

3. To do the offending Party any good. This is the height of Goodness, and by
Christ is called Perfection: and to this we have an obligation, not only from
the greatness of Rewards, which are promised to so great a mind, but from our
own act and the nature of Forgiveness. For where you entirely pardon, you
restore the man into his former circumstances and condition, and if your
Charity was due to him before, so it is now. Our Prudence and our Religion
sometimes bid us not be too credulous in thinking the repentance of the
offending Party to be sincere, nor too profuse, without distinction in
scattering our Mercies, yet to be too severe in judging, is often Cruelty, and
many times an hypocritical pretense to stop a merciful or a bountiful hand. Or
to be too rigid about the after carriage of the Penitent, as though hereafter
he was to be impeccable, and expect no grace for common Errors and Frailties,
this is Severity and Unmercifulness, and you are so far from pardoning, that
you punish still: for, before, he had the allowance of all mankind, but now you
have taken it away: and is far from the kind dealings of God with Offenders, to
whom, upon repentance, when he promises remission of sins, he means, not only
you shall escape an Hell, non pasces in cruce corvos, but you shall enjoy an
Heaven. To pretend to pardon, and when the opportunity of doing a great good to
the Delinquent is come, then to deny him, is only delaying the Punishment to a
more convenient season, for a more heavy revenge. If your Mercy be misplaced
and abused, it only aggravates his Crime you pardon, but lessons not your
Goodness, whose purpose was honest and great of doing well. It has been the
immortal honor of the great and brave, that they have not only forgiven their
Enemies, but advanced them, and many times it has proved their Interest;
candor and sense of their Princes Goodness and their own Offenses has made
them surer Friends and more faithful Servants. It Is a Proverb that only fits
the Vulgars Mouths who know how to forgive, but not to forget. The Mercies of
the noble and truly Christian are clean and large, not fettered with too many
Conditions and Restrictions, endeavoring more to be generously good, then
nicely wise; and though his Mercy should not gain is excellent end to reclaim
the Offender, yet it is the Perfection of his own Nature, and the advancement of
his Glory.

Secondly, the Pattern to do this by, and the reason of it. Even as God, for
Christ's sake, has forgiven you. The obligation to this is strong, if we
consider these two things. 1. Our selves, or what we are. He knows not himself
to be a man, who will not write himself naturally ignorant and perverse, little
and proud, insolent and disobedient, full of so many follies and baseness, that
here we want, shall I call it ill, or good and proper Language to express his
Character. His Body is compounded of the Elements common to the Bruits over
whom he domineers, and scorns; subject to more Diseases and greater filth; his
better part, his Soul, the Image of God, is strangely corrupted and defaced,
and the worse now, because originally, so good, his carriage rude and
ungrateful toward his Maker, cruel and inhumane toward his Fellows,
superstitions in his Devotion, silly and false in his Conversation; in short,
whatever is mean, wicked, or imperfect, in some degree at least, we may charge
on man, he being prone to all these, and in a Passion may cry out, Lord, what
is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him?
And which more shows what a strange Being Man is, the eminent Kindness and
Providence of God over him, makes him conceited, that he is a Being very great
in himself, useful unto God, and merits this care at his hands. For such a
Being as this, that wants so much mercy, not to show any, that receives so much
bounty, not to give, that is supported and lives by the immense Love and
Charity, to be envious and cruel, confutes his pretense, that he is not the
Image of God, he is only a clod of Earth tempered with Blood, lutum sanguine
maceratum, as was said of one of the vilest of the whole Creation. Should
Malefactors in their Prisons upbraid one another with their Crimes, or deny
their mutual Pardons for Offenses committed among themselves, would it not
tempt their Prince to deny them a reprieve; should Slaves, Beggars and
Hospitals, fall out and implead one another, for wry Faces, undecent Words, and
stand upon Terms of Honor and be implacable; would it not move laughter in the
Beholder, and call for a lash to discipline them into Meekness and Love among
themselves? Such Creatures are men, ill meriting that noble name, who for their
Hatred and Malice, their Revenge and Cruelty among themselves, are as much
laughed at, and condemned by the great and knowing Spirits above, as we scorn
Frogs and Lice, and other Vermin here. Our Prayers for pardon of Sin, are but
confident Provocations, while we are Cruel and entertain Revenge; with what
Brow can we expect that God should every day forgive, when we sometimes will
not pardon a single Offense all our Life. Do we not come to crucify the Lord
of Life again, and make him the daily boody Sacrifice, when we bring our Hatred
and Malice, to that holy Board of Love and Charity. A Wolf to feast with a
Lamb, and instead of making him an Atonement for our Sin, we make him the
Aggravation of it. Tyrants and men of Blood seldom dye dry Deaths, and the
unmerciful, rarely find Mercy; and men of implacable Spirits, of Sowerness and
Rigor, of Malice and Revenge, are most commonly hated and contemned by all,
while they live, dye without a Tear, and are laughed unto their Graves. So it
is our Interest and Reputation here, as well as our Religion and Heavens Reward
hereafter, to be of a forgiving Temper. 2. The Nature of God and his
Proceedings with Men, among all the imitable things of the Divine Nature none
are so fairly proposed and recommended, as the long Suffering and Mercy of God,
the frequency of its exercise, the absolute Necessity of it for mankind, make
it appear the most lovely among all his mighty Attributes, there being no sort
of men so good and circumspect in their Demeanor here, but must daily beg the
Divine Pardon and Mercy; the best of men have therefore thus humbled
themselves. Lord who knows how often he offends, cleanse thou me from my secret
Faults, describing theirs Sins with all their aggravating Circumstances, of
Number, Scandal, Presumption, and the like, not for Rhetoric or Passion sake,
to make a tedious Prayer, but to make them truly sensible of Gods Mercy and
Forgiveness. He that knows not this, is the worst of Men, having fined himself
into Stupidity, and made his Condition desperate. Shall not therefore the
superabundant Mercy of God, and his infinite patience toward Mankind, lead
them into an imitation to Pity, and forgive their offending Brother. It Is not
the Nature of God willingly to grieve the Children of Men, and shall we please
our selves with Severitys, be unconcerned at common Calamities, and make
Vengeance upon our Enemies, our pleasure and pastime, has he not commanded us
to forgive our Brethren till seventy times seven, and his Meroy is as far above
ours as Heaven is from Earth, and so far removes our Sins froms us: Shall his
Mercy retch unto the Heavens and his Truth unto the Clouds, and shall our
kindness and bowels being only consigned to our little selves? We sin, and God
is provoked every day, and he punishes and lightly too once in an Age be being
slow to Anger and of great Mercy, but we are quick with Revenge, usurping the
Privilege of God, making Vengeance our own never forgiving, sometimes not on a
dying Bed, but persuing the Memory and Ghost of our Enemy beyond the grave, and
entailing Quarrels upon Posterities beyond the third and fourth Generation, and
contrary to the Mereies of God our. Anger endures for ever: Should our desire
of Revenge take place, Fire every day would be coming down from Heaven, and
Plagues and Mildews would be as common as our Breath to destroy our
Adversaries, which in their several turns would almost be the Race of Mankind,
till we existed alone, as troublesome to our selves as to our fellows. Is not
the Honor of God as great as ours, his Power as large, andweless serviceable
to him than to one another? Had we been condemned to endless Miseries upon our
first Offense, or returned to our former nothing, there had never been less joy
in Heaven, there are infinite numbers of Spirits about his Throne, to praise
his Name, and execute his Will, or he could out of stones have raised up
Children to magnify the God of Abraham, or enjoyd himself in the same infinite
manner before the World was, but because he would be Merciful, he therefore
would be Merciful, not compelled by any necssity from without or from within;
and must our dealings and conversation in Rigors in Extremities with our fellow
Christians, of the same stamp of Nature and Religion with us, and so useful to
us, be so far unlike to the Methods of this mighty Being? When we were
Bankrupts, and had nothing to compound our Debts with Heaven, except God
perfectly forgave all, which he so freely has done, ought not we to pardon and
relieve, to be easily reconcill'd, and Friends to those that offend us? This
Argument is so plain and so cogent, so useful to us and excellent in its
Nature, that to add more would be to trifle, and therefore I shall conclude
with St Paul's enetreaty, If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if
any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and
Mercies, which give us so much praise and satisfaction of Mind here and rewards
hereafter: Think on these things, God Almighty grant it for the sake of his
Son; To whom be Glory and Praise both now and for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.

