AN ALARM TO PAMPHLETEERS; OR THE DANGER OF AN Habeas Corpus; BEING A serious
and seasonable advice to Antitemporizing Scriblers, to desist in time, least
they untimely be forced to sing their own Obsequies, and write with their own
Pens in Dismal Characters their own EPITAPHS.

By R. B. H.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1659.

An Alarm to Pamphleteers; Or the danger of an Habeas Corpus, etc.
NO sooner is the Sun set, and that Twilight invades our Horizon, but the
Owls that are pur-blind by light, flutter abroad, hooping in every Ivie-bush.
Whole legions of Beerles hum and buz, keeping consort with croaking Froggs in
Ditches: Thus it is, when there is a mutation in State Affairs, the Press
presently groans in the bringing forth such a numberless quantity of Spurious
Paper Bratts, by which means Paper becomes to be excessive dear, and Gold
finders quickly grow rich in the so often emptying of those Privies, State
biting or scurrulous Pamphlets dam up: But let them beware they imitate not too
much the silly Moths, that never leave flying about the Candle till they have
(at least) scorcht their wings. I cannot but laugh when I think into what a
deep silence and pannick fear, they will be all thrown into when there shall be
one of them caught, and for an example to the rest shall be hanged up with his
Pen, in his ear, as a demonstration of his fault: As yet they multiply daily,
and fight stoutly in their Billingsgate-Language; some whereof should they but
see a Sword drawn, would be in a far more affrighted and amazed condition, then
the Indians were in, when they first heard the Spanish-Guns: Nay, I durst say,
That it would make some of them run to Pegg-Trantums and that is five miles
beyond Hell, without so much as once looking behind them. They verisie old
Nasis verse.

Tutuis est igitur fictis contendere verbis.
Quam pugnare manu --
It Is safer far to fight with words,
Then to contend with killing swords.
These fellows now make it a matter of nothing, to speak Treason in the
Superlative degree, as first they must needs forsooth be meddling with our
Grave, Wise, and Gray Headed Citizens, for taxing unworthily Alderman T. for
having no beard, whereas it may be his Barbers fault: Grant it were not so, and
that he never had any, what can he help it? Nam genus and Barbam and quae non
fecimus ipsi,

Vix ea nostra voce -- And so likewise Alderman At. that leaves a sweet smelling
savor of piety behind him where ever he goes. And yet for all their high
vaunring and seditious words, would rather hang then act any such thing really,
and yet take the liberty upon them to reprehend-others for their dull, slavish,
and unactive Spirits. But I smell their intent, they foolishly apprehend Treason
is in fashion, and that the Promoters of sedition and confusion, are the only
persons that are now regarded or esteemed. And they forsooth must needs (...)
in the number, men of the times, and are willing to venture the cracking of a
Neck, rather then to want that which must procure Liquor to swill the Gullet:
It seems they find this kind of libelling a ready money commodity, otherwise we
should not have half so many of them. Well I can resemble these snarling
fellows to nothing so properly as to Currs that (when they have no other
object) will bark against the Moon, and retaining the same nature of the beast
will bite at that stone that is thrown at them, though they endanger the
breaking of their grinders.

Alas poor Pigg-wiggen myrmidons, you must be Jocky like correctors, and
consers of every man's actions without the endeavoring to reform your own. Ye
are like the rest of the wavering and giddy multitude, whose small spark of
understanding being dimmed and obscured with the mist of prejudice, and darkened
with the Cloud of passionate affections, judge of matters and persons, (that
are so high they s^em but very little to you) only I say by your sensitive
apprehension; And being not able of your selves to look into the debts of
PARLIAMENTARY and ARMY politic designs and actions, then the superficial bark
will suffer the eye of your internal sense to pierce into them, do by reason
thereof even calumninate virtue it self. Because some high persons now have
been heretofore low; their stupid sconces thinks no other, but they must needs
have the same low minds and uncoath dispositions still. It is not what we have
been, but what we are that shall speak for us or against us. True worth may
chance a long time to lurk under an obscure cobling bulk, or under a dirty
frock, and perhaps in the form of a securing man, or else may be hid under a
great heap of Thimbles and Bodkins, or some such light things; but when
goodness and virtue shall hack and hew their way through these impediments and
obscurities, you may then plainly see (as now we do) goodness, virtue, piety,
religion, and zealous, yet profound policy, shine as bright as the Sun in
Velvit Jackets, though others indeed by some fatal necessity must easy be
content, (since they cannot help it) to shine no brighter then the Sun, when he
is eclipsed. If our Rulers were low, and are now risen, it was by some means;
if so, then teachly it may be by their proper worth. But grant that the Devils
temptations should be so strong, as to be possibly able to stain their red
white souls with any fault; what Man is there that dares come personally to
delect or correct them? It may be who so e're thou art that durst do it, thou
have faults of thine own, as well as they and therefore can not be a
convenient Person. For I should think that the presenting of Physic to a sick
Patient in an ugly and filthy form and fashion, may at least occasion distaste
in the Person, if not utter refusal. For (...) Good things loose the grace of
their goodness, when they are not performed in that manner that is convenient,
or when by good and convenient Persons, they be not propounded. Wherefore
(...), that it may not be said of thee;

Cladius accusat Machos, Catalina Cothegum. It is an excellent harmony parallel
with that of the Spheres, to see a mutual concent of works and words, I speak
in general; and that they walk hand in hand, accompanied with verity and
sincerity, The Devil (you have heard) has transformed himself into an Angel
of light, for a time, but it would have argued a strong delusion, and very
great folly to have then took him to be a Saint, or belonging to some holy
order, but the Devil a Monk was he. Therefore I should advise you not to look
on things as they seem to be, but as they really are. The Harpies have
vultures talons, yet they have Virgin faces, why then may they not have
innocent hearts; And as for the Hyaena, it has continually the looks of a
friend, though it devour like a face, and yet it may not prove so. Though
perhaps our Governors seem like Watermen, that look one way and row the other;
you must not therefore rashly judge they will never arrive to their desired and
intended port. But you will object, and say that there are too many Scullers in
one Boat, which by reasons of their several opinions, one going this way, the
other that way, the third contrary to them both, and perhaps the fourth he
knows not whither, the fifth it may be would do some thing, if he knew what. To
which I answer, that by the m^ltitude of counsel a Nation is often times
preserved, for every single Person cannot perform every act, but many together
may do -- what may they do? why -- I forgot what I was going to say. But let
me tell you what e're I think, that the powerful hand of irreprovable wisdom
has divided sufficiency in all things into several persons, and it is
impossible to find it epitomized in one single person. And therefore that man
does but manifest his presumptuous arrogance, that dares to challenge
super-excellency in the performance of all things; as did our P. Monarch K. C.
take the P. which way you will, either Proud or Pious. He that will confidently
give out that he is eminent in all things, does thereby secretly insinuate,
that he is deficient in most things. But me thinks I hear some privately
whispering, that had not our Common-wealths-men been ambitious, they would have
rested contented in their former states and conditions. Suppose it to be true,
what then? are they not here in most like the noble Romans, who being emulous
of praise, and extraordinary ambitious, were thereby carried on to the
effecting of those things, that might be thought impossible for humane
weakness to attain to. Death though disguised in the most offrighting vizard,
could never defer them from any high archievement, whither pious or impious. So
that I shall think with Tacitus, Optimi quique mortalium altessima cupiunt. To
conclude glory, and wealth that they might enrich their poor friends, were the
only subject of all their differences, and contentions. Why then should we cast
an opproprium on our Governors, for that they are somewhat like so victorious
and conquering Nation: I must not go beyond the bonds of the Booksellers
prescriptions, not to exceed one sheet; wherefore to fill it up, I shall
conclude with some few Queries on some new Books, though I intended to discant
on them all.

1. Whither he that wrote the 36. Queries, did not like a judicio is Ass,
propound more in one hour, then all the Common-wealths-men could answer all
their life time.

2. Whither a word to the purpose, or a Parthian Dart, may not be termed the
Fools bolt that is soon shot.

3. Whither he that wrote the 44. Queries, is not more Fool then Knave, since
there is seen in them so much of the first, but very little of the other.

4 Whither the Inquirers will not 'ere long verify the old Proverb, It Is good
sleeping in a whole skin, since.

5. Lastly, Whither he that tendered 19. Cases for Conscience to Hugh Peter's,
did not do preposterously and absurdly, since all the World knows, that one
little Case would have contained all that he ever had. I should have added this
Querie, whither the Bookseller that printed this sheet, and my Self, have not
more honesty then we can tell what to do with all.

FINIS.

