A DISCOURSE ABOUT Edification: IN ANSWER TO A QUESTION, Whether it is Lawful
for any Man to forsake the Communion of the Church of England, and go to the
Separate Meetings, because he can better Edify there?

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Jun. for Fincham Gardener at the White Horse
in Ludgate Street, 1683.

A DISCOURSE About EDIFICATION:
In Answer to a Question, England, and go to the separate Meetings, because he
can better Edify there?

Answer, It is Unlawful.

To make this plain, two things must be considered: First, What sort of Person
this is, who asks this Question. Secondly, What he means by Edification.


As to the Person, he is supposed to be one, that is fully satisfied, that he
may lawfully Communicate with the Church of England; That there are no Terms of
Communion put upon him, but which he can comply withal with a good Conscience;
That there is nothing in it contrary to the Word of God, natural Reason, or
plain Consequences fetched from both or either. And therefore he who thinks,
that there are some things unlawful in the Communion of the Church of England,
is not concerned in the Question; for he separates upon the Account of
Unlawfulness, and not Edification only, as is supposed in the Question.

Secondly, By Edification is meant, an Improvement of his Spiritual Condition
in the full latitude whereinsoever it may truly consist, whether in the
Articles of his Faith, which in the separate Congregations are better taught,
more clearly proved, more fitly applied to his practice, and to support his
hopes of Heaven, or whether in the Rules of Life, which are there more exactly
laid down, and more strongly enforced upon his Mind, or in Prayers, which among
them are better composed, and more fervently sent up unto God, and in all other
parts of Devotion, which there are better framed and ordered to affect his
Soul, and make a truly Christian man.

These two things being explained, and premised, the Answer to the Question
will be found true, if we consider these following Reasons:

1. That the Ground upon which the Question stands is false, viz. There is not
better Edification to be had in the separate Meetings, than in the Communion of
the Church of England.

This will appear, if we consider, 1. How apt and fit the whole Constitution of
the Church of England is to Edify Men's Souls. 2. That this Constitution is
well used, and managed, by the Pastors of our Church for Edification.


The first will be manifest by induction, if we consider the several parts of
her Constitution reducible to these following Heads:

1. Her Creeds or Articles of Faith are those which our Dissenters themselves
allow; which are full and plain, containing all Necessaries and Fundamentals in
Religion, nothing defective in Vitals or Integrals to make up the Body of a
true Christian Church. Christ that founded his Church, best knew what was
absolutely necessary to her being, and there is nothing that he has declared
to be so, but is contained in her Creeds. Whatever is fundamental for us to
know of the Nature of God, is to be found there, or by easy Consequences
deduced from them. Would we know what we ought to believe of the Nature of
Christ or his Officer, the Designs of his coming upon Earth, the Constitution
of his Reign and Government, the Rewards and Punishments of his Laws, the Times
of Account and Retribution, the mighty Miracles and extraordinary Acts of
Providence to confirm these, we may read them at large in Holy Writ, and find
wisely summed up in our Creeds. Whose Articles, to help the Memories of Men,
are short and few; and to assist the dullness of their Understandings, are
manifest and plain; they containing no more, than what was some way or other,
either supposed before, or included in, or following from that brief Creed, the
Character of a true Christian, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. 1 John
4.15.5.5.
Whatever is any way revealed by God as necessary, is an Article of our Faith;
nothing that is nice and obscure, fit only for dispute and wrangling, is
brought into our Creed; all whose Articles are Primitive and of Divine right,
none of them purely speculative or curious, but plain and useful in order to
practice, naturally leading to an Holy Life, the end of all Religion. We love
every thing that is truly ancient, and Apostolical; but we cannot call that an
eternal truth, which was but yesterday, and we are ready to embrace all truth,
but we cannot call that the High Priest which is but the Fringe of his Garment.
We believe all that the early Christians in the first 300 Years thought
sufficient for them to know (and they were very secure that this would save
them.) And if any truth be disguised or defaced by the iniquity of the
descending Ages, we are ready to receive it, whenever it is made clear, and
restored to its former shape and complexion; we casting out obstinacy and
perverseness out of our Practice, as well as niceness out of our Creed. That
Creed that Christ and his Apostles taught, the Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors,
the Wife and Good Men in the first and purest days of Christianity believed,
and were secure of Heaven by it, and therefore added no more; that Faith this
Church maintains, which will sufficiently and effectually Edify the Souls of
Men.

2. The Necessity she lays upon a Good Life and Works. For this is the solemn
intention of all Religion, our Creed, our Prayers, our Sacraments, and
Discipline, and all Devotion. Her Creed is such, that all its Articles so
directly, or by natural consequence, lead unto Virtue and Holiness, that no man
can firmly believe them, but they must ordinarily influence his Manners, and
better his Conversation; and if by virtue of his Creed his Life is not mended,
he either ignorantly and grossly mistakes their Consequences, or is wilfully
desperate. Our Church publicly declares, that without preparatory Virtues, no
Acts of Devotion, however set off with Zeal and Passion, are pleasing unto God,
and if obedience be wanting afterward, are but scene and show. Such a Faith
she lays down as fundamental to salvation, which rests not in the brain and
story, in magnifying and praising, in sighing and repeating, but in the
production of Mercy, Charity, and Justice, and such excellent Virtues. She
makes no debates between Faith and Good Works, nor argues nicely about the
preference, nor disputes critically the Mode how jointly they become the
condition of Salvation, but plainly determins, that without Faith and Good
Works, no Man shall see God. She not only keeps to a Form of sound Words, but
to a Conversation of equal Firmness and Solidity. Her Festivals are to
commemorate the Virtues of Excellent Men, and to recommend them as Presidents
for imitation. Her Ceremonies, which were principally designed for Decency, may
also remind us of those Virtues which become the Worshippers of God. Her
Collects and Petitions are for Grace to subdue our Follies, and to fortify our
resolutions for Holiness. Her Discipline is to lash the sturdy into Sobriety
and Goodness: And her Homilies are plainly and smartly, to declare against the
gross Acts of Impiety, and to persuade a true Christian Deportment in Word and
Deed, and her whole Constitution aims at the Design of the Gospel, to teach Men
to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly. She flatters and lulls no Man asleep
in Vice, but tells all secure sinners plainly, that they do not pray nor
receive aright, that they are not absolved, that their persons are not
justified, nor can have any true hopes of Heaven, except they purify
themselves, and be really just and good. She neither uses nor allows any nice
distinctions in plain Duties to baffle our Obedience, nor suffers a cunning
head to serve the designs of a wicked heart, and teach Men learnedly to sin;
but urges plain Virtues laid down distinctly in holy Writ, and taught by
Natural Reason and Conscience (without calling them mean Duties or ordinary
Morality) to be the great Ornament of our Religion, and the Soul of our Faith.
She sets no abstruse and fantastic Characters, nor any Marks, whose truth
must be fetched in by long deductions and consequences for Men to judge by,
whether they shall be saved or no, but Faith and good Works, which the
Philosopher and meanest Christian can easily judge of the civil interest of a
Nation is Edifi'd by such a Church, pressing the necessity of good Works, not
only thereby enforcing Peace and Justice, Pity and Tenderness, Humility and
Kindness, one toward another; but she makes Kings safer, and Subjects more
secure, condemning both Tyranny and Disobedience; Parents more obeyed, and
Subjects more loved, commanding equally Bowels and Affections, and Duty and
Honor; Masters and Servants, Husbands and Wives, and all Relations are kept in
their just Bounds and Privileges. With other Churches we make good Works
necessary to Salvation, but think our selves more modest and secure in taking
away Arrogance and Merit, and advancing the Grace of Christ: With other Men we
cry up Faith, but not an hungry and a starved one, but what is fruitful of good
Works, and so have all that others contend for, with greater modesty and
security.

3. How fitly this Church is constituted to excite true Devotion. When we make
our Addresses unto God, we ought to have worthy and reverend Conceptions of his
Nature, a true sense and plain knowledge of the Duty, and of the Wants and
Necessities, for which we pray to be supplied. All which our Church, to help
our Devotion, plainly sets down, describing God by all his Attributes of just,
wise, and laying forth the Vices and Infirmities of Humane Nature, and that
none else but God can cure our needs. When her Sons are to pray, the matter of
her Petitions are not nice and controverted, trivial, or words of a Party, but
plain and substantial, wherein all agree. Her Words in Prayer are neither
rustic nor gay, the whole Composure neither too tedious nor too short,
decently ordered to help our Memories, and wandering Thoughts. Responsals and
short Collects in Public Devotion are so far from being her fault, that they
are her beauty and prudence. There are few Cases and Conditions of Humane Life,
whether of a Civil or Spiritual nature, which have not their proper Prayers and
particular Petitions for them, at least as is proper for public Devotions.
When we return our Thanks, we have proper Offices to inflame our Passions, to
quicken our Resentment, to excite our Love, and to confirm our future
Obedience, the best instance of gratitude. When we Commemorate the Passion of
Christ, we have a Service fit to move our Affections, to assist our Faith, to
enlarge our Charity, to show forth and exhibit Christ and all his bloody
Sufferings, every way to qualify us, to discharge that great Duty. She has
indeed nothing to kindle an Enthusiastic heat, nor any thing that savours of
Raptures and Ecstasies, which commonly flow from temper or fraud, but that which
makes us manly devout, our judgment still guiding our affections. When we enter
first into Religion, and go out of the World, we have two proper Offices,
Baptism, and Burial, full of Devotion to attend those purposes: so that if any
does not pray, and give thanks, communicate, and live like a Christian; it is
not because the Services to promote these are too plain, and hungry, beggarly
and mean, but their own mind is not fitly qualified before they used them;
bring but an honest mind to these parts of Devotion, a true sense of God, sober
and good purposes, and affections well disposed, that which is plain will prove
Seraphical, improve our Judgment, heighten our Passions, and make the Church a
Quire of Angels. Without which good disposition our Devotion is but
constitution or melancholy peevishness, fullenness, or Devotion to a Party, a
Sacrifice that God will not accept.

4. Her Order and Discipline. Such are the Capacities and Manners of Men, not
to be taught only by naked Virtue, a natural Judgment, or an immediate Teaching
of God; but by Ministry and Discipline, decent Ceremonies and Constitutions,
and other external Methods: these are the outward Pales and Guards, the
Supplies and Helps for the Weakness of Humane Nature. Our Church has fitted
and ordered these so well, as neither to want or to abound; not to make
Religion too gay, nor leave her slovingly, neither rude nor fantastic, but is
clothed in dresses proper to a manly Religion, not to please or gratify our
senses, so as to fix there, but to serve the reason and judgment of our Mind.
There are none of our Ceremonies which good Men, and wise Men, have not judged
decent and serviceable to the great ends of Religion, and none of them but
derive themselves from a very ancient Family, being used in most Ages, and most
of the Churches of God, and have decency, antiquity, and usefulness, to plead
for them, to help our Memories, to excite our Affections, to render our
Services orderly and comely. Were we indeed all Soul, and such seraphical
Saints, and grown Men, as we make our selves, we might then plead against such
external helps, but when we have Natures of weakness and passion, these outward
helps may be called very convenient, if not generally necessary; and as our
Nature is mixed of Soul and Body, so must always our Devotion be here, and such
God expects and is pleased with. Our Church is neither defective in Power and
Discipline (had she her just dues, and others would do well to join with her in
her wishes, that they might be restored) which would turn all into confusion;
not yet tyrannical, want of authority breeding as many, if not more Miseries
than Tyranny, or too much Power, both of them severe Curses of a Nation. But
her Government, like her Clime, is so well tempered together, that the Members
of this Christian Society may not be dissolute or rude with her, nor her Rulers
insolent; being constituted in the Church with their different Names and
Titles, not for luster and greatness, and Secular purposes, but for suppression
of Vice, the maintaining of Faith, Peace, Order, and all Virtues, the true
Edification of Men's Souls. And if those Vices are not reproved and chastised,
which fall under her cognizance, it is not the fault of her Power, but because
by other ways ill restrained, unnecessary Divisions from her hindering der
Discipline upon Offenders, and so they hinder that Edification which they
contend for. This Government is not Modern, Particular, or purely Humane, but
Apostolical, Primitive, and Universal, to time as well as place: till some
private Persons, for Number, Learning, or Piety, not to be equaled to the good
Men of old, who defended it, and obeyed it, and suffered for it, out of some
mistakes of humane frailty and passion, or born down with the iniquities of the
times, began to change it, and declaim against it, though so very fit and
proper to promote Christanity in the World. This is a general account of that
Edification that is to be had in that Church in which we live; a more
particular one would be too long for this Discourse; but thus much must be
said, that examine all her particular Parts, and Offices, you will find none of
them light, or superstitious, novel, or too numerous, ill disposed, or uncouth,
improper or burdensome, no just cause for any to revolt from her Communion:
but considering the present circumstances of Christianity, and Men, the best
constituted Church in the World. Heb. 6.1.2 Pet. 3.18. Romans 15.2.1 Cor. 14.3.
If therefore Edification be going on to Perfection, or growing in Grace, if it
is doing good to the Souls of Men, if it be to make plain the great things in
Religion to the understandings of Men, or whatever the import of it is, in
relation to Faith or Virtue, which is the condition of our Salvation, it is to
be found in this Church; whose Constitution is apt and fit to do all this: And
St. Jude seems to tell us, that true Edification was a stranger to those who
separated from the common building, Verse. 19.
but those who kept to the Communion of the Church, built up themselves in
their most holy Faith, and prayed in the Holy Ghost. And the honest Christian,
with greater assurance, may expect the Grace and Blessings of Christ, and the
Divine Spirit, whose Promises are made to them, who continue in the Communion
of the Church, and not to them who divide from the Body, and have greater hopes
of Edification from their Teacher, than the Grace of God, from Apollos, that
waters, than from Christ, the chief Husbandman, who gives the increase.

2. This Constitution is used and managed in the best way, by the Pastors of
our Church to Edify the Souls of Men. This will appear, if we consider these
two things: 1. That there are strict Commands under great Panalties laid upon
the Pastors of our Church to do this; who are not left to their own freedom,
and private judgment, or the sorce only of common Christianity upon them thus
to improve Men's Souls committed to their charge, but have Temporal Mulcts and
Ecclesiastical Censures held over them, to keep them to their Duty. That when
they do inform or direct their Flocks about their Blief, they should keep to
the Analogy of Faith, or Form of sound Words. Or when they persuade to
Practice, their Rules and Propositions must be according to Godliness. That
whenever they Exhort or Rebuke, Preach or Pray, whenever they Direct, or Answer
the Scruples of Men's Minds, in the whole Execrise and Compass of their
Ministry, they are to have an eye to the Creed, to regard Mercy and Justice,
the Standard of good Manners; in short, to preserve Faith and a good Conscience
with substantial Devotion, which will to the purpose Edify Men's Souls, and
effectually save them. 2. That these Commands are obeyed by the Pastors of our
Church, and they do all things in it to Edification. For the truth of this, we
appeal to good Men, and wise Men, in the Communion of our Church, who have
Honesty and Judgment to confess this truth, and with gratitude acknowledge,
that the Pastors of the Church of England have led them into the ways of Truth
and Righteousness, cured their Ignorance, and reformed their Lives, and upon
good grounds given them an assurance of Heaven. To say such as these are
prejudiced, and want sincerity and knowledge to pass a judgment, is only to
prove, what we justly suspect, that they want true Edification among
themselves, and should be better taught the Doctrine of Charity. Our Protestant
Neighbors, impartial Judges, will give their Testimony to this Truth, who have
owned and commended the Government of this Church, condemned the Separation,
magnified the Prudence, Piety, and Works of her Governors, and Pastors, and
wished, that they and their Charge were under such a Discipline, and translated
many of their Pious and Learned Works to Edify and Save their People. The
Unreason-ableness of Separation, p. 117
Our dissenting Brethren themselves (at least in the good Mood, and out of the
heat of Dispute) give their consent to this, that the Instructions and
Discourses of our Pastors from their Pulpits are Solid, Learned, Affectionate,
and Pious, and their only Crime was, that sometimes they were too well studied,
and too good. If in the great number of the English Clergy, some few may be
lazy, one particular person may clothe his Doctrine in too gay a dress, another
talks Scholastically above the capacity of his hearers, a third too dully, a
fourth too nicely, and opinionatively, and here and there a Pastor answers not
the true design of Preaching to inform Men's Minds, to guide their Consciences,
and move their Affections; what is this to the general Charge, that no
Edification so good is to be had as in the separate Meetings, the pretended
Cause of their Separation; for it is no more a true Cause, than want of
Accommodation or Room in Churches, for some to separate, where good Edification
and Convenience too may be easily had. And since they compel our Pastors to
speak well of themselves by their detraction and speaking ill of them, they
must gladly suffer them as fools, ^ Cor. 11.19.
boldly to say, That since the Reformation, and many hundred years before,
there has not been a Clergy, so learned and pious, so prudent and painful, and
every way industrious, to Edify and save the Souls of Men, as now is in the
English Church.


The Second Argument to confirm the Answer is, That those that usually make
this pretense for Separation, do commonly mistake better Edification. We have
proved already, that good and sufficient Edification, to save the Souls of Men,
is to be had in the English Church. For if teaching plainly the Articles of
Faith, and laying down clearly Rules of Manners, using well composed Prayers,
and proper Administration of Sacraments, be not good, and sufficient
Edification, I know not what Edification means: it may be heating of fancy,
stirring up of humors, this, or that, and Men may as well define the thing
they call Wit, as what Edification means. And therefore to desert the plain and
great Duty of our Church Communion, for disputable, doubtful, or truly mistaken
Edification, is to be guilty of the sin of Schism. In most cases to judge what
is better or best, is very hard, and requires a sincere and considering head;
and so it is in the business of better Edification, which is so easily
mistaken, especially by the generality of the People, who are usually ignorant
of such nice things, and prejudiced by their Parties, and Affections, and are
mutable and various, according to their fancies. For better Edification, purer
Administrations, and Churches, and things that are more excellent, absolute
Prefection, and a less defective Way of Worship, are hard to understand,
perplex men's minds, and fill them with innumerable doubts and scruples, and put
them upon refining and purging so long, till they weaken and destroy the Spirit
of Religion. And so they run themselves into a known sin, for dark and
disputable advantages; which indeed are only mistakes, and principally are
these three that follow: 1. In taking nice and speculative Notions for great
and Edifying Truths. When Doctrins have been raised, only to please the temper
of the curious and inquisitive, yet have made many think, their hearts were
warmed, when their heads and fancies were gratified. And dark and obscure
Discourses about Angels, the state of separated Souls, Colos, 2. 18.
and things of the like nature, have made some call the Preacher high and
mysterious, while others, teaching the way of Salvation plainly, by Faith and a
good Conversation, have been lessened, with the character of dull, honest, and
moral Men, fit only for Catechists, and Christians of the lowest Form. Tickle
but their imaginations with conjectural Discourses about the situation of
Paradise of old, or Hell now, and you are a sounder Divine, than he, that only
draws wholesome Conclusions from Adam's prevarication, to caution you against sin
of the like nature, or how to avoid those dismal flames where ever they are.
And others have been silly and fantastic in admiring those who have pratled
about the length of the Sword that guarded Paradise, or how the Spirits above
pass Eternity away, and scorned him, who in plain methods chalkt them out the
way that will lead them to Heaven. 1 Timothy 1.4.
The ancient Gnostics, because they made a mixture of the Jewish Fables, and
Genealogies, of their Lilith and Behemoth, and fetched in the stories of the
Gods, out of Orpheus and Philistion, (two great Divines in the Pagan Religion)
into plain Christianity, thought themselves the most knowing Men, of the
Secrets of God and Heaven, and wondered how only Faith upon Jesus, and keeping
of the Commands, could be knowing of God, or Wisdom from above. The wranglings
of the Schools, with their fine distinctions and barbarous terms, sitter for
Magic than Christianity, by their Disciples have been prized for great and
precious Truths. And Enthusiastic Raptures, and flights, making once the Brain
to swim, have snatched the hearers beyond themselves, and then thought them the
Dictates of the Spirit, and the Teachings of God, and the more dark and obscure
the Doctrine has been, the greater illumination it was esteemed, and called a
noonday Thought, which was a midnight Dream. Such things as these pass with
too many for saving Truths, a great part of Mankind being ignorant in their
Heads, and corrupt in their Practice, espoused to Parties and Interests, having
Constitutions and Passions fit for these, they readily swallow them down. The
Apostle confirms the truth of this, 2 Timothy 4. ^.
telling us the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but
after their own lusts, shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears, caused by some disease of Vice within, which is not to be cured by good
Physic, but only scratched and gratified; and and if the Food, though wholesome
and good, be not to their Palate and Fancy, they complain of hunger and
starving. These and many more are the Instances of a weak and sickly nature,
craving only nice and curious things for Spiritual Meat, and kecking at the
sincere Milk of the Word, plain and substantial Truths that it may grow
thereby. To give therefore a liberty to every Man to run from an established
Church, upon the account of better Edification, which is so often and easily
mistaken, is to direct Men into temptation and a snare, and is dangerous and
sinful; and when once the gap is open, where will, especially the Vulgar stop?
May we not add, that this pretense of better Edification is very sit to
disguise and color other Vices. When Controversies have unhappily risen, from
an unjust denial of the Ministers Rights and Dues, or the accidents of civil
conversation, they make The Ministry, that was spiritual and good before, to be
called dull and mean, and better must be sought elsewhere, while only Revenge
or Covetousness is at the bottom. Wandering Reports, or their own lavish Tongue,
and censorious Temper, have called some Pastors, Covetous, or Intemperate, or
branded them with other Vices, and then cry out, they cannot Edify in such a
Church, and so make one fault help out another, and Defamation must excuse
their Schism. 2. In taking the Opinions of Parties for undoubted Truths
essential to salvation. When men have once wedded a Party, and the Opinions
peculiar to it, they magnify and propagate them, grow surious for their
defense, and call them the best part of Religion: and if these be not abetted
and cried up by the Pastors of our Church, or they differ from them in
explications and distinctions of them, the way of salvation is not taught, they
do not improve their Spiritual condition, and therefore is a just cause of
their separation. Because the Notion or Explication of Faith, and Spirit,
Church, and Grace, Justification, Regeneration, Conversion, Adoption, and other
things of the like nature, are generally different in our Church from those of
the separation, they therefore cry we destroy the saving Truths of the Gospel,
and instead of being Edifi'd, they find themselves weakened in their Christian
Faith. Though it is plain to all impartial judgments, that their sense and
interpretation of them, by natural consequences lessen the Grace of the Gospel,
and give security to lazy sinners, a strange sort of Edification. For though
our Charity is not so narrow, as to think every man a vicious person, who is
thus mistaken in his conclusions, yet however, this alters not the nature of
these Opinions, and their consequences, and who knows how far men of ill
Principles do improve them? Such is the perverse and angry temper of many about
their own Opinions, no way necessary to salvation, wherein wise men and good
men may differ, which are not stated by Authority, and may not be determined
till Elias come; yet if these be not insisted on, and pressed with vehemence,
the great things of the Gospel are omitted, and truths are wanting to their
perfection. And if once the People are possessed with Opinions and Notions,
they grow fierce about them, and call them salvation truths, and run headlong
into a Sea of disorder; and tumult, for their defense. The Disciples of the
fifth Monarchy, the Pretenders to the Spirit, the Enemies of Childrends
Baptism, think themselves wronged, and the Gospel hidden, if casually they hear
you making Interpretations of the Kingdom of Jesus, the Operations of the
Spirit, and that divine institution, different from their lewd sense. And many
Questions, when determined, after a great deal of labor, and passion, and
expense of time, may improve our knowledge, but not Faith and a good Life, the
only Edification. The early and best Christians thought themselves mighty
Saints, and secure of Heaven, if they only knew Jesus and the Resurrection in
their full extent, and the World being such ill Judges about any other
Edification, it would be well if they returned to this good old way, and rest
satisi'd there, lest they take the Inventions of Men, Rhetoric, or subtely,
secular interest, or conjectures, for the Pillars of the Temple, to support
their Faith; and so upon the score of Edification, break the Peace and Unity of
the Church, and Obedience to our Governors, the great things of Religion. 3.
In taking sudden heats and warmth for true Edification, when melting tones,
affectionate expressions, solemn looks and behavior, passion and vehemence,
and other Arts have played upon the fancy, and put their constitutions into
different motions, some have thought themselves so strangely Edifi'd, as though
it was the impulse and powerful acting of the Divine Spirit; which many times
is no more than a bright or a lowering day can do, acting upon the Animal
Spirits, and a Dose of Physic will do the same. And if they carry the men no
further, improve no virtue in them, they are nothing else but down right flesh
and blood. And they are hot and cold, high and low very changeable and
uncertain, according as the humors flow, and as is the bodily temper of the
men. Upon this account some are melted into Tears, and others are fired into
Rage and Zeal, their Spirits, like Tinder, easily catching the flame; and these
have hapened in the worst of Men, serving only the Designs of Fury and
Hypocrisy, and can no more be called Edification, than the Fire from the
Altar, that may consume the Temple, Zeal. Yet such mistakes as these have been
too common; Anger and Revenge have been called Zeal for God; Trade and Interest
have been baptized Christianity; Fury and Fumes of the Stomach have been
thought the Divine Spirit; ridiculous Looks and unmanly Postures have been
fancied true Acts of Devotion, and when they themselves were pleased, and in
the good humor, God was reconciled, and when they were dull and heavy, the
Spirit was withdrawn: and according as these heats and bodity passions were
stirred, Matthew. 6.16.
so the Ministry was Edifying or unprofitable; pale Cheeks and hollow Looks
have been counted signs of Grace, and the Disease of their body passed for the
Virtue of their mind. And when a Doctrine has been so insinuated, as to hit
and favor these, they were strangely improved, and had obtained a good degree
in Religion. Many of these may be beginnings, or occasions, leading unto
Religion, and may serve some good purposes in men that can manage them well,
but to cry up these for Edification, and going on unto prefection, is to
betrary their People into the power of every Cheat and Impostor, who has the
knack to raise these heats, which pass for reason and conviction of mind; and
most commonly are great hindrances to solid and sound reasoning, plain
discourses, the true way to Edification, to make firm and lasting impressions
upon the mind; while the filly and the weak, who are most subject to these
heats and colds, the uncertain motions of their spirits, are fickle and
inconstant, turning round in all Religions, such men being all sail are more
easily tossed about with every wind of Doctrine.


3. Argument to confirm the Answer is; That pretense of better Edification will
cause endless Divisions in the Church. This Question does suppose that every
man must judge, and so great a part of the World being ignorant and vicious,
partial and prejudiced, false, and insincere to themselves and others, they may
run from Teacher to Teacher, from Presbyterian to Independent, from Independent
to Anabaptist, or Quaker, and never stop till they come at their Grave to find
out better Edification, ever learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.
and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, ever seeking and never
satisfied, till they find the Pattern upon the Mount, or the new Jerusalem be
come down from above, till they meet with such a prefect Church, as perhaps
will never be here upon earth, till her great Master comes. The ignorant will
easily mistake, and who can know the heart and intention of the false and the
hypocrite? And the Governor has nothing to do here to retrench this liberty,
which, as they pretend, is either born with them, or given them by God. At this
rate, may not every single person be a Church, leaving all other Christian
Societies, fancying that he can better Edify at home with the workings of his
own mind, and some pretended infusions of the Spirit, that he shall better meet
with in his privacies and retirements than in an external and carnal Ministry
and Crowd. When once they have torn the Unity of the Church in pieces, and set
up their more Edifying Meetings, in comes whole shoals of Vices, Envy and
Detraction, Strife and Emulation, Murmurings and Complainings, Fierceness and
Wrath, and a great number of things more, prejudicial to the state of the
Kingdom, the interest of Families, the good of Friendship and all civil
Conversation, a wonderful Edification, destroying the very soul of
Christianity. The same Principles that divide them from this Church, will
crumble them into endless Parties, and every little Chip may call it self a
Building, and so destroy all good Government and Discipline, so necessary to
propagate and preserve Christianity in the World. And should I live to see that
fatal day, when the Government in our Church should be dissolved, and liberty
given to every man, upon pretense of better Edification, to choose his Pastor
and his Church, so many Mischiefs and Confusions, would follow from it, that If
there was any regard to common Christianity, or sense of temporal happiness
left within their Breast, they would too late repent their Schism, (as once in
a great degree many of them did) and beg upon their Knees, that the Pale of
this Government in Church might be set up again, and they would receive it with
all its pretended load of Impositions. This will certainly follow from dividing
from the Church, to the laughter of Rome, and joy of all the Enemies of our
Christian Religion. All this would be avoided if men were sensible of the
heinous nature of Schism, which the Apostles and all the ancient Christians
have painted forth in such black colors, though others think our Divisions in
the Church are no more, than variety of Companies and Liveries in a City.

4. What great discouragement this is to an honest and truly Christian
Ministry. When a Pastor of our Church shall diligently and faithfully, plainly
and devoutly unfold the Articles of Faith, and lay down Rules for Practice,
which will certainly bring him to Heaven, yet his Flock or Charge, one after
another, upon pretense of greener Pastures, greater Knowledge, better
Elocution, Delivery, Tone, or the like, to be had elsewhere, shall run from
him; will it not cool his Zeal, check his Labors, and affront his Person and
Office? This may be done to the painful, as well as idle, to the judicious and
learned, as well as imprudent and ignorant Pastor, where the People shall have
liberty of Separation for the sake of Edification. The ill effects of this have
turned upon their own Ministers, and new Government, and the most own
Ministers, and new Government, and the most judiclous among them have sadly
complained of it. Formerly they Petitioned, for a painful and preaching
Ministry, but this pretense of better Edification gives denial to their own
request; such Discouragements as these happening severely sometimes to the best
of Pastors, as well as the worst. And they have no cure for this, having put a
power into the Peoples hands which they cannot recall; for neither King,
Parliament, Bishop, or Pastor, can tell them what is Edification so well as
themselves. And are the Pastors of the Church to be so treated and trisled
with, who derive their Offices and Authority from God to Command and Persuade,
to Rebuke and Exhort, and have the Charge of Souls committed to them, for
fancies, peevishness and humor, to be scorned and discountenanced, and have
their Ministry rendered useless, and the Sheep to govern the Shepherd; But what
if our Pastor be idle or remiss in his Duty, or corrupt in his Faith, and
teaches Error instead of sound Doctrine, and we have no means of Edification?
what must we do? must we take in Poison for Food? or not be sed at all? to be
sure you must not run into Schismatical Separation; it is more tolerable to go
to other Congregations of our Communion, that may be irregular, but it is not
schismatical; but thanks be to God we have a Government, which upon a just and
modest Complaint, will quicken the lazy and negligent, correct the Heretical
Pastor, and restore to you true Edification.

That this Discourse may prevail upon such who make this Question, I desire to
recommend these two following things, which are very reasonable, to their
consideration.

1. That if they fancy any Defects in our Government, they should not hence
conclude, that they have not sufficient Edification in the Church to save their
Sold. If upon a nice search and critical enquiry, they think they have found
some little Flaws and Defects, improper Phrases, doubtful Senses, and some
small Omissions in the matter of our Prayers and Discipline, yet let them not
conclude, that these can weigh in the balance against the black sin of Schism
and Separation, and all its sad Consequences, which is excused by nothing else
but terms of communion plainly sinful. Have not Divine Services been accepted,
which were less perfect, and came not up to their rule? as is plain in
Hezekiah's Passover, which was not to the Purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.
yet the good King's Prayer and the necessity of the time prevailed with God to
heal the People, that is, to repute them clean and well prepared, and their
Sacrifice and Devotion good. Is there no Reverence to be paid to the Pious
Authors of our Service and Reformation, but to tell them, they must divide from
them, were they now living? for they cannot Edify under that Religion and
Government for which they died. Is there, or will there over be any Government
in the Church, so well framed and built, but some curious Surveyor can spy out
some disproportion or ill shape, especially if assisted by ill Nature,
Emulation, the Spirit of Pride and Contention, which is ever quick sighted
abroad, and blind at home? the difficulty of knowing what is utmost perfection,
and absolute purity of Administrations, (which, till attained, these Men think
they are not to rest in any Church) should make them judge heartily, interpret
fairly, and comply with every thing, that is not sinful, to preserve Peace and
Love. When Men in the English Church are plainly taught to believe well, to
live well, and to dye well, and have good and proper Offices to serve these
great purposes, in order to their Salvation, what can they desire more? to be
better, or more saved, we know not what it means. To leave such a Communion,
upon such an account, proceeds from peevishness, uncharitableness, or some ill
Principle, and is down right Schism, if ever there was Schism in the World.
Bring but an honest, sincere and teachable mind, and it will find improvement
and advantage in Offices and Administrations fuller of spots and blemishes far
than they can pretend to find in the English Church; but if the mind be by
assed by a Party, or corrupted by Designs, if is Palate be vitiated, the best
Food is course and insipid to it.

2. Let Edification be placed in the substantial things of Religion. Some
revolt from our Church for things wherein the Pastor is solely concerned, and
others for things of decency, and indifferency; but these things do not concern
the Case of Edification: That a right Faith, and an honest Conversation, are
not taught in our Church, is only a scandal cast upon her, to plead for their
unjust Separation. For after she has plainly and distinctly taught the
Articles of Faith, (as was proved before) with the same Spirit and Zeal she
commands and presses Justice, Humility, Mercy, and every Virtue that is
necessary to a true Christian Life, and both under the Penalty of Eternal
Damnation; these, and these alone, do truly Edify the Souls of Men, as is
plain, if we consider, that our Prayers and Sacraments, our Churches Ceremonies
and Discipline, and all other parts in Religion are in order to, and minister
unto Faith their head, that works by love: and the nearer these approach unto,
and the greater service they do to this design, the greater degree they have in
Religion, and more value is set upon them. This is that Religion which our
first Parent was of in his Paradise and innocence; Noah and his Posterity in
their Precepts, and Pious Men in different Countries before the Law of Moses
thus served God. And the scope and aim of the Jewish Law, with its Temple and
Utensils, its Figures and Ceremonies, was to discipline and teach Men thus to
be good, with allowance to the Nature of that People, and the Times they lived
in. And the best and most knowing Pagans thought such a Religion as this would
most please God, who therefore in some measure did accept it, and reward it
with greater Discoveries, as is plain in Cornelius, the Queen of Candaces
Treasurer, Acts 8.27.
and others, who having not the Law, Acts 10.4.
were a Law unto themselves. In such things as these the Kingdom of our Messiah
was to consist, Romans 14.17.
not in Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Such a Religion as this Edifies in so great a degree, that it is the only
Condition and Qualification for the upper World; where (though other great
Parts of Religion shall dye with us) Righteousness, Gratitude, Love of God, and
glorified Beings, and such like Virtues, are of an Eternal Nature, shall be
Ingredients of our Happiness, and shall live with us for ever. What can be
justly required in Religion, to improve Men's Souls, that is not found in this?
Is it to recover the Nature of Man now defaced? Righteousness and Goodness,
proceeding from Faith, their root, will make us truly good. Is it to give us a
clearer Knowledge and worthy Conceptions of God? such a practical Religion as
this best prepares for greater knowledge, and in Scripture sense is knowing of
him. 1 John 2.4.
Is it Religion to love God? the love of God consists in obedience to his
Precepts, submission to his Will, and resignation to his Providence, otherwise
it is flattery and fondness. Is it the design of Religion to bless Mankind here,
and edify them in their different relation? such a Religion as this in our
Church will do all that, and make the World a Paradise once more. This will
give us the best character to judge by, whether we shall be saved or no, being
the perfection of all other marks and signs of our assurance of Life and Glory.
When we are so Edifi'd and Religious, we are certain, that we are justified and
adopted, accepted and treated like the Sons of God, that we are in Christ, and
have our wedding Garments on, our proper qualifications for the state of
Heaven. Such an honest Principle as this, makes our Prayers to be heard, our
Devotions to be regarded, our Hopes to be strengthened. This is the great
intention of Christianity, the Holy of Holys of our Temple, and all Religion.
Such a Religion as this being so strongly enjoined and zealously taught in our
Church, no ways disguised by a dress of Phrases, or corrupted into soft and
lushious fences, we need not complain for want of the means of Grace and
Edification; we need not cross the Seas, or run into private corners for it,
it is nigh us, even at our doors, in the established Government of the Church of
England. Some use to say, that brown Bread and the Gospel was very good Fare;
but now they are grown as nice and delicate about Religion and Edification, as
about Sawces and Dresses. Thanks be to God, it is a knowing Age, I wish it was
as good. The Corruption of it does not arise for want of Knowledge and
Information; if it does, the Cure is near, let them value that Church and
Government that has all things in it sufficient to Men's Salvation. Let them
not think so light of Schism. and speaking evil of the Rule and Discipline in
our Church, so fit and necessary to the preservation of Christianity; let them
not cry up other Paul's and Apollos's; any other Teachers making Divisions among
us than this Church has allowed for their Edification, which is so far from
Spiritual Edification, that it calls such Men Carnal. 1. Cor. 3.4.
For the desire of any other Nourishment, beside such plain Food, is Spiritual
Pride and Wantonness, and they pamper their Fancies, while they starve their
Judgment. Let us therefore stick to such a manly Religion, one great part of
which is, to preserve Obedience, Peace, and Order, and say of our Church, that
teaches it, as the Disciples of its Author; Thou art he, and we seek for no
other: whither shall we go, thou have the Words of Eternal Life? Ephesians. 4.12,
13.
She has all things in her that are necessary for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body, till we all
come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature, of the fullness of Christ. That
such a Religion as this in our Church is pleasing both to God and Man, we have
the Testimony of an Apostle: Romans 14.18.
He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
Men.

FINIS.

