Obsequium and Veritas: Oxford, March 21st. 1681.
In a Dialogue betwixt a Shoo-maker, and a Tailor.
Shoom. GOod morrow, Jack! how stands the case of your Affairs at your end of
the Town!


Tailor. Stand! Believe me, we are like to have a blessed Parliament; and we
don't doubt, but we shall have hopeful Resolutions, and a brave Result of all
their Consultations.


Shoom. Well; but let us not stand here, let Affairs stand how they will; let
us take one Cup of good Ale together, and discourse it further. Let us step
here into the King's Head, here is a glass of good liquor.


Tay. Come, allons donc. --


Shoom. Well; we were talking of hopeful Resolutions; and a successful Issue to
all the Consultations of the Parliament. This, you say, the City hop's for, nay
doubts not of.


Tay. Yes, indeed; for to show you how great an E^eem, and sublime regard we
have for our Parliament, we have had the Major part of the City, all true
Protestants, and good Patriots; who offered their services to, and accordingly
did accompany our Sheriffs and Members of the Parliament to Oxford.


Shoom. God's Death! that is an unwonted Ceremony, and it smells plaguey rank of
Rebellion. Bless me! what were you afraid of, that made you enter upon such a
tumultuous Complement? I heard indeed you were all richly equipt, and made a
most glorious show, I was then in the Country, and so, did not understand it.


Tay. Why not understand it? had we not a great deal of reason, to secure the
safety of those worthy Persons, who were to deliver us out of the Fears,
Distractions and Disorders, which the cursed Popish Plot, and the Succession of
a Popish Prince, by which would follow the Subversion of our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties, and consequently the yoke of Popish Servitude, did put us into:


Shoom. I faith; you are brave fellows! you talk of the safety of His Majesty's
Person, and how great Loyalty and Zeal tends to it; but for ought I see, the
subject is preferred before the Prince; the King is not at all intimidated,
though in the midst of the most Implacable Enemies, but he can and did venture
his Journey to Oxford, attended with not Twenty of his Guards, when Mr.
Parliament Man has forsooth about Three or Four hundred for his suit! Well, but
what News have you from Oxford, what, are we like to have a longer Session
than they had last?


Tay. They are Dissolved!


Shoom. Dissolved? God's Death, when?


Tay. On Monday last, being on the 28th. of March.


Shoom. Really, I Am glad of it. Indeed, I heard how their Procedings were, and
what measurs they took in their Votes. I thought the Kings speech would have
had that Influence upon them, that they would have Regulated their Actions
according to that Rule, which His Majesty told them, should be ever his, viz.
The Law of which, they, with the King were the Fathers; and not have pretended
to make themselves a particular (nay, Supreme) Court of Judicature, in Cases of
Treason; that no Person Impeached of Treason by the Commons of England in
Parliament, and stands so Impeached, could be tried by any other inferior
Court, without a high Breach of the privilege of Parliaments. Good God! I find
then the King and the Lords, are but Ciphers; and what the King has declared
ought to be, must not be done, because the Commons will not have it so. So
that, they who make so great an Outcry against Arbitrary Proceedings, make
themselves the great Favorers of it. What, I pray, was the cause of this? And
who the Plague was it, they stickled about then?


Tay. Fitz. Harris; would the Devil had him, e're we had been troubled with
him, and his Depositions too, with a pox to 'em. -- But I Will tell thee, there is
somewhat else, that was the more immediate Reason of their Dissolution; 'twas,
concerning a Business of the --


Shoom. Ay, ay, of the Devil, I think; you Citizens, if you cannot hear of the
true genuine Reasons, forsooth, you will make them; and shall pass Authentic
too, as if you had been intimately acquainted with the Kings Cabinet, or had
known his Resolutions before he thought upon them. Faith, I Will tell thee
plainly; would but you (Sir Formals) learn this old Maxim, that Sua quemque
alit ars, which perhaps is too much Latin for a third part of our Mechanic
News-mongers; who make it the greatest part of their Business to run from the
Coffee-house to the Alehouse, and thence to the Tavern; and so buzzing about,
till they lose their sense, as well as Reason; I say, would every Man but mind
his own private Affairs, erect a Tribunal in his own Closet, and let his
Domestic Economy be his greatest Study, we should have the Public Peace less
disturbed, and the Government less obnoxious to Censure and Contempt. 'T has
never been good times, since every Cobbler and Porter pretend to understand
State Policy, and every Finical Mechanic, and proud Tradesman, to be verse't
and knowing in the Arcana's of the Privy-Councel. In Troth, Jack, my name's
Veritas; and I must speak like myself; I case not for popular Applause, nor
will I suffer Hypocrisy veil my Nakedness; though I have, what I must always
expect, an Odium, or Hatred: For my part I am a good honest Southwark Borough,
and I thank God, we love our King, and our Country; and our Public Peace,
Utility, and Order; and, as we said in our Addresses to our Elected Burgesses;
Though we did not like your accompanying to Oxford, them in such Pomp and
Splendour; yet we assured them, we were as ready to stand by them, in the
discharge of the Trust we reposed in them, as the best Life-and fortune-men of
them all.


Shoom. But prithee Jack, are they all returned home yet from Oxford?


Tay. Yes, a great part of them; but they are not all come yet.


Shoom. Ha, ha, ha! Faith I cannot choose but laugh, to see how silly and
sneaking they looked, with their Heads hanging downwards, and their Hats
Flapping about their Ears, their hopes frustrated, and their Designs
infatuated; when in their Setting out, they appeared brisk and airy, and their
Equipage showed them like Men designed for a Camp, rather than an Assembly of
Peace.


Tay. Well, well, come, talk no more of it: Quod factumest, infectum fieri
nequit, Prithee hold thy Tongue.


Shoom. Hold my Tongue, I Gad, it would make a Stone speak, to see how hot
brained Men are; and forsooth, to make their Designs more plausible, a needless
fear of the Subversion of the Government, the Protestant Religion, and the
Liberties of the Subjects, must still be the specious pretense for all their
unwarrantable and unlawful Practices, and every half wited Scoundrel, must
pretend to censure the management of those at the Helm. A fine age IN Faith!
Come, come, Jack, be of my mind; Been vixit, qui been latuit: let us keep at
home with our wives, and leave frequenting the News-mongers; and let us
administer what we can to public Utility and Peace.


Tay. IN Faith, thou say very well? Come, here is a health to thee, which I
am confident thou will pledge; God bless King Charles, and send us all Peace
and Tranquillity, now, and at the hour of Death.


Shoom. Come, with all my Soul, and hang up all the Roundheads, as the Oxford
Blades said, and let every true Englsh-man, Loyal Heart, and Honest Protestant,
say, Amen,


By R. Hearn.
LONDON, Printed for the Author in the year, 1681.


