THE Perjured Phanatick: Or the Malicious Conspiracy of Sr. JOHN CROKE of
CHILTON, HENRY LARIMORE and other PHANATICKS, AGAINST THE LIFE of Robert
Hawkins Clerk, And late Minister of CHILTON, Occasioned by his Suit for TITHS.
Discovered in a TRIAL AT ALISBURY Before the Right Honorable Sir MATTHEW HALE
Then Lord Chief BARON of the EXCHEQUER AND Lord Chief JUSTICE OF ENGLAND:

Published by his Lordship's Command.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhil, 1685.

TO THE READER.
THere are two Questions which every one that looks on this Trial will be apt
to put, and expect a Resolution: viz. Why was not this Published sooner? and
why now? The answer to the former depends on matter of Fact, (so that as it can
have no more credibility, so it demands as much as the serious Protestation of
a Christian and a Minister can give it:) and will be a fit introduction to the
Reply to the second Query, and I hope both together will give sufficient
satisfaction. A very good friend of mine, and near Relation of Sir John Croke
engaged me not to do it whilst he lived; 'twas hard to forbear so long, and
suffer my Innocence to be so publicly aspersed, and not receive as public a
Vindication. The Conspirators had their Agents abroad, who published and very
zealously heightened the Crimes they themselves had forged: many years the Plot
had been tontriving and endeavored to be brought forth in most of the Courts
in England: My Credit defamed, false Arrests, and Excommunication procured,
violent Entrys made upon my Church and threats used (barbarous Malice) to those
Women who came to assist my Wife in Travail: But Justice prevailed against
their Malice, I had right upon my side, and bafled their Contrivances: Then the
grand Roguery was brought upon the Stage, and they took Counsel together to
take off the Just Man, because he was unprofitable to them; They had heard that
a dead Lion could not bite, and resolved to make the Experiment on Me. Yet tho
the Provocations were so great, the Obligations my Friend had put upon me
prevailed, and I spared the Family, that He might not see the Evil which they
had brought upon themselves in his days: Besides, as to the neighboring
places, Justice had done me Right, and secured my Reputation, both by the
Acquittal, and the encouragement it gave me (the Lord Chief Baron himself
directing the Process for special Bail) to Prosecute several of the
Conspirators: A hearty submission and reasonable compositions were the easiest
terms that could be allowed: Larimore paid 30 l. Thomas Croxton, 44 1. Tho.
Beamsly, 20 1. Mayn, 15 l. Nicholas Sanders, 12 l. The rest their Poverty
secured, and Sir John Croke lost his Commission. So much in answer to the first
question: which might be partly applied to the Second, and with what I shall
farther add I hope make a just reply: I have lately heard this Trial more
talked of than formerly, some notable Evidences of the present times prompted
several Men's Curiosity to look back into what had been formerly done; and this
Account convinced them that 'twas no new thing for Fanatical Villains to Plot,
Contrive, and be Perjured for less matters than Rule and Empire,

Beckly, Nov. 13, 1684. R. H.

THE TRIAL.
UPon Tuesday, being the 9th. of March, 1688. I went to Alisbury, and got
thither about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, and about the same time, came
in the Reverend Judges, viz.

Sir Matthew Hale Knight, (then Lord Chief Baron of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, but now) Lord Chief Justice of England: and Hugh Windham Sergeant at
Law. And upon Wednesday the tenth of March, the Assizes began, and in the
afternoon of the same day, Larimore (by the advice of Sir John Croke who had
then got leave to come to the Assizes) carried his Bill of Indictment against
me, to the Grand Jury, their names were as follows,

John Hill, Gent. Samuel Grange, Gent. Richard Cokeman, Gent. Jacob Sale, Gent.
Thomas Redding, Gent. Thomas Berringer, Gent. Clement Summerford, Gent. John
Winter, Gent. John Burnham, Gent. Ralph Rice, Gent. Jonathan Tomlins, Gent.
William Barret, Gent. John Butterfield, Gent. William Pedder, Gent. John
Fosket, Gent. John Sare, Gent. John Merydale, Gent. Robert Worrel, Gent. George
Wells, Gent. In all Nineteen.

These were the Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest for the Body of the County of
Buckingham, and unto them the foresaid Larimore exhibited his Bill of Felony
against me, the Sum, and Substance of it, was as follows, The Grand Inquest
for our Sovereign Lord the King upon their Sacred Oaths present, that Robert
Hawkins late of Chilton, in the County aforesaid Clerk, did upon the 18th. of
September, in the 20th. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the II.
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender
of the Faith, etc. with Force, and Arms, etc. at Chilton aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, two Gold Rings, each of them at the value of ten shillings,
one white Holland Apron, of the value of one shilling six pence, two pieces of
Gold, each of them at the value of ten shillings, and nineteen shillings in
Silver of the Goods and Chattels of Henry Laurimore, in the Parish, and County
aforesaid, then and there being found, Then and there Feloniously he did Steal,
take, and carry away, contrary to the Peace, etc.

This Bill was Signed by the G^^nd Jury, Bill^ Vera, and Returned to my Lord
Chief Baron Hale, who then sat on the Crowns side, (or upon Life and Death)
about six of the Clock at night.

Upon Thursday the 11th. of March, 1668. my Lord Chief Baron came to the Hall
about eight of the Clock in the morning, and the Court being set, I rendered my
self willing to be tried according to the Laws of this Kingdom. And when the
Clerk of the Assizes saw me bow to the Court, he then informed my Lord (and
said) this is Mr. Hawkins, who stands Indicted for Felony, and then the Clerk
of the Arraigns read the Bill, which was Signed, and Returned, as beforesaid;
and then I was set to the Bar, without any other Prisoners.

Clerk of the Arraigns said, Robert Hawkins hold up thy hand, which I then did,
and then the Clerk Read the Indictment against me as follows, YOu stand
Indicted in Alisbury, in the County of Bucks, by the name of Robert Hawkins,
late of Chilton in the County aforesaid, Clerk, for that you the said Robert
Hawkins (not having the fear of God before your eyes,) upon the 18th. of
September, in the 20th. Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, Charles the
II. By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. With Force and Arms, etc. at Chilton aforesaid in
the County aforesaid into the dwelling house of one Henry Larimore, Feloniously
did enter, and two Gold Rings at the value of ten shillings each of them, one
white Holland Apron, of the value of one shilling and six pence, two pieces of
Gold, each of them at the value of ten shillings; and nineteen shillings in
Silver, of the Goods and Chattels of him, the said Henry Larimore, then, and
there being found, then and there Feloniously you did steal, take, and carry
away, contrary to the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, His Royal
Crown and Dignity, etc.

How say thou Robert Hawkins, art thou guilty of the Felony whereof thou
stand Indicted, or not Guilty?

Robert Hawkins, Not Guilty my Lord.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Rob. Hawk. By God, and the Country.


Clerk. God send you a good Deliverance.


Court. Call the Jury, which the Clerk did.


Crier, Call these, viz.

Richard Lambourne* James Reynolds Jun. Robert Ho^re, I challenged him* L. C.
B. Set him by.


Edward Butler. Tho. Coals, I challenged him. L. C. B. Set him by.


Richard Hearnese. Thomas Sanders of Chilton was Challenged by Larimore,
contrary to Custom. Edward Carter. John Goodwyn. William Porter. John Ringham.
William Cannon Jun. William Welsh. Edward Cope. Francis Rushell.
All these being in number 15. but three of them were challenged, two of them
by me, (I being informed) they were no friends to the Church of England; and
for the third, viz. Mr. Tho. Saunders, he was challenged by Larimore contrary
to custom, without showing and reason, he being a Neighbor that knew us both,
and the business better than any of the rest of the Jurors. The other twelve
were sworn as follows.

Clerk. Rob. Hawkins, Hold up thy hand which I did.


Marshal Richard Lambourne, Lay thy hand upon the Book; look upon the Prisoner,

YOU shall well and truly Try, and true Deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King, and the Prisoner at the Bar, whom you shall have in Charge
according to your Evidence, So help you God: Kiss the Book. And so were all the
rest Sworn.


Clerk. Crier count these. Richard Lambourne, James Reynolds, two, etc. twelve
good men, and true, stand together, and hear your Evidence.


Clerk. Crier make a Proclamation.


O Yes, etc.

IF any man can inform my Lords, the Kings Justices, the Kings Sergeant, or the
Kings Attorney, of any Murders, Felonys, or Treasons, Done, or Committed by the
Prisoner at the Bar, before this Inquest be taken, between our Sovereign Lord
the King and the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come forth, and they shall be
heard, for now the Prisoner at the Bar stands upon his Deliverance. And all
others bound by Recognizance to give in Evidence against the Prisoner at the
Bar, come forth and give your Evidence, or else you will forfeit your
Recognizances.


Clerk. Crier call the Witnesses,


Henry Larimore Sen. the Prosecutor. Richard Main Jun. Constable. Tho.
Beamsly. Tythingman, (Brother in law to the said Larimore)* Dodsworth Croke
Esquire, (Sir John Crokes eldest Son.) John Cox. Henry Larimore Jun. (Son to
the said Larimore, near twenty years old and not Baptized.) Mary Keen. John
Beamsly, Sister to the said Larimore.) Margaret Larimore, (wife to the said
Larimore.) John Chilton. William Croke Gent. (Son to Sir John Croke.) John
Boyse. Thomas Welsh. Samuel Salter. John. Stop (Sir John Crokes Man.) Francis
Luce. William Mantill, alias Miles, (Nephew to the said Larimore.) Richard
Mantill, alias Miles, (Brother-in-Law to the said Larimore.) Tho Croxtone, of
Weston on the Green, in the County of Oxon, Yeoman. Nicholas Sanders,
Christopher Bethum. Edward Good of Long Crendon, Clerk, (a person that
committed a Riot and forcible Entry upon my Church at Chilton.
All these (being in number 22.) were Witnesses procured (by Sir John Croke and
Larimore) and Sworn against me.

Clerk. Rob. Hawkins, Hold up thy hand.Which I did.

Here the Indictment was again Read.

The Clerk speaks to the Jury thus, Look upon the Prisoner you that be Sworn.
You shall understand that the Prisoner at the Bar has been Arraigned upon this
Indictment, and thereunto has pleaded not Guilty, and for his Trial has put
himself upon God and the Country, which Country you are. Your Charge is, to
enquire whether the said Rob. Hawkins be guilty of this Felony (in manner and
form as he stands Indicted,) or not guilty; if you find him Guilty, you shall
inquire what Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements he had at the time of
committing this Felony, or at any time since; if you do find him not guilty,
you shall enquire if he fled for the same; if you do find that he fled for the
same, you shall enquire what goods and Chattels as if you had found him guilty;
if you find him not guilty, and that he did not flee for the same, you shall
say so, and no more, and hear the Evidence.

Henry Larimore the Prosecutor was sworn as follows, Mr. Larimore, lay your
hand upon the Book; look upon the Prisoner.

The Evidence that you shall give unto the Court, and to the Jury, between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoner at the Bar, shall be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, So help you God. Kiss the Book.

Here I took Pen, Ink, and Paper, to take Notes at the Bar.

Larimore said, (May it please your Honor my Lord,) upon Friday the 18th. of
Sept. in the year of our Lord 1668. between twelve and one of the Clock at
Noon. I locked my doors fast, and left no body in my house; putting the Keys in
my Pocket, I went to a Hemp-plot (about two Furlongs from my House) to pluck
Hemp, where I, (and the rest of my Family) continued till an hour and half of
Sunset, and then coming home, found my doors wide open, so I went in, and run
up the Stairs, into my Chamber, (or upper Loft, over my inward Chamber where I
lie,) I then hearing a noise (in the Chamber where I lie, just under me,) I
peeped down through some of the chinks of the Loft-boards, there I say this Mr.
Hawkins (pointing with his left hand toward me, but having his face all that
time toward the Judge) ransacking and rifling of a Box, in which Box was (then
amongst other Goods) one white Holland Apron, a Purse, and in that Purse was,
(at that time) two gold rings, (each of them of the value of 10s.) two ten
shillings pieces of Gold, and 19s. in Silver, all the which said Gold Rings,
Gold, and Silver, (except one small piece of Silver or two) I then saw this Mr.
Hawkins (that is now the Prisoner at the Bar,) take, and turn out of this very
Purse, (which I do now show unto your Honor) and he did then steal and carry
away all the foresaid Rings and Money, (with the said Holland Apron;) All these
things (My Lord) I saw him take out of my Box, and Purse, (for I was all that
time looking through the chinks of the Board:) And when Mr. Hawkins heard some
noise (above) I further saw the Prisoner now at the Bar, go out of my said.
Lower Room where my Box was, and glanced by the Stair-foot-door, and so run out
of my house, with a great bunch of Keys in his hand, down my Yard, and hid
himself in a Close (where there were some Beans and Weeds.) All this, my Lord,
I saw with my own eyes. Moreover (my Lord) I having a Warrant from Sir Richard
Pigott to search for the said Rings and Money, etc. I did upon the next day (it
being Saturday, and the 19th. of September, after Mr. Hawkins had robbed me,) I
called Richard Main Jun. the Constable, and Mr. Tho. Beamsly Tithingman, with
some others of our Town to search Mr. Hawkin's house for my said Money, and
Goods, (which the day before, I saw him steal from me,) but he refusing to open
his doors (or to let us search) when we saw that, the Constable broke open his
doors, and then we went in, and searching his house I did then find in an
inward Room below Stairs, in a Basket hanging on a pin, (put amongst papers and
rags, and other trumpery,) this Gold Ring, and this five shilling piece of
Silver, And I do Swear, that this Ring and piece of Silver is one of the same
Rings, and pieces of Silver which the day before I saw the Prisoner (now at the
Bar) take out of this very Purse, it being Friday, the 18th. of September, and
an hour and half before Sunset. This was the Sum and Substance of Larimore's
Evidence, whereupon my Lord Chief Baron asked Larimore these Questions.


Lord Chief Baron Hale. Are you sure (Larimore,) that you left your doors
locked, when you went out to pluck Hemp.


Larimore, Yes my Lord, I am sure I did.


L. C. B. When?


Lar. Between twelve and one of the clock at noon my Lord.


L. C. B. Upon what day was it?


Lar. It was upon the 18th. of September last past, my Lord.


L. C. B. Upon what day of the week was it?


Lar. It was upon Friday my Lord.


L. C. B. In what year was it?


Lar. It was in the year of our Lord 1668. my Lord.


L. C. B. Are you sure that your Chamber door where your Box stood was locked at
that time?


Lar. I cannot (certainly) tell my Lord.


L. C. B. Was the Box locked at that time?


Larimore to this Question paused a while, and gave no answer.


Marshal. My Lord desires to know whether your Box was locked (at that time)
when you lost your money, and goods out of it.


Lar. It was locked, my Lord.


Clerk. Was it at that time locked, (by the Oath you have taken.)


Lar. It was Locked, if it shall please your Honor.


L. C. B. Were the Locks of the doors and Box broken?


Lar. (My Lord) I cannot certainly tell, but I do believe that they were picked
open with some pick-lock, (or false key.)


L. C. B. Did you see him, that is now the Prisoner at the Bar, in your House
at that time, and in that posture, by the Oath you have taken.


Lar. I did then see him that is now the Prisoner at the Bar in my house, my
Lord, as I said before.


L. C. B. At what time of the day was it that you saw him in your house.


Lar. It was an hour and an half before Sunset.


L. C. B. Said to me, Sir, will you ask Larimore any questions before we call
more Witnesses?


Rob. Hawkins, Yes my Lord, if I may have leave.


L. C. B. Sir, you may proceed to your questions.


Hawkins. I humbly thank your Honor.


Hawkins. I pray my Lord, ask Larimore if he be sure that I am the person that
robbed him.


L. C. B. Larimore, answer to the Question.


Lar. Yes my Lord, I am sure he is the person that robbed me, for I know him
very well.


Hawk. Why did you say before Sir John Croke, when I was before him, that you
could not say that I had stolen them.


Lar. I said no such thing, this all that were there can justify.


Hawk. (My Lord) I desire to know of Larimore if he be sure that it was upon a
Friday, and the 18th. of September, 1668. and an hour and half before Sunset,
when he saw me in his house, robbing him.


Lar. Replied, that it was upon that day and time, as near as he could guess.


Hawk. Why (when Larimore found his doors open, which he expected to have found
locked,) did not he call some of his Neighbors, to assist him in searching his
house, and to secure me, (or any other person which he might find robbing him,)
rather than to run up Stairs (by himself) to alarm any person that was in his
house, and thereby giving them opportunity to escape.

Larimore said, he did not then so well consider of it as now; but (being
willing, seeing his doors open) ran up the Stairs to know what the matter was,
and looking through the chinks of the Loft, saw me in his house, as aforesaid.


Hawk. Larimore, did you speak to me when you saw me, or endeavor to stay me?


Lar. Replied, that he was (for that time) so amazed, that he could not speak
to me.


Hawk. (My Lord) I think he is still in great amazement.


Hawk. Lar. Was my house the first, or the only house you searched?


Lar. Replied, no.


Hawk. If you saw me commit the Robbery in your House, why then did you search
other houses for the Goods which you saw me steal?


Lar. Replied to this, that he had been robbed at several other times.


Hawk. Why did not you then rather send out Hue and Cries to apprehend my
person, than to search my house; and why did not you charge me with flat Felony
before Sir Richird Pigott, of whom you had your Warrant? if you saw me rob you.


Lar. To these Questions made no direct answer.


L. C. B. Mr. Hawkins, will you ask Larimore any more Questions?


Hawk. No my Lord (not at present) but when I come to my Defense, I hope I
shall be heard.


L. C. B. You shall be heard (at large,) and so shall they.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.


Clerk. Ass. Larimore, who shall be next called?


Lar. Call Henry Larimore the younger.


Clerk. Crier, Call Henry Larimore the younger.


Crier. Henry Larimore the younger: who answered, here Sir.


Marshal. Lay your hand upon the Book, look upon the Prisosoner.


Hawk. My Lord, may I be heard a word.


L. C. B. Yes Sir, you may go on.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.


Hawk. (My Lord) Is it usual to admit persons that are not Baptized to give
evidence upon a trial of Life and Death; for that person which is now about to
be sworn, (I suppose) is not Baptized.


L. C. B. Sir, a person that is not Baptized, may be sworn, and give Evidences
in cases of Felony.


Hawk. (My Lord) I submit, but am not fully satisfied in it, and if occasion be
I shall crave Counsel in that point, it being matter of Law, and not of Fact.


L. C. B. The Jury may consider of it.


Hawk. (My Lord) I doubt not but they will weigh of what validity the Oath, and
evidence of such a person is.


Mar. Larimore the younger, lay your hand upon the Book, look upon the Prisoner.

The Evidence that you shall give to the Court, between our Sovereign Lord the
King, and the Prisoner at the Bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, So help you God. Kiss the Book.


Larimore Jun. My Lord, upon the 18th. of September. I came home a little after
my Father, and coming in the yard, I saw this Mr. Hawkins (that is now at the
Bar) run out of my Fathers house, with a great bunch of keys in his hand, and
run down my Fathers Yard, and hid himself in a close with Beans and Weeds, and
when I came into my Fathers house, I asked him what Mr. Hawkins did there, he
answered me, that he had done too much there, for he had robbed him.


L. C. B. What day of the week was it?


Lar. Jun. It was upon a Friday.


L. C. B. In what Year was it?


Lar. It was this last September, my Lord.


L. C. B. Will you ask him any questions?


Hawk. Yes my Lord (if I may be permitted.)


L. C. B. You may proceed to your Questions.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.


Hawk. Larimore, are you sure that I am the person which you sew run out of
your Fathers house?


Lar. Yes, I am sure that you are the same person that I then saw run down my
Fathers Yard.


Hawk. What time of the day was it when you saw me?


Lar. It was an hour and an half before the Sun was down.


Hawk. Was your Father within when you came there?


Lar. He was within when I came there, and I asked him as aforesaid.


Hawk. Did your Father say no more to you, than what you have related? and did
not he enquire which way I ran, or went?


Lar. He said no more, but that you had robbed him.


Hawk. My Lord, and you of the Jury, Is it likely, that when the Father had
seen me commit a Robbery in his house, and the Son coming in immediately upon
it, that the Father would not ask of him which way I went?


Hawk. (My Lord) I have done with him at present.


Lar. Sen. My Lord, pray let Joan Beamsly be called next.


Clerk. Crier, call Joan Beamsly.


Crier, Joan Beamsly.


She answered, here Sir.

Joan Beamsly, Lay your hand upon the Book, look upon the Prisoner. The
Evidence that you shall give shall be the truth.


Joan Beamsly. May it please your Honor (my Lord) upon Friday the 18th. of
September. last past, about an hour and half before Sunset, as I was going to
Milking in the Street (near Larimores house) I met Henry Larimore the younger,
and being (at that time) much troubled with the Toothache, I told him of it,
desiring him to help me to some hot water, for I believed that might give me
ease, Larimore replied, that if I would go with him to his Fathers house, he
would help me to some; so going both together, we saw this Mr. Hawkins (that is
now the Prisoner at the Bar) run out of Larimores house with a great bunch of
Keys in his hand, and run down Larimores Yard into a Close of Beans and Weeds,
and there hid himself; and when we came into Larimores house I there heard
young Larimore ask his Father what Mr. Hawkins did there, Larimore told his Son
that he had done too much there, for he had robbed him. When my Lord Chief
Baron Hale heard how these three Witnesses agreed in their Evidence, he said,
here is enough Sworn (if believed) to hang twenty men.


Hawk. I doubt not but to clear my self, notwithstanding their evidence, if I
may be heard.


L. C. B. You shall be heard.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.


L. C. B. Larimore, have you any more Witnesses?


Lar. Yes, (if it may please your Honor) a great many more.


L. C. B. Who are they? call them.


Lar. Call Richard Main, Constable.


Clerk. Crier, call Richard Main, Constable.


Crier. Richard Main Constable, who answered, here Sir, and being sworn, said
as follows.


Main. My Lord, upon Saturday the 19th. of September last past, came Henry
Larimore Sen. to me, and giving me a Warrant from Sir Richard Pigott to Search,
commanding me (amongst others) to search Mr. Hawkins for some Money and Goods,
which he had lost; and when I saw his Warrant, I went to Tho. Beamsly
Tythingman, and charged him, with three or four others, to assist me, and
coming to Mr. Hawkin's House, he denying to open his doors, I broke them open,
and I went into his house, and Henry Larimore Sen. did find in a basket this
Gold Ring, and Five-shilling piece of Silver, (Mr. Hawkins himself being by
whilst he found them) so we had him before Sir John Croke, who committed him to
Prison, and so on Sunday morning we brought him to Alisbury. This also was
Sworn by Dodsworth Croke, Esquire Tho. Beamsly, and young Larimore.


L. C. B. Said to me, will you ask these witnesses any Questions?


Hawk. Yes my Lord (if I may be permitted.)


L. C. B. You may go on to your Questions.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.

Hawk, Main Constable, did Larimore desire you to search my house alone, and
did he then tell you, that he saw me rob him the day before?


Constable. Larimore did desire me to search several houses, but did not say to
me that he saw you rob him.


Hawk. Where is the Warrant upon which you broke open my house? I desire to see
it.


Constable. Here it is,


Hawk. Was it Larimore himself that found the Ring and Five-shilling piece?


Constable. It was Henry Larimore the elder that found it.


Hawk. Was I in the same room when the found them?


Constable. You were in the same Room when he found them.


Hawk. This was proved false, by Mr. Charles Wilcox, and Nicholas Faulkner,
which persons kept me in the Hall, whilst they pretended to find them in the
Buttery.


Hawk. Constable, why did you compel me to go before Sir John Croke, which you
knew was my adversary?


Constable. We did not force you before him.


Hawk. This I proved to be so, by Michael Reed Gent. Mr. Tho. Saunders, Mr.
Wilcox, Mr. Goulder, Robert Casemore, and many others that saw it.


Hawk. Constable. Why did you advise the Jailer, Mr. Burch, to load me well with
Irons?


Constable. I did not advise him to do so.


Hawk. Pray (my Lord) ask the Jailer, Mr. Burch, what the Constable said to
him, when he brought me thither.


Clerk. Mr. Burch, inform the Court what the Constable said to you, when he
brought Mr. Hawkins to you as a Prisoner.


Jailer. (My Lord) when he Constable delivered Mr. Hawkins to me, on Sunday
morning, he said, that Mr. Hawkins was a notorious picklock, and that he was
confident he could pick every lock about the Prison, and therefore he advised
me to watch him narrowly, and load him well with Irons.


Thomas Beamsly being Sworn, his Evidence being the same in effect with the
Constable's; for brevity sake I omit, but I craved leave to ask him a Question
or two, which being granted were as follows.


Hawk. Beamsly, Pray what discourse had you with Mr. Wilcox upon the 19th. of
September (presently after my house was broken up) concerning the time when,
(as your Brother pretended to you) he lost the Ring, and five-shilling piece of
Silver?


Beamsly. He did not remember that he had any discourse with Mr. Wilcox about
that.


Hawk. Did you not say to Mr. Wilcox, that your Brother Larimore told you that
he had lost the Stone Rring, and five-shilling-piece of Silver, which (as he
pretended was found in my house) before the difference began betwixt me and
your Brother; and moreover that your Brother said he had an intent to search
for the same a month before?

Beamsly replied, that he did not remember any such discourse.


Hawk. My Lord, may I be heard a word or two.


L. C. B. You may go on.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.


Hawk. (my Lord) I suppose that I can prove these particulars.

1. That Larimore told Beamsly that he had lost this Gold Ring and
five-shilling piece of Silver (now in Question) before there was any difference
between Larimore and my self, which began in Michaelmas Term 1667. this was
proved by Mr. Wilcox.

2. And that Larimore confessed (upon his Oath) before Sir John Croke, (upon
the 19th. of Sept.) when I was committed, that he lost the said Ring and piece
of Silver about a month before, which must be about Aug. 19. This was proved by
Mr. Brown, Faulkner, and others.

3. I can prove that Larimore told Sir Richard Pigett, (when he went for his
Warrant to search) that he did suspect several persons for robbing him of this
Gold-ring and five-shilling piece, and that I was only one of them suspected
persons, this Sir Richard Pigott did acknowledge to be true.

But now he swears that he saw me steal the Gold Ring and five-shilling piece
out of his house on Friday the 18th. of Sept. an hour and half before Sunset,
1668.


Hawk. I pray my Lord, and you that are of this Jury, take notice of this, and
compare the times out of his own mouth; but more of this when I come to make my
Defense.


L. C. B. Larimore, have you any more witnesses?


Lar. Yes my Lord.


L. C. B. Call them, who are they?


Lar. Call Margaret Larimore.


Clerk. Crier, Call Marg. Larimore, the wife of Henry Larimore. Crier, Margaret
the wife of Henry Larimore. She being sworn said, that when she was a Servant
to Larimore, which now is her Husband, she had seen Mr. Hawkins, at several
unseasonable hours in the night (when her Master was in bed) lying lurking in
and about her Masters house, yard, window, and doors, and said that she
believed he lay there for no good intent.


Hawk. My Lord, may I ask this woman a Question or two?


L. C. B. You may do so, if you please.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor. I Will promise you to be brief.


Hawk. At what time was it, Margaret Larimore, that you saw me lurking in your
Masters Yard as you have said?


Marg. Lar. It was in the night time.


Here Larimore prompts his Wife, which I told my Lord, for which he Checked him.

Hawk. But how long may it be since?


Marg. Lar. I cannot tell, it might be about the time that my Master was Robbed.


Hawk. Did you speak, or call to me when you saw me there?


Marg. Lar. No, for I was affrighted at it; this same was also sworn by Richard
Mantill, alias Miles, Son in law to the said Larimore, and also by William, his
Son, which for brevity sake I omit farther to relate.


L. C. B. Lar. Have you any more?


Lar. (Yes my Lord) to prove that this Ring and Fiveshilling-piece is mine.


L. C. B. Call them, who are they?


Lar. (Esque Dodsworth, Sir John Croke's eldest Son,) and Mr. Good, Minister of
Long Crendon my Lord.


Clerk. Crier, Call Dodsworth Croke Esquire; and Edward Good, of long Crendon,
Clerk, both answered, here Sir. They both being Sworn, Mr. Dodsworth Croke said
as follows; (taking the Ring in his hand, turned it up and down, and looked
very narrowly upon it within and without, and put it upon his finger, and
pulling it off several times in the face of the Court and Country, he then
informed my Lord,) that he was confident, that this was Larimore's ring, and
for his proof and credit, tells the Court that he had pawned it to Larimore.

Mr. Good took the fiveshilling piece into his hand, and swore, that he being
at Buckingham Sessions last, about some trouble, which I had put him to, he
then wanting some money, did pawn a fiveshilling piece to this Larimore for
other money, and he desiring of him to take care that he had the same piece
again, Larimore told him that he put a mark upon it; so seeing a mark upon this
fiveshilling piece, he swore that he did verily believe that this was the same
fiveshilling piece which he had pawned to Larimore at the Sessions before.


L. C. B. Said to me, Sir, if you will ask the witnesses any Questions, you may?


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor for that freedom, but I do humbly conceive
that the proving of the last point, viz. that the ring, and fiveshilling piece
was either Larimore's own Goods, or pawned to him, is not much material to my
Case, for I am free to confess, (as much as I can have ground to believe) which
is, that Larimore might have the Ring and five shilling piece of silver in his
possession, but the Charge against me is, that I stole them from him, which I
do flatly deny, and do not doubt of clearing my self when I come to my Defense,
if I may be heard.


L. C. B. Sir, you need not question but you shall be heard.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor, and crave leave to be heard a word or two
(if it be not unseasonable)


L. C. B. You may go on.


Hawk. May it please your Honor, and the Jury, to take notice that Mr. Good
Swears he believes this to be the five shilling piece that he pawned to
Larimore last Sessions at Buckingham, but I desire to know if Larimore Swears
that this is that piece which Mr. Good pawned then to him, for he best knows.


L. C. B. Larimore, what say you to that?


Lar. My Lord, I do swear that this is the same five shilling piece which Mr.
Good pawned to me, the last Sessions at Buckingham.


Hawk. Then my Lord, and the Jury, be pleased to observe, That Sessions was
held upon the 9th. and 10th. of July, 1668. but the Difference between me and
Larimore, (for Tyths) was begun in Michaelmas Term, 1667. which is near nine
Months before that Sessions; and notwithstanding, Larimore did say to his
Brother Beamsly, upon the 19th. of September, that he had lost this very Ring
and five shilling piece of silver before the difference began, which is
impossible (My Lord) as appears by the Oaths of Larimore, and Mr. Good, for how
could he be robbed of that five shilling piece nine months before he had it?
And that he did say the very words to his Brother Beamsly we have already
proved, by the Testimony of Mr. Wilcox.


L. C. B. said, Mr. Hawkins, was this Suit for Tyths begun by you against this
Larimore before the time that Larimore swears this Felony was committed?


Hawk. Yes, my Lord, for I began that Suit for Tithes in Michaelmas Term, 1667.
and Larimore Swears that I robbed him upon the 18th. of September, 1668. which
is (my Lord) about a year after. My Lord, it is an easy way thus for the
Fanatics to pay Tyths, if they can but hang up the Clergy, they may cease all
their future pleading for Liberty of Conscience.

Now Larimore began to stumble, and show his malice in prosecuting me unjustly,
by his multiplying of feigned Felonies? wherewith he did (then endeavor to)
load me, of which I appeared innocent.


L. C. B. Larimore, have you any more?


Lar. Yes my Lord, Pray call John Chilton*


Clerk. Crier, call John Chilton.


Crier, John Chilton, who answered here Sir, and being Sworn, my L. C. B. said
to him, come Chilton, what can you say to this business?


John Chilton said, (My Lord) I can say nothing, but that I am paid for my
Boots.


L. C. B. What Boots?


Chilt. My Lord, I am paid for my Boots.


L. C. B. Our Business is not now about Boots, but however, come, and tell me
what thou meanest by them?


Chilt. My Lord, Mr. Hawkins brought me a pair of tops, to put new legs to
them, which I did, and he coming by my Shop, told me he wanted his Boots, I
replied, they were done, but I being then about to go out, did promise Mr.
Hawkins to lay them in my Window, so that he might take them as he went home,
which accordingly he did, and when I came home, I went to Mr. Hawkins, who (at
that time) was at Sir John Croke's house, where he contented me for my work
before we parted, and this is all that I can say, my Lord.


L. C. B. What is this to the purpose, can you say any more Chilton? if you can
go on.


Chil. My Lord, Mr. Hawkins paid me honestly for the Boots: but as soon as he
began to demand the Tyths of Chilton, and did sue for them, then they lay at me
night and day, to have me charge Mr. Hawkins with flat Felony, for stealing the
said Boots out of my Shop, but I told them, that I laid them in my Shop-window
for him, and did bid him take them as he came back; and he paid me for my work,
and therefore I cannot say he stole them.


L. C. B. Who were they that desired you to charge Mr. Hawkins with the
stealing of your Boots?


Chil. This Larimore, Mr. Dodsworth Croke, Richard Main the Constable, Miles,
and John Sanders, (who is since dead, my Lord) -- Larimore here interrupted
Chilton, and said, my Lord, I have five or six witnesses that can prove that
all this is false which Chilton has sworn.


L. C. B. Call them, for I Will hear all, if I sit till night.

Then Larimore called Dodsworth Croke, William Croke, John Stop, Thomas Welsh,
Samuel Salter, and William Sanders, all these being sworn, the sum, and
substance of their Evidence was to this effect.

That they had heard John Chilton say that I had stolen a pair of Boots from
him, to which Chilton (being then upon his Oath) said, that Mr. Hawkins did no
otherwise than what before I have sworn; and he further added, that he never
said that I had stolen any thing from him, for he had no reason for it.


L. C. B. Did this Larimore desire you to charge this Mr. Hawkins with Felony,
and when did he desire you to do so?


Chilton. My Lord, Larimore, and the rest (that I have named) desired me to
charge Mr. Hawkins with flat Felony, for stealing the said Boots, as soon as he
demanded the Tyths of Chilton; and they would have forced me to fetch a Warrant
from a Justice of Peace to search for them, and did further threaten me, (in
case I would not do it) that Sir John Croke would indict me (at the Assizes) as
one accessory to the stealing of my own Goods.


L. C. B. Was Larimore one of them?


Chil. Yes (my Lord) and he said, that he would make me swear that Mr. Hawkins
had stole my Boots, and for that end did serve me with a Subpoena to be here --
Here Larimore the second time interrupted Chilton, and said, (My Lord) this
Fellow, (pointing at John Chilton) is hired by Mr. Hawkins to swear this.


Chil. Replied, No (My Lord,) I am not hired by Mr. Hawkins, to swear, but I
might have been hired, or born out, if I would but swear that Mr. Hawkins stole
my Boots, by one Croxstone.


L. C. B. How! what is that hired, or born out to swear, by whom, and how, tell
me the story?


Chil. (My Lord,) I am not hired to swear by Mr. Hawkins, but if I would swear
that he stole my Boots out of my Shop, I might have been born out in so doing.
For Tho. Croxstone (of Weston on the Green, in the County of Oxon) told me
(upon Monday last, it being the 8th. of March, 1668.) that if I would but swear
what he would have me against Mr. Hawkins, (viz. that he stole my Boots) he
would bear me harmless; but I replied, that it went against my Conscience to do
it; I added farther, that, if I should be so wicked as to swear it, Mr. Hawkins
can prove the contrary by Mr. William Croke and others; to which Larimore
replied, that I need not fear what Mr. Croke knew in that case, for he is one
of us, and will not justify any thing that may tend to our prejudice; I
farther told him that I durst not do it, for if I should, Mr. Hawkins might
make me fly the Country, as Smart did Wheeler, to which Croxstone replied, that
if I would swear it, he would bear me out against the said Mr. Hawkins as far
as an hundred pound would go, and if that would not do, as far as five hundred
pound would go.


L. C. B. How bear you out to swear, what Croxstone is this that would do so?
this is not likely to be true.


Tho. Croxstone said (My Lord,) I said no such thing.

L. C. B. I do not believe it to be true.


Chilton run in, and said, As I live and breath, my Lord, Croxstone did say, if
I would swear that Mr. Hawkins had stole my Boots, he would bear me out, as I
said before, and if I made any doubt of it, he would give me Bond to make good
his promise.

L. C. B. said, This is strange.


Croxstone, (My Lord,) I said I would bear him out in speaking the truth, and
no otherwise.


Hawk. My Lord, may I be heard?


L. C. B. Yes, you may go on.


Haw. I thank your Honor. My Lord, pray let me ask Mr. Croxstone two or three
Questions.


L. C. B. So you may, go on.


Hawk. Mr. Croxstone, do you confess that you did promise to bear out Chilton
(as you said before) in swearing the truth?


Croxstone. Yes Sir, I did, and no otherwise*


Hawk. Was it not about the Boots?


Croxstone, Yes Sir, it was so.


Hawk. Did not you desire Chilton to swear that I had stolen his Boots, after
that he had told you I had paid him for them, and thereupon promise to bear him
out against me, in a 100. or 500 l?


Croxstone, I think you cannot prove it against me.


Hawk. I pray my Lord, and you of this Jury, consider that this Chilton is one
of Larimore's witnesses, and swears for the King, yet he swears that he had
given me orders to take those Boots, and that I then paid him for legging of
them, and that he had repeated this to Larimore and Croxstone several times,
and after all this, Larimore, and Croxstone, (with others) used their utmost
endeavors to persuade Chilton to charge me with Felony, for stealing them, and
Croxstone promised him to bear him out in so doing, as far as a 100 l. would
go, and if that would not do, as far as 500 l. and give him Bond for his
security, etc. My Lord, if this amounts not to a Subornation, I am mistaken.
But, my Lord, I have two witnesses more, to prove the same against Mr.
Croxstone, and I pray that they may be heard.


L. C. B. Who are they?


Hawk. Anne Scoly, and John, the Son of Mr. Tho. Sanders. Both these being
called, justified in Court, what Chilton had sworn against Mr. Croxstone: upon
which my Lord Chief Baron said to Croxstone, Come, you did ill to solicit
persons to swear these things which you knew were false, and it is farther
added, that this made not for the King, but rather for the Prisoner at the Bar;
after all this, a rude fellow, (Tho. Welsh) came in, and said (my Lord) I did
hear Chilton say, that Mr. Hawkins had stole a pair of Boots from him.


L. C. B. What, more Boots still? Come Larimore, have you any more.

Larimore said, Yes my Lord, one Mr. Boyce, (who being sworn) said, That at a
certain time, he coming into a house at Chilton, found this Mr. Hawkins, (now
the Prisoner at the Bar,) and one James Noble, (which Noble was then drunk, and
asleep upon a Bed,) and I saw Mr. Hawkins have his hand in Noble's pocket, and
the said Noble told me, that (at that time) he lost a Gold Ring, and a piece of
Gold out of his pocket.


L. C. B. said to me, Sir, what say you to that?


Hawk. My Lord, I desire to know if there be any Bill or Indictment against me
for it.


Clerk. There is none, my Lord, that I do know of.


Hawk. I desire (my Lord) that Noble may be sworn, if he be here.


Lar. He is not here, my Lord.


L. C. B. Why was not that Noble here (himself) to prosecute?


Lar. I could not find him, my Lord.


Hawk. I desire to know whether Boyce came hither of his own accord, or i^ he
be Subpoenaed to be here; (if so) by whom, and who bears his charges.


Boyce. I was Subpoenaed by Larimore, and he bears my Charges, my Lord.


Hawk. How long was it since (Mr. Boyce) that you saw my hand in Noble's
pocket, as you said before?


Boyce. It may be near two years ago, my Lord.


Hawk. Did you see me pick (or take) out of the said Noble's pocket, the said
Ring, or piece of Gold, or any thing else.


Boyce. I saw your hand in Noble's pocket, but did not see you take any thing
out of it.


Hawk. Did Noble ever tell you that I had picked his pocket of the said Ring,
or piece of Gold, or any thing else.


Boyce. No, but said, he lost them at that time.


Hawk. But you say that Noble was drunk at that time, and if so, it is possible
he might be mistaken.


Boyce. So he was drunk, and asleep likewise.


L. C. B. I think you were all drunk.


Hawk. Boyce, you might have done well, to have told Mr. Noble of this, when he
told you that he had lost his Ring, and piece of Gold; but can you say any
thing touching Larimore's being Robbed, or do you know that I am the Person
that robbed him?


Boyce. No not I (my Lord) I cannot charge him.


Hawk. But you say that Larimore Subpoenaed you to be here, and that he bears
your Charges.


Boyce. Yes (my Lord) and so he does.


Hawk. Mr. Boyce, if this be all you can say for Larimore, you will hardly
requite his charges.


Hawk. My Lord, may I be heard, as to the evidence of Boyce.


L. C. B. You may go on.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor.


Hawk. This Boyce Swears, (My Lord,) that about two years last past he saw my
hand in Noble's pocket, and that Noble told him, he then lost a Gold Ring, and
piece of Gold. (My Lord, I think (with Submission to your Honor and the
Court,) I am not bound to answer to this Charge, because there is no Indictment
exhibited against me for it, nor is Noble himself here to Prosecute, or can
Boyce swear that I picked Noble's pocket, or that Noble ever told Boyce I did,
(as he himself Swears.) But (my Lord) I observe (in this) the Malice of
Larimore's heart, (as well as in that of the Books,) for Boyce Swears that he
can say nothing to Larimore's Bill of Robbery, and yet he forces him to come
from London hither, to start a senseless story about Noble's Ring, and Gold,
which is of near two years standing. (My Lord) if there had been any truth in
it, why was not Noble (himself) here to prosecute; and why did he let it rest
so long? I say again (my Lord) if it had been true that I had picked Noble's
pocket, and if Larimore had known it, I pray (my Lord) and you of the Jury,
what had that concerned Larimore; but my Lord, I am as clear of picking Nobles
pocket as I am as of stealing Chilton's Boots, and as clear of both these, as I
am of robbing this fellow Larimore, (that now calls my Life in Question) nay,
if he can fairly prove me guilty of one, I am willing to suffer, as guilty of
all.

My Lord, I am bold to appeal to your Honor, whether it be a fair Prosecution
in Larimore, to stir up Chilton (falsely) to charge me with Felony in stealing
his Boots, when I had not only a right in them, but also leave (from him) to
take them, and paid him for his work, (which Larimore himself knows. Nay (my
Lord) if I had never paid Chilton for his Legs, the Tops being mine (by Law) it
had not been Felony, but a Trespass, because I had leave from him to take them,
and a right in them the Tops being mine, and again, (my Lord) I appeal to your
Honor, whether it be fair in Larimore for him to ride up and down City, and
Country, to bring a multitude of Witnesses together, that can say nothing to
his Bill, (as Boyce swears he cannot) if this does not discover malice in a
Prosecutors heart, I know not what does, and if that appears to your Honor,
and the Jury to be in him, how far that ought, (as well by Law, as Equity, to
frustrate his Evidence, I am willing to leave to your Honor, and the Jury, and
so I have done as to Boyce's Evidence.


L. C. B. Larimore, have you any more?


Larimore. Yes (my Lord) John Cox, and Francis Lucy, they being both Sworn.


John Cox said, (My Lord) I being in Mr. Hawkin's Company (not long since,) one
asked him, how he thought to come off at the Assizes: Mr. Hawkins replied, he
cared not much for this Plot, (tho he should be Convicted,) for they could but
burn him in the hand for it, and that he could bite out.

Lucy being sworn, said, that he heard Mr. Hawkins confess, that he owed
Larimore 15s. but because he had dealt so (unjustly) with him, he would make it
cost Larimore fifteen times 15s. before he would pay him.

L. C. B. said this makes little to the purpose.

Come Larimore, Have you any more?


Lar. I think not (my Lord.)


L. C. B. If you have any more Witnesses, call them, and they shall be heard,
and do not say, when I am gone, that your Witnesses could not be heard.


Lar. My Lord, I confess they have been fully heard, and I have no more to say.


L. C. B. said to me, Sir, you have heard the Indictment against you, and the
Evidence to prove it, you have the Charge, now say what you can for your own
Defense, and you shall be heard.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor; and I hope (my Lord) because the Evidence is
large, I shall have the more time allowed me, to make my Defense, (and if so) I
doubt not but fully to open this Conspiracy.


L. C. B. Do not fear that, for as they have been heard at large, so shall you
likewise. (God forbid else.)


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor, and do promise to be as brief as
conveniently I can; and as I intend to offer nothing but the naked truth. So I
will say no more, (if I am not misinformed) than I can prove to be true. And
(my Lord) because it may seem necessary for me to offer many things (by way of
Defense) in answer to so great a Charge, (to save time) I pray, that it may not
be expected by your Honor, or the Jury, that I should call Witnesses to prove
every particular; but when I offer such things, as are most material, if either
your Honor, or the Jury be not fully satisfied touching the truth of such
material points, I do humbly pray, that I may be called upon to prove them, for
when I am not called upon for proof, I shall under favor (my Lord) take it for
granted, that I am believed. And for Method herein, (if I may have leave) I do
intend this.

1. In General, to show how improbable it is, that I should be guilty of this
Robbery, and also deliver some hints to move the Court, and Jury to Question
whether this Prosecutor (Larimore) was Robbed at all, or no?

And 2ly. More particularly to examine the Evidence, as to matter of Fact.


L. C. B. Go on Sir, to your Defense.


Hawk. May it please your Honor, and you of this Jury, I begin with the first
part of my Defense, which is, to hint how unlikely it is, that I should be
guilty of robbing this Larimore.

1. Larimore is Generally known to be a notorious Anabaptist, and an Enemy to
the Church of England, and a hater of the Ministry in General; but more
particularly, he is most Envious, and Malicious against my self, because I sued
him for Tyths, and caused him to be Indicted, for not coming to Church, or
Baptizing his Children; for which reason, his Malice against me has appeared
notorious several ways, as (amongst others.)

1. By dissuading all that owed me any money, not to pay me.

2. By his inducing those to whom I owed money, to arrest, and trouble me.

3. By dissuading those that I sued for Tyths, not to agree with me; he
promising them, that Sir John Croke, and himself would force me to run the
Country, ere long.

4. By his continual tormenting, and vexing me with his false Arrests, and
illegal Indictments.

5. By his constant endeavor to dissuade my friends from (any ways) relieving
me, or mine, in my greatest wants, and necessities, advising them to starve us.

My Lord, and this Jury, if you are nor fully satisfied in any of these
particulars that I have alleged, I am ready to prove them; but if this be
granted, they are (no doubt) sufficient Arguments, to prove the malice of his
heart. Again I say, that it is no ways possible, that Larimore was Robbed (at
all) and of this opinion are most of his Neighbors round about him, as may
appear by this Certificate) which follows.


WE do humbly certify, that Henry Larimore of Chilton in the County of Bucks,
Labourer, is a notorious Anabaptist, an Enemy to the Church of England, and a
perfect hater of all Ministers of the same, but in particular, most Inveterate,
and Malicious against Robert Hawkins Clerk, late Minister of the Church of
Chilton, (aforesaid,) for that he does not only seek, and design utterly to
ruin the said Mr. Hawkins (himself) but makes it his business, and daily
practice, to instigate others to do the like, and for no other cause, (as he
has often confessed himself) but for that, the said Mr. Hawkins has caused
him to be Indicted for not coming to Church, and Sued him for Tyths; And we do
verily believe, and are fully satisfied in our Consciences that the said Mr.
Hawkins is not (at all) guilty of the pretended Felony, in Stealing the Ring,
and piece of Silver, which the said Larimore has Charged him with, but that it
is a mere contrivance inehoated, and set on foot by the said Larimore, Sir John
Croke, and others, on purpose to Revenge themselves. And we do also believe,
that the said Mr. Hawkins is a very Honest Man, and that he is a very able
Minister, and a true, and faithful labourer in Gods word, and never heard that
he was ever suspected (in the least) of Felony, till this Malicious
Prosecution, which is by the said Larimore, and others, whom the said Mr.
Hawkins sueth for Tyths,

Witness our Hands, March, 8. 1668. Michael Read, Gent. William Read, Gent.
Mrs. Bulstode, Widow. Mr. John Bulstrode. John Turner. Joseph Parsons. Nicholas
Faulkner. Mr. William Bulstrode. John Chilton. The Widow Paverell. Robert
Sanders. Christopher Hinton. John Mortimore, Sen. Mr. John Daniel. Mr. John
Clarke. The Widow Clare. William Landsdell. William Bouden. John Newman. Thomas
Coals. The Widow Newman. Robert Barlow. Theophilus Sanders. John Sanders. John
Mortimore, Jun. Mr. Henry Golder. Mr. Thomas Sanders. Mr. Henry Lovell. Mrs.
Lovell, Widow. Owen Gibson. Mr. Tho. Sanders, Sen. Robert Casemore. Edward
Jarvice. Thomas Green. Edward Barker. John Grace. John Freeman. Richard Carr.
John Carr. John Acreman. Thomas White. Thomas Ludet. The Widow Meades. Richard
Toms. Joseph Nero. Richard Low. John Culledge. Richard Waude. Theophilus
Hinton. Edward Clarke. Jeffery Heart. Richard Budd. John Budd. Thomas Higgs.
Roger Gye. Robert Coxhead. William Hitchcock. John Powell. Luke Turner. Richard
Badger. John Golder. John Newton. William Collet. John Beckley. Richard Kenp.
The Widow Acreman. Robert Flint. William Beckly. Robert Hicks. John Barney.
Robert Steel. Stephen Toms. Robert Willet. William neighbor. Will Chittle.
Henry Parker. William Ash. John Golder, Jun. William Golder. William Tipping.
Richard Goodwyn. John Bosly. Moses Collings. Roger Carr. John Cato. William
Hayward. Edward Hollyman. Abraham Quelch. John Pymm. John Carter. William Toms.
Robert Bud. William King. Cadwalider Crawton. William Ash. Thomas White, Sen.
Thomas White, Jun. David Turner. Jonathan Hand. John Young. John Bedford. John
Norcutt.


By this Certificate, which you see subscribed with above an 100. names,
wherein, many others (for brevity sake) are omitted, although I made no use of it
upon my Trial; yet the World may see what an opinion Larimore's Neighbors had
concerning him, and his (pretended) Robbery; which Certificate I have for that
purpose here inserted.

2. It is not likely that Larimore was robbed, because he did not declare it to
his Neighbors immediately, which doubtless he would have done, had any such
thing befallen him.

3. Nor is he certain (as to the time,) when he was Robbed.

For 1. He told his Brother Beamsly, that he had lost the Ring and
Five-shilling piece (in Question) before there was any difference between him
and I: As may appear by this Certificate, under Mr. Willcox's own hand, which
is as follows.

THese are to Certify all whom it may concern, that Tho. Beamsly of Chilton,
Tything-man, told me, Charles Willcox of Long-Crendon, (upon September. 19. in
the 20th. year of his Majesty's Reign, An. Dom. 1668.) That the Five-shilling
piece of Silver, and the Stone-ring, which Larimore pretended he found in Mr.
Hawkin's House, were both lost before there was any difference between the said
Larimore, and the said Mr. Hawkins; and he further added, that his Brother
Larimore told him, that he had an intent to search for the same Ring, and
Five-shilling piece above a month before he did. This I can, and will depose,
whenever I shall be thereunto required.

Witness my hand, October. 1. 1668. Charles Willcox.

By this Certificate, it appears (by Larimore's own Confession to his Brother
Beamsly) that he had lost this Ring, and Five-shilling piece, before there was
any difference between him, and I, and seeing I began my Suit for Tyths in
Michaelmas Term, 1667. against him, and others, as it is well known to the
Inhabitants of Chilton, (and also may appear by the Records of the Exchequer.)

This is the first time, that Larimore said he had lost the Ring, and
Five-shilling piece.

And that this is false, must needs appear, by what Mr. Good, and Larimore have
already sworn in open Court, viz. that Mr. Good pawned the Five-shilling piece
to Larimore at Buckingham Sessions last, (which Sessions were held upon the
9th. and 10th. of July, 1668.) which is near nine Months after the difference
began.

And moreover, Larimore confessed upon his Examination before Sir John Croke,
when I was Committed, (which was upon the 19th. of Sept. 1668.) that he had
lost the Ring, and Five-shilling piece a month before, which must
(consequently) be about the 19th. of August, 1668. And if so, how is it
possible that he could have lost them before the difference began betwixt us,
which was above ten Months before?

3. He now swears in open Court, that he saw me steal the said Gold Ring, and
Five-shilling piece of Silver, out of his house upon Friday the 18th. of Sept.
1668. (precisely) an hour and half before Sunset; all which times being
compared together, can no ways be possible; for which, I dare appeal to all
that hear it. Nor is it likely, in case he could prove that he was robbed,
(which I am confident, he never can) that I am the Person that robbed him; as
may appear upon these confiderations, amongst others.

1. Is it likely that I should commit a Robbery in my own Parish, (in the day
time) where all that saw me, must needs know me, and at the house of such a
person as this Larimore is, that had solemnly Swore (but a little before) that
he would take away my life, as may appear, by what his Son said to Anne Scholy?

2. Is it probable, that if I were Guilty, I would not have made my escape,
having twenty four hours time, and four or five hours notice after they first
attempted to search my house; or that in all that time, I could find no better
place to conceal a Ring, and Five-shilling piece, than in a little basket with
two or three eggs, (which all that time was hanging upon a pin.)

Again, if Larimore saw me rob him upon the 18th. day of Sept. 1668. (as he
swears he did) why did not he then secure me? He swears, I ran away, why did
not he send out Hue and Cries, to discover, and apprehend me? But the said
Larimore was so far from doing it, that he never declared it to any of his
Neighbors, nor to the Constable, when he commanded him to search, as may appear
as well by the search it self, (in that they searched other Houses before they
searched mine,) as by the Constable's Oath, who swears, that Larimore said not
any thing to him, that he had seen me rob him, nor did the said Larimore
declare it to Sir John Croke; for if he had, Sir John (no doubt) would have
inserted it in the Mittimus, which he has not done, Nor did he declare it to
Sir Richard Pigott, from whom he fetched his Warrant to search, as may appear
by the contents of it. Whereupon, my Lord Chief Baron Hale calling to the
Constable for the Warrant, (which being delivered) the Judge (himself)
immediately espied, that the said Warrant, bore date a day before the Robbery
was committed, which, when my Lord observed, he asked Larimore if he fetched
this Warrant to Search for this Ring, and Five-shilling-piece; to which
Larimore replied, he did, and then my Lord asked Larimore upon what day he was
Robbed, he replied, upon Friday, the 18th of September, 1668.

L. C. B. How comes it then to pass, Larimore, that the Warrant bears date the
17th. day, and you Swear, that the Prisoner at the Bar did not Rob you till the
18th. day? This is likely to be true.


Larmore* To this replied, that he was robbed at several other times.


Hawk. (My Lord) may I be heard a word.


L. C. B. You may may go on.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor. And I hope the Jury will take notice how
Larimore has ensnared himself, by the date of the Warrant, which my Lord first
discovered. And whereas Larimore replies, that he was Robbed at several other
times, he may have credit, (but by those only that can believe all that he has
said and sworn;) For he says that he was robbed before he and I differed,
which must be before October, 1667. and he told Sir John Croke likewise (when I
was committed,) that he was robbed of the foresaid Goods but a month before,
which must needs be about the 19th. of August, 1668. but now he swears in
Court, that he saw me steal these Goods on Friday, the 18th. of Sept. 1668.
which must needs be impossible, that I should rob him at three several times of
the same Ring and Five-shilling piece; and besides this, it is improbable, that
he should be robbed before, October, 1667. and again in Aug. 1668. because he
never declared any of these Robberies to any person, before the 16th. of Sept.
1668. (upon which day, he, and Sir John Croke concluded upon this Conspiracy,
as hereafter we shall make appear; And moreover, Larimore (himself) confessed
even now, that he fetched this Warrant to search for this very Ring and
Five-shilling piece (which now he denis.) By this, all may see, how notoriously
he contradicts himself.


L. C. B. said to Larimore, thou art very cunning, to be provided with a
Warrant, a day before you was robbed. It seems you knew upon the 17th. day,
that you should be robbed on the 18th. day, and also, that this person (now at
the Bar) should Rob you. Surely, you can Divine. Here the people began to cry
out shame on Larimore.


L. C. B. said to me, Sir, but if you were innocent of this Robbery, why did
you refuse to open your doors, or to have your House Searched?


Hawk. My Lord, I had several reasons, that moved me so to do.

1. in General, most of those persons that were present, were my inveterate
enemies, and several of them had threatened to ruin me, and my Family; and
therefore, I bad reason to suspect, that they came to injure me, either in my
possession, or Goods: For the first, Sir John Croke, and Larimore, had often
threatened to pull down my House, and for that end, had hired several persons,
to make a forcible entry upon it, and particularly, they had lately hired
Jaires the son of Leonard Styres of Them, (in the County of Oxon) by a Ladder
to climb up, and run down my Chimney, and open my doors, when we were all
abroad: And about the same time they also contracted with one Christopher Tyler
of Chilton for the same purpose. And 2. I feared the seizing of my Goods by the
said persons, because they had then a Writ of Levary (or Execution) to seize
them, which Larimore's Son had a few days before in part executed, and he was
then present; And if these reasons are not sufficient, I have more to justify
my act, in refusing to have them search my house, which was all (my Lord) I
ever denied, for I then declared my self willing that Mr. Sanders the other
Constable, (he being then at the next door) might charge whom he pleased, and
search as narrowly as he could.


L. C. B. said, Mr. Hawkins, can you prove what you have said?


Hawk. Yes, my Lord, which particular shall I prove?


L. C. B. Prove that about the Ladder, if you can.


Hawk. I pray my Lord, call John Acreman: He being called, did fully justify
what I said concerning their intended forcible Entry, and added farther, that
he did help to set up the Ladder for that purpose, being called by Sir John
Croke's own Sons, they and Larimore standing by all that time to watch. And
touching the second particular, concerning the seizing of my Goods, Mr. Sheriff
himself can justify, that they had then in their hands such a Writ: (my Lord)
he is in Court, if your honor please to call him.

And for the 3. Particular, that I showed my self willing that Mr. Sanders
should Search, I can prove (my Lord) by these Witnesses following, viz. Michael
Reed, Gent. Mr. Thomas Sanders, Mr. Henry Golder, Robert Casemore, Mr. Charles
Willcox, and several others that were present; my Lord Chief Baron hearing
these Reasons fully proved, commended my discretion, in not opening my doors,
and he added further, that he should have done as much himself, saying it was a
soul business, and the Judge (then looking toward Sir John Croke with an angry
Countenance,) said to me, Sir, is this Sir. John Croke concerned in this
business?


Hawk. If it may please your honor (my Lord) with permission, I suppose that
Sir John Croke is deeply concerned in this Conspiracy, and I doubt not but to
make it appear to the World, (if I may be heard)


L. C. B. You need not fear that, for you shall have time; go on.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor; and I crave leave to call two Witnesses,
viz. Mr. Charles Willcox, and Mr. Samuel Brown; both these being called, Mr.
Willcox said, If it may please your Honor, my Lord, upon Friday the 18th of
September. 1668. I was at Larimore's house (in Chilton, from noon till it was
near night) with Larimore, a driving of some bargain about Tyles, and other
things, and, my Lord, Mr. Hawkins was not at Larimore's house all that
afternoon, nor did I hear any thing at all then, that Larimore was robbed,
which (my Lord) I must needs have done, if he had been robbed that afternoon,
for I was there.


L. C. B. At what time came you to Larimore's house Mr. Willcox? take heed what
you say:


Willcox, Before noon my Lord.


L. C. B. Mr. Willcox, how long did you stay there?


Mr. Willcox. Until it was near night my Lord.


L. C. B. Was Larimore with you all that time?


Mr. Willcox. Yes, my Lord, for we were about to bargain for some Tyles, and
other things.


L. C. B. Are you sure that it was upon the 18th. of September that you was at
Larimore's house?


Mr. Willcox. I am sure, my Lord, that it was upon the 18th. of September that
I was there, and the day before Mr. Hawkins's house was broke open.


L. C. B. What day of the Week was it upon?


Mr. Willcox. It was upon a Friday my Lord, and Mr. Hawkins's house was broken
open on the next day, it being Saturday.


Lar. It was upon Thursday, my Lord, that Mr. Willcox was at my house, it was
not upon that day that my house was robbed, but the day before.


Sir Ralph Verney replied, No, no, Larimore, it could not be on the Thursday,
that Mr. Willcox and you were together at your house, for that was the 17th.
day of September, and that was the day you was busied in fetching your Warrant
from Sir Richard Pigott.


L. C. B. It is well observed Sir, and so he was, and therefore it could not be
on the Thursday that Mr. Willcox was with him at his house.


Sir Richard Pigott replied, I am sure (my Lord) that Larimore, and that fellow
the Constable were both at my house upon the 17th. of September, as my Warrant
testifies.


L. C. B. At what time was it, Mr. Willcox, when you came that day from
Larimore's house?


Mr. Willcox, It was about Sunset, my Lord, for it was dark by that time I got
to my house at Crendon.


L. C. B. How far is it from your house at Crendon, to Larimore's house?


Mr. Willcox, It is about a mile and half, my Lord.


L. C. B. Were not the ways bad at that time?


Mr. Willcox, No, my Lord, the ways were very good.


L. C. B. Did not you stop, or stay, or meet with some body by the way that
might hinder you?


Mr. Willcox. No, My Lord, I went a good pace, it being near night, my Lord, I
was afraid of being benighted, and yet it was dark by that time I got home.


L. C. B. You that are of the Jury, do you know this Mr. Willcox, of what
credit is he?


Jury. We have known him a long time, and we know no harm by him.


L. C. B. He looks with an honest face, and you Larimore, do you know what that
honest man, Mr. Willcox says? do you know him, and did you ever see him at your
house?


Lar. Yes, my Lord, I know him well.


L. C. B. Larimore, do not you remember that he was at your house upon Friday
the 18th. of September, 1668.

Larimore replied, No, my Lord, sure it was not upon that day that I was robbed.

My L. C. B. Hale Replied, Larimore, No, in my Conscience thou say well, for
it seems you were not robbed upon the same day, that you have Sworn you saw the
Prisoner at the Bar commit this Robbery.


Hawk. My Lord, or upon any other day, (as I do verily believe.) And here many
of the People cried out, that they believed as much.


L. C. B. If that man Mr. Willcox speaks true, then all is false that Larimore,
his Son, and Sister, has sworn, etc.

Come Mr. Hawkins said my Lord Chief Baron, have you any more to say?


Hawk. I have one witness more, that I desire may be called, viz. Mr. Samuel
Brown.


L. C. B. Yes, yes, call him, come Mr. Brown, what can you say?

Mr. Brown said, my Lord, I can say something, but I dare not speak.


L. C. B. Why dare you not? Come, speak the truth; and spare not, and say no
more.


Mr. Brown said, I dare not speak, for Sir John Croke, and this Larimore have
threatened me, that if I came down to this Assizes, to testify what I heard
about this plot, Sir John Croke said, he would fling me in the Gaol, and load
me with Action upon Action of a 1000 l. and ruin me and my Family.

When the Judge, and the Justices heard Mr. Brown relate this, every eye began
to be fixed upon Sir John Croke, and the People asked which was that Sir John
Croke? Then my Lord Chief Baron Hale commanded the Clerk of the Assizes to give
Mr. Brown a Writ of Privilege, to protect him home again: which being
immediately done in Court, my L. C. B. said, Come Mr. Brown, let us now hear
what you can say to this business?


Mr. Brown said; If it may please your honor, (my Lord) upon Wednesday, the
16th. of September. last past, (early in the morning) as I lay in my Bed at Sir
John Croke's house in Chilton, hearing a great noise, (I being then entrusted
by Sir John Lentall, as keeper to Sir John Croke, which is a Prisoner at the
Kings Bench,) I fearing that they were contriving some way for him to escape, I
started suddenly out of bed, (having nothing on but my shirt,) and stood at the
Dining Room door behind the hangings, and then, my Lord, I heard this Larimore.
tell Sir John Croke that he had undone him, by causing him to contend with the
Parson. Sir John Croke asked him why? Larimore replied, because this Hawkins
will undo me, for he has entered me into most Courts of England, and summoned
me into the Crown Office and Chancery, and I cannot maintain so many Suits: Sir
John Croke replied, is that all? Come brother Larimore, be contented, we will
have one trick more for Hawkins yet which shall do his work. Larimore replied,
Sir John you have put me upon too many tricks already, more than I can manage,
and the Parson is too hard for us still. Sir John replied, [If thou will but
Act, I will Hatch enough to Hang Hawkins.] Larimore replied, but how shall we
bring this to pass? Sir John Croke made answer, [Canst not thou conveigh some
Gold, or Silver into Mr. Hawkins his House, and have a Warrant ready to search
his house, and then our Work is done.] Larimore replied, Sir, if we could but
bring this to pass, it might do well, but I know not how. Sir John Croke said
to Larimore, Do you but go to Sir Richard Pigott, and inform him, that you have
lost some Money, and Goods, and desire his Warrant to search for them, (which
Sir Richard neither can, nor will deny you) and then take Dick Main the
Constable, (who is one of us, and will do whatever we desire of him,) and go
and search Mr. Hawkins's house, and there you will find these things; and then
Charge him with flat Felony, and force him before me, and no other Justice, and
i will send him to the Gaol without Bail, [And we will hang him at the next
Assizes.] Come, said Sir John Croke, Brother Larimore, let us go and drink our
mornings draught, and we will consult more about this business. And so, my
Lord, I heard no more for that time. But --


L. C. B. That was enough, and too much too, but however, Mr. Brown go on.


Mr. Brown. So upon Saturday next, (being the 19th. of Sept. 1668.) I having
been abroad (and toward night) coming up the Town, I was informed that Mr.
Hawkins (as Larimore pretended,) had robbed him: I then began to think more
seriously upon what I had heard pass the Wednesday before, between Sir John
Croke and this Larimore, and coming to Sir John's house, I saw a paper lying
upon the Hall-Table full of writing, and Larimore, with the Constable, and
several others, had brought Mr. Hawkins before Sir John Croke, who Committing
Mr. Hawkins for Robbing Larimore, as he pretended, took up the said paper, and
read it to the Constable, and said, that it was Mr. Hawkins's Mittimus, which
said Mittimus was written before Mr. Hawkins came to Sir John Croke, (as all
that were there can justify.) And on Sunday morning I went to an Alehouse,
where they had kept Mr. Hawkins all night, and there I saw Mr. Hawkins go to
the Gaol, and then my heart began to tremble, and yet I durst not discover any
thing of what I had heard; but coming home, I said to Sir John Croke, Sir,
What, they have carried the poor Parson to the Gaol. Sir John Croke replied,
[Yes, let him go, and the Devil go with him, and more shall follow after;] have
I not often told you, that if my Brother Larimore and I, did but lay our heads
together, none are able to stand against us? I replied, Yes, Sir John, I have
often heard you say so, but I never believed it until now.


L. C. B. Mr. Brown, Is all this true which you have related?


Mr. Brown. Yes, my Lord, all that I have said is true, and there sits Sir John
Croke, (pointing to him with his finger) who knows, that every word that I have
said is true.


L. C. B. If but ever a word that Mr. Brown says be true, it is as soul a
Conspiracy as ever was heard of.

About this time Sir John Croke stole away from the Bench, without taking his
leave of my Lord Chief Baron; or any of the Justices.

My L. C. B. said, Is this Sir John Croke a Gentleman, and contrives such Plots
as this? I never in all my days heard of the like: but I think once in this
place, I met with one something like it, but this far exceeds that, if this be
true that Mr. Brown has said.

But you of this Jury, there is an honest man, said my Lord, pointing to Mr.
Willcox, he overthrows all; if that be true which he said, then all that is
false which Larimore, his Son, and Sister has sworn.

Larimore said, My Lord, what I have sworn as to Mr. Hawkins is true.

My L. C. B. replied, Come, Larimore, thou art a very Villain: Larimore said, I
wish that the Ground may open, and swallow me, if any thing that I have sworn
against Mr. Hawkins is false.


L. C. B. Replied, Come, come, Larimore, thou art a very Villain, Nay, I think
thou art a Devil.


Hawk. I hope you Honor, and this Jury, are by this time fully convinced, that
Sir John Croke is concerned in this Plot, for (my Lord) he has appeared all
along to be the Grand contriver of it, as appears by Mr. Brown's Testimony, and
by what he said to Larimore before me and others.


L. C. B. Hales Replied, I am fully satisfied, and so (I think) are all that
heard it; And he said to the Justices, Gentlemen, where is this Sir John Croke?
They replied, he is gone.


L. C. B. Is Sir John Croke gone? he said, Gentlemen, I must not forget to
acquaint you, (for I thought that Sir John Croke had been here still) that this
Sir John Croke sent me this morning two Sugar-loaves, for a Present, praying me
to excuse his absence yesterday, I did not then know, (so well as now) what he
meant by them, but to save his Credit, I sent his Sugar-loaves back again. Mr.
Harvey, did you not send Sir John his Sugar-loaves back again?


Clerk of the Assize. Yes (my Lord) they were sent back again.


L. C. B. I cannot think that Sir John Croke believes that the Kings Justices
come into the Country to take bribes, I rather think, that some other person
(having a design to put a trick upon him) sent them in his name. And so taking
the Letter out of his bosom, showing it to the Justices, said, Gentlemen, do
you know this hand? To which some of them replied, they believed it might be
Sir John Croke's own hand, which Letter being compared with his Mittimus, (for
he had no Clerk) and some other of his Writings there, it plainly appeared to
be his own hand. So my L. C. Bar. seeing that, (putting up the Letter again
into his Bosom) said, he intended to carry that to London, and he added
farther, that he would relate the foulness of the business as he found
occasions fit for it.


L. C. B. said, Mr. Hawkins, have you any more?


Hawk. My Lord, I hope that the Jury, and your Lordship is fully satisfied as
to my Innocence, if so, my Lord, but if not, I humbly desire to know wherein I
have not given full satisfaction, and if any thing else shall be alleged
against me, I humbly crave time, and leave to answer it, for (my Lord) I am
confident, I can give a fuller satisfaction, if what I have said already be too
short.


L. C. B. You of the Jury, what do you think? The Prisoner at the Bar desires
to know whether you are satisfied as to the Indictment, if not, you may do well
to declare wherein you are not satisfied.


Jury. It is a very plain case my Lord.


L. C. B. And I think so too, but it is a very foul one.


L. C. B. said to me, Sir, have you any more?


Hawk. My Lord, I humbly thank your Honor, and the Court, for that great
patience, and liberty I have had, and intend to say no more, but with
Quintilian I conclude, Innocentia melior est quam Eloquentia, Innocence is
better than Eloquence.


My Lord Chief Baron. Hale's Directions to the Jury were to this Effect.

L. C. B. said, You that are of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar stands
Indicted for Robbing this Larimore, and you have heard (at large) both the
Prosecutors Evidence to prove him Guilty (which if you do believe) I never
heard a fuller. And 2. You have also heard the Prisoners Defense, wherein (as I
think) he has as fully answered the same Charge. I shall First, repeat the
Evidence against him, which consists of two branches; the first is the
Prosecutors proof of this Indictment, and Secondly, his charging him with other
Crimes of the like nature, as the stealing of Chilton's Boots, and the picking
of Noble's pocket.

1. For to prove him guilty of Robbing him, he observes this Method.

First, He himself swears that he saw the Prisoner at the Bar, commit the
Robbery.

Secondly, His Son, and Sister swears that they saw him run out of the house at
the same time.

Thirdly, He brings in four or five persons that swear the Gold, Ring, and the
Five shilling piece, was found in the house of him, that is now the Prisoner at
the Bar.

Fourthly and Lastly, He proves by two witnesses, that the Gold Ring, and
Five-shilling piece was pawned to him.

And for the First of these, Larimore swears that upon Friday the 18th. of
September last past, he locked his doors, between twelve, and one of the clock
at noon, and went out (leaving no body at home,) to pluck Hemp, about two
Furlongs from his House, where he stayed with the rest of his Family till
within an hour and half of Sunset, at which time, he coming home, found his
doors open, and ran up into his Chamber, and there through the chinks of of the
Loft-boards, he swears that he saw the Prisoner, now at the Bar, ransacking,
and rifling of a Box, in the which was at that time a Holland Apron, and a
Purse, in which Purse was two Gold Rings, two pieces of Gold, and 19s* in
Silver, all which said Rings, Gold and Silver, with the said* Apron, he swears
that he did see the Prisoner now at the Bar, turn out of the said Purse, take,
and Feloniously carry away, (except one piece or two of the Silver,) and shows
the very Purse out of which he saw him take them. If you compare the Evidence
with the Indictment, you may see the policy of the Prosecutor. For, he would
gladly seem a moderate Prosecutor, by Indicting him for Felony only, as the
stealing of Rings and Money, etc. But by his Evidence, he would as gladly
charge him with Burglary also, for he swears, he broke open, or picked the
Locks of his Doors, and Box, which by Law is the same.

And Secondly, To corroborate this his evidence, he brings in two Witnesses
more, viz. his Son, and Sister Beamsly, and they swear that they did (at the
same time) see the Prisoner that is now at the Bar*) run out of Larimore's
house, with a great bunch of keys in his hand, and he hid himself amongst
Beans, and weeds And note the keys, to intimate that by the help of those, he
picked Larimore's Locks.

Thirdly. He brings in his Son. Dodsworth Cook, the Constable, and Tything
man, which all swear that they found this Gold Ring, and Five-shilling piece of
Silver in a basket hanging upon a pin* in the house of the Prisoner at the Bar
with a few Eggs, which the Prisoner at the Bar, the day before had stolen from
him.

And Fourthly and Lastly, He brings in one of Sir John Croke's Sons, and Mr.
Good, who swear, that the one pawned the Ring, the other the
Five-shilling-piece to Larimore.

Thus Larimore Swears he saw the Prisoner Rob him, his Son, and Sister swear
that they saw him run out of the house, the same time, four more swear, that
they found the Ring, and Five-shilling-piece in his house upon search; And
Lastly, two swear that the Ring and Five-shilling piece was pawned to him. If
all this be true, he must needs be guilty, and if so, (although I have a great
respect for his Calling, yet that shall no ways excuse him but rather aggravate
his Crime.

And thus much touching the Indictment.

And Secondly, He seems to charge him with other Acts of the like nature, as

1. He brings in one Chilton to swear that the Prisoner at the Bar did steal a
pair of Boots from him, and four or five Persons swear, that they did hear
Chilton say he did.

2. He brings one Boyce from London, a person, I think, of no great Credit, he
swears that he saw the Prisoner at the Bar, (about two years ago) have his hand
in the pocket of one, James Noble, and that Noble said, that he lost a Gold
Ring, and piece of Gold at the same time. This, (if true) would render the
Prisoner now at the Bar obnoxious to any Jury. Thus far the evidence against
the Prisoner at the Bar.

Now we come to the Prisoners Defense, which because it is so full, I shall be
the briefer in it. The parts of his Defense were two, as himself observed.

1. He shows how too improbable it is.

And 2. How, impossible that he should be guilty of this Charge.

First, That it is not likely that Larimore was robbed at all because he did
not declare it to any of his Neighbors, as soon as he saw the Robbery
Committed; again, he varies as to the time when it was done, for that he told
his Brother Beamsly. that he had lost the Ring and Five-shilling-piece, before
there was any difference between him, and the Prisoner at the Bar, as appears
by Mr. Willcox, and that difference began in Michaelmas Term, 1667. And before
Sir John Croke* he confessed that he had lost this a month before the Prisoner
(viz. Mr. Hiwkins) was committed, which must be about the 19th of August 1668.
And in Court he swears that he saw the Prisoner at the Bar Rob him of the same
Gold Ring, and Five-shilling-piece of Silver, upon Friday the 18th. of
September 1668. an hour and half before Sunset, all this cannot be true, and
for the Warrant, that bears date a day before the Robbery was committed:
Whereupon the Judge said to Larimore, Come, thou art a cunning fellow, for thou
went to Sir Richard Pigott for a Warrant upon the 17th. day, and wast not
robbed until the 18th. day, Larimore thou knew it seems, upon the 17th. day
that thou should be robbed on the 18th. day, that the Prisoner now at the
Bar, should rob thee: Surely Thou can Divine, if all this be true. Again, is
it likely, that when the Prisoner at the Bar was charged with flat Felony at
his own doors, the Constable likewise threatening to break open his House to
search, if he had been guilty, his Wife and himself, having the opportunity of
going abroad after they had so Charged him, while they were gone to consult
with Sir John Croke, as the Prisoner at the Bar sufficiently proved, they did
by the Testimony of several Witnesses, (as Mr. Reed, Mr. Sanders, and others)
that in all that time he would not have made his escape, or at least found a
more convenient place to convey a Ring, and Five-shilling-piece, than to let it
remain all that time in a little Basket with a few Eggs, (hanging on a Pin?)
Again, who came first into the Room where this Egg-Basket hung? why Larimore;
and who took down the Basket? Larimore; who turned out the Eggs? Larimore. And
who had the dressing of the Eggs? Larimore. He is a special Cook; you Gentlemen
of the Jury, it is an easy thing, for Larimore to juggle a Ring, and
Five-shilling-piece into a Basket he being the first that came into the Room,
as he put up his hand to take down the Basket, he might with ease enough,
conveigh such things as those were, into it. All this, and many more, are
probable Circumstances to move you, and me to believe, that it is not possible,
that the Prisoner at the Bar is guilty of this Robbery; But that I must leave
to you to consider of.

Again, The Prisoner at the Bar proves the whole business to be but a mere
Contrivance of Sir John Croke's, and this Larimore's, (on purpose to ruin him)
as is fully made manifest by the Testimony of Mr. Brown, who justifies, that
upon Wednesday the 16th. of September last past (and but two days before this
pretended Robbery) he heard Sir John Croke advise this Larimore, to fetch a
Warrant to search the House of the Prisoner at the Bar, and then to conveigh
Gold and Silver into it; which having done, Charge him with flat Felony, and
bring him before the said Sir John Croke, and no other Justice, he then
promising to the said Larimore to Commit him to the Gaol without bail, and
hang him at the next Assizes, which is now. And as I take it, they do aim at
it. You of this Jury, if you do believe what Mr. Brown says, it is as foul a
Conspiracy, as ever was heard of: And I am apt to think it may be probable,
because that Sir John Croke, and Larimore did threaten to cast this Mr. Brown
into Prison (and so ruin him) if he came down, and testified his knowledge
about this business* which thing is of a very ill consequence. Again, it seems
likely that Mr. Brown may be credited, if you compare their Actions with the
Times, for upon Teusday Sir John Arrested the Prisoner upon a (feigned) Action
of an 100 l. upon Wednesday the Plot was concluded upon, by Sir John Croke, and
Larimore, as may appear by Mr. Browne's Testimony. On Thursday, they procured
of Sir Richard Pigott the Warrant to Search: On Friday Larimore pretends that
he was Robbed, (tho in truth there appears no such thing.) Upon Saturday, the
Prisoner's House was broke open, and he apprehended; and upon Sunday he was
carried to the Gaol, it was a good weeks work* But there is an honest man, said
my Lord Chief Baron (pointing at Mr. Willcox) he knocks down all, for he
justifies, that he came to Larimore's house upon Friday, the 18th. of September
last past, (it being the same day, that he swears he saw the Prisoner at the
Bar Robbing him, and an hour an half before Sunset;) and there continued till
it was near night, and he further says, that Larimore was with him all that
afternoon: And he said, that Larimore was not Robbed that afternoon, nor was
Mr. Hawkins there at that time. If this that Mr. Willcox says be true, then
all that Larimore, his Son, and Sister has Sworn, must needs be fase.

And as touching the Boots, Chilton Swears that he had legged a pair of Boots
for the Prisoner at the Bar, and laid them in his Shop-window, for him to take
along with him as he went by, which he did, and paid him for his Work, and yet
this Larimore, Sir John Croke, Croxstone, and others, did use their utmost
endeavors, to stir up this Chilton to Indict the Prisoner at the Bar, for
Stealing of them; (Croxstone promising him to bear him out in it.) This can
argue nothing else but Malice in those persons; And for that which Boyce
swears, is a Story that can argue nothing else; for neither is Noble hereto
Prosecute, nor can Boyce Swear that the Prisoner at the Bar did pick his
Pocket, or that Noble ever said he did.

Thus I have repeated the Evidence to prove him Guilty, and have not (I think)
omitted any thing in it that is material. Which if you do believe, he must
needs be guilty. And also the Prisoners Defense, which (I think) is sufficient,
it is a plain case, and (I suppose) you need not go from the Bar, but that I
leave to you.

And so the Jury, not stirring from the Bar, which the Clerk observing, he
called the Jury, who severally answered to their names, which being done, The
Clerk of the Arraigns asked whether they were all agreed upon their Verdict.


Jury. Yes, we are all agreed.


Clerk. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Clerk. Robert Hawkins, Hold up thy Hand, which I did.


Jury. Look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, How say you? Is he guilty of the
Felony, whereof he stands Indicted, or not guilty?

Foreman of the Jury said, Not Guilty my Lord.


L. C. B. Hale said to the Jury, you have found like Honest Men: I do believe,
that he is not Guilty: and he said to Larimore, thou art a very Villain.

Jailer said, Is Mr. Hawkins (my Lord) discharged of his Imprisonment.


L. C. B. Replied, Yes, yes, he is discharged, paying his Fees.


Hawk. May it please your Honor, my Lord, I am poor, (and this, with other
troubles, which they have (unjustly occasioned,) has cost me a great deal of
money already.


L. C. B. I cannot help that, nor can I give away other men's rights, if they
will not remit their Fees, you must pay them.


Hawk. I humbly thank your Honor, and shall observe your Lordships Commands.

And so the Court arose, there being no other business, (but my Trial) the
whole morning, which lasted from eight until one. So as soon as my Trial was
over, Sir John Croke, Larimore, and the rest of that Crew, fled privately out
of Alisbury, and durst not stay.

Thus, I have (as briefly as possible I could,) run over my Trial, and for the
truth of it, I dare appeal to all that heard it, (which were hundreds) who can
justify, that I have given a just and faithful account of it.

This Conspiracy may put us in mind to pray (with our Mother, the Church of
England, in her Letany.

From all Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, Good Lord deliver us. Amen.

And with her, I am bound to give Thanks, and say always.


O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense, unto thy Servant against
the face of his Enemies. I yield thee praise and Thansgiving, for my
Deliverance from those Great, and apparent Dangers, wherewith I was Compassed,
I acknowledge it to be thy Goodness, that I was not Delivered over as a Prey
unto them; Beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercys toward me, that
all the World may know, that thou art my Savior, and Mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Psalm 21. 11. For they imagined such a device, as they were not able to
perform. Psalm. 37. 6. He has made my Righteousness as clear as the light, and
my just dealing, as the noon day. Psalm 103. 1. Praise the Lord O my Soul, and
all that it within me. Praise his Holy Name. Verse 2. Praise the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his benefits. Verse 4. Who has saved thy life from
Destruction, and has Crowned me with Mercy, and Loving Kindness. Verse 20. O
Praise the Lord, all ye Angels of his. Verse 21. O Praise the Lord, all ye his
Servants, that do his pleasure. Verse 22. O speak good of the Lord all ye Works
of his. Psalm 104. 35. In all places of his Dominion, Praise thou the Lord, O
my Soul, Praise the Lord. 1 Kings 1. 34. 39. God Save the King. Amen.
FINIS.

