ABSOLUTE Election of Persons. Not upon foreseen Conditions, STATED and
MAINTAINED; In some Sermons preached at Hartford.

With some ANIMADVERSIONS on some Pelagian Passages in a Book, entitled,
Vulgar Erros in Divinity removed, written by Mr. Ralph Battle, present
Minister at St. Alhallows in Hartford.

By WILL. HAWORTH, Servant of Jesus Christ in the Ministry of his Gospel.

Romans 11.6. If it be of Works, it is no more of Grace; if Grace, no more Works,
etc.

LONDON; Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Lord, who has determined the Bounds of our Habitation, Acts 17.26. having
cast my Lot at Hartford, where I have continued in the Ministry of the Gospel
above twenty Years, yet not without Interruption; and having, from the time of
my Conversion, received in the Doctrine of Election much sweet and pleasant
Comfort to my Soul, (as the Church of England's Phrase is, speaking of it in
the 17th Article) I have been a constant Preacher of it, and not without
various Effects to several Hearers; it has been (as the Apostles speak of
their Doctrine) 2 Cor. 2.16. A Savor of Life unto Life, to others a Savor of
Death unto Death. Some that at first through Novelty stumbled at it, now
rejoice to hear it preached: Others have so stumbled at it through Ignorance,
Conceitedness and Prejudice, that to this day they have not recovered
themselves. Some forsook our Meetings and turned Quakers upon hearing of this
Doctrine, the now George Keith (a chief Preacher among them) owns the Doctrine
of Election of a definite Number of Persons that shall infallibly be saved. The
Church-of- England-Professors in Hartford are (as far as I can learn) most-what
prejudiced against it, tho it is owned so plainly in their Articles of
Religion; and no wonder when one of their Teachers is such an Enemy to it,
witness his slender Book, entitled, Vulgar Errors in Divinity removed, printed
1683. wherein he does with Bullets of Glass batter the Brazen Mountains of the
absolute Decrees of the Supreme Sovereign, Zech. 6.1. Who gives not an account
of any of his matters; Job 33.13. but this Man impudently disputes with God,
contrary to that in Romans 9.20. and arraigns his Creator, saying, Why have thou
made me thus? and yet P. 8. confesses God might have made him, as to his
Temporal Being, a Dog, a Hog, or poisonous Serpent; and bethinks himself, and
modestly in his Preface faith, If his Superiors think he is in an Error, he
will disown it. I am confident the late Reverend Bishop Barlow of Lincoln would
have branded the Book (had the read it) as fulsome Pelagianism. In the fifth
Page he writes; And what he says to Moses is most equal, I will have Mercy on
whom I will have Mercy: Thanks be to the Gentleman for that ingenous Judgment
upon Jehovah's Dealings. But now hear his own Comment; (that is) It belongs to
me to appoint upon what Terms I will show Mercy, and justify Men, whether by
the Law of Faith, or by Works. For as he that builds an Hospital, has an
equitable Right to appoint the Qualifications of the Persons that shall partake
in this Gift, whether poor Children, or Widows, aged Persons, or the like: so
it belongs to God to appoint upon what Terms he will justify me, (it should be
Elect, for of that he is treating) whether by the Law of Works, or Faith. It is
evident by this, that the Author is for Election upon Conditional Terms and
Qualifications; and that it is a vulgar Error, viz. Free Election of Persons
unto Qualifications. The Phrase [shewing Mercy] in this Paragraph can be no
otherwise interpreted but of Election, tho he adds the word [justify] to it.
Foreseen Faith, according to this Author, is the Cause of God's Election; and
that Faith must surely be accompanied all a Man's days with good Works, else it
is not true Faith: so that Election is upon Works as much as Faith; and there
is no Election but at the utmost Period of a Man's Life. Against this Arminian
vulgar Error do I militate in the following Sheers, wherein the Reader will, I
question not, find sufficient Armoury against it. As for absolute Reprobation,
no wonder the Author is against that, whenas he is against absolute Election:
But that God of his own Will and Pleasure, and for no other Cause, should
decree to damn any, (which this Author upbraids us withal) was never asserted
by any Divines that ever I read; but they constan^^y, uno Ore, affirm, That God
has from Eternity determined to condemn Man of Sin, persisting therein to the
end of his days in Unbelief. 2. They are all in one Mind, That no Man, whoever,
but sins freely when he sins, notwithstanding the Decree to permit Sin. Now it
is no Injustice in God to condemn Man for final sinning and Impenitency
therein, nor to decree so to do from Eternity; tho withal we say, the desert of
Sin is not the Cause of the Purpose and Decree it self. And let them quarrel
with us for that, Thomas Aquinas (a great School-man) shall answer for us; long
since he writ, viz. He is mad that says, there can be any Cause of the Divine
Will; that which is in Time, cannot be the Cause of that which is eternal; the
Cause must exist before the Effect. The foresight of the future Sin of Man in
time, before it has Existence, cannot have a causal Influence upon the eternal
Will of God: Neither can God foresee any thing future, before he had willed it
to be. There could have been no Evil in the World if he had not decreed to
permit it. That the Decree of Damnation should precede the Decree of permitting
Sin, our Divines do not say; but one of them says, This is the Order which God
takes in his Decrees: (Dr. Twiss in his Answer to Hoard, Book 2. p. 30.) God at
once decrees both to create Men, and suffer them to fall in Adam, and to bring
them forth in their several Generations into the World, and to bestow the Grace
of Faith and Repentance upon one sort, and so to save them, and to deny the
same Grace unto others, permitting them to go on finally in their sinful
Courses, and so to condemn them for Sin; and all to manifest the Glory of Mercy
in one, and the Glory of Justice on the other, yea, and his Sovereignty too:
But wherein? not in rewarding the one with Salvation, and inflicting Damnation
on the other, but only in giving Grace to the one, and not to the other. What
fault can be found in this Order of God's Decrees? Why should this Author
exclaim and say, that we make God to ruin the Innocent, and make him like the
Devil, Page 8. to be a Murderer from the beginning. These are but old cankered
Pelagian Cavils against the Cause of God, that will have Mercy on whom he will
have Mercy, and whom he will he hardens, and yet is righteous. How do we make
God to ruin the Innocent, whenas we heartily declare, that God never determined
to ruin any but for Sin, and never did execute his Will and Determination, and
so actually ruin any but for Sin contumaciously continued in to the end? And is
this to ruin the Innocent? When the Decree was made, Man was neither nocent nor
innocent; for the Creature had no Existence before the Creation, nothing had a
Being but the Decree; and so that of Reprobation had a Being before the World
was. The Nature of God he says cannot come so nigh the Nature of the Devil, as
to be a Murderer from the beginning; intimating that by our Doctrine we make
God to be like Satan, a Murderer from the beginning. But I doubt not but this
Author will by this Crimination make himself like Satan, a Liar, and false
Accuser of the Brethren; Ad triarios ventum est, Cannot we defend our selves?
Satan was the moral Cause of Eve's sinning, and so of Destruction. Did we ever
say that God was the moral Cause of Eve's sinning? I trow not: And then how can
he be said to be the Murderer? He that is not Causa Causae, how can he be said
to be Causa causati? Is the Judge that passes Sentence upon a Criminal, a
Murderer; or the Sheriff that executes the Sentence? We profess constantly,
steadily, that God never did sentence any to Death, but for final Sin; (we are
speaking of the Adult) neither did he decree any to Hell, but for final
Impenitency in Sin; much less does he execute any, inflict Death eternal upon
them, but for persevering obstinately in Sin to the end of their days without
Repentance. And to say that the Judge of the Earth in executing Judgment upon
Sinners, is to make him like the Devil, is Monstrum horrendum! etc. This is all
that can be laid to our Charge, that God denies Faith and Repentance to some,
which he gives to others, and has decreed so of his mere Will and Pleasure,
according to that in the 9th of the Romans, He will have Mercy on whom he will
have Mercy, and whom he will he hardens; not by infusing any Hardness into any,
but by not infusing Grace. Is this to make God like Satan, a Murderer? Is Satan
Sovereign Lord? Has he Power over the Creature, as the Potter over the Clay?
But this Man does apprehend God to be like Satan, a Murderer, because he wills
to punish some for their Sin persisted in, and because he will not give Faith
and Repentance to all: Who can think but he is for universal Salvation? The
Adversaries do much insist upon this Theme, crying out, that we render God
cruel in this Point of absolute Reprobation: One of them has this strain, It Is
contrary to sound Reason, which cannot but argue such a Decree of extreme
Cruelty, etc. But does not sound Reason also argue the Prescience of God of as
extreme Cruelty as this Doctrine of Reprobation? and they cannot, without
offering Violence to the Light of Nature, deny the Fore-knowledg of God: and
whatever Absurdity they would fasten upon us from our Tenet of absolute
Reprobation, shall necessarily divolve upon themselves in every respect, if
they preserve but the undeniable Doctrine of God's Prescience.

Another vulgar Error is concerning Free Will in Mr. Battell's Book: why he
should call the Calvinistical Tenets vulgar Errors is uncouth, whenas the
Pelagian Heresy suits the Reason and Affections of all natural Men, and is very
plausible to the common People. There is Popery and Pelagianism in every ones
Belly by Nature; whole Towns and Countries espouse this Harlot, and wonder
after her: but strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way of Truth, and few find
it. I have read over the Treatise of Free Will, and find nothing but what is in
Cardinal Bellarmine the Jesuit. The Author describes Free Will in the same
Terms with the Jesuit; but how well does he agree with his Mother, the Church
of England? has he not undoubtedly spit in her Face, while he contentedly sits
in her Lap, and sucks her Breasts? Did he ever subscribe or swear to the tenth
Article of Free Will; is it not diametrically opposite to his Book? Let the
Reader judge. The Condition of Man after the Fall is such, that he cannot turn
and prepare himself (mark that) by his own natural Strength and good Works to
Faith and calling upon God; wherefore we have no Power to do good Works
pleasant and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ [preventing
us] (Mark that!) that we may have a good Will. But the Import of all this
Treatise is, viz. That there is a Free-will-in-fallen Man to spiritual and
supernatural Acts, tho indeed he calls it a remote Free Will to supernatural
Acts; that this Will of Man is not subject to the special Motion of God in the
Act of Conversion, so that the Grace of God is irresistably powerful, P. 73.
This, as the Opinion of our Divines, he disputes against; that this Will is
ready, tho with some Remoteness, to act with God's Grace, and is as bent to
choose Good as to refuse and choose Evil, is not dead, but sick and lame; and
this Power waits for God's Power, that they may act evenly and jointly in the
working out of Salvation, page 81. And that Man's Will together with the Grace
of God, casts the Scale in Conversion; not to wrong him, he says, Grace has
the chiefest Stroke in it, page 91. But which of them moves first, he says
not, and surely the first Mover has the greatest Stroke. Now Bradwerdine
asserts God to be the first Mover in all Actions, and it is most consonant to
right Reason; and if in all, then surely in good Actions. He has, it is true,
mentioned preventing Grace: In page 77. he is there setting forth the
difference betwixt one dead naturally, and one spiritually dead; and the first
difference is this, viz. The one is capable of preventing Grace, and the other
is not: but is not he that is naturally dead as capable of the miraculous
preventing Power of God, in raising him up from that kind of Death to Life, as
he that is spiritually dead is capable of Grace preventing to convert him? And
must not this Grace as really go before Conversion, in Order of Nature at
least, as the other miraculous Power precedes the Resurrection, or quickening
of him that is naturally dead: He says one may be raised by Means, the other
only by Miracles; we query what those Means are? External only, or Internal?
(i. e.) infusing of spiritual Life as a Principle, and is not this a Miracle?
Job. 5.25. compared with 28. there you plainly perceive, there is as much Power
exerted in raising the spiritually as the naturally dead; but the Author
supposes external Means only, according to that he writes, p. 79. Efficacious
Grace is nothing but Persuasion, which does not determine the Will: This is
noisome Pelagianism.

Our Opinion is plainly this, and we have Boldness in the Truth, viz. In our
Conversion Free Will is neither a total or partial Cause, pre-operant
co-operant, but the passive Subject, recipient of that Vim Gratiae verticordiam
(as Austin called it) the changing Power of Grace. The Will in Conversion is
neither a free Agent, nor natural Agent, but an obedient Subject of the
efficacious Grace of God: This we are ready to maintain. All the Author's
Arguments are in Bellarmine, Pelagius, Arminius, and fully answered by
Bradwerdine, Twiss, Ames, and Davenant, a Bishop of the Church of England. Is It
not pity that this Dish of twice sodden Coleworts should be made ready and set
on the Table for the poisoning of so many Souls, making them lazy, proud and
hypocritical? Without an Answer (...), to lay open the Fallacies and
Absurdities of this vulgar Error, it may be done in season. In the Interim I
offer a few things to manifest the Absurdities of this Tenet, viz. The Power of
Free Will cooperating with the Grace of God, being a Partner with God in
Conversion. First, See what Bellarmine says of this matter. The Concourse of
God does not impress or work any thing upon our Wills, but immediately flows
upon the Effects; it is like to that of two carrying a great Stone, which one
of them singly cannot do; the Will and God work together in one and the same
moment of time, (but now mark, the Author will not speak out so plainly, but I
suppose will not oppose the Cardinal) yet God works because the Will works; not
on the contrary, i. e. the Will works because God works, because he did as it
were oblige himself freely of his own accord when he created Free Will. Now
this is ingenuously spoken. Against this we offer: 1. This takes off from the
Dominion of Providence, and the efficacious Government of all the Operations of
Human Will. 2. This takes away the Subordination of Second Causes to the First
in their Operations. 3. This makes Man not God's Subject, but Companion; not
subordinate, but equal to God. 4. It makes the Gubernation and Directions of
Human Actions, and of whatsoever follows thereupon, first and chiefly to depend
upon Man's Free Will. 5. It paints out God depending upon the nod and beck of
Man in things of the highest Concernment. 6. This Opinion inverts and subverts
that Piety which God has taught us in the Scripture, James. 4.15. which we
should use our selves to in our Besolves, viz. If the Lord will, we will do
this or that; if Man will, to do this or that. 7. It is against not only
Aristotle, Augustine, Aquinas, and the Thomists and Jansenists but the very
Trent-Roman-Catechism, Art. 8. Symb. n. 22. Deus Providentia sua quae moventur
and agunt aliquid, intima virtute ad Motum atque Actionem impellit.
God by his Providence does impel with most intimate Power to Motion and Action
all things that are moved, and act any thing. I cannot forbear adding as to the
Description of Grace, p. 72. It is Strength and Assistance from God to do
something above Nature; these Men think it enough when they speak or write of
God's Actings of us, to grant that he aids, strengthens, assists, helps us.
Bellarmine argues thus, The Scripture teaches that we are helped of God in our
Actions, but he that does nothing cannot properly be said to be helped, but he
who labors in acting: yet I remember that Christ healing the possessed,
casting out the Devils, in which Men were merely passive, is called helping,
Mat. 15.25. Mark 9.22. Have Compassion and help us. Lactantius long since did
very well answer this of Bellarmine. The Propriety of this word [juvare] help,
does not hold forth to us Divine, but only Human Help: For Cicero interprets
Jove and Juno to be called so from the word juvando, to help; and Jupiter is
called so, Juvans Pater, the helping Father, which Name does not in the least
suit God; because to help belongs to Man, bestowing something upon one that
has but little: none does so pray to God that he should help them, but save
them; that he would bestow Life and Salvation upon them, which is much more
than to help. And because we speak of a Father, no Father is said to help his
Sons when he begets them, and brings them up; this word is too light, than that
the Greatness of a Father's Bounty should be expressed by it: How much more is
it inconvenient and unbecoming God, who is most truly our Father, by whom we
are, whose we wholly are, by whom we were made, quickened, enlightened? etc. He
does not understand the Divine Benefits, that thinks himself only to be helped
of God. Therefore he is not only ignorant, but wicked, that by the word Jove,
does impare, diminish, or lessen the Power of the Highest.

Now hear a few Queries that should be resolved by these Levellers,
Co-operators, Coadjutors. 1. Whether the Grace of Calling, or the whole Work of
God which he exerts to the converting of a Man, be only moral, only in
persuading, proposing, inviting, exhorting, etc. or also real and of proper
Efficacy? 2. Whether there be no Action of the Spirit acting immediately upon
the Mind and Will, which causes us to believe; but the proposing only of the
things to be believed, does suffice to the begetting and bringing forth of
Faith? 3. Whether there be not the same manner of working as to the Efficacy of
Grace in the quickening of the Intellect, Affections and Will; the Intellect
and Affections being quickened in an irresistible, but the Will in a resistable
manner? 4. Whether any other Powers are given to the Will to its Conversion,
besides the inlightening the Mind, and the exciting the Affections? 5. Whether
besides the inlightening the Mind, and the exciting the Affections, Grace works
any thing by way of Principle, or antecedently unto Conversion; but only
accompanies the Will already consenting? 6. Whether there being all the
Workings and Operations which God uses in the effecting Conversion in Men,
whether Conversion does not always follow? 7. When Conversion follows, whether
does it follow and is effected by any Necessity of the Cause, or Infallibility
of the Event from the Intention and Action of God, or only contingently and
uncertainly, as it pleased the indifferent Will of Man to incline it self? Let
these Queries be plainly answered.


A third vulgar Error is, viz. That Christ died for the Elect only, he is for
universal Redemption: Now this vulgar Error the Church of England is for with
us, for they are for the Election of Persons, witness their 17th Article; and
it is evident that these two Opinions are inconsistent, viz. Election and
universal Redemption. As for those universal Terms he says, p. 101. the Church
teaches the Children in their Catechisms to answer, viz. I believe in God the
Son, who redeemed us and [all Mankind]: And that in her Collect for
Good Friday, she prays for the Conversion of Jews, Turks and Infidels. Indeed
according to this Author's Opinion, there needs no Prayer be made for them that
have Power already in their own Hands. God works in Conversion, because the
Will works, says Bellarmine; but we answer, by querying, Whether we should
judge of the Church's Doctrine by her Collect, and Catechism, or by her Articles
of Religion? surely by the latter. Again, Are we to pray for Turks, Jews and
Infidels Conversion, without this addition (if it be the Will of God to convert
them)? I think not. This Term [all Mankind] so general, no more is signified
thereby, than Christ died for Mankind, in Opposition to Angels kind, and we say
the same. The ground for praying for Turks, Jews and Infidels, arises from the
Scripture prophesying of the Jews Conversion, and bringing in of the Fullness of
the Gentiles; which is plainly notified in the 11th of the Romans. But that
Christ died for all and every one, with his own and Father's Intent to save
them, we deny; and offer those Arguments drawn up lately by that Learned and
Reverend Brother, Mr. Isaac Chauncey, in his late Book, entitled, The Doctrine
which is according to Godliness, there cannot be better Arguments produced. The
Preface swells, else I would have transcribed them all; take but one suitable to
the following Subject, and I will bid the Reader farewell.

It is not fit Christ should die for all, seeing his Father elected not all,
and gave not all to him; For Christ to redeem more, were to disobey his
Father's Will, and not to do it. If any say God elected all, it is most absurd
to talk of choosing some from among many others: when a Man takes the whole
Number, this is no Election. Or if any say Election is conditional provided if
a Man will, this also is no Election; for if Election be upon the Condition of
Man's Free Will, neither one nor another is chosen, but all have equal pervious
Designation to the end, and so there is no Election at all.
Farewell, EPHESIANS. 1.5. Having predestined [us] to the Adoption, etc.


THis Text speaks this Truth, viz. That particular Persons are decreed unto
Eternal Life, and the Means thereof are decreed in their effectual working:
Some singular Persons are the immediate Objects of Election, the word [us]
denotes it; it speaks Persons still: All the Adversaries grant Persons are
elected, but here is the difference; some think that Persons are in God's Eye
first, and his Love was first cast upon them as soon as he thought of
glorifying himself out of himself among the Sons of Men: and whatever Means
(some calls them Conditions) by which they may come to this Salvation, they are
chosen to, they shall have Strength from God to perform.

The other think that Persons are elected, but out of foresight that they do
fulfill such Conditions, and those Conditions are first of all ordained, and
Persons so far as they come under them. Some of them say, that the Object of
Election is Man dying past the use of Reason, who in all probability will not
return and live to enjoy the Means wherein they may use the Power of their
Will, to take or leave. Some will say a Man is not elected while he is a Man of
this World.

Therefore this Order they that are of this Opinion make of God's Decrees. 1.
God decrees to send his Son into the World, that he dying his Justice might be
satisfied, he might be free upon what Terms he would save Men. The second
Decree, that Men shall have no other Terms for Salvation, but Perseverance in
believing on him who has died for them. Third Decree, to give fit Means to
make them believe. 4. God picks out particular Persons as his chosen ones, as
they fulfill the Conditions at the Point of Death. Or thus; God considered all
the ways possible that may bring to Salvation, and of all pitched upon the way
of Faith; this they call Predestination unto Life. 2. Then there is a
particular Decree of this Man or the other to Life, according as he has
fulfilled that Condition. By what has been said, you may see the difference.

This is not God's Election, to say, if Men believe and persevere in believing,
then they shall be elected and saved, then I will pitch upon you rather than
others to Life: but this is God's Election I do take thee, and therefore will
enable thee and not others to do all the things I require of thee; I will call
thee, and I will not depart from thee till thou art partaker of Eternal Life;
the Question then is great about the Cause of God's Election, what makes a
complete Act of God's electing? God chooses particular singular Persons, John,
Peter, Paul, these are those God immediately pitcheth upon, not Conditions
first and then Persons, as they fall under these; but Persons first, and
appoints them to all the Means: I prove this, 1. By Scripture. 2. By Reason. 3.
I will show the danger of the other Opinion.


The Scripture says, that the very Hairs of our Head are numbered, Mat. 10.30.
Acts 27.34. not one falls without your Heavenly Father: 2 Samuel 14.11. Much more
surely has God a Care of all the Heirs of Salvation, of all that shall be made
partakers of that Inheritance in Glory: things that are numbered are that they
may not perish. If superfluous things are taken care of by the Providence of
God, and it reaches to minute things, as Hairs of the Head, does it not extend,
think you, to the Persons of them that are saved?

The Proofs of Scripture for this are three.

1. That the Scripture is silent about any such way as the Adversaries speak
of; now the Scripture is the Light that is given to know the Mind of God by in
this matter: The Silence of the Scripture in this thing speaks aloud, what it
says nothing of is not to be believed. For in this lies the very Nature and
Essence of a Rule, that what is not according to it is not right, nor
authentic, not to be supposed; in the Scripture are all the Truths that are to
be received, and view it throughout, and there is not a word of this, viz. That
there are Conditions made of Election if we believe, and repent, and persevere;
indeed of Salvation there are Conditions the Scripture speaks of, taking
Conditions in a general sense, as they signify Means to a thing, or a Connection
betwixt one thing and another: but Salvation is much differing from Election,
as much as the Effect from the Cause, and the End from the Means; we are saved
by Grace therefore in the use of Means, but Election gives that Grace: Some
Scriptures seem to be for them, but of them I shall speak afterward. 2. The
Scripture speaks of particular Persons, singular Persons elected, wherever it
speaks of Election or Predestination; in this of the first of the Ephesians,
predestined [us], i.e. the Ephesians, in distinction from others. In the
second Chapter he says, they were Children of Wrath by Nature as others, till
God made known his Purpose to them by calling of them: It must have been
instead of this word [us] (all Men) predestined all Men to the Adoption of
Children; now according to them we are no otherwise adopted to be Sons, but as
we our selves by our well-doing make our selves Sons: We are elected after we
have persevered in Faith and well-doing to the end. Romans 8.39. [Whom] he has
predestined; are not these Persons spoke of? the Romans in distinction from
others, when the Apostle says in the 28th Verse, All things work together for
good, to them that are the called according to his purpose: here is a Purpose
of God spoke of that has determined some Persons, that they shall receive
Profit and Good by all Afflictions that shall befall them; there it cannot be
(as they would have it) spoke of all Men. Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained
unto Eternal Life, believed: This Scripture speaks of Ordination unto Eternal
Life, something that was done before believing; no Man can dispose himself (as
some would have the word (...) read and understood) for Eternal Life before
Faith, this ordaining to Eternal Life is an Act of God, not any Act of ours,
and it is spoken of Persons in distinction from others: for the words are
brought in to give a Reason why some Men did believe the Doctrine preached by
Paul, and others contradicted; they that were ordained there believed the
Doctrine, as Christ says in another place, Joh. 10.26. Ye believe not because
you are not of my Sheep. None can believe but those that are elected, Romans
9.18. He has Mercy on whom he will; this having Mercy is God's Election unto
Eternal Life, making a Man a Vessel of Mercy; now are not here Persons spoke
of? To put it out of doubt there are Persons named in the 9th of the Romans,
Isaac and Jacob; now he speaks of them not as Persons who came to their Estate
of Election through any Conditions; for he says they were elected before they
had done any good. Object. They will say these two were only Types of such a
sort of Men as are elected upon Faith, not Works. Answ. They were not only
Types, but they are Examples also: The Conception of Isaac was not typically
only, but a thing that was done; so also is the difference that God put between
him and Ishmael at his Conception, and the declaring, of his Love concerning
him: but if they were Types only, which is not so, (for it was verified as to
their own Persons being elected) yet not of such as upon believing come to be
elected; for God it is said loved Jacob before he had done any good, so that he
was not considered by the Lord as one that did believe, or was to believe and
seek Salvation by Christ in the way of Faith, and not for his Works; for then
he should be considered as one who had exercised Faith, which the Scripture
denies.

Romans 9. that Similitude of the Potter shows that God makes a distinction of
Persons: The Potter of the same Matter forms one Vessel to Honor, another to
Dishonor; so God makes one Person to be an elect Person, and therefore puts
him into an Estate differing from all others which are not so: Romans 11.7. the
Election (i. e. Persons elected) have obtained it, the rest were hardened; what
were those rest but Persons? those that are elected they are such Persons as
are severed and plucked out from the rest.

3. The Scripture that speaks of Election speaks also of Means, and tells us we
are ordained to all Means which lead unto Eternal Life: Whatever are the
Condition or Conditions of Salvation, we are elected to the fulfilling of them:
Election carries with it a Power to enable us to fulfill what is required of us,
as well as signifies the Love of God who by the Means will give Eternal Life.
Ephesians. 1.3. Who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places
in Christ; if with all, then with Faith and Perseverance, for they are
Blessings and spiritual ones: then are they given to us in Christ, chosen in
him the Head; ver. 4. chosen that we should be holy and without Blame: why then
we have Holiness by Election, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Christ gave himself for the
Church: Now this giving of himself an Offering it was according to the Will of
God, Gal. 1.4. which Will of God is Election. Now wherefore was it? that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word; that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without Blemish. So then it so
be that the Persons that be elected be distinguished from others in that Act,
then God does not first choose a Condition, because in that they are alike with
others. Again, if so be God do undertake the Condition, then Election lies not
upon their fulfilling of it.
Thus much from the plain Scripture it self: now, secondly, Reasons and
Arguments from the Scriptures that Persons are elected, not Conditions, or
Persons upon Conditions, if they believe and repent, etc.

1. There is but one Election of Head and Members; now the electing of the
Human Nature into Personal Union is the Pattern of God's electing us to have
Communion with himself: the Human Nature of Christ was elected unto personal
Union with the Divine, and unto Grace and Glory, Mat. 12.18. Isa. 42.1. Mine
Elect in whom my Soul delights. 1 Pet. 1.20. Who verily was foreordained
before the Foundation of the World: he speaks of the Human Nature of Christ,
for he says there, he was manifested in these last Times. Now the Human Nature
of Christ was not chosen of God to be united upon any Condition, he required
not the Human Nature to do any thing that it might be united; thi^ is
impossible, for the Human Nature of Christ had no Subsistence of it self out of
the Divine, so then it could not do any Action; for then it must be a Person,
and united before it was united, which is a Contradiction. God took the Human
Nature into Union before it was in an Estate of doing any thing, or acting any
thing: then the Argument lies thu^; so as the Head is elected, so are the
Members; so as Christ is predestined, so are all those which are considered
by God the Father in him; but he was not predestined, or came out to his
Election by fulfilling of any Condition.

2. Reason. The Scripture does plainly hold out, that Infant^ that die as soon
as they be born, or those that die in the Womb, or before they come of Years,
if any of them be saved, as who dare deny that then they are elected: of such
(the Scripture says) is the Kingdom of God, he means such Children as were
brought to him whom he blessed, Children of Disciples that followed him and
believed on him: The Branches are holy, Romans 11. and in the same Chapter the
Jews are said to be be beloved with the Love of Election for their Fathers
sake: Children are elected, if any are saved none are saved but the Elect; it is
said Romans 11.7. the Election has obtai^; but now what Conditions did these
Infants fulfill of obeying and per^^^^ing, when as they were cut off before they
were capable of doing any thing, or using any Means, and God had decreed and
determined them unto Death in their Infancy? Remember now that elect Infants
dying in Infancy make but one Body together with us of those that shall be
saved. Here are some elected without Conditions.

3. Reason. The Number of those that shall be saved is certain, the Number can
neither be increased or decreased, added to or taken from; there is a Book of
Life spoke of in Scripture, Rev. 20.15. it is a figurative Speech borrowed from
Men, it signifies the unchangeable Purpose of God in giving Salvation to some:
now as it is among Men, Names are written in Books, so the Names of them that
shall be saved are in God's Mind and known to him, certain as if they were
written in a Book; now this Book is so kept, that none that are written here
can be blotted out, nor any written that are not already written from Eternity;
there fore this is given as a Reason why some Men stood and persevered in
Aposta^izing Times when others fell, it was this, their Names were written in
this Book. (i. e.) God had chosen them, they must stand, their Names could not
be blotted out: Rev. 13.8. All that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, and
whose Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World. Rev. 21. ult. None shall enter into the City new
Jerusalem but they that are written in the Lamb's Book of Life; that Number
written there, and none but that Number shall be saved: Rev. 20.15. And
whosoever was not found written in the Book, was cast into the Lake of Fire:
All went to Hell but they, not any added to them, the Number is definite; Mat.
24.24. it is said, if it were possible the very Elect: But if it were upon
Condition that Men are elected, this could not be; for th^s;^ are tendered to
a^l Men, and sufficient Means to believe, and they have Power to believe or
not, then the Number must increase or decrease as they believe or not,
persevere or fall off, to day there are more tomorrow less, more again and ^ess
again, as Men will hold on or not; the Election of a definite certain Number to
which not one can be added nor taken from, does diametrically oppose the
Election of Conditions, which all must be under equally, and no on^ ^eparated
from the rest.

4. If Election was upon Conditions, if we believe, and repent, and persevere,
then would he have given Means to all to have known those Conditions, else v^r,
little Love in God to set Terms upon which all Men may be saved, and yet not to
let all Men know these Terms: now it is clear from Scripture, that none knows
the way to Eternal Life, but those that have the preaching of the Gospel, or
the reading of the Scripture: Romans 1.16. it is said of the Gospel it is the
Power of God to Salvation to every one that believes, for therein is the
Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith; here is the Reason, he tells
after what the Gentiles could attain to by their Helps, it was only to know
there was a Godhead full of Power and Wisdom, but they could not reach this, to
understand the Righteousness of God, and how the Just should live by Faith, and
depend upon another for Salvation, and receive the Righteousness of God; 1 Cor.
1.21. it is said the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe: Acts 11.18. Then has God
also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life. This was when the Apostles
came among them and preached to them; till then, notwithstanding all their
Helps, they were in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death.

5. To elect upon Conditions, is to turn the Grace of God into a Covenant of
Works, and to put us into that Covenant: This makes a Covenant of Works, viz.
That there is a Condition of Life given to us, and it lies upon our Hands to do
it; we are to perform it be it what it will, if we are to do it for Life: the
Condition to Adam was, Do this and live; but now it is, Believe and live: but
it is all one as if he had said, Do and live, in case that our Election depends
upon it. The Article is changed only, or the Act to be done, but the Obligation
and manner of Treaty is the same, it lies upon us to do it, otherwise we shall
not have the Election of God or Salvation.

Object. But we have Faith given us. Answ. This makes not a difference, this
alters it not to say we have Power given us, or the Grace of Faith to believe;
for so had Adam Power given him to do whatever God should command or did
command, this Power he had given him before he sinned, all his Abilities were
given him with his Being from God; so that they did not arise (as some think) I
say his Abilities (whereby he was to walk upon Terms of Justice) did not arise
from his natural Principle.

Thirdly; Now hear the Inconveniences that follow upon their Doctrine that
seems so plausible, if you believe and persevere then God chooses you, if you
perform the Conditions; he elects them first, then Persons as they fall under
them.

1. This is against the Perfection of God; for to will upon a Condition is but
an imperfect Act of the Will, it is but a Velleity, a wishing or woulding;
because whatever is willed upon a Condition, is willed disjunctively, either I
will do, or I will not do it. Now to say God does imperfectly will, is not
becoming God, who can do what he will do, it only saves God's Credit however it
falls out, but it suits not his Greatness and Goodness to wish a thing that is
never accomplished. 2. It does not suit the Wisdom of God to proceed from
Generals to Specials: first he wills Conditions, and then Men as they fall
under these Conditions, particular Persons as they fulfill them. This argues
Weakness in God's Knowledge, as if he knew not who they should be beforehand.
3. It makes void all Election of Persons: thus their Election runs, viz. He
that believes shall be saved: what needs any more except God's Fidelity be
suspected? If a Prince should say all Rebels that come in shall be pardoned,
what need any more mentioning of Persons, except you will not give Credit to
the Prince? there needs no Act of Pardon to be granted when they do come in;
all that do come in enjoy their Pardon, and it is not given them by any new Act
except there be cause to suspect the Prince's or Magistrate's Fidelity: There
is no cause at all to suspect that God will not keep his Word, and make it
good; for he has said whosoever believes shall be elected, there needs no
Election of particular Persons afterward. 4. It will not suit the Government
of God to have his Will depend upon Man's frail fickle Will, and that in the
highest Things that concern his Glory; to wait upon Man's Will, to lacky it
after Man's Will, and be determined by it. 5. It Is against the Nature of a
Decree; the Decree of Election is a severing some from others, as it is said in
Scripture, many are called [few] chosen; Mat. 20.16. the Election obtains it,
the [rest] are hardened, Romans 11. See, here they are distinct from others; but
now it belongs to all to be under a Condition, viz. if you believe. 6. This
will follow upon it; then those that are elected may be damned, and those that
are for the present Reprobate, and do not fulfill the Condition, may afterward
fulfill the Condition, and be elected and saved; which is ridiculous, and clean
contrary to the whole Current of Scripture. 7. If God chooses Conditions, and
not Persons, until such time as they fulfill those Conditions, then Christ is
made a King without a Kingdom, a Shepherd without a Flock, a Husband without a
Spouse, a Head without Members, a Savior without a Body, a Prophet tho he
reveals not God's Will to any, a Priest tho none be reconciled; for it is
possible none of these Conditions may be fulfilled. 8. Yea, this supposes a
Power in Man as to his own Conversion, that it lies in him whether he will turn
or no, be converted or not be converted, tho God has done what is fitting for
him, and tho he has done what he can do, according to the Rule which he has
appointed to work by. 9. It supposes a Falling from Grace. 10. It supposes
plainly Justification by Works: for if a Man is elected, if he continues in
Faith and Obedience, then is he also justified by Works: The Consequence is
easy.
Object. 1. John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes should not perish, etc. Now they form the
Objection thus: there is a Love of God common to all the World, that upon
Condition they do believe, they may be saved, therefore no difference of
Persons, only as they believe or not believe: This they say it proves, that God
gives Christ for this End, that every one might be elected if he would believe.

1. The first Answer might be as to the word World here: it is the Elect of
God, and this word is so used in other places: God was in Christ reconciling
the [World] to himself; 2 Cor. 5. John 17. that the World may believe that thou
have sent me. 2. Does not the Text speak of our fallen Estate? for it speaks of
perishing; but surely God did not then begin to elect when Man was fallen, no,
the Fall of Man was decreed as a Means unto the Accomplishment of the Election;
what was done against the second Adam Christ, was done by the determined
Counsel of God, Acts 4.28. so as to the first Adam all was decreed. God who is
infinitely wise, and governs to accomplish his own End, would not let Sin be in
the World, but that he knew how to make Grace abound; thereby Grace began to
appear at the Fall, broke out, was manifested thereby: but Grace was given us
in Christ before the World began, 2 Timothy 1.9. therefore before God did consider
or think of any thing, or had any thing in his eye, of what was done in the
World by us. 3. This Scripture tells you, that what God did he did out of Love;
God so loved the World: Now this Love of God must either be natural Affection
in him, or else it must be a Decree. Natural it was not, for then it must
extend to all, to the Devil and his Angels as well as to Men: those that
conceive that there is naturally in God an Affection unto those that are in
Misery, must needs conceive that Affection to be as well to the Devil and his
Angels (which were in greater Misery than Men), as well as unto Men themselves:
no it cannot be that, for those Affections that are in Men are to be ruled by
Reason and their Will; so are God's Affections likewise. So that the Love spoke
of here, is God's Electing Love, Love in his Decree, Love with Choice. 4. So
loved: It is the greatest highest Love God could show to us; nothing able to
parallel it, nothing that can go beyond it: so it is said, Romans 5.8. God
commends his Love to us in that Christ was sent to die for us; (i. e.) he
could not have set out his Love more to us. In this was manifested the Love of
God to us, because that God sent his only begotten Son that we might live
through him, 1 John 4.9. This Love is made equal to that Love that he gave
Eternal Life by, therefore it must be electing Love, the highest Love: now to
elect upon Conditions, is not the highest Love; it is greater Love to elect
without a Condition, than to elect after the Condition is fulfilled.
Object. 2. If particular Persons be elected, then they shall certainly be
saved; their Salvation is necessary; and if it be necessary, what need any
Endeavors, what need Men use the Means who shall be saved, and it cannot be
otherwise? but Election makes it necessary that those Persons be saved, and so
takes away Endeavors: we may live as we list.

Answ. There is a double Necessity: 1st. Of Nature, as a Stone that goes
downward, and a Necessity of Compulsion when things are made to act against
their own Nature, as Stones to move upwards, to ascend; this Necessity takes
away all Endeavors. 2d. There is a Necessity of Infallibity, or
Unchangeableness, and this stands with Freedom: As for Example, the Apostle
Paul said, he must go to Jerusalem, and yet he went freely. Christ ought to
suffer, it is said, the things he was appointed to; and yet he did suffer very
freely, he laid down his Life very willingly. When things are ordained to some
End, they are so ordained that that End shall certainly be accomplished. So
when God says we shall obtain eternal Life through Holiness, we shall be holy
that we may attain thereunto. Look into Scripture, and ye shall find that
notwithstanding the Salvation of the Saints has been certain, this has been
so far from taking them off Endeavors, that it has been as a great Weight
upon the Wheel to make them very obedient; their Obedience and Holiness has
not been slackned at all, but increased by this, viz. that God has taken so
much care of them in his Election, that they should not come short of Glory,
but certainly obtain it. Paul said, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's Elect; and who shall condemn, and who shall separate? Romans 8.33, 34. And
yet who more diligent than he, abounding in Goodness, and stirring up others
thereunto? his Spirit too big to be enticed with the Pleasures that are in Sin,
to sin against the Grace that so much abounded toward him.

Use. I. If this be true, that there are Persons, particular Persons elected
unto such Conditions, then do not say, because thou can not find the
Condition as yet, that thou art not in the Election: Election does not depend
upon the having of Faith. It is an Act of God, and it is manifested and
declared when he makes thee believe; this is not the Method of God, Go and do
thus much, and when you have done thus much, I will elect you and bring you to
Glory: but this, I have passed the Sentence that you are mine, and shall be
mine, and I will fill you with my Spirit, and enable you to Obedience, and
bring you to Glory. But suppose we find it not so, we have no Faith, Holiness,
Obedience, yet say not ye are not in the Election; for it depends not upon
these things: They are not the Causes of it, and you may be in the Election for
all that, tho you cannot know it but by Faith. You know Paul ran an ill Course
in Sin, he persecuted the Saints, thought he ought to do so with Zeal; yet
says God, he is a chosen Vessel unto me, Acts 9.15. yea he was in the Election
then: so it is said in Acts 18.10. I have much [People] in this City. God calls
them his People before Conversion; and in John 10.16. Other [Sheep] I have
which are not of this Fold, them also I must bring. They are called Sheep
before they are brought in. And of the Jews it is said, that they were very
refractory, would not receive the Gospel because the Gentiles did, thinking it
a Breach of Promise, Romans 11.28. As concerning the Gospel they are Enemies for
your sake; but as touching the Election, they are beloved for the Father's
sake. Enemies, and yet beloved. Now say not, because thou have nothing written
in thy Heart, that therefore thy Name is not written in the Book of Life: thou
have no ground to exempt thy self, tho thou can not know it till Faith come;
thou can not be worse than those Jews, to be angry with God because he is
merciful to others: Who knows but God may yet give Faith to thee? if thou were
to bring Faith with thee, thou were in an ill Case, on a splitting Rock; thou
would never get off: But seeing thou art to have Faith as an Effect of
Election, it is the Gift of God, he gives it to the Persons he sets his Love
upon; be silent then, conclude nothing against they self.

Use II. Does not Election depend upon Conditions to be fulfilled? then measure
not God's Love to thee according to the Grace thou find in thy self; judge
not of his Purpose according to the Purpose thou have of serving him. Without
Faith we cannot know that we are chosen of God; but by a little we may come to
know it. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. The Apostle he knew the Thessalonians Election,
because the Word came unto them in Power, (i. e.) it did prevail with them, and
overcome their Hearts: Yet they were but newly converted, and in diverse Errors.
Signs and Tokens are to be taken from the least Degrees of Grace. Although then
our Faith be low and scanty, we are not received according to the Measure of
our Gifts, but according to his Purpose; his Purpose to do thee Good is
complete, tho yet thou have by little Good in thee: He works all things
according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. He works to will and
to do of his own good Pleasure, Phil. 2. He does not work a Will, because we
have had a Will before; gives the first good Will to them that had none before
to any Spiritual Good: he gives a Will to do great things, to work out their
own Salvation. If Election were upon Conditions of Grace, then you might
measure God's Choosing of you, loving of you, to eternal Life; to be according
to your Grace: there is this practical Error in us, or this Error in us
practically, that we hang God's Electing Love upon Conditions: here is the Root
and Bottom, and first Seed of many Doubts and Troubles in the Saints, that
their Eyes are not only upon Qualifications as desirable, or the things they
should labor after, but they are upon Qualifications as the Movers of God's
first Love of Election; they think because of their Sin God will repent, and
has no purpose of any Good to them: this wrongs the Grace of God. When he took
us at first, his Love was not for any thing he saw in us, or for any thing he
knew would be in us; he was resolved to make us lovely, but he will so do it,
as you shall acknowledge his free Love and Grace: Our Loveliness is not the
cause of his Love, tho it makes you a suitable Object to his Love. And when his
Love at first was pitched upon thee, what a Case wast thou in then? Ezekiel. 16.
Thou wast in thy Blood, cast out, loathsome, no Eye pitied thee. When God did
call thee to consider of eternal Life, thou wast minding nothing but Ways of
eternal Death; thou wast found of him when thou soughtest not after him. Did
God pitch his Love upon thee at first? he does not alter in his Love; his Love
is fixed on thy Person still: thou alterest, but he changes not; thou art the
same Object for him to do Good to, tho thou art not the same (it may be) in
regard of Disposition of Spirit. Consider but this, you that are in Christ; you
are loved, not because you are fruitful, (as Leah thought, and said, now will
my Husband love me, Genesis 29.32.) We are not loved because we are beautiful, but
loved that we may be holy; and this should make us cleanse our selves, and walk
answerably to the Love of God: Judge thy self, condemn thy self for every Sin;
but do not think God cannot be good, because thou art not good, for his Love is
not upon Conditions.

Use III. If God has given thee any Knowledge of thy Election, rejoice with
exceeding Joy: So the Lord bad his Disciples above all things, Rejoice that
their Names were written in Heaven, Luke 11.20. The Elect are a peculiar People
that he has severed from all other; his Heart is to you in a singular Manner,
as the Heart of a chaste Husband to his Spouse, forsaking Father and Mother,
and all else in Comparison, in regard of that Relation. When the King picks out
from the rest one for his Favorite, or one for a Pardon out of many Offenders,
how should it rejoice his Heart that he had not only his Pardon, but the King's
special Love? Know this for thy Comfort, thou shall certainly be saved, the
Love of God will be to thee, (as when we love the Person of any, our Love holds
and continues) because upon thy Person. If a Man marries for an Estate, when
Poverty comes, his Love his gone; if for Beauty, when Sickness comes to blast
it, then no Love: but if Love be to the Person, Love holds as long as the
Person holds. God has pitched his Love on thy Person; therefore whatever has
been thy Hazard in the Way to eternal Life, it is all but suffered for this
End, to make thee cleave to Christ in whom thy Strength is, and to prize him
and the Gospel the more. Thou shall never come into Condemnation, tho thou
may say God has cast thee off, I am but Reprobate Silver: Why what is the
matter? why I have done Evil so and so: why thy doing Good so and so, was not
the Cause of God's electing thee: thy doing Evil is displeasing to him, but his
Love was not pitched upon thy doing so and so. Well, neither does it cease when
thou do so and so Ill; but if thou do so, he will bring thee by
Weeping-cross, because of his Love, unto that eternal Glory to which he
appointed thee.

Use IV. That as to your Judgments ye would stand fast in this Doctrine, viz.
That God has chosen Persons, singular Persons, and Means for them, and will
enable them to perform those Means, believe, repent, and persevere, and bring
them infallibly to Glory. Receive this, and stand fast in it in this day, when
it is so much spoke against every where.

The other Doctrine, as has been said before, casts great contempt upon the
Godhead.

1. To make God to be at the Will of the Creature, is a very bad thing. Now
this is evident their Way, by Election upon Conditions; for according to them,
God that is the first Cause, cannot determine of Love or Hatred, whether the
Man shall be elected or reprobated, till such time as the Creature has tried,
and so showed whether he will choose and embrace the Means or not; he waits to
see what the Creature will do before he determines any thing as to particular
Persons. It was so under the Law, that if a Child or Wife had made a Vow
without the Father's or Husband's Consent, it was null and void. Now to make
God stand in the same Obedience to the Creature, is a great Evil: according to
this Doctrine, Man can make void all God's Desires and Ends that he has, as to
particular Persons. 2. Things wherein Contempt is cast upon the Godhead by this
their Doctrine. Bucer affirms, that if any say there is any Good done which God
does not do, he denies God, for God is the Author of every good thing: But now
there is some Good done, according to these, by the Creature, that is not done
by God; for it is Man makes that Love special, which God made but common: This
is a Good done, and makes those Means effectual, which he did but leave at
liberty, and at the Will of Man. Come to the Height and Critical Question,
Whether that which determined the Will, and cast the Soul upon Christ by Faith,
and chooses him, be any thing on God's part, or from it self? If, as they must
say, from it self, he did it, his Will determined the Business; for that is the
very thing we dispute about: then some Good may be done which God does not; if
from God on his part, then we have done, the Cause is ours. 3. God cannot know
who shall be saved and who not; as to the Persons he cannot certainly know, for
there cannot be in God a Fore-knowledg of that which is uncertain; but now
nothing more uncertain than this, what the Will of Man will do: tho is has the
best Means God can give, yet it must be left to its own Inclination how it will
act, otherwise the Nature of Free Will is destroyed, according to them. Now to
say God does not certainly foresee who shall be saved, is to take away his
Prescience, and make him no God: But the very Light of Nature will show you
that God foresees all things. 4. The Love of God is wronged mightily: For what
a Love is that worth? Little be sure that does not save a Man from Hell
effectually, that does not effectually deliver him from the Danger he is in,
whenas he could very easily do it. What Love had that Parent, that seeing a
Knife in the Hand of his Child, and should know that his Child would certainly
cut himself to Death, with the Knife would so wound it self as to kill it self,
yet leaves the Child to it self to do as it will, when as he could save the
Child from killing it self, satisfying it with some other thing as well as the
Knife? Now surely God is able to make our Wills consent, and that infallibly,
and yet preserve their Freedom, make us freely believe in Christ, as he is able
to raise from the dead, create the World of nothing: What Love then is that
which is spoke of? nothing but a poor low common Love that effects nothing. You
see God is abused by this Doctrine of the Adversaries. 5. It wrongs the
Sovereignty of God: He may not do with his own as he pleases; but according to
the Law of distributive Justice. He is bound up to such a Rule, to respect
Persons, to give what is due, to very one what he deserves: Mat. 20.15. Is it
not for me to do with may own as I will? 6. It wrongs the Wisdom of God: For
according to this, Man is not made to a certain End: Now what wise Man is there
but makes every thing he makes to some certain End? or else God makes Man to
such an End as he cannot attain without his Good Will. 7. It takes off from the
Grace of God; for he gives eternal Life only for a Life of Faith and Works: it
is not Grace every way, and so no way. 8. It Is against his Perfection. God
wills that which shall never be, giving them Conditions with a Desire they all
may be saved, and yet they are not saved: and that befalls God which he would
not have come to pass, viz. that any are reprobated and damned. Is this for
God's Perfection? 9. It makes God changeable. God's Will was, that all shall be
saved, and thereupon gave them Means, Preaching, and Scripture, or Light of
Nature, helped by the Works of Creation and Providence; but upon their not
fulfilling those Conditions of Faith and Perseverance, he casts them off,
reprobates them: is not this then a Change, to love and hate the same Persons
in a small time, to elect and reprobate the same Persons? 10. It makes God's
governing the World, to be in Weakness. For his Government according to this
Doctrine of Conditions, is ordered according to the inconstant Mind of Man:
sometimes he has this End, to glorify his Mercy if Men accept, believe, obey;
sometimes to glorify his Wrath, when Men refuse; thus he is unsteady, weak in
his Government: it makes as if God had not, without depending upon Man,
determined from Eternity how his Mercy and Wrath should both be glorified. 11.
The Omnipotency of God is greatly wronged in this thing; it makes Man stronger
than God: tho God puts forth all his Power, yet if Man will, he can refuse and
disobey: surely, if God really wills Men to be saved, and gives them sufficient
Means, would not they be saved infallibly, if God put forth all his Power? or
else his Power is but weak, he is not Omnipotent. 12. How can God be happy,
that desires, and has not his Desire satisfied and accomplished? he desires
the Salvation of all (say these) and yet has it not: Happiness is having every
good Desire satisfied. Thus the other Doctrine wrongs God, takes off from the
Glory and Praise of the Godhead.
Motive 2. Take heed of the other Doctrine, cleave to this; if you receive the
other, it will corrupt you in all the great Points of Religion, it influenceth
you in all. When the Blood is poisoned, all the whole Body will soon be
poisoned; so here: If upon Faith and Obedience Man is elected, 1. Then Man is
converted by Works, and the Obedience of his own Will, and no Man otherwise
converted. 2. A Man then is justified by Works; Justification follows Election,
no Man is saved but by Works, and so all that Glory, and Beauty, and
bright-shining Virtue of Grace which God has manifested in the Gospel
vanishes, and comes to nothing: for if it be of Works, it is no more Grace;
Romans 11.6. 3. It is then to bring in another Gospel, to bring in this other
Opinion of Election upon Conditions: now there is a Curse upon any that shall
bring in another Gospel, Gal. 1. Hear then, are you willing in the matter of
Salvation to trust to your selves, and lean upon your selves? Has Christ died
and laid down a Price that you might live at your own Hand, and be upon the
same Terms for Eternal Life and Heaven, as Adam was before he fell, in a
Covenant of Works? Then it was, Do and live; and so now, Do this, viz. Believe,
and persevere, and live. God has given you Power to do this, so he did to
Adam; he gave him more Power than you; for you are full of Infirmities, and
Weakness, and Failings daily, but he was perfect and strong: Now is this the
Gospel of Grace, to require as much of a poor weak fallen Man, as of Adam
before he fell, who was perfect and not subject to Infirmities?


All the Duties thou do, all the Acts of Faith, all thy persevering in good,
being done for this end, that God may elect thee, they are but Acts of high
Pride and Arrogance; every one of them has this Language in them, I do this,
that I may be elected rather than another, and to put a difference betwixt my
self and those that shall go to Hell: I do this and this, and elect God at
first; and after I have walked on all my days to the end in good Works, he will
elect me; for this is the Condition he has made of my Election: If I persevere
to the end, he will then infallibly and peremptorily set his Love upon me and
choose me. Now thus God does made a Bargain with Man, barters and sells his
Love, as Laban his Daughter, If thou will have my Daughter, then serve seven
Years, or else thou shall not have her: So does God sell Heaven and Glory for a
Life's Perseverance in Faith and Holiness.

Motive 3. To make you take heed of this false Doctrine, it destroys all the
Fruits of Election: if not elected till Death, then no benefit of Election in
this Life; let us see the Fruits of Election, and how they are brought to
nothing if Election of particular Persons be made void.

1. Love to God (...) a Fruit; God's electing Persons sets out the Greatness of
God's Love, and fills the Heart with Love to God again. Thus the Soul that has
any Intimation that God has chosen him, says, God has passed by Millions,
and some of my Neighbors, Kindred, Friends, and they are walking on in
Ignorance, Evil, Unbelief; God has called me, in which I read my Election; he
has chosen me before the World from Eternity, not respecting any thing that
would or could be in me; for I was a Sinner in my Blood when he visited me, and
by this Love of his he will enable me to do whatever is required of me to
Salvation. Who can think of this free eternal Love of God, and not love God
again? God does therefore in Scripture speak of this peculiar special free
Love, as an Argument to stir us up to Thankfulness. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. God has
chosen thee to be a special People, and it was not for any Qualifications in
them, but because he loved them. Chap. 10.15. Only the Lord had a delight in
their Fathers, to love them. What, for any thing in them? no: Was it for
fulfilling Conditions? No, it is over and over in Deuteronomy 9. Not for thy
Righteousness sake; no, a base wicked People they were. And what could he see
in their Fathers? why Abram was an Idolater, Josh. 24.3. and called. Now this
free Love is brought as an Argument to press them to love God, and walk in
Holiness: Deuteronomy. 7. Thou shall therefore keep the Commandments and Statutes,
etc. Circumcise therefore the Foreskin of your Hearts, etc. Deuteronomy. 10.16. Deuteronomy.
14.2. you shall see the same Argument there; the Lord has chosen thee,
therefore thou shall not do so and so.

Object. None of these Scriptures speak of God's eternal Love, or of singular
Persons chosen out of that Love.

Answ. The Text speaks of Love showed to particular Persons, and how that such
free Love is a Motive to love God, and obey him. Now this Love that God had to
the Jews, is a Type of that Love that God bare to the Elect. Compare Isa. 1.9.
with Romans 9.29. Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a very small Remnant, etc.
this is spoke concerning the Temporal Preservation of the Jews; the Apostle
takes it and applies it to the Elect, Isa. 8.18. Behold, I, and the Children
whom the Lord has given me, are for Signs, etc. this is spoken of God's
delivering the Jews from their Enemies; the Apostle, Heb. 2. brings this, and
speaks it of Christ having all the Elect considered in him. God's electing
Persons provokes to love God; to think that God freely chose thee from
Eternity, thy Person, appointed for thee all the Means, hearing, etc. that thou
might be saved, blessed them to thee, and gave thee Faith then in the use of
them; this is to stir up Love to God. From the other way let us hear how it
promotes Love to God. God has given Means to all, and left them Talents, and
commands to improve and manage these well: Now what if any of these be saved,
what may Christ say to them? Have not I showed you great Love? should not you
love me? Yea, may it be answered, It was great Love to come (...) the Flesh to
redeem me from my Sin in Adam, to give me Means to believe, and Power to
believe; but there is no more Love laid out for me, than for them that are in
the Flames of Hell: Can these love Christ so well as the other in the other
Doctrine?

2. This Doctrine of Election rightly stated, keeps one humble, very humble all
his days. Election does not take away Free Will, we have Free Will, but then,
being called, it is to what is good: but it takes away glorying in it; Not of
him that wills, Romans 9.16. Romans 11.35. Who has first given to him? etc. He
gives to will. Not a Thought that is good but from him: Joh. 15. Without me ye
can do nothing. As to our natural Being, in him we do move. So in the Spiritual
Being he knits himself to us, he is in us as a Principle, then we act: We
cannot pray to him for his Grace but by Grace. What have thou that thou have
not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. Will not this make us humble?

Object. But they will say that their Doctrine of God's electing upon Faith
will keep a Man humble, because Faith is opposed to Works.

Answ. These Men need not bring this; for they hold that Faith, as a Work of it
self, not because of the Object it receives, justifies a Man. Faith is not
opposed to Works in Election, in Justification it is: but it is of no use in
Election: Christ's Righteousness is not accepted to make us elected; Election
goes before our Faith, or laying hold on Jesus Christ.

Object. Yea, but Faith is the Gift of God, we should be humble then.

Answ. Is it such a Gift as he that has it offered cannot but receive it? and
because of the way and manner of God's working in him is he effectually brought
to believe, yet his Free Will preserved? then we have the Cause as we would:
God elects Persons, and works all the Conditions for them which he requires of
them to Eternal Life: But if there be any thing of us required at our Hand that
must cast the Scale, then we have to glory.

3. Assurance and Certainty of Salvation springs from Election. When the
Scripture would comfort Believers with the Assurance of their Salvation, that
they should not perish but go to Heaven certainly, it fetches the Comfort from
the Fountain: The Decree of God taking their Persons, the Constancy of the
Decree of God, makes that Assurance which could never be by God's giving
Conditions for Election, because the fulfilling of them depends upon our own
changeable and mutable Will. What Assurance can a Man have that is chosen under
a Condition? For when he has attained to the best degree of Grace in the use
of Means, yet then may he say, this is no more than what may be done by him
that shall perish: For it is not the doing this, tho great, but the continuing
to do this, upon which Election is grounded; and I may fall as others, and lose
this before Death: no Assurance this way. But in the other, as we have stated,
Election there, is to take off the Fears of the Saints: when they saw the Jews
fall, he brings this, and comforts them that they should not fall; Romans 11. God
has not cast away his People whom he fore-knew. Ver. 7. What then? Israel has
not obtained that which he sought after, but the Election obtained it, and the
rest are hardened. He tells you none fell that were elected. Psalm. 33.11, 12.
The Counsel of the Lord that shall stand, and his Thoughts to all Generations:
then it follows, Blessed is the People, whom he has [chosen] for his
Inheritance. Isa. 54. With everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee. He
comforts them with the Decree, no assurance the other way. For it must be
either from God or a Man's self: from God it cannot be, he elects none but
after all is fulfilled; not of himself, for his Will is changeable every moment.

4. The Doctrine of Election is a mighty Comfort in times of Sorrow and Grief:
There are two things that are apt to trouble us especially. 1. The Apostasy of
Professors. 2. The Trials and Temptations that we meet with in the World, viz.
Poverty, Sickness, Disappointment, Death of Relations, etc.
Now in both these cases Election comforts.

(1.) Election of Persons: As for Apostasy, when they say, If such Cedars fall,
what will become of such a Shrub as I? Dan. 12. he speaking of the last Times
how bad they should be, yet adds, and at that time thy People shall be
delivered, every one that shall be found written in the Book. Mat. 24.22. he
speaks of such perilous Times, that no Flesh should be saved; but for the
[Elects] sake those days should be shortened: In Romans 9. and 11. the Apostle
removes this Stumbling Block out of the way, when the Jews fell, and tells the
Saints none fell but those that were ordained thereunto; not one whom God
fore-knew: when Hymeneus and Philetus fell, he comforts them with this; 2 Timothy
2.18. The Foundation of God stands sure, he knows who are his. (2.) As for
Afflictions of what sort soever, there is Comfort in them from the Doctrine of
Election; the Apostle in Romans 8.28. comforts the Saints with this, viz. We know
that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them that are
called according to his Purpose: Calling here is Conversion, and that Power
that works it, not any particular Obedience of ours following Faith. Whom he
predestinates, them he calls: his Purpose here is not the Object of Obedience
which God has purposed that Men should do; for the Apostle brings it to show
that the Call is not in our selves, but in his Purpose; they that are called
are not called by any Obedience or Free Will of theirs, but according to his
Purpose. But on their Doctrine, what Comfort can a Man have when he sees
another fall, that he shall stand by his own Might; and when he meets with
Afflictions, that he shall be the better by them, when many stronger than he
have turned aside and grown worse; some of as much Light and Parts as he, that
were just at Land have sunk, that were at the very Borders have miscarried? He
must say, tho I be now in a good State, yet what I may be is uncertain:
Temptations have prevailed upon others, and they have fallen, I am not sure
till I have done all, and that is not till I go out of the World. But the other
can be comforted that receive our Doctrine: God has chosen my Person for
better for worse; and tho I be weak, he will enable me to do what he requires,
and work in me all the Conditions, Faith and Perseverance therein, will keep me
by his Power to his Kingdom; he was moved by nothing to love me and do me good,
nothing therefore that shall separate from his Love shall be done by me: he
has ordained me to be conformed to his Image, therefore all my Afflictions
shall tend to this, to plant his Image in me which he loves; Afflictions shall
be as an Axe to cut off that which is superfluous in me, and that
Unanswerableness to his Image.
5. Nothing so much quickneth a Soul to Obedience as the Knowledge that God has
loved our Persons from Eternity, and will bring us to eternal Life infallibly.
The Angels they are particularly elected, and how full of Zeal are they in
their Obedience for God? they are said to be Flames of Fire sent out to
minister, Flames for Zeal and Delight in their Service. The Apostles and
Prophets they had the Love of God revealed to them, and that their Names were
written in Heaven; and how full of Holiness and Zeal, suffering any thing for
Christ Jesus, and rejoiced in their Sufferings? Ephesians. 1.4. he speaks of Love
before the Foundation of the World to their Persons in Christ, and what would
this do? that we might be holy and without Blame before him in Love. John 15. I
have chosen you out of the World, says Christ, What then? ver. 16 and ordained
that you should bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain; be
constant in it: therefore is this Argument, Col. 3.12. Put on therefore as the
[Elect] of God, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness.

Object. But who will labor to be holy, and to walk in Holiness and good
Works, if God chooses without the Consideration of these, has no respect to
these, and so elects that nothing can make it void?

Answ. Tho Election be free, and without Consideration of Faith or good Works
as going before Election; yet none are elected but to that Salvation which is
obtained through Faith and good Works; we are ordained to walk in them to
Glory: Faith and Works are the Means of obtaining Salvation, tho they be not
the Cause of Election; there is a great difference betwixt Salvation and
Election: two Scriptures for this, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the
fore-knowledg of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Because God has from the beginning chosen you to
Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth.

6. The Doctrine of God's electing particular Persons is a Ground to try
themselves upon, whether they be elected or not, and so find upon themselves
the Marks of Election: This is that the Apostle does intend in Romans 8. in
giving Calling, Justification, as the Effects of God's Predestination; that
even as a Tree is known by its Fruits, and the Cause by the Effects, so they
may come to know themselves to be predestined. The Apostle speaks expressly of
the Predestination of particular Persons, for he says these and these, and
none but these: Whereas on the other side, if God only elect Conditions, then a
Man cannot know himself to be elected in this World, there is no sign of
Election upon him, nothing is to be found in him but what he may perish with;
it is his Perseverance when he is past all Temptation that God does crown with
Election. To conclude this with that Apostle in Gal. 1.8. when some among them
had preached Justification by Works, this is that which should be noted to you,
it is another Gospel for any to look for Justification or Election by Works.
Exodus 33.19. God says, I will show Mercy on whom I will show Mercy; he speaks
it of pardoning: The Apostle does expressly use these words concerning Election,
Romans 9.15. whence I gather it is another Gospel (and so a Curse pronounced
against them that bring it) to look for Election from Works, and so by Works,
as for a Man to look for Justification and not by Grace. The Apostle says it
is another Gospel; Why does he say so? because whatever way of Salvation we
make, that will not reveal God's Love, nor comfort the Heart, nor be a
Provocation to Holiness, nor fill the Heart with Love again to God; it is
another Gospel, in that it will not have the Effect of the Gospel, of that
Gospel that shows Salvation to be only by Grace.

Use of Trial.
Try now whether you be one of these Persons, for God chooses Persons. To stir
you up to the Trial, 1. You may safely do it, no danger either of Despair or
Presumption. Satan hinders this as much as may be: 1st. He tells us if we do
it, there will be no end of our Doubts, but we shall come forth of this Enquiry
more scared and amazed. 2dly. Sometimes tells the Soul God's Love is equal to
all. 3dly. Sometimes gives a false Balance to weigh the Soul, by some crooked
Rule or other. 4thly. Sometimes he puzzles the Soul with many Objections; it is
dangerous, he casts in this, to go about it: 'twill make one cast off Holiness,
make one presumptuous if he can attain it, and despair if he attains it not;
that it is a Secret belongs to God, and that none can come to know it, etc. yet
we say it is very safe to enquire into that which God reveals that we may
believe it. Yet, 1. It is modestly, humbly, and warily to be looked into; our
Heads will be dazzled if we alone look into this Depth, as he that looks down a
steep Place tumbleth with the Giddiness that is wrought in him thereby: Many
have fallen because they have not looked aright into this Doctrine; if we
follow the Light of the Scripture, there is no danger. It is a Secret, as is
said, as to the Cause of it, why one is chosen, and not another; but as to the
Persons it is not a Secret, for it is revealed, Romans 8. Those that are called
and justified, as to Persons that are adult, these very Persons, and none else
besides them, are predestined and shall be glorified; those whose Afflictions
make them more conformable to Christ, ver. 29. those that trust in him for
Justification: ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect?
The Levites might look into the Ark, and none else; so those that are called,
may reflect upon Election from whence this proceeds. 2. Take this Caution: In
the Enquiry you are so to seek it as to advance the Grace of God in the seeking
of it, without hindering the Work of Sanctification, s^ that Holiness may not be
hindered. Some do so look after this, that they never mind the other; yet so to
look after Sanctification, that the Love of God may not be lessened. The Works
of God's Grace in thee, are not so to be insisted on as to think that for them
thou have God's Grace of Election; neither is God's Election so to be thought
on, as that it will save thee without Grace in thee: Grace inherent, is the
Messenger of Election, a Stream from the Fountain, an Effect of it; where there
is Heat, there is Fire. But why God should work this in thee rather than
another, it is his Free-Love: and the Reason why he loves thee and not another,
was not thy Grace that was in thee.


Use II. Much Profit comes by knowing our Election.

1. Hereby we shall answer that great Question that is in the Mind of a
Believer, viz. Whether Christ be in him? 2 Cor. 13.5. Know you not? he speaks
of something known to all Believers, know you not? ( i. e.) you do know, that
Christ is in you: all Believers know this, that Christ is in them by Faith,
except they be Reprobates. The plain Meaning of it is this, viz. All true
Christians know this, that where God does long afford the Gospel unto Men, and
it has had some Workings on them, if they resist it, and resist it totally,
there is reason to fear that they are Reprobates. Christ it is true may be in
one, and he not know it; but all Christians fear, that if so be Christ be not
in them under the Means, that then they are not accepted of God.

2. We shall know hereby, that by every Affliction we shall be the better: Romans
8.28. the Apostle comforts the Romans against Afflictions, that they should be
the better for them; because they were called according to his Purpose. Nothing
will comfort a godly Man under Affliction, but that he shall be the better for
it: Not the taking off the Afflictions, or Support under them; but it is only
this that will quiet, that they shall work together for good. As a covetous Man
is not contented to have his own, unless he may have Profit by it; so a godly
Man is not content to keep his Grace under Affliction, except he grow better by
it. Now this we shall see by knowing our Election.

3. Knowing you Election, you will be enabled to give God the Praise of the
Glory of his Grace: This Grace is his Electing Love: Those that know their
Election, their Hearts will be exceeding humble, for they see nothing in
themselves moving God to have a Love to them: this will empty the Heart and lay
it low, and cause it to magnify Grace mightily.

Your Election may be known;

1st. It is an Act that is past, and has a Being in the Will of God from
Eternity; things that are to be known, must have a certain Existence: Election
has, he knows who are his; and he knows who are his only, from his own
good Will and Pleasure: Romans 11.34. Who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who
has been his Counselor? Now Election upon Condition is from a Man's
uncertain, fickle, slippery, mutable Will; so can never be known, and has no
Existence.

2dly. It may be known, for it is an Act of God which he will not reverse nor
repeal, 2 Timothy 2.19. The Foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who
are his: As sure as the Knowledge of God cannot be deceived, so he cannot cast
off them that he has chosen, The Foundation of God stands sure: tho Professors
fall, and eminent ones, yet not one that was of the Foundation of Election.

3dly. It may be known, for God has made known who are the Vessels of Mercy;
Heb. 6.17. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise, the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. His Counsel
is made known to the Heirs of Promise by the Oath or Gospel: 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. the
Apostle says, he knew their Election; and not by Revelation and Inspiration,
as he had the Doctrine which he was to deliver unto Men; but he judged of Men's
Persons by their Practice. The Apostle Paul did so, Acts 13.10. he judged him
to be a Child of Satan, because he did not cease to pervert the right Ways of
the Lord. And so Peter, Acts 8.23. of Simon Magus, Thou'art in the Gall of
Bitterness: The Ground of it was, because he thought the Gift of God was to be
purchased with Money. The Apostle speaks of the Assurance of Election, putting
himself in, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? Romans 8.33.
And again, Who shall separate us? ver. 35. He speaks of Believers. How knew he
the Thassalonians Election by the Works he saw in them? 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. For
our Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but also in Power: And by the Works
of the Gospel they might know as well as Paul, nay better than Paul, because
the Work was wrought in them: The Midwife knows that the Woman was with Child
when she see the Child, but the Mother that brought it forth knew it more
certainly. He that eats any thing knows the Savor better by his Taste, than he
that smells the Scent of it. The Apostle judges by the Thessalonians Works;
they might judge of themselves more certainly than he: he judged by external
Actions, and they had the internal Operation in themselves.

4thly. God calls upon to be sure of it; puts us upon it, engages us to look
after it: Now if it could not be known, then may it be said that God
dissembles, which cannot be said; 2 Pet. 1.10. Make your Calling and Election
sure.

Object. But it will be said, Many have been deceived, and thought they have
had Evidence of it, when they have not; they have taken these things for Signs,
in which there was no Light.

Answ. Some have taken Brass for Gold: Will it follow then that there is no
difference betwixt those two Metals? If Men have been deceived with false Coin,
they should learn to go try them at the Touchstone.

1. If you will know your Election, it is required you should be those whose
spiritual Senses are exercised to discern of things: You must have a good
Understanding of spiritual Matters; Novices will not reach this: Hypocrisy may
be so finely drawn as that it may be taken for the Power of Godliness by Men
that are good, and counted great Men.

2. You must have the Counsel of the Spirit, beside your own Understanding; 1
Cor. 2.11, 12. None knows the things of a Man, but the Spirit of a Man that is
in him; so the things of God none knows, but the Spirit of God: and this
Spirit which is of God, is received that we may know the things that are freely
given us of God.

3. That you may judge aright, you must judge by the Scripture; not by Reason or
Revelation, or external Privilege, or the Persuasion or Testimony of others, or
the Persuasion of a Man's own Heart only.

First, Not by immediate Revelation without the Scripture, as some pretend:
Some think to know their State by Revelation; so some poor Souls cry out
sometimes, O if they knew they were in the Number of them that should be saved,
why then they would believe. They that hold that a Man is elected
conditionally, if they hold that God does know beforehand, who will do well
and who will not; yet they must hold no Man knows his Election but by
immediate Revelation; because as none knows what he shall do at the point of
Death but only God, so none but he can immediately reveal what he will do with
us, and what he will do then. In these late Times some have made light of the
Word of God, as a low Rule, as a Light in a dark Place, as a Morning Star only,
which withdraws when the Sun comes: they have been given up to strong Delusion,
and they have seen (they tell you) Glory like to the Glory of the Son of God,
testifying to them that they are in the Favor of God. But God does not speak
now to Men immediately, but by Scripture: The Spirit makes use of the Sciptures
now in this case; if we would prove our Election, it must be by our calling,
and our calling must be proved by the Word of God, through which he calls us.

Secondly, Reason cannot give us an Assurance of our Election: For this does
not know, neither can know spiritual things; 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Reason
is led by Sense and Feeling; and therefore biassed in Judgment.

Thirdly, Nor thirdly, You must judge of it by external Privilege: So the Jews
thought, Rom 9. because to them were committed the Oracles of God: therefore if
they were rejected, God was not true; they thought they were elected to eternal
Life, because they were elected unto the Means: but it is not so, for many are
called, but few chosen.

Fourthly, The Testimony of a Church will not do it: A Christian it is true is
bound to take their Testimony as a Help to clear his own Case and Condition,
and to help him to make a Judgment of himself, whether he is meet for
Ordinances: This is to be taken as to the Judgment of Men's Graces, and it is a
Divine Testimony; for it is an Ordinance of God, but it is not full and
complete; you must have other Grounds than this. Do not rest in this, that God
has plucked you out of the World, and called you to a Church, and you enjoy
Ordinances upon the Testimony of the Saints; but be as curious to know your
Election from the Spirit and the Word, as if you were not of a Church.

Fifthly, It is not by a Man's making Judgment of himself from the Persuasion
of his own Heart; for many Eyes see more than one. It Is hard for a Man to walk
so evenly as to escape the Observation of vigilant Saints, who walk with God,
and have their Eyesight daily quickened by searching into their own Conditions.
In Gal. 5.8. there were some we read of, that were persuaded, that because they
did so and so, according to the Law of Moses, therefore they were justified:
now says the Apostle, this Persuasion comes not of him that calls you. It
is no matter what you think of your selves; you must have a Testimony from him
that calls: so no matter what thou think, or may think, unless God
justify and ratify, and testify it to thy Spirit. Now the right trying of your
selves ought to be done,

1. With much Justice and much Impartiality to a Man's self: As in a Court of
Justice a Man must not regard whose the Cause is, but the Cause it self; so
must a Man in the Judgment of himself. Allowances are to be given for the
Degrees of Grace, and the Time they have been under the Means; but as to the
Truth of Grace, the Person must not be considered at all. Sometimes when we
fall upon the Trial of our selves, our Eyes are blinded with Anger; we have
fallen into some Sin, and upon it there has been a Spirit of Indignation and
Wrath in us against our selves, and we are very jealous of every thing that
Conscience can say, or which our Ways do speak: says Conscience to a Soul,
Thus has it been with thee sometimes, viz. thou have sought the Lord, and
feared him above all things, his Love was better than Life; thou thought it
a Burden to live longer than thou had the Kisses of his Lips: Says
Conscience again to a Man, Thou lie, through the Wrath that is in him: Why
do thou speak thus to me? How long shall I charge thee in the Name of the
Lord, that thou speak nothing but the Truth? Can there be the Love of God and
the Love of Sin? Whatever I have done, it is no more than what a Hypocrite may
do; and I am afraid it will prove so. This is a Judgment blinded with Anger. At
another time we are in love with our selves, and indulgent to our selves; then
every little is much, and every probable Argument a Demonstration: and this is
the Reason why Men mistake; they are not in cool Blood, they are not equal
Arbitrators, they look upon the Cause as their own, and not upon the Cause in
it self: Oft-times our Judgments are rash and indeliberate, upon a sudden
Apprehension, without weighing and pondering of what went before, or what may
follow after. The Rule in this Case in this, That therefore when thou have any
Conceptions of thy spiritual Estate, that thou let these abide in thy Mind
sometime before thou pass a Judgment on thy self. Have thou any Thought comes
into thee of the Love of God? keep it, nourish it, lodge it; sit thee down
alone, weigh it, examine it, consider whence it took its Rise, consider what
its Effect is in thee. When thou find it came in according to the Manner of
God's Working, and it works divinely and heavenly in thee, then let it be as a
Decree, not to be altered. As Saints fall into Sin through Indeliberation, and
want of consulting the Matter, and judging by the Appearance of things; so they
fall into Misjudging of themselves and their Estates, because they do it
heedlesly and without Consultation.

Object. But you will say, I have taken this course as near as I could, and yet
I cannot attain to the Assurance of Election; the Word has been my Rule, and
nothing else: I have looked upon Privileges and the Dictates of my own Spirit
and my Reason, when they have come alone, as lying Reports, in which there is
no Certainty; I have labored to set my Soul in as even a Frame as I could when
I have gone about the Work, and yet still Difficulties have perplexed me, and
puzzled me.

Reasons why we have not Assurance.
1. Thou have, it may be, been unacquainted with the manner of judging thy
self, and receiving the Witness of God; thou art in the dark as to this matter.
And as it is with a Man that has been in black Darkness, he cannot presently
see when he comes into the Light: so here, thou art but newly come out of the
dark, and art not acquainted with the Light, with this way of judging thy self,
and having the Light of the Spirit. In 1 Samuel 3. young Samuel was unacquainted
with God's way and manner of appearance and speaking, and therefore when he did
speak to him, he ran to Eli thinking it had been Eli. Some of us are not well
skilled with these things, God has been beating down thy Corruptions,
struggling with thee, imbittering Sin to thee by Godly Sorrow; but thou know
not what these Evidences of Eternal Life experimentally mean, thy Eyes have
been upon thy Works and Doings, and thou know not what God speaks to thee;
when God is speaking Peace, thou understandest it not. 2. Thou may want it,
in that thou may be dallying, trifling with some one Corruption or other; it
may be thou will not commit it, but thou will salute it; it may be it has not
actual, but it has contemplative Commission, the whole Act is in thy Thoughts,
tho not in thy Practice; there is a constant breaking out of Corruption upon
all Occasions. Now 1 John 1.6. If we say we have Fellowship with him, and walk
in Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth: (i. e.) as when Men's Consciences
tell them that when they lie they speak not the Truth; so when a Man goes about
to lay hold on Assurance, his Conscience tells him he cannot be assured of his
Election, who walks not sincerely with the Lord. A corrupt unprofitable Word
will grieve the Spirit, by which ye are to be sealed, Ephesians. 4.30. 3. We want
it, because we are not sollicitous to grow and increase in all Graces, but only
in some one; we neglect some Graces while we follow after others, we do some
Duties not others, or all we know. If we would make our Election sure, 2 Pet.
1.5. the Apostle tells us, We are to give all Diligence to add to Faith Virtue,
etc. He reckons upon all the Cardinal Graces and Virtues of a Christian, which
comprehend all the rest, in which our Diligence is to be, not one but all. We
have prayed for it, no question, but never joined Fasting to Praying; we have
done both but only alone, never in Company of the Saints, that understand the
Voice of God: it may be we have done this, but yet never waited upon the Lord
in the Use of those Ordinances which he has appointed his People to walk
through, and as Trunks by which he speaks and conveighs himself. It may be thou
art given to Anger, Passion, Frowardness, and strivest against it; but then art
led, and not a little, by a covetous Worldly Spirit: it may be thou art against
this, yet there is in thee a vain foolish Spirit, following the Customs and
Fashions of the Times, that the World may know thou have a Liberty. I do not
say, that those that do such things cannot have assurance, but that the
allowing a Man's self in any one Sin, or the neglecting of any one known Duty,
is the Cause many times that Assurance is not given. 4. Suppose that be not the
Case, yet it may be thou take not the Hints and Opportunities God gives when
he would speak his Mind to thee, or thou withdrawest when he has spoken a word
or two, thou have made nothing of it: yet such there have been upon thy Spirit,
and thou have not regarded them; every Touch of God upon the Heart, every
Intimation is like a Character, which is but a little Dash, but it contains a
whole Word: or like some Hieroglyphics of the Heathen, a whole Story was
comprehended in one Sign or Image: So if thou have been able to have construed
or expounded that Touch of God upon thy Heart, it would have told thee the Love
of God from Eternity, and would have showed how it has waited on thee, and
done thee good in several Estates, as in the knowledge of Duty. And if a Man
would know his Duty, he must take the least Motion and Intimation of it, and
the least Light must be made much of, if he will grow up to know the Mind of
God fully. So it is also in the knowledge of our State, thou must begin with
Principles to know thy Duty, thou must begin with Intimations to get Assurance:
God begins after that manner with his People; whereas Presumption is all at
once, and comes by Violence. Lastly; If that be not the Case, it may be thou
do not go on with the Trial of thy self; it may be when thou art sick or in
imminent danger, or to do some hazardous Duty, then thou go about it
diligently, else desistest. Now Suits in Law hang long, come not to an end
because they are not followed. As he that would have a true understanding of
any Science, must traverse the Principles clean through; so he that would have
Assurance, must go on the next day where he left off before. Thou do not make
it the Work of every Grace and every Prayer to search into thy Heart, nor the
Work of every Day, but now and then when thou art in some imminent danger, or
special Service. Let us know this to encourage us, there is nothing God takes
more Pleasure to reveal than his electing Love: tho it pass thy Knowledge, yet,
as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3. Christ and the Spirit dwelling in thy Heart by
Faith, will make you see into all the Heights and Depths, Lengths and Breadths,
that pass Knowledge: And tho it be the Weakness of a Christian to analise and go
from the Effect to the Cause, yet unto this Men should endeavor and labor,
that they come to know the Cause and Fountain whence all their Good comes: and
God has given you two Lights in this Firmament for the revealing of it; 1.
Your Faith: 2. Your Love. As the Sun does sometimes make another Sun in the
Firmament, so does the Love of God work in us a Love of electing him again.
That you may read all the whole Heart and Frame of God's Intentions toward you
in the Reflection of your Heart toward him, make it your Work to make your
Election sure. He is a happy Man that knows the Causes of things, and he is the
wise Man, that does know things by their Causes. There is nothing more pleasant
and delightful than for you to drink of the Fountain; a little of the Knowledge
of God's electing Love will be like the Spirit of Wine, like a Spring within
you, like a strong Motion. The Saints do much by the Power of Grace, but much
more by the Power of Love, and aspecially by that Love that has ordained all
those things to be given so freely to them, even the Love of Election. And if
it were for nothing but for this (that you may come to know your Estate) abhor
Conditional Election, which puts you to work, but gives you no Certainty nor
Security of your Condition but only by your Walkings, (as they say themselves)
which are changeable; and that Doctrine will bear it, that he that lived forty
or fifty Years in a holy way, and all things ready to go to Heaven, yet has
his Will so changeable and slippery, that in one moment he may turn off from
God, and lose all he has done, and never be remembered, but perish eternally:
were there nothing but this to make a Man stand at a distance from that
Doctrine, it should do it. However, it may seem to the Flesh to keep a Man
cautious and wary in what he does, yet notwithstanding, a Man can have no
Knowledge in this World how it shall be with him to Eternity: whereas our
Doctrine calls up to the Mount, and bids us there sit down and read our Names
in the Book, as they are made known by the effectual workings of the Spirit.
If you would know whether you be elected or no: 1. Look after your Faith. 2.
Whether the Love of God be in you through Jesus Christ. Beside these I shall
propound no more; for tho there be a great help oft-times in the number of
Signs and Marks, as many Stars make the Darkness Light, yet it comes to pass
oft-times, that being weak in Understanding, and not well able to manage them,
we are more perplexed by Number. He that has many Notions, and is not able to
master them, is but the weaker for them; so he that has many Signs and Marks,
and has not his Mind truly instructed, that is not able to go into the bottom
of them, grows but into more Doubts and Perplexities: and as I instance but in
two, so in these two, because they are such as are in all Christians; every one
that is born of God, believes on him and loves him. And I may truly call these
two, to be as the two great Lights that God has given to the Souls of Men in
this Business; like the two great Commandments; all that can be said on any
other Head hangs on these: take what you will as a Sign, what Duty you will, if
it comes not from Faith and Love; take what Graces you will, if they be not all
turned upon these two Hinges, Faith and Love, they will give no Assurance at
all: if you can find Faith and Love, you may be sure there are other Graces,
for they are never alone.

1. Faith is a Sign of a Man's Election, and that I take to be the meaning of
all those Scriptures which make Calling and Conversion to be the Fruit and Mark
of Election, the out-going of Election; 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has called us
according to his own Purpose. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. Knowing your Election; for our
Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but in Power. And Calling and Conversion
is put sometimes for Election, 1 Cor. 1.26. You see your Calling, Brethren;
ver. 27. But God has chosen, etc. All these prove that Faith is a Sign of
Election. By Faith we answer God's Call; He that has heard and learned of the
Father, comes to me, Joh. 6.45. The Gospel comes unto Men in Power, when it is
the Power of God to make Men believe, Romans 1.16. For I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power of God to Salvation, to every one that
believes: the meaning is not, that first Men have Faith, and then the Word of
God is the Power of God to Salvation, for that implies a Contradiction; he that
believes has Salvation, and a Power whereby he may come to Eternal Life: but
it is the Power of God to Salvation to every one that believes, (i.e.) by
making every one that shall be saved to believe, whether they be Jews or Greeks.

But to make it more clear.

1. Faith is in no Person but one that is elected, that particular Person is
elected which has Faith; therefore the Apostle describes Faith by the Subject
of it, and calls it the Faith of God's Elect, (i.e.) the Faith which the Elect,
and only the Elect have; Tit. 1.1. Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to
Eternal Life, believed. For the opening of which you must know that the Apostle
does not mean by ordaining to Eternal Life, Men's disposing of themselves, or
being in a good Disposition or Aptness to improve and make use of the Means of
Eternal Life; and whatever be meant by ordaining, Faith does follow upon it
certainly, but it does not follow upon Men's disposing of themselves, till such
time as Men do believe they are natural; and what can that which is natural do
to that which is supernatural? We neither by Nature are able to resist the
Temptation of Satan, nor are able to ingenerate in our selves a Principle of
Faith, no more than a Beast can do the things of a Man, or a Man the things
that belong to the Being of an Angel. By ordaining, the Apostle means God's
ordaining, and they, and they only believed; so the words [ as many] are to be
understood. As many, he does not mean, that all that were in that place
believed, but only those were ordained. Faith is a mere Fruit of Election,
there had been no such Grace but for Election; other Graces are necessary to
make a Man innocent, other Graces come from God's Holiness, and the love of his
Creation. God cannot but make Man good, if he will make Man at all; but Faith
comes from God's Love to save Man, and it is nothing else but only a Soul's
reposing it self for Life (being guilty, and liable to Condemnation) upon God
the Father through Jesus Christ: this Adam had not; this God would not have
bestowed, but that he would throw a Cord from his Love for sinking Man to lay
hold on that he may be saved.

2. It is a Sign of Election; for where God begins it, he never leaves it till
it be grown up from the least degree to Perfection, till the small Mustard Seed
become a great Tree. This is the Character of all things that come from
Election, that God never repents of them; Romans 11.29. for the Gifts and Calling
of God are without Repentance: he sets out the Certainty of God's Election by
this, God never repents of the Work of Faith: But he that believes shall have
Eternal Life. As in Joh. 6.35. He that believes, shall never thirst. Ver. 37.
He that comes, I will in no wise cast out: Every one that believes on him,
shall have Eternal Life. Ver. 40. This is the Will of him that sent me, that
every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have Everlasting Life;
and I will raise him up at the last day. These words are put in, because Men
will be apt to say, Death and the Grave will devour, and how can this sinful
Dust, scattered into all the Corners of the Earth, ever come to be Partakers of
Glory? Take you no care for that, my Father has said, I have Power enough to
do it, it shall be my Work, I will raise him up at the last Day. Ver. 47. he
says it, and he says it with an Oath, Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
believes on me, has Everlasting Life. Romans 10.11. For the Scripture says,
Whosoever believes on him, shall not be confounded. So 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold, I
lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect, precious; and he that believes on
him, shall not be ashamed. This might be brought as a Sign of Election, because
it is of such Power with God, as to prevail with God for every thing; Mat.
21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall
receive it.

Object. If any say that the Scripture speaks of many that believed, and yet
perished; and therefore how do you say Faith is the Gift of Election, and is
only in those that are elected? What was Simon Magus, and those in Joh. 2. that
Christ would not commit himself to them?

Answ. They are called Believers after the manner of Men, not because they had
Faith, but because they said they had Faith, and made Profession of it: That is
the Language of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, James 2.14. Tho a Man say he has
Faith: according to that Phrase, if thy Brother sin, and say it repents him,
(i.e.) professes his Repentance: so Men say they have Faith, and yet it is but
a dead Faith; for the Life of Faith is immortal and passes not away.

Object. But I doubt whether I have Faith.

Answ. By this thou may know it, if the Gospel has come to thee in Power,
not in Word only, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. (i.e.) when thou came to hear the glad
Tidings of Salvation by Christ, which is the Gospel-Doctrine, when thou came
to hear of the Love of God that is so free and large, and the Spring of all
Good from God and of Holiness in thee: these things thou did not give a bare
hearing to, but they came pressing on thee, as the things that must be
believed, that were necessary to thee, and commanded thy Spirit. When thou
came to be in Affliction, thou could truly say, if thou might have thy
Wish, it would not be to be freed from Trouble, but to honor Christ in
Trouble; thou carest not what Trouble thou have, so thou may but get more
hold on him: Tho thy lazy Spirit begins to be weary in toiling in the use of
Means, or Suffering for Christ; thou countest thy self vile and unworthy
because of it. This Work will prove thy Election to be true.

Object. But I have but little Faith, if any.

Answ. 1. It is not the degree, but true Faith that argues Election. 2. Love
also is a Sign of Election as well as Faith. Faith is our choosing of God, so it
is a sign of God's choosing us; thus our Love to God, is a sign that God loves
us. As the Sun in the Firmament by its Reflection upon a Cloud makes another
Sun; the Seal leaves it self upon the Wax when impressed; A Father begets a
Child in his own Likeness: so Love in us is the very Image of Election, Love is
but a Reflection of God's Love upon us: We love him, because he first loved us,
I Joh. 4.19.

How may we know that we love God?

1. God by electing us, wills us Good; so we by Love, will Good and Honor unto
God. We say, O that his Name may be glorified, and his Will done on Earth as it
is in Heaven! he longs for this, prays for this, acts for this, desires nothing
more than God's Glory to be set up on Earth, that all might honor him. 2. God
by Election takes Pleasure in us, we by Love take Pleasure in God above all
things; he says, as in Psalm. 73. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, whom on Earth
besides thee? He prefers him to all things; God is his Portion and Treasure,
all things are Dung in comparison. 3. God loves us in Election because he loves
us; he cannot but love us, so we cannot but love God. The Love of God lays a
Law upon himself, Love puts a Law upon us: The Love of God is said to constrain
2 Cor. 5. 4. God's electing is free, there is no Motive; so our Love to God is
free Love. Benefits indeed to us are Motives; but Love is pitched chiefly upon
himself, on his Holiness, Goodness, Truth, which are his Nature: Benefits are
Motives, and they be the first in Order, but not in Strength and Worth: We come
to love him at length more than his Gifts.
A word of Caution in the Close; That tho by these two you may know you are
elected, yet one may be elected in whom these are not yet wrought. Election is
known by Grace inherent; but Grace is not wrought in every one that is elected
until God's time is come: Election is an Act of God concerning the Creature,
not upon the Creature, as Sanctification is, and therefore makes a real and
present Change. A Man may have a purpose to build a House a long while before
he lays one Stone toward it; so God purposes to give Grace long before he
gives it. God purposed to create us that are now long before the World was: So
God purposed to create his Image in some Men whom he lets go on a great while
in their Sins. Let not then the want of Grace make you conclude against your
Election. Election, it is true, is to Qualifications, and cannot be known but by
the working of them in us: but we may be elected and have no present
Qualifications. The Signs of Election are given, that you may comfort them that
do believe already; but you must not conclude that you shall never believe that
do not now believe; the Scripture gives not Signs for any such end as that:
It Is true, it is said in Joh. 12.39, 40. They could not believe, for God had
hardened their Hearts, and blinded their Eyes, etc. That is dreadful, but mark,
that you may not be discouraged; These Persons to whom God does declare they
are not elected, they were not Persons that only lived in Sin, for so do all
the the Elect till they be converted. Nor, 2. such only who had the Means, and
yet not wrought upon by the Means: for God calls at the eleventh Hour in the
Parable, Mat. 20. (i.e.) when they have stood out obstinately to the very last
of their Days, going out of the World. 3. Nor such as despise the Means, the
Word and Gospel; Acts 13.41. Behold, ye Despisers! he calls to them, there is
Hope. In Romans 10. they sought him not, never minded him, never prayed to him,
yet he was found of them. 4. Nor those that hate Christ and Holiness; for all
of us do so by Nature. Romans 1.30. Haters of God, yet some of those were elected
and converted: It is impossible, we being sinful by Nature, but that we should
strive and make all the Resistance we can till it be overcome by the Power of
God. Resist so as to overcome converting Grace we cannot, for we strive with
one that is stronger than we; but to resist so as to oppose the Offers of
Grace, that we cannot but do by Nature. Who that is evil can take Pleasure in
any thing that is good? All these may stand with Election that I have named. I
conceive in this 12th of John he speaks of them that had sinned unto Death, and
therefore given up of God; they had sinned in Malice against God and his Word,
and God in Justice revenged their Malice in giving them up. Therefore do not
conclude against your selves, that you are not elected, but use the Means:
although the Means cannot bring you to Election, the Means show to you your
Election; they are things by which you read your Names written in the Book, tho
they are not the Ink and Pen by which they are written in the Book of God.
Faith may come to the worst of you that are now in your Sins, and then you may
know your Names are certainly written in the Book of Life from Eternity.

FINIS.

