HEADS OF THE EXPEDIENT Proposed in the Parliament at Oxford, In lieu of the
former BILL For EXCLUDING The Duke of York.
I. THat the Duke of York be Banished during his Life, Five hundred Miles from
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories to them
belonging.

II. That the whole Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, shall upon the
demise of the King, be vested in a Regent, for such time as the Duke of York
shall Survive.

III. That the Regent be the Princess of Orange, and in case of her Decease
without Issue, or with Issue in Minority, then the Lady Anne.

IV. That if the Duke have a Son Educated a Protestant, then the said
Princesses respectively shall succeed in the Regency, during the Minority of
such Son, and no longer. Which obviates an incurable absurdity in the former
Bill of Exclusion.

V. That the Regent nominate the Privy-Councel, and they to be, or not to be
approved in Parliament, as shall be judged safest upon directing the drawing up
of this intended Act.

VI. That notwithstanding these Kingdoms (out of respect to the Royal Family,
and Monarchy itself) may be Governed by the said Regent, in the Name and Style
of James the Second, etc. yet it shall by this intended Act be made Capital for
any to take up Arms on his behalf, or by a Commission not Signed by the said
Regent, or not granted by lawful Authority, derived from and under such Regent;
or to maintain an Opinion, that the retaining the said Name and Style, shall in
this case purge the disabilities imposed by this Act, or elude the force
thereof.

VII. That Commissioners be forthwith sent to the Prince and Princess of
Orange, to take their Oaths that they will take upon them the execution of this
Act, and that their Oaths be here Recorded.

VIII. That all Officers, Civil and Military, forthwith take Oaths to observe
this Act, and so all others from time to time, as in the Act for the Test.

IX. That His Majesty would graciously declare, to call a Parliament in
Scotland, in order to the passing the like Act there, and recommended the same;
and the like to be done in Ireland if thought necessary.

X. That in case the said Duke shall come into any of these Kingdoms, then he
shall be, ipso facto, totally excluded, and shall suffer as in the former Bill,
and the Sovereignty shall be forthwith entirely vested in the Regent, upon such
his coming into any of these Kingdoms.

XI. That all considerable Papists be Banished by Name.

XII. That their fraudulent Conveyances be defeated.

XIII. That their Children be Educated in the Protestant Religion.

By this means these Three Kingdoms will be united in defense of the Protestant
Religion, His Majesty's Person and Government, and a sure foundation laid of an
effectual League with Holland, and consequently with the rest of Christendom,
in opposition to the growing greatness of France.

LONDON: Printed by F. Collins. 1681.


