The Life and Death of Mother Shipton.

Being not only a true Account of her strange Birth; and most important
Passages of her Life; but also all her Prophesies, now newly Collected, and
Historically Experienced, from the time of her Birth, in the Reign of King
Henry the Seventh, until this present Year 1667 Containing the most Important
Passages of State during the Reign of these Kings and Queens of England
following, Viz. Henry the Eighth. Edward the Sixth Queen Mary Queen Elizabeth.
King James. King Charles the First. King Charles the Second.


Strangely preserved amongst other Writings belonging to an old Monastary in
Yorkshire, and now published for the Information of Posterity.



LONDON, Printed for B. Harris, at the Stationers Arms in Swe^things-Ally near
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1677.

Beloved Contrymen;
THe great Fame, and general received Opinion of Mother Shipton, with the
Credit she has obtained by those several Prophesies uttered by her, which
since in the greatest measure have come to pass: These considerations (I say)
put me upon a Resolution to search out by my best endeavor, the Parents,
Place, and Time wherein this Mother Shipton Flourished. Many old Manuscripts
and rusty Records I turned over, but all in vain; at last I was informed by a
Gentleman (whose Ancestors by the Gift of King Henry the Eighth, enjoyed a
Monastary in those parts) that he had in his keeping some ancient Writings
which would in that point satisfy my desire, were they not so injured by Time,
as now not legible to Read; however, I not despairing to find out their
meaning, with much Importunity desired to have a sight of them; which having
obtained, I took of the best Galls I could get, beat them grossly, and laid them
to steep one day in good White Wind, that done, I distilled them with the Wine;
and with the distilled Water that came off them, I wetted handsomely the old
Letters, whereby they seemed as fresh and fair, as if they had been but newly
written; here did I find her Life and Prophesies copied out by an impartial
hand, which I have in this Book presented to thy view, together with an
Exposition upon her Prophesies, for the better understanding of them, and which
may serve to them whose leisure will not permit to read, or want of money
forbid to buy more Voluminous Authors; this (I say) may serve to them instead
of a Chronicle, wherein they may find related the chiefest matters performed in
each King and Queens Reign since the time wherein she flourished: much more
might be added, but least I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle, and like
the Citizens of Mindium, make my Gates too bigg for my City, I shall here break
off abruptly, wishing thee as much pleasure in the Reading thereof, as I had in
the VVriting of it; and so

Farewell. R. Head.
POSTSCRIPT.
COurteous Reader, let me desire thee Heartily to pass over some seemingly
Impossibilities in the first sheet, (allowing the Author Licentia Poetica in
her description) and some Actions performed in her Minority; and only to weigh
the more serious parts of her Prophesies, wherein (if thou be rational) I
doubt not but thou will receive ample satisfaction.



The Contents.
CHAP. I. WHat her Father and Mother were, and what wonderful things happened
at her Birth; as also the place of her Nativity. CHAP. II. How the Devil
constantly visited her, in what forms and shapes, what strange things she did
to those that offended her, harming some, and making sport with others. CHAP.
III. How Agatha Shipton was apprehended, and brought before a Justice; what her
Confession was, her Mittimus being made to be sent to Prison, how she escaped
by the help of her friend the Fiend; she is retaken, and found with Child, is
bailed, CHAP. IV. What kind of shape Mother Shipton had when she was born, how
she was put to Nurse at the charge of the Parish, and what strange things were
seen in the house where she was Nursed, during the space of four years. CHAP. V.
How Mother Shipton whilst but very young at Nurse, was daily visited by
Spirits, in diverse shapes and forms, and what prancks they played during her
abode there. CHAP. VI. How Mother Shipton was put to School, learning more in a
day, than other Children could in a Month; how she was jeered by her
School-fellows for having such a monstrous long Nose, and what prancks she
played upon them by way of Revenge, she now growing very famous. CHAP. VII. How
several persons came to Mother Shipton for her Predictions, and how a rich
Heiress being deceived by her Maid, fell sick and dyed. CHAP. VIII. Mother
Shipton's Prophesies concerning Henry the Eighth's journey into France, of
Gardinal Woolsey, and other things. CHAP. IX. Her Prophesies to the Abbot of
Beverly, concerning the downfall of Abbyes, Nunneries, Priories, etc. with other
things. CHAP. X. Her Prophesies concerning King Edward the Sixth, the Rebellion
of the Commons, the Death of the Duke of Somerset, with other things. CHAP. XI.
Her Prophesies concerning the Death of Jane Gray, the burning of the Martyrs,
of Wyats Rebellion, the Death of Queen Mary, and Cardinal Pool. CHAP. XII. Her
Prophesies concerning the Reign of Queen Elizabeth the change of Religion, the
attempts of the Papists upon the Queen, the Spanish Invasion, the burning of
Paul's Steeple, the death of the Queen of Scots, the reducing of Ireland, the
beheading the Earl of Essex, etc. CHAP. XIII. The Prophesies of the Reign of
King James, his uniting England and Scotland, his peaceable Reign, a Learned
time, the Powder Treason, the Marriage with the Prince Elector and Lady
Elizabeth, the Death of Prince Henry. CHAP. XIV. The Prophesies of the Reign of
King Charles the First, his Marriage with France, the Murder of the Duke of
Buckingham, the Scottish troubles of the long Parliament, and Bloody War
ensuing after the Execrable Murder of the King. CHAP, XV. The Reign of King
Charles the Second, the Usurpation of Cromwell, the strange Confusion of a
Democratical Government, the Restoration of the King, the great Sickness, the
Burning of the City of London.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF MOTHER SHIPTON.
CHAP. I.
What her Father and Mother were, and what Wonderful things happened at her
Birth, as also the place of Her Nativity.

IN the Second Year of King Henry the Seventh, which was in the Year of our
Lord One thousand Four hundred Eighty and six; there lived a Woman called
Agatha Shipton, at a place called Naseborough near the Dropping-Well in
Yorkshire. She came of poor Parentage, who died and left her to shift for her
self, at the Age of fifteen. After their decease, she still inhabited in the
Old House; but being now deprived of those helps she formerly enjoyed
conducible to a livelihood, she was constrained to seek relief from the
Parish? which she did, but with so much regret and grief, that she seemed in
her begging rather to command Alms, then in an humble manner to desire it. At
length she arrived to that pass, that she was upon the matter starving, rather
then she would be beholding to the charity of any.

The Devil looking on her poverty to be great, and knowing her evil
inclinations by her completion (for you must understand, that the Devil is a
great Scholar, well read in all things, and much acquainted with the
constitutions of all sorts of persons.) I say, perceiving that she was willing
to accept of any proposition to change her condition* He one time as she was
sitting Melancholy under a Tree by a River side, accosted her in the form of a
very handsome young man, well apparel'd with all things suitable to a youthful
garb. Pretty Maid, (quoth he) Why do thou fit so sad? Thy age is too slender
for thy head to be troubled with cares of the World; come tell me what is the
matter, and if it lie within my power to assist thee (as I am sure it does)
thou shall not want a friend of me.

Agatha casting up her eyes, and there seeing a face so lovely, could not
suspect a Devil bid in that comely shape; whereupon in a lamentable tone she
expressed all that troubled her, informing him of her great wants, and that
knowing not how to work, she could not provide what her necessaries required:
Pish (said the Devil) this is nothing, be ruled by me, and all shall be well;
she told him she would; hereupon be ordered her to meet him at the same place
the next day, and he would bring some friends along with him, for he told her
he resolved to marry her; she promised him she would, and accordingly they met.
He came riding upon a stately Horse, with a pillion behind for his Spouse,
attended by a great many Gallants (as they appeared) well mounted, and in a
noble equipage.

His Devilships attendants soon conveyed his Mistress behind him, as she
imagined; not in the least doubting the reality of all she saw.

They needed neither switch nor spurr to hasten them forward, the Iades were
fiery enough of themselves, and ran with that swiftness that the wind could not
over-take them in their full speed; soon they arrived at their journies end,
where seemed to be a very stately House, with a great pair of Gates, which at
their approach opened by a Porter with his stick, in his Livery-gown:
Alighting, she went in, where she saw a great many servants, which seemed at
the sight of her and their Master, to show much respect and obeisance.

Now did the Devil command rich Garments to be brought, which she was
immediately clothed with, and being, thus richly attired, she was ushered into
a great Hall, where was a long Lable furnished with all the Varieties the whole
world could afford; at the upper end of which table she was placed, next her
the Friend her intended husband; all the rest of the guests did place
themselves as they thought fit. As they had the choicest cheer, so had they
the best of Wines, and sweetest Music.

Dinner being ended, they fell to Dancing; and now could my lecherous Devil
stay no longer, but he must needs walk a co^ant with his Mistress into another
private room, and there courted her to lust; the simple Girl consented, and so
they both went to bed together, with the Ceremonies of Marriage. His touches
(as she confessed to the Midwife that delivered her of her Devilish Offspring)
were as cold as ice, or snow. After they had lain a little while together, he
told her what he was, and what she must do hereafter, if she intended to live
happy and delightful days. First, he told her that he was no Mortal, but a
Spirit immaterial, and not burdened by a body, nor hindered by any material
thing; So that I can when I please pierce through the Earth and ransack its
Treasures, and bring what precious things I please from thence to bestow on
those that serve me. I know all rare Arts and Sciences, and can teach them to
whom I please. I can disturb the Element, stir up Thunders and Lightnings,
destroy the best of things which were created for the use of man, and can
appear in what shape, or form I please. It will be too long to discribe my
power, or tell thee what I can do; but will only tell thee what thou shall do.
That being done, I will give she power to raise Hail, Tempests, with
lightning and Thunder; the Winds shall be at thy command, and shall bear thee
whither thou art willing to go, though never so far off, and shall bring thee
back again when thou bast a mind to return. The hidden treasures of the Earth
shall be at thy dispose and pleasure, and nothing shall be wanting to complete
thy happiness here. Thou shall moreover, heal or kill whom thou please;
destroy or preserve either man or beast; know what is past, and assuredly tell
what is to come. Here note by the way, the Devil is a Liar from the beginning,
and will promise more by ten millions, than he knows he is capable to perform,
to the intent he may ensnare and damn a Soul.

This poor ignorant wretch easily believed what this Grand Deceiver of Man kind
told her; and being ravished with the thoughts of being so highly preferred, she
condescended to all the Devil would have her do: Whereupon he bid her say after
him, in this manner: Raziel ellimiham irammish ziragia Psonthonphanchia Raphael
elhaveruna tapinotambecaz mitzphecat jarid cuman hapheah Gabriel Heydoncurris
dungeonis philonomostarkes sophecord hankim. After she had repeated these words
after him, he plucked her by the Groin, and there immediately grew a kind of
Let, which he instantly sucked, telling her that must be his constant Custom
with her morning and evening; now did he bid her say after him again,
Kametzeatuph Odel Pharaz Tumbagin Gall Flemmngen Victow Denmarkeonto. having
finished his last bellish speech, which the chiefest of his Minions understand
not, out of which none but the Devil himself can pick out the meaning; I say it
thundered so horridly, that every clap seemed as if the vaulted roof of Heaven
had cracked and was tumbling down on her head; and withal that stately Palace
which she thought she had been in, vanished in a trice; so did her sumptuous
apparel: and now her eyes being opened, she found her self in a dark dolesom
Wood; a place which from the Creation, had scarce ever enjoyed the benefit of
one single Sunbeam. Whilst she was thinking what course to steer in order to
her return, two flaming fiery Dragons appeared before her tied to a Chariot,
and as she was consulting with her self what was best to be done, she
insensibly was hoisted into it, and with speed unimaginable conveyed through
the Air to her own poor Cottage.

CHAP. II.
How the Devil constantly visited her, in what Forms and Shapes; what strange
things she did to those that offended her, harming some, and making sport with
others; and at length brought to Bed of a Child, which is commonly called,
Mother Shipton.

BEing come home, the Neighbors flockt about her, having mist her two or three
days, shrewdly suspecting some mischief had befallen her; but when they beheld
her face they were all amazed, to see such a strange alteration in her
countenance, in so short a time; and here the Proverb was verified in her: She
looked as if a Hagg had rid her. Before she met with this wanton Devil, she
looked plump and fresh, which were all the good quallities she had in her ill
featured face; but now that red plumpness vanished, and there was nothing to be
seen but a pale shriveled skin on her cheek, which for want of flesh seemed to
fall in her mouth, to be devoured by her hunger-starved jaws. Those about her
which were charitable minded, pitied her, comforted and gave her monys, which
with a great deal of disdain and scorn she threw them, saying, she wanted not,
nor stood in need of their Alms; for look ye here (said she) is many enough,
plucking her hand out of her pocket, the people drawing near her, discovered
that what was in her hands, was nothing else but some Aspin-leaves: and
notwithstanding, they endeavored to persuade her that she was mistaken in
supposing that to be money, yet would she not believe them; so strong a Power
the Devil had gotten over her already.

In fine, she did bid them all be gone, for now she began to take little
delight in humane Society: It was not long that they had left her, before the
Devil (with whom she made a Hellish Contract) came in to see her, in the same
handsome young form as he first appeared unto her, telling her that he came to
supply the company of those she had wisely dismissed, that she needed not the
Society of humane creatures, for he would not fail to he constantly with her;
always bringing with him what should not only serve for a bare Livelihood, but
her Delight, Pleasure, and Satisfaction: Hereupon by the Devil's command, there
instantly appeared seemingly, a complete noise of Music, with Dishes of Meat,
great variety of the choicest and most pleasing sort: which so ravished Agatha,
that she fell to the ground in a very profound and deep trance. One of her
Neighbors coming in this while, wondered to see Agatha lying on the floor
motionless; however out of pity and commiseration, she kneeled down, and having
crossed her self, and said a short prayer, she endeavored to waken Agatha, but
using what means she could, it all signified nothing; she shook and pincht her,
and pulled her by the nose, yet still she lay insensibly: This
Neighbouring-woman being strangly amazed and scared hereat, ran out amongst the
rest of the Neighbors, crying out, that poor Agatha Shipton was suddenly
struck dead, and so desired them to go into the house with her, and they should
there be the eyewitnesses of the truth thereof; whereupon several went and
found what this woman had said, to be seemingly true: but one wiser then the
rest stooped down and perceiving that she breathed, spoke aloud, Friends, ye
are all mistaken, Agatha is not dead, but in a trance, or else she is
bewitched; she had scarce uttered these words before Agatha began to stir; and
soon after, raised her self on her legs, crying out in a very distracted tone,
What make ye here, vile wretches? Cannot I enjoy my pleasures, but ye must be
Ches-dropping? get ye gone, as having nothing to do here, and hereupon she fell
a dancing, which they wondered at because they could here no Music. At length
Agatha turning about, and seeing they were not gone; said, if ye are resolved
thus to disturb me, and will not go, I will make ye: this something affrighted
them, for they now verily believed she was a witch; and as they were hastening
away with all imaginable speed, a sudden strong wind boisted them a great
height into the air, falling all to the ground again without the least barm,
only some shame to the women, for they descended with their heads downwards,
their coats over their ears, their lower parts appearing all naked to the
astonished spectators; the men were seen like overgrown Goats with larg horns
on their heads, and women riding on their backs: which sights as they produced
inexpressible wonder, so amidst their amazement, they could not but burst out
into excessive laughter.

This wonderful and unexpected exploit, was instantly noised all about the
Country, which occasioned a great resort of people to the place where Agatha
lived; which so perplexed her by their undesired visits, that she resolved
within her self to be revenged on some of them; which by the Devils help she
effected; mischieving some in their persons, others in their cartel, and others
in their credits: one had a Horse that dyed suddenly, and being opened, there
was found in his stomach fish-books, and hair, instead of Hay and Dars. Another
going to sit down at Table with persons of good quality at dinnertime, and
thinking himself very spruce and fine, had in an instant his Kuffe pulled off,
and the seat of an House of Office clapped on in its place, he that sat next
him, breaking out into a great laughter at the sight thereof, was served little
better; for his Hatt was invisibly conveyed away, and the Pan of a Close-stool
which stood in the next room, put on instead thereof; A modest young
Gentlewoman which did sit at the Table at that time, on no other errand but to
see this young witch which was so much talked of; looking on these two worthy
spectacles of laughter, endeavored all she could to refrain laughing, but
could not, and withal continued farting for above a quarter of an bour; this
made them all laugh so extremely that the Master of the house was alarmed
(below) therewith, and being desirous to share with his Guests in their mirth,
came running up stairs as fast as his legs would carry him, about to enter the
door, he could not, and no wonder, since the oldest man living, never saw a
larger pair of horns then he had on his head: Whilst they were gazeing one on
another as more then half distracted, they were all reduced to the same
condition they were in before; after which there followed a noise, as if an
hundred persons were laughing together, but nothing at all was seen.

These persons fearing something worse might befall them if they staid any
longer, made all the have they could to be gone: Agatha knowing their intent
resolved to take her farwell of them by serving them one trick more, which was
thus; As they were about to mount on Horseback, they were pelted with rotten
Apples, Dung, and stuff that smelt worse then can be imagined. As they rid
through the Town, such men as thought they rid singly, were all observed to
have behind them a deformed old Woman; and as their Faces differed all one from
another, so did their habits, which were all tattered and ragged, and patcht
with a hundred colors, fear, shame, and the hooting of the people, made them
put spurs to their Horses, neither did they forbear the switch, nor any thing
that might add speed to their Horses heels, so that it may be said, they rather
flew then rode; how could it be otherwise? for needs must he go whom the Devil
drives.

Coming home, they declare what wonderful things they had seen performed,
though by a young one, yet as they believed the greatest witch in the world:
this news being so generally spread, came at length to the ear of the Justices,
who now thought it high-time to question and bring into examination a person
that was so much talked of, and might, if let alone, do a great deal of
mischief.

CHAP. III
How Agatha Shipton was apprehended and brought before a Justice; what her
Confession was, her Mittimus being made to be sent to Prison; how she escaped
by the help of her friend, the Fiend; she is retaken, and being found with
Child, is bailed.



Agatha is now no longer suspected, but plainly known to be a witch, doing
something or other daily which was very remarkable; she has been frequently
observed to walk alone muttering to her self, and having been watched by some,
they have seen her stamp upon the ground thrice, then wound her hands over her
head, lastly, she spoke one word thrice, and in the twinkling of an eye, the
sky has been dark and gloomy, though clear before, which belcht out nothing
for half an hour but flames, thundering after a most hideous manner.

But now the time draws on, wherein she must give an account for what she has
done, and in order thereunto, she is apprehended by two resolute fellows, who
were not a whit daunted when they entered the house, though Toads, Adders, and
such like noisome creatures crawled up and down the house, but could not choose
but be much startled when they seized her and were carrying her, to hear such a
terrible crack of thunder, the house at that time reeling too and fro like a
Cradle.

However they carried her before the Justice, where being brought, she was
strictly examined by him; she not a jot daunted, told him that she had more
authority then he, and that notwithstanding his power, she could command one
that could overruled him when he list; That she was a Princess, and could have
at her beck a thousand Spirits of the Air, and as many of the Earth and Water;
That she could raise a Tempest presently, that should overturn his house about
his ears; and that you may know, it lies not in your power to detain me, three
words shall procure my liberty: hereupon she said Updraxi, call Stygicon
Helluox, she had not scarce uttered the last word, before there came in a
horrid winged-Dragon, which immediately took her up, and carried her away from
the amazed Justice and Attendants about him, half dead with fear.

This so affrighted all that heard of it, that none would undertake to meddle
with her more; so that she had a constderable time of respire. But she now
began to be more admired than before, being discovered by the great swelling of
her Belly, to be with Child: The people could not tell what to think, or who
should be the Father, concluding that none would be so vile and wicked, as to
have Copulation with a Devil incarnate; neither could they believe a Spirit had
either desire or power, to generate with any humane Creature; while people were
generally passing their verdicts on Agatha, she was once more taken and brought
before a Justice, and amongst other questions, was asked, whether she was with
Child, she acknowledged it; nay further, that it was begot by no mortal Wight:
The Justice gave no credit to what she said, as looking on her as an ignorant
seduced Woman; and so asked her what Bail she could produce, intending to deferr
the business till she was Delivered; in this very nick of time two Gentlemen as
they appeared by their habits, voluntarily proffered themselves, which as soon
as accepted for Bail, vanished presently, however Agatha had permission to go
home.

CHAP. IV.
What kind of shape Mother Shipton had when she was born: How she was put to
Nurse at the charge of the Parish; and what strange things were seen in that
House where she was Nursed, during the time of four years.

THe usual time of forty weeks being expired, her Mother, after many strange
and horrible Torments which she underwent in her Travil, was at last delivered
(by the rare skill and industry of her Midwife, and others of that Sir) of her
which is now called, Mother Shipton, which proved the conclusion of her
miserable Life. But her entry into the world was such a terror to all that
beheld her, that several credible persons then present, have several times
confessed that they never beheld the like: Such strange and horrible noises, that
the persons concerned about her, could scarce find so much courage in
themselves as to continue in the place where she was, much less when they
beheld the strange and unparrallel'd Phistognomy of the Child, which was so
misshapen, that it is altogether impossible to express it fully in words, or the
most ingennous to Limn her in colors, though many persons of eminent
qualifications in that Art have often attempted it, but without any success;
therefore according to the best observations of her, take this true, though not
full account of her features, and body: she was of an indifferent height, but
very morose and big hon'd, her head very long, with very great goggling, but
sharp and fiery Eyes, her Nose of an incredible and unproportionable length,
having in it many crooks and turnings, adorned with many strange Pimples of
diverse colors, as Red, Blew and mixed, which like Uapours of Brimstone gave
such a luster to her affrighted spectators in the dead time of the Night, that
one of them confessed several times in my hearing, that her Nurse needed no
other light to assist her, in the performance of her duty: Her Cheeks were of a
black swarthy complexion, much like a mixture of the Black and yellow jaundies;
wrinckled, shrivelled and very hollow; insomuch, that as the Ribs of her Body,
so she impression of her teeth were easily to be discerned, through both sides
of her face, answering one side to the other, like the notches in a Ualley,
excepting only two of them which stood quite out of her mouth, in imitation of
the Lushes of a wild Bore, or the Tooth of an Elephant, a thing so strange in
an Infant, that no age can parallel: Her Chin was of the same Completion as her
Face, turning up toward her mouth, and shreeks being heard, from an unknown
cause, as if there had been a more than an ordinary correspondence between her
Teeth and it.

Her Neck so strangely distorted, that her right shoulder was forced to be a
supporter to her head, it being propt up by the help of her Chin, in such sort,
that the right side of her Body stood much lower than the left; like the
reeling of a Ship that sails with a side wind. Again, her left side was quite
turned the contrary way, as if her Body had been screwed together piece after
piece; and not rightly placed: her left shoulder hanging just Perpendicular to
her Fundament.

Her Legs very crooked and misshapen: The Toes of her feet looking toward her
left side; so that it was very hard for any person (could she have stood up) to
guess which road she intended to stear her course; because she never could look
that way she resolved to go.

After she had remained under the care of her Nurse, for the space of a Moon,
or there abouts, her Mother being unable to provide for her, she was put out to
Nurse at the charge of the Parish, to a poor Woman hard by in the Town, where
she continued for the space of half a year or there abouts, the house not being
any ways disturbed at all, till at last her Nurse having been abroad amongst
some of the chief of the Parishoners, either to procure something of their
Charity for her subsistence, and the maintenance of her Family, or else to
fetch her money from the Overseers of the Poor, for Nursing the Child; and
returning home to her House, she found her doors unbard and wide open, whereat
she much amazed and affcighted, ran to her next Neighbor, and acquainted her
that she was quite undone, for her house was broken open and robbed; the man
immediately rises from his Dinner, carrying his bread and Cheese in his hand,
accompanied with his Wise and another labring man; approaching the door,
endeavored to enter, but before they could all get quite in, there was
immediately a very strange noise heard in the next Room to them as if it had
been a consort of Catts, which so affrighted them, that they all ran toward
the door endeavoring to get out again but it was in vain; for at their
approach there were great long yoaks about their Necks, in the form of a Cross,
or turned style; so that they could not possibly return; and while they were
thus striving and crying out for help; their yoaks at last fell off, and a
cou^e-staff, or Brewers-sting laid upon the men's shoulders; upon which an old
Woman presented her self Naked, some times hanging by the Heels, some times by
the Toes, anon by the Middle; with diverse other postures, they continuing for
the space of half an hour, in such sort, that the poor men were never more
tired in clearing of Legs, nor less pleased at any thing than in being
constrained to humor this piece of hellish activity.

After they had got a discharge from this their new employment, the house being
now quiet, and they a little recovered their senses and missing the women, they
ran further into the house, where at last they found them lying flat upon their
bellies, their clothes being turned backwards over their heads, two great black
Catts were playing Hocus Pocus upon their posters, which the men in vain
attempted to drive away, until at last their own stavery procured the women's
freedom from that employment, though they changed not much for the better, for
as they were coming out of that Room, in the next their stood a pair of
Yarwingles, made in the form of a Cross, upon which women use to put great
skains of Yarn, that so they may wind it off with more case and less trouble:
These being placed in the middle of the Room, the two men and two women were
forced to take the four ends the e^f in their hand, and so dance round about
the Room one after another, until such time as they were almost tired to death,
carrying upon every one of their shoulders an Imp in the likeness of a Monkey
or Ape, which hung close upon them; and when ever they stackned their pace,
these Spirits pricked them forward, continuing this recreation for a very
considerable time; and being cloyed with this kind of diversion, they vanished
quite out of fight, leaving these poor wretches as weary, as astonished; who
(notwithstanding) no sooner perceived themselves at liberty but they presently
quitted the house, and soon after addressed themselves to several of the
Neighborhood, acquainting them with what bad happened, which caused great
amazement amongst them, and immediately the whose Town was in an uproar; and
the Minister and several of the most eminent Inhabitants, consulted together
what the occasion thereof should be, and what to do in the bussness, some of
them threatening the informers; others thinking they were distracted: But at
last they resolved to go to the House; yet when they came near, there arose a
great dispute amongst them who should first enter, which at last was agreed
upon, and the Parson (with his congregation attending him in the rear;) gave
them the first onset, and entering the door quivering and shaking, they heard
the Nurse-Child cry in a most hideous and doleful manner; whereupon there was
suddenly a noise like the treading of people upon stones, though the house in
any place had no other then an earthen floor; at which the Child ceased, and a
very sweet musical harmony of several notes was heard, and all presently
banished again: after which the Minister and Inhabitants entering, and searching
the House, and at length missing the Child one of them looking up the Chimney,
saw the Cradle wonderfully hanging about three yards high without any support;
which being as strangly conveyed down again: they encouraged the Nurse, and
leaving her in the House (though affrighted) they departed for the present.

CHAP. V.
How Mother Shipton whilst but very young at Nurse, was daily Visited by
Spirits, in diverse Shapes and Forms; and what prancks they played during her
abode there.

MOther Shipton now grew a pace, and as her stature increased, so did her
deformity: Her supposed Father (the foul fiend) omitted not a day wherein he
visited not the House where she was, sometimes visibly in the form of a Cat,
Dog, Bat, or Hog; at other times, invisibly by noises, so terrible, as it so
affrighted the Nurse, that she oftentimes resolved to deliver up her charge,
and forsake her habitation; sometimes she came in a pleasant humor, either
singing or playing on an Instrument, which was usually a Scotch Bag-pipe.

Her Nurse sometimes was in great perplexity, not knowing what was become of
her, for an whole day together; but when she was in her greatest search after
her, she saw her oftentimes drop through the Roof of the House: Going out, upon
her return, she many times found her Child stretched out to a prodigious length,
caller than the tallest living; and at other times as much decreast or
shortened. The poor woman's work for the Mayor part, was only to rectify what
these Spirits disordered about her House; the Chairs and Stools would
frequently march up stairs and down, and they usually played below at Bowls with
the Trenchers and dishes: Going to dinner, the meat was removed before she
could touch a bit of it, which things, as they much troubled the Nurse, so they
gave much satisfaction to Mother Shipton; as it appeared by her monstrous
smiles: Now and then to pacify her Nurse, when she saw her much vexed hereat,
she would say, be contented there is nothing here will harm you.

To be short, the Nurse was so continually terrified by these apparitions, that
she resolved to complain to the parrish; and having made known the truth of
what had past, in commiseration to the woman almost distracted, they removed
Mother Shipton to another place, where she was put to School, being of an age
now fitting for it.

CHAP. VI.
How Mother Shipton was put to School, learning more in a day, then other
Children in a Month: How she was jeered by her Schoolfellows, for having such
a monstrous long Nose: and what pranks she played upon them, by way of Revenge;
growing now very famous.

MOther Shipton was now grown a lusty Girl; and as she was left to the care of
the Parish, so the Parish took care that she should have the common sort of
Learning; that is to say, Reading and Writing bestowed upon her. Coming to
School, her Mistress began to instruct her, as other Children, beginning with
the Cris-cross-row as they called it, showing and naming only three or four
Letters at first, but to the amazement and astonishment of her Mistress; she
exactly pronourced every Letter in the Alphabet without teaching. Hereupon her
Mistress, showed her a Primmer, which she read as well at first sight, as any in
the School, and so proceeded in any Book was shown her.

As this produced wonder in her School-Mistris, so hatred and enby in her
Comrades; some flouted her for her monstrous long Nose, others endeavored to
heat her, and all strove to mischief her; but she valued them not, revenging
her self upon every one of them, that intended her harm. Some were pinch't, and
yet no hand seen that did it; others struck speechless when they were about to
say their Lessons, not being able to utter a word; and none escaped from being
served one scurby trick, or other. This so enraged the Parents of these
Children, looking on Mother Shipton the sole cause hereof; that she was
discharged the School, and so lest to the wide World.

She has been often seen when alone, to laugh heartily; at other times to talk
by her self, uttering very strange riddles, which occasioned some of the more
sober sort to converse with her, receiving such strange things from her, as
required a long study to find out the meaning.

Never a day passed, wherein she related not something very remarkable, and
required the most serious consideration. And now it was that people flockt to
her far and near, (her fame was so great) to be resolved of their Doubts, all
returning wonderfully satisfied in the Resolution of their questions.

CHAP. VII.
How several persons came to Mother Shipton, for her Predictions, and how a
Rich Heir being deceived by her Maid, fell sick of Grief, and dyed.

ANd now Mother Shipton beginning to grow Famous in the World, for her notable
Judgment in things to come: There reforted to her House a number of people, of
all sorts, both old and young, rich and poor; Especially, of the Female Sex
viz. Young Maids and Wenches, who have always a great Itching desire to know
when they shall be Married; as also, what manner of Husbands they shall have;
to which she gave such satisfactory answers, both for the Persons, and time;
that no sooner could a young Maid get into the Teens, but She would presently
Trott to Mother Shiptons, to be resolved of her doubt. Now though she were not
Mercenary her self, but refused great Gifts, when proffered unto her; yet did
she keep a young Wench, who rather then fail, if they forgot to open their
purse to her she would remember to open her mouth to them, and tell them, that
her Dame Shipton, nor she, could not be maintained with thanks, but that the
belly required meat to feed it: and that it was money which made the Mare to
go. One day there came a certain young Heir thither, whose Father was sick, to
be resolved by her, whether he should live or die; but Mother Shipton could by
no means be wrought upon to tell him any thing; whereupon he proffered the Maid
great store of Money, if she could by any means persuade her Dame, to fulfill
his request; the Wench greedy of Money, promised him fair; and that if he would
come the next Morning, he should be certain to be resolved; in the mean time,
she importuned her Dame with the most cunning Rhetoric that she could invent;
but she was deaf to all entreaties, and would by no means be induced thereto,
whereupon the Wench resolved with her self, rather than to lose the money, to
give him an answer of her own intention; which the next morning she performed
in these words.

The Grave prepared has a Room,
Prepare for Death, thy hour is Come.
The young Gentleman having received this answer, went home joyfully, hoping
presently to reap the Golden Crop which his Father had sown, and to be in an
instant, possessed of all his vast estate, but the sequel proved quite
contrary; for by that time he came home, great hopes of amendment appeared in
his Father, who each day grew better and better, so that in a short time he
became perfectly well. This unexpected recovery of the old man, struck such a
dump in our young Heir, that he presently took his Bed, fell extreme sick, and
in a short time grew extraordinary ill, that all the symptoms of a dying man
appeared in him: The old man, who had carked and cared all his life time for
his Son, (having no more Children but he) was very desious of his life, and to
know whether be should recover; whereupon he sent to Mother Shipton about the
same; who knowing by her Art, what her Maid bad done, sufficiently did chide
her for the same: threatening upon such another offense, to turn her out of her
service. In the mean time, the Messenger was come to her House, who having
delivered his errant, was turned back with this answer.

For others Deaths who do gape out,
Their own unlook't for, comes about:
Earth he did seek, e're long shall have,
Of Earth his fill, within his Grave.
The old man having received this answer, was much troubled, as thinking his
own Death predicted thereby, not imagining in the least, what his Son had done;
but he was soon quit of that suspicion, for within two days the young man
dyed; when by a Servant (who knew the passages) he was informed the truth of
the whole matter.

CHAP. VIII.
Mother Shipsons Prophecies concerning King Henry the Eighth's journey into
France; of Cardinal Wolsey, and other things.

ABout this time, some differences arising betwixt King Henry the Eighth, and
the French King; great preparations of War were made in England, the Drums
beating in every County, to summon Voluntary Valor to express it self,
indefence of their King and Country, Many Heroic Spirits, who made Honor
their Aim, not dreading any dangers for the attaining thereof, now listed
themselves Bellona's followers: so many appearing under Mars his Banner, that
he who was furnished with Limbs and an Estate, to decline the Service, was
adjudged a Coward. There was then living in the North, a young Heir, who was
newly come to his Estate, one whose Tongue was all fire, and his heart all ire,
who would kill Thousands with words, but durst not adventure to do any thing in
deeds. This Gallant being by some of his Equals, pricked on to make his
appearance in the fields of Mars, and not to lie sleeping at home, when Fame
Summoned him forth to Action, he knew not what to do in this case; loath was he
to lose his loved Life, and yet the aspersion of a Coward, though to a Coward
himself, is of all things most odious? He therefore promised them fair; that
none should be more willing then he, to to spend his blood in the quarrel of
that Country, from whence he received his dearest life; but yet resolved with
himself, not to set one step forward in that path of danger, till he had first
consulted with Mother Shipton, concerning what success he should have in his
journey; if bad, be was resolved by a feigned sickness to evade, thinking it no
policy for a man to part away with that life in an instant, which with great
cost and care, had been many years in bringing up.

Hereupon he basts to our Northern Propheress, acquaints her with his
Condition, and very earnestly desires of her (as she to whom nothing was unhid)
that she would unfold to him whether-good, or bad fortune should be his
attendant, in this his Expedition. Mother Shipton though she perceived his
sheepless courage to be every way unanswerable to that of a Soldier, yet
foreknowing what would come to pass, returned him this answer; which without
more ado, fully satisfied him to proceed, and perform what be had promised; the
answer was this.

When the English Lion shall set his paw on the Galligue shore, then shall the
Lillies begin to drop for fear: There shall be much weeping and wailing amongst
the Ladies of that Country; because the Princely Eagle shall join with the
Lion, to tread down all that shall oppose them: and though many Sagitaries
shall appear in defense of the Lillies, yet shall they not prevail; because
the dull Animal of the North shall put them to Confusion; and though it be
against his will, yet shall cause great shame unto them. Now shall the Mitred
Pearock first begin to Plume, whose Train shall make a great show in the World,
for a time; but shall afterward vanish away, and his great Honor come to
nothing; which shall take its end at Kingston.

The Explanation of the Prophecy.
By the English Lion was meant the King of England; and by setting his Paw on
the Gallique shore, the Landing of his Army in France, which not long after he
did; by the Lillies beginning to drop for fear, was signified the great trouble
and perplexity of the French, the Lillies being the Arms of France; the weeping
and wailing amongst the Ladies of that Country, denotes the miseries and
destructions incident to War, the Sword, Famine, Destruction and Desolation
being inseparable Companions; by the Princely Eagle joining with the Lion, and
treading down all that should oppose them, is meant Maximilian the German
Emperor (whose Arms were the Eagle) who not only joined in Amity with King
Henry, but also took wages of him, and served him in his Wars as an hired
Soldier; by the Sagitaries that appeared in defense of the Lillies, was meant
the French Cavalry, the chief strength of France, consisting of Horsemen, who
appearing like Sagitaries, that is to say, half Men, and half Horses, gave
Mother Shipton to use that expression; whereas it is said, yet they should not
prevail, it fell out so accordingly; for notwithstanding all the oppositions of
the French Armies, King Henry proceeded on vigorously, conquering and taking
several Towns of importance, as Tourmey, Bulloign, etc. But to come to that
which most nearly concerns the matter, viz. the success of our young Heir, in
this expedition, which was hinted forth unto him in these words, because the
dull Animal of the North shall put them to Confusion; and though it be against
his will, yet shall cause great shame unto them; by the dull Animal of the
North, was meant this fresh water Soldier, who according to the Prophecy, put
the Frenchmen to confusion, and great shame; for passing the Seas with King
Henry, being Mounted on a stately Horse, as both Armies confronted each other,
he being in the Head of the Battle, just before the Charge, some body striking
his Horse, the Jade carried him perforce upon the Enemy, with such violence, as
put their front into some disorder, which being perceived by our men, they
presently so seconded him, that in fine, the French very fairly ran away,
leaving the English a glorious victory, purchased with a little cost.

By this means was Mother Shiptons Prediction fulfilled to the disgrace of the
French, and great praise of the young Gallant; for the rest of the Prophecy,
the Interpretation thereof runs thus.

By the Mitred Peacock was intended Cardinal Wolsey, signified by that Bird,
because of his great Pride, who being but a poor Butlers son of Ipswich in
Suffolk, grew to such height, that he thought himself Superior to she chief
Novies of the Land, living in such splendour as not to be paralleled, according
to the Prophecy: Whose Train shall make a great show in the World, and whereas
it is said, the Peacock shall then begin to Plume, so it was, that when King
Henry had taken the City of Tourney, in France he made Wolsey Bishop thereof,
who soon after rose to the highest degree of Honor a Subject could be capable
of, which afterward (as the Prophecy says) vanished away, and his great
Honor come to nothing: And lastly, whereas it is said, be should have his end
at Kingstone; the Cardinal being told of this Prophecy, would never pass
through the Town of Kingstone, though lying directly in the Road, from his own
House to the Court, but afterward being arrested of High Treason, by the Earl
of Northumberland and Sir Anthony Kingston the Lieutenant of the Tower sent
unto him, his very name (remembering this Prophecy) struck such a terror to his
heart, that he soon after expired.

CHAP. IX.
Her Prophecy to the Abbot of Beverly, concerning the downfall of Abbeys,
Nunneries, Priories, etc. with other things.

MOther Shiptons Prediction^ coming thus effectually to pass, spread her Fame
far wider than it was; insomuch, that many who before looked upon her as a
crackt-brain'd Woman, now began to admire her, and to esteem of her words as
Oracles. And as the nature of English people is, rather to destre to know what
is to come, than to seek to rectify ought what is done amiss; so the greatest
part of her disitants, came only to be resolved, of what she knew, would come
to pass, of which number was the Abbot of Beverly, who fearing the downfall of
Religious Houses, and a change of the Religion then professed, putting on the
counterfeit Clothes of a Lay-person, he came to Mother Shiptons, and knocking
at the door, she being within, called to him, and said, come in Mr. Abbot, for
you are not so much disguised, but the For may be seen through the Sheeps skin;
it is not those Clothes makes you a Lay-person, no more than a Long-Town, makes
a man a Lawyer; come, take a stool and sit down, for you shall not go away
unsatisfied of what you destre, and thereupon she began to utter forth her
Prophecys in this sort.

When the Cow does ride the Bull,
Then Priest beware thy Soul.
And when the lower Shrubs do fall,
The great Trees quickly follow shall.
The Miter'd Peacocks lofty Pride.
Shall to his Master be a Guide.
And one great Court to pass shall bring,
What was near done by any King.
The Poor shall Grieve, to see that Day,
And who did Feast, must Fast and Pray.
Fate so Decreed their Overthrow,
Riches brought Pride, and Pride brought Woe.
These Prophesies were thus Explained; by the Cow was meant King Henry, who
gave the same, by reason of the Earldom of Richmond, which was his Inheritance:
and the Bull betokens Mrs. Anne Bulloign, whom the King took to Wife, in the
room of Queen Catharine, her Father gave the Black Bulls head in his
Cognizance, and was his Beast; and when the King had married Queen Anne, then
was fulfilled the second line of the Prophecy, viz. Then Priest beware thy
Scul; for what a number of Priests Religious and Secular, lost their heads for
offending of those Laws made to bring this matter to pass.

And when the Lower Shrubs do fall,
The great Trees quickly follow shall.
The Miter'd Peacocks lofty pride.
Shall to his Master be a Guide.
Cardinal Wolsey (who is here intended by the Miter'd Peacock) in the height of
his Pride, and vastness of his undertakings, intending to erect two fair
Colleges, one at Ipswich where he was born, the other at Oxford where he was
bred; and finding himself unable to endow them at his own Charges; be obtained
License of Pope Clement the Seventh, Anno 1525, to suppress forty small
Monasteries in England, and to lay their old Lands to his new Foundations,
which was done accordingly; and the poor People that lived in them, turned out
of doors, many of the Clergy were very much against this action of Wolseys,
especially, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, alleging for the same an Apologue
out of Aesop, that the Iron Head of the Axe, craved a handle of the Wood of
Oaks, only to cut off the seere boughs of the Tree; but when it was a complete
instrumental Axe, it felled all the Wood: applying it, That the suppressing of
those smaller Houses, would in fine, prove Destructive to all the rest; which
came to pass accordingly; for King Henry seeing the Cardinals power to extend
so far; as to suppress these lower Shrubs, be thought his Prerogative might
stretch so far, as to fell down the Great Trees; and soon after dissolved the
Priory of Christ's Church nigh Aldgate in London, now known by the Name of
Dukes-place, and which was the richest in Lands, and Ornaments of all the
Priories in London, or Middlesex; and which was a forerunner of the
Dissolution of all the rest; and which not long after came to pass.

And one great Court to pass shall bring,
What was never done by any King.
By the Great Court, is meant the Parliament, the Supreamest Court of England;
who in the Twenty seventh of King Henry's Reign, Anno 1539. To support the
Kings States, and supply his wants, contented on the Crown, all Religious
Houses, which were not able clearly to expend above two hundred pounds a year;
the great ones not long after following the same fortune of the smaller, which
was never done (though attempted) by any King before.

The Poor shall Grieve to see that day. The Abbots and Priors being most
bountiful Housekeepers, relieving all comers and goers, got themselves much
reputation for their Hospitality.

And who did Feast, must Fast and Pray. By the Dissolution of these Houses,
many thousands were driven to seek their fortunes in the wide World, and become
utterly exposed to want, when Monkish profession was without possession; many a
young Nun proved an old Beggar, and were forced to fast for want of Victuals,
who formerly had it provided for them, to their hands.

Fate so Decreed their overthrow,
Riches brought Pride, and Pride brought woe.
The great Riches and Pride of the Monks and Eryers was (no doubt) the main
cause of their overthrow; for whatsoever was the pretense, questionless profit
was the Rope which pulled these Religious Houses down.

All these things coming to pass before such time as this Abbot died, caused
him to have a great esteem of Mother Shipton, and to value her Prophecys more
than ordinary conjectures; though at the first, he could not tell what to make
of her Ambiguous Lines, which like the Oracles, formerly delivered at Delphos?
rather brought one into a Labyrinth of confused conjectures, then satisfied the
expectation, until by the Clue of Time, the Riddles were manifest, and that
which at first seemed so hard, now appeared to the understanding, as easy:
However, be at present kindly thanked Mother Shipton, and liverally rewarded
her Maid (who else would have put him in mind of his neglect) much admiring
that she should be so clear-sighted, as to see through his counterfeit Dress;
resolving afterward to be more informed by her, concerning future events; be
at that time took his solemn leave of her, and returned home.

CHAP. X.
Her Prophecys concerning King Edward the Sixth: The Rebellion of the Commons:
The Death of the Duke of Somerset, with other things.

NOt long had the Abbot been at home, but his Abbey was visited by some
Instruments employed by the Lord Cromwell for that purpose. He who knew what was
intended by this Complement, thought it not safe to strive against the Stream,
and therefore quietly surrendered his Monastary, into the Kings hands. And now
perceiving Mother Shiptons Prophecy plainly fulfiled, in the downful of those
Houses, which were judged Impregnable, against all the assaults of Malice and
time; Considering the strange Revolutions of so short a space: he was very
desirous to be more fully informed of the future. In this Resolution be repairs
again to Mother Shiptons, whom he now accosts more familiarly, than he did
before, making himself plainly known unto her; telling her that as what she had
formerly spoken, he had found to be true in the event; so his Judgment
persuaded him, she was not ignorant of those things which were for the future
to ensue; and therefore desired her, she would not be nice in imparting of this
her fore-knowledg unto him; for which so great favor, though it were more than
his deserts could command, yet should there never in him be wanting a grateful
tongue to acknowledge, and a grateful heart to be thankful unto her, for so
great a favor.

Mr. Abbot (said she) leave off Complementing, as more fit for Courtiers, and
Lovers, and not agreeable to an old Woman, who will neither flatter, nor be
flattered by any: and for what you came about, I shall not be squeamish to
fulfill your request, let me therefore desire you, to lend me your attention,
and thereupon (after some short pause) she thus began.

A Prince that never shall be Born,
Shall make the Shaved Heads forlorn.
Then shall Commons rise in Arms,
And Women's Malice cause much harms.
O deadly Pride! O hateful Strife!
Brothers to seek each others Life.
Ambition shall so deadly spread,
The Griffin fierce shall lose his Head.
Soon after shall the Lion die,
And mildness usher Cruelty.
These ten lines being prophecies of the Actions in King Edwards Reign; for the
Readers benefit; (before we proceed any further in her Predictions,) we will
unfold the meaning of them by themselves, that we may not too much burden
their memory; but by variety add a pleasure to the reading of them.

A Prince that never shall be born.
Shall make the Shaved Heads forlorn.
By the Prince that never shall be born is meant King Edward the Sixth, of whom
all reports do constantly run, that be was not by Natural Passage delivered
into the World, but that his Mothers Body was opened for his Birth, that she
died of the Incision the fourth day following; and by the Shaved Heads, is
understood the Monks, Friars, etc. who are said to be become forlorn: the
Reformation beginning, with the beginning of King Edwards Reign: and the Popes
Priests put down, as his Supremacy was before, Then shall commons rise in Arms.

King Edward having set out certain Injunctions, for the Reformation of
Religion, as the Commissioners passed to diverse places for the establishing of
them, many scorns were cast upon them, and the farther they went from London,
as the people were more uncivil, so did they more rise into insolency and
contempt; for in Cornwall, the Commons flocked together, having killed one of
the commissioners; and albeit Justice was done upon the offenders, the
principal of them being Executed in several places, yet could not their
boldness be beaten down with their severity, but that the mischief spread
farther, in Wiltshire, and Somersetshire, where the people supposeing that a
Commonwealth could not stand without Commons beat down Enclosures, and said
Parks, and Fields Champion. The like Commotions followed in Sussex, Hamp-shire,
Kent, Gloucestershire, Warwickshire, Essex, Hartford-shire, Lecester-shire,
Worcestershire, and Rutland-shire. but the greatest of all, was in Devon-shire
and Norfolk: the one Headed by Henry Arundel Esquire, Governor of the Mount in
Cornwall, the other by Robert Ket a Tanner of Windham in Norfolk: Those of
Devon-shire, were accounted above ten thousand, who with a close and smart
Siege, Surrounded the City of Exeter, which they brought to extreme misery,
having a potent Foe abroad, and Famine sorely rageing within; insomuch, as they
were fain to bake Bran and Meal molded up in Clothes, for otherwise it would
not stick together; at last the Rebels were routed from thence; by the Lord
Privy Seal, with the loss of a Thousand of their Number, and soon after totally
routed, at a place called Clift-heath. These of Norfolk, were judged to be more
dangerous; both because their strength was great, being estimated to be above
Twenty Thousand; as also the City of Norwich was a friend unto them, or at
least wished them no harm: This rude rout Encamped on Monshold-hill, a place
Impregnable in some sort, being near to Norwich; against whom was sent the
Marquess of Northampton, and afterward the Carl of Warwick, who made many
Sallies upon the Rebels with various success; had the Rebels kept in this Fort,
they might have tired out the Earl, his Horse being useless against them; but
they relying on an old prophecy, came down into Dassin Dale and quitted the
Fort: the words of the prophecy were these.

The Country Knuffs, Hob, Dic, and Hic,
With Clubs, and Clouted Shone,
Shall fill up Dassin-Dale with Blood,
Of slaughtred Bodies soon.
Which they Interpreted to be of their Enemies Bodies, though it proved of
their own; for the Earl setting upon them, after a stout resistance, they were
overcome, two thousand stain upon the place; Ret with his Brother and nine
others Executed; the rest taken unto mercy.

And Women's malice cause much Harms. Lamentable was the effects occasioned by
the malice of two Women in this Kings Reign, which that you may the better
understand, we shall declare the Original grounds thereof. The King had two
Unkles, Brothers to Queen Jane his deceased Mother, Edward Duke of Somerset,
Lord Protector, etc. and Thomas Lord Seymor Baron of Sudly, High Admiral of
England: The Lord Sudly, had taken to Wife Katherine Parr, Queen Dowager, last
Wife to King Henry the Eighth. The Duke had Married the Lady Ann Stanhope, a
Woman for many Imperfections intolerable; This Woman did bare such invincible
bate, first against the Queen Dowager for light causes, and Women's quartels;
especially, for that she had Precedence of place before her; that albeit, the
Queen Dowager dyed by Childbirth, yet would not her malice either die, or
decrease, but hated the Lord Sudly, for her sake; and left buzzing fears and
jealousses in her Husbands Pate, (who was of an easy belief) that within few
days the Lord Sudley was arrested and sent to the Tower, and in very short time
after Condemned by Act of Parliament; and within few days after his
Condemnation, a Warrant was sent, under the hand of his Brother the Duke,
whereby his Head was delivered to the Axe; which verified what was before
predicted:

O deadly Pride! O hateful Strife!
Brothers to seek each others Life.
O Wives! the most sweetest Poison, the most destred Evil in the World!
certainly. as it is true, as Syracides faith, that there is no Malice to the
Malice of a Woman: so no Mischief wants, where a Malicious Woman bears
sway; a Woman was first given to Man for a Comforter, but not for a Counselor,
much less a Controler and Director; and therefore, in the first sentence
against Man, the cause is expressed, Because thou obeyest the voice of thy Wife.
And doubtless the Protector, by being thus ruled to the Death of his Brother,
seemed with his left hand to have cut off his right; for hereby he left himself
now unguarded from the Malice of his Enemies, the Earl of Warwick, etc. who
being ambitious of engrossing all power into his own hands, soon wrought the
confusion of the Duke, as it follows in the Prophecy.

Ambition shall so deadly spread,
The Griffin fierce shall lose his Head.
For the Earl of Warwick espying opportunity, showing himself, and knowing,
that in troublesome times, the obedience of great persons is most easily
shaken, drew about eighteen of the Privy Council to knit with him against the
Lord Protector: These he did, to wind up his purpose, that they withdrew from
the Court, fell to private Consultations, and so ordered the matter, that at
length they brought the Protector upon the Scaffold, wherein fine he had his
Head cut off, figured here by the name of the Griffin.

Soon after shall the Lion die,
And Mildness Usher Cruelty.
By the Lion is meant King Edward, who survived his Unkie the Duke of Somerset,
nor above two years grief for his death (as it is generally conceived) bringing
him into a Consumption, though some have reported him to be poisoned; soon
after his death Mass and Popery was restored again by Queen Mary, for which
cause many afterward fried in the flames, berifying the last verse.

And Mildness Usher Cruelty. CHAP. XI.
Her Prophecys concerning the Death of Lady Jane Gray; the burning of the
Martyrs; of Wyats Rebellion; the Death of Queen Mary; and of Cardinal Pool.

BY Parents too ambitious Pride,
The Scaffold shall with Blood be Di'de.
A Virtuous Lady then shall die,
For being raised up too High.
Her death shall cause another joy,
Who will the Kingdom much anoy.
Miters shall rise, Miters come down,
And streams of Blood shall Smithfield drown.
England shall join in League with Spain,
Which some to hinder strive in vain.
The Lyoness from Life retires,
And Pontificial Priest expires.
This Prophery is peruliarly applied to the Reign of Queen Mary, and may be
interpreted after this manner.

By Parents too ambitious Pride,
The Scaffold shall with Blood be Di'de.
This is meant by the Lady Jane Gray daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, who
having Married the Lord Gilford Dudly, Son to the Duke of Northumberland, the
ambition of Northumberland was so great, that be practiced much on King Edwards
tender years, who now was much weakened with sickness, that excluding his two
Sisters, the Lady Mary, and Lady Elizabeth, He conveyed the Crown to the Lady
Jane, by that which we may call the Testament of King Edward, and the Will of
the Duke of Northumberland. But the Commons taking part with the Lady Mary,
notwithstanding, the Duke went with great forces against her, yet his Soldiers
differting him, he was forced to tach about, and with an unwilling mind
Proclaim her Dueen, whom in his heart be hated above all others.

A Virtuous Lady then shall die,
For being raised up too high.
The Lady Jane Gray, who out of dutifulness to her Parents, assuming the Title
of Queen upon her, for her offense, lost her head: This Lady Jane was a woman
of most rare and incomparable perfections; for besides her excellent beauty,
adorned with all bariety of bertues, as a clear sky with Stars, as a princely
Diadem with Jewels; she was the mirror of her time, for her Religion and
Education in the knowledge of the Liveral Sciences, and skill in Languages, for
in Thealogy, in Philosophy, in all the Liveral Arts, in the Latin and Greek
Longues, and in the Vulgar Languages of diverse near Nations, she far exceeded
all of her Sex, and every one of her years.

Her Death shall cause another joy,
Who will the Kingdom much anoy.
The Death of the Lady Jane was supposed to be a rejoicing to Queen Mary, and
who by restoring Popery, and the Persecutions that the Professors of the Gospel
suffered in her time, is said to bring the Kingdom to anoy.

Miters shall rise, Miters come down,
And streams of Blood shall Smithfield drown.
By the Miters are meant the Bishops, who in the Change of Religion found great
Change; very few of them keeping their Seats wherein they had been seated by
King Edward the sixth, the names of the Bishops thus put down, were these,
Cranmer Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Ridly Bishop of London, Poynet Bishop of
Winchester, Holgate Archbishop of York, Bush Bishop of Bristol, Bird Bishop of
Chester, Hoopen Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, Barlo Bishop of Bath and
Wells, Scory Bishop of Chichester, Ferrar Bishop of St. David's, Coverdale
Bishop of Exeter, Tailor Bishop of Lincoln, and Harley Bishop of Hereford; in
the room of these Bishops thus put down, several Bishops were raised, as
Cardinal Pool made Archbishop of Canterbury, Bonner Bishop of London, Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, Heath Archbishop of York, Holeman Bishop of Bristol,
Gotes Bishop of Chester, Brook Bishop of Gloucester, Pates Bishop of Worcester,
Bourn Bishop of Bath and Wells; Christopherson Bishop of Chichester, Morgan
Bishop of St. David's, Turbervile Bishop of Exeter, White Bishop of Lincoln, and
Parfew Bishop of Hereford.

And streams of Blood shall Smithfield drown. Great was the number of Martyrs
burned in Smithfield in this Queens Reign, under the Bloody bands of Bonner
Bishop of London, and Dr. Story Dean of St. Paul's; the first persecuting by
wholesale, the second by retail; the names of all those who in this place thus
restified their Faith by the loss of their Lives, would be too long here to
recite: the chief of them were, Mr. John Rogers, Mr. John Bradford, Mr. Robert
Glover, etc.

England shall join in League with Spain,
Which some to hinder strive in vain.
Queen Mary intending to match her self with Philip King of Spain, the bruit
thereof being spread amongst the people, was by them ill resented, as dreading
to be under the yoke of a stranger; to hinder the same (amongst others) Sir
Thomas Wyat, a Kentish Knight, took Arms, with a great party assisting him.
The Queen bearing of his Commotion, sent a Herald to him to desist, which be
refusing to do, she resolves upon force, sending the Duke of Norfolk with five
hundred Londoners against him; but these Soldiers bearing more affection to
Wyats cause than the Queens, forsook their Leader, and their Loyalry together,
and joined themselves to Wyats Faction; who much elated with this supply,
presently resolves for London, promising to himself east entrance into that
City, and hearty entertainment therein; but contrary to his expectation, coming
to Southwark, he found all the Lowers of the Tower, and the tops of the square
Steeples near the Bridgfoot on the other side, planted with Ordnance against
him, so that both Church and State threatened his ruin; so that seeing no good
to be done there, with a swift March (having the Darkness of the Night for his
Coverture) he hastes to Kingston, passes the River, and comes to
Knights-Bridg, before almost any had notice of his Motion.

Here he divides his Army into two parts, Five hundred of them wheels down
toward White Hall, but could not force their passage into it; Himself with the
rest of the Army went directly to Charing Cross, where he met with some
opposition, but nothing daunted thereat, he marched directly down the Strand
and Fleet Street, and coming to Ludgate promised himself entrance into the
City, but finding the Gate close shut, and well fortified against him, with Men
and Ammunition, his hopes then began to fail him; retreating to Temple Bar, he
was faced with some Norse, where after a short Fight, he submitted himself
Prisoner, being first carried to White Hall to be examined, from thence to the
Tower, and soon after to the Scaffold, where he received the rewards of his
Revellion.

The Lyoness from life retires,
And Pontificial Priest Expires.
By the Lyoness is meant Queen Mary, who having Reigned five years and some odd
months, dyed of a Dropsy, though others say of Grief for the absence of her
Husband King Philip, and others again, for Calice (taken not long before) and
that she should say, if after she was dead they ripped her up, they would find
Calice written on her heart.

The Pontificial Priest signified Cardinal Pool, who expired within sew hours
after the death of Queen Mary. This prelate was of princely extraction, his
Mother Margaret being Daughter to George Duke of Clarence; when he was young be
was brought up together with Queen Mary, and being a zealous Catholic during
King Edwards Reign, suffered a voluntary exile for the same; when the marriage
with Prince Philip and Queen Mary was made up, be returned into England, was
made Archbishop of Canterbury, more moderate than some oaths of his fellow
Bishops, having a favorable inclination toward the Protestants. He survived
the Queen but few hours, and was buried in his own Cathedral at Canterbury,
with this short and modest Epitaph on his Monument, DE POSITUM CARDINALIS POLI.

CHAP. XII.
Her Prophecys concerning the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; the change of Religion;
the attempts of the Papists, upon the Queen; the Spanish Invasion; the burning
of Paul's Steeple; the death of the Queen of Scots; the reducing Ireland; the
beheading the Earl of Esser, etc.

THe Lion fierce being dead and gone,
A Maiden Queen shall Reign anon.
Those who sighed, then shall sing,
And the Bells shall Changes Ring.
The Papal power shall bear no sway,
Roms trash shall hence be swept away.
The Locusts sent from the seven Hills,
The English Rose shall seek to kill.
The Western Monarks Wooden Horses,
Shall be destroyed by the Drakes forces.
Troy novant's Triumphant Spir^,
Shall be consumed with flames of Fire.
More wonders yet! a Widowed Queen,
In England shall be headless seen.
The Harp shall give a better Sound,
An Earl without a Head be found.
Soon after shall the English Rose,
Unto a Male her place dispose.
These lines being a Prophecy of the most remarkable Actions, during the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, are to be interpreted after this manner.

The Lion fierce being dead and gone,
A Maiden Queen shall Reign anon.
Queen Mary is here meant by the fierce Lion; so called, not so much for the
Cruelty done by Her, as by the Bishops and Priests was done under her; for take
her in her self, secluded from bloody Counselors, and she was a most Merciful,
Pious, Just Princess; but in respect of the Blood that was shed, and the
persecutions then suffered, she is here Termed a fierce Lion: After whom is
said, A Maiden Queen to Reign Anon, meant by Queen Elizabeth, one who was the
Mirror of her Set and Age, who for above forty years, to the admitation of
enby it self, managed the affairs of this Kingdom; having when she began, few
friends that durst help, and leaving no Foes when she died that could hurt her;
acting her part so well whilst here she Reigned; that History canscarcely
afford us one Prince to be matched to her Fame, in all considerable particulars.

Those who sighed then shall sing,
And the Bells shall changes Ring.
Many who sat and sighed in the days of Queen Mary, by reason of the hot
persecution, being forced to forsake their Houses, because they should not
forsake their Religion; now that Queen Elizabeth began to Reign, their mourning
was turned into joy, their sighing into singing; returning from their etile,
with Psalms of thanksgiving in their mouths: where their Bells rang such
Changes in Religion, that the Mass was put down, and the Common prayer set up:
Popery banished, and reformation established; the Ministers of the Bospel
advanced, and the Schaveling Priests, Monks and Friars, depressed.

The Papal Power shall bear no sway;
Rooms trash shall hence be swept away.
Soon after the Queens coming to the Crown, a Parliament began at Westminster,
wherein the Laws of King Henry, the eighth against the Sea of Rome were
renewed, and those of King Edward the sixth, in favor of the Protestants
revived, and the Laws by Queen Mary made against them repealed: Uniformity of
Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments was enacted, with a Restitution of
first Fruits and Tenths to the Crown; and the Queen acknowledged to be the only
and Supreme Governor of her Kingdoms: The people in each place beating down
Superstitious Pictures and Images, which blind and misguided zeal had set up.

The Locusts sent from the seven Hill,
The English Rose shall seek to kill.
By the Locusts are meant the Priests, Friars and Jesuits, who spread all the
World over in greater numbers than the Locust did in the Land of Egypt; and by
the seven Hills is meant Rome, which is built upon seven Hills; and by the
English Rose is signified Queen Elizabeth, whom the Priest and Jesuits by their
Instruments did often attempt to kill; so that if we seriously consider her
Reign, we shall scarcely find any Prince, whose life was so often attempted as
hers, of which to give you some examples would not be impertinent to our
purpose, and first in her Sisters Reign; Stephen Gardener Bishoy of Winchester,
and other Romanists, offended with her Religion, so wrought with Queen Mary,
suggesting that she was consenting to Wyats insurrection, that she was sent
prisoner to the Tower, and (as it is said) a Warrant intended to be sealed for
her execution, had not king Philip interceeded. After she came to the Crown she
was as incident to troubles as the Month April is to showers, Spain, France and
Scotland, combining against her, Pope Plus Quintus by his Bull deposes her, in
prosecution whereof the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland rise up in
Rebellion, being to have been assisted by the Duke D'alva out of the
Low Countries, but out of these troubles she was delivered by their Confussion.
After these Leonard Dakers, second San to William Lord Dakers of Gellesland,
endeavored to bring her into trouble, being entrusted by her with competent
forces, which he intending to have employed to her detriment, failed in his
hopes and Power; and brought both shame and ruin to himself. Next did Thomas
and Edward Stanley younger Sons to the Earl of Darbey, with several others,
plot against her; all which ended in their Ruin and her safety. These failing,
Captain Stukley promised to perform wonders against her, but his mountains
proved not so much as mole-bills, he being stain in Barberry, his design
failed. But to speak of personal attempts against her, one Somervile drew his
Sword in the Court to have slain her, Doctor Parry a Spaniolized Italian
intended to have Pistoled her as she walked in her privy Garden: Savage,
Windsor, Salisbury, Tilney, and others, conspired to kill her, the which they
waited several times to effect: one William Stafford, by the instigation of the
French Ambastador, undertook to kill her: Doctor Laper one of her sworn
Physicians, for a sum of money, engaged to Poison her: and to conclude all, one
Edward Squire, formerly belonging to her Stable, with a mortifferous
confection, Poisoned the Pomel of her Saddle, when she was riding out; from all
which notwithstanding, though she were maliciously Poisoned, she was
miraculously preserved, and died in peace; maugre all the malice of her enemies.

The Western Monarchs Wooden Horses,
Shall be destroyed by the Drakes Forces.
By the Western Monarchs Wooden Horses, is meant the King of Spains, great
Armado, in the year 1588, by them termed Invincible, though the success of it
answered not the name, being by Sr. Francis Drake and others, brave Sons of
Neptune, and Soldiers of Mars, met withal, fought with, and really vanquished,
most of them sook, and the rest destitute and scattered, being chased by our
Ships past the 57 degree of Northern Latitude, and there left to be pursued by
hunger and cold, a victory so remarkable, that time, nor age, will ever wear
the remembrance thereof away.

Troy novant's Triumphant spire,
Shall be consumed with Flames of Fire.
By Troy novant is meant London, which in ancient writings is called Troy
novant; and the Triumphant Spire, signifies Paulssteeple, which in the year
1561 the fourth of June, strangly fell on fire, burning for the space of five
full hours, in which time it melted all the Lead off the Church, only the Stone
Archer escaping the fury thereof; sundry causes were attributed by sundry
persons of this fire; some that it was casually blasted with Lightning; others
that it was mischievously done by Art Magic; and others which was most likely)
done by the negligence of a Plummer carelessly leaving his coals therein. The
Queen was much grieved for this mischance, but by her bounty, the Cities
liberality, and a Contribution from the Clergy, it was afterward repaired,
only the blunt Tower had not the top thereof sharpened into a spire as before.

More wonders yet! a Widowed Queen,
In England shall be headless seen.
The Widowed Queen signifies the Queen of Scots, the Mother of king James, who
was beheaded at Fotheringhay-Castle some say by the privity, others to the
great discontent of Queen Elizabeth: A Lany of a sharp wit, undaunted spirit,
comely person, Beautiful face, Majestic presence, a fluent Orator, and an
excellent Poet, as may appear by several things now extant; amongst others of
her Verses, this was one, which she wrote with a pointed Diamond, in a window,
during her Imprisonment in Fortheringhay-Castle.

From the top of all my trust,
Mishap has laid me in the Dust.
She was beheaded the(...) day of(...) Anno 1587, and was first buried in the
Quire of Peterborough, afterward by her Son King James, solemnly removed from
thence to Westminster, where in the South side of the Chapel of King Henry the
seventh, be exected a stately monument to her Memory.

The Harp shall give a better Sound. The Harp signifies Ireland, as being the
Arms of that Country, which Queen Elizabeth by reducing to a better obedience,
made it give a better Sound, that is, made it more civilized, and profitable to
the Exchequer then ever before.

An Earl without a Head be found. This was spoken of the Earl of Essex, one who
was the favorite of the Queen, and darling of the poeple; (two things which
seldom come together, and yet could not both of them protect him from the
Scaffold, but that thereon he left his Head: Soon after shall the English Rose,
Unto a Male her place Dispose.


By the English Rose is meant Queen Elizabeth, as we said before; by whose
Death, the Right and Title to the Crown, came to James the sirth, King of
Scotland, as lineally descended from Margaret the Eldest Daughter to King Henry
the seventh; the issue Male failing, by the death of Queen Elizabeth: and here
is to be remembered, the Policy of King Henry the seventh, who having two
Daughters, Married the oldest of them to the King of Scotland; and the Youngest
to the King of France, that if his issue Male should happened to fail (as it
afterward did) then Scotland might wait upon England as the greater Kingdom,
and not England upon France as the lesser: Besides there was an old Prophecy,
which intimated King James his coming to the English Crown; for when King
Edward the first baraced Scotland amongst other things he brought from thence
their Ropal Chair, (still preserved at the Abbey in Westminster) upon which
Chair these verses were writ.

If Fates go right, where ere this Chair is Pight,
The Regal Race of Scots shall rule that Place.
Which by the Coronation of King James there performed, made good the words of
the Prophecy.

CHAP. XIII.
The Prophesies of the Reign of King James, his uniting England and Scotland,
his Peaceable Reign, a learned time, the Powder Treason, the Marriage with the
Prince Elector, and Lady Elizabeth; the Death of Prince Henry.

THe Northern Lion over Tweed,
The Maiden Queen shall then succeed,
And join in one, two mighty States,
Ianus then shall shut his Gates.
Mars shall yield to Mercury,
All things tend to Prosperity.
Hells power by a fatal blow,
Shall seek the Land to overthrow.
Which by mistake shall be reverst,
And heads from shoulders be dispersed.
The British Olive next shall twine
In marriage with the German Vine.
The Ninth to Death his power shall yield,
Death Conquers all, he winns the Field.
Next follows the remarkable actions of King James's Reign, predicted in the
foregoing lines, which may be thus explained.

The Northern Lion over Tweed,
The Maiden Queen shall then succeed,
And join in one, two mighty States.
By the Northern Lion, is meant King James; and by the Maiden Queen, Queen
Elizabeth, whom King James, being King of Scotland succeeded in the English
Crown, joined thereby the two Nations of England and Scotland, which had been
often attempted before, not only by Conquest, but by Marriage; once by
Conquest, by King Edward the first, who subdued their Armies, took their strong
places, and made their Nobles yield him obeisance; yet what they thus lost by
him, they recovered of his Son King Edward the second; the other of Marriage,
was by King Henry the Eighth, who endeavored to have matched his Son, Prince
Edward, with the Heiress of Scotland, and had proceeded very far therein, when
Death cut him off; and though afterward attempted by the Duke of Somerset,
Lord Protector, and the Scots beaten at Musselboroughfield, yet all would not
prevail; God having decreed their union to be afterward, in a more peaceable
manner.

Janus then shall shut his Gates. Janus was one of the gods belonging to the
ancient Romans; whose Temple was never shut, but in the days of Peace, which
happened not above twice, in the space of two thousand years: King James his
Reign being a very peaceable time, when Swords rusted in their Sheaths for want
of using them; Mother Shipton in her Prophesse alludes thereto.

Mars shall yield to Mercury,
All things tend to prosperity.
War shall give place to Peace, Fighting to pleading, the Sword to the Gown,
the Pike to the Pen, Barbarism to Learning, etc. this Peace shall cause Plenty,
Plenty work prosperity, etc.

Hells power by a fatal Blow,
Shall seek the Land to overthrow.
Which by mistake shall be reverst,
And heads from Shoulders be dispersed.
These Lines have reference to the horrid Powder Plat, which was to have been
acted by some desperate Papists, to have blown up the Parliament House with
Gunpowder, and therein our Religion, Laws, King, Prince, Peers, Bishops,
Judges, Knights and Burgesses, all designed to Destruction: The chief actors
herein were, Robert Catesby, Thomas Perey, Sir Everard Digby, Francis Thresham,
Robert Winster, Thomas Winter, John Wright, Chris. Wright, Ambrose Bookwood,
Robert Key, John Grant, Guido Faux, and Bates, Catesbies man, Gentlemen most,
of Ancient Families, some of plentiful Fortunes, but all of resolute Spirits:
These being suggested by the Devil, and seconded by his Agents, the Jesuits, to
bring their purpose about, hired a Vault under the Parliament House, wherein
they stowed Thirty six Barrels of Powder, with several Iron Bars, to make the
force of the fire more effectual, all which they covered with Billets, thinking
thereby to have covered their Design, from being Discovered: On the Fifth of
November, the day of the Parliaments first sitting, was the time appointed, to
put their Design in execution; but Providence had ordered it otherwise, that
those who intended mischief, should taste the effects of it; on the Evening
before, came to the Lord Monteagle, a strange Letter, from a strange hand, by a
strange Messenger; without Date to it, name at it, and (to outward appearance)
sense in it? A Letter which when it was opened, was even still Sealed, such the
affected obscurity therein: The Letter contained these words,

My Lord,
OUt of the Love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation; therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise
some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament: For God and Man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly of
this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the Event in safety: for though there be no appearance of any stir, yet
I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall
not see who hurts them: This counsel is not to be Contemned, because it may do
you good, and can do you no harm; for the danger is past so soon as you have
burnt the Letter; and I hope God will give you the grace to make good use of
it: to whose holy Protection I commend you.


This Letter being communicated to the King, he expounds the mystical Blow, to
be meant by Gunpowder, and thereupon commanded the Rooms under the Parliament
House to be searched, where the Mystery of Iniquity was quickly discovered, some
of the Traitors taken in London, others in the Country, the hands of Justice
overtaking them, they became examples of Justice, and tasted of that Cup
(though not with that Cruelty) which they intended others should have drank of.

The British Olive next shall twine,
In Marriage with the German Vine.
By the British Olive, is meant the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to king James; and
by the German Vine, the most Illustrious Prince Frederick, Count Palatine of
the Rhine; this Lady Elizabeth was enriched with all the endowments both of
Body and mind, which make to the completing of a Princess; most dearly beloved
of the English, as one that deserved well of all; hear a wit of that age thus
complaining.

Most sweet Elixabeth! that happy Name,
If we lost nothing else by losing thee,
So dear to England is, we are too blame:
If without tears and sighs we parted be.
They were married with great solemnity, at Westminster, February 14, Anno 1612.

The Ninth to Death his Power shall yield.
Death Conquers all, he wins the Field.
This is meant of Prince Henry, who is called the Ninth, in regard that if be
had lived till King James dyed, he would have been the Ninth King of that name,
since the Conquest: He was a Prince of most excellent parts, not wanting any
thing wherewith Nature and Art could enrich him; of a very pious disposition,
never heard by any alive to swear an Dath, for which Archbishop Abbot
commended him in his Funeral Sermon, the Prince being wont to say, That he knew
no Game or value to be won or lost, that could be worth an Oath. He died of
an extraordinary burning Fever, being generally lamented of the whole Land.

CHAP. XIV.
The Prophesies of the Reign of King Charles the First, his Marriage with
France, the Murder of the Duke of Buckingham, the Scottish Troubles, of the
Long Parliament, and Bloody War ensuing after the execrable Murder of the King.

MOther Shipton having proceeded thus far in her Prophesies, broke off abruptly
with a deep sigh, the tears trickling down her Cheeks, accompanied with the
wringing of her hands, as if some extraordinary mischance had befallen her. The
Abbot wondered greatly what should be the cause of this sudden alteration,
having observed all along before a settled composedness in her countenance, and
now to break out into such exclamations: He therefore thus said unto her,
Mother Shipton, it is more than some ordinary matter which has made you to
break out into this sudden passion, and if it may not be troublesome unto you,
I shall desire, that as hitherto you have not been scrupulous in revealing
those secrets unto me, which have wrought in me both wonder and amarement, so
that now you will not so abruptly break off, as to leave me in suspense of the
cause of your sorrow; Ah Mr. Abbot (said she) who can with dry eyes repeat what
must next ensue, or but think upon it without a heart full of Agony, to see
virtue trampled on, and vice exalted; Beggars on Horseback, and Princes on
Foot; the Innocent condemned, and the Blood-thirsty go free. But since my
promise binds me to fulfill your request, I shall proceed where I left.

The Crown then fits the White Kings Head,
Who with the Lillies soon shall wed;
Then shall a Peasants bloody knife,
Deprive a great Man of his Life.
Forth from the North shall mischief blow,
And English Hob shall add thereto.
Then shall the Council great Assemble,
Who shall make great and small to tremble.
Mars shall rage as he were wood,
And Earth shall drunken be with blood.
The white King then (O grief to see)
By Wicked Hands shall Murdered be.
These lines are so plain, relating to the Actions of the late times, as shall
need no Oedipus to explain them; however, as we have all a long before made
several Comments upon her Text we shall here likewise proceed in the same
Method as we did before.

The Crown then fits the white Kings Head. By the White King, is meant King
Charles the first, so called not only in respect of the purity and uprightness
of his life, signified by White; but also that at the time of his Coronation he
was clothed in White, which some venomous tongues have since urged against him,
that he was not Crowned as other Kings, as if Princes might not have the same
liverty as meaner persons, to assume what colored Bard they list to wear, to
themselves.

Who with the Lillies soon shall wed. Somewhat before King James his Death a
marriage was concluded on betwixt Prince Charles, and the Lady Henrietta Maria,
Daughter to that Martial Prince Henry the fourth, King of France; but before
the Consummation thereof, King James dyed, not long after his Funerals were
over, she was brought into England, and solemnly married to King Charles, who
is hereupon said to wed the Lillies, the Lillies being the Arms of France.

Then shall a Peasants bloody Knife,
Deprive a great man of his Life.
This is spoken of the Duke of Buckingham, the greated man in favor of those
times, and thereupon (as it is most commonly seen) most bated of the People;
who laid the blame of all miscariages in the State upon him; right or wrong he
was sure to undergo their censure: Being made General for the Relief of Rochel)
then besteged by the French Forces (before he Embarked at Portsmouth, he was
most villanously Stabbed by one Felton a discontented Officer in his army; who
was so far from flying for the same, that though be might have passed away
undiscovered, he holdly avowed himself to be the man that did it; alleging
that he had therein done his Country good service; but before his Death, was
better Principled, and made sensible of the beinousnes of the sin of Murder,
recanting his former erroneous Principles, and dying very Penitently, being
banged in Chains at Portsmouth, Anno 1627.

Forth from the North shall mischief blow,
And English Hob shall add thereto.
This Prophecy alludes to that ancient Proverb, From the cold North all ill
comes forth; and may be understood of our troubles commencing in 1639, taking
their original rise from Scotland, and fomented by several Factions Spirits in
England, the Dagon of Presbytery beginning then to appear in its own colors,
the Kirk of Scotland having so high an opinion of its own purity, that it
participated more of Moses his Platform in the Mount, than other Protestant
Churches, being a Reformed Reformation; so that the practice thereof might be
divertory to othere, and she fit to give, not take, write, not receive Copies
from any neighboring Church; desiring that all others were like unto them,
save only in their afflictions. Hereupon they stood so high upon their
pantoffles, that they refused the Common Prayer, disclaimed their Bishops,
raised Lumults, and under the pretense of defending the Scottish Kirk, raised a
War against the English State, the benom of which Poison so infected the veins
of the English, who followed this Scottish President, that it brake forth into
a most bitter War, and ended not, but with the deaths of many thousands of
people.

Then shall the Council great assemble,
Who shall make great and small to tremble.
By the great Council is meant the long-lasting Parliament, so known to all
posterity, for the remarkable transactions therein: It began November the 3d
1640, and may more properly be said to be the Parliament that wrought wonders,
then that in the time of King Henry the Third, which had the same appellation.
By them sell the wise Stafford, and Reverend Laud, by them was Episcopary voted
down, and Presbytery voted up; by them was the common prayer denied, and the
Directory exalted? they were the first that brought that strange Kiddle into
the World, that a man might fight for, and against his King; by them was the
Dath Ex Officio condemned and the covenant (fat worse) applauded; in sum, by
them was the Church and State turned topsey turvey; but this cannot be reported
of all amongst them, many of them hated their doings, dissented from them, and
suffered by them.

Mars shall rage as he were wood,
And Earth shall drunken be with blood.
To repeat all the Skirmishes, Fights, and Battles that have happened betwixt
the Kings and Parliaments Forces) here intended by this Prophecy (would of its
self, require a Volume, in some of which, viz. that at Marston-more eight
thousand men were killed at a time, so that the Earth might well be said to be
Drunken with their Blood; and which is the more pity, was shed by English men
of one Country, Citizens against Citizens, Neighbors against Neighbors, nay,
one Kinsman against another, and prosecuted with the greatest bigor that might
be, according to that of the Poet.

The highest fury reigns in Civil war,
And Country men in fight most cruel are.
As was verified all a long during our unnatural Civil War, none holding out
with more obstinacy, fighting more eagerly, nor in the execution more bloody
than they!

The White King then (O grief to see)
By wicked hands shall Murdered be.
Spoken concerning the Execrable Murder of that Pious Prince King Charles the
First, the most Renowned for Piety, Prudence and Patience; of all his
contemporary Princes throughout the whole World; of whom when all is said that
can be spoken, yet does all come far short of his deserved praises: I shall
therefore sum up all with this Epitaph made on him by a learned Pen.

He that can spell a Sigh, and read a Tear,
Pronounce amazement, and accent wild Fear:
Having all grief by Heart; He, only he,
Is fit to Write and Read thy Elegy.
Unvalued Charles! thou art so hard a Text,
Writ in one Age, not understood in the Next.
CHP. XV.
The Reign of King Charles the second; the Usurpation of Cromwell; the strange
Confusions of a Democrital Government; the Restoration of the King; the great
Sickness; the Burning of the City of London.

THe White King dead, the Wolf shall then,
with blood possess the Lions den.
But Death shall hurry him away,
Confusion shall a while bear sway:
But Fate to England shall restore,
A King to Reign as heretofore.
Mercy, and Justice too, likewise,
Hein his time shall exercise.
Great Death in London shall be though,
And Men on tops of Houses go.
These Prophesies being all fulfilled in the memory of man, and so well known
unto the World, we shall be the briefer in the explanation of them.

The White King dead, the Wolf shall then,
With blood possess the Lions den.
By the White King (as we said before) is meant King Charles the First; and by
the Wolf, Oliver Cromwell, so termed by reason of his bloody disposition; that
beast being judged most greedy and ravenous of all others; and therefore fitly
resembled to Cromwell, whose ambition was such, that he left no means
unattempted, until he had got into the Lions den, that is to say, until he had
attained the sole Government; which being done, he then plucked the Stairs down
by which he had mounted; turning the Rump out of doors, making them his
Servants, who had formerly been his Masters; exercising his cruelty upon
Cavailiers, which he deemed double Policy, as being thereby rid of his Enemies,
and enriching his Coffers with their Wealth, though it were in effect but
Murder and Robbery, and Proclaimed him to be a Blood-thirsty-Lyrant.

But Death shall hurry him away. Very remarkable was the day in which the
Protector dyed, being the Third of September Anno 1658, wherein the wind was so
violent, that it overthrew many Houses, tore up many Trees by the Roots,
tumbled down Chimneys, and unreav'd Barns and Stables; but as it is a very ill
wind that blows none good, so with all the burt this wind did, it made some
recompense, in blowing this bloody Tyrant away, which made the people so little
sensible of their losses, that they thought their private harms not to stand in
competition with this general good.

Confusion shall a while bear sway. Spoken in respect of the Confusion of
Governments we then had: First, a Rump Parliament, then a Protector, next a
Rump Parliament again, then a Fools Bauble, called a Committee of safety,
afterward a Rump Parliament again; now thus, then that, a great many
Governments, and none good.

But Fate to England shall restore,
A King to Reign as heretofore.
This was fulfilled in the happy Restoration of King Charles the Second, which
put a period to all those Oligarchical Confusions, and Restored the Land to its
Ancient pristine Government; which till then, groaned under the pressurers of a
Company of Mechanical (and therein the worst sort of) Lyrants.

Mercy and Justice too likewise,
He in his time shall exercise.
Of this many are the examples which might be produced; how many, though
notorious Delinquents, received to Mercy? Life given to those, who would have
taken his life away; few only suffering, but such whose offenses were so
Capital, as could not come well within the Verge of a Pardon, or stood upon
Justification of their former execrable Actions: Such rotten members deserving
to be cut off from the body of the Commonwealth, who otherwise would have been
very Obnoxious and prejudicial to those that were found.

Great Death in London shall be though. Verified by the great Plague in London
1665 (which for number) was the greatest that has been known in these latter
Centuries of years, and which (if not any thing else) might convince our
Sectaries, how necessary that prayer in the Letany is for to be used, From
Plague, Pestilence and Famine, good Lord deliver us.



And Men on tops of Houses go. This was suddenly fulfilled in that great
Conflagration of Fire, which happened in London, Sept. 2. 3. and 4. Anno 1666.
by which so many Houses were destroyed, that men afterward in the Kuins went
on the tops of those Houses, whose lofty Structures not long before seemed to
brave the Sky, and which would dazzle weak eyes to look up and behold the tops
of them.

The Fiery year as soon as over,
Peace shall then be as before.
A Phoenix City in strange wise,
Shall out of fatal Ashes rise.
These predictions were exactly accomplished by the Peace concluded with the
Dutch soon after 1666, called here properly the Fiery year, and the wonderful
Rebuilding of the City of London to greater Magnificence than ever in so short
a space.

When Mars again unsheaths his Sword,
Your Treacherous Friends small Aid afford:
Great noise there shall be heard, great shouts and cries,
And Seas shall thunder louder than the Skies.
This alludes to the second Dutch War, wherein the French pretended to be
Friends to the English, but afforded them small Aid, but in truth basely
deserted them in the Engagements at Sea, where the Canons were louder than
Thunder.

A Boat a Boat, look twart the Thames,
The Southern Pile is all on Flames.
This can be understood of nothing but the great Fire in Southwark, wherein the
best part of the Borough, which She calls the Southern Pile, was Consumed.

The World's in Arms, and ill at ease,
Another World looks on in Peace.
The happy Isle shall freely Trade,
While Blood and horror mighty Realms invade.
This was happily as to England verified in the year 1677. when she only stood
looking on in Peace, and enjoyed freedom of Trade, whilst all the rest of
Europe were fiercely engaged in War.

Here follow other Prophestes she uttered, which seem to foretell the overthrow
of the French, or some great disaster to that Nation, with several other
Revolutions; but because they concern future times, we shall leave the
Interpretation to Time and the Intelliligent Reader.

I.
The Eagle Droops, and Moults his Wings,
And fewds shall grow between Northern Kings.
Holland is threatened, Spain does pine,
And Blood shall swell the Rapid Rhyne.
II.
When once the Orange and the Rose
Unite, beware old Englands Foes.
III.
It Is done, no more shall Monsteurs pride
Triumphant over Nations Ride.
The Meteor falls, and scarce shall have
A mourning Tear, or Christian Grave.
IIII.
The Lillies now bewail their loss,
And serve but to Adorn the Cross.
V.
The work's begun, but would you see
The Harvest Ripe, join eight to three.
The Northern Star at last appears,
And an All-conquering Banner rears.
VI.
Howl, howl, you miscreants, all your deeds
Shall now receive their worthy Meeds;
But long e're this poor Shipton Sleeps
In her safe Grave, and Europe weeps.
This Mother Shipton, the Authoress of these and the foregoing Prophesies,
lived till she was of an extraordinary Age, and though she was generally
believed to be a Witch, yet all persons whatsoever that either read or heard
her Prophestes, have esteemed them little less than Oraculous, and her Memory
to this day is much Honored by those of her own Country.

FINIS.

