THE MEANING OF THE REVELATION, OR A PARAPHRASE With Questions on the
Revelation of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist JOHN the DIVINE; In which the
Synchronisms of Mr. Joseph Mede, and the Expositions of other Interpreters are
called in Question; and a new Exposition given of the Prophecies of the
Revelation, never heard of before, nor extant in any Author whatsoever, from
the sixth Chapter to the eighteenth, with variety of Reasons for the
Exposition. By Richard Hayter of Salisbury.

Grotius de Antichristo. page 59. Multum autem interpretes and hic and in aliis
Prophetiis explicandis dissident, ita ut consensu hic non urgeamur ut in
dogmatibus, Et in Prophetiis explicandis semper patuit and patere dibet omnibus
Dei honorem amantibus campus liber. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Williams
in Cross-Keys Court in Little-Britain. 1675.

PTHODOXOTATO, PIISSIMO Et DOCTISSIMO Ecclesiae Anglicanae Clero, PARAPHRASIN
Suam cum Quaestiunculis IN APOCALYPSIN Sancti Apostoli and Evangelistae
JOHANNIS Theologi Dat, dicat, Consecrat Richardus Hayter Salisburiensis.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THis exposition of the Prophecies of the Revelation is my own invention, thou
shall not meet with it in any other Writer whatsoever. All that I intended at
the the first was to read over those few Books which I had in my study upon the
Revelation, which I did for my own satisfaction, contentation, and delight, to
see what Men did say on that Subject. And I did read of some which held Babylon
to be the World, the City of the Devil, or the City of wicked Men, but all
others held it to be Rome, and some would have it to be Heathen Rome, and
others to be Papal. Some have found the Revenues of the Popedom, and others
the wealth of the King of Spain in the Revelation, and if that were once taken
away, the fall of Babylon would not be long after, which perhaps might give
encouragement to Oliver Cromwell to send a Navy to Hispaniola to fetch it away.
Some have found Gustavus Adolphus the victorious King of Sweden, and the house
of Austria there; and to come nearer home, some have found our renowned Queen
Elizabeth, King James of blessed memory, yea, and men of meaner rank, Mr.
Burton, Mr. Prinne, and Dr. Bastwicke there, and which I count as senseless as
any of the rest, Laodicea, England as they call it, and Philadelphia, Scotland
there: And if men will give their minds to mystical interpretations, and
believe the common saying, quot verba, tot mysteria, that there be as many
mysteries as words in the Revelation, what is it that one may not find there?
Some forsake our Church Assemblies, and judge them to be Antichristian, and
fetch a warrant for their separation out of the Revelation, Come out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Yea, a great inlet to our late Civil Wars, has been the
misinterpretation of the Revelation, and some men did believe that that War was
Prophesied of, Rev. 17. 16. When I found that men were of this mind, my spirit
was moved within me, not only to read what men did Write, but to study the
Prophecies of the Revelation, as the men of Berea did the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, to see whether those things which they did write upon this subject
were so, or no. And upon serious examination of the point, I call in question
all the mystical interpretations of the Revelation, excepting those few which
John himself has delivered for such, or are so obvious that he that runs may
read them, as when it is said, When the Lamb ha^ opened the first Seal, every
Child can tell that by the Lamb is meant Jesus Christ, and such as these are
mystically to be understood, but all others that be not of this nature, are
called in question by me. And I put it out of question that our Church
Assemblies be not Antichristian, nor our Bishops, Babylonians. A man may
frequent our Church Assemblies, or be a Minister of the Church of England, and
not partake of Babylons sins, and receive not of her Plagues: Yea, I make a
question what the City of Babylon is, and whatever mystical interpretations
have been made of that and other Prophecies, besides those which the Holy Ghost
has made himself, or are so apparent, that every one at first sight may know
them to be such, are called in question by me, whether they be the true meaning
of the Prophecies; and I give a new interpretation of the Prophecies of the
Revelation, which former Writers knew not of, nor ever came into their minds.
And this I do, first, by way of Paraphrase, wherein I deliver the true sense
and meaning of the Prophecies, without giving reasons for my exposition; and
next I add diverse questions, wherein I first dispute against the false opinions
and conceits of other men, and demonstrate by diverse arguments and reasons,
that the Prophecies have not such a meaning, were not fulfilled in such a way,
such a manner, at such a time, and in such a place as they say they were; and
after this is done, in some question or other I give the reasons for my own
exposition. In a word, the main points wherein I differ and dissent from other
men, may be reduced to four Heads.

1. Whereas other men expound the Prophecies of the Revelation mystically,
according to the common saying, quot verba, tot mysteria, as many mysteries as
words, making them symbols, types, and figures of other things; I for the most
part, and so far as lawfully I may, expound the words literally, without making
them symbols, types, or figures of any other things than what their usual
signification will afford.

2. Whereas others will have the accomplishment of the Prophecies to be in
England, Scotland, and other parts of Europe, I make the Scene in which the
Prophecies shall be acted and fulfilled to be Judea, and other parts of Asia.

3. Whereas other men will not have the Prophecies commence in order as they
were revealed to John, I make them all come to pass in order as they were
revealed to him, and I make the order give light to the exposition, and not the
exposition to the order; and I say the order teaches how the Prophecies are to
be explained and interpreted, and not the exposition in what order they shall
come to pass.

4. Whereas others are of the mind that the Prophecies which I write upon, are
for the most part fulfilled already; I am of opinion that all, and every one of
them are yet to be expected.

If I discover the truth unto thee, as I believe I do in most things, if not in
all; give God the glory, and not me; but if thou find that I am in an error,
as none that have written upon this Subject before me are without; convince me
of my error by sound reasons, for bare votes will not do it, and I will be of
thy mind. Read what is written at thy leisure, and consider of it; but read it
in order and without prejudice, for that will cloud thine Eyes and thou will
not see the truth; if thou read the Book with prejudice, weigh one thing with
another, as well the series and order of the Prophecies, as the words and
exposition of them, and the Lord who is the Author of the Prophecy and revealed
it to John, reveal the truth unto thee, Farewell.

Richard Hayter.

A Paraphrase with Questions on the Revelation of the holy Apostle and
Evangelist John the Divine, from the sixth Chapter to the eighteenth.
CHAP. VI.
The Prophecy of the first Seal.
1. AND when Jesus Christ had opened the first Seal, I heard the first living
Creature say unto me, Come and see what shall come to pass hereafter, not
shortly as the things thou have seen already shall, but a great while hence,
and that not in Europe, but in Asia.

2. And I saw that there should come a man riding on a white Horse, which is a
sign of conquest, and that he should be a King, and should have first a Bow,
and afterward a Crown, and should go forth Conquering, and to Conquer; but
some things should be left unconquered by him.

The Prophecy of the second Seal.
3. And when he had opened the second Seal, I heard the second living Creature
say unto me, Come and see what shall come to pass hereafter, not shortly as the
things in the Epistles to the seven Churches shall, but a great while hence,
and that not in Europe, but in Asia.

4. And I saw that there should come another man after the Prophecy of the
first Seal is ended, riding on a red Horse, which is a sign of blood, and that
he should take peace from off the earth, or the place where he lived, and
should cause that men should kill one another by intestine Wars, and that he
should have a great Sword to commit a great and mighty slaughter, and slay many
men therewith.

The Prophecy of the third Seal.
5. And when he had opened the third Seal, I heard the third living Creature
say unto me, Come and see what shall come to pass hereafter not long before the
day of Judgment does begin, and that not in Europe or the Isles afar off, but
in Asia.

6. Then I looked and saw that there should come a third man after the Prophecy
of the second Seal is ended, riding on a Black Horse, with a pair of balances
in his hand, which are a sign of Civil Justice. And I heard a voice among the
four living Creatures say, Prove. 16. 11.
that in the time of this rider men should not live by rapine as in the time of
War, but should pay for what they took; if any one would have a measure of
Wheat, 2 King. 7. 1.
he should pay a penny for it, and if any one would have a measure of Barley,
he should pay a penny for it, and if any man would have any Oil, or Wine, he
should pay good money for it, and wrong no man therein.

The Prophecy of the fourth Seal.
7. And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I heard the forth living Creature
say unto me, Come and see what shall come to pass hereafter, not in Europe, but
in Asia, a little before the day of judgment shall begin.

8. And I saw that there should come a fourth man after the Prophecy of the
third Seal is ended, riding on a pale Horse, which is a sign of Death, and that
should be this riders name, because so many people should be killed and
destroyed by him, that death it self should go along with him where ever he
went, and the compass they should fetch should be the fourth part of Asia, to
slay men with Sword, and with Famine, and with Pestilence, Ezekiel. 14. 21.
and with the Wild ravenous beasts that should be therein.

The Prophecy of the fifth Seal.
9. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw the Souls of them which had
been slain for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ a long
time before this Prophecy should begin.

10. That they should now cry to God for vengeance of their blood, and it
should be a loud and earnest cry, which they should make, as if they did
expostulate with God and say, How long Lord holy and true, do thou not judge
and avenge our blood on the bloody inhabiters of the earth? why do thou delay
the time so long?

11. And hereupon I saw that some addition should be made unto their present
happiness; and as for the revenging of their blood, it was said unto them, that
it should be deferred a little longer, until their fellow Servants, and their
Brethren which should profess the same Faith which they did, should be slain as
they were, and this is to be done in the time of this Seal, before the sixth
Prophecy shall begin, and when this slaughter of their fellow Servants, and
their Brethren should be over, then God will revenge their blood all together.

The Prophecy of the sixth Seal.
12. And when he had opened the sixth Seal, I saw that there should be a great
shaking and concussion in the Heavens, Mat. 24. 29.
and that the Sun it self should become as black as Sackcloth made of Goats
hair, Mark. 13. 24, 25.
and the Moon as red as blood. Luke 21. 25, 26.


13. And diverse Meteors should fall from Heaven to the earth in clusters, like
as unripe Figs of a latter spring fall off from the Tree in heaps, when the
Tree is shaken of a mighty wind.

14. And black gloomy clouds should cover the face of all the Sky, and the
Heaven should depart from men's eyes and sight, like a scroll of Parchment when
it is folded up and rolled together, and a Star should not be seen in all the
Sky, no more than a letter is discernable in a roll of Parchment when it is
folded up and rolled together: and by the many earthquakes which should happen,
every mountain in the earth should be removed out of his place, and every
Island in the Sea.

15. And men of all sorts should be astonished at the sight of these things,
the Kings and Great men of the earth, the Soldiers and their chief Commanders,
the rich men and the poor men, the bondmen, and the free men should be
astonished all together as well the one as the other, and should seek a place
to hide themselves, some in Dens and Caves that be below the earth, and some in
Rocks that be upon the Hills and Mountains.

16. And such a fear should come upon them all that they would cry unto the
Mountains to fall upon them, and to the Rocks to cover them from the presence
of that angry God which sits upon the throne, and from the face of Jesus Christ
represented by the Holy Lamb.

17. For they shall now perceive and know that the great day of his revenging
wrath is come, and who is able to stand before it?

Disputation I.
1. Quest. Whether John received and wrote the Revelation, in the Reign of
Claudius before the destruction of Jerusalem, or in the Reign of Domitian,
which was afterward?

Answer.
1. It is the common and Unanimous voice of antiquity that John received, and
wrote his Revelation in the Reign of Domitian, after the destruction of
Jerusalem, and not in the Reign of Claudius, which was many years before it.
Irenaeus l. 5. c. 25. speaking of the name of Antichrist says, Si oporteret
manifest praesenti tempore praeconari nomen ejus, per ipsum utique editum
fuisset qui and Apocalypsin viderat, neque enim ante multum temporis visum est,
sed pene sub nostro seculo ad finem Domitiani imperii. If the name of
Antichrist ought to be proclaimed openly now* it would have been proclaimed by
him who saw the Revelation, for it was seen not any long time ago, but almost
in our age at the end of Domitians Reign. Eusebius says the same word for
word, l. 3. c. 16. Hieronymus catalog. script. Ecclesiast. tit. Joannes, has
these words, Joannes quarto decimo igitur anno secundam post Neronem
persecutionem movente Domitiano in Patmon insulam relegatus scripsit
Apocalypsin. John therefore after he was banished into the Isle Patmos by
Domitian, who raised the second persecution after Nero, writ the Revelation in
the fourteenth year of his Reign. The like he says adversus Jovinian. l. 1.
page 35. in these words, Vidit in Pa^mo insula in qua fuerat a Domitiano
principe ob domini Martyrium relegatus, Apocalypsin infinita futurorum mysteria
continentem. He saw in the Isle Patmos in which he had been banished by
Domitian the Emperor for the testimony of the Lord, the Revelation containing
infinite mysteries, concerning things to come. And there is not any one says
otherwise, excepting only Epiphanius, who is not to be heard against the
testimonies of so many.

2. Not only ancient Writers, but our modern too Unanimously consent, that this
Book was written in Domitians Reign after the destruction of Jerusalem by
Titus, and there be not any of another mind, except Grotius and his followers.

3. This Book was written after John was banished into Patmos, Rev. 1. 9. Now
we read in History, that John was banished thither by Domitian, in the tenth
year of his Reign, and in the fourteenth year he writ the Revelation. See
besides Jerome before alleged, Eusebius, l. 3. 16. 18. Dorotheus of the Lives
and Ends of the Prophets and Apostles, page 532. Baronius in the ninth and
fourteenth years of Domitian.

4. The Church was under persecution when John was banished into Patmos, and
not only he but all the Churches of Asia, to whom he writes, felt the stroke of
that persecution* Rev. 1. 9. but there was no persecution made against the
Church by Claudius, therefore this fell not out in his time, but rather in
Domitians Reign.

5. There was no imperial edict, for persecuting Christians in the Reign of
Claudius, and if he had banished John into Patmos for Religions sake, he would
have banished Paul, and the rest of the Apostles too, and not have suffered him
to preach so openly as he did, but we find that Paul did openly preach the word
at Corinth at the same time that Claudius commanded all Jews to depart from
Rome, Act. 18. 2.

6. If John had been banished into Patmos, in the ninth year of Claudius, he
might have returned out of exile after his decease, either in the Reign of
Nero, as Aquila, and Priscilla did who were at Rome when Paul wrote his Epistle
to the Romans, Romans 16. 3, 4. or else in the Reign of Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
or Vespasian: but we find in History, that in the time of Nerva, the successor
of Domitian, the Roman Senate decreed that the honors exhibited to Domitian,
should cease, and such as were injuriously exiled by him, should return unto
their native soil, and that John returned then, Eusebius, l. 3. c. 18. which
plainly shows that John was banished into Patmos, not by Claudius, but Domitian.

7. The Deeds and Doctrine of the Nicolaitans were crept into the Churches
before this Book was written by John, and he commends the Church of Ephesus for
hating the deeds of the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 6. and he blames the Church of
Pergamus, for that they had them amongst them which held the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 15. but when did these Nicolaitans first begin, and when
did their Doctrine first creep into the Churches? Not in the Reign of Claudius;
for then other Books of Scripture would have spoken of them; especially those
which were written at that time: but we find nothing of these Nicolaitans in
any Book of Scripture, save only in the Revelation, which shows they were not
known in the Reign of Claudius but came up afterward, and therefore Baronius
and others place them in the Reign of Nero. Baronius Anno Neronis 12.

8. This Book was written after Antipas was slain, Rev. 2. 13. and it is written
and sent to the Angel his successor who ever he were: But now History tells
us, and our Adversaries confess that Antipas was slain not in the days of
Claudius, but in the days of Domitian the Roman Emperor. See Doctor Hammond
Page 927. Menolog. April. 11. Baronii Martyrolog. page 249. Baronii Annal. Anno
Domitiani 10. And to this Argument they have not any thing to say, but that
Rev. 2. 13. the Preter tense is put for the Future tense, Antipas was slain for
Antipas will be slain, to which I answer, 1. That the Preter tense is not
usually put for the Future tense, except it be in Prophecies; but that part of
the Epistle to the Church of Pergamus is not a Prophecy, but a History of what
was done before the Revelation was written. 2. The proper names of men be not
usually joined with Verbs of the Preter tense, before the thing spoken of be
done, but in the Future rather, as when it is said of Josiah, that he shall burn
dead men's Bones upon the Altar, 1 King. 13. 2. it is spoken in the Future tense
and not in the Preter tense. So when it is said of Cyrus, He is my shepherd and
shall perform all my pleasure, Esa. 44. 28. it is spoken in the Future tense,
and not in the Preter tense. 3. The Epistle to the Church of Pergamus is
directed and sent to the Angel, Antipas his successor: Therefore it was
written after Antipas was dead. 4. Men are not commended in Letters in the
Preter tense for what they will do hereafter, but for what they have done
already; but the Angel of the Church of Pergamus is commended for that he had
not denied the Faith of Christ even in those days wherein Antipas was slain;
therefore this commendatory letter was written after Antipas was dead: and
because he was slain in the days of Domitian, and not in the days of
Claudius, therefore we conclude that this Book was written in the Reign of
Domitian, and not in the Reign of Claudius.

9. This Book was written after the Seven Churches of Asia were converted to
the Christian Faith: But we cannot find that these Seven Churches were
converted to the Faith in the days of Claudius, but it is more likely that
Ephesus was converted in the days of Nero, and that because, as Doctor Hammond
observes page 648. the first time that Paul disputed at Ephesus was about Ann.
Chapter 51. and it was three years after that before Ephesus was converted, and
that was Anno Chapter 54. which was the First year of Nero's Reign. See Bishop
Vshers Annal. page 668. 670. 671. from whom we may learn that Ephesus was not
converted until the Reign of Nero.

10. Suppose it were true that these Churches were converted in the days of
Claudius; yet they could not be converted any long time before his Death, and
that because he Reigned but thirteen years and nine months in all, and either
all or the greatest part of that time was spent in converting other Churches,
as you may read Act. 15, 16, 17, and 18. Chapters; so that they could not be
converted any long time before his death, yea in his time it was that Paul and
Timothy were forbidden to Preach in Asia, Act. 16. 6. But now the Gospel had
been Preached unto them a long time before this Book was written, and they were
not new converts, but old ones, and of long standing in the Christian Faith,
when this Book was written to them, as these Texts of Scripture sufficiently
declare, Rev. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. 9. 13 19. 21.

11. If this Book had been written in the ninth year of Claudius, Paul would
not have gone to Ephesus to Preach the Gospel there at the latter end of his
Reign, for Paul did not Preach the Gospel where it had been Preached before by
others, as he himself confesses, Romans 15. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 10. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Now we find that Paul went to Preach the Gospel at Ephesus before it was
converted, Act. 18. 19. and this was at the latter end of Claudius's Reign, for
his going thither was, as Dr. Hammond in his Preface before the Epistle to the
Ephesians says, about the one and fiftieth year of Christ, and that was at the
latter end of Claudius's Reign, and therefore this Book was not written then,
but at some time or other afterward.

12. Why was this Book revealed unto John, and not rather unto Paul, for Paul
was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and John of the circumcision, Gal. 2. 9. and
Paul had the honor to convert the Gentiles to the Christian Faith, not John,
as you may read in the Acts of the Apostles, c. 18. 19. and 20. and therefore
it is likely that if this Prophecy had been revealed in the days of Paul, that
it should have been revealed unto him, and that Paul should have been the
penman of it, and not John, which we know is otherwise; and therefore the true
cause, why this Prophecy was revealed unto John, and not to Paul, was because
Paul was dead, and the other Apostles were dead when this Prophecy was
revealed, and only John was then alive, whom it could be revealed unto.

13. This Book was one of the last Books of Scripture that was written, if not
the last of all, as the words Rev. 22. 18. do imply: but if this Book were
written in the ninth year of Claudius, the Epistle to the Ephesians, and all
other of Paul's Epistles had been written after this, yea the Gospel of St.
Luke, the Acts of the Apostles, and all other Books of the new Testament,
except the Gospel by St. Matthew, had been written after this, and this Book
should not have been one of the last, much less the last of all, but one of the
first Books of the new Testament that was written.

Ob. What Irenaeus affirms concerning John 's Vision at the end of Domitian, is
not of all but particularly of that Vision of the number of the Beast, c. 13.
18. Thus will Eusebius 's words be understood, (...), etc. If the name of
Antichrist ought to be Proclaimed openly now, it would have been declared by
him that saw the Revelation, for it was not seen any long time ago. Where it is
clear that (...) (was seen) may belong to (...) (the name of the Beast) as
before (...) (declared) did. And that it not only may, but must be so
understood, appears by the Latin of Irenaeus (which only is extant) which
reads it thus, Antichristi nomen per ipsum utique editum fuisset qui and
Apocalypsin viderat, neque enim ante multum temporis visum est sed pene sub
nostro seculo ^d finem Domitiani imperii, The name of Antichrist would have
been published by him who saw the Apocalypse, for it was not seen any long time
since, but almost under our age, at the end of Domitians Empire. Where the word
visum in the Neuter, seen, not visa in the Feminine, belongs apparently to the
name not to the Apocalypse.

Ans. 1. John saw the Prophecies of the Revelation all together at one time,
and not at several distant times, as shall be proved in the next question, and
therefore for any man to think that he had the vision of the name of the Beast,
by it self alone, at the end of Domitians Reign, and of the rest of the
Apocalypse at some other time before, is but a mere fancy at the best. 2.
Irenaeus counted the name of the Beast no^ worthy to be divulged at large by
the Holy Ghost, and therefore it is far from his meaning, that it was seen by
itself alone from the rest of the Apocalypse. 3. Irenaeus does not say, nomen
viderat, that John saw the name of the Beast, but Apocalypsin viderat, that he
saw the Apocalypse, and this was seen not any long time ago, but almost in our
time at the end of Domitians Reign. 4. Eusebius brings the Testimony of
Irenaeus, to prove that John was banished into Patmos at the end of Domitians
Reign, and therefore he understands Irenaeus as we do, and his opinion is, that
the Apocalypse was seen by John in the Reign of Domitian, and not the name of
the Beast by itself alone. 5. It is a very unlikely thing that John should be
banished into Patmos, in the Reign of Claudius, and see some part of the
Revelation there in his time, and the name of the Beast elsewhere by itself
alone at the end of Domitians Reign, which was above forty years afterward,
without the least intimation of any such thing. 6. (...) in Eusebius, is not
the Nominative case to (...), was seen, as the objection would have it, but
(...) is the Nominative case unto it, which I prove thus: That which John saw,
is the Nominative case to (...) was seen; but Eusebius says, that John saw
(...), the Revelation; therefore (...) the Revelation, is the Nominative case
to (...) was seen. 7. Though it be true, that in the Latin Copy of Irenaeus,
the word is visum in the Neuter Gender, yet in the Latin Copy of Eusebius, the
word is visa in the Feminine Gender, and in the Margent of one of them, I find
these words, Anno Domini 96. Joannes in Patmon relegatus scripsit Apocalypsin,
in the year of the Lord 96. John was banished into Patmos, and then wrote the
Revelation. 8. Let the word be visa, or visum, one that has but half an eye,
may see what Irenaeus's meaning is, that if the name of Antichrist ought to be
divulged openly now, it would have been divulged by him who saw the Revelation
for it; this is, the Revelation was seen not any long time ago, but almost in
our age, at the end of Domitians Reign; and seeing it was not openly declared
by him who saw the Revelation, and that so lately too, it ought not to be
proclaimed openly by us, as to say that (...), or (...) is his proper name:
this is Irenaeus's meaning, and the drift of his discourse. Lastly, be it so as
they would have it, that visum seen does belong to the name of the Beast, yet
it is far from Irenaeus's meaning, that the name of the Beast was seen by itself
alone, his meaning rather is, that it was seen when the rest of the Apocalypse
was, and that was, as he says, at the latter end of Domitians Reign; and so
for the name of the Beast, his meaning is, that it was not seen by John
himself, (...) manifest^^, that is, in words at length, but in figures only.

Ob. Though it should be acknowledged to be the opinion of Irenaeus, that John
received the Revelation, and all his Visions at the end of Domitian, yet on the
other side it is the affirmation of Epiphanius, that John Prophesied in the time
of Claudius Caesar, when says he, he was in the Isle Patmos. And that which
may give authority to Epiphanius's Testimony, is this. 1. That Epiphanius in
that place, is a writing against the Montanists about the authority of the
Apocalypse, and that the later it were seen, or written, the more it would have
been for his turn, toward confuting, or answering them, whose objection it was
that the Church of Thyatira, mentioned in the Apocalypse, was not yet a Church,
when that was said to be revealed. And therefore if it had been but uncertain,
whether it were written so early or no, he would without all question, have
made use of this as some advantage against his adversaries, whom he was then in
confuting, 2. That Epiphanius is so far from doing this, that he does twice in
the same place expressly affirm, 1. That his being in the Isle of Patmos, 2.
That his seeing these Visions there, were in the time of Claudius.

Ans. The Testimony of Irenaeus who lived so near the time of Domitian, is far
to be preferred before the Testimony of Epiphanius, who lived above two hundred
years after. 2. If there be any truth in Epiphanius's Testimony, why did Jerome,
Eusebius, and others follow the Testimony of Irenaeus, and not the Testimony of
Epiphanius, but that they saw some fault in his Testimony? yea, why did all our
modern Writers since, as well Papists as Protestants (except Grotius and his
adherents) follow the Testimony of Irenaeus, and forsake the Testimony of
Epiphanius? if there were any credit to be given to his Testimony. 3. Either
the Copy of Epiphanius is corrupt, or else he mistook and set down Claudius for
Domitian, as the marginal note mendose pro Domitiano does imply, and he might
as well mistake Claudius for Domitian, as he did Priscilla, Maximilla, and
Quintilla, for Jesebel, for he thinks that by Jesebel the Apostle meant
Priscilla, Maximilla, and Quintilla, which is a very unlikely thing, for
Iesebel was a woman then in being, though of another name when the Apostle
wrote the Epistle to the Church of Thyatira, and he called her Iesebel by a
Metaphor, for the likeness she bore to Iesebel, Ahabs Wife, in wickedness,
witchcraft, Adultery, and Idolatry, whenas Priscilla, Maximilla, and Quintilla
the Disciples of Montanus, were not Prophetesses till the latter end of
Antoninus Pius, which was many years after Claudius, and Domitian too. 4. I
find another gross mistake in Epiphanius, for he makes John to be above ninety
years old in the days of Claudius, whenas he was not above fifty at that time,
and he lived at least forty years after his decease, and died in the Reign of
Trajan. Helvirus page 87. 5. Whereas it is said, the later it was seen, or
written, the more it would have been for his turn, it is nothing so, for he
makes the Epistle to the Church of Thyatira, to be a Prophecy of a Church then
to come, and not a History of a Church that then was, in which regard it made
nothing to his turn, whether it were written sooner, or later; for suppose it
were written sooner in Claudius's time, and that there were no Church in
Thyatira at that time, it made nothing against him, nor against the authority
of the Revelation, if the Epistle be meant Prophetically of a Church then to
come, as he understood it; or suppose it were written later in Domitians time,
and that there were no Church at Thyatira in his time neither, it made nothing
against him, and his way, nor against the authority of the Revelation neither,
if the Epistle be to be understood prophetically of a Church to come, as he
understood it: but the truth is, there was no Church at Thyatira in the Reign
of Claudius, nor in any other part of Asia, Act. 16. 6. much less such renowned
Churches as St. John speaks of, consisting of Elders, Bishops, and
Metropolitans too, as some would have it, and therefore this Book was not
written in his days, but at some time or other afterward. Lastly, if the
Epistle to the Church of Thyatira were written in the days of Claudius, how
will they answer the objection of the Montanists, which was, that there was no
Church there when that Epistle was written, as indeed there was not, if that
Epistle were written in Claudius's days.

Ob. Having said this for the confirming this assertion of Epiphanius, to have
as much authority as his Testimony can give it, four Arguments I shall add for
the truth of it. The first Negative, to the disparagement of that relation that
affirms him banished by Domitian, and returned after his death in Nerva's
Reign. For of the persecution by Domitian, there be but two authors mentioned
by Eusebius, l. 3. c. 20. Tertullian, and Egesippus; but of Tertullian, he has
these words, (...) (...), Domitian went about to do as Nero had done, being a
part of his cruelty, or as Tertullians words are Apol. c. 5. portio Neronis de
crudelitate, a Portion of Nero for cruelty, sed facile coeptum repressit,
restitutis etiam quos relegaverat, but he ceased from it presently, and
recalled those whom he had banished, which no way agrees with his banishing
John, and not recalling him all his life, as is supposed in the other relation,
and affirmed by Eusebius, l. 3. c. 20. And therefore Baronius, that is for his
banishment under Domitian, in the tenth year of his Reign, is forced fairly to
reject Tertullians authority in this matter, giving for it his proof out of
Dio, viz. that Nerva released those who were condemned of impiety, and restored
those who were banished. Which affirmation of Dio's being granted as far as
belongs to those who were in exile, or stood condemned at Nerva's coming to the
Empire, does no way prejudice the truth of Tertullians words, of Domitians
having repressed his severity against the Christians, and revoked the banished,
(wherein he is much a more competent witness than Baronius.) No more does his
killing his Uncle Clemens, and banishing his Cousin Flavia Domitilla, for that
was five years after this time of John's supposed banishment, in the fifteenth
or last year of Domitians Reign. In the relation of Egesippus a most ancient
Writer that lived in those times, there is no more but this, that Domitian had
made a decree for putting to death all that were of the lineage of David, that
some delators had accused some of the Children of Jude, the Kinsman of our
Savior (...) as such who were of David's Seed, that Jocatus brought these to
Domitian, but upon examination, being found to be plain men, and such as
believed not Christ's Kingdom to be (...) or (...) of this World, or earthly,
but heavenly, and angelical, to begin at the end of the World, (...), he set
them free, and by Edict took off the persecution against the Church, and they
being released, became Bishops in the Church, and continued peaceably, and
lived till Trajans days. And this certainly agrees very little with the other
relation, not can any account probably be rendered why when the persecution of
Christians was taken off by the Edict, and (...) peace restored to the Church
of Christ, and when the profession of Christianity in the Sons of Jude being by
them avowed to the Emperor, was not yet thought fit to be punished in the
least, yet John should be banished, and continue in his exile, 'till Nerva's
Reign, for no other crime, but that of being a Christian. Where by the way,
Baronius's artifice much fails him, Tertullian (says he) fell into this error
by following Egesippus's authority, but Egesippus (says he) spoke apparently
de ea persecutione quae mota est in Judaeos, of that persecution which was
raised against the Jews, not against the Christians. How true that is, will now
appear, when the express words are, that by that Emperors edict the persecution
against the Church (sure that was not of Jews, but Christians) ceased.

Ans. If there be no credit to be given to that relation that affirms John
banished by Domitian, and returned after his death in Nerva's Reign, why did
all Writers ever since give credit to that relation, and forsake Epiphanius in
this point, except Grotius and his followers? 2. If Domitian presently ceased
from his cruelty, and recalled the banished, why did Dr. Hammond say, that
after the rebuilding of the Capitol Domitian began a persecution against the
Christians, as those which opposed the Heathen Worship, and continued it above
three years and a half, until his death? Paraph. on Revelation 13. v. 5. page
967. 3. If Domitian presently ceased from his persecution of the Church, how
can he be the Beast Apocalyptical as they would have him? for the Beast after
he began a persecution against the Church, never ceased from it, but continued
it until his dying day, Rev. 19. 19, 20. 4. If Domitian began his persecution
in the tenth year of his Reign, and presently ceased from it, how came it to
pass that in the fifteenth year of his Reign, he slew Flavius Clemens, (who had
been a Consul) for his Christianity, and banished Flavia Domitilla for being a
Christian? does not this plainly show that Domitian continued his persecution
against the Church, and never wholly ceased from it? though for a while he
might relent, and be more remiss at one time than another, as a continued
fever has its time of relaxation, and exacerbation, yet never wholly cease.
5. If Domitian presently ceased from his persecution, and never took it up
again, this had been no grand persecution, as all the ten persecutions were,
but a very light one, even the lightest that ever was. 6. That relenting which
Tertullian speaks of, may very well agree with that which Eusebius says, for
he might cease from his cruelty for a time, and take it up again, as a
continual fever does relent for a time, and have a strong fit again: but I
rather think that that ceasing which Tertullian speaks of, was in the fifteenth
year of his Reign, not long before his death; and whereas it is said he ceased
presently, the meaning is not, that he ceased presently after he first began
his persecution, but the meaning rather is, that he ceased presently after he
heard the words of Judes Sons, that Christ's Kingdom was not earthly, but
heavenly, this was it which made him to relent, and this was done at the latter
end of his Reign, whenas his persecution began about five years before, and
this does well agree with that which Dio says, that Nerva released those who
where condemned of impiety, and restored those who were banished, Domitian not
living himself to see it put in execution. Lastly, that which Egesippus says,
does very well agree with that which Eusebius says, for 'twas at the latter
end of his Reign that the Sons of Jude were brought before him, and when he
found them to be plain men, and such as believed not Christ's Kingdom to be of
this World, he thereupon set them free, and there were no more set free by him
than they, and more than this he did not, but made an Edict that the
persecution against the Church should cease, and this edict reached not the
Jews only, as Baronius would have it, but the whole Church, but Domitian dying
suddenly thereupon, no more was done in his days but the making of the edict
only, all the rest was put in execution by Nerva; in his days it was that the
Sons of Jude became Bishops in the Church, and not before; in his days it was
that peace was restored, and not before; and in his days it was that John was
released, and not before: and upon this account it is, that it was not done in
Domitians days, because Domitian died suddenly after he heard the words of
Judes Sons, and was slain by Stephen, and did not live to see his edict put in
execution.

Ob. About the ninth year of Claudius, the Christians were pursued, and banished
by the Roman Powers. That at that time Claudius banished the Jews out of Rome,
is evident by Josephus, and acknowledged by all. And that by the Jews, the
Christians are meant, appears by Suetonius in the life of Claudius, c. 25.
Judaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit, he banished the
Jews out of Rome, for the tumults which they daily raised by the impulsion of
Chrestus. By Chrestus it is certain that the Roman Writers meant Christ,
calling him Chrest, and his followers Chrestians, as Tertullian observes, Apol.
c. 3. And so they that were acted by the impulsion of Chrest, in that narration
must, though called Jews, necessarily be resolved to be Christians. And what
was done at Rome, is to be supposed to have been done also in other parts of
the Emperors Dominions. And so that edict mentioned Act. 18. 2. was in reason
to reach to Ephesus, and may justly be thought to have involved Sr. John there.
And accordingly Chronologers have placed this banishment of his to Patmos in
that year.

Ans. That the Christians were pursued, and banished by the Roman Powers about
the ninth year of Claudius, does not yet appear to me, for as yet there was no
law made against Christian Religion, says Dr. Hammond. paraph. on Act. 18. v.
15. and a little after he says, that Claudius set out an Edict against the
Jews, but none against Christians, any otherwise than as they were comprehended
under the name of Jews. 2. That edict set forth by Claudius, in the ninth year
of his Reign, was against the Jews only, and not against the Christians; and
the Christian Jews, as Jews, not as Christian fell under that edict, says the
same Doctor, notes on Act. 26. page 456. 3. The cause of that edict were the
tumults which the Jews made in Rome, but John was banished into Patmos, not for
any such cause, but for the word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
Rev. 1. 9. 4. The Ringleader of these tumults was one Chrestus, as Suetonius
says, lib. 5. c. 25. but that by Chrestus is meant our Lord Christ, adhuc mihi
persunadere non possum, I cannot yet persuade my self, says Bishop Usher in
his Annals, page 666. 5. What Roman Writers they be, which called Christ
Chrest, and his followers Chrestians, they do not tell us; I find that Tacitus
in his Annals lib. 15. c. 6. calls them Christians, and our Savior he calls
Christ. Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos and quaesitissimis poenis
affecit quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat. Therefore to
extinguish the rumor, Nero falsely accused and punished most grievously,
certain people hated for their wickedness, which the common sort called
Christians. Auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante per
procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat. I find also that Pliny
in his Epistle to Trajan which is in the tenth-Book of his Epistles, calls him
Christ, and his followers he calls Christians.
The author of that name was Christ, who in Tiberius 's Reign was put to death,
under Pontius Pilate Procurator of Judaea. Yea Suetonius himself in the life of
Nero lib. 6. c. 16. calls them Christians by their right name, Afflicti
suppliciis Christiani, the Christians were put to death; and though others call
them Chrestians, as Tertullian observes they did in his time, yet since
Suetonius himself calls them otherwise, this is another Argument that by
Chrestus he does not mean Christ, but it is very likely that that name came up
after he was dead, and that through ignorance of the common people. 6. These
tumults were raised impulsore Chresto by the impulsion of Chrestus; now what is
meant by impulsion but verbum and exemplum his winning words, and leading
example? and this also shows that Chrestus was not Christ, but a man then
alive, and one that lived in Rome at that time, else he could not stir up these
tumults, verbo and exemplo by his winning words, and leading example, as this
Chrestus did. 7. But suppose it to be true, that by Chrestus he means Christ,
yet it will not serve their turn, for the exile which Suetonius speaks of, is
of such as were at Rome at that time, Judaeos Roma expulit, he banished the
Jews out of Rome, and St. Luke has the same expression of the place, Act. 18.
2. Claudius commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, but how does it appear that
St. John was then at Rome? for unless he were there at that time, how is he
concerned in the exile? 8. But let us suppose as they do, that that edict went
farther than Rome, and did reach those that were at Ephesus, how does it appear
that St. John was then at Ephesus? for unless he were there at that time he is
still unconcerned in the exile. And here by the way the Reader may observe that
they suppose John to be at Ephesus at that time, and that the edict did reach
him there, both which we expect they should prove, and make good before we can
consent unto it, that John was banished by Claudius into Patmos. 9. But though
they bring no Argument for it, I will advance an Argument or two against it, If
that edict did reach to Ephesus, and involve John there, how came it to pass
that it did not reach to Corinth, which is nearer Rome than Ephesus, and
involve Paul at Corinth, but suffer him to continue there, and Preach the
Gospel there, Act. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 10. If that edict did banish John from
Ephesus, how came it to pass that Paul went to Ephesus a little afterward, and
was not banished too, Act. 18. 19, 20? 11. The Jews were commanded by that
edict to depart from Rome, but not confined to any certain place, as John was,
and after they were gone from thence, they were at liberty to reside where they
would, as appears by Aquila's going to Corinth, and residing there, where he
was at liberty, to continue or remove from thence to any other place except
Rome, as he pleased, Act. 18. 2, 3. 18, 19. So was not John's confinement unto
Patmos, from whence he had not liberty to remove to a more commodious place,
but was forced to continue there against his will. 13. The Church of Ephesus
was planted by Paul, as appears, Act. 19. and confirmed by John, as Irenaeus
says, l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius, l. 3. c. 20. and therefore Paul was there before
John, and when John came thither he confirmed what Paul had done before; but if
John were at Ephesus at that time, when that edict came forth from Claudius, he
must have been there before Paul, for Paul had not been there at that time, but
came thither afterward, and found no Church there, as appears, Act. 18. 1, 2.
19, 20, 21. Act. 19. 1, 2. To which may be added, that Paul did not Preach the
Gospel, where it had been Preached before by others, Romans 15. 20, 21. 2 Cor.
10. 13, 14, 15. and therefore John did not Preach at Ephesus before Paul came
thither, as he must have done, had he been there the ninth year of Claudius.
Lastly, what Chronologers they be, which have placed John's banishment into
Patmos, in that ninth year of Claudius, they do not tell us, neither can I tell
who they be, for all that I have seen, do place it in Domitians Reign, and they
are these, Bucholcerus, Helvicus, Alstedius, Calvicius, and Funcius a Papist,
beside our English Writers Isaacson, Fox, and Hanmer.

Ob. About Claudius's time it was, that the unbelieving Jews began, and
continued to oppose and persecute the Christian Jews, and thereupon the
Gnostics compliances, (and making as if they were Jews to avoid persecution)
are so often taken notice of by St. Paul, Gal. 6. 12. and elsewhere. And by all
the Epistles, both of him and the rest of the Apostles, written from about that
time of Claudius, the Gnostics are every where touched on as the pests that
were creeping into the Churches, against which they endeavored to fortify the
believers, and assure them that those persecutions of the Jews should be
shortly ended by their destruction, (that night of sadness far spent, and the
day of deliverance and refreshment at hand, Romans 13. 12. Romans 16. 20.) and that
then the Gnostics which were so sollicitous to save their lives should lose
them, i.e. should perish with them. Acordingly to the very same purpose is most
of the Vision here that concerned the seven Churches, c. 2. 2. 4. 9. 14. 20.
and c. 3. 9, 10. etc. and much of the following Prophecy, to assure them, that
God would take revenge on those impenitent and impure professors, and rescue
the constant Christians. And that makes it very reasonable to believe that this
Vision was received about the same time also.

Ans. Did not the unbelieving Jews persecute the Christians before Claudius's
time? was not the persecutions Act. 8. 1. Act. 9. 23. before Claudius's time?
and was not Steven stoned to death before Claudius's time, yea did not the
unbelieving Jews persecute the Christian in Christ's time? Ioh. 9. 22. and did
not many of the Rulers believe in him, but because of the Pharisees did not
confess him lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue? Ioh. 12. 12. Why do
they not say that this Book was written then? 2. Did not Christ foretell the
destruction of the Jews in his time, Mat. 24. 2. etc. Luke 21. 24. and did not
he say unto them, When ye see these things begin to come to pass, then look up
and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near, Luke 21. 28. And if
the Revelation were written to comfort the Christians against the Jews, and
assure them that those persecutions of the Jews should be shortly ended by
their destruction, (as they say it was) Why do they not think that it was
written then? 3. Does not Paul take notice of the Gnostics in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, c. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. as well as in the Epistle to the Galatians c.
6. 12. and were not both these Epistles and many others his where the Gnostics
are taken notice of, not any of Paul's Epistles nor of the other Apostles were
written about the ninth year of Claudius, but afterward.
written after the days of Claudius? and why may not the Revelation be written
after his days too? 4. Did not the Jews persecute Christians in Domitians time,
and were there not Gnostics at that time too, Menander, Basilides and others,
and why do they not think that this Book was written then? In a word, the
persecution of the Jews, and the complying of the Gnostics to save themselves
from persecution, is no good Argument to show the time when the Revelation was
revealed to John, but John being in the Isle of Patmos for the word of God, and
for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, is a characteristical note of the time of
its revealing. Now there were no imperial edicts against the Christians, as
Christians, in the time of Claudius as appears by Gallio's words, Act. 18. 14,
15. and by Paul's appeal to Caesar, Act. 25. 11. and by Act. 28. 31. but in
Domitians time there were edicts made against them, and it is the more likely
that John was banished then, and the scope of the Revelation is not to acquaint
the Churches with the destruction of the Jews or Gnostics, but to acquaint
them rather with the things that are, and the things that shall be hereafter to
the end of the World, Rev. 1. 19. Rev. 20. 11, 12.

Ob. The eight Kings or Emperors c. 17. 10. cannot otherwise be made
intelligible, but by beginning the account from Claudius, so that he and Nero,
Galba, Otho, Vitellius shall be the five that were fallen, and then Vespasian
(in whose time I suppose these Visions were committed to writing by St. John)
being the sixth shall be the [one is] and Titus the seventh, that is not yet
come, and when he comes shall stay but a little while, reigning but two years
and two months, and then the [Beast that was and is not, and is the eighth, and
is of the seven and goes to destruction] will fall out to be Domittan, to whom
(and to whom only of all the Emperors, nay of all men in any story) all those
distinctive characters will appertain, as that he exercised the office of the
Emperor, and was called Emperor at Rome, when Vespasian was gone into Judaea,
and after his return became a private man again, delivered up the Empire to
him, and so was and is not, and then was the eighth (reckoning from Claudius as
the first) and the Son of one of the seven, viz. of Vespasian, and should be a
bloody persecutor, and accordingly punished, and so go to destruction.

Ans. It is past my understanding to find a reason why we should begin the
account of the eight Kings or Emperors, c. 17. 10. from Claudius and end it in
Domitian, and so leave out all the Emperors that were before Claudius, and all
them that went behind Domitian, for the ten first persecutions did not begin in
Claudius, but in Nero, neither did they end in Domitian, but in Dioclesian,
Maximian, Galerius, and Licinius, neither did any remarkable thing happen in
the days of Claudius, and end in the days of Domitian, so as to force us to
begin the account in the one, and end it in the other. 2. It cannot be made
intelligible how the Angel could say to John at the Revelation of these
Visions, Five are fallen, meaning thereby Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, if so be these Visions were revealed to John in the Reign of
Claudius, for these five were not fallen then, but Nero, Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius did succeed him in the Throne, and were not fallen while he lived. 3.
It is past my intelligence to make it good, that these Visions were received by
John in the time of Claudius, and not committed to writing till the time of
Vespasian, who began his Reign fifteen years after Claudius's decease, for John
did write his Visions presently, as soon as he received them, as appears Rev.
10. 4. and was commanded so to do, Rev. 1. 19. Rev. 22. 10. 4. It is past my
capacity to conceive that all the Prophecies in the Revelation, from the
beginning of the sixth Chapter, to the end of the ninth, besides some of them
that follow after, were fulfilled before the destruction of Jerusalem by
Vespasian; and yet to think (as they do) that they were committed to writing in
the time of Vespasian, for then the Revelation should be written, and sent to
the Churches, after most of the Prophecies were past. Lastly, It cannot be made
intelligible unto me, that John should commit these Visions to writing in the
time of Vespasian, and yet see the name of the Beast (as they say he did) in
the time of Domitian, for then he should write these Visions before some of
them were revealed. See more of this c. 17. q. 2. p.

2. Quest. Whether John received the Revelation at several distant times, or
all at once in one day?

Ans. If any one will say, that John received the Revelation not all together
at one time, but at several distant times, as the Prophet Esai did his Visions,
Esa. 1. 1. Let me request him to tell us what Visions John received at one
time, and what Visions at another time, for unless he can and will do that, why
should any one believe him?

2. If any one suppose that John received some Visions in the time of Claudius,
and did defer the writing of them till the time of Domitian or Vespasian when
he received more Visions, this were to do the Apostle injury, who was to write
his Visions presently, and send them to the Churches presently, and not defer
them till a long time after, Rev. 1. 11. Rev. 22. 10. and Rev. 10. 4. He was
about to write presently what the seven thunders had spoken, and had so done,
if he had not been commanded to conceal it.

3. If any one shall think, that John received some Visions in the Reign of
Claudius, and did write them then, and that he received other Visions in the
time of Domitian or Vespasian, and did write them then; this were to make two
Books of the Revelation, and one of them is supposed to be written in the time
of Claudius, and the other in the time of Domitian or Vespasian.

4. If any man imagine, that John received the Vision of the seven Churches
first, and did write it presently, and send it to the Churches by it self, and
that afterward he received more Visions at several times, and did write them at
several distant times as he did receive them, this were to make two or more
Books of the Revelation as was said before. And if it be said, that when he had
received all, he did write the first Visions over again, and add the latter to
them, and put them into one volume, this were to make the Apostle do things
over and over, and write some of his Visions twice, and send them to the
Churches twice, which we cannot find that any of the Apostles did. Besides,
this is a mere imagination, and every thing they say in this point is but mere
imagination and no more: but let them imagine what they will, I prove it was
not so by this Argument. If John were commanded at the first entrance of his
Visions, to write his Visions all together, and send them to the Churches all
together, then he did not write the first Vision by it self, and send it to the
Churches by it self, without the rest: but John was commanded at the first
entrance of his Visions, to write his Visions all together, and send them to
the Churches all together: therefore he did not write the first Vision by it
self, and send it to the Churches by it self without the rest. The minor is
proved, Rev. 1. 19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things
which are, and the things which shall be hereafter: where by the things which
he had seen, is meant, the Vision of the seven Golden Candlesticks, mentioned
in the first Chapter, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. by the things which are, is meant,
the things which Christ should reveal unto him, concerning the present state of
the seven Churches, and they are spoken of in the second and third chapters,
with which some prophecies concerning the future state of the seven Churches
are mixed; and by the things which shall be hereafter, is meant, the Prophecies
from the fourth Chapter to the end of the Revelation. Now had he said at this
time, which was the first entrance of his Visions, Write the things which thou
have seen, and the thing which are, and no more, he might have written the
three first chapters by themselves without the other: but in regard he says at
this time, which was the first entrance of his Visions, Write the things which
thou have seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter, he might not write any one of them by themselves, but he was to
write them all together, and send them to the Churches all together.

5. If John received his Visions at several distant times, as the Prophet
Daniel did his, it is likely he would have told us of it, as the Prophet Daniel
does, who c. 7. 1. tell us that the Vision which he then saw, was in the first
year of Belshasar, and c. 8. 1. he tells us that the Vision which he then saw,
was in the third year of Belshasar; and it is likely, that if John had received
his Visions at several distant times, he would have told us of it, as Daniel
does.

6. There be many differences between the Visions of the Prophet Esai, and the
Visions of the Apostlical Prophet John; as, 1. The Prophet Esai says expressly,
that his Visions were in the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings
of Juda, Esa. 1. 1. but John makes no mention of any other day that he received
his Visions, than on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. 2, The Visions as well of Esai
as of John, were when both of them were in a trance; but herein they differ,
that the trances of Esai were at distant times, some in one Kings Reign, and
some in another Kings Reign, as he himself confesses, Esa. 1. 1. but the
trances of John were all of them upon the Lords day, and upon no other, Rev. 1.
10. 3. The Visions which the Prophet Esai saw concerning Judah, and Jerusalem,
were so many Sermons which he Preached to the people at several times, far
distant one from other, and they were so many, and so long, that he could not
preach them all in one day, therefore of necessity there was an intermission
between his preaching of one Sermon, and the preaching of another: but the
Visions of the Apostolical Prophet John were not preached Sermons, but mental
Revelations which he was to write, and send unto the Churches all at once, and
they were not so many, nor so long, but they could be seen, and be written by
him too, all in one day. 4. The writings of the Prophet Esai, be but the heads
of the Sermons which he preached, the Sermons for the words were a great deal
longer; but the Revelation of the Apostolical Prophet John, is the full
substance of what he saw and heard, without diminution of the words. 5. The
Prophet Esai was at liberty to go and preach unto the people, Sermon after
Sermon; but the Apostlical Prophet John was not at liberty to travel to the
Churches, and Preach one day to the Church of Ephesus, and another day to the
Church of Smyrna, and other days to the other Churches, as he must have done,
had he preached the Revelation to them, the places being far distant one from
another, therefore he was necessitated to write his Revelation to the Churches,
and send it all together, and his Commission was so to do, Rev. 1. 11.

7. There was not any considerable intermission between one Vision and another,
excepting only at the opening of the seventh seal, where there was an
intermission (not of John's ecstasie, for he was in the Spirit all that while,
but an intermission) of father Revelations for the space of half an hour, and
no longer, Rev. 8. 1. but between the other Visions there was not such an
intermission, but as soon as one was past, the other came immediately without
any considerable intermission, as you may read Rev. 11. 14.

8. The Book sealed with seven seals, was revealed all at once, and not at
several times far distant one from other, Rev. 5. 1. now that Book contained in
it all the Prophecies in the Revelation, as shall be proved when we come unto
the tenth chapter.

9. The seven Trumpets were presented to the Apostle all together, Rev. 8. 2.
and so were the seven vials too, Rev. 15. 7. and he did not see one Trumpet in
one year, and another Trumpet in another year, nor one Vial in one Kings Reign,
and another Vial in another Kings Reign, but he saw them successively all
together: and because all the Prophecies in the Revelation, from the eighth
chapter downward, do belong to these two, therefore they were revealed when
they were: The Prophecy in the eleventh chapter, which concerns the two
witnesses, does belong to the sixth Trumpet, and was revealed when that Trumpet
was, Rev. 11. 14. the Prophecies in the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth
chapters, do belong to the seventh Trumpet, and were revealed when that Trumpet
was; and the Prophecy concerning the fall of Babylon in the seventeenth,
eighteenth, and nineteenth chapters, does belong to the seventh Vial, and was
revealed when that Vial was, Rev. 16. 19. and consequently all the Prophecies
in the Revelation from the eighth chapter downward, were revealed all together,
not at several distant times, but successively one after another, without an
interval between the Prophecy which immediately goes before, and the Prophecy
which immediately follows after.

10. John received all his Visions when he was in the Spirit, and there is no
mention that John was in the Spirit any other day than on the Lords day, Rev.
1. 10. and he says the Lords day in the singular number, and not the Lords
days in the plural number.

11. If John received the Visions of the Revelation at several distant times,
some in one Kings Reign, and some in another Kings Reign, then seeing he
returned from exile, as they say, in Claudius's time, I would entreat them to
tell me, whether every time he received a Vision after Claudius's death he were
not carried by the Spirit into Patmos to receive it, or else received it
elsewhere? and seeing he saw the name of the Beast, as they say, in Domitian's
time, whether he were not carried by the Spirit into Patmos to see that name,
and recarried back again to Ephesus after he had seen it? These inventions do
not become the Pens of learned men: but if they will suppose or invent such
things as these and deliver them for truth, it becomes not any man to believe
such feigned imaginations.

12. John received all his Visions in a trance, and how many trances was he in
if he received them at sundry times, and not at once? We read but of one trance
that he was in, and that was in Patmos on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 9, 10. and
therefore he received his Visions all at once before he was out of that trance.

3. Quest. Whether the Prophecies of the Revelation shall come to pass in Asia,
or in Europe?

Ans. The Prophecies were written unto Asia, and not unto Europe, Rev. 1. 4.
11. therefore in all likelihood they have their accomplishment in Asia chiefly,
if not in Asia only.

2. John was to write both the things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter, Rev. 1. 19. Now by the things which are, is meant the things which
are in Asia; therefore by the things which shall be hereafter, is meant the
things which shall hereafter be in Asia.

3. Christ himself does make the chief scene of the Prophecies to be Asia, Rev.
22. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angels to testify unto you these things in the
Churches, so we read in the English, but in the Greek it is (...) concerning the
Churches, so that the Churches are the scene of the Prophecies, though not the
adequate scene of them all, yet the scene of many of them, and the things he
writes to them of, are concerning the Churches, or which is all one, they shall
befall the Churches; and what is meant by the Churches, but the Churches of
Asia? Rev. 1. 4. 11.

4. To what purpose should he write to Asia the fates and destinies of another
Country, and not acquaint them with the fates and destinies of their own? But
if the scene of the Prophecies be Europe, what does he else but acquaint them
with the fates and destinies of another Country, and neglect to tell them the
fates and destinies of their own?

5. What be the places which are named in the Prophecies, and made the Scene
where they shall be acted? be they not Jerusalem, Sion, Babylon, the East, and
the River Euphrates, and where shall we find these places but in Asia? Rev. 9.
14.
though not in Asia Minor, Rev. 11. 2. 8.
yet in Asia Major, and therefore the Revelation is concerning both Asia's,
Rev. 14. 1.
and the things spoken of in the Epistles to the seven Churches are concerning
Asia Minor, Rev. 16. 12.
and the Prophecies which follow afterward concerning Asia Major, not secluding
Asia Minor from having a share in them also.

6. That which I drive at in this question, is against those which make the
chief Scene of the Prophecies to be Europe, and will have none of them come to
pass in Asia, except the Prophecy of the sixth Trumpet, concerning the four
Angels which were bound at Euphrates, Rev. 9. 14. when as the chief Scene of
the Prophecies is Asia, and but very few of them shall come to pass in Europe,
and those few are such as are common to them both, such as is the Prophecy of
the Resurrection of the dead, of the final Judgment, and of the end of the
World, which concern all persons throughout the World, Rev. 20, 21, 22, 23, etc.

7. The seat of the Holy War was Iudaea, yet the Soldiers that Warred there
against the Turks, and Saracens, were Europeans, and such is the case here; the
main seat of the Prophecies is Asia, yet the Countries near adjoining may feel
the smart of them, as Europe felt the smart of the Holy War which was waged in
Iudaea.

8. The Prophecy of the final Judgment does concern all the World; yet the
place where it shall be managed, and to which they shall be brought to Judgment
is Iudaea: So the Prophecies of the Revelation, may some of them concern
Europe, as well as Asia, yet the Scene in which they shall be acted, is rather
Asia than Europe.

4. Quest. Whether the Prophecies of the Revelation be of a long continuance,
or a short?

Ans. If all the Prophecies of the Revelation be of a short continuance, God
has left his Church without a Prophecy to the end of the World, for there is
no Prophecy which does reach so far, except Daniel or the Revelation; but they
say the Prophecies of Daniel ended with the destruction of Jerusalem, and if
the Revelation ends then too, or a little after, where have we a Prophecy to
the end of the World?

2. We have a Prophecy in the fifth seal, which begins with How long Lord, Holy
and true, Rev. 6. 10. therefore it is a long time before that Prophecy of the
fifth seal is to begin, and consequently it is a long time before the
Prophecies of the four first Seals shall have an end.

3. We have in the twentieth chapter, a Prophecy of a thousand years long; now
a thousand years are not of a short, but of a long continuance.

4. There is but a little space, it may be less than a year, between the
thousand years, and the last Judgment, Rev. 20. 3. and there is also set down
what shall come to pass in that little space, to wit the insurrection, and
destruction of Gog. and Magog, Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9, 10. therefore the Revelation
is a Prophecy reaching to the last Judgment.

5. We have in that twentieth chapter, a Prophecy of the last Judgment it self,
and a large description of it, from the eleventh verse, to the end of the
chapter, therefore the Revelation is a Prophecy reaching not only to the last
Judgment, but takes the last Judgment in to boot.

6. We may go a little further, and say, that in the one and twentieth, and two
and twentieth chapters, we have a Prophecy of the new Jerusalem, the eternal
City of the blessed, and of the Lake of fire, burning with Brimstone, the
everlasting habitation of the damned; therefore the Revelation reaches not
only to the last Judgment inclusively, but goes beyond it, and speaks in
general of what shall come to pass afterward.

Lastly, If the Prophecies of the Revelation were of short continuance, what is
the reason that Christ is not come to Judgment all this while? is it not
because the Prophecies of the Revelation which go before it, are not yet
fulfilled? for if they were, Christ would come to Judgment presently, and not
defer his coming a moment longer; and if Christ should come to Judgment to
morrow, the Prophecies of the Revelation which go before it, would be fulfilled
before to morrow; and if Christ should defer his coming until another year, or
until another age be over, it is because the Prophecies of the Revelation which
go before his coming will not be fulfilled before. I will not take upon me to
determine when the day of Judgment shall begin, but my opinion is, it is farther
off than many men suppose, it may be six thousand years from the Creation of
the World shall be expired first, and the seventh thousand shall be the day of
Judgment; and he that lives two hundred, or three hundred years hence, and
finds that Christ is not then come to Judgment, let him know the reason is,
because the Prophecies of the Revelation which go before that day, are not then
fulfilled, and that Christ will defer his coming till they be: And as when he
suffered on the Cross, he remained alive upon the Cross till all things were
fulfilled, and then gave up the Ghost, Ioh. 19. 28. 30. so Christ will not come
to Judgment, but abide in Heaven, where he is, until the Prophecies of the
Revelation be fulfilled which go before that day; and as soon as that is done,
then Christ will come to Judgment and not defer it any longer, as we may read,
Act. 3. 21. And if it shall be asked of me what Prophecies of the Revelation be
yet behind, and unfulfilled? I answer, there is the destruction of Gog, and
Magog, Rev. 20. 8, 9. there is the thousand years in the same chapter, there is
the destruction of the Beast, and false Prophet, Rev. 19, 20, 21. there is the
destruction of Babylon, Rev. 17, and 18. and for ought we yet know, all the
Prophecies in the Revelation, from the first Seal to the end of the Book are
yet to be expected.

Ob. But what then is the meaning of the words Rev. 1. 1. (...), things that
must shortly come to pass, do not these words imply that all the Prophecies of
the Revelation were shortly to begin, and speedily to have an end?

Ans. The words Rev. 1. 1. are not to be extended to all the Prophecies in the
Book, but to the things spoken of in the Epistles to the seven Churches, and no
farther; and the meaning of them is, that the things spoken of in the Epistles
to the seven Churches were shortly to begin, and speedily to have an end, but
the Prophecies which follow afterward in the Book sealed with seven Seals, were
not to begin so soon, nor speedily to have an end. 2. There is a manifest
opposition, between (...), things which must shortly be done, Rev. 1. 1. and
(...), things which must be done hereafter, Rev. 4. 1. now the latter of these,
that is, the things which must be done hereafter, mentioned c. 4. 1. is the
preface to the Prophecies contained in the following chapters; therefore the
first of these, the things which must shortly be done, mentioned c. 1. 1. is
the preface to the things spoken of before in the Epistles to the seven
Churches, contained in the three first chapters, and to end where they do end.
And I find that some are of the mind, that the Vision of the seven Churches was
written first, and sent unto the Churches by it self before any of the rest was
written, or revealed unto John; and if that were true, it were then out of
question, that the words c. 1. 1. are a preface to the three first chapters,
and not unto the whole Book. But 3. Suppose the words c. 1. 1. (...), things
which must shortly be done, are to be extended to the whole Book, as a Preface
thereunto, upon that supposition, I say, the meaning of them is, not that all
the Prophecies of the Revelation are of a short continuance, but the meaning
rather is, that they shortly shall begin, but after they are once begun, they
are to be of long continuance before they have an end; for they are to teach to
the last Judgment, and beyond it too, Rev. 20. 1^, 12, 13, 14, 15. Rev. 21. 1,
2, 3, etc.

5. Quest. Whether the scope of the Revelation be to comfort the seven Churches
of Asia, against the persecution of the Jews, by acquainting them with their
destruction near approaching?

Ans. 1. The destruction of the Jews was past before the Revelation was made
known to John, the one was in the time of Vespasian, the other in the time of
Domitian.

2. John knew of the destruction of the Jews before he was banished into
Patmos, but he knew not of the Revelation till after he was there.

3. Christ had sufficiently foretold his Disciples of the destruction of the
Jews in his lifetime, Mat. 24. Mark. 13. Luke 21. and therefore there needed
not a second Revelation of the same thing to John again.

4. There is not one Syllable of the destruction of the Jews by Vespasian, in
all the Revelation. That Prophecy Rev. 11. 13. is not meant of the destruction
of the Jews, but of the Gentiles rather, and is not yet fulfilled.

5. There is not one Syllable of consolation to the Churches, taken from the
destruction of the Jews near approaching.

6. The Epistles to the seven Churches are not spent in consolations taken from
the destruction of the Jews near approaching, but in reproofs and menaces for
their sins, threatening them with their own destruction, unless they did amend,
as you may see, Rev. 2. 4, 5, 14, 16, 20, 22, 23. Rev. 3. 2, 3, 15, 16.

7. The destruction of the Jews did not terminate the persecution of the
Christians, but they were persecuted afterward more than they were before, and
there was but one general persecution before the destruction of Jerusalem by
Vespasian, and that was in the Reign of Nero, but there were nine general
persecutions afterward.

8. If any will extend the destruction of the Jews to the time of Adrian, this
will not terminate the persecutions of the Christians neither, for there were
but three persecutions before his time, the fourth was in his Reign, and there
were six persecutions afterward.

Disputation II.
1. Quest. Whether the six first Seals were fulfilled in Judaea, at and before
the destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian?

Ans. No Prophecy is fulfilled before it be revealed: but these six first Seals
were revealed to John in the Reign of Domitian, and therefore not fulfilled at
and before the destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian.

2. No man was ever cast into a trance to behold things which he was told of
before: but John was told by Christ in his lifetime, the things which should
happen in Iudaea at and before the destruction of Jerusalem, by Vespasian,
therefore he was not cast into a trance for such a Revelation.

3. No man did write the Prophecies of the Revelation, except John: but if the
six first Seals be meant: of the things which shall happen in Iudaea, at and
before the destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian, Matthew, Mark, and Luke did
write thereof, as well as John, and that more copiously and plainly than is
here delivered, see Mat. 24. Mark 13. Luke 21.

4. No Prophecy is of things useless, or needless: but if the six first Seals
be meant of the affairs of Iudaea, at and before the destruction of Jerusalem
by Vespasian, this Prophecy might very well have been spared, for it was well
known before, and John might have said unto the Angel which showed him these
things, Why am I cast into a trance, and made believe that I should see things
which no man ever saw before, and of such concernment as no man in Heaven, or
in the earth, or under the earth was counted worthy to reveal save Christ
alone? and now I have seen the six first Seals opened, of this so highly
praised, commended, magnified, and extolled prophetical Book, as no Book ever
was the like, alas! what am I the better for it? I have seen no more than I
knew before.

5. Let us take a view of the several Seals in order, and we shall find that
not any one of them was fulfilled in Judaea, at or before the destruction of
Jerusalem by Vespasian, as some would make us believe they were.

Begin we with the first Seal, which is a Prophecy of a white Horse, and he
that sat thereon, had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth
conquering, and to conquer, but no such thing was fulfilled in Iudaea, at or
before the destruction of Jerusalem in a literal sense, which is the cause they
fly unto a mystical, and understand the Prophecy of the conquest of the Gospel:
but it will not serve their turn, for the Scene of the Gospel is the World, and
not the narrow confines of Judaea, from whence it was removed before this
Prophecy was revealed, Mat. 21. 43. Act. 13. 46. To which may be added, that
the first Seal ends before the second Seal begins, but the Gospel shall
continue to the Worlds end.

The second Seal, is a Prophecy of a red Horse, and power was given to him that
sat thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one
another, and there was given unto him a great Sword, but when was this Tragedy
acted in Judaea? The intestine slaughters of Jews among themselves will not
amount unto a War, and if they would, yet they were not such noted ones, nor so
numerous as these shall be, to which may be added, that the rider on this Red
Horse was to take peace from the earth, which word is too large to be confined
to the narrow compass of Jerusalem, where the Zelots slew their Brethren, not
on Horseback, but on Foot, and the Sicarii had not great Swords as this Rider
had, but short Pocket Daggers to slay men with, a weapon fitter for Thieves and
Robbers, than such noted Warriers as this Prophecy aims at.

The third Seal, is a Prophecy of a Black Horse, and he that sat on him, had a
pair of balances in his hand. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four
Beasts say, A measure of Wheat for a penny, and three measures of Barley for a
penny, etc. which words are either meant of Famine, or of civil Justice; but
the broiles, and tumults in Judaea would not suffer civil Justice to be used.
And if we understand this Prophecy of Famine, where shall we find a noted
Famine in Judaea? except that which Agabus spoke of, Act. 11. 28. or that which
happened in the City, in the time of the Siege: but neither of these can be
meant in this place; not the first, because the adequate Scene of that Famine
was not Judaea but the World, and the time when it happened, was in the second
year of Claudius, which was before John's banishment into Patmos as themselves
confess; and not the second, for the like reason, because it came to pass at
the Siege of the City, by Vespasian, which was before the Prophecy was revealed
to John, which was in the Reign of Domitian. To which may be added, that this
third Seal begins when the second Seal does end, but the slaughters which the
Zelots committed in the City, were not ended when the Famine did begin, but the
Famine was the occasion that they slew the people which denied them bread. Add
we further that a Choenix was no Jewish measure, and therefore the Prophecy was
not fulfilled in Jerusalem in the time of the Siege, but is to be sought for in
those places where a Choenix is used.

The fourth Seal, is a Prophecy of a pale Horse, and his name that sat on him
was Death, and Hell followed with him, and power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with Sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with the Beasts of the earth, but when was this Prophecy fulfilled in
Iudaea? for either this Seal is the same for substance with the two former, or
a distinct Seal from them both. If they say it is the same for substance with
the two former, then seeing the two former were not fulfilled in Judaea, this
Seal was not fulfilled there neither, and if it be so, that this Seal is the
same with the two former, then there are but six Seals in all, and not seven.
But if they say that this Seal is distinct from the two former, then besides
the great Sword mentioned in the second Seal, they must find out another Sword
for this Seal, and besides the Famine which they suppose is meant in the third
Seal, they must find out another Famine for this Seal which as yet they have
not done. To which may be added, that the Scene of this Prophecy is the fourth
part of the earth, and therefore not Iudaea which is but a corner of the earth,
much less the tetrarchy of Galilee, which is less than the former; for though
the Sword was in Galilee, and the War began there, yet when was there a Famine
in Galilee? when was there a Pestilence in Galilee? and when were men slain
with wild Beasts in Galilee, or in any other Region of Iudaea? Does not
Eusebius say, that when the City was taken, the handsomest were reserved for
triumph, the rest that were above seventeen years of age were sent bound to
Egypt, to be Slaves there, others dispersed in the Provinces to be torn asunder
by wild Beasts, so that the Scene where this was done is not Iudaea, but the
Provinces afar off.

The fifth Seal, is a Prophecy of the Souls under the Altar, of them that were
slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, etc. v. 9,
10, 11. but where shall we find any Martyrs in Iudaea before the destruction of
Jerusalem, except Stephen, and James the Brother of John, and James the Brother
of the Lord* and those that were slain by Paul before his Conversion, Act. 9.
21. Act. 22. 4. Act. 26. 10. but all these are too few to make up such a number
of Martyrs as the Prophecy aims at, for they were without number, Rev. 7. 9.
Besides, the Prophecy speaks of two ranks of Martyrs, first the souls under the
Altar that cried to God for vengeance; secondly their fellow Servants, and
their Brethren upon earth, that should be killed as they were: now if these men
can find these Martyrs in Iudaea, before the destruction of Jerusalem, and tell
me who the first and second ranks were, I will hearken to them. The multitude
of these Martyrs plainly shows, that they were not all slain before the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the words which they used in their cry, How long
Lord, Holy and true, do also show that it is a long time before they make their
cry, and longer than that before their fellow Servants, and their Brethren
suffer as they did, and longer than both before the vengeance which they cry
for comes to pass. Let men consider what they say, does the Prophecy speak only
of the Martyrs which were slain in Iudaea, before the destruction of Jerusalem?
then it speaks but of three Martyrs, besides those which were slain by Paul,
and no more: but if they say that others be included which were slain in other
places, then the adequate Scene of the Prophecy is not Iudaea but the World:
but take we all the Martyrs that were slain in the World, before the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the number is too few, and the time too short to
include all the Martyrs which the Prophecy speaks of.

The sixth Seal, is a Prophecy of Eclipses of the Sun, and Moon, for the Sun
became black as sackcloath of hair, and the Moon became as blood, v. 12. but
there was but one Eclipse of the Moon, between Christ's Ascension, and the
destruction of Jerusalem, and that was in the sixth year of Claudius, which was
before the Prophecy was revealed, for they say themselves it was not rev^^led
till the ninth year of Claudius, and we say it was not revealed till the
fourteenth year of Domitian; but take which of these you will, it comes all to
one effect as to this matter, for the Eclipse was in the sixth year of
Claudius, and so before the Prophecy was revealed, which way soever we take,
and there were but two Eclipses of the Sun, whereof the first was in the fifth
year of Claudius, before the Prophecy was revealed by their own confession, the
other was in the sixth year of Nero, which was more visible at Rome than at
Jerusalem, where the Sta^s were seen at the time of the Eclipse, and the
Eclipse it self was seen in the midst of their Sacrifices, which the Senate
caused to be made for the death of Agrippina who was slain by her Son Nero; so
that if it portended any thing at all, it was rather against Rome than
Jerusalem. But every one of these Eclipses were but natural, such as come to
pass now a days every year by the natural course of the Sun and Moon, and
Astronomers can Prognosticate of them before hand: but it is more likely that
the Eclipses which the Prophecy speaks of be supernatural, such as that was at
our Saviors passion, where the Sun was Eclipsed, the Moon being at the full,
when as a natural Eclipse does always happen at the change of the Moon. It
follows in the text, And the Stars of Heaven fell unto the earth, even as a Fig
Tree casts her untimely Figs when she is shaken of a mighty wind, but if this
were done in Iudaea, at or before the destruction of Jerusalem, who took up
these Stars, and showed them to Vespasian? They cannot say that these Stars are
mystically to be understood, for they themselves understand them literally of
meteors: but that there did such meteors fall from Heaven upon Judaea, and in
such a Multitude as the Text speaks of, either at or before the destruction of
Jerusalem by Vespasian, History is too lame to bring us tidings of it. And the
Kings of the earth hid themselves, but there were no Kings in Jerusalem at the
time of the Siege, and the great men, and the rich men, and the bondmen, and
the freemen that were in it at that time hid themselves, not for fear of
Christ and his wrath, as the men whom the Prophecy speaks of shall, but for
fear of Vespasian and his Army. The conclusion therefore is, that this Prophecy
was not fulfilled in Judaea, either at or before the destruction of Jerusalem
by Vespasian, but is yet to be expected.

2. Quest. Whether the first Seal be a Prophecy of the Preaching, and
prevailing of the Gospel?

Ans. 1. No good reason can be given for such an exposition.

2. The Gospel was preached in all the world for a witness to all Nations* and
prevailed very much among them before this Prophecy was revealed, Mat. 24. 14.
Mark 13. 10.

3. There is nothing in the Prophecy which is an emblem or symbol of the
Gospel, but of War and Victory very fitly.

4. By this reckoning this Seal shall never have an end, until the Church on
earth has an end, for the Gospel, and the preaching of it shall continue unto
the Worlds end, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 28.
20. Mat. 16. 18.

5. By the Lamb which opened the first Seal, is meant Christ; therefore by the
Rider on the white Horse is meant some other person. Christ was the revealer,
and he that sat upon the white Horse, is the person revealed, the executioner
of the Prophecy.

6. Christ's Crown was given unto him before this Prophecy was revealed to John,
but this Rider on the white Horse who ever he be, was to receive his Crown
afterward by virtue of this Prophecy.

7. What Christ does undertake, he does bring to pass, and not desist before
the work be finished, but this Rider who ever he be, went forth conquering, and
to conquer, that is, did conquer some, and had a mind to conquer more, but did
not finish the work.

8. Christ did threaten the Church of Ephesus to take the Gospel from them,
Rev. 2. 5. therefore he does not Prophecy in this Seal, that the Gospel should
continue and prevail among them, the event does show the contrary at this day,
for the Gospel is removed from thence, and from all the seven Churches to whom
this Prophecy was sent.

3. Quest. Whether the third Seal be a Prophecy of Famine, or of civil justice?

Ans. 1. Famine is Prophesied of in the next Seal, therefore not in this.

2. Balances are not an emblem or symbol of Famine, but of civil Justice rather.

3. To eat bread by weight is a sign of Famine, Ezekiel. 4. 16. but if a measure
of the finest grain be to be bought for a penny, and of courser three measures,
men should not be afraid of such a Famine* says Dr. Mayer p. 316, 319.

4. A measure of fine flour for a Shekel, and two measures of Barley for a
Shekel was a Prophecy of plenty in the Gates of Samaria, 2 King. 7. 1. Why may
not a measure of Wheat for a penny, and three measures of Barley for a penny be
a Prophecy of plenty too, or at least of sufficiency if not of plenty? It is
certain that a Shekel was much bigger than a penny, for a penny was but seven
pence half penny of our money, but a Shekel was fifteen pence at least: but
whether (...) were more than (...), the measure 2 King. 7. 1. more than the
measure Rev. 6. 6. or how much bigger it was is very uncertain.

5. The word Choenix which we translate measure, was as well a great measure as
a small. Now they which understand this Prophecy of Famine, say that Choenix
was a small measure, and did contain so much Wheat as would suffice a man for
one day and no more, and they say a penny was as much money as a man could earn
in one day, and no more. Now as for the word penny, it is true, it was as much
money as a man in those times could earn in one day, as may appear, Mat. 20. 2.
but as for the word Choenix it was no certain measure, but varied in respect of
Nations, places, and men, and was as well a great measure as a small, of which
see Mr. Mede Comment. Apocal p. 21. Yea Crispin in his Lexicon, makes (...), to
be half a bushel, and the Septuagint Ezekiel. 45. 10, 11. make it to be as much as
the Hebrew (...) which is as much as half a Bushel*

6. Suppose Choenix be a small measure and to contain a quart as some would
have it, and no more, yet here is no great Famine for all that, as was in
Jacobs time, when there was no Corn to be had for money in the Land of Canaan,
but they were forced to travel into Egypt* to buy them Corn, Genesis 42. 2. Here
be also three measures of Barley for a penny, and that would serve a man three
days, and here be three measures of Barley for another penny, and that would
serve a man three days more, and if he had a mind to eat wheaten bread there
were four days more in the week, wherein he might labor to provide him wheat
and other commodities which he wanted.

4. Quest. Whether the Prophecy of the sixth Seal be literally to be
understood?

Ans. 1. Where a literal sense may stand, an allegorical may not be used: but
here a literal sense may stand: therefore.

2. A Revelation cannot be a mystery, nor a mystery a Revelation, they are as
contrary each to other, as light is to darkness: but the Prophecy in this Seal,
and all others in this book are a Revelation: therefore not a mystery, nor
mystically to be understood.

3. Where things are mystically to be understood, they are afterward
interpreted in this Book, or in other Texts of Scripture which speak of the
same or the like matter, as Rev. 1. 20. Rev. 17. 7, 8, 9, etc. Dan. 7. 17. 23,
24. but here being no such interpretation, the Holy Ghost has left it to be
understood literally.

4. The same or the like things in other places are literally to be understood,
as Joel 2. 31. Mat. 24. 29. Mark. 13. 24, 25. Luke 21. 25, 26. and why may they
not as well be literally understood i^ this?

(...) begin, and when to have an end? or whether they be already past, or yet
to be expected?

Ans. 1. It is said in the beginning of the fifth Seal* How long Lord, Holy and
true, therefore it is a long time ere the fifth Seal is to begin, and
consequently it is a long time before the four first Seals have an end.

2. It is said in the close of that Seal, that they should rest yet for a
little season, until their fellow Servants, and their Brethren which should be
killed as they were, should be fulfilled, therefore that Seal is to continue
but a little season after the cry of the souls is over, and consequently the
seven Trumpets which contain Gods Judgments on their persecutors are to come
shortly after.

^. The sixth Seal is a Prophecy of the signs which Prognosticate the day of
Judgment, and the second coming of Christ to be near at hand, Mat. 24. 30. Mark
13. 26. Luke 21. 27, 28. therefore the fifth Seal is to continue, and the
Saints to suffer under it till those signs begin; and because those signs are
not yet begun, therefore the fifth Seal is not yet fulfilled.

4. From the coming of those signs unto the day of Judgment is but a short
time, as our Savior also says, Mat. 24. 33. therefore all the Prophecies in
the Revelation, from the sixth Seal, to the nineteenth chapter, v. 11. where
the day of Judgment does commence, are to continue but a short time, and
consequently it is a long time before the four first Seals do end, and for
ought we know, it is a long time before any of them shall begin.

5. The opposition between the words (...), things that must shortly come to
pass, Rev. 1. ^. and the words (...), things that must be done hereafter, Rev.
4. 1. intimate so much. The first are a Preface to the things spoken of in the
Epistles to the seven Churches, and show they were to begin shortly after John's
time; the second are a Preface to the Prophecies in this chapter, and in the
chapters following, and show they were not to begin so soon, but a long time
after.

6. The conjectural expositions of these Prophecies signify as much, for time
is the best interpreter of Prophecies, and if these Prophecies were fulfilled
already, men would not speak upon conjecture, nor write so variously and
uncertainly of the meaning of these Prophecies as they do.

CHAP. VII.
The Prophecy of the Sealed which were to be secured from suffering.
1. ANd after these doleful sights were over, I saw farther what should come to
pass in the time of this Prophecy before the seventh Prophecy should begin, to
wit that four Angels should stand upon the four corners of the earth, upon each
corner one, which should have power over the four winds that be in the earth to
let them loose, Mat. 24. 31.
or to keep them in, that they should not blow upon the earth, nor upon the
Sea, nor upon the Trees, but as they pleased.

2. And I saw that another Angel should then come with a Commission from the
East, and bring the Seal of the living God along with him, and that he should
cry with a loud voice to the four Angels which had power to hurt the earth, and
the Sea.

3. Saying. That they should not hurt the earth, nor the Sea, Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6*
nor the Trees, until we have sealed the Servants of God in their foreheads.

4. And I heard the number of them which were to be Sealed, and they were a
hundred and forty and four thousand young men of the Jewish Nation, which are
to be reckoned in this manner.

5. Of the young men of the tribe of Judah, shall be sealed twelve thousand, of
the young men of the tribe of Reuben, shall be sealed twelve thousand, of the
young men of the tribe of Gad, shall be sealed twelve thousand.

6 Of the young men of the tribe of Aser, shall be sealed twelve thousand, of
the young men of the tribe of Naphthali, shall be sealed twelve thousand, of
the young men of the tribe of Manasse, shall be sealed twelve thousand.

7. Of the young men of the tribe of Simeon, shall be sealed twelve thousand,
of the young men of the tribe of Levi, shall be sealed twelve thousand, of the
young men of the tribe of Issachar, shall be sealed twelve thousand.

8. Of the young men of the tribe of Zabulon, shall be sealed twelve thousand,
of the young men of the tribe of Ephraim, shall be sealed twelve thousand, of
the young men of the tribe of Benjamin, shall be sealed twelve thousand.

The Prophecy of the blessedness of the not sealed Martyrs after death.

9. But lest any should be discouraged from suffering for the cause of Christ,
because they be not sealed, and secured from suffering as the other were, there
was presented unto me the great felicity, and transcendent bliss, which the
Martyrs should enjoy in Heaven at the same time that the sealed ones should be
secured on earth; and I saw they should be more in number than the other were,
to wit an exceeding great multitude which no man could number, of all Nations,
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, which should stand before the Throne of
God, and before the Lamb in white robes of Glory, and Palms of triumph in their
hands.

10. Where they shall laud, and praise the Lord for that Heavenly Glory, and
felicity which they shall be in at this time, acknowledging, and saying,
Salvation proceeds from the Lord our God which sits upon the Throne, and from
Jesus Christ the Holy Lamb, and to them be it ascribed for evermore.

11. And not only they themselves, but also all the Holy Angels which are in
Heaven, shall laud, and praise the Lord for that Heavenly bliss and happiness
which the Martyrs shall have in Heaven at that time when the sealed ones are
sealed on earth.

12. Saying, Amen, Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor, and
Power, and Might be ascribed to the Lord our God for evermore.

13. And that I might understand the meaning of the Vision, one of the four and
twenty Elders asked of me, saying, What be these comely persons, whom thou
see arrayed in white robes of Glory, and Palms of triumph in their hands, and
from whence came they to that blessed State, and transcendent degree of
happiness which thou see them now to have?

14. And I said, Ah Sir, thou know who they are, and I would learn of thee
who they be, and from whence they came to that blessed State, and transcendent
degree of happiness which I see them in at this time, and what it was that
brought them hither. Then he said unto me, These be the Holy Martyrs of the
Church which were in great affliction in the World, and suffered death for the
cause of Jesus Christ, and shed their blood for professing of his Gospel, for
this cause it is that they be now in white robes of Glory which were made so by
his blood, and are given them as a reward for their suffering for him.

15. For this cause it is that they be now before the Throne of God, and serve
him in the Church Triumphant, as in their lifetime they did in the Church
Militant, and God shall dwell with them, and be their God.

16. They suffered hunger heretofore, but now they suffer it no more, they
suffered thirst heretofore, but now they shall suffer it no more, they suffered
persecution heretofore, but they shall suffer it no more.

17. For Jesus Christ shall feed them with his Heavenly Food, and give them
drink of his Heavenly Well, and God shall wipe all tears from off their eyes,
so that no sorrow shall come near them.

Disputation III.
1 Quest. Whether the sealed ones be the Jews, and they only?

Ans. 1. The tribes of the Children of Israel be usually the Jews only, as Genesis
49. 16. 28. Exodus 24. 4. and so in other places; but the sealed ones here
mentioned are one hundred forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the
Children of Israel, v. 4.

2. Where the tribes of Israel are distinctly reckoned by their names, there
the Jews are meant, and they only, as Genesis 49. 3. 5. etc. Numb. 1. 5, 6, etc.
Numb. 10. 14, 15, etc. Numb. 34. 19, 20, etc. Deuteronomy. 33. 6, 7, etc. Jos. 21 4,
5, etc. but here the tribes of Israel are distinctly reckoned by their names,
of the tribe of Juda, of the tribe of Reuben, of the tribe of Gad, etc.

3. Where the tribes of the Children of Israel are distinguished from the
Gentiles, there the Jews are meant and they only; but here the tribes of the
Children of Israel are distinguished from the Gentiles, v. 9.

4. If by the tribes of the Children of Israel be not meant the Jews only, how
shall we know when they are only spoken of in Scripture? and when not? or
whether they be only spoken of by that name at all?

5. I find that the word Israel is sometimes put for Jacob, Genesis 32. 28.
sometimes for the whole Nation of the Jews, Exodus 5. 2. sometimes for the ten
tribes only, Hos. 4. 15. sometimes for the Godly People of that Nation, and no
more, Romans 9. 6. Gal. 6. 16. But if any one can find, that by that word is
meant the Godly Gentiles only, or the Church of God in general consisting both
of Jews and Gentiles, let him cite the place, and prove it so to be, and I will
be of his mind.

6. The tribe of Juda is not the tribe of Reuben, nor the tribe of Reuben, the
tribe of Gad, etc. and if by these words we understand the Gentiles, what
Nation shall we understand by the tribe of Juda? what Nation by the tribe of
Reuben? and what Nation by the tribe of Gad? and so of all the rest. And if it
be said, That by the tribe of Juda, is meant the tribe that does confess God,
and by the tribe of Reuben, the tribe that does behold the Son, and by the
tribe of Gad and Aser a blessed company, what is this but to turn the propet
names of men into appellatives, and to confound the tribes one with another?
and make no distinction at all between them? For Reuben does confess God as
well as Juda, and Juda does behold the Son by Faith as well as Reuben, and both
of them are a blessed company. Yea, it were to make but one tribe of all the
twelve, for all the twelve tribes do confess God, and behold the Son by Faith,
and all the twelve tribes are a blessed company, and not one or two only. And
if we should translate the Hebrew proper names of men, and put them into
appellative, as the first of Matthew, and the third of Luke, and as some would
have it the nine first Chapters of the first Book of Chronicles, we shall make
^mad translation of the Bible, and mere nonsense of the Scripture.

7. If by the tribes of the Children of Israel, be meant the Church in general,
then by the tribe of Juda, is meant some Church or other in particular; and if
so, then let me request them to tell me what that Church is? what Church is
meant by the tribe of Juda? what Church by the tribe of Reuben? and what Church
by the tribe of Gad? and so of all the rest. But to these questions they have
hitherto held their peace.

2 Quest. Whether the definite number of the Sealed be definitely to be
understood?

Ans. 1. If the definite number of the sealed be put for an indefinite, how
shall we know when such a number is definitely to be understood? and when not?

2. A whole number, such as 10. 20. 30. 40. and the like, may be taken
indefinitely, and is so taken in this Book, Rev. 2. 10. but a broken number,
such as 120. 130. 140. and the like, are never so taken. Now the number of the
sealed is a broken number 144000, and so is 42 a broken number, and 1260 a
broken number, and such numbers are never taken indefinitely. See Annotations
of certain Learned Divines, Rev. 11. 3.

3. Where a number is opposed to an indefinite, it is definitely to ^e
understood; but the number of the sealed is opposed to an indefinite, v. 9.

4. Where a number is exactly told, and total'd it is definitely to be
understood: now the number of the sealed is exactly told, and total'd, and when
he says, v. 4. I heard the number of them which were sealed, his meaning is,
he heard the total number of them, after they were told, and the total number
was 144000, neither more nor less: and when afterward he says, I beheld, and
lo a great multitude which no man could number, his meaning is, they were not
told, and summed up as the former were, and therefore he could not set down the
just number of them, as he had done of the other.

3 Quest. Whether all the Jews were sealed, or but some only?

Ans. 1. The number of the sealed were one hundred forty and four thousand,
and no more; but if all the Jews were told, and total'd, they would far exceed
that number, Hos. 1. 10.

2. There be as many sealed of one tribe as of another, but it is not likely,
that at the execution of the Prophecy, there shall be no more person living of
one tribe than of another. We read Numb. 1. 21. 23. 25. that when the tribes
were numbered, the Children of Simeon were more than the Children of Reuben, and
the Children of Reuben were more than the Children of Gad at that time, and so
of other tribes there spoken of some were more than others; and so of every
tribe that shall be sealed at the execution of this Prophecy, it is likely,
that some tribes have more than others living upon earth, and not that every
tribe has just twelve thousand persons living at the time of sealing, and no
more.

3. All the Jews cannot be sealed because the whole tribe of Dan is left out,
and not any one of them sealed.

4. It is likely that in the opposite number to the sealed, there be some Jews
among them, and that they likewise are included under all Nations, and
Kindreds, and People, and Tongues mentioned v 9. and not the Gentiles only.

5. If all the Jews should be sealed at this time, then from the time of this
sealing none of them could suffer Martyrdom; but we find afterward that many of
them suffer Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ under the Beast, Rev. 12. 17.
Rev. 13. 7.

6. The first Fruits are less than all; but these sealed ones are the first
Fruits and no more, Rev. 14. 4.

7. It may well be thought that these sealed ones be men, and not women, and
that for these reasons. 1. Because it is not usual in Scripture, to count the
number of men and women, but of men only: thus when they went into Egypt the
men are counted, and not the women, Genesis 46. 8, 9, etc. and again when they
came forth of Egypt, the men were counted, and not the women, Numb. 1, 2. 20,
21. etc* and so the like in other places, the males are counted, and not the
Females, Ezra 2. 2, 3, etc. Nehemiah 7. 7, 8, 9, etc. and therefore these that
are counted here, be only Males, and not Females. 2. The first Fruits that were
dedicated to God of men, and of Beasts, were the Males only, and we may not
think that the first Fruits were only of vegetables, for then these sealed ones
could not be first Fruits, as they are said to be, Rev. 14. 4. but the first
born of men and Beasts were first Fruits as well as vegetables, Exodus 22. 29,
30. and such were males only, Exodus 34. 19, 20. Exodus 13. 2. 12. 15. Now these
sealed ones are called the first Fruits of God, and to the Lamb, Rev. 14. 4.
not in respect of sanctification, as all believers are, Iam. 1. 18. but by
peculiar dedication to God, and to the Lamb, as the first born were, and
therefore they be Males only. 3. Because these are said to be redeemed from
among men, Rev. 14. 4. Now what redemption is this? not the common redemption,
by the blood of Christ from sin, and condemnation which belongs to all the
elect in general, but the peculiar redemption of the first born which belongs
to the Males only, Exodus 13. 2. 12. 13. 15. Exodus 34. 19, 20. Lastly, because
it is said, Rev. 14. 4. These are they which were not defiled with Women, and
therefore they be men, and not women; and what kind of defilement does he mean?
not a spiritual defilement with Idols; which is as much as to say, that these
men be not Idolaters, nor yet a carnal defilement with Harlots, which is as
much as to say, that these men be not Adulterers: but a ceremonial defilement
with Wives, which is as much as to say, that these men be Virgins, and
unmarried persons, and had not known a woman, of which kind of defilement see
Exodus 19. 15. 1 Samuel 21. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

4 Quest. What kind of Seal is meant in this place? whether the Seal of
Sanctification, or of corporal preservation?

Ans. 1. The seal of sanctification is not committed to the Angels, but to the
Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. but the seal here spoken of, is committed to the
Angels, v. 2, 3.

2. The seal of sanctification is chiefly inward in the heart; but this here
spoken of, is only outward in the forehead, v. 3.

3. They are called the Servants of God before that they be sealed, v. 3. and
therefore they are sanctified before this seal is given unto them.

4. The seal of sanctification is a common seal, and does belong to all
believers; but this is peculiar to the persons here spoken of.

5. The seal of sanctification does not exempt from bodily danger, Rev. 11. 7.
Rev. 13. 7. But this is therefore given them, that their bodies might not be
hurt, Rev. 9. 4. see the like Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6. Exodus 12. 13. Genesis 4. 15.

6. The seal of sanctification is given successively in all ages of the World;
but these are sealed all at once in one day.

7. The seal of sanctification is given by degrees to some more, to others
less; but these are all sealed alike, one as far forth as another.

8. The seal of sanctification does admit degrees after it is given, and a man
is sanctified more at one time than another, 2 Pet. 3. 18. but these were
sealed as much at one time as another: and as the mark which Cain had, Genesis 4.
15. and which the men in Jerusalem had, Ezekiel. 9. 4. did not diminish or
increase, so the seal which these men had, continued in the same condition all
their life afterward.

5 Quest. Whether the great multitude mentioned v. 9. were sealed?

Ans. 1. It is not said that they were sealed, and therefore we may not think
they were, unless we have some reason for it.

2. They are a distinct company from the sealed, v. 4. 9.

3. They are more in number than the sealed, and therefore they could not all
be sealed, for the number of the sealed is but finite, one hundred forty and
four thousand, and no more; but this great multitude were so many that no
mortal man could number them, v. 9.

4. John knew the sealed who they were, and what their number was, v. 4. but he
knew not these who they were, nor the number of them, v. 9. 14.

5. The sealed were preserved from destruction, and the seal was therefore
given, that they might be secured, v. 1, 2, 3. Rev. 9. 4. But these are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb v. 14. and therefore these be Martyrs, but the
others are not.

6. The sealed be the men which are to live in the time of the seven Trumpets,
but are not to suffer under them, Rev. 9. 4. Rev. 14. 3, 4. but these latter be
the men which shall suffer for the Faith of Christ before the Trumpets shall
begin; and the reason why they are introduced in this place, is not to show the
time or causes of their sufferings, but to show the blissful state, and
happiness which they have in Heaven at this very time, when the other shall be
sealed upon earth.

7. The sealed be the men which are to get the Victory over the Beast, and over
his mark, and over the number of his name, Rev. 14. 2, 3. Rev. 15. 2, 3. but
these latter be the men which shall die for the Faith of Christ before the
Beast begins his Reign, and shall be then in Heaven, in unconceiveable bliss
and happiness, when the other shall be sealed upon earth.

8. The sealed be some eminent members of the Church Militant, which shall be
in jeopardy of their lives in the time of the ensuing Prophecies, but are
therefore sealed that they might be preserved from suffering in the time of
those dangers: the latter be some eminent members of the Church Triumphant,
which suffered while they lived, but when the sealed ones are sealed, they
shall be in Heaven secured from suffering any more.

CHAP. VIII.
The Prophecy of the seventh Seal, divided into seven Prophecies, called seven
Trumpets.
1. ANd when he had opened the seventh Seal, it did not immediately appear what
the Prophecy of that Seal should be, there came nothing forth of that Roll as
there did out of the other Rolls to show the Prophecy thereof, whereupon there
was silence in Heaven for the space of half an hour, every one expecting what
would happen, and show the Prophecy of this seventh Seal.

2. And after the space of half an hour, I saw there were given to the seven
mighty Angels which stood before the Throne of God, seven Trumpets, whereby I
understood, that these seven Trumpets contain the Prophecy of the seventh Seal.

3. And when they had received their Trumpets, another Angel came and stood at
the Altar, where the Souls were that prayed to God for Vengeance of their
blood, with a Golden Censer in his hand, and much sweet Incense in it, that he
might add it to the prayers of the Saints which were under the Altar; that as
they prayed for Vengeance of their blood, before their fellow Servants and
their Brethren were slain, so now they being slain, take up the same Request
again, and their fellow Servants and their Brethren join with them therein, and
the Angel offers Incense upon the Altar at the same time.

4. And the Incense which the Angel offered was added to the prayers of the
Saints, so that the prayers of the Saints which were under the Altar did not
ascend alone, but the smoke of the Incense which the Angels offered, ascended
with them, and both of them made a sweet perfume before Almighty God.

5. And when the Incense was consumed, the Angel took the fire which remained
upon the Altar, and filled the Censer with it, and cast it to the ground, in
token that the Offering of the Incense with the prayers of the Saints was
ended: and presently after that there was a great Noise of Thundering, and
Lightning, and a very great Earthquake, denoting God's heavy Judgments which
were now to fall upon the World for the wrong they did to his Saints, and for
the blood of his Saints which they had shed till this time, and many Years
before.

The Prophecy of the first Trumpet.
6. Then the seven Angels prepared themselves to sound their Trumpets
successively one after another.

7. So the first Angel sounded, Exodus 9. 22, 23, 24, 25.
and the Prophecy of his Trumpet was, Ps. 105. 32, 33.
that it should rain Hail, and Fire, and Blood upon the Land of Asia, as
heretofore there rained Hail and Fire upon the Land of Egypt, so that the third
part of Trees should be burnt up, and all the green Grass should be burnt up,
and this is to be done not in Europe, but in Asia.

The Prophecy of the second Trumpet.
8. And after the first Angel, the second Angel sounded, and the Prophecy of
his Trumpet was, that a Sulphurous Mountain burning with Fire, should be cast
into the Sea of Asia, Exodus 7. 19, 20, 21.
and the third part of that Sea should be turned into Blood, as the Waters of
Egypt sometimes were.

9. And thereupon the third part of the fish that shall be in the Sea shall
die, and the third part of the Ships shall be destroyed.

The Prophecy of the third Trumpet.
10. And after him the third Angel sounded, and the Prophecy of his Trumpet
was, that a great blazing Star should fall from Heaven, burning and flaming
like a Torch, and that in burning, it should part asunder, and fall into the
third part of the Rivers, and into the third part of the Springs of waters
throughout the Land of Asia.

11. And the Name of the Star from that day forward shall be called Wormwood,
and the third part of the waters shall be as the juice of Wormwood, and many
men shall die by drinking of the Waters, Exodus 15. 23.
because they be made exceeding bitter as the juice of Wormwood is, and as the
waters of Marah were.

The Prophecy of the fourth Trumpet.
12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and the Prophecy of his Trumpet was, that
the third part of the Sun should be smitten with darkness, and the third part
of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, and the day should want the third
part of that Light it had before, and the Night likewise.

13. And before the fifth Angel sounded, I saw an Angel flying through the
midst of Heaven, and I heard him say as he fled along, Woe, woe, woe, to the
Inhabitants of the Land of Asia, by reason of the plagues of the three other
Angels which are yet to sound their Trumpets more grievous and calamitous than
any of the former were.

Disputation IV.
Quest. 1. Whether the four first Trumpets were fulfilled in Judaea before the
Siege of Jerusalem by Vespasian, and be meant of the Seditions and Slaughters
that were there?

Answ. 1. No Prophecy is fulfilled before it be revealed; but these four
Trumpets were revealed to John in the Reign of Domitian, therefore not
fulfilled in Judaea before the Siege of Jerusalem by Vespasian.

2. No Prophecy is fulfilled before it be written by the Prophet, and made
known unto the people, for then it is a History and not a Prophecy; but these
Visions in their Opinion were written in the Reign of Vespasian, therefore not
fulfilled before the siege of Jerusalem, which began in the Reign of Nero.

3. The seventh Seal is not fulfilled before the sixth; but if these four
Trumpets be meant of the seditions and slaughters in Judaea, before the siege
of Jerusalem, a good part of the seventh Seal, even so much of it as is
comprised in the four Trumpets, will be fulfilled before the sixth; for the
sixth Seal in their opinion is a Prophecy of the siege (...) it self, and by
the Kings, and the great Men, and the rich Men, which hid themselves in Dens,
they understand the men that hid themselves in Caves at the taking of the City.

4. If these Trumpets be meant of the seditions and slaughters of the Jews
before the siege of Jerusalem, what is the difference between these Trumpets
and the second Seal? For they say the second Seal is meant of the slaughters
and seditions of the Jews by one another before the siege of Jerusalem, and if
these Trumpets be meant of them too, what difference is between them?

5. If these Trumpets be a Prophecy of the seditions of the Jews; why do they
not tell us what sedition is meant by the first Trumpet, what sedition by the
second, and what sedition by the third? And if it be said that they are meant
of the seditions of the Jews in gross, what is this but to make a Chaos of the
Revelation? To which may be added, that they told us before, Chap. 6. verse. 1.
that the things which Christ foretold concerning the Jews, Mat. 24. are set
down in gross in the sixth Chapter, and more particularly as they have their
Execution in the Chapters following; and now I am come to the eighth Chapter,
here be no particulars neither, but the seditions of the Jews in gross, what is
this but to gainsay here what they said before?

6. The Angels be not the Authors or Executioners of sedition; but four Angels
be the Authors or Executioners of the four first Trumpets, and the prime Agents
under God, whereby they come to pass, as appears not only verse. 7. 8. 10. but
also Rev. 7. 2, 3.

7. Where shall we find in all the Scripture, that by Fire is meant sedition? I
find it sometimes taken for affliction, persecution, and temptation, Psalm. 66.
12. Zach. 13. 9. Mal. 3. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 12. but for sedition never.

8. If by Fire (...) these Trumpets be meant sedition, what is meant by Hail in
the first Trumpet? is that sedition too? where have they a president for that?
How is it that men interpret Scripture, and have no Scripture for what they
say? To which may be added, that Fire is hot and dry, but Hail is cold and
moist, and how can these two be symbols of the same thing in one, and the same
Prophecy? surely if the Fire be sedition, the Hail must be some other thing.

9. If by Fire be meant sedition, what is meant by Trees and green Grass which
the Fire burnt up, v. 7? Here they tell us that by green Grass is meant the
righteous, but what is meant by Trees they do not tell us, perhaps they think
that by Trees is meant the righteous too? but this is not so, for but the third
part of the Trees was burnt up, but all the green Grass was burnt up, and none
left, and therefore the Grass is one thing, and the Trees another thing.

10. Where shall we find in all the Scripture, that by green grass is meant the
righteous? True it is, that green trees are sometimes taken for the righteous,
Luke 23. 31. but green Grass never.

11. The green Grass is opposed to those which have the seal of God in their
foreheads, Rev. 7. 3. Rev. 9. 4. now by the latter is meant the righteous,
therefore by the former is meant some other thing.

12. If by Fire be meant sedition, what is meant by Sea in the second Trumpet,
where it is said that a great Mountain burning with Fire, was cast into the Sea?
here they tell us that by Sea is meant the Land of Galilee, why do they not
also say that by the earth in the first Trumpet, upon which also Fire was cast,
is meant the Sea of Galilee? If this be not to wrest the Scripture, I know not
what is; for if by Sea be meant the Land, why may they not as well say, that by
Land is meant the Sea?

13. If by Sea be meant the Land, what is meant by Ships, when it is said the
third part of Ships were destroyed? be there any Ships upon the Land? Here they
tell us that by Ships is meant the Cities, why do they not also say that by
Cities in the Revelation, is meant the Ships? And when it is said Rev. 16. 19.
the great City was divided into three parts, why do they not say the meaning
is, the great Ship was divided into three parts? And when it is said, Rev. 17.
18. the woman which thou saw is the great City which Reigns over the Kings
of the earth, why do they not say the meaning is, the woman is the great Ship
which Reigns over the Kings of the Sea? But let them tell me indeed, be
Cities meant by Ships? then when it is said v. 9. the third part of Ships were
destroyed, the meaning is, the third part of Cities were destroyed; but History
will tell us, that not Jerusalem only, but all the Cities were destroyed by the
Romans, except some few only which yielded to them of their own accord, and
there was not one of three, much less two of three left remaining, which was
not destroyed by them, and the time when this was done, was after the siege of
Jerusalem by Gallus, whenas it is here according to their exposition of the
Trumpets set before it, for they will have the destruction of the Cities be the
meaning of the second Trumpet, and the siege of the City by Gallus the meaning
of the fourth Trumpet, which cannot be, because Jerusalem was besieged first by
Gallus, and the Cities were destroyed afterward, of which see Bishop Ussers
Annal. p. 691, 692.

14. If by Sea be meant the Land, and by Ships the Cities, what is meant by the
Rivers, and Fountains of Waters in the third Trumpet? Here they tell us, that
by Rivers, and Fountains of Waters, is meant the Towns, and Villages. Alas wit,
whither will thou go? From Sea to Land, from Ships to Cities, from Rivers and
Fountains of Waters, to Towns and Villages, and when all this is done the Text
will not bear it, for men died in the Towns and villages, but not of the Towns
and Villages, but in the Text it is said men died of the Waters, (...) of the
Waters, not in the Waters, and the death which they died, was a sickly death,
as they that drink poisoned water do, but the death which the Jews died was a
bloody death.

15. What is the meaning of the fourth Trumpet? Here they tell us that the
fourth Trumpet is a Prophecy of the siege of Jerusalem by Gallus, but* the time
does not agree with their exposition of the Trumpets, for this siege of his was
before the War began in Galilee, when as by their exposition of the Trumpets it
is made to succeed it.

16. The smiting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars are used in Scripture, to
prefigure an utter desolation of a City or Country, and not a bare siege and no
more, Ezekiel. 32. 7. Esa. 13. 10. Joel 2. 10. 31. Joel 3. 15. but here they make
the smiting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars to denote a bare siege of Jerusalem by
Gallus without the taking and destroying of it.

17. If the fourth Trumpet be a Prophecy of the siege of Jerusalem by Gallus,
what is meant by the Sun, Moon, and Stars which that Trumpet speaks of? Here
they tell us that by the Sun is meant the Temple, by the Moon the City, and by
the Stars the People; but by their leave, the Sun, Moon, and Stars are said to
be smitten in the Prophecy, so was not the Temple, City, nor People by Gallus:
but rather as when the Syrians left the siege of Samaria and fled, Israel had
the Victory against the Syrians, so when Gallus raised the siege of Jerusalem,
the Jews had the Victory against the Romans. But why may not these things be
understood literally? Do not they themselves understand the day and night in
the fourth Trumpet literally? Why not the Sun, and Moon, and Stars also? But of
this more in the next Questions.

2 Quest. Whether the Prophecies of the seven Trumpets be literally to be
understood?

Ans. 1. What necessity is there to understand them otherwise? We may not
forsake the literal sense of Scripture except necessity do enforce us.

2. How is this a Revelation, if all the Prophecies of the seven Trumpets be
mystically to be understood?

3. Where have we an interpretation of the mystery as we have in other places
where things are mystically delivered, as Rev. 1. 20. Rev. 17. 7, 8. Is there
not as much need of an interpretation here, as there is there? And is it not
likely that the Holy Ghost would afford us an interpretation here, as well as
there, if these things were mystically to be understood.

4. What text of Scripture does the literal interpretation cross?

5. What iniquity is there in the literal sense?

6. What absurdity does follow therefrom? Unless these things be made manifest
(as indeed they cannot be,) let no man find fault with me if I understand the
Prophecies of the seven Trumpets literally.

7. We may not make the Scripture a nose of Wax, and turn it whither we please;
but if we understand the Trumpets mystically, what do we else, but make the
Scripture a nose of Wax, and turn it whither we please? Yea, every one takes
the liberty to interpret it as his private fancy and affection leads him, and
there be well nigh as many interpretations of the Trumpets, as there be Writers
on them: and from whence does this proceed, but from the false preconceived
opinion that the Prophecies of the seven Trumpets be mystically to be
understood?

3 Quest. Whether the Prophecy of the first Trumpet be literally to be
understood?

Ans. 1. All the reasons in the former question prove it.

2. This Trumpet is less grievous and calamitous than the fifth, Rev. 8. 13.
But if we understand this Trumpet to be meant of Wars which destroy the body,
or of Heresies which destroy the souls of men, this Trumpet will be more
grievous, and calamitous than the fifth, and that because the Locusts in the
fifth Trumpet, do not hurt the soul but the body only, and they do not kill the
body outright as Wars do, but hurt it only, and put it to pain, and that for
five months and no more, Rev. 9. 4, 5.

3. This plague is the same for kind with the seventh plague of Egypt, Exodus 9.
18, 19. 22, 23, 24. and what man will say that that Egyptian plague is
mystically to be understood? and if that be not, why is this?

4. The Holy Ghost does as good as say, that the Trees, and the green Grass be
not men, for the Locusts were to hurt men, but not the Grass, nor any green
thing, nor any Tree, Rev. 9. 4. And Mr. Mede himself does confess, that the
Trees, and green Grass may be so expounded, Comment. Apoc. p. 92.

5. Good men cannot be meant by Trees, and green Grass, for these plagues were
not to fall on good men, but on bad only; and bad men cannot be meant by them,
for the Locusts were to hurt the bad, but to let all the Trees, and all the
green Grass alone, and not to hurt any of them, Rev. 9. 4.

6. Mighty men cannot be meant by Trees, for there be little Trees as well as
great, and the Hail spared neither of them, but fell on Trees indifferently
without excepting any sort: and though by Cedars, and Oaks of Bashan, Esa. 2.
13. some understand mighty men, yet Trees in General cannot point out one sort
of men more than another, for there be little low Trees, as well as great and
tall, and little Trees cannot note out mighty men, though great Trees such as
Cedars, and Oaks of Bashan sometimes may.

7. Mean men cannot be meant by green Grass, for then all mean men should be
destroyed by this Trumpet, and only two parts of mighty men be left alive to be
the objects for the other Trumpets to play their parts upon.

4 Quest. Whether the Prophecies of the second, third, and fourth Trumpets be
literally to be understood?

Ans. 1. All the reasons in the second question may be reduced hither.

2. There is not such a woe Prophesied of in these Trumpets as in those which
follow, Rev. 8. 13. But if we understand these Trumpets mystically of Wars,
Heresies, or seditions, the woe of these Trumpets will be far greater than of
the other, for the Locusts in the fifth Trumpet did spare the life, and but
hurt the body only, Rev. 9. 5. But Wars, Heresies, and seditions destroy the
body and soul to boot.

3. What mystical interpretation soever is put upon one Trumpet, the same may
be put upon the other Trumpets also, and then what difference is between them?
For if we understand the second Trumpet to be meant of Wars and seditions, we
may as well understand the first, third, or fourth to be meant of Wars and
seditions too; or if we understand the second Trumpet to be meant of Heresies,
we may as well understand the other Trumpets to be meant of Heresies too, and
then what difference is between them?

4. The Ships mentioned in the second Trumpet, are literally to be understood,
for they are never taken otherwise in Scripture; and therefore the Sea, and all
that follows in that Trumpet after it are literally to be understood also.

5. The second Trumpet is the same for kind with the first Plague of Egypt,
Exodus 7. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. and what living soul will say that that Plague of
Egypt is mystically to be understood? and if that be not, why is this?

6. The judgment on the Rivers, and Fountains of Waters mentioned in the third
Trumpet, is the same which befell the waters of Marah, Exodus 15. 23. therefore
as that is literally to be understood, so is this also.

7. The Darkness in the fourth Trumpet, is of near affinity with the darkness
which befell the Land of Egypt, Exodus 10. 21, 22, 23. and therefore as that is
literally to be understood, so is this?

8. The judgments Prophesied of in these Trumpets, are not contained in the
first words, but in the last; for instance, the judgment foretold in the first
Trumpet is expressed in these words. And the third part of the Trees was burnt
up, and all green Grass was burnt up; and the Hail, and Fire mingled with Blood
which fell upon the earth was the natural cause thereof. So the judgment in the
second Trumpet is expressed in these words. And the third part of the Creatures
which were in the Sea, and had life, died, and the third part of the Ships were
destroyed; and the Mountain burning with Fire, and cast into the Sea, and
turning it to Blood was the cause thereof. So the Judgment in the third Trumpet
is expressed in these words. And the third part of the waters became Wormwood,
and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter; and the Star
which fell into the Rivers burning like a Torch was the cause thereof, and the
Star is called Wormwood, not formally, as if the Star it self were bitter as
Wormwood is, but efficiently, because it made the waters bitter as Wormwood is.
Lastly, the judgment in the fourth Trumpet is contained in these words. And the
day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise; and the smiting
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars with darkness was the true cause thereof.

Ob. But when were these things literally fulfilled?

Ans. 1. The like question may be asked by me, when were these Trumpets
fulfilled mystically? Show me this he that can. 2. The same things for kind
were fulfilled in the Land of Egypt, and that in a literal sense. But if the
Question be, whether these Trumpets in particular be fulfilled already, my
answer is, they are yet to be expected, and I prove it thus. The sixth seal is
yet to be expected, therefore the seventh seal succeeding it in which the
Trumpets are, must be expected also. Again, the sealing of the Servants of God
in their foreheads is yet to be expected, therefore the Trumpets which follow
after it, are to be expected also. And if we can have Faith to expect our
Saviors Prophecy, Mat. 24. 29. Mark, 13. 24, 25. Luke 21. 25, 26. which is the
same in special, if not in particular with the sixth seal, In specie if not in
indiv iduo.
and shall be fulfilled in a literal sense, why can we not have Faith to wait
on God for the fulfilling of the Trumpets also?

CHAP. IX.
The Prophecy of the fifth Trumpet.
1. AND the fifth Angel sounded, and the Prophecy of his Trumpet was, that an
Angel shall descend from Heaven to the earth, Rev. 20. 1.
and the Key of the bottomless Pit shall be given into his hand.

2. And he shall open the bottomless Pit, and upon the opening of it shall come
a great smoke out of the bottom of the Pit, like the smoke of a great Furnace,
and the air shall be darkened with the smoke, and it shall be so thick that the
Sun shall not be able to break through to give light upon the Earth.

3. And out of the smoke shall come Locusts into the Land of Asia, Wisd. 11. 18.
of a most horrid shape and form, never the like seen before, and they shall
have power to sting the Inhabiters of that Land as the Scorpions of the earth
have power.

4. And it shall be given them in charge, that they shall not hurt the Grass of
the Field, Rev. 7. 3.
nor any green Herb, nor any vegetable Tree, but sting the Men only which shall
not have the Seal of God in their Forehead.

5. And their Commission shall be not to kill the Men outright, but torment
them only five Months and no more; Luke 1. 24.
and the pain of these Men shall be as grievous as the pain that comes of a
Scorpion when he has stung a Man.

6. And all the time of these five Months shall Men wish for Death, thinking to
end their pains thereby, but shall not find it, and shall desire to die, rather
than to live in such woeful pain and torment, but Death shall flee away from
them.

7. And the bodies of these Locusts shall be in shape like to Horses prepared
unto Battle, and they shall have on their Heads the shapes of Crowns, like
Crowns of Gold, and their Faces shall be in shape like the Faces of Men, but
the matter of them shall be such as insects have.

8. And the hair which they shall have, shall be in shape like the hair of
Women, and the teeth which they shall have, shall be in shape like the teeth of
Lions, but the matter shall be such as insects have.

9. And the Brest-plates they shall have, shall be in shape like Brest-plates
made of Iron, and the dreadful noise of their Wings shall be as the noise of
Chariots drawn with many Horses, running furiously unto Battle.

10. And the tails which they shall have, shall be like the tails of
Scorpions, and they shall have stings in their tails like the stings of
Scorpions, and their Commission shall be to sting the Men of Asia, five Months,
literally to be understood.

11. And they shall have a King or Ruler over them, to guide them, Genesis 19. 13.
and direct them in this Work, so that they shall not sting every one they
meet, Exodus 12. 23.
but whom the Angel of, 2 King. 19, 35.
or over the bottomeless Pit will have* them, and this Angel is not an evil
Angel but a good Angel of the Lord, Mat 13. 41, 42, 49, 50.
whose Name in Hebrew is Abaddon, 1 Cor. 10. 10.
in Greek Apollyon, and in English a Destroyer, Heb. 11. 28.
not of the Saints and People of God, but of the Enemies of God and of his
Church.

12. The first Woe is past when these things shall be fulfilled, and behold
there be two Woes yet to come after these things are ended.

The Prophecy of the sixth Trumpet, reaching from the thirteenth Verse of this
Chapter, to the fourteenth Verse of the eleventh Chapter, or the first part
thereof.
13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and the Prophecy of his Trumpet was, Rev. 8.
2.
that a Command should come from God from the four Corners of the Altar, upon
which the Angel offered Incense before the Throne of God.

14. Saying to the sixth Angel which did sound the sixth Trumpet, that he
should go and loose the four Angels, which should be then bound or restrained
from doing Hurt at the great River of Asia, called Euphrates; but now they
should be loosed to execute God's Judgments on the people that dwell there.

15. Then the sixth Angel shall go and loose the four Angels which before were
bound at Euphrates, but ready upon Command to slay the third part of Men that
shall be dwelling there, and that in as little time as an hour, or in as little
time as a day, or in as little time as a month, or in as little time as a year,
waiting for a Command to put their power in Execution.

16. And the number of the Army of Horse, that under these four Angels shall be
employed in this Work, shall be two Hundred thousand thousand; for the number
of them was related unto me.

17. But these Horses shall not be usual Horses, nor their Riders Men properly
so called, but either Angels or strange kind of Creatures, Wisd. 11. 18, 19.
newly created for this purpose, and never known in the World before; and thus
I saw the Horses in the Vision, and they that sat on them, what ever they be,
shall have Corslets of a fiery color, and of a blew jacinth color, and of a
pale Brimstone color, and the heads of their Horses shall be in shape like the
Heads of Lions, and out of the mouths of every one of them shall come forth
fire, smoke and brimstone, literally to be understood.

18. Of these three shall the third part of Men be killed, which shall be
dwelling at Euphrates at that time, some shall be killed by the fire, and some
by the smoke, and others by the brimstone which shall come out of the Horses
mouths.

19. For the power of these strange Beasts shall be in their mouths, and which
is yet the more strange, they shall have mouths in their tails, for their
tails shall be like a Serpents body, and have Heads at the end of them, and in
their Heads a mouth, with which they slay the third part of Men which be
dwelling at Euphrates at the Execution of the Prophecy.

20. And the two other parts of Men which shall escape from these Plagues and
not be killed by them, shall not for all this repent of their former
wickedness, that they should not worship Devils, nor Idols which are the work
of Men's hands, and are made of Gold, and of Silver, and of Brass, and of Stone,
and of Wood, and are such stupid Figments, that they neither see what Men do
unto them, nor hear what they pray unto them for, nor do them any good at all.

21. Neither shall they for all this repent of their other sins which before
these Plagues they committed, as of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor
of their Fornication, nor of their Thefts, but persist in them as they did
before.

Disputation V.
1 Quest. Whether the Locusts in the Prophecy of the Fifth Trumpet be literally
to be understood?

Answ. 1. All the reasons in the former Chapter Quest. 2. may be reduced hither.

2. No Text of Scripture is mystically to be understood without sufficient
reason or warrant from Gods word; but Men are so far from giving a reason of
the mystical sense of these Locusts, that they never so much as go about it. It
is supposed beforehand and must not be questioned nor denied, for if it be,
they are undone, and know not what to say unto it; it is supposed (I say) that
the Text is mystically to be understood, and then they interpret it as they
please. Non amo te (...) nec possum dicere quare, Hoc tantum possum dicere, non
amo te

O literal sense I love thee not, the cause I cannot tell.
This one thing I can say of thee, I love thee not, Farewell.
3. The Trees, the Grass of the Earth, and the green Herbs are literally to be
understood as was proved before, Chap. 8. Q. 3. why not the Locusts also? Mr.
Mede himself does confess that the Trees may be so expounded Comment. Apoc.
page 92.

4. Men are not made of smoke but ex humano semine of the seed of Man, but
these Locusts were made of smoke, for out of the Pit came forth smoke, and out
of the smoke came forth Locusts, v. 3.

5. Wicked Men were to be hurt by these Locusts, v. 4. but if the Locusts
should be such themselves, what wicked Men be there left for them to hurt, the
Locusts be so many?

6. All sorts of wicked men were to be hurt by these Locusts, no whole sort
excepted; but if the Locusts should be wicked Men themselves, one sort would be
excepted, for the Locusts by this supposal are one sort themselves.

7. The description of the Locusts does not agree to Men, neither can it in any
wise be applied unto Men, but unto strange hideous Creatures never known in the
World before very fitly, and such these Locusts be as appears by the
description of them. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.

8. Only the faces of these horrid Locusts, were as the faces of Men, and
their hair like the hair of Women, v. 7, 8. but the rest of their bodies was
like to other Creatures.

9. The shapes of the Locusts were like Horses prepared unto Battle, v. 7,
etc. but it is not likely that Men should have such monstrous hideous shapes as
be here described from the seventh Verse to the middle of the tenth, neither is
it likely that this is a description of the Locusts, quoad mores, in respect of
manners, but quoad externam formam and figuram, in respect of outward form and
figure and composition of their bodies. And when it is said they were like
Horses prepared unto Battle; the meaning is not, that they shall have such
Flesh or Armor as Horses have, but that they shall have such shapes as War
Horses have. And when it is said, that on their heads were, as it were Crowns of
Gold; the meaning is not, that the matter of these Crowns shall be Gold, but
that they shall be in shape and color like Crowns made of Gold. And when it is
said that their Faces were as the Faces of Men; the meaning is not, that they
shall have such flesh in their Faces as Men have; but the meaning is, that
their Faces shall be in shape and figure like the Faces of Men, though the
matter whereof they are made, be such matter as insects have.

10. Men have reason to guide them, and direct them in their doings, but these
Locusts wanted reason, and therefore they have an Angel to direct them, verse.
11.

11. The Saracens are supposed to be the Men that should be meant by these
Locusts, others think the Goths and Vandals, and some of late the Zelots, and
seditious Persons in Judaea, before the taking of Jerusalem by Titus: But that
none of these be meant, I prove by these Reasons following. 1. The Saracens had
a being in Arabia, before this Trumpet was revealed to John, and so had the
Zelots in Judaea; but these Locusts have no being in the World until this
Trumpet is put in Execution. 2. Some of the Goths and Saracens were good Men,
and embraced the Christian Faith; of which number Dietricus de Berna was one,
and Totilas another; but none of the Locusts were good Men. 3. The Locusts were
not to hurt the Grass of the Earth, nor any green Herb, nor any Tree but only
Men, v. 4. But it were very strange if none of the Saracens, none of the Goths
and Vandals, and none of the Zelots, at any time should hurt the grass of the
Earth, nor any green Herb, nor any Tree but Men only. 4. The Locusts did only
hurt the body, but did not kill it outright, v. 5. But the Saracens, Goths,
and Vandals killed Men outright, and the Zelots in Judaea by the help of the
Idumaeans, slew eight thousand Men in one Night. See Bishops Ussers Annal. page
693. 5. The Locusts were not to hurt the good, but the bad only, v. 4. But the
Saracens, Goths, and Vandals, and the Zelots in Judaea, made a prey of both. 6.
The Locusts were to hurt but five Months and no longer, v. 5. But whether we
understand the five Months literally, as they ought to be understood, (for
Months are never taken otherwise in Scripture) the Zelots in Judaea did
continue longer, for they began in the Reign of Nero, after that Vespasian had
subdued Galilee, and continued all the t^^e of Galba, which was seven Months,
all the time of Otho, which was three Months, all the time of Vitellius, which
was eight Months, and all the time of Vespasian, until the taking of Jerusalem
by Titus, which was above a year; or whether we understand the five Months
mystically for one Hundred and fifty years, the Goths and Vandals continued
longer, and the Saracens remain to this day. 7. This Trumpet is not yet begun,
as has been proved in the former Chapter, Q. 4. But if we understand it of the
Zelots in Judaea, or of the Saracens, Goths, and Vandals, it should be past
long ago. 8. The Locusts have a King over them, v. 11. and this King is not an
evil Angel (as is generally supposed) but a good, and a Destroyer of wicked Men
for their sins, as shall be proved in the next Question; and therefore the
Saracens, Goths, and Vandals, and the Zelots in Judaea, be not the Locusts
mentioned in this place; for they were rather led by Satan than by such a King.
9. The Zelots had unusual and unheard of ways to torture Men; and that was by
stopping the passage of their privy members with the Seeds of Orobus, and by
horrid and painful Torments in their Fundaments, as Eusebius writes of them,
lib. 3. c. 6. but yet the Instruments which they used to do the latter Villainy,
were artificial and external, such as pricks, and sharp twigs; but these
Locusts had another way to torture Men, and that was not by external
Instruments, as the Zelots did, but by internal of their own bodies; and that
was by the sting in their tails, for they had tails like to Scorpions, and
there were stings in their tails, and with these stings did they torment Men,
v. 10. and the pain that came of these Torments, was like the pain that comes
of a Scorpion when he has stung a Man, v. 5. and this was a way of torturing
which the Zelots could not use, nor did the Saracens, Goths and Vandals, nor
any other men, for they have not stings in their bodies to torment men with, as
the Locusts have.

2 Quest. Whether the Angel of the bottomless Pit, whose Name in Hebrew is
Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, be a good Angel, or a bad?

Answ. 1. The Angel shall come from Heaven at the Execution of the Prophecy, so
shall not Satan at that time; for he was never there since his Fall, nor ever
shall be.

2. The Angel shall come from Heaven in the likeness of a Star; but Satan fell
from thence at the beginning of the world in the likeness of a Devil.

3. The Angel shall come from Heaven willingly, but Satan fell from thence
against his will; it is true he sinned willingly, and that in Heaven too, but
he was driven forth of Heaven against his will, 2 Pet. 2. 4.

4. The Angel has Commission from God, to do what he does at this time; but
Satan when he acts his Wickedness, goes without Commission to act what he does.

5. The Angel has the Key of the bottomless Pit committed to him, v. 1. but
that Key is not committed unto Satan, but to a good Angel only, Rev. 20. 1, 2,
3.

6. The Angel has power to open the bottomless Pit, which it seems was shut
before, v. 2. but Satan is to be a Prisoner in that Pit, and has no power to
open it at all, Rev. 20. 3. 7.

7. The Angel has command over the bottomless Pit, and he is therefore called
the Angel of the bottomless Pit, because he has command over it, as the Angel
of the Waters is so called because he has command over them, Rev. 16. 5. but
Satan is to be a Prisoner in that Pit, and has no more command over it, than a
Fettered Prisoner has over a Jail.

8. The Angel is called a destroyer, v. 11. but where shall we find Satan
called by that name? I deny not but he is such a one, for he destroyed Jobs
Children, Job. 1. 19. and he is called a murderer, Joh. 8. 44. but he is never
called a destroyer in direct terms as the Angel is here.

9. Suppose Satan be called a destroyer in direct terms, be not the good Angels
called so too? Were not the Angels that destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah good
Angels, Genesis 19. 13? was not the Angel that destroyed Israel with the
Pestilence, a good Angel, 2 Samuel 24. 15, 16? and was not the Angel that
destroyed Sennacheribs Army a good Angel, 2 King. 19. 35? and is not a good
Angel called a destroyer, Exodus 12. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 10? And if every one of
these were good Angels, why should any one think that the Angel the destroyer
in the fifth Trumpet is not a good Angel but a bad?

10. Is there not a grand difference between a spiritual destroyer of the souls
of men, and a corporal destroyer of the body only? Now Satan is a Spiritual
destroyer of the souls of men by infecting them with sin; but the Angel here
spoken of, is a Corporal destroyer of the body only, as appears v. 4, 5.

11. Is there not also a great difference, between a destroyer of good men, and
a destroyer of wicked men? Now Satan is a main destroyer of good men, as when
he moves Tyrants to persecute the Church of God, his aim is to destroy good
men, and them only, and if it were in his power he would not leave a good man
alive upon the earth, his malice is so great, as appears Rev. 12, and 13. but
the Angel here spoken of is a destroyer, not of good men for serving God, but
of wicked men only for their sins, v. 4, 5. 20.

12. Is there not a vast difference between a destroyer ex Officio, out of
Office, and Duty toward God, and a destroyer ex Malitia, out of Malice, both
to God and man? Now Satan is a destroyer in the latter sense; and is therefore
called a Murderer, because he destroys men out of malice, Joh. 8. 44. but the
Angel here mentioned is a destroyer ex Officio out of Office, and Duty toward
God, v. 1, 2.

3 Quest. Whether the sixth Trumpet be a Prophecy of Vespasians Army, marching
to besiege Jerusalem?

Ans. 1. We have already proved that John received the Revelation not in the
Reign of Claudius, but in the Reign of Domitian the Roman Emperor, Disp. 1. Q.
1. therefore this is not a Prophecy of Vespasians Army marching to besiege
Jerusalem, which was past some years before the revealing of the Prophecy.

2. They that be of this mind, do hold withal that these Visions were written
by St. John in the Reign of Vespasian, therefore this Prophecy is not meant of
the marching of his Army to besiege Jerusalem, which was before his Reign began.

3. The fifth Trumpet is before the sixth, as appears v. 12. but the fifth
Trumpet in their opinion, is a Prophecy of what the Zelots did in the time of
the siege, therefore the sixth Trumpet which follows after it both in Vision
and Execution, is not meant of the marching of Vespasian, and his Army to begin
the siege.

4. To what purpose should our Savior show John in this Vision the besieging
or destruction of Jerusalem, which was so plainly told him before, Mat. 24. 2.
Luke 19. 43, 44?

5. Here is no mention nor intimation of the besieging of Jerusalem, nor of
besieging any other City, but of killing the third part of men without
besieging of them.

6. The Army here spoken of, came from Euphrates, v. 14. which is a River in
Asia, but Vespasians Army came from Rome, which is a City in Europe.

7. The Army here Prophesied of, were two hundred thousand thousand, but
Vespasians Army were nothing near so many.

8. The Army here meant, be only Horse, and no Foot, v. 16. but Vespasians Army
were Foot as well as Horse.

9. The Army here spoken of, did slay men with Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone, but
Vespasians Army slew the Jews in Jerusalem with the Sword, according to our
Saviors Prophecy, Luke 21. 24.

10. The Army here spoken of, slew the third part of men, and no more; but
Vespasians Army slew well nigh all the Jews in Jerusalem, and they that escaped
were but few to the number of the slain.

11. They that escaped, and were not slain by these plagues, repented not of
the works of their own hands, that they should not worship Devils and Idols of
Gold, etc. v. 20. But the Jews that lived in Vespasian's time, and were not
killed by him, were not guilty of these sins, for they never worshipped Idols,
neither they nor their Fathers, since their Transportation into Babylon.

12. There is no express nor implicit mention of Jerusalem in all this
Prophecy, nor in the next Chapter, nor in the eleventh Chapter, except it be v.
2. and 13. where it is said, that the tenth part of the City fell, and not the
whole City, and it fell by an Earthquake, and not by the hands of Men, as it
did in Vespasian's time; and it fell too upon the Gentiles that were there, and
not upon the Jews; and in the Earthquake were slain seven thousand men, and
the Remnant that escaped, gave glory to the God of Heaven: none of which things
do agree to Vespasian and his Army, nor to any other since, but are yet to be
expected.

13. If this Trumpet be a Prophecy of the Marching of Vespasian's Army to
besiege Jerusalem; where have we a Prophecy of the taking and Destruction of
the City? Or is it likely that here should be a Prophecy of the marching of
Vespasian's Army to besiege Jerusalem, and no Prophecy in the Revelation of the
taking of it? To this they have no other answer, but that the things which the
seven Thunders spoke in the next Chapter, are a Prophecy of the Taking and
Destruction of the City; but this is a very unlikely thing, for the things
which the seven Thunders spoke, were to be concealed, and John was commanded
not to write them; but the Destruction of Jerusalem was not to be concealed but
revealed rather, that the Jews might have Notice of it; yea, and it was
revealed by Christ to his Apostles, and committed unto Writing before it came
to pass, as appears, Mat. 24. 2. Mark 13. Luke 19. 43, 44. Luke 21. 24. To
which may be added, that the godly people that were in Jerusalem knew thereof
beforehand, and fled to Pella to save their lives; yea, and Lib. 3. c. 8.
Eusebius tells us of the signs that went before the Destruction of the City,
foretelling the Destruction of it; as that a Star stood over the City like a
Sword, and a Comet, enduring the space of a whole year. An Army of Soldiers
was seen marching in the Clouds, and compassing the City round. A Voice was
heard in the Temple, saying, Eamus hinc, Let us go hence. One Jesus the Son of
Ananias, a Countryman of mean birth, four years before the War, at a time when
all was in deep Peace and Tranquillity, cried on a sudden, and said, A voice
from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four Winds, a voice
against Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice against Bridegrooms and Brides, a
voice against all the people. Thus he went about all the narrow Lanes, crying
Night and Day, and being apprehended and scourged, he still continued the same
Language under the blows without any other word. And they on this supposing
(as it was) some Divine Motion brought him to the Roman Prefect, and by his
appointment being with Whips wounded, and his flesh torn to the bones, he
neither entreated, nor shed tear, but to every blow in a most lamentable
mournful Note cried out, Woe, woe to Jerusalem. This he continued to do till the
time of the Siege seven years together; and therefore for any man to think that
the concealed things which the seven Thunders spoke, were concerning the
Destruction of Jerusalem, is a ridiculous thing.

4 Quest. Whether the four Angels mentioned in the sixth Trumpet, v. 14. be
literally to be understood?

Answ. 1. I know no reason to the contrary, neither does any Writer that I have
met with give me any; they take it for granted, that the four Angels are
Mystically to be understood, and then they interpret them of whom they please.
Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.

My Will of me Commander is, to Reason it says nay,
My Will is such, obey I must, let Reason go away.
2. The Angels are never put for Men, except they be the Ministers or Preachers
of the Gospel, Rev. 1. 20.

3. The Angels are never put for bad Men, but for good only.

4. These Angels were prepared to slay the third part of men, and that in an
hour at least, or in a year at most, v. 15. but four men have not power so to
do in so short a space.

5. The number of the Army of Horse, v. 16. does agree to Angels, but not to
men, they were so many, Rev. 5. 11. but of this more in the next question.

5 Quest. Whether the Army of two hundred thousand thousand Horsemen,
mentioned in the sixth Trumpet, v. 16. be Turks or any other men?

Ans. 1. Arias Montanus reads the words, (...) the Armies of Horse, and if that
be the right reading, here is no mention made of men in this verse.

2. Suppose the reading be (...) which we translate Horsemen, and that right
enough; but whether they be men in truth, or in appearance only, that the word
does not declare of it self, but must be gathered from the circumstances of the
text where the word is used.

3. The three men which appeared unto Abraham, Genesis 18. 2. and the two men
which appeared unto Lot, Genesis 19. 1, 2. were not men, but Angels in the shapes
of men, and the bodies which they took were true bodies, but they wanted souls
to make them men, and why may not these Horsemen be such too? that is, not men
indeed, but either Angels, or strange kind of Creatures, or both, in the upper
part like men, in the lower part like Horses, newly created for this purpose,
and never seen nor known in the World before?

4. The Horses, and Chariots that were round about Elisha, 2 King. 6. 17. were
not men, but Angels; and therefore these Horsemen may be such too, either
Angels or strange kind of Creatures, or both as was said before.

5. The Angels can assume to themselves true bodies, the body of a man on Foot,
or the body of a man on Horseback, and they were wont so to do heretofore in
cases extraordinary, as appears Genesis 18. 2. Genesis 19. 1, 2. Luke 24. 4. 2 King.
6. 17. 2 King. 7. 6. and therefore they may do so again in such a business as
is here before us. And if it be asked of me, whence they had these bodies which
they did assume? To this I answer that the Angels cannot create them out of
nothing, for that is only Gods work, and therefore they had them from God, who
did either create them out of nothing, or else did make them out of matter
preexistent, as the Locusts in the former Trumpet out of smoke, v. 3. And if it
be asked again, what became of these bodies when they laid them down? To this I
answer, that they returned into their former principles again, and in case they
were created out of nothing, they returned into nothing, and in case they were
made of matter preexistent, they returned into it again: but whatever became of
these bodies afterward* this is certain out of Scripture, that the Angels can
assume them, and lay them down again, for they have done so heretofore, and
therefore they may do so again, in the case that is now before us.

6. The Angels can make use of living bodies that were before created, and
leave them when they have done, as Satan made use of the Serpent to beguile the
woman, Genesis 3. 1, 2. and the good Angel made use of Balaams Ass to speak unto
his Master, Numb. 22. 28. and the Angel in the former Trumpet, made use of the
Locusts to torment men with their stings: so the Angels in this Trumpet, may
make use of these Creatures to destroy the third part of men, though they
assume them not.

7. If we read the fifteenth verse, we shall there find that the Angels have a
special hand in this business, for they were prepared to slay the third part of
men which this Army were to slay; and therefore we have reason for to think
that either these Horsemen be Angels, or else had the guidance of the Angels
in this work; and we need not say that there were as many Angels employed in
this work, as there be Horsemen mentioned, v. 16. but four Angels besides the
Angel that did sound this Trumpet may suffice to guide these Creatures in this
work, as one Angel did suffice to guide the Locusts in the former Trumpet.

8. The Book sealed with seven seals, of which this Prophecy is a part, was
such a special Book of Prophecy, as no man in Heaven, or on earth, or under the
earth was counted worthy to open the Book, and look into it but Jesus Christ,
Rev. 5. 3. therefore we may not think that this Book of Prophecy contains
only things ordinary, usual, or accustomed, such as Church Heresies, and
Turkish Wars are, which though they be grievous and calamitous while they last
and continue, yet they be common, usual, and accustomed things, which the World
and Church of God is well acquainted with. We must rather look that in this
Book of Prophecy, should be things extraordinary, unusual, rare, and
unaccustomed, such as the plagues of Egypt were, which were never known before
nor since, and such as the Locusts were in the former Trumpet, and the Horses
and Horsemen in this sixth.

9. The Horses be not usual Horses, such as men use in War, and therefore they
that sit on them, be not men, for how should men come by such Horses as be here
described, and what men will adventure for to ride them in case they could come
by them? First it is said, that they had heads as the heads of Lions, and out
of their mouths issued Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone, v. 17. 2. They had tails
like to Serpents bodies, v. 19. 3. They had heads behind at the end of their
tails. 4. They had mouths in their heads, so that they had two mouths, as well
as two heads, one before, and another behind, and the head before was like a
Lions head, v. 17. and the head behind in the tail like a Serpents head, v. 19.
5. Out of both their mouths issued Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone. 6. By this Fire,
Smoke, and Brimstone were the third part of men slain, v. 18. Never any men did
ride such Horses as these were, nor ever will do.

10. The Army here spoken of, was two hundred thousand thousand; but the
Turkish Armies never were so many at one time, nor ever will be. They say
Bajazet the Turk was once in the Field, with five hundred thousand, and
Tamerlan the Tartar, with thirteen hundred thousand, but what be all these to
two hundred thousand thousand? There never was such an Army in the Field at one
time, nor ever will be.

11. The Turkish Armies do consist of Foot, as well as Horse, though most of
them be Horse; but the Army here spoken of, be only Horse, and no Foot.

12. The Army here spoken of, did send Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone out of their
Horses mouths, and slay the third part of men therewith, this the Turks never
did, nor ever will or can do. And as for those who think that this is meant of
Gunpowder, in which there is Fire, Smoke, and Brimstone when they shoot, I
think it fit to tell them that Guns and Gunpowder were not invented by the
Turks, but by Bertholdus Niger, alias Swart, a German Alchymist, and a
Franciscan Monk, about the year of Christ 1380. And Guns and Gunpowder are used
not only by the Turks, but by other Nations in their Wars all the World over.
And it is not the Gunpowder which does slay men of it self, but the Bullet which
it drives forth. And the Turks shoot not Gunpowder out of their Horses mouths
and tails, but out of their Iron, and their Brazen Guns, and that at one end
only: so that Guns and Gunpowder are not intended in this Prophecy, but Fire,
Smoke, and Brimstone to kill the third part of men therewith, and that without
either Gunpowder, Guns or Bullet.

13. By this Army were the third part of men slain which were dwelling at
Euphrates. Now the Turks be the men which dwell there, and therefore it is
likely, that the Turks be the men which shall be slain by this Army, and not
the Army which shall slay the third part of men; so that the Turks be intended
in this Prophecy, not as Agents, but as Patients, not as killing others, but as
killed by others, and God has showed in this Prophecy, how the third part of
Turks shall be destroyed, not by Jews, nor by Tartars, nor by any other men,
but by Angels in a fearful manner, and yet not by them alone, but by strange
kind of Horses, newly created for this purpose, and never known in the World
before, and by Fire* Smoke, and Brimstone, which proceed out of their mouths
(...) the wonders that be in these Prophecies, so wonderful, and strange, and
unaccustomed, that men will not believe them, nor think upon them in a literal
sense, because they do not see them; but what said Christ to Thomas in a matter
as hard to be believed as this, Be not faithless, but believe, John 20. 27. and
such things as these or very like them in some kind or other, or at least in
some degree or other, have been done already if we believe the Book of Wisdom,
c. 11. v. 18, 19.

CHAP. X.
The continuation of the sixth Trumpet, or a preparation to the second part
thereof.
1. AND I saw another Angel of special dignity among them, come down from
Heaven in a cloud, having a Rainbow over his head, to denote a glorious
apparition, and his face was as the Sun for beauty, and his feet as Pillars of
fire.

2. And he had in his right hand, a little Book or Schedule, not sealed as the
other was before, but wide open in the Angels hand, Rev. 5. 1.
have nothing written in it, and he set his right foot upon the Sea, and his
left foot upon the dry Land.

3. And he cried with a loud and dreadful voice, as when a Lion roareth after
his prey, and is in sight of it; and upon this cry of his as upon a call, seven
claps of Thunder uttered their voices in my hearing.

4. And when the seven Thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write
what the seven Thunders had spoken, for they spoke things (...), but I heard a
voice from Heaven saying unto me, Conceal the things which the seven Thunders
have spoken, and write them not, for they are too terrible to be revealed.

5. And the Angel whom I saw standing with his right foot upon the Sea, and
with his left foot upon the dry Land, lifted up his hand to Heaven, as a token
that he meant to swear.

6. And he swear by the true, and ever-living God, who made the Heaven, with
the things which are therein, and the earth, with the things which are therein,
and the Sea, with the things which are therein, that the mystery of God should
be delayed no longer.

7. But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, Romans 11. 25.
when he shall sound his Trumpet, Esa. 11. 11, 12.
which after these things now in hand, Esa. 14, 1, 2, 3.
will shortly be, the calling, Esa. 27. 12, 13.
conversion, Jer. 23. 7, 8^
and restoring of the Jewish Nation shall be put in execution, Jer. 31. 27, 28.
and not be laid aside until it be brought to full perfection. Jer. 32. 37, 38.
As soon as that Angel shall begin to sound, Jer. 46. 27, 28.
their calling and conversion shall be brought to pass, Eze. 37. 16, 17.
and before that Angel ends, Hos. 3. 4, 5.
the restoration of their Kingdom shall be finished, Joel 3. 1.
and this joyful news is no new invention, Amos 9. 11. 14, 15.
but God has told it his Servants the Prophets in the old Testament long ago.
Zach. 8. 20, 21, 22.


8. And the voice which I heard from Heaven before, bidding me seal up the
things which the seven Thunders had spoken, and write them not, spoke to me
again the second time, and said unto me, Go take the little Book or Schedule,
which is wide open in the hand of the Angel which stands with his right foot
upon the Sea, and with his left upon the dry Land.

9. So I went unto the Angel as the voice commanded me, and I said unto him,
Give me the little Book or Schedule which is wide open in thy right hand; and
he said unto me, Take and eat it, and when thou have so done, it shall make thy
belly bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as Honey.

10. So I took the little Book or Schedule out of the Angels hand, and eat it
up before him, and it was, as the Angel said, in my mouth as sweet as Honey, but
when I had eaten it, my belly was bitter.

11. And he told me the meaning of it, and he said unto me, Thou must Prophecy
again before the sixth Trumpet ends, and thou must tell what shall befall the
People of the Jews, and what shall befall the Gentiles and their Kings before
the seventh Trumpet sounds, and the mystery of God which I told thee of take
effect: And the first things that thou must Prophecy of, will be very sweet and
pleasant as Honey to thy mouth, but the second will be very bitter as Gall unto
thy stomach.

Disputation VI.
1 Quest. Whether the little Book had any Prophecy written in it?

Answ. 1. It is not said in the Text, that it had any Prophecy written in it,
and therefore they which say it had, do it upon no ground at all?

2. It was wide open, and not shut nor sealed, therefore there was not any
secret thing therein.

3. It was but one Schedule or piece of Parchment, and that a little one too,
and therefore too little to contain all the Prophecies from the eighth verse of
the tenth Chapter, to the end of the Revelation.

4. It was far less than the other Book which had seven rolls, and seven seals
to them: But if all the Prophecies from the eighth verse of the tenth Chapter,
to the end of the Revelation should be comprised in it, it would be far bigger
than the other Book which had seven rolls and seals to them.

5. The other Book which had the seals is commended for its Prophecies, Rev. 5.
2, 3, 4, 5. but this Book is no where commended for any Prophecy it had.

6. The Prophecies in the following Chapters be of higher note, and far more
excellent, and of more concernment than the Prophecies in the former Chapters
be, and therefore they belong not to this little Book which is no where
commended for its Prophecies, but to the other Book with seven seals which has
so high a commendation as not any Book the like, Rev. 5. 3, 4, 5.

7. There should be by this reckoning, two Prophetical Books of the Revelation,
and the seventh verse of the tenth Chapter, should be the last verse of the
first Book, and the eighth verse of the tenth Chapter, should be the first
verse of the second Book: but St. John makes but one Book of all the
Revelation, and he writes it all in one Volume without division, and calls it a
Revelation in the singular number, and not two Revelations in the plural
number, Rev. 1. 1.

8. By this reckoning the Prophecies of the other Book with seven seals, should
be mingled with the Prophecies of the little Book without seals, for they say
that all the Prophecies in the Revelation, from the eighth verse of the tenth
Chapter, to the end of the Revelation belong unto the little Book. Now if you
look into the eleventh Chapter, you shall there find the ending of the sixth
Trumpet, v. 14. and after that the seventh Trumpet, or some part thereof, from
the fifteenth verse to the end of the Chapter, both which belong unto the other
Book with seven seals, and namely to the seventh seal thereof, Rev. 8. 2. and
after this come in the Prophecies, as they say, of the little Book again. What
a mingle mangle have we here of those two Books one in another? Surely as St.
John eat up the little Book, so they make the little Book swallow the
Prophecies of the other Book into his Belly.

9. The sixth Trumpet does not end with the seventh verse of the tenth Chapter,
but goes onward to the fourteenth verse of the eleventh Chapter, and there
ends, and not before; so that all that Prophecy in the eleventh Chapter to the
fourteenth verse, does belong unto the other Book with seven seals, and the
seventh Trumpet does not end with the eleventh Chapter, for if it did, a close
would have been put unto it at the end of that Chapter, to distinguish it from
the Prophecies that follow; but there being no period put unto it there, as
there is to the former Trumpets where they end, it is an Argument sufficient
that it does not end there, but is to be extended farther, even to the twelfth
Chapter, and to all the Chapters following inclusively until a Period be put
unto it, which is no where to be found, so that the seventh Trumpet has no end
at all, nor any close put unto it, as the fifth and sixth Trumpets have, Rev.
9. 12. Rev. 11. 14. and seeing the seventh Trumpet does belong unto the Book
with seven seals, the Prophecy of the twelfth Chapter, and of all the rest that
follow, does belong unto that other Book also.

10. If the little Book had the following Prophecies written in it from the
eighth verse of this Chapter, to the end of the Revelation, what is the reason
that the Angel does acquaint John with them afterward? A man would think that
after he had taken the Book, and eaten it up, he should have known what the
Prophecies had been which were contained in it without any further help, or any
further Revelation: but we find, that in the next Chapter after this, the Angel
does acquaint John with the Prophecies of that Chapter, and tells him what they
be from point to point; and therefore the little Book, though eaten up by him,
did not acquaint him with them before, nor tell him what they were.

Ob. But why was John commanded to eat the little Book, if it had no Prophecy
written in it?

Ans. 1. To acquaint him with the sweetness, and the bitterness of the
Prophecies which follow; for by eating of the Book which was sweet in his
mouth, and bitter in his belly, he thereby knew that the Prophecies which
follow should be be sweet in the beginning, but bitter afterward. 2. To
signify unto him that he had not made an end of Prophesying, and in
particular, that the Prophecy of the sixth Trumpet was not fully ended, there
was a little more behind, not yet revealed to him, which he was to add to the
former part thereof, and therefore it is said, thou must Prophecy again, not
begin a new Prophecy, ab ovo from the first Original, but Prophecy again, (that
is) of the other part behind belonging to the sixth Trumpet, which was not
spoken of before; but what that other part was, was not written in the little
Book, but reported to him by word of mouth, and it belongs all of it to the
sixth Trumpet, and the little Book it self to boot.

From hence it follows, 1. That the whole Prophetical part of the Apocalypse
does not consist of two main Prophecies, both of them beginning their race at
the same Epoch^ (or terminus a quo) of time, and concluding together likewise
at the same goal or terminus ad quem. The first of these (as Mr. Mede would
have it) is prophetia sigillorum reaching from the fourth Chapter unto almost
the end of the tenth. The second is prophetia libri, beginning at the eighth
verse of the tenth Chapter, and reaching to the end of the Book. But herein Mr.
Mede is exceedingly out, for there is but one Prophetical Book of the
Apocalypse as has been proved in this Question, and this Book is Prophetia
sigillorum the Prophecy of the seals reaching from the fourth Chapter, or
rather from the sixth Chapter to the end of the Revelation. 2. That the
Prophecies of the Revelation shall come to pass in order, as they came forth
out of the sealed Book, seal after seal, Trumpet after Trumpet, Vial after
Vial, and so of all the rest in order as they were presented unto John in
Vision, of which more in the next Question.

2 Quest. Whether the Prophecies of the Revelation shall come to pass in order
as they were revealed to John?

Ans. 1. Things revealed at once, and not at several distant times, come to
pass in order as they be revealed; as for instance: The Prophecy of the four
Monarchies, Dan. 7. was revealed to Daniel all at once, and it did, and shall
come to pass in order as it was revealed; so the Prophecy of the Ram, and
Hee-Goat, Dan. 8. was revealed to him all at once, and it came to pass in order
as it was revealed; and so give instance where you will, it never fails. But
now the Prophecies of the Revelation were revealed to John all at once, and not
at several distant times as was proved at large Disp. 1. q. 2. therefore they
shall come to pass in order as they were revealed. It is otherwise where things
are revealed at several distant times, here no such order is observed; as for
instance: The Prophecy of the fourth beast, Dan. 7. was revealed to him above a
year before the Prophecy of the Ram and Hee-Goat mentioned Dan. 8. but yet the
Prophecy of the Ram and Hee-Goat came to pass before it. In like manner, had
the Prophecies of the Revelation been revealed to John at several distant
times, as some of Daniels Prophecies were, we could not conclude from thence
that they shall come to pass in order as they were revealed; but in regard they
were revealed to him all at once, or at one continued time without ceasing or
intermission of his ecstasie, we may and must conclude from thence that they
shall come to pass in order as they were revealed, and presented unto John in
Vision.

2. The Prophecies of the Revelation were written all of them in one Book, and
not in two, and that was the Book sealed with seven seals, c. 5. But as for the
little Book, c. 10. it had not any Prophecy written in it, as was proved at
large in the former Question. Now had the Prophecies of the Revelation been
written in two Books, and not in one, it might be possible that the Prophecies
of these two Books might begin their race at the same Epoch^ (or terminus a
quo) of time, and conclude together likewise at the same goal or terminus ad
quem: but in regard they were all of them written in one Book, and not in two,
here is no color at all for such a groundless imagination.

3. Histories write of things in order as they come to pass, as if a man were
to write a Chronicle of the Kings of England, he would not put King Henry the
eighth and his Reign, before King Henry the seventh, but set down the Kings in
order as they Reigned. And no other is the case here, the prophetical part of
the Revelations is a History of things to come, as a Chronicle is a History of
things past, and therefore it sets down things in order, as a Chronicle does.

4. It is acknowledged by Mr. Mede and others of his mind, that all the
Prophecies in the Revelation (except that of the Palm-bearers Rev. 7. 9.) from
the beginning of the sixth Chapter to the middle of the tenth shall come to
pass in order as they were Revealed, but the grand Question is of those which
follow after. Now that the Prophecies which follow after from the beginning of
the eleventh Chapter to the end of the Revelation shall come to pass in order
as they were Revealed, shall be proved severally of them all when I come to
write on those Chapters, see Chapter 11. q. 1. chapter 12. q. 1, 2. chapter 13. q. 1. chapter
16. q. 1.

5. First, second, third, fourth, etc. are all of them ordinal numbers and not
cardinal, and they are so called because they show not only the number of
things spoken of, but the order also. Now the Prophecies of the Revelation do
all of them consist of these numbers, seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Vials
consisting all of them of ordinal numbers, whereof the seven Trumpets are the
issue of the seventh Seal, and therefore shall come to pass in order after the
sixth Seal is ended, and the seven Vials are the issue of the seventh Trumpet
(though not the immediate nor the adequate issue of it,) and therefore they
shall come to pass in order after the Prophecy of the fourteenth Chapter does
determine and not before.

6. What Man will say that King Henry the seventh was before Henry the sixth?
such an absurdity do they run into which interpret the sixth Seal of the day of
Judgment, and make the seventh Seal which contains the seven Trumpets to be
before it. It is as if a Man should say that King Henry the seventh was before
King Henry the sixth, and the reason why King Henry the sixth is set before
King Henry the seventh in the English Chronicles is because he was first
revealed unto the Writer, but in order of Reigning King Henry the seventh was
before him.

7. If the seven Trumpets shall come to pass before the sixth Seal, what is the
reason that the sixth Seal was revealed to John before them? And so of other
Prophecies, if that which was revealed first, shall come to pass after that
which was revealed afterward, why was it revealed first, and not afterward? God
could have revealed to John the seven Trumpets before the sixth Seal, and
doubtless would have done so, if the seven Trumpets were to come to pass before
it; but now we find it is otherwise, the sixth Seal was revealed to John before
the seven Trumpets were, and what was the reason of it? but because it shall
come to pass before the seven Trumpets shall, and no other reason can be given
for it. But if any one think otherwise, that the sixth Seal shall come to pass
after the seven Trumpets, let him tell me why was it revealed before the seven
Trumpets were, and not tather after them. And so of other Prophecies it may be
asked, if that which was revealed first, shall come to pass after that which
was revealed afterward, why was it revealed first? Give an answer he that will.

8. Unless the Prophecies of the Revelation shall come to pass in order as they
were revealed, what a confused Chaos is the Revelation? It is as if a man
should write a History of the affairs of England, but in such a mingled and
confused manner, that no man can find any order in it, no man can tell by
reading of it, whether such a Parliament were in such a Kings Reign, and such a
Parliament in another Kings Reign, nor which King did Reign first, and which
next, the Book is such a mingle mangle, a mess of altogether, that no man can
tell what Accidents were in one Kings Reign, and what Accidents in another
Kings Reign. Such a confused Chaos do they make of the Revelation, no man can
tell by reading of it, where to begin, nor where to end, nor where to find the
middle of it, whether the Seal shall come to pass first, and the Trumpets next,
and the Vials next, or whether some of the seven Seals shall come to pass
first, and some of the seven Trumpets next, and some of the seven Vials next,
or in what order things shall come to pass in the Revelation, no man can tell.

9. Where no instance can be given to the contrary, there things shall come to
pass in order as they were revealed, and such are the Prophecies of the
Revelation, no instance can be given of any Prophecy that shall come to pass
before or after the order of its Revelation, and therefore they shall come to
pass, Prophecy after Prophecy, as they were revealed, and presented unto John
in Vision.

Ob. But Mr. Mede in his Synchronisms, has given diverse instances to the
contrary.

Ans. Every one of those instances do fail, as shall appear by the answers
which I give to every Synchronism in order.

An Answer to the Synchronisms of Mr. Mede.
The first Part.
The first Synchronism of the woman remaining in the Wilderness, of the seven
headed beast restored, of the outer Court trodden under foot by the Gentiles, of
the witnesses in the mean time Prophesying in Sackcloth. All which he will have
Synchronise because they be of equal times.

To which I answer, that the month of April has as many days as the month of
June, and the month of June has as many days as the month of September, yet
these three months succeed one another; and no other is the case here. The
Prophesying of the witnesses in Sackcloth, has as many days as the woman has
in the Wilderness, and that is 1260 days, and the woman has as many days in
the Wilderness as the 42 months of the Beast amount unto, yet they succeed one
another, as the month of June succeeds the month of April, and the month of
September succeeds them both. But as for the conculcation of the outer Court 42
months, and the Prophesying of the witnesses in the mean while 1260 days, I
confess that they Synchronise, but none of the other do.

Mr. Mede saw the weakness of his first Argument, and in the close thereof
confesses that it is not necessary that equal times should Synchronise,
howbeit, for confirmation of it, he adds in his Parenthesis, that in Visions
showed at the same time, it is very likely that they do.

To which I answer, that this does no way strengthen nor add any confirmation
to his Argument, for equal times presented all at once, at one view, may and do
succeed one another, as appears in a leaf Almanac wide open, where all the
months of the year (many of which are equal one to another, and have as many
days, one as another,) are presented to my eye all at once at one view, yet
they succeed one another, the month of March succeeds the month of January,
though equal in duration to it, and the month of May, (though of equal duration
too) succeeds them both. So put the case that these Prophecies were presented
unto John the same time at one view, yet may they succeed one another for all
that. But the case is not so in the point in hand, for these Prophecies were
not presented unto John at one view, as the Image was to Nebuchadnezar in his
dream, but successively one after another, the Prophecy of the witnesses in the
eleventh Chapter first, the Prophecy of the woman in the Wilderness, in the
twelfth Chapter, next, and the Prophecy of the Beast, in the thirteenth
Chapter, afterward. And because they were presented unto him successively,
therefore we conclude that they shall come to pass successively, the Prophecy
in the eleventh Chapter first, the Prophecy in the twelfth Chapter next, and
the Prophecy in the thirteenth Chapter, afterward. And thus much for the first
Argument.

2. He undertakes to prove that the times of the Beast, and of the woman's being
in the Wilderness, begin at the same instant of time, to wit the Conquest of
the red Dragon, and the thrusting him out of Heaven unto the earth, but he
mightily fails in the probation of it. 1. In that he makes the Dragon cast out
a flood of water after her, before she came into the Wilderness as she was
flying thither, but it is not so, for the woman gets into the Wilderness first,
as appears Rev. 12. 14. and then he sends a flood of water after her to drive
her out from thence, as appears v. 15. 2. He thinks that by the remnant of her
seed, is meant the Children which the woman should bring forth in the
Wilderness, and that the Dragon makes War with them in that place, but this is
nothing so, but by the remnant of her seed is meant, those which did remain
behind, and were not fled into the Wilderness with the woman, for if they had
been there, they had been safe as the woman was, v. 14. and the Dragon could
not War with them, nor get the Victory over them in that place. Briefly then,
the order of the Prophecy is this: 1. The Dragon persecutes the woman, and that
as soon as he was cast forth of Heaven unto the earth, v. 13. 2. The woman
flies and gets safe into the Wilderness from his persecution, v. 14. 3. The
Dragon casts forth a flood of water after her, to drive her out from thence, v.
15. 4. The earth opens her mouth, and swallows up the flood of water, v. 16. 5.
The Dragon seeing that, leaves the woman in the Wilderness, and departs from
thence ((...)) to make War with the remnant of her seed, v. 17. and who be
they, but those which were not fled into the Wilderness where the woman was?
This is the true sense, and order of the Prophecy, and I wonder that any man
should set his wit against it.

3. He would have the times of the Beast, and of the witnesses end together at
the exit of the fixth Trumpet, and this he thinks to prove from Rev. 11. 13,
14, 15. but all in vain, for though the times of the witnesses do end at the
exit of the sixth Trumpet, and we hear no more of them afterward, yet the times
of the Beast, do not, as may appear if these things be considered. 1. The City
there spoken of is not Babylon the Royal City of the Beast, but Jerusalem, v.
2. and 8. 2. The whole City does not fall, but the tenth part only, v. 13. 3.
That tenth part of the City fell by an earthquake, but Babylon shall be
consumed by fire, and not by an earthquake, Rev. 17. 16. Rev. 18. 8. 4. Seven
thousand men are slain, and no more, v. 13. and what is so small a number to
the ruin of the Beast? 5. Though at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, the
Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and his Christ, yet
this is but in fieri at that time, and not in facto esse, it is then a doing,
and not entirely done, it is then in esse inchoato, in inchoation only, not in
esse completo, in complete perfection, it is then in the bud, and in the
blossom, but not come to full maturity till afterward, and as long as it is so,
and no more, the Beast may have a being in the World, after the seventh Trumpet
sounds, until the Kingdom of Christ be brought to full perfection. In a word,
the seventh Trumpet is to sound more days than one, as the Angel says, Rev.
10. 7. Now the first day that Trumpet sounds, the Kingdoms of the World are
become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ inchoative inchoatively, but
when the seventh Trumpet has sounded many days, and when all the Prophecies of
the Revelation, from the eleventh Chapter to the twentieth are fulfilled, then
the Kingdom of Christ shall be brought to full perfection, and then the Beast
shall have a final end, and not before. And here it is to be noted, that the
Beast which Wars against the Witnesses, chapter 11. is not the same with the Beast
which overcomes the Saints, chapter 13. v. 7. of which more hereafter in its proper
place.

4. He will have the times of the witnesses, and of the Court or Holy City
possessed by the Gentiles, Rev. 11. 2, 3. to contemporate, and this I grant to
be true, for the 42 months of the Gentiles in which they shall tread the Holy
City under foot, v. 2. and the 1260 days in which the Witnesses shall Prophecy,
v. 3. are the same.

5. He concludes the Synchronism with an inference. If the treading underfoot
of the Court, and Holy City, do contemporate with the Prophecy of the
Witnesses, it will also contemporate with the Beast. And this I deny, for the
Witnesses do not contemporate with the Beast, only the two first do
contemporate, viz. the 42 months of the Gentiles, and the 1260 days of the
Witnesses, but the rest succeed one another, the woman in the Wilderness
succeeds the times of the Witnesses, and the Beast succeeds them both. And thus
much in answer to the first Synchronism.

The second Synchronism, is of the two horned Beast, (who is also the false
Prophet) with the ten horned Beast, who is also called the Image of the Beast.

Ans. And this is true, if meant of the time which succeeds his restoration;
for as soon as the wounded Beast is healed, the other Beast is raised to
counsel and assist him, and from that time forth they Synchronise. But whereas
he thinks they were raised, the one out of the Sea, and the other out of the
earth both together, it is nothing so, for the ten horned Beast is raised
first, and in that respect is called the first Beast, v. 12. and after he is
raised, he is wounded, and when his wound is healed, then the other Beast is
raised, and not before. And thus much of the second Synchronism.

And as for the Appendix, because it makes nothing to the Synchronism, whether
it be true or false, I omit to speak unto it; only I think it not amiss to
acquaint the Reader, that the ten horned beast is not the Image of the Beast,
as he would have it, but the object represented by the Image.

The third Synchronism is of the great Where, or mystical Babylon, with that
same Beast which has seven heads and ten Horns.

Ans. If this were meant of the Beast chapter 17. it were true, and not to be
denied, but it being meant of the Beast chapter 13. it is false, for that Beast
outlives the Whore, and Wars against him that sat upon the White Horse, that
is, against Christ, after the Whore is destroyed, Rev. 19. 19, 20. And the
Synchronism does suppose these Beasts to be all one, of which more hereafter.

The fourth Synchronism, is of the 144000 Sealed Virgins, with the Whore of
Babylon, and the Beast.

Ans. Five Arguments are brought to prove their Synchronising. The three first
as he confesses are insufficient to make up a full and entire contemporising,
for they may all consist but with a partial. The fourth Argument is brought to
prove a total contemporising, but it comes short of it, as the three other did,
for though these Virgins be antistoechal to the Beast, and all his followers,
yet this is only at his declination, and not before; and though they be the
Servants of God, and wear his Livery, and have his name written in their
foreheads, yet God had other Servants besides these which had to deal with the
Beast, and he with them before these had, and they be the remnant of the woman's
seed, Rev. 12. 17. Rev. 13. 7. but these Virgins advance against him afterward,
Rev. 14. 1, 2. It is true if God had had no more Servants to oppose the Beast
but these only, then must these have been antistoechal to the Beast throughout
from his first breathing, to his last gasp; but God had other Servants to
oppose the Beast before these did, and they are the remnant of the woman's seed,
as was said before, therefore these are actually antistoechal to him afterward,
when the other have done their work, and not before. The last Argument speaks
expressly of a final contemporising, and no more, which I grant to be true,
though I dislike the medium which is brought to prove it. The truth of the
Synchronism which we have in hand, is this, the Virgin company of the Sealed
are antecedaneous to the Beast and false Prophet, for they are Sealed in the
time of the sixth Seal, which is before the times of the Beast and false
Prophet do commence, but yet they advance not against him, nor have to deal
with him, nor he with them, until his 42 months be ended, and then they step
forth against him, and get the Victory over him, Rev. 15. 2. And as for the
Whore of Babylon, we have a Prophecy of her final ruin, which is to come to
pass in the time of the seventh Vial, Rev. 17. 1. but of her first beginning,
when she began to be a Whore, we want a Prophecy in the Revelation to inform us
of it.

The fifth is a consectary of the general Synchronism of all hitherto mentioned.

Ans. His inference is, that they all Synchronise; my inference is from what I
have said and proved, that only the conculcation of the holy City 42 months,
and the Witnesses in the mean time Prophesying in Sackcloth 1260 days are
Synchronals, but all the rest succeed one another. The whole Prophecy of the
twelfth Chapter, shall succeed the Prophecy in the eleventh Chapter, the
Prophecy in the thirteenth Chapter, shall succeed the Prophecy of the twelfth
Chapter, the Prophecy of the fourteenth Chapter, shall succeed the Prophecy of
the thirteenth Chapter, and the Prophecy in the seventeenth Chapter, concerning
the fall of Babylon, shall be the last that shall come to pass of all that have
been hitherto spoken of.

The sixth Synchronism is of the inner Court measured with the Reed of God, and
of the lying in wait, and the Battle of the seven headed Dragon with Michael,
concerning the Childbirth of the woman in travel.

Ans. To which I answer, 1. That they are not the immediate Antecedents of
contemporaries, for the woman in the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 14. the Beast with
ten Horns, Rev. 13. 5. and the outer Court, Rev. 11. 2. do not contemporate,
but succeed each other, as has been proved in my answer to the first
Synchronism. 2. Though it be true that the woman's Travel, and the Dimication of
the Dragon with Michael do contemporate, and the flight of the Woman into the
Wilderness immediately succeed them, Rev. 12. 6, 13, 14. yet the seven headed
Beast restored does not immediately succeed the Duel, in which Michael
over-threw the Dragon; for the Dragon does not immediately raise the Beast so
soon as he is cast out of Heaven unto the Earth, but before he attempt such a
Work, he first of all persecutes the Woman, Rev. 12. 13. then the Woman flies
into the Wilderness, verse. 14. after that he sends a Flood of Water after her
to carry her away, verse. 15. then the Earth swallows up the flood of Water,
verse. 16. and when all this is done, then he leaves the Wilderness, and goes
into the Sea, from whence he raises up the Beast to War against the Remnant of
the Woman's Seed and not before, verse. 17, 18. Rev. 13. 1. 3. That the measuring
of the inner Court shall precede the conculcation of the outer Court I grant,
and that the forty two Months in which the Gentiles shall tread it under foot,
begin when the measuring of the inner Court is ended; but that the measuring of
this inner Court shall synchronise with the Woman's Travel, and the Dimication
of Michael with the Dragon, I deny, and that because the conculcation of the
outer Court, and the Habitation of the Woman in the Wilderness, do not
synchronise, but succeed each other, as has been proved in my Answer to the
first synchronism; And therefore as the measuring of the inner Court shall
precede the conculcation of the outer, so they both shall precede the Woman's
Travel; and as the Woman's Travel shall precede her flight, and habitation in
the Wilderness, so the habitation of the Woman in the Wilderness shall precede
the Beast, and all his Actings against the Remnant of her Seed. Lastly, Whereas
he talks of a repeated Prophecy, he should have first proved a repeated
Prophecy before he had said so much of it, or built an Argument upon it, for
there is no repeated Prophecy in the Revelation. And when the Angel says,
Oportet te iterum prophetare, thou must prophecy again, Rev. 10. 11. the
meaning is not that he must begin a new Prophecy, ab ovo, from the first
Original, repeating the same times over again; but the meaning is, that he must
prophecy of other things, and of other times, which shall succeed the former,
and which he had not spoken of before.

The seventh Synchronism is of the seven Vials, and of the Beast and of Babylon
inclining to ruin.

Answ. And this Synchronism I grant to be true, for the seven Vials are the
seven last plagues, Rev. 15. 1. and they fall upon the men which have the Mark
of the Beast, Rev. 16. 2. and upon his Throne and Kingdom, verse. 10. and upon
Babylon, verse. 19. and they never leave her, till they bring her, and the Beast
to a final end, Rev. 17. and 18. and 19. 20.

The second Part.
Answ. And thus I have gone over the first part of his Synchronisms, and as I
believe have given fit Answers to them all; what is true I have confessed to be
true, and what is otherwise, I have given Reasons for my denial and dislike of
it. I proceed now with the like Candor and Ingenuity, to speak unto the rest of
the Synchronisms which follow; but before I begin, I must premise a few things
in answer to his Prologue. 1. That the little Book had not any Prophecy written
in it as has been proved in the former Question. 2. That upon this account the
Revelation, or the prophetical part thereof may not fitly be divided into two
main Prophecies, as he would have it, whereof the first is Prophetia
sigillorum, the prophecy of the Seals, reaching from the fourth Chapter (or
rather from the sixth Chapter) to almost the end of the tenth; the second (as
he would have it) is Prophetia libri, the prophecy of the little Book beginning
at the eighth Verse of the tenth Chapter, and reaching to the end of the
Revelation: I say, that this may not fitly be done, because there is but one
prophecy of the Revelation, and that is Prophetia sigillorum, the prophecy of
the Seals which begins at the sixth Chapter, and reaches to the end of the
Revelation; for as for the little Book, it had not any prophecy written in it,
and Mr. Mede should have proved, that the little Book had all the prophecies in
the Revelation, from the eighth Verse of the tenth Chapter to the end of the
Book, written in it, and not have supposed it so to be. 3. That because there
is but one Book of prophecy and not two, therefore the prophecies of the
eleventh Chapter, and so onwards, which are subsequent to the little Book,
shall not begin their race at the same Epoch^ that the Seals do, and so run
along with them ad eandem metam, to the same Goal, for this were to make two
Books of prophecy, when there is but one. 4. Suppose it to be true (as he
says) that the Revelation does consist of too main prophecies, and the first
of them to be Prophetia sigillorum, the prophecy of the Seals, reaching from
the fourth Chapter to almost the end of the tenth, the other to be Prophetia
libri, the prophecy of the little Book, beginning at the eighth Verse of the
tenth Chapter, and reaching to the end of the Revelation: Yet it no way
follows, that these two prophecies must contemporate, or begin their race at
the same Epoch^ of time, and conclude together at the same Goal, for the latter
may begin where the other left for all that. 5. Suppose the Book of the
Revelation might fitly be divided into two Tomes, and the second Tome to begin
at the eighth Verse of the tenth Chapter, at these Words, And the voice which I
heard from Heaven spoke unto me again; yet by that voice is not meant, the
voice mentioned Chap. 4. verse. 1. but the voice mentioned Chap. 10. verse. 4.
and by the Words, Thou must prophecy again, is not meant, that he must begin a
new prophecy, ab ovo, from the first Original, but rather that he must begin
where he left before. As if a man were commanded to write a History of the
Kings of Israel in two Volumes; the first Volume beginning with the Reign of
Saul, and ending with the Reign of David; the other Volume beginning with the
Reign of Solomon, and ending with the Reign of Zedekiah; does not this last
Volume begin where the other left? And no other is the case here. Suppose the
prophecies of the Revelation to consist of two Tomes, the one reaching from the
fourth (or sixth) Chapter, to the eighth Verse of the tenth Chapter, the other
from thence to the end of the Book, this last tome does not contemporate with
the former, but succeeds it, and begins to Prophecy where the other left. 6. We
read not that the voice chapter 10. v. 8. was as the sound of a Trumpet, and
therefore not likely to relate to the voice, chapter 4. v. 1. but rather to the
voice, chapter 10. v. 4. for that voice, chapter 4. v. 1. is said to be as the sound of
a Trumpet, but this not. But to what purpose he would have the Reader take
notice of this, I cannot tell; Is this an Index that the Prophecy of the little
Book, (as he calls it) does contemporate with the Prophecy of the Seals? No
more than the voice, chapter 4. v. 1. is an Index that the Prophecy of the Seals
does contemporate with the Vision of the seven Churches; Rev. 1. 10.
for both these, Rev. 4. 1.
as well that Rev. 1. 10. as that Rev. 4. 1. had a voice as of a Trumpet before
them, yet they do not contemporate each with other. Lastly, you may be sure
that it is not so as he says, that the second Prophecy, or the Prophecy of the
little Book does begin at the eighth verse of the tenth Chapter, and reach from
thence to the end of the Revelation, because Chapter 11. you have the Period of the
sixth Trumpet, and the beginning of the seventh, from the fourteenth verse to
the end of the Chapter, both which belong (not unto the little Book) but to the
Prophecy of the Seals, as you may see if you look into his scheme. And thus
much by way of answer to his Preface I come now to the Synchronisms themselves.

The first Synchronism which is the principal one, is of the seventh Seal, so
far as the six first Trumpets reach with the ten horned, and two horned Beasts,
and the rest contemporisers.

Ans. To which I answer first in general, that the beginning of the Beast does
not contemporate with the beginning of the seventh Seal, as he would have it,
nor the end of the Beast contemporate with the exit of the sixth Trumpet,
therefore here is no Synchronising. 2. I answer to each branch of the Argument
in particular, and

1. I say that the beginning of the Beast, does not contemporate with the
beginning of the seventh Seal, but is the offspring of the seventh Trumpet, and
comes forth into the World after the seventh Trumpet is begun, Rev. 11. 15.
Rev. 13. 1. 2. One opposite may be before another, witness David and Goliath,
who were deadly opposites one unto another, yet Goliath was the elder, and David
was the younger, and did outlive Goliath: so though these Sealed Virgins be
opposite to the Beast Reigning, yet the Virgins are the elder Company, and are
Sealed by the Angel before the Beast has a being in the World. Opposition
implies a partial contemporation, not a total. 3. In what respect are the
Sealed Virgins opposite to the Beast, but in respect of Religion, and warlike
persecution for Religion? And how either of these severally, or both of them
jointly, can cause a total contemporation, I am yet to seek. For instance, The
Christians, and the Turks are opposites in respect of their Religion, and who
knows not but that the Christian Religion, was before the Turkish? And they be
also opposite in respect of War, and yet this made them not contemporate, but
come behind the Christians. So what if these Virgins be opposite to the Beast
in respect of Religion, is not their Religion before his? And what if
difference in Religion produce a War betwixt them, does not this War succeed
Religion, and the Beast that is raised to begin this War, succeed it too? 4. If
you look into the text, you shall find that these Virgins, though they be
before the Beast in respect of their Sealing, yet they actually oppose him not
in his Wars until his declination; then it is that they actually advance
against him, and not before. And if it be asked of me, who they were that
opposed him in his Wars before his declination? I say, they were the remnant of
the woman's seed whom he warreth with, and overcomes, Rev. 12. 17, 18. Rev. 13.
7. but the Sealed ones advance against him afterward, and get the Victory over
him, Rev. 15. 2. 5. The Sealed ones are Sealed at the sixth Seal, immediately
before the seventh Seal begins, and therefore they be more ancient than the
Beast who has no being in the World till the seventh Trumpet is begun, and so
much thereof as is contained in the twelfth Chapter past before he rises, Rev.
13. 1. 6. The contemporation he has proved in the fourth Synchronism of his
first part, is but a partial contemporation, and comes far short of a total;
for which see the Synchronism it self, and my answer to it. 7. The Sealed ones
are the Servants of God before that they be Sealed, for the Seal does not make
them such, but find them so to be, Rev. 7. 3. And in this respect too they are
more ancient than the Beast, and do no otherwise contemporate with him, than as
an elder contemporates with a younger man. 8. The reason why the Seal is put
upon them in the sixth Seal, is not to call them forth against the Beast, but
to preserve them against the storms of the ensuing Trumpets. And this is a
sufficient answer to the first branch of the Synchronism, that the beginning of
the Beast does not contemporate with the seventh Seal.

2. I say that the end of the Beast does not contemporate with the exit of the
sixth Trumpet; for though it be true, that the 1260 days of the two Witnesses
do end at the exit of the sixth Trumpet, yet that the 42 months of the Beast do
end at that time too, I deny. 2. Instead of proving that the 42 months of the
Beast are ended at the exit of the sixth Trumpet, he says, that it is
demonstrated already, part 1. Synch. 1.. 3. whither I refer the Reader for
better satisfafaction. And by the answer which I have given to it he shall
find, that it is no more proved there, than it is here; for if you look into
the Text, you shall find that the great City did not fall at the exit of the
sixth Trumpet, but the tenth part of it fell, and no more: and by the City in
that place is not meant the Throne of the Beast, but the holy City which the
Gentiles trample under foot 42 months, Rev. 11. 2. 3. He says; by reason of
the destruction which he then felt, the Beast was at the last gasp or giving up
the Ghost; but if you look into the Text, you shall find that seven thousand
men are slain in the earthquake, and no more, and what is so small a number to
the expiration of the Beast, or to his last gasp? No more than the loss of
seven thousand men is to the ruin of the Turkish Empire. For suppose the Turk
should send an Army from Constantinople to Jerusalem to slay the Jews and
Christians that be there, and after this is done, seven thousand of his men
should be slain by an earthquake, what is this to the ruin of the Turkish
Empire? And no other is the case here; The Beast sends his Soldiers to
Jerusalem which slay the two Witnesses which Preach the Gospel there, and after
this is done, seven thousand of his men lose their lives by an earthquake, what
is this to the ruin of the Beast? No more than the loss of seven thousand men,
is to the ruin of the Turkish Empire. 4. He says, that we might know in what
time of the Seals and Trumpets this should happen, the spirit immediately
joined the second Woe, that is, the sixth Trumpet even then to be past: but he
should have proved that the Beast was then past, and not that the second Woe was
then past; which last I grant to be true, but the other I deny. Lastly, he
says, lest happily it should raise a scruple in any that those things which
are related in the Text concerning the overthrow of the Beast, the fall of the
City, and the slaughter of men caused by the earthquake, ought not to be
understood of the utter destruction of the Beast, he says that it is not
requisite to the Synchronism in hand, but that they be means at least of the
ending of the time of his power and reign. But if you look into the
Synchronism, the Words of the Synchronism are, Finis lestiae contemporat cum
exitu tubae sextae, the end of the Beast does contemporate with the exit of the
sixth Trumpet, not the end of the time of his Power and Reign; and if you look
into the sacred Text, there is nothing at all of the ending of his Power and
Reign, nor of the time of their ending; all we find there is, that there was a
great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, and in the Earthquake
were slain seven thousand Men: But what is this to the ending of his Power and
Reign, or the ending of the time thereof? No more than the loss of so many Men
is to the abolition of the Turkish Power and Kingdom. We read, Dan. 7. 12. that
the rest of the Beasts had their Dominion taken away, yet their lives were
prolonged for a season: But we read not Rev. 11. 13. that the Beast has his
Dominion taken away at the exit of the sixth Trumpet, and his Life prolonged
till the seventh. In a word, the Synchronism does suppose things which are not
to be granted. 1. That the sealed Virgins, and the two Witnesses be all one
Company. 2. That the Beast Chap. 11. is the same with the Beast Chap. 13. 3.
That the one Thousand two Hundred and sixty Days of the Witnesses Chap. 11. 3.
are the same with the 42. Months of the Beast Chap. 13. 5. 4. That the whole
time of the Beasts Reign is determined in those 42 Months; all which must be
proved before the Synchronism can be made good. And thus much in Answer to the
first Synchronism.

The second Synchronism is of the contemporating inner Court, and the battle
of Michael and the Dragon, about the birth of the Child, with the six first
Seals.

Answ. To which I answer. 1. That the measuring of the inner Court, and the
battle of Michael and the Dragon, about the birth of the Child, do not
contemporate each with other; and therefore not contemporate with the fix first
Seals. 2. Neither are they immediate Antecedents of contemporating
Succedaneans; for though the six first Seals be the immediate Antecedent of the
seventh Seal, yet the measuring of the inner Court, and the Dimication of
Michael with the Dragon, are not the immediate Antecedents of the Beast, and
the sealed Virgins. 3. The seventh Seal, or (which is all one) the six first
Trumpets, and the company of the sealed, and the Beast, are not contemporants,
therefore here is no Synchronising.

The third Synchronism is of the Vials, with the sixth Trumpet.

Answ. To which I answer. 1. That the seven Vials are the seven last plagues,
Rev. 15. 1. and therefore they do not begin the ruin of the Beast, but end it.
2. The Kingdom of the Beast is not brought to such a ruin in the sixth
Trumpet, as to put an end to his forty two Months; all that is done in that
Trumpet, is the falling of the tenth part of the City, and the loss of seven
Thousand men, and what is that to the ruin of the Beasts Kingdom, or to the
ending of his forty two Months. 3. The Beast shall have a far greater loss
than that, before any of the Vials be effused, for the Harvest Chap. 14. is a
far greater loss than that in the sixth Trumpet, and the Vintages far greater
than the Harvest, and both of them shall come upon the Beast before any of the
Vials be effused. 4. The fifth Vial is poured out upon the Throne of the Beast,
but that the Beasts Throne is touched in the time of the sixth Trumpet, I deny.
For by the tenth part of the City, is not meant the Throne of the Beast, but
Jerusalem. 5. The seventh Vial is a consummating Vial, and the seventh Trumpet
a consummating Trumpet: but this does not make them to contemporate; for the
one takes up more time in consummating than the other does, as having more
things to consummate than the other has; the one begins Chap. 16. and
consummates the things from thence unto the end, the other begins Chap. 11. and
reaches from thence unto the end of the Revelation.

The fourth Synchronism is of the thousand years of Satan's being bound with the
seventh Trumpet or the space from the destruction of the Beast.

Ans. To which I answer that the thousand years of Satan's being bound are
shorter than the seventh Trumpet, both a part ante, and a part p^st. 1. They
are shorter a part ante, for the thousand years begin Rev. 20. 1. but the
seventh Trumpet begins Rev. 11. 15. and all the Prophecies between that
Chapter, and the twentieth belong unto the seventh Trumpet, and not unto the
little Book which had no Prophecy written in it. Again the thousand years
expire at the enlargement of the Prisoner, Rev. 20. 7. but the seventh Trumpet
goes beyond it, and contains under it, not only that enlargement, but the
insurrection and destruction of Gog and Magog, the resurrection of the dead,
and the final Judgment: so that the thousand years are much shorter than the
seventh Trumpet, both a part ante on the fore part, and a part post on the
hinder part. To that which follows in the Synchronism I have no more to say,
but what has been spoken to already, the rest not spoken to I leave to others
to answer that have a mind unto it, for my opinion is, that the Prophecies of
the Revelation shall come to pass in order as they were revealed.

The fifth Synchronism is of the thousand years of the Sovereign Reign of
Christ, and of the seventh Trumpet, or the space from the destruction of the
Beast.

Ans. To which I answer that the seventh Trumpet, and the space of time which
succeeds the destruction of the Beast are not all one, for that space begins
with the twentieth Chapter, but the seventh Trumpet begins before, and contains
not that space alone, but all the Prophecies besides, from the eleventh Chapter
to the twentieth. The rest that follows in that Synchronism I leave to others
to answer that be so minded, for my opinion is, that the Prophecies of the
Revelation (what ever the meaning of them be) shall come to pass in order as
they were revealed.

The sixth Synchronism is of the new Jerusalem, the Lambs Bride with the
seventh Trumpet, or the space from the destruction of the Beast.

Ans. To which I answer. 1. In general that the new Jerusalem does not begin at
the destruction of the Beast, nor contemporate with the thousand years, but
succeed them. 2. I answer to each Argument in particular.

To the first, I say that the marriage of the Lamb, Rev. 19. 7. and the
marriage, Rev. 21. 2. 9. are not the same. The first is the personal marriage
of Christ, with the spouse in grace; the other is the personal marriage of
Christ, with the spouse in glory.

To the second, I deny that the new Jerusalem is the beloved City which Gog and
Magog shall environ after the thousand years are ended, Rev. 20. 9. for this
latter is the Church in the full state of grace, but the other is the Church in
the full state of glory.

To the third, factum est, it is done, Rev. 16. 17. is not the same factum est
with that Rev. 21. 6. By the first is meant that the seven last plagues were
then expiring, that being the last which then was pouring out, and the full
state of grace was ended, and the state of glory was presently to begin.

The fourth Argument proves no more than this, that the new Jerusalem shall
succeed the utter exstinction of the Beast, and Babylon: but that it shall
succeed immediately, I deny. The order shall be this, Babylon shall be
destroyed first, the Beast and false Prophet next, then shall be the thousand
years, after them the insurrection and destruction of Gog and Magog, after that
the last Judgment, then the Lake of fire for the cursed, and the new Jerusalem
for the blessed.

The seventh Synchronism of the Palm-bearing multitude of the numberless
triumphants out of all Nations, Tribes, People, and t^ngues, c. 7. v. 9. with
the seventh Trumpet, or space of time from ^^struction of the Beast, c. 11. 15.

Ans. Two Arguments are brought to prove this, the first is to this effect, The
Palm-bearing multitude immediately succeeds the Company of the Sealed, and that
company ended with the Beast, at the exit of the sixth Trumpet, therefore the
Palm-bearing multitude follows both.

Ans. But if you look into the seventh Chapter, you shall there find they
immediately succeed the time of their Sealing; not the race of the Sealed, but
the time of their Sealing. Now their Sealing is in the time of the sixth Seal,
before any of the Trumpets do begin, therefore these Palm-bearers precede the
seventh Trumpet, and the first to boot.

The second Argument is, that they be Citizens of the new Jerusalem.

Ans. But in the sixth Seal, under which they are presented unto John, they are
not come to that estate at that time, their bodies being not then raised from
the Grave, their Souls being then in Heaven in the state of bliss, at such time
as the Sealed ones are Sealed on earth.

Other things there be in these Synchronisms, which for brevity sake I omit to
speak unto. By that which has been said the Reader may perceive there be no
such Synchronisms as he would have, except those which belong to one and the
same Prophecy; as the two Beasts in the thirteenth Chapter do: otherwise the
Prophecies succeed one another, and shall come to pass in order (not as they be
written) but as they were revealed; and this is as sure rule to go by, and
gives great Light to the Exposition of the Prophecies; for such an Exposition
must be put on each Prophecy, as to make it succeed the Prophecy that went
before, and precede the Prophecy which follows after; the same order to be
observed in Execution, as was in Revelation.

And here the Reader may take notice. 1. That every one of these Synchronisms
is to be understood of a total, not of a partial Contemporation; for some of
them are true of a partial Contemporation, (as that the sealed Virgins do
contemporate with the Beast) but none of them of a total. 2. That for the most
part things are set down in writing, in such order as they were revealed; and
there be but very few things that be set down otherwise, and they be such as
belong to one and the same Prophecy, and were presented to John both together,
but could not be set down in writing both together, but immediately one after
another: As for instance, the Travel of the Woman with Child, Chap. 12. and the
watching of the Dragon to devour her Child as soon as it was born, were
presented unto John both together, and shall come to pass both together; but he
could not set them down in writing both together, but immediately one after
another: So the watching of the Dragon, and the Battle of Michael, with him,
were presented to John both together, and shall come to pass both together, but
could not be set down in writing both together (but immediately one after
another) unless it were in Colums in this manner.

And there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars. And she
being with child, cried traveling in birth, and pained to be delivered, Rev.
12. 1, 2. And there appeared another wonder in Heaven, and behold a great Red
Dragon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his Heads.
And his Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to
the Earth; and the Dragon stood before the Woman which was ready to be
Delivered, for to devour her Child as soon as it was born, Verse. 3, 4. And
there was War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and
the Dragon fought with his Angels; and prevailed not, neither was the^^ place
found any more in Heaven. And the great Red Dragon was cast out, that Old
Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceives the whole world, he was
cast out into the Earth, and his Angels were cast out with him, Verse. 7, 8, 9.

Unless it be in this manner, these things could not be set down in writing
together, but one behind another; and in such a case as this, things are not
set down in writing in some places, in such order as they were revealed, and
they are such as belong to one and the same Prophecy; but in other cases, where
Prophecies are distinct one from another, and concern different matters, they
are set down in writing in such order as they were revealed, and shall come to
pass in the same order as they were revealed; not any thing of another nature,
or belonging to another Prophecy coming between. See more of these
Synchronisms, Chap. 11. q. 1. Chap. 12. q. 2. Chap. 13. q. 1. Chap. 14. q. 1:
Chap. 16. q. 1.

CHAP. XI.
The conclusion of the (...) Trumpet, or the second part thereof.
1. ANd there was put into my hand a Reed like unto a Rod to measure withal,
and the Angel that gave it me, stood by, Ezekiel 4. 3, 5, 6. 8, 9, 13, etc.
and said unto me, Arise, and measure the Temple, and the inner Court, and them
that worship therein; Ezekiel. 41. 5, 13.
whereby I knew that a Temple, and an inner Court should be built at the
Execution of this Prophecy at Jerusalem, for the people of the Jews to worship
in.

2. But the Court which is without the Temple (said he unto me) leave out, and
measure not; whereby I knew that it should not be built; and the reason of it
is, because it shall be given to the Gentiles to inhabit, and Jerusalem shall
be trodden under Foot by the Gentiles three years and an half, after the Temple
and inner Court shall be finished.

3. And as soon as the Temple, and the inner Court shall be built, I will give
them to my two Witnesses, whom I will raise up of the Jewish Nation, 2 King. 1.
18.
and they shall Prophecy therein by immediate Inspiration three years and a
half, Mat 3. 4.
with good success, Esa. 20. 2.
clothed in Priestly Garments, Zach. 13, 4.
as Eliah's and John Baptist 's were made Sackcloth.

4. These be two anointed ones, as Josua and Zerubbabel were; and they be also
two Candlesticks standing for or before the God of the earth to receive
Commandments from him, and impart them to the People; and they be also so
called, to signify the good success of their Ministry* which is to lay the
Foundation of the Jews Conversion, Zach. 4. 2, 3. 6, 7. 9. 10. 14.
which shall be brought to pass not by might, nor by power, but by the Spirit
of the Lord.

5. And if any one will hurt them, or do them any harm before the three years
and a half allotted to their Prophesying shall be ended, they shall call for
fire from Heaven as Eliah did, and it shall presently fall upon them, and
devour them. And I say again, 2 King. 1. 10. 12.
if any one will hurt them or do them any harm before the three years and a
half allotted to their Prophesying be expired, Luke 9. 54.
in such a manner as was said before, shall he be killed.

6. These have power to shut Heaven, as Eliah had, that it rain not in the days
of their Prophecy, for three years and a half, 1 King 17. 1.
as it did not in the days of his; they have also power over waters, Luke 4. 25.
to turn them into blood, Jam. 5. 17.
as Moses did in Egypt, and to smite the earth with all manner of earthly
Plagues so often as they will.

7. And when they shall have finished their testimony which they were to do in
three years and a half, the Scarlet colored Beast which shall arise out of the
bottomless Pit, shall make War against them, and overcome them, and slay them,
which not any one could do before their Prophecy was ended.

8. And their bodies after they be slain shall lie in the open Street of the
great City, which in a mystical sense, is called So^om, and Egypt for the
excessive wickedness that is therein at this time, Uncleaness, Blood, Murder,
and other abominable sins and wickedness committed by the Gentiles which shall
be therein: but yet neither of these be in a literal sense the place where the
witnesses shall be slain; but that you may know, what that City is indeed
without any mystical sense at all, it is (...) City where our Lord himself was
crucified.

9. And the Soldiers of strangers of diverse People, Tribes, Tongues and Nations
that shall be sent to Jerusalem by the Beast, to make War, and slay these two
Witnesses, shall behold, and see their dead bodies in the open Street of the
City, three days and a half, day by day, one after another, and all that while
shall not suffer their dead bodies to be buried; and this is done not out of
favor or disfavour unto them, but only that men might know and see that they
be dead, and relate it unto others This was the reason that the body of Campson
Gaur^us was by command of Selimus laid forth in an open place for all men to
behold, that such as believed him to be alive, might know that he was dead. See
Turkish History, page 532. See the like Story in Graftons Chronicle, page 705.
where he relates that the dead bodies of the Earl of Warwick, and the Marquess
his Brother, by the space of three days, lay open visaged in the Church, to the
intent that all men might evidently perceive that they unfeignedly were dead.
And for no other reason be the two witnesses left unburied three days and a
half, that men might behold and see that they be dead.
.

10. And the Inhabitants of the place, City, or Country thereabout shall
rejoice over these men, and make Feasts, and be merry, and send presents from
their Tables, one unto another, because these two Prophets of the Lord are
dead, who by their Preaching, and Miracles, and Plagues, tormented the
Inhabitants of the Land, when they were alive.

11. But after they have been dead three days and a half, their souls shall
enter into them again, and they shall stand upon their Feet, and be alive again
in their bodies, and great fear shall fall upon all them that shall behold it.

12. And they shall hear a voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither;
and they shall presently ascend to Heaven in a Cloud, as Christ himself did:
and this shall be done, not in their successors, but in their own bodies, and
their enemies shall behold them, Act. 1. 10, 11.
and see them ascending into Heaven, as Christ's Disciple did behold and see him
when he ascended thither.

13. And the same hour that this is done, shall be a great earthquake at
Jerusalem, and the tenth part of the City fall, and be thrown down unto the
ground, and seven thousand men be slain by the earthquake, and the rest that
shall escape shall be afraid, and glorify God for their deliverance.

14. The second woe is past when these things shall be fulfilled, and there is
but one woe more to come, when these things are ended, and that woe shall come
quickly.

The Prophecy of the seventh Trumpet, or the inchoation of it.
15. And the seventh Angel sounded his Trumpet, and presently upon the sound
thereof, there were voices of joy, exultation, and ovation in Heaven, saying,
The Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and his
Christ, and he shall Reign for evermore, and the time is now at hand in which
it shall be done.

16. And upon this joyful acclamation, the four and twenty Elders rose up from
their seats and fell prostrate on their faces, and worshipped God, because the
time was come that the Lord and his Christ should Reign.

17. Saying, We give thee thanks Lord God Almighty, the Monarch of Heaven and
Earth, the Ruler and Governor of all things therein, and that not only now, but
heretofore in all ages past, and throughout all ages for time to come, because
thou will receive thy great power and might, and put thy Kingdom in execution.

18. And the heathen shall be angry, and thy wrath shall come and is now
approaching, and the time of the dead, that Judgment be given to them, and
reward be given unto thy Servants whom thou shall employ to Preach thy Gospel,
and to thy Saints which be not Preachers but believers of thy Gospel, and to
all that fear thee both small and great, and that thou should destroy, and
root the Heathen out, which corrupt and defile the earth where thou intendest
to Reign and set up thy Kingdom.

19. And the secret Closet of God shall be opened in Heaven, and there shall be
seen in his Closet the Ark of his Covenant, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34.
which he made with the Jewish Nation, that they should be converted to the
Faith of Christ; Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
which at this time is to be put in Execution, according to the Prophecy of the
Angel in the tenth Chapter; but before it commence, or take effect, there shall
be Lightnings and Thundrings, and a terrible Earthquake to usher it in.

Disputation VII.
1. Quest. Whether the Prophecy in the eleventh Chapter, from the first Verse
to the end of the fourteenth, does belong to the sixth Trumpet, and be a part
thereof?

Answ. 1. The sixth Trumpet does not end with the ninth Chapter, nor at the
sixth Verse of the tenth Chapter, but reaches onward to the fourteenth Verse
of the eleventh Chapter, and there ends, and not before, as appears from the
words of that Verse, The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes
quickly.

2. The close of the sixth Trumpet is not set down at the end of the ninth
Chapter, nor at the sixth or seventh Verse of the tenth Chapter; but at the
fourteenth Verse of the eleventh Chapter: Therefore whatever comes between the
seventh Verse of the tenth Chapter, and the fourteenth Verse of the eleventh
Chapter, does belong unto the sixth Trumpet, and is a part thereof.

3. Look into the former Trumpet, and you shall not find any thing interposed
between the end of that Trumpet, and the close thereof; and why should any Man
think that so large a Prophecy, as is contained between the seventh Verse of
the tenth Chapter, and the fourteenth Verse of the eleventh Chapter, is
interposed here?

4. Of all the six Trumpets, none have a remarkable close added to them, but
the fifth and the sixth Trumpets only; and wherefore were these closes added to
them, but that we might exactly know as well where they end, as where they do
begin? Now the fifth Trumpet ends where the close thereof is set, and that is
Rev. 9. 12. and therefore also the sixth Trumpet ends where the close thereof
is set, and that is Rev. 11. 14. and not before.

5. St. John when he wrote the Revelation, did not distinguish it into Chapters
and Verses, as now it is, but did set down the sixth Trumpet, and all the rest
of the Revelation jointly together, without any such Partition, or Division;
and if they which did at first distinguish the Revelation into Chapters, and
Verses, had made but one Chapter of the sixth Trumpet, beginning with the
thirteenth Verse of the ninth Chapter, and ending with the fourteenth Verse of
the eleventh Chapter, as they might have done, the matter had been more clear,
perspicuous and evident to the eye than now it is. It cannot be denied (says
Mr. Mede) but the Division of Chapters, especially in the New Testament, being
but Humani instituti, is sometimes so ill ordered, that it does much prejudice
the Reader in understanding the meaning of the Holy Ghost. Remains page 5. And
if the Contents of this Trumpet had been ordered into one Chapter, beginning
with the thirteenth Verse of the ninth Chapter, and ending with the fourteenth
Verse of this eleventh Chapter; what man would have doubted, but that this
Prophecy of the eleventh Chapter, to the fourteenth Verse thereof, did belong
unto the sixth Trumpet, as the Prophecy in the ninth Chapter, from the
thirteenth Verse, to the end thereof does.

6. Had it been said in the tenth Chapter, at the end of the sixth Verse, The
second Woe is past; here had been an undeniable Argument, that the Prophecy of
the sixth Trumpet, did not reach so far as the eleventh Chapter: Or had it been
said in the eleventh Chapter, The first Vision of the little Book is past, and
behold the third Woe comes quickly; here had been another Argument, that the
Prophecy in the eleventh Chapter to the fourteenth Verse, did belong unto the
little Book, and not unto the sixth Trumpet. But in regard it is not said in
the tenth Chapter, The second Woe is past, nor in the eleventh Chapter, The
first Vision of the little Book is past; but in the eleventh Chapter, verse. 14.
it was said, The second Woe is past, and behold the third Woe comes quickly:
Here is an irrefragable Argument, that the Prophecy in the eleventh Chapter to
the fourteenth Verse, does belong unto the sixth Trumpet, and not unto the
little Book, which had no Prophecy written in it.

Object. In the tenth Chapter, at the sixth Verse, is the end of the sixth
Trumpet; for there it is said, that Time shall be no more.

Answ. By time is not meant the time of the sixth Trumpet; as if the time
thereof were past: but the meaning is, as Brightman well Expounds it, Exiguum
admodum jam superesse tempus ad consummationem, that there is now but a very
little time remaining to the seventh Trumpet, in which the Mystery of God shall
be fulfilled.

Object. In the same Chapter, at the seventh Verse, comes in the seventh
Trumpet, which plainly shows, that the sixth Trumpet ended at the Verse before.

Answ. But if you look into the Text, you shall there find, that the seventh
Trumpet is then to be expected, and it is there spoken of to signify so much.
But in the days of the Voice of the seventh Angel, (...) when he shall be
ready to sound, Quando futurum est ut clangat, says Brightman, when his turn
shall come to sound; which plainly shows, that the time for the seventh Trumpet
was not yet come to sound, and that the time of the sixth Trumpet was not yet
expired, but to continue longer, even to the fourteenth verse of the eleventh
Chapter.

Ob. The Prophecy of the little Book is no part of the sixth Trumpet, but the
Prophecy of this eleventh Chapter, from the first verse to the fourteenth does
belong unto the little Book, therefore etc.

Ans. I deny the Major, for a little Book may be the issue or Daughter of a
great Book, and as out of the seventh Seal came forth seven Trumpets, so out of
the sixth Trumpet came forth the little Book, whether any thing were written
therein or no, and if there were, it does belong unto the sixth Trumpet, and to
no other. 2. I deny the minor, for the little Book had not any Prophecy written
in it, as has been showed in the former Chapter; and when the Angel said to
John in the former Chapter; Thou must Prophecy again, his meaning is not that
he must begin a new Prophecy, ab ovo, and so begin a new Book, repeating the
same times over again, as Mr. Mede would have it, clavis Apoc. p. 13. Remains
p. 4, 5. but his meaning is, that he must go forward with the former Prophecy
of the Seals and Trumpets, and in particular, with the Prophecy of the sixth
Trumpet, and make know the other part thereof which was yet behind.

Ob. By 42 months mentioned ver. 2. is meant Prophetical months, and by 1260
days ver. 3. is meant Prophetical days, that is 1260 years, as appears Numb.
14. 34. Ezech. 4. 6. but it is not likely that the sixth Trumpet should
continue half so long.

Ans. Look into the Prophets he that will, he shall never find a Prophetical
month any more than a natural month, and that is thirty natural days, and no
more; and as for the word days, it is very seldom, if ever at all put for
years, unless it be typically, as Numb. 14. 34. Ezech. 4. 6. but not elsewhere.
2. What if Numb. 14. 34. Ezech. 4. 6. a day be put for a year? Is it therefore
so here? Or is it so in all other Prophecies of the Scripture beside? If it
were, it is very likely it should be so here; but look into the Prophets while
you will, you shall hardly find it taken for a year in other places, therefore
not likely it should be so taken in the Revelation. 3. Is the same number, or
the same matter spoken of Numb. 14. 34. Ezech. 4. 6. as is here? If it were, no
doubt they should be taken all alike in all the three places; but compare the
words together, you shall not find the same number, nor the same matter spoken
of Numb. 14. 34. Ezech. 4. 6. as is here. 4. What if I should show you a Text
of Scripture, where the self same number that is here used, is taken literally
for 1260 natural days, and no more? Is not this a more probable Argument, that
it is so taken here? Look then into the next Chapter following, verse. 6. and
ask Mr. Mede himself, and others of our Protestant Divines, whether 1260 days
be any more than three years and a half, Comment Apoc. page 174. Moulins
Accomplishment of Prophecies, page 194. 200, 201. Piscator in Apoc. cap. 12. v.
6. and then judge of it. 5. What if Numb. 14. 34. Ezekiel. 4. 6. days be not put
for years absolutely, but typically? Read the words, and you shall find that to
be the meaning. After the number of the days in which ye searched the Land,
even 40 days, each day for a year shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty
years: be not days here, types of years? So again, Ezech. 4. 5, 6. According to
the number of the days, 390 days, so shall thou bear the iniquity of the House
of Israel. And when thou have accomplished them, lie again on thy right side,
and thou shall bear the iniquity of the House of Juda 40 days, I have appointed
thee each day for a year: is not this typically to be understood? And if days
be not put for years in neither of these places unless it be typically, why
should any man think that in the Revelation they be put for years absolutely?
For typically they cannot be, unless a man will say, that John was three years
and a half in receiving this Prophecy, as the men of Israel were forty days in
searching the Land of Canaan, which I think no man will affirm. Briefly then,
if days be put for years in the Revelation, 1260 days for 1260 years, it is
either absolutely, or typically. If absolutely, show me the like in other
places: If typically, show me the analogy between the type, and the Antitype,
as it is plainly to be seen in Moses and Ezekiel, As ye were forty days in
searching the Land, so shall ye bear your iniquity in the Wilderness forty
years; and as Ezekiel was to lie on his right side forty days, so God would
wink at their iniquity forty years, and then the captivity should be brought
upon them. This is the analogy beteen the type, and the Antitype, in Moses and
Ezekiel, show me the analogy in the Revelation; for if no analogy can be found,
there is no type, nor Antitype to be had. Again, if days be put for years
absolutely in the Revelation, then neither that place, Numb. 14. 34. nor that
place, Ezekiel. 4. 6. will prove it, for in both these places, they be put
typically, not absolutely. And if it be said, that they be put typically in the
Revelation, then as Ezekiel was to lie on his right side forty days in his
ecstasie, so the Angel was three years and a half in revealing this Prophecy
unto John, and three years and a half more in revealing the Prophecy of the
Woman, and three years and a half more in revealing the Prophecy of the Beast,
and John was so long in his ecstasie, when as the whole Revelation was revealed
to him in one day, and that was the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. See Disp. 1. q. ^2.
6. What if these 1260 days of the Witnesses, and the 1260 days of the Woman's
living in the Wilderness, and the 42 months of the Beast do not contemporate,
but succeed one another? Is not this an Argument that they are literally to be
understood? Now that the 42 months of the Beast, shall succeed the 1260 days of
the Woman, and the 1260 days of the woman shall succed the 1260 days of the
Witnesses, has been proved already in the former Chapter, q. 2. and shall be
proved farther in the twelfth and thirteenth Chapters following. 7. What if
these days of the Witnesses be days of safety and security, is it likely that
they shall be in safety or security so many years? Now that these days of the
Witnesses be days of safety and security, the fifth, sixth, and seventh verses
of this Chapter do plainly teach, And if any man will hurt them, (understand
before the 1260 days be ended) fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their Enemies, etc. so that their enemies be in danger all that time,
but the Witnesses be in safety. 8. To this may be added what the Angel says in
the former Chapter, v. 6, 7. that there should be time no longer, but in the
days of the voice of the seventh Angel when he shall begin to sound, the
mystery of God shall be finished, which words imply that there is but a very
little time from thence to the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, as Brightman
well expounds it, and consequently the 1260 days of the two Witnesses which
comes between that time, and the sounding of that Trumpet, is but a short time.
To which likewise may be added that these two Witnesses be two men, and no
more, and therefore they cannot live so long as to Prophecy 1260 years. And if
it be said that these two Witnesses be put for all the Prophets that suffered
for the name of Christ all that time, and that they be called two because they
be but few, to this I answer. 1. That if this were the meaning, the word [two]
might very well have been left out, and it had been sufficient to have said, I
will give power to my Witnesses, and they shall Prophecy 1260 days, and this
would have took them in all, and the sense had been complete without the word
[two,] but the wisdom of God thought it fit to put it in, and that no less than
four times in this Prophecy, once v. 3. twice v. 4. and the fourth time v. 10.
and wherefore was it done but to show that these two Witnesses be two men, and
no more, like as when it is said, Mat. 27. 38. And there were two Thieves
crucified with him, wherefore was the word [two] put in, but to show the
Thieves were two men, and no more? So when it is said, I will give power to my
two witnesses, wherefore is the word [two] put in, but to show that these two
Witnesses be two men, and no more? 2. We cannot say that all the Prophets which
suffered for the name of Christ in Queen Mary's days were but few, or that they
which suffered since in Ireland were but few, or that they which suffered of
late days in Savoy, were but few, much less can we say that all the Prophets
which suffered in 1260 years space, were but few. And though the Prophets which
suffered in some Kings Reigns were but few, or none at all, yet count we the
number of them all which suffered in 1260 years space, and we cannot say that
they be few. 3. We cannot say that all the Prophets which suffered for the name
of Christ in 1260 years space (call them few or many) did begin and end their
Prophecy together, Rev. 7. 9. 14.
but some at one time, and some at another time. We cannot say that they did
all dye in one day, and in one place, but some in one year, and some in another
year, some in one place, and some in another place: but of these two Witnesses
we may say, that they did both begin and end their Prophecy together, they both
suffer death in one day, and in one place, and they both return to life in one
hour. And therefore these two witnesses be not all the Prophets of the Lord
which have suffered for his name 1260 years together, for they dyed
successively at distant times, and in distant places, but these died both in
one day, and in one place too, and therefore they be two men, and no more, and
the 1260 days be three years and a half, and no more. And this is more than I
need have said to this objection, but if any does desire more, let him read
what is said chapter 12. q. 2. and he shall find something more said unto it.

2 Quest. Whether this Prophecy were fulfilled in Adrians time?

Ans. 1. The measuring of a Temple and an Altar, does imply the building of two
Holy places at Jerusalem, for the People of the Jews to worship in, the one in
the place where the Temple stood, the other in the place where the Altar stood,
but we read not of any such places built in Adrians time, but we read in some
Books of History, that Adrian would have built a Church for Christians without
Images, if some about him had not told him that it would be dishonorable to
all the rest of the Gods, which was the cause he did it not. See Prideaux
History, page 199.

2. The not measuring of the Court which is without the Temple does imply the
not building of it, therefore the building of a new City at Jerusalem by Adrian
in the place where the outer Court did stand, cannot be meant thereby.

3. After the building of the Temple, and the Altar, the outer Court shall be
given to the Gentiles, and the Holy City shall they tread under Foot 42 months
after the Holy places be provided, and no longer: but since the time of Adrian
to this day has been more than 42 months which way soever we take them, and
Jerusalem has been trodden under foot by the Gentiles all this while.

4. The two Witnesses be not two Bishops at Jerusalem, the one of the Jewish,
the other of the Gentile Congregations, for there was but one Bishop of
Jerusalem at one time, and there were but fifteen Bishops in all, until the
destruction of the Jews by Adrian, and all of them were Jews, whereof the first
was James the Brother of the Lord, and the last was Judas; and after the City
was destroyed by him, there were no more Bishops of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles, and the first of them was Marcus. See Eusebius l: 4. c. 5. l. 5. c.
11.

5. The two witnesses be Prophets extraordinary, as appears by their
description, v. 3, 4. and by their miracles, v. 5, 6. now there were no
Prophets extraordinary in the days of Adrian, and there were not any that could
do such miracles as these had power to do v. 5, 6. in Adrians time, nor in any
time since.

6. When the two Witnesses shall have finished their testimony, the Beast that
comes out of the bottomless Pit, shall make War against them, and overcome
them, and slay them, v. 7. Now there was no Beast in Adrians time, except
Adrian himself, and he did not make War against the Christians in Judaea, but
against the wicked and Rebellious Jews only: but they with whom I deal in this
question, will not allow Adrian to be the Beast here spoken of, but one
Barchocheba a Rebellious Captain of the Jews in Adrians time. Now by the Beast
is meant some potent King or other that had ten Kings under him, or to join
with him, as appears Rev. 17. 12, 13. 17. but Barchocheba was no King, nor had
any King under him, or to join with him.

7. After the two Witnesses had been dead three days and a half, the Spirit of
life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, v. 11. but
there were not any that were raised from death to life in the days of Adrian,
nor in any time since. And if it be said, that this is meant of their
successors, to this I answer. 1. That the two Witnesses had no successors,
for there were no such Prophets in Adrians time, nor at any time since, and
there were not any that could do such miracles as these had power to do v. 5,
6. in Adrians time, nor in any time since. 2. The Souls of men after they be
dead, do not enter into other men's bodies, but into their own bodies only, now
it is said, the Spirit of life, (that is their Souls) entered into them, v. 11.
therefore this is not meant of their successors, but of their own bodies; for
if the Spirit of life did enter into their successors, it did not enter into
them, but into others, and they did not stand upon their feet, that is their
own feet, but upon the feet of others, 3. They heard a voice from Heaven saying
unto them, Come up hither; and they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their
enemies beheld them, v. 12. Now, what man did ever ascend to Heaven in
successors? And what benefit were it to him if he did? We read that Christ
ascended thither, and so did Enoch and Elias; but of any that went to Heaven in
successors, we read not in all the Scripture. And if these two Witnesses did
ascend to Heaven, as were made alive in successors, what became of their dead
bodies? The Text says, they shall lie in the street of the great City, and
they shall see their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer
their dead bodies to be put in Graves, v. 8, 9. but if the Spirit of life did
not enter into them, what became of their dead bodies afterward? Did they lie
in the street still? Or did the Ravens eat them, or the Dogs devour them, or
were they buried in the earthquake? Or what became of them, let them tell me
if they can? And let them tell me too, whether Barchocheba and his accomplices,
whom they suppose to be the enemies of the Witnesses here spoken of, were not
dead before the Christians in Adrians time were advanced to peace, and
Halcyonian days in Iudaea? And if they were, how can it be said that their
enemies did behold their ascension into Heaven, seeing they were dead before?
And lastly, if the Witnesses were made alive in successors, why do they not
also say that the Widows Son of Naim was made alive in a successor? And if
they ascended up to Heaven in successors, why do they not also say that Enoch
and Elias ascended thither in successors? Yea, why do they not say that Christ
himself ascended thither in a successor? And why do they not say that all the
Texts of Scripture which speak of the Resurrection of the dead, be meant of the
rising of successors? And if they can have Faith to believe that the Texts of
Scripture which speak of the Resurrection of the dead, be meant of the
Resurrection of the same bodies that were dead, why can they not have so much
Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, to believe that the enlivening of the
Witnesses, is meant of the enlivening of the same bodies that were dead?

8. The same hour that this was done, there was a great earthquake, v. 13. but
we read not of any earthquake at Jerusalem in Adrians time, but in Iulians
time there was.

9. The tenth part of the City fell, v. 13. Now in Adrians time the whole City
was destroyed, and the Plough passed over it, and a new one built by Adrian on
its ruins, which he called Aelia, after his own name Aelius. And here we are
to take notice, that this new City was not built by Adrian before the Rebellion
of the Jews began, as the Temple and the Altar were, v. 1. before the Witnesses
began to Preach, but this new City was built by him after the Rebellion of the
Jews was over. Eusebius l. 4. c. 6. Carrion. Chron. l. 3. p. 229.

10. And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, v. 13. but the
Jews that were slain in Adrians time, were far more in number, and they were
also slain by the Sword, and not by an earthquake, as these in the Text were;
so that there is scarce any thing in the Text that does agree to Adrians time
or Person. But that which makes men run into these errors, is partly because
they turn the literal sense into a mystical, and partly because they make a
History of that which is yet a Prophecy, and seek for things future in ages
past, where they shall never find them.

Lastly, If this be a Prophecy of what was done in Adrians time, what is the
reason we have not a Prophecy of what was done in Iulians time? For remarkable
things were done in his time, and there was not a total destruction of the
Temple until then, at which time there was such an earthquake at Jerusalem
that the very Foundations of the Temple were destroyed thereby, which was not
done before. Yea, what is the reason we have no Prophecy of the Turks, and
Saracens, who have trodden Jerusalem under foot many hundred years, and not only
it, but all the Churches in the East beside, is not this more considerable than
what was done in Adrians time, or in Iulians either? And is it likely that so
many Prophecies should be spent about the affairs of Iudaea and Jerusalem, and
not a word of this? Is not this an indication that the Prophecies have some
other meaning? And that this Prophecy of the two Witnesses was not fulfilled in
Adrians time, but is yet to be expected?

3 Quest. Whether, what is done by the two Witnesses in this Prophecy be not an
inchoation or preparation to the Jews Conversion?

Ans. 1. What did the Angel mean when he said that time should be no more, chapter
10. 6. but the time of the Jewish blindness? Or else we may with Brightman and
some others translate the word (...) by the word delay, and then the meaning
is, the conversion of the Jews shall be no more delayed, but in the days of the
seventh Angel, when he shall sound his Trumpet, the mystery of God, that is,
the conversion of the Jews shall be brought to pass, and therefore here is a
preparation for it before the sixth Trumpet ends.

2. What is it to measure the Temple of God, and the Altar but to build two
Holy places at Jerusalem for the Jews to worship God in? And what is it to
build two holy places at Jerusalem for them to worship God in, but to begin the
conversion of that Nation?

3. It is said, v. 3. And I will give power to my two Witnesses, and they shall
Prophecy 1260 days clothed in Sackcloth. Now what is it to Prophecy in
Sackeloth, but as John Baptist did, to prepare the way of the Lord by Preaching
of Repentance, and begin the conversion of the Jews before the Lord come? And
where shall this be done, but at Jerusalem where the Jews dwell, and in the
Temple, and the Altar that is the inner Court, which is to be provided for this
end and purpose that the Witnesses may Prophecy therein.

4. Look into the History of their return from Babylon, and you shall find they
began their restoration with the building of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 26. 22, 23.
Ezra 1. 1, 2, 3. they did not build their own Houses first, (as men have done
in our days,) and the Temple afterward, but they built the Temple first, and
their own Houses afterward: and no other course do they take here; we read not
of the building of their own Houses in this place, but of the building of a
Temple, and an Altar at Jerusalem to worship God in, and no more.

5. Look into the Prophet Zachary, and you shall find that the Vision of a
Candlestick, and of two Olive Trees is presented to the Prophet, to signify
unto him the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, and restoring the worship of
God to that Nation, Zach. 4. 2, 3, etc. and for no other reason are these two
Witnesses called two Olives, and two Candlesticks, than that they restore the
worship of God in some measure to the Jewish Nation.

6. Wherefore does the Beast make War against the two Witnesses, but because
they Preach the Gospel to the Jews at Jerusalem, and endeavor the conversion
of that Nation, which the Beast and all that be of his mind cannot endure to
hear of, the conversion of the Jews is such an eyesore unto them, and to
Satan's Kingdom, that they had rather hear of any thing than of it.

7. We read in History, that the Jews heretofore have attempted to rebuild a
Temple at Jerusalem in Iulians time to restore their former worship, but God
did not approve thereof, and therefore it suddenly came to naught: but such a
Temple, and such an Altar shall be built in this place as is approved of by God
and John is commanded for to measure it, and therefore it is not done to
restore the old worship and ceremonies of the law, but the true worship of the
Gospel.

8. The place where this is to be done is Jerusalem, and therefore that people
are concerned in this Prophecy; and the thing that is aimed at by the two
Witnesses, is the conversion of that Nation, and what is here done by them, is
a tendency or preparation thereunto, and not only the Jews which are then
dwelling at Jerusalem shall come unto them and hear them preach, but other Jews
also which dwell in other Countries hearing what is done at Jerusalem, and what
success the Witnesses have there, will resort thither, hoping to see their
Restoration brought to pass at this time, or to learn of them what they should
do in order to their Restoration. Now that Jerusalem is the place where these
things shall be fulfilled, may appear by these Reasons. 1. It is called the
Holy City, v. 2. Now Babylon is never called a Holy City, but Jerusalem is,
Mat. 4. 5. Mat. 27. 53. To which may be added, that the Hebrew Tongue is called
the Holy Tongue, and the Land of Canaan is called the Holy Land, and the War
against the Turks, for regaining of that Land, is called the Holy War; and it
is remarkable that Jerusalem is now called by the Turks, who are the Possessors
of it, Kuddish, which is in their Language a Holy City; and who can tell
whether the Holy Ghost might not use this Expression in this place for that
Reason? 2. It is the City which the Gentiles shall tread under foot 42 Months,
v. 2. and what is that City but Jerusalem? Luke 21. 24. 3. It is Spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt; now Jerusalem is called Sodom, Esa. 1. 10. 4. It is the
City where our Lord was crucified, and what should that be but Jerusalem? 5. It
is called the great City, and that City is distinguished too from Babylon, Rev.
16. 19.

Object. Here is no mention of the Jews in this Prophecy?

Answ. Here is mention of a Temple, and an Altar to be built at Jerusalem,
which none can be supposed to do at this time but the Jews only. 2. Here is
mention of an outer Court unmeasured, because given to the Gentiles; therefore
the inner Court called the Temple, and the Altar is measured, because given to
the Jews to worship God in, and for the two Witnesses to preach the Gospel in.
3. Wheresoever ye find mention of Prophets, there is still a Reference had unto
the Jews, to whom only it was peculiar, and their great privilege to be
furnished with Prophets extraordinary: Now here is mention of such Prophets,
verse. 10. And if it be said that Jonah was a Prophet extraordinary, and sent to
Ninive, to this I answer, that he was sent unto the Jews first, and did
peculiarly belong to them, 2 King. 14. 25. and that he was sent to Ninive at
all, was a case extraordinary, and not usual to be done.

Object. By the measuring of the Temple and the Altar, is meant a spiritual
Building, and not a material.

Answ. If that spiritual building be the Jews, it is as much as I labor for in
this Question. 2. Here is both a material building, and a spiritual in this
place. A material in the words (Temple and Altar) and a spiritual in the words
which follow (those which worship therein) 3. A spiritual building cannot well
be without a material, nor a material without a spiritual; for if there be a
material House or Chapel, it is for the use of the spiritual, and if there be
a spiritual building, it is requisite that there should be a material, I mean a
Holy place for them to meet together to worship God in.

Object. By Altar is not meant a material Altar, but a spiritual; for no such
Altars are to be made in the time of the Gospel.

Answ. A material Altar properly so called, is to offer a material Sacrifice,
such as the Sacrifices of the Jews were in the time of the Law, and such a one
shall not be built at this time; but a material Altar improperly so called is a
Holy place, Church, or Chapel, or some such thing to worship God in, and such
a one shall be built at this time. See this meaning of the word Altar, Rev. 14.
18. Rev. 16. 7. See Mede Comment. Apoc. p. 125.

Object. It is not likely that the same City, in the same Prophecy, should be
called a Holy City, and spiritually Sodom and Egypt too: but Jerusalem is
called a Holy City, verse. 2. and therefore Sodom and Egypt, verse. 8. is some
other place.

Answ. It is not likely that the Holy City, and Sodom and Egypt should be two
distinct places; neither is it likely that the two Witnesses should prophecy
in one place, and be slain in another place, remote from the place where they
prophesied: Now the place where they prophesied is Jerusalem, and the Temple,
and the Altar, that is the inner Court, are given them to that end and purpose;
and the place where they be slain is the City, where our Lord was crucified; so
that every thing agrees unto Jerusalem, and he that has but half an Eye may
see it. 2. One and the same place is called Bethel and Bethaven in the same
Prophecy, Hos. 10. 5, 15. so is Jerusalem called a faithful City, and a Harlot
too in one and the same Prophecy, Esa. 1. 21. And we read of the Abomination of
Desolation standing in the Holy place, Mat. 24. 15. And therefore no marvel if
a Holy City be made unholy, and yet retain the Name of Holy from its first
Institution. 3. The reason why Bethel was called Bethaven, is because it was
the place of Idol Worship, 1 King. 12. 29. and the reason why it retained the
Name of Bethel still, is because it was the ancient place of Gods Worship,
before the Idol Worship came thither, Genesis 28. 17, 19. Iud. 2. 18. 1 Samuel 10.
3. So the reason why Jerusalem is called Sodom and Egypt at this time, is
because the Gentiles which are in it at this time are as unclean as Sodom, and
as cruel to the people of God as Egypt was heretofore; and the reason why it
retains the Name of the Holy City still, is because it was the ancient place of
God's Worship before the Sodomites came thither, and shall be so again when the
Sodomites are gone from thence, Ioh. 4. 20. Esa. 2. 2, 3. Or else we may say,
that the reason why it was called a Holy City, is because the Temple was in
some part thereof; and the reason why it is called Sodom and Egypt at this
time, is because the Gentiles are in another part thereof, as bad as Sodom and
Egypt were.

Object. Christ was not crucified in Jerusalem, but without, Heb. 13. 12.

Answ. The word (where) has not reference to the word (street) but to the word
(City) and the meaning is, that their dead Bodies shall lie in the street of
the great City, (where) that is (at which) not (in which) our Lord was
crucified. 2. Let it be supposed that the word (where) has reference to the
word (street) and that it signifies as much as (in which) yet this will do them
no good; for part of Jerusalem does now stand on Mount Calvary at this day, and
what may be hereafter when this Prophecy comes to be fulfilled, who can tell?

Object. Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, and in the Roman Empire too.

Answ. What then? The first is meant in this place, and not the last; for
Christ was not crucified all the Roman Empire over, but in one only place
thereof, and that was at Jerusalem, and no where else. 2. If a man should ask
of these men where our Savior Christ was born, they would not answer at
Bethlehem, and in the Roman Empire too? For they know very well, that the
Question is not meant of the place in general, but of the place in particular;
so when it is said (where our Lord was crucified) it is not meant of the place
in general, but of the place in particular, and the general is included in the
particular, and is sufficiently known by naming the particular; so that they
need not say at Jerusalem, and in the Roman Empire too, for the latter is
included in the former, and is sufficiently known by naming of the former,
unless there had been two Ierusalems in the World, one in the Roman Empire, and
the other without, as there were two Bethlehems heretofore, one in Judea, and
another in Galilee, which is the cause that the Gospel says, in Bethlehem of
Judea, Mat. 2. 1. to distinguish it from the other Bethlehem which was in
Galilee: So if there had been two Ierusalems in the World, one within the Roman
Empire, and the other without, one might have said at Jerusalem, and in the
Roman Empire too; but in regard there was but one Jerusalem in the World, and
that was within the Roman Empire, one may not say at Jerusalem, and in the
Roman Empire too, unless he has a mind to speak nonsense, which the wisets man
may too often do.

Ob. Christ was crucified by the authority of the City of Rome, and in that
respect may be said to be crucified at Rome.

Ans. I deny the sequel. For Christ told Pilate, thou could have no power
at all against me, except it were given thee from above, Joh. 19. 11. yet no
man will conclude from thence, that Christ was crucified in Heaven, because
Pilate had authority from Heaven; no more ought any man to say that Christ was
crucified at Rome, because Pilate had authority from thence. Herod had
authority from the City of Rome, yet the young children which were slain by
him, were slain at Bethlehem, and not at Rome, Mat. 2. 16. Yea, we may go a
little farther, and say that the City of Rome was not guilty of their death,
nor of Christ's neither, for the authority which Herod had, was only in the
general, and that is not sufficient to make the City of Rome guilty of their
blood, it must be a special warrant, order or authority from Rome that must do
that, and this Herod wanted, and so did Pilate too. Yea, let us go a little
farther, and suppose that Pilate had a special order or authority from the City
of Rome, to put our Savior Christ to death, yet this will not suffice to make
the ((...)) the (ubi) or the (where) to be the City of Rome, but Jerusalem
alone; and the reason of it is, because the ((...)) the (ubi) and the (where)
do note the place where the thing was done, and not the power or authority by
which 'twas done: as when it is said that Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of
Ioses beheld where (...) he was laid, Mark 15. 47. it is not meant of the power
or authority, which they had from Pilate to lay his body there, but of the
place where they laid him. And so give instance where you will, it never fails.
See Ioh. 19. 18. 20. 41.

Ob. Christ was crucified not only by the Roman power, but also for the Roman
cause.

Ans. It was a pretended cause, and not a real, for Pilate did acquit him, and
said he found no fault in him, Luke 23. 4. and the reason why he put Jesus to
death, was for fear of the Jews, and not for any other cause, Mat. 26. 27. Luke
23. 22, 23. But secondly, let the cause be what it will, it is nothing to the
purpose, for the cause is not here spoken of, but the place only, and they
which understand the ((...)) the (ubi) or the (where) our Lord was crucified to
be meant of the cause, and not of the place, are as far from the meaning of the
Prophecy as Jerusalem is from Rome.

Ob. Christ has been crucified in his members at Babylon.

Ans. Is this indeed the meaning? Why, Christ has been crucified in his members
at Jerusalem, as well as in his own body, so that Jerusalem may be the City in
that sense too. 2. I deny that to be the meaning, for it is not said in every
City, where our Lord was crucified, but in the street of the great City,
pointing out but one City, and no more. 3. These words (where our Lord was
crucified) were added to declare what City it is where the Witnesses shall be
slain; and if we understand them of the City where Christ was crucified
himself, we can quickly tell what City it is that is meant in this place; but if
we understand it of the crucifixion of his members from time to time, Christ
has been crucified in so many places, that we cannot tell by this description,
what City it is is meant here. 4. Who be the members in which you say Christ was
crucified? Be they the same with the two Witnesses? Or be they other members of
his? If other ^^mbers, then unless you tell us who these other members be, we
cannot tell by this answer what the City is, in which the two Witnesses shall
be slain. But if you say the members be the same with the two Witnesses, what
is this but a mere Tautology? It amounts to no more than this, the two
Witnesses shall be slain in the City where they shall be slain.

That which makes men run into these errors, and mistake the meaning of the
Prophecy, is because they put no difference between the seat of the Witnesses,
and the seat of the Beast, in which respect the Protestants are as far remote
from the meaning of the Prophecy, as the Papists; for the Papists make the seat
of the Witnesses to be Jerusalem, and the same the seat of the Beast too, but
the Protestants make Babylon the seat of both. And both of them are out in this
particular, for Jerusalem is the seat of the Witnesses, but not of the Beast,
and Babylon is the seat of the Beast, but not of the Witnesses: and it is
altogether unlikely, and inconsonant to reason that the Witnesses should
Prophecy in Babylon where the Beast has his Throne, or that the Beast should
let them Prophecy before his own door three years and a half before the War
against them. But it is very likely and consonant to reason that the Witnesses
should Prophecy at Jerusalem some hundred miles distant from the City of
Babylon, for some space of time before the Beast hear thereof; and it is also
likely, that as soon as he does hear thereof he will send his Soldiers forth of
Babylon to march unto Jerusalem to War against the Witnesses, and put an end
unto their Prophesying, which Soldiers of his may come thither at that nick of
time, in which the three years and a half allotted for their Prophesying shall
be ended. So that the Witnesses are not slain within the compass of that time,
or before that time be ended, as some would have it, but immediately when that
time is over. This is my conception of this Prophecy, which I shall adhere unto
until a better shall be shown me. And here the Reader may perceive, that I
follow neither Papist nor Protestant in the exposition of this Prophecy, but
the truth only, which if it please God to discover by my weak endeavors, it is
as much as I look after in writing what I do.

4 Quest. How long the six first Trumpets shall continue?

Ans. The Plagues of Egypt did continue but a little while, as the learned
Bishop of Armagh has proved in his Annals, page 20, 21. and most of these
Trumpets are the same with them.

2. The fifth Trumpet is to last but five months, Rev. 9. 10. which wants a
month of half a year.

3. The Sealed ones were Sealed before any of the Trumpets did begin, Rev. 7.
3. and the same persons are all of them alive, after all the six Trumpets are
ended, and a good part of the seventh Trumpet also over, Rev. 14. 1.

4. All the time from the sixth Seal, unto the day of Judgment mentioned Rev.
19. 11. etc. is but a short time, as has been proved already, chapter 6. Disp. 2.
q. 5.

CHAP. XII.
The Prophecy of the Woman and the great Red Dragon, representing the
conversion of the Jews, and the opposition and persecution of the Devil.
1. AND I saw a great wonder in the Starry Heaven, prefiguring what should be
done upon the earth, and the wonder which I saw, was a woman representing the
Nation of the Jews, clothed with the Sun, in token of her future Glory, and
the Moon beneath her Feet in token she should change no more, Genesis 37. 9, 10.
and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, which are the twelve Tribes of
Israel.

2. And their conversion shall be like the pains of a woman in Travel, which
has hard labor, and strong pains, and throws before she be delivered; even so
they of this Nation that be converted first, shall have hard labor, and Travel
to convert the rest.

3. And I saw another wonder in the Starry Heaven, and it was a great Red
Dragon representing the Devil, and his mighty Agents upon earth, which shall
oppose the Church of Israel in her Travel, and hinder their conversion what
they can, and they be seven Heathen Kings, which shall have Crowns upon their
Heads, and ten Heathen Kingdoms which shall have no Kings of their own in them
at this time.

4. And he shall be in a great rage to hear of the conversion of this Church
and Nation, and in this rage of his shall with his tail (in which as some say
his main strength does lie) seek to overthrow the frame of nature, and had
rather Heaven and Earth should have an end, than the conversion of that Church
be brought to pass. Or else his tail may represent the vulgar people that be in
his Kingdoms, as his seven heads do represent his Kings, and by the help of
this vulgar people, he shall turn aside some part of that Nation from minding
their conversion at the present, and draw their hearts away from Heavenly
things to earthly, or else do some other hurt unto them, and he himself shall
stand before the Church of Israel, now ready to be converted to the Faith of
Christ, threatening to devour them and their Children so soon as they become
Christians.

5. Yet for all this they shall be converted to the Christian Faith, and the
Child that shall be born of them is Jesus Christ, who is then said to be born
spiritually, whenas a Church or Nation is brought to believe in him, and after
their conversion he shall subdue all Nations that War against them with the
Sword, but he himself shall sit in Heaven at Gods right hand, and on his Throne.

6. And when they be converted, a great part of that Nation shall flee into the
Wilderness, especially they that be instrumental to convert the rest, where
they shall have a place prepared for them by the Lord their God, as their
forefathers had, Hos. 2. 14, 15.
when they came forth of Egypt that they may be nourished, and preserved there
three years and a half, from the fury of the Devil and his Agents.

7. But before that this is done, there shall be a great battle in the Church,
Michael and his Angels shall fight against the Devil in behalf of the Church of
Israel, Dan. 10. 13. 21.
that they may be converted to the Christian Faith, Dan. 12. 1.
and the Devil shall fight against Michael, and his Angels against the others
Angels, that they may remain in unbelief.

8. But Michael and his Angels shall prevail, and the Devil and his Angels
shall be overthrown, and there shall be no place for them any more in the
Church of Israel.

9. And the great Red Dragon, that old malicious Serpent, otherwise called the
Devil and Satan, who deceived our first Parents at the first and the whole race
of mankind ever since, shall be cast forth of the Jewish Nation, and all his
evil Angels cast forth with him.

10. And there shall be great joy in the Church of Israel, and loud acclamation
and Thanksgiving, saying, Now is salvation come to the Church of Israel from
the Lord our God, he is the Author of it, and to him be it ascribed for
evermore. And the might and Kingdom of our God shall now be seen and made known
unto the World, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser of that Church and
Nation is cast forth, who before their conversion, accused them of their
unbelief before our God, day and night, but from henceforth shall accuse them
of that crime no more.

11. But they shall overcome him by the merits of his blood, who died for them,
and by their Faith which they have in him, and the open profession of the same,
and they shall not love their lives more than they love their Christ, but
expose them unto death, rather than remain in unbelief, and deny their Faith in
him, and for this it is that Satan shall be cast forth of that Nation.

12. Rejoice ye Church of Israel because Satan is cast forth of your Nation,
and from ruling any more therein, but woe be to the unbelieving Gentiles after
this is done, for the Devil will be among you altogether, and have great wrath,
as knowing he has but a short time to stay among you.

13. And when Satan shall perceive that he is cast forth of the Jewish Nation,
he shall set himself to persecute that Church and Nation, especially those
members of them which were converted first, and shall be instrumental to beget
the rest to the Faith of Christ.

14. But power and opportunity shall be given to those members of that Church,
to fly into the Wilderness, to the place prepared for them, where they shall be
nourished and preserved three years and a half from the power of the Devil and
his Angels.

15. And when the Devil shall perceive that they are fled into the Wilderness,
he shall send a flood of Water after them, to drown them in the Wilderness, or
drive them out from thence.

16. But God shall cause the dry and thirsty earth to open her mouth, and
swallow up the flood of Water which the Devil shall send after them, and the
Water thereupon shall do them no hurt.

17. At which the Devil shall be very wroth, and thereupon shall leave the
Wilderness where they be, and make War with the remnant of that Church and
Nation which shall not flee into the Wilderness as the other shall, but keep
the commandments of the Lord their God, and profess the faith of Jesus Christ
in their known and open dwellings.

18. And to accomplish this design of his, he shall stand upon the sea shore,
representing the heathen people and Nations of the World, out of whom he shall
raise a beastly Tyrant to make War against that part of the Church of Israel
which shall flee into the Wilderness as hereafter follows.

Disputation VIII.
1. Quest. Whether this Prophecy does belong to the seventh Trumpet, and be a
part thereof?

Ans. 1. The seventh Trumpet does not end with the former Chapter, but reaches
onward to the end of the Book; and whereas the other Trumpets have a close
added to them, this Trumpet has no close at all, and therefore has no end at
all before the Book be ended. You will say the four first Trumpets have no
close to them. Answ. They had other Trumpets to succeed them, but this Trumpet
is the last of all, and has no Trumpet to succeed it. Again the two first Woe
Trumpets had a close set unto them, Rev. 9. 12. Rev. 11. 14. But this Trumpet
is the third Woe Trumpet, and therefore should in all likelihood have a close
set unto it as the other have, if there were any to be set.

2. This Prophecy does not belong to the little Book, but to the Book sealed
with seven Seals, for that Book had something written in it, but the little
Book had nothing written in it, now there is no part of that Book to which this
Prophecy can belong but to the seventh Trumpet only.

3. The Prophecy of the seven Vials does belong unto the seventh Trumpet,
therefore that which comes between the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, and
the seven Vials does belong to the seventh Trumpet also. Now that the seven
Vials do belong to the seventh Trumpet may appear from hence, that as the
seventh Seal does contain seven Trumpets, so the seventh Trumpet by the like
proportion does contain seven Vials, and Mr. Mede in his Remains, page 10. does
implicitly confess this Argument to be good, in case there be but one Book of
Prophecy, and this I have already proved in a select question on the tenth
Chapter concerning this subject.

4. The mystery of God does belong unto the seventh Trumpet, as the Angel
plainly says, Rev. 10. 7. but the parturition of the Woman is the mystery of
God there spoken of, Romans 11. 25.

Ob. In the former Chapter, v. 15. 17, 18. there is mention of the Kingdom of
Christ, and of the time of the dead that they should be judged, and shall this
Prophecy succeed that?

Ans. No, it shall not succeed it but begin it. The conversion of the Jews is
the inchoation of the Kingdom there spoken of as appears v. 10. and the time of
the dead in which they shall ^e judged or avenged, shall follow thereupon as
appears v. 12. but more particularly chapter 14. 7. 13. 15, 16. chapter 15. 1. chapter 16.
throughout, chapter 18. 6. 20. 24. chapter 19. 2. 20, 21. all which belong unto the
seventh Trumpet, and is the execution of what was spoken of in general in the
former Chapter, in which the seventh Trumpet is set down in gross, but in this
and the Chapters following at retail. To which may be added that the seventh
Trumpet is a Woe Trumpet, and there be no Woes belonging to that Trumpet in the
former Chapter, but only in the general, therefore the particulars are in the
Chapters following.

2. Quest. Whether this Prophecy does contemporate with the Prophecy of the two
witnesses, or succeed it?

Ans. 1. The seventh Trumpet does succeed the sixth, but this Prophecy belongs
to the seventh Trumpet, and that of the two witnesses to the sixth.

2. That which gave occasion or an opportunity to the building of the Temple,
and the prophesying of the witnesses, and removed the impediment thereof, was
the slaughter of the third part of men which were dwelling at Euphrates, and
that which gives occasion or an opportunity to the parturition of the Woman,
and removes the impediment thereof, is the fall of the tenth part of the City,
and the judgment on the Beast; Rev. 11. 13. and as the slaughter of the third
part of Men which were dwelling at Euphrates, goes before the prophesying o^
the witnesses, as being the occasion of it by removing the impediments, 2 These.
2. 6, 7.
and affording an opportunity thereunto, so the fall of the City, and the
judgment on the Beast goes before the Travail of the Woman, as being the
occasion of it, by removing the impediments, which were or might be a hindrance
to it, and affording an opportunity thereupon, whereby it might be brought to
pass.

3. The Church in building is before the Church builded, but during the
prophesying of the witnesses, the Church is in building, and when the Woman has
brought forth her child, the Church is then built.

4. Persecution and freedom from it cannot contemporate each with other, but in
the time of this Prophecy, the Church is under persecution, and during the
prophesying of the witnesses, the Church is free therefrom until the 1260 days
be ended, and then the Beast does war against the witnesses, but not before,
and though the outer Court be given to the Gentiles during the prophesying of
the witnesses, yet the inner court where the Church is, they dare not meddle
with.

5. Good success, and bad success cannot contemporate each with other, but in
the former Prophecy the enemy has some success against the Church, for three
days and a half, as appears v. 9. 11. but in the time of this Prophecy the
Dragon has no success at all.

6. The beginning of this Prophecy does not contemporate with the beginning of
the former, nor the end of this Prophecy with the end of the former, therefore
the middle, which is the 1260 days in each Prophecy, do not contemporate each
with other. First, I say the beginning of this Prophecy does not contemporate
with the beginning of the former, for in the beginning of this Prophecy, the
Church is under the opposition and persecution of the Dragon, but in the
beginning of the former while the Temple is in building, the Church is free.
Again, in the end of the former Prophecy, the Church is worsted by the enemy
for three days and a half, but in the end of this Prophecy, the Dragon has the
worst of it, and the Church the better.

7. Other differences there be, which show they do not Synchronise, as first
the Church in this Prophecy flies away, in that she stands to it and flies not.
Again, in this Prophecy the Church is in the Wilderness, in that she is without
in an open place. And thirdly, in this Prophecy the Church is invisible, and
none but the Dragon knew where she was; but in the other Prophecy the Church is
visible, and the Beast knew where she was, all which do show that they do not
Synchronise.

Object. The days of the two Witnesses, and the days of the Woman's being in the
Wilderness, are equal in duration, for they be 1260 days a piece, therefore
they Synchronise and contemporate each with other.

Ans. The month of January, and the month of March are equal in duration, for
they be one and thirty days a piece, yet they succeed one the other, and the
month of February comes between; and no other is the case here: the 1260 days
of the Prophesying of the Witnesses, and the 1260 days of the Woman's being in
the Wilderness are equal in duration, yet the last of these succeeds the
former, as the month of March does the month of January, and that which follows
in the former Prophecy, from the seventh verse to the end of the chapter, comes
between.

Object. But these Visions were presented both at one time, without ceasing or
intermission, therefore seeing they be equal in duration, they contemporate
each with other.

Ans. Things presented all at once, at one view, or at one time, may succeed
one another, witness Nebuchadnezars Image, Dan. 2. and the seven heads of the
Beast, Rev. 17. 3. 9, 10. 2. These Visions were not presented both at once, at
one view, or at one time, as Nebuchadnezars Image was, eodem tempore
simultaneo, but successively and immediately one after another, as Daniels four
Beasts were eodem tempore successivo, Dan. 7. and look in what order they were
revealed, in the same shall they come to pass, that is successively and
immediately one after another, as Daniels four Beasts do, Dan. 7. 3. etc.

Object. The Woman's slight into the Wilderness was presented unto John before
the Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon did begin, v. 6. but it shall come
to pass afterward, as appears v. 14.

Ans. I deny the Antecedent, for the sixth verse shows that the woman's flight
into the Wilderness, was when her Travel ended, and she had brought forth her
Son, and the fourteenth verse also shows that her flight into the Wilderness
was when the Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon ceased, and he was cast
forth into the earth, therefore the woman's Travel, and the battle betwixt
Michael and the Dragon ended both together, and were presented unto John both
together, but could not be set down in writing both together unless it were
collaterally, as was showed page 118. but successively as it is one after
another, which is the reason that the woman's flight is set down v. 6. after her
Travel ended, and repeated again v. 14. after the Battle ended. 2. Suppose it
to be true that the woman's flight into the Wilderness was presented unto John
before the Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon did begin, if this were so,
then the sixth verse is meant of the beginning of the woman's flight into the
Wilderness, and the fourteenth verse of the ending of it, and if this be so,
the Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon is not durante puerperio during the
time of the woman's Travel, but durante fuga during her flight into the
Wilderness, and if this latter hold good, then things are set down in writing
as they were revealed, and shall come to pass accordingly in such order as they
be written in the Book, no Book of Scripture equalizing it.

Object. Three years and a half may succeed one another, but 1260 days
mentioned in these two Prophecies, be so many years, and it is not likely that
so many years should succeed one another.

Ans. It is not my opinion only, but Piscators in Apocalyp. Cap. 12. v. 6.
Peter Moulins in his accomplishment of Prophecies, page 194. 196. and the late
Annotators on Daniel c. 7. v. 25. who all of them do understand by these
numbers, three years and a half, and no more. Again, the Church is in the
Wilderness 1260 days together, but the Church never was, nor ever will be in
the Wilderness so many years together. 3. The Church is in safety 1260 days,
but the Church never yet was, nor ever will be in safety from the enemy so long
a time as 1260 years amount unto. 4. When days be put for years in the
Scripture, it is usually expressed or intimated in the Text, as Numb. 14. 34.
Ezekiel. 4. 6. but here is no mention nor intimation of any such thing; had not
God told Moses and Ezekiel that a day goes for a year, neither of them would
have so understood it; but now in the Revelation God does not tell us that a
day is put for a year, therefore we may not so understand it. 5. In other
Prophecies of Scripture where days are mentioned, we do not understand years
thereby, as Numb. 11. 19, 20. Dan. 8. 13, 14. Jona 3. 4. Mat. 12. 49. Joh. 2.
19. and that because God does not bid us: so then where God does not bid us by
days understand years, we may not so understand it; but now in the Revelation,
God does not bid us by days understand years as he does in Numbers and Ezekiel,
therefore we may not so understand it. 6. 1260 days be no more than time,
times, and half a time, and that is no more than three years and a half, as the
Annotators on Daniel, in their first Edition do confess, and it may be proved
by reason, for time is one year, times two years, and half a time is half a
year, and seven times in the Book of Daniel, is seven years, Dan. 4. 16. Again
it is said in Daniel, that he shall wear out the Saints, and they shall be
given into his hand until a time, times, and half a time, Dan. 7. 25. but now
the Saints were never wearied out so long together, neither were they ever
given into the enemies hand so long a time as 1260 years, nor ever will be. And
thirdly, there is an Analogical proportion observable in these times, for times
is double in quantity to time, and time is double in quantity to half a time.
But now if by time we understand a thousand, and by times two hundred, and by
half a time sixty, we destroy the proportion, for by this reckoning, time is
more than times which ought to be less by half, and half a time is less than
half a time, which ought to be just so much. You will say that there is the
like inconvenience in applying this number to 1260 days. I answer no, for time,
times, and half a time is not 1260 days formally but vertually, neither is it
so many days divisim, but conjunctim, my meaning is, time is not a thousand
days, times two hundred days, and half a time sixty days, but time is a year,
times two years, and half a time is half a year, that is, three years and a
half in the total. Now because in three years and a half, there be just 1260
days, hence it is that these times be even in the total, but not in each
several part, as has been showed. And fourthly, to make these times of Daniel
to amount to 1260 years, they take a strange course, for they turn years into
days, and days into years again, first they turn three years and a half, into
1260 days, and this they may do, for it is all one in the total, but this will
not content them, but when they have so done, they turn these days into so many
years, and say that 1260 days is 1260 years, and this they may not do, for it
is not all one in the total. Others take a stranger course, and by time, times,
and half a time, they understand three years and a half, as we do, but then by
years they mean mystical years, and what that is they do not tell us, neither
can they tell us, for if a mystical year be a thousand years, two mystical
years must be two thousand years, and half a mystical year half a thousand
years, and then we are gone beyond the number, but if by a mystical year be
meant a hundred years, then two mystical years must be two hundred years, and
half a mystical year half a hundred years, and then we are far short of the
number. Such inconveniences do they fall into, which turn the Scripture into
mysteries, and make a mystical sense of a Revelation. Lastly, a thousand years
and upward, is a long time, but by 1260 days is meant a short time, yea the
whole time of Satan's abode upon the earth from the time he is cast out of
Heaven, is but a short time, as appears v. 12. and yet that time is much more
than the 1260 days we speak of.

3. Quest. Whether this Prophecy were fulfilled in the Reign of Nero?

Ans. 1. This Prophecy was not revealed to John till after Nero's Reign, in the
time of Domitian one of his successors as has been proved chapter 6. q. 1.
therefore it does not prophecy of what was done in his Reign.

2. This Prophecy does belong unto the seventh Trumpet, in which the mystery of
God shall come to pass as has been proved q. 1. but Nero's reign did not reach
unto the seventh Trumpet.

3. This Prophecy shall succeed the Prophecy of the two witnesses as has been
also proved; q. 2. but that Prophecy of the two witnesses is long after the
Reign of Nero, as they with whom I dispute in this Question do confess, for
they say it came to pass in the Reign of Adrian.

4. By the parturition of this Woman, is meant the national conversion of some
people or other. Now there were some persons converted to the Faith in the
Reign of Nero, but what is that to the national conversion of a people? The
national conversion of the Romans came not to pass till the days of
Constantine, which was long afterward.

5. The first general persecution of the Church was in the days of Nero, and if
this Prophecy should be meant of it, the persecution spoken of in this place
should be the first, but the persecution in the fifth Seal was before this,
Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11.

6. In Nero's persecution many were slain for professing of the Faith, and
amongst them Peter was one, and Paul another, but in the persecution here
spoken of, not any one was slain, the Dragons power was too weak, as appears
verse. 4, 5, 6. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Lastly, after the parturition of this Woman, the Dragon knows he has but a
short time, but since the days of Nero to this day the Dragon has had a long
time, and how much more is yet to come before the day of Judgment, who can
tell?

4. Quest. Whether this Prophecy be meant of the conversion of the Jews?

Ans. 1. The Woman here spoken of had upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars,
and who should they be but the twelve Tribes of Israel?

2. The national Church of Rome which some suppose to be the Woman here meant,
was not converted till the days of Constantine, all the time before that she
was in Travail, and when she was converted in his time, she did not fly into
the Wilderness as the Woman here does, but was advanced to great honor and
prosperity in the World, and the head of that Church was the Emperor himself.

3. The Dragon with seven heads and ten horns, which some suppose to be the
Pagan Roman Empire, did no more persecute the Roman Church after she was
converted in the days of Constantine, but as soon as that Church was converted,
that Empire wholly ceased as Pagan and became Christian, and persecution ceased
with it, but here the case is otherwise, for as soon as the Dragon is cast
forth of Heaven to the Earth, the persecution of the Woman does begin.

4. We read Dan. 12. 1. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which stands for the Children of thy people, and there shall be a time
of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time,
and at that time thy people shall be delivered, etc. Now who be meant by
Daniels people but the Jews, and who is meant by the Woman here spoken of but
Daniels people whom Michael stands for?

5. What does the Angel mean by the mystery of God, Rev. 10. 7. but the
conversion of the Jews? And when shall that mystery be finished, but when the
seventh Angel begins to sound? And when does this Woman fall in Travail, but at
the same time too? And if it be said that by the mystery of God is meant the
end of the world, and the second coming of our Lord, as Doctor Mayer does
expound it: To this I answer. 1. That the mystery of God there spoken of is the
conversion of some Church or other, and wha^ Church can we imagine is left
unconverted till the seventh Trumpet, but the Jews only? 2. The conversion of
the Gentiles is called a mystery, Ephesians. 3. 3. 4. 6. Col. 1. 26. and so is the
conversion of the Jews too, Romans 11. 25. But now the conversion of the Gentiles
is already, and the Apostle speaks of it in both those places as a thing then
in being* but the conversion of the Jews is yet to come, and when shall it be
finished, but at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, which is the time the
Woman here spoken of falls in Travail? 3. The conversion of the Jews goes
before the coming of our Lord, and that which hinders or keeps back the coming
of our Lord, is the non-conversion of that Nation, and that which expedites and
hastens the coming of our Lord is the conversion of that Nation as St. Peter
says in two places, Act. 3. 19, 20, 21. 2 Pet. 3. 12. and seeing in this
Prophecy of the seventh Trumpet is mention made of the coming of Christ, (...),
hastening the coming.
Rev. 19. 11. etc. We may well conclude the conversion of the Jews to be meant
in this place which is to go before it. 4. Where shall we find the end of the
world, or the second coming of our Lord, called a mystery? The Incarnation is
so called, 1 Timothy 3. 16. but where the end of the world, or the second coming
of our Lord is so called, it concerns them to show which do affirm it. 5. The
mystery which the Angel meant is declared by God to his servants the Prophets
in the Old Testament, and what do they speak of more than the conversion of the
Jews, Esa. 11. 11, 12. Esa. 14. 1, 2, 3. Esa. 27. 12, 13. Jer. 23. 7, 8. Jer.
31. 27, 28. Jer. 32. 37, 38. Jer. 46. 27, 28. Ezekiel. 37. 16, 17. Hos. 3. 4, 5.
Joel. 3. 1. Amos 9. 11. 14, 15. Zach. 8. 20, 21, 22. with many more the like.
6. The Objection does suppose the seventh Trumpet is to sound but one day, and
that one day is to be the end of the world; but the Angel says, the seventh
Trumpet is to sound more days than one, and the mystery of God is to be at the
beginning of them, Rev. 1^. 7. Lastly, Concerning the conversion of the Jews,
see what Bishop Prideaux, Dr. Wills, Mr. Mat^n, Mr. Mather and others have
written of that subject. See also Doctor Heilins Cosm^graphy, lib. 3. p. 95.
it is not sense to say the end of the world shall be finished, for then an end
shall have an end; but it is good sense to say the conversion of the Jews shall
be finished, or shall have an end, that is, an end of consummation, not of
annihilation as the world shall, Rev. 20. 11.

CHAP. XIII.
The Prophecy of the first Beast, and his rising and success against the Jewish
Nation.
1. THEN I saw a wild Beast representing a new Empire which shall be raised by
the Devil out of the people and Nations of the world which shall be then in
arms, consisting of the same seven Kingly heads that the Dragon had, Rev. 12. 4.
and the same ten horns, but with Crowns added to them which they had not
before.

2. And this Empire shall be as cruel against the Christian Jews, as ever the
Greek, or Persian, or Babylonian Empires were heretofore to that Nation, and
cannot sufficiently be deciphered by one cruel Beast alone, but by variety of
cruel Beasts made up together in one, for it shall have the body of a speckled
Leopard, as the Greek Empire had, and the feet of a cruel Bear, as the Persian
Empire had, and the mouth of a devouring Lion, as the Babylonian Empire had,
and to the making up of this Empire, the Devil shall resign unto him his
Militia, his Imperial Throne, and secular authority.

3. But before he be established in his Throne, there shall be some opposition
made against the settling, and uniting of this Empire, and in the opposition one
of his seven heads shall receive a wound by a sword, to all men's thinking unto
death, but his deadly wound shall be healed, and after that there shall be no
more opposition, but all the Country far and near shall admire at it, and yield
subjection to the Beast without resistance.

4. And they shall worship the Beast as the substitute of the Dragon, and in so
doing they shall worship not the Beast only, but the Dragon also, and in
worshipping of him they ascribe unto him titles of transcendent honor, saying
who is so potent as the Beast, who is able to war with him?

5. And he shall take upon him, and it shall be permitted to him to speak great
and proud things amounting to blasphemy, Dan. 7. 8. 11. 25.
and he shall have power to continue three years and a half in great
prosperity, Dan. 11. 36.
and after they are past, he shall decay from day to day and never come into
prosperity any more.

6. And he shall open his mouth wide unto blasphemy, and shall not be afraid to
blaspheme the God of Israel, and his name and his Church and the Jewish Nation.

7. And he shall be permitted by God to make War against the remnant of the
Church of Israel, that shall not fly into the Wilderness with their brethren,
and to overcome them in the War and he shall have power over all kindreds, and
tongues, and nations, far and near to make them join with him, and assist him
in this War.

8. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth both far and near, shall worship him
and yield subjection to him, and they that shall so do, are such whose names
were never written in the Book of life, which Jesus Christ has purchased by
his Blood for all that believe in him.

9. Let every man take heed how he joyneth with the Beast, and takes part with
him against the Saints whom he warreth with.

10. He that leads any of Gods Saints into captivity shall himself go into
captivity, he that slays any of his people with the sword shall himself be
slain by the sword, which makes much for the patience and the Faith of the
Saints, and is a great encouragement thereunto, and they need not use unlawful
means for their deliverance, or renounce their Faith to save their lives; let
them believe and trust in God, and wait with patience for his help, and he will
surely visit them, and work Deliverance for them.

The Pr^phecy of the second Beast, and his Actings and Achievements, for the
settling of the first Beast.
11. And I saw another Beast which shall arise from among the people of the
Earth, which live a civil life, as the other did from the men that were in
Arms, and he shall have but one Head, and on that one Head but two Horns, of no
great strength and magnitude, but very small, short, and feeble, Act. 1^. 6.
and can do no hurt therewith; 2 Pet. 2. 16.
but he shall speak like a Dragon, and be a false Prophet or Magician, as
wicked Balaam was, and shall do more Mischief by his Witchcraft than the other
by his Arms.

12. And he shall be a chief Officer of the first Beast to manage his Affairs
in his behalf, and he shall execute all the secular or civil Power and
Authority of the first Beast in his behalf; and he shall cause the Inhabitants
of the Earth, where the Beast does live, to worship, and yield Obeisance to the
first Beast, who received a deadly Wound at his first arising, and was healed
thereof.

13. And he shall do great signs and wonders, and one of those wonders is that
he shall cause fire to come down from Heaven in the sight of men, Exodus 7. 11.
22.
as the true Prophets (...) Lord have done, Exodus 8. 7.
and as the Devil himself has also done. 2 King. 1. 10. 12.
Rev. 11. 5.
Job. 1. 6.


14. And he shall deceive the Inhabitants of the earth through the signs and
wonders which shall be given him to do in behalf of the other Beast; and one of
these wonders whereby he shall deceive them, shall be this, that he shall say
to the Inhabitants of the earth, where the Beast does live, that they should
make a Molten, or a Carved Image in honor of the Beast which had the mortal
wound of a Sword, and did live.

15. And he shall have power to give not life, but breath to the graven or
molten Image of the Beast, Dan. 3. 5, 6, 7. 10, 11, 12. 14, 15. 18.
in so much that the Molten or Graven Image of the Beast, shall speak, and
cause, and appoint, and command, that as many as will not fall down and worship
it, shall be killed.

16. And he shall cause all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond and
free, to take an engagement, or an oath to be true and faithful to the other
Beast, and receive a visible mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads,
whereby it may be known that they have so done.

17. And he shall take special order with the Inhabitants of the earth, that no
man shall buy or sell any victuals, or commodities, save he that has taken the
engagement or the oath to be true and faithful to the first Beast, and has
received a visible mark in his right hand, or in his forehead, in token that he
has so done; and this mark which he shall receive, is nothing else but the
name of the first Beast, or the number of his name imprinted on him.

18. Now here is the mystery of the business, here is wisdom to be seen in him
that can unfold this riddle, let him that has skill in the art of numeration
count the number of the first Beast, for it is a number, or a computation that
is used by man, and may be found out by the art of man, and the number he must
count to find out (...) other number which is the true mark, and name of the
first Beast, is 666, and he that will count this number as it ought to be, must
not think to do it by addition or subtraction, for here is no other number
which this number can be added to, or subtracted from; neither may he think to
do it by multiplication or division, for here is no other number which this
number 666 can be multiplied or divided by: but it must be done by extracting
of the root thereof; and he that can perform this work as it ought to be, and
compare it with the mark which the second Beast shall cause men to take, shall
thereby know who the first great Beast is, and his name to boot, this cannot be
done before the Beast be come into the World, and his mark be imprinted on his
loyal Subjects, and then is the time to perform this work, and not before.

Disputation IX.
1 Quest. Whether this Prophecy shall contempor^te with the Prophecy in the
former Chapter, or succeed it?

Ans. 1. Prosperity cannot contemporate with adversity, nor the Church in
safety with the Church in danger; but the woman in the former Chapter, is in
prosperity, or at least in safety, in the Wilderness, as appears v. 6. 14, 15,
16. and the Dragon cannot hurt her in that place: but in this Prophecy the
Church is in adversity, and the Beast is in prosperity, and does War with her,
and overcome her 42 months together, v. 5. 7.

2. The Beast is not raised by the Dragon till he went to make War with the
remnant of the woman's seed, and he went not from the Wilderness to make War
with the remnant of her seed, till his attempts against the woman in the
Wilderness proved frustrate, and succesless, Rev. 12. 17.

3. The true order of the Prophecy is this. 1. The woman falls in Travel, and
the Dragon stands before her to devour her child as soon as it was born, v. 2,
3, 4. 2. Michael and his Angels fight against the Dragon, and cast him forth of
Heaven to the earth, that he might not hinder the Nativity of the Child, v. 7,
8, 9. 3. The woman brings forth, and the Dragon persecutes the woman, and she
flies into the Wilderness, v. 5, 6. 13, 14. 4. The Dragon sends a flood of
Water after her, to drown her in the Wilderness, or drive her out from thence,
and the earth opens her mouth, and swallows up the flood of water, v. 15, 16.
5. the Dragon is angry with the woman, and goes away from the Wilderness to the
Sea, with an intent to make War with the remnant of her seed, v. 17, 18. 6. The
Dragon raises up the Beast mentioned in this thirteenth Chapter, to be his
Captain General in this War, v. 1. 7. The War begins, and the Saints are
overcome 42 months, v. 5. 7. 8. After this the Beast prevails no more, but
decays every day more and more until he come unto his end, chapter 14. 16. and 19.
this is the order of the Prophecy, and it is to be admired at, that men should
set their wits against it.

4. They which hold this Prophecy to contemporate with the former, think that
by the remnant of the woman's seed whom the Dragon Warreth with, is meant the
Children which she brings forth in the Wilderness; but this cannot be so, for
the woman in the Wilderness is in safety, as appears v. 14. and the Dragon
cannot War with her nor her Children in that desolate place: and therefore by
the remnant of her seed, is not meant the Children which she brings forth in
the Wilderness, but the Children which were left behind and were not fled into
the Wilderness with the woman, and these be they whom the Dragon Warreth with,
but the other are in safety.

Ob. The 1260 days of the woman, and the 42 months of the Beast are all one.

Ans. 30 days in April, and 30 days in June are all one in quantity, yet they
succeed one another: so the 1260 days in the former Chapter, and the 42 months
in this Chapter be all one in quantity, yet they succeed one another; as June
succeeds April.

Ob. 1260 Days be so many years, and 42 months be so many years too, and it is
not likely that times of so long continuance should succeed one another.

Ans. This objection has been answered twice already, first chapter 11. and
secondly chapter 12. and now I will answer it the third time, and say something
else unto it. 1. I might say that theologia symbolica non est argumentativa,
mystical Theology is no sufficient Argument to build our Faith upon; and if men
have nothing else to say for themselves but mystical expositions of the
Scriptures, it is a sign that their cause is very bad. 2. Times of equal length
may succeed one another, as appears in the months of the year. So put the case
that these 42 months, and the 1260 days, be so many years, yet it is possible
they may succeed one another, though not in whole, yet in part; as Solomon and
David reigned forty years a piece, yet some part of Solomon's Reign was with
David his Father before his death, and the other part after his death. 3. Where
shall we find in all the Scripture that a month is put for thirty years? I find
in many places where it is put for thirty days, as Jam. 5. 17. Heb. 11. 23. Luke
1. 56. but for thirty years never. 4. The Revelation it self does put a
difference between a day, a month, and a year, Rev. 9. 15. which were prepared
for an hour, a day, a month, and a year, where a day is less than a month, and
a month is less than a year. 5. These 42 months is the time of the Beasts
prosperity, and of the Churches great adversity, but the Church never was nor
ever will be in adversity so long, and the strongest Beast that ever was, was
never in prosperity so many years together, nor ever will be. 6. By this
interpretation of 42 months, one may find out the day of Judgment, and some men
have been very bold in this point, for they make these 42 months to last unto
the day of Judgment, so that by this reckoning the Church will be in a sad and
calamitous condition until the day of Judgment; and if they can but tell us one
thing more, and that is, when these 42 months begin, we may easily calculate
the day when Christ shall come to Judgment, which no modest man will adventure
once to do, seeing Christ says of it, Of that day and hour knows no man, no
not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only, Mat. 24. 30. And yet such
inconvenien^es do follow from this interpretation. 7. Will you know the truth
of this matter, and be no more deceived with mystical expositions, then take it
briefly thus: These 42 months be three years and a half, and no more, and all
this time the Beast is in prosperity, and makes War against the Church of
Israel with good success; but as soon as this is over, the Beasts adversity
does begin, and in the fourteenth Chapter the Angels make a slaughter of him,
and in the sixteenth Chapter the Vials of Gods wrath fall upon him in his own
Dominions, and in the nineteenth Chapter Christ comes himself in person, and
destroys him, and makes a final end of him, v. 20, 21.

Ob. The sixth Trumpet is before the seventh, but the Beast here spoken of,
does War against the Witnesses in the sixth Trumpet, before the Prophecy of the
Woman and the Dragon does begin, therefore he is not raised in the seventh
Trumpet, after the Prophecy of the Woman and the Dragon have an end.

Ans. This objection were something, if the Beast that Wars against the
Witnesses, chapter 11. and the Beast spoken of in this Chapter were the same, but
what if they be not the same? what is become of the objection then? Now that
these Beasts be not the same, may be proved by these reasons. 1. That Beast chapter
11. ascends out of the bottomless Pit, Rev. 11. 7. but this in the thirteenth
Chapter out of the Sea, v. 1. and the bottomless Pit in the Revelation is never
taken for the Sea, or the element of Water, but for a deep hole in the element
of the earth, Rev. 9. 1, 2. 11. Rev. 20. 1. 3. 2. That Beast has seven heads
and five of them fall and never rise again, Rev. 17. 10. and this Beast has
seven heads too, and but one of them is wounded, and that wound is healed
again, Rev. 13. 3. 3. That Beast has ten horns, but no Crowns upon them, Rev.
17. 3. and this Beast has ten horns too, and ten Crowns upon them which the
other has not, Rev. 13. 1. 4. That Beast has a woman riding on him, Rev. 17.
3. but this Beast arose out of the Sea, but no woman riding on him, Rev. 13. 1.
5. This Beast has another Beast with two horns to assist him, Rev. 13. 11, 12.
but that Beast has no other Beast that we read of to assist him. 6. That Beast
is red, of a Scarlet color all the body over, Rev. 17. 3. but the body of this
Beast is speckled like a Leopard, the feet like a Bears feet, and the mouth
like a Lions mouth, Rev. 13. 2. 7. That Beast is raised twice, Rev. 17. 8. but
this Beast though wounded yet does rise but once, Rev. 13. 1. 8. The Throne of
that Beast is Babylon, Rev. 17. 5. but the Throne of this Beast is some other
place, as may appear if we compare Rev. 16. 10. 19. 9. This Beast has a
puissant Army, and that immediately after Babylon is destroyed, Rev. 19. 19,
20. which cannot well be, if the Babylonish Beast and this Beast be all one.
10. That Beast has an eighth head, which in some respects is to succeed the
seventh, Rev. 17. 11. but this Beast has no such eighth head which in any wise
is to succeed the seventh. Compare we these things together, and it may very
well be questioned whether the Beasts be the same or no.

2. Suppose the Beast be the same in both places, yet unless the head be the
same too, the objection fails in that respect also, for the Beast has seven
heads in all, and one of them may War against the Witnesses in the sixth
Trumpet, and another head be raised in the seventh Trumpet. Yea, let us go a
little further, and suppose the head be the same too in both places, yet this
will not prevail neither, for that head may be deposed in the sixth Trumpet
before the Prophecy of the woman and the Dragon does begin, and be raised again
in the seventh Trumpet to War against the woman's seed, after the Prophecy in
the former Chapter has an end. Look into chapter 17. v. 8. and you shall find the
Beast is raised twice. The Beast which thou saw was, and is not, and shall
ascend out of the bottomless Pit, and go into perdition. Here you see is a time
in which the Beast was, and this time may be the sixth Trumpet. Here is next a
time in which the Beast is not, and this time may be at the beginning of the
seventh or at the exit of the sixth before the Prophecy of the woman and the
Dragon does begin. Here is thirdly a time when the Beast shall ascend out of
the bottomless Pit, and be again, and this may be the time spoken of in this
chapter, after the Prophecy in the former chapter has an end. Now of these two
answers the Reader has his liberty to choose which he likes best, but were I
to choose my self, I would choose the first before the second, and that for
that very reason which is urged in the objection, for the Beast has a being
and does War against the Witnesses in the sixth Trumpet, therefore he is not
raised or begins to be in the seventh. So that it does not follow that the
Prophecies shall not come to pass in order as they were revealed, or that the
Prophecy of this chapter shall not succeed the Prophecy in the former chapter:
but it rather follows that the Beasts be not the same, as was said before.

Ob. The Kingdom of the Beast has a final end with the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 11.
14. and therefore the Prophecies shall not come to pass in order as they were
revealed, nor the Prophecy of this Chapter succeed the Prophecy of the former
Chapter.

Ans. 1. It may be questioned whether this Beast and that in chapter 11. be the
same as was said before. 2. Whether they be the same or no, I deny the Kingdom
of the beast has a final end with the sixth Trumpet, and that for these
reasons. 1. Because we read of his Acts afterward, chapter 17. 2. Because Babylon
is not destroyed till then. 3. Because the City spoken of chapter 11. is not
Babylon but Jerusalem, it is not the seat of the beast, but of the two
Witnesses. 4. The tenth part of the City falls, and no more, Rev. 11. 13. 5.
Seven thousand men are slain, and no more, and what is that to a final
destruction of the beast? 6. It is not said that the beast was among them. 7.
Suppose he were among them, and also slain with them, yet all this will not put
an end to the Kingdom of the beast, but to one head only, for the beast has
seven heads in all; and put the case that one of them does die in the time of
the sixth Trumpet, yet another may succeed him in the seventh, there being some
interval between, I mean between the death of the one, and the rising of the
other, and so that which is spoken of the beast, chapter 11. belongs to the account
of the sixth Trumpet, and that which is spoken of him in the chapters
following, to the account of the seventh.

2 Quest. Whether this Prophecy were fulfilled in the Reign of Domitian?

Ans. 1. This Prophecy was not revealed to John till the Reign of Domitian was
well nigh over, as both Irenaeus, and Jerome, and others do testify, and
therefore it does not Prophecy of what was to be done in his Reign, for if it
did, it would have been revealed sooner, for Domitian did not live two years,
much less three years and a half after this Prophecy was revealed.

2. This Prophecy does belong unto the seventh Trumpet, and therefore shall
succeed all the Prophecies of the former Trumpets, but Domitian did not live to
see any of the former Trumpets finished, and they with whom I deal in this
question confess themselves that the Prophecy chapter 11. was not fulfilled till
the time of Adrian, who began his Reign after Domitian twenty years.

3. By the beast is not meant the Idol Worship as they would have it, but a
Kingdom with its King, for by that word is meant both, and sometimes that word
denotes the King, as Rev. 17. 11, 12. Dan. 7. 17. and sometimes besides the
King it denotes the Kingdom, as Rev. 17. 3. Dan. 7. 23. and so it is taken in
this place: and besides this the Idol-worship was set up at Rome before
Domitians Reign began, and therefore John does not Prophecy of the rising of
it in the time of his Reign; to which may be added that the beast was to
continue 42 months, but the Idol-worship did continue longer.

4. The head which John saw as it were wounded to death, is not the Capitol as
they suppose, but one of the Kings of the Empire, as appears by the acception
of that word, Rev. 17. 10. And besides this the head was wounded by a Sword, v.
14. but the Capitol was burnt by fire, and that fire was caused by Lightning
from Heaven. To which may be added, that the head here wounded, was wounded but
once, but the Capitol was burnt in the time of Vitellius, and rebuilt in the
time of Vespasian, and after that burnt again in the time of Titus, and rebuilt
by Domitian; and this healing of the beasts wound, was a matter of admiration,
but the rebuilding of the Capitol after it was burnt, was no matter of
admiration, but a feasible thing.

5. It was given to this beast to make War with the Saints, and to overcome
them, v. 7. which words do imply resistance on the Saints part, but in the
persecution of Domitian there was no resistance on the Saints part, the
Christians in his days thought it better to fly than to fight.

6. By the second beast v. 11. is meant some famous witch or other, such a one
as the Devil never had the like since he was a Devil, but this witch cannot be
Apollonius Tyanaeus, as they suppose, for neither he nor any other since his
time could do such feats as this witch is said to do, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc.

7. Domitianus Apollonio infestus fuit, and Apollonius Domitiano, says Grotius
de Antichristo, page 77. Domitian was a hateful enemy to Apollonius, and
Apollonius to Domitian, but the false Prophet here spoken of was the chiefest
Friend the beast had, and used all the art he could to establish him in his
throne, v. 12. 14, 15, 16, 17. Rev. 16. 13.

8. Neither the beast nor the witch here spoken of do die a bodily death as
other men do, but are both cast into Hell alive, as appears, Rev. 19, 20. but
Domitian and Apollonius died both of them a bodily death, and Domitian died
first, and Apollonius Tyanaeus afterward, the one died Anno Christi 98* the
other Anno Christi 99. according to Baronius, see Prideaux History, page 198.

3 Quest. Whether the Prophecy of the first Beast be fulfilled in the Papacy,
and be meant of them?

Ans. 1. The first beast is a secular power, but the Pope is an ecclesiastical
person.

2. If the Pope be the seventh head of the first beast, who then is the seventh
head of the Dragon? for he had so many heads before the beast began, Rev. 12. 3.

3. If the Pope be the seventh head of the first beast, who be the other six?
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Military Tribunes, and Emperors of Rome
till Constantines time were all of them Pagans; but if the Prophecy were
fulfilled in the Papacy, all the seven heads should be Papists, else the
Prophecy cannot be fulfilled in them. 2. If the six first heads be Pagans, and
the seventh head be Popes, the beast is more Pagan than Papist, and the
Prophecy is not fulfilled wholly in the Pagans, nor wholly in the Papists, but
partly in the one, and partly in the other, but most of all in the Pagans. 3.
It cannot be that the six first heads of the beast should be Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Decemvirs, Military Tribunes, and Emperors, for five of these were
past before the Prophecy was revealed, the Emperors then were, but the beast
which John saw rise out of the Sea, had seven heads, whereof none of them were
past, none of them were present, but all of them were then to come, for after
the Visions in the three first chapters, John had no more Visions of things
present, much less of things past, but only of things that were to come, as the
Angel told him, Rev. 4. 1. Come up hither, and I will show thee things which
must be hereafter, therefore not heads which were then past, nor heads which
were then present, but heads which were then to come, and if five of these
heads were then past, one were then present, it had been sufficient to have
presented unto John the head that was then to come, and no more. And if it be
said that the Angel speaking of these heads, chapter 17. says, five of them are
fallen, one is, and the seventh is not yet come, to this I answer that the
rising of that beast is not presented unto John in that Vision, but the
destruction of the Whore which sits upon him; and when it is said that five of
them are fallen, this is not to be understood Historically of what was past
before the Apostles days, nor of what was present in his days, but
prophetically of what should be past before, and what should be present at the
execution of that Prophecy.

4. The beast has not only seven heads, but also ten horns, and ten crowns
upon them, and that at one time, and not successively one after another; but
where shall we find so many horns in the Papacy, and ten crowns upon them at
one time, and not successively one after another.

5. The beast was like a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a Bear, and his
mouth as the mouth of a Lion, Rev. 13. 2. Now a Leopard was the emblem of the
Greek Monarchy, a Bear the emblem of the Persian Monarchy, and a Lion the
emblem of the Babylonian Monarchy, Dan. 7. 4, 5, 6. and therefore this beast is
made up of all the three, partly of the Greek, partly of the Persian, and
partly of the Babylonian Empires, but the Papacy does consist of none of these,
for they were secular Monarchies in the East, but the Papacy is a spiritual
Monarchy in the West.

6. One of the Beasts heads was as it were wounded to death, and his deadly
wound was healed, Rev. 13. 3. but when was any head so wounded in the Papacy,
and afterward healed, and who should that Popish head be? It cannot be said
that this was done when the Dragon was dethroned, and cast forth of Heaven, for
the beast was not then in being, and not one head only but all the Dragons
heads were cast out of Heaven with him. It cannot be said that this was done
when Constantine became Christian, for that was before the Papacy did begin,
and there was not any Popish head wounded then, nor any Popish head healed at
that time. And thirdly the meaning is not that one head was wounded, and
another head was healed, but the meaning is, that one head was wounded, and the
same head was healed. Now the Emperors were one head, and the Popes another
head, and it cannot be said that the Emperors were healed when the Popes came
up in their room, no more than it can be said that the Kings were healed when
the Consuls did succeed them, or that the Consuls were healed when they were
put down, and the Dictators did succeed them; and suppose the Popes should be
put down, and the Emperors come up again, it cannot be said that the Popes
wound was healed by that means.

7. The beast was to continue 42 months, Rev. 13. 5. that is three years and a
half, as has been proved in the former questions. Now these 42 months are not
the time of the beasts continuance, but the time of his prosperity, and no
more: but the Pope has lived in prosperity more than 42 months, and many more
he is like to live, and therefore he is not the beast that here is spoken of.

8. They that understand this Prophecy of the Papacy, do confess that the Pope
is not the first beast but the second, and they understand by the first beast
the secular power of Rome, and by the second the Ecclesiastical, and yet in
reckoning up the seven heads of the first beast they make the Pope one, and who
the seven heads should be and leave the Pope out they cannot tell.

4 Quest. Whether the Prophecy of the second Beast be fulfilled in the Papacy,
and be meant of them?

Ans. 1. The second beast is a secular power, as the first beast is, and a
beast in Scripture is never taken for any other power than a secular, Dan. 7.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 17. 23. but the Pope is an Ecclesiastical power, not a secular.

2. If the Pope be the second beast, who then is the seventh head of the first
beast, for they be two distinct persons, as appears, Rev. 13. 11, 12. Rev. 16.
13. Rev. 19. 20. Rev. 20. 10.

3. The second beast does exercise all the power of the first beast before him,
or in his behalf, v. 12. Now that power is a secular power, for that beast is a
secular beast, as all confess. Now what beast is there in the World whose
secular power the Pope does exercise in his behalf? This the Pope never did, it
is too mean for his supremacy who thinks himself above all Kings and Princes in
the World, to exercise the power of another in his behalf, neither will he ever
do it, except he cease to be a Pope, and become a Layman.

4. The second beast does great wonders, so that be makes fire come down from
heaven upon earth in the sight of men, v. 13. and when did the Pope do this,
and what should this fire be? It cannot be the holy Ghost, as some would have
it, for he is not at the beasts command as this fire is, and it is a wicked
thing for any man to think that this wicked Beast can bring the Holy Ghost down
from Heaven when he will. It cannot be meant of Excommunication as others would
have it, for that is no wonder as this fire is, but a common thing, and a
spiritual duty incumbent on the Bishops and Pastors of the Church which are not
Papists. It remains then that this fire is true material fire as that which
fell on Jobs cattle was, Job 1. 16. and this may be done by art Magic, and is
one of the great wonders of the second Beast that he can make fire come down
from Heaven upon earth in the sight of men to bring them in subjection to the
first Beast, which was never yet effected nor attempted by the Pope and his
Clergy to bring men in subjection to a secular power, for which end it is
effected here, but is yet to be expected.

5. The second Beast says to the Inhabitants of the earth, that they should
make an Image to the Beast which had the wound of a Sword and did live. And he
had power to give breath unto the Image of the Beast, that the Image of the
Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image
of the Beast should be killed, v. 14, 15. And when did the Pope do this? What
Emperor is there in the World whose Image the Pope caused to be made unto him?
When did he give breath to such an Image? And when did he make such an Image
speak, and command that as many as would not worship it should be killed? and
what should this Image be but a Molten or a Carved Image, as Nebuchadnezzars
Image was? Look we all the Scripture over, and we shall never find an Image
made by man (as this Image of the Beast is) taken for any other Image than a
Molten or a carved Image, as Nebuchadnezzars Image was, Dan. 3. 1, 2, etc. and
because the Pope never did this, the Prophecy is not fulfilled in him.

6. The second Beast causes all both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, and that no
man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark or the name of the Beast, or
the number of his name, v. 16, 17. And when was this fulfilled in the Papacy?
To this it is said that this mark is nothing else but the promise of obedience;
to which I answer. 1. That the Beasts mark is something else besides the
Promise of obedience to the Beast, for the promise of obedience is a common
thing between King and Subject all the World over, but the mark of the Beast is
peculiar to the Beast alone. 2. The promise of obedience is made unto the
Beast, but the mark of the Beast is received from the Beast, not imposed on the
Beast, v. 16. 3. Suppose a man has promised obedience to the Beast how shall
it be known that he has so done? And when he comes into a Market or a Fair to
buy or sell, how shall it be known that he has promised obedience to the
Beast, except he have his mark to distinguish him from others? For the reason
why the mark is given, is that such persons may be known from others, and no
man is to buy or sell that is without it, and this is a course which the Pope
never took as yet, nor is ever like to do, and if he should do such a thing
hereafter, yet he were not the Beast, for the Beast did it at his first rising
out of the earth which the Pope did not.

7. Let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast, for it is
the number of a man, and his number is 666, v. 18: But what is this to the
Papacy? Count the number while you will, and see whether you can find the
Papacy therein? Some think to find the number in the word (...), A Papist may
as well say that he has found it in the word (...), but both of them in vain,
for if you write the word perpendicularly in this manner (...) every letter is
a numeral, and the total is 666, but if you write (...) the word collaterally
in this manner (...), the letters are not (...) numeral, but syllabical, and
they serve to make up a word or (...) the name of a man, and not 666, nor any
other number, (...) by it (...) self is 30, and (...) is 31, but (...) is
nothing, and (...) is nothing (...) and so join the whole word (...)
altogether, and it is (...) nothing else but the name of a man, and not any
number (...) at all. And if a man were to write 666 in Greek letters, he would
not set it down in the letters of the word (...) but in the same letters that
the Apostle does, and they are (...), and in no other. 2. Suppose it so to be
as you would have it, write the word (...) how you will, collaterally or
perpendicularly, and let it go for 666 which way soever it be written, yet what
is this to the purpose? for what Pope or Popish Emperor was ever called by this
name? 2. When was any man marked with this name, as they are with the Beasts
name? 3. Men do not mark their Cattle with all the letters of their names, but
with the first letters only, and the Greek word (...) which is here used does
signify such a mark as men put upon their Cattle, now the first letter in the
word (...), is the Greek letter (...), and that stands for 30 and no more, and
if (...) were the name of the Beast, and he to mark his Cattle with it, or any
other for him, his mark would be the letter (...), and no more. 4. We are not
bid to count the Beasts name to find out his number, but to count his number to
find out his name thereby. Now they that count the letters in the word (...),
take a contarry course, they suppose the Beasts name to be (...), and when they
have so done, they count his name to find out his number, and not his number to
find out his name as they ought to do, and how know they that (...) is the
Beasts name? A Papist may as well say that (...) is his proper name, for that
is as much 666 as the word (...). 5. It is a point of understanding, or of
excellent skill in numeration to count the number of the Beast, but to count
the number of the letters in the word (...) is no such excellent skill in
numeration, a young Scholar in Arithmetic may do that, and yet have no
excellent knowledge in that Art. 6. To count the number 666 is to extract the
root thereof, for it can be done no other way, as was showed in the Paraphrase;
but to count the number in the word (...), is to do it by addition, and it can
be done no other way, no nor that way neither, for it can be done no way at
all. 7. Will you know the mark of the Beast, and the name of the Beast, and the
number of his name* indeed^you must go another way to work than hitherto has
been gone, and the way that you must go, is this, 666 is not numerus numeratus,
the number of the Beast counted to our hand, but numerus numerandus the number
to be counted by us. Now the way to count this number is, not by addition or
subtraction, for here is no other number which this number can be added to, or
subtracted from, neither is it to be done by multiplication or division, for
here is no other number which it can be multiplied or divided by; therefore to
count that number, is to extract the root thereof. Now what is the root of 666
but 25 or 26, (...) or (...) in Hebrew Letter, (...) or (...) in Greek letters?
And when you see a Beast with seven Heads, and ten Horns, and another Beast
with one head and two Horns, like a Lamb, to exercise all his civil power and
authority in his behalf, and cause his Subjects to be marked in their right
hand, or in their foreheads with the Capital or Acrostick Letters of his name,
and the letters of that mark be in numeration, 25 or 26, then he is the Beast
that here is prophesied of, and because this has not been done in the Papacy,
this Prop^ecy is not fulfilled in them* but is yet to be expected. Hitherto I
have showed you who the Beast is not, I will now discover unto you who the
Beast is.

5 Quest. Whether this Prophecy be meant of the persecution of the Jews after
their Conversion?

Ans. 1. This Prophecy is to come to pass in the time of the seventh Trumpet,
as has been proved, q. 1. and the mystery of God, by which is meant the
Conversion of the Jews shall come to pass at that time too, Rev. 10. 7.

2. What is meant by the woman in the former Chapter but the Nation of the
Jews? and wherefore is this Beast raised by the Devil, but to make War against
the remnant of her seed, Rev. 12. 17?

3. We read in Daniel that the little Horn who is thought to be the Beast here
spoken of, made war with the Saints and prevailed against them, Dan. 7. 21, 22.
25. Now who are meant by the Saints in Daniel but the Jews?

4. We read in the same Book that Daniels people shall be in great trouble,
such as never was since there was a Nation, Dan. 12. 1. Now from whom shall
they have this trouble if not from the Beast here spoken of?

5. We read in the Prophet Micah, According to the days of thy coming out of
the Land of Egypt will I show unto him mavelous things, the Nations shall see
and be confounded, etc. Micah 7. 15, 16. Now the plagues which shall fall upon
the Beast are many of them the very same for kind with the plagues of Egypt;
therefore as the plagues of Egypt fell upon them for the wrong they did unto
the Jews, so the plagues which shall light upon the Beast, shall fall upon him
and his people for the persecution of that Nation.

6. After the partu^ition of the woman in the former Chapter, v. 12. the Devil
knows he has but a short time, and therefore the Beast who is raised by him
afterward has but a short time too. Now if we look upon the Beasts which are in
the world at this time whether Turks or any other, they have continued a long
time, and therefore this prophecy is not meant of any of them, but remains to
be expected upon the Jews Conversion.

7. The Beasts which now are in the world came to their height and eminency by
long and tedious wars and by the ruins of other Nations, but this Beast is
raised on a sudden by the Devils art and policy, as you may read v. 2. 4. and
there are such strange courses taken, such witchcraft and enchantment used,
such signs and wonders showed, such cunning and deceitful tricks invented, and
such a strange mark imposed by the second Beast to make men adhere unto the
first Beast, as you may read v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. as never yet was known
take them all together at the rising of any Beast since the world began to this
very day, nor will be till the Jews Conversion and the rising of this enemy of
theirs, the Beast here spoken of.

The conclusion therefore is, The Antichrist of St. John, St. Paul's Man of sin,
and the Beast here spoken of be not all one. The Antichrist of St. John be the
false Christ's that our Savior speaks of in the Gospel Mat. 24. 24. which
should start up before and after the destruction of Jerusalem, 1 John 2. 18.
22. and 4. 3. 2 John 7. The Man of sin spoken of by St. Paul is avouched by
some and denied by others to be the Pope of Rome, of which see those that have
written on that subject. But the first Beast here spoken of is a Heathen King
or Emperor raised by the Devil to war against the Jews after their Conversion,
and the second Beast is a Witch as Balaam was, raised by the Devil and employed
by the first Beast as Balaam was by Balak to help him and assist him and do
mighty things for him and for his settlement in his Kingdom, v. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. and for the ruin of the Jewish Nation. Chap. 16. 13, 14.

CHAP. XIV.
The Prophecy of the Virgin Company.
1. THen was presented unto me in a Vision what shall come to pass after the
three days and a half allotted to the Beasts prosperity shall be ended, and I
saw a Lamb representing Jesus Christ stand on Mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand of the Jewish Nation (spoken of before but to
another purpose in the seventh Chapter,) who notwithstanding the power and
prevalency of the Beast shall boldly profess the Name of Christ and have it and
his Fathers Name besides legibly written in their Foreheads.

2. And I heard a voice out of Heaven as the sound of many Waters and as the
found of a great and mighty Thunder, and after that the voice of Harpers making
pleasant Melody with their Harps.

3. And they sung a new Song before the Throne of God, and before the four
living Creatures, and before the four and twenty Elders, which Song shall be
sung by none that be upon the earth but by the one hundred forty and four
thousand which shall be redeemed from the rest that be upon the earth.

4. These be they which shall not be defiled with Women for they shall be
Virgins and unmarried Persons; these be they which shall wait and attend upon
the Lamb as a Lifeguard does upon their Prince whithersoever he shall go, these
shall be redeemed from the rest of men as being the first Fruits to God and to
the Lamb of the Jewish Nation.

5. These be they which shall be without guile, fraud, and deceit, and without
stain of heinous sin in the sight of God.

The Prolcamation of the first Angel.
6. And I saw an Angel fly in the midst between the Heaven and the Earth, with
a commission to preach, proclaim, and make known and publish the everlasting
Gospel of Jesus Christ to the inhabitants of Judaea and to every Nation and
Kindred and Tongue and People that shall be therein.

7. Saying and proclaiming with a loud voice as he shall fly along, Fear God
and give him Glory, for the hour of his Judgment is come and will shortly fall
on all that fear not him, worship not the Beast, nor yield obeisance unto him
in the way that he goes in opposition to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but
worship him alone that made the Heaven and the Earth and the Sea and the
Fountains of Waters.

The Proclamation of the second Angel.
8. And another Angel followed after him proclaiming and saying, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, meaning thereby that she shall shortly fall and come to
naught, because she made all Nations drink of the bitter Wine of her spiritual
Fornication.

The Proclamation of the third Angel.
9. And the third Angel followed after them proclaiming and saying with a loud
voice, If any worship the first Beast or his carved Image, or take an Oath to
be true and faithful unto him, and receive a mark in their right hand or in
their Foreheads in token that they have so done.

10. The same shall drink of the bitter Wine of the wrath of God without
mixing any thing therein to allay the sharpness of it, and shall be tormented
with Fire and Brimstone in the sight and presence of the Holy Angels, and in
the sight and presence of the Lamb.

11. And the smoke of their torment shall ascend for ever, and never have an
end, and they shall be tormented Day and Night without ceasing or intermission,
which worship the first Beast or his carved Image, or take an engagement to be
true and faithful unto him and receive the print of his Name in token that they
have so done.

12. Here will be the trial of the patience of the Saints which are living in
Judaea when the Beasts engagement comes among them, then it will be known who
they be which keep the Commandments of the Lord their God and the Faith of
Jesus Christ, and will not engage unto the Beast though they perish for
refusing.

13. Then I received a command from Heaven saying unto me, Write for the
consolation and encouragement of these faithful men which shall suffer at this
time, Blessed are the dead which die for the Faith of Jesus Christ, and for
professing of the same, and they need not doubt thereof, for the spirit says
so, which is the spirit of truth, and cannot lie, and herein their blessedness
does consist, they shall rest from their labors, miseries, calamities, pains,
and dolours which they sustained in this life, and the reward and recompense of
their Faithful service shall follow after them as soon as they be dead.

The first Judgment on the Beast.
14. Then an Angel shall sit upon a white Cloud, in the likeness of a young man
with a Golden Crown upon his head, and a sharp sickle in his hand, to execute a
heavy Judgment upon the Beast, and his men.

15. And another Angel shall come out of the Temple, and say unto the Angel
which shall sit upon the Cloud, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and cut down the
people which belong unto the Beast, for the time is come for thee to cut them
down, because their sins are now ripe.

16. And as soon as this commission shall be given, the Angel shall thrust in
his sharp sickle upon the earth, and the people which belong unto the Beast
shall be cut down as the Corn is when it is full ripe.

The second Judgment on the Beast.
17. And after this Angel shall have done his work, God shall send another
Angel from the Temple with another ^arp sickle to execute another heavy
Judgment upon other persons belonging to the Beast in like manner as the former
Angel did.

18. And another Angel shall come out from the Altar, which has power over
fire to Plague the earth therewith when God will have him, and he shall cry
unto the Angel which has the sharp sickle, saying unto him, Thrust in thy
sharp sickle, and cut down some other people of the earth which belong unto the
Beast, because their sins are also ripe.

19. And the Angel shall make no delay, but thrust in his sharp sickle into the
earth, and cut down the other people which belong unto the Beast, and cast them
into the great Wine Press of the wrath of God Almighty, and squeeze the blood
out of them as Grapes are squeezed in a Wine Press.

20. And the place where this execution shall be wrought, S^ all be in Judaea
without Jerusalem, and the blood of the slaughter be so great that it shall
reach even to the Horses Bridles in height for the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs in length.

Disputation X*
1 Quest Whether this Prophecy does contemporate with the Prophecy in the
former Chapter, or succeed it?

Ans. 1. Prosperity cannot contemporate with adversity, but in the former
Chapter, the beast is in prosperity, v. 7. and in this Chapter the Beast is in
adversity, v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. therefore,

2. Good success in War, and bad success therein cannot contemporate each with
other, but in the former Prophecy the Beast has good success in War for 42
months together, and in this Prophecy the Beast has bad success therein, and a
lamentable slaughter is made of him two times one after another, as appears v.
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

3. Rising, growing, and increasing, cannot contemporate with dying, falling,
and decaying; but in the former Chapter the Beast is rising, growing, and
increasing, till he come unto his height, and in this Chapter and those which
follow, the Beast is dying, falling, and decaying, till he come unto his end.

Ob. The Virgin company are so called because they were not defiled with
Harlots, v. 4. therefore they fall into the meretricious-times of the Whore of
Babylon.

Ans. Whether they be called Virgins for that reason, or because they were
unmarried persons as St. Jerome thinks, I list not to inquire at this time; it
is sufficient to say, that this Chapter speaks not of the first times of the
Virgin Company, nor of the first times of the Whore of Babylon, but of her
declining times only, as appears v. 8.

Ob. Of this Virgin Company, be they which proclaim the fall of Babylon, v. 8.
and deterr men from wor^hipping the Beast or his Image, and from receiving his
mark, v. 9.

Ans. Be they of the Virgin Company or no which Proclaim the fall of Babylon,
it makes no matter? be it so or otherwise, it is not done by them at Babylons
first and prospering times, but in her latter and declining days only.

Ob. These be the called, and chosen, and faithful Soldiers of the Land, and
(if I may so say) his life guard, by whom he wageth War with the horns of the
Beast, and at length gets the Victory against them, v. 4. and chapter 17. 14.

Ans. This Victory is not gotten in the first and prosperous times of the
beast, for then he gets the Victory of the Saints, Rev. 13. 7. but in his
latter and declining times only.

Ob. The Virgin Company be the bands of Faithful Soldiers, which opposed the
Beast, and adhered unto the Lamb when others of the World forsook him, and
received the Character of the Beast; therefore either these opposed the Beast
at his first beginning, or else the Lamb had none on his side to oppose him at
that time.

Ans. The beast was raised to make War against the remnant of the woman's seed,
Rev. 12. 17. so that they be the men which opposed him at the first, and were
overcome by him, Rev. 13. 7. but the Virgin Company are they which oppose him
in his latter and declining days, and get the Victory against him.

Ob. The beast and the Virgin Company do contemporate in their ends, for they
both end together, and that is, when the History of the Palm-bearers does
begin, Rev. 7. 9. 14.

Ans. Whether the History of the Palm-bearers does begin or no, when the
History of the beast and the Virgin Company does end, I think it needless to
inquire at this time, for the present I confess that the beast and Virgin
Company do end their race together, but I deny that they begin their race
together, but whether they do or no, this Chapter speaks not of it, for it
speaks only of the first declining of the beast, and not of his first
beginning, nor of his final end.

Ob. The Virgin Company are sealed, chapter 7. before any of the Trumpets do begin,
and therefore are they sealed at that time, but that they might set themselves
against the beast at his first beginning?

Ans. They are not sealed for that end that they might set themselves against
the beast at his first beginning, for there were others to oppose him then,
Rev. 12. 17. but that they might be preserved from the storms of the ensuing
Trumpets, Rev. 9. 4. and they are not called forth against the beast till his
declining age does come.

Ob. By this reckoning the Virgin Company are before the beast, and before any
of the Trumpets too, for they are sealed under the sixth seal chapter 7. before the
Trumpets do begin, and six of the Trumpets are expired before the beast in the
former Chapter does ^egin.

Ans. In respect of their sealing they are before the Trumpets, and so before
the Beast too, but in respect of their actings spoken of in this Chapter, they
succeed the 42 months of the former Chapter.

2 Quest. Whether this Prophecy be a prediction in gross of what should come to
pass from Domitians time to Constantines?

Ans. 1. The Prophecy in the former Chapter is not a prediction of what should
come to pass in the time of Domitian, as has been showed, chapter 13. q. 2.
therefore this Prophecy is not a prediction of what should come to pass from
Domitians time to Constantines.

2. The Prophecy in the former Chapter is a prediction of the persecution of
the Jews after their Conversion by the Beast and false Prophet there spoken of,
as has been also showed, chapter 13. q. 5. therefore as the persecution of the
Jews is yet to be expected, so is the fulfilling of this Prophecy to be
expected also.

3. Here is a prediction of a hundred forty and four thousand Sealed persons,
standing altogether on Mount Sion, with the Lamb having his and his Fathers
name written in their foreheads, but there were no such men so qualified as
these were in ev^ry point in the time of Constantine, nor betwixt his time and
Domitians; read what is said of these men, chapter 7. q. 1, 2, 3. and in this
Chapter, q. 3. and tell me where shall we find such men so qualified as these
were in every point, and so many of them gathered together in one body as these
were, since the days of Domitian, to this day.

4. This Prophecy is to be fulfilled in the time of the Beast, as appears, v.
9. 10, 11. Now this Beast as they interpret the heads thereof, does not reach
beyond Domitian; for the Beast has but seven heads, and no more, and the first
of these, as they say, is Claudius, and the last is Domitian, and therefore it
does not extend so far as to the days of Constantine.

5. Here is no persecution Prophesied of in this Chapter, except it be, v. 12.
13. Now this persecution is to be in the time of the Beast for refusing his
Mark, and not Worshipping his Image, and therefore not between his time and
Constantines.

6. Here is an immense effusion of the Enemies blood Prophesied of, v. 20. And
the Wine Press was trodden without the City, and blood came out of the
VVine-press, even unto the Horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs. But there was no such slaughter in the time of Constantine,
and Maxentius; yea take we all the Soldiers of Maxentius, and add we
Constantines unto them, and suppose we every man of them to be slain on both
sides, it will not amount nor come near to so vasta slaughter as here is spoken
of. To which may be added, that the destruction of Maxentius and his Army was
in Italy, but the Wine Press here spoken of, is without the City, that is,
without Jerusalem in Iudaea, and the blood that came out of the Wine Press, was
up to the Horse-bridles in height, for the space of a thousand and six hundred
furlongs in length, when as Maxentius and a good part of his Army were drowned
in the water. Eusebius l. 9. c. 9. Socrates l 1. c. 2.

3 Quest. Who be meant by the Virgin Company, and for what cause be they
spoken of in this place?

Ans. 1. The two Witnesses of which before chapter 11. be not any of the Virgin
Company here spoken of, for both of them were slain at one time by the beast
there spoken of, but none of these were slain by him; yea they were therefore
Sealed that they might be preserved, Rev. 7. 3. Rev. 9. 4. Again the Prophecy
of the Witnesses is ended before the seventh Trumpet does begin, but these are
all alive, and sing a song on Mount Sion after the seventh Trumpet is begun,
Rev. 14. 1, 2.

2. The Woman in the Wilderness is not the Virgin Company mentioned in this
place, for the woman was not converted till the beginning of the seventh
Trumpet, but these were all of them the Servants of God, before any of the
Trumpets did begin, Rev. 7. 3. 2. The woman is the Nation of the ^ews converted
to the Faith, but these are but the first fruits of that Nation, Rev. 14. 4. 3.
The woman is a Church of men, women, and Children, but these are all of them
young men which never knew a woman, Rev. 14. 4. 4. The woman fled into the
Wilderness for safety, but these were never in the Wilderness, but stand on
Mount Sion with the Lamb, without fear, what the beast can do unto them, Rev.
14. 1. 5. The woman has to deal with the Dragon, and he with her before the
beast begins, Rev. 12. 3. 4. 12. but these have no dealing with the Dragon, but
with the beast his successor after the Dragons time is over, Rev. 15. 2.

3. The Virgin Company be not the remnant of the woman's seed mentioned before,
chapter 12. 17. for the woman's seed was overcome and slain by the Beast, Rev. 13.
7. but none of these were slain by him, but all of them sing a song that they
escaped, Rev. 14. 3. Rev. 15. 2, 3.

The Virgin Company be the same persons that are mentioned before, chapter 7. 4. as
both the number of the persons, and the Seal in their foreheads do Demonstrate.
And the reason why they are spoken of again in this place is, to show what
became of them, and how it fared with the Beast and them. For chapter 7. it is said
that they were Sealed, and this was done before any of the Trumpets did begin,
and chapter 9. v. 4. they are secured from the Locusts, but what became of them
afterward, from that time to this, is not any where declared until now, they
did not perish in the time of the six Trumpets, but did outlive them all, they
were not slain by the Beast that is mentioned, chapter 11. as the two witnesses
were, they did not fly into the Wilderness, as the woman did, chapter 12. they were
not slain by the Beast that came out of the Sea, as the remmant of the woman's
seed was, chapter 12. 17. chapter 13. 7. what became of them then? did they adhere unto
the Beast, and receive his mark? No neither, for they had the Lambs name, and
their Fathers name written in their foreheads, but the Beasts name they had
not, chapter 14. 1. and yet for all this they escaped from the Beast, and did not
perish under him, but sing a song for their deliverance, as in this and the
next Chapter is declared, Rev. 14. 3. Rev. 15. 2. 3.

Ob. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but VVhore-mongers,
and Adulterers, God will Judge, Heb 13. 14.

Ans. Notwithstanding this text of Scripture, I cannot think that these were
married persons, for there is a moral undefilement opposed to Fornication and
Adultery, and in this sense it is, that marriage is called the bed undefiled,
but besides this there is a legal undefilement spoken of in Scripture, Exodus
19. 15. 1 Samuel 21. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 7. 5. and it is opposed to carnal Copulation,
and in this sense it is, that these were not defiled with women, for they be
Virgins that are unmarried persons which had not known a woman.

Ob. Let the Husband render unto the Wife due benevolence, and likewise the
Wife unto the Husband, 1 Cor. 7. ^. but it is not likely that the Apostle
would exhort them unto that, which should defile them.

Ans. Married persons be not morally defiled, as Whoremongers, and Adulterers
are, which sin against the seventh Commandment, but yet they are legally
defiled, as the texts of Scripture before cited do declare, Exodus 19. 15. 1 Samuel 21. 4. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Thus a woman in the time of her separation is not
morally unclean, but legally she is, Lev. 12. 2. Lev. 15. 19. and so is a man,
whose seed departs from him, Lev. 22. 4. Deuteronomy. 23. 10, 11.

Ob. Then the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles did not follow Christ, for all
of them were Married, except Paul, and John.

Ans. There is a general way of following Christ, which is common to all
believers, and that is by Faith, and a holy Life; and thus the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles followed Christ: but besides this, there is a special
way of following Christ, which is peculiar to these Virgins only, and that is
in the office of a Soldier in his Conquest of the Beast, which the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles were not called unto.

Ob. Then all that are converted, both of Jews and Gentiles in the time of this
ungodly Beast, shall be Virgins only.

Ans. Coversion is a Common thing to all believers, but to follow Christ in his
Wars against the Beast with good success, is pe^culiar to these Virgins only.

Ob. (...) be Virgins of the Female sex, therefore if ye take the words
properly, these Virgins shall be only maids, and not men.

Ans. (...) may be used of both Sexes, as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 7. 25. but
in this place it is meant of Males only, as the context does declare. Had it
been sad, these were not defiled with men, it had been meant of Females only,
but in regard it is said, these were not defiled with women; he that has but
half an eye may see it is meant of Males only.

Ob. Then all that be Virgins according to the flesh, should follow Christ.

Ans. All that are Converted follow him carefully, 1 Cor. 7. 32. but to follow
him in the way, and calling of a Soldier in his Conquest of the Beast, is
peculiar to these Virgins only.

Ob. By this reckoning, not one among a thousand of the Popish Clergy should
follow Christ, for they be not real Virgins, but Whore-mongers, and Adulterers
well-nigh all.

Ans. No Comparison to be made between these Virgins, and the Papists, for
these were not defiled with women, as some of the Papists are, and these are
they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, which the Papists do not.

Ob. Then Jerome himself should be excluded from following Christ, because he
was no Virgin, as he confesses in his Apology to Pammachius. Virginitatem in
coelum fero, non quia habeam, sed quia magis mirer quod non habeo. I extol
Virginity up to Heaven, not because I have it, but because I admire the more
that I have it not.

Ans. Exclude him from following Christ the common way which all believers go,
and ye do him wrong, exclude him from a Soldier of Jesus Christ in his Wars
against the Beast, and ye do him none. 2. Jerome did not err in thinking these
were Virgins, neither did he err in that he was a married man, as his words
imply he was, but he erred in this, in placing merit in Virginity, where God
has placed none.

Ob. All believers, both married, and unmarried, are so joined unto Christ as
members to their head, that they cannot be parted from him, Joh. 17. 24. 1
These. 4. 16.

Ans. All believers are united unto Christ in the common way of Union, and that
is by the spirit on Gods part, and by Faith on man's part, but to be the
lifeguard of the Lamb (which the expression to follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, does allude unto) or to be triarii milites his ablest, and his choicest
Soldiers in his Wars against the Beast, is a special way of Union and proper
to t^ese Virgins only.

The Conclusion therefore is, The Virgin Company for their number be 144000.
neither more nor less; for Nation they be Je^s, and not Gentiles; for Religion
they be Christians, and holy Christians too; for age they be young and not old;
for Sex they be Males, and not Females; for state of life they be Virgins, and
not married persons; for office and calling they be Soldiers, the Victorious
Army of the Lamb, by whom he Wars against the Beast, and gets the Victory
against him, Rev. 15. 2. Rev. 17. 14. And it is very likely that this Virgin
Company were not bodied into an Army until now, and that when they were Sealed,
chapter 7. they lived dispersedly about the Country, some in one place, and some in
another place, some in one Nation, and some in another Nation, and so they
continued until now; by which means they were less discernable, and little
notice taken of them in the former Trumpets, and there is nothing spoken of
them in those Trumpets, save that they were Sealed and preserved from harm: but
this is the first time that they were bodied into an Army, which the Beast
hearing of, he presently makes against them, where he is well rewarded for his
pains; and the first time his men are reaped as Corn is reaped in the Field;
and the second time his men are slaughtered, and cut down in clusters, as
Grapes when they are fully ripe, as in the la^ter end of this Chapter is
declared, see more of these Virgins, chapter 7. q. 1, 2, 3, 4.

CHAP. XV.
The seven Vials.
1. AND I had another Vision of Gods heavy Judgments upon the World, as great
and mavelous as any of the former, and methought I saw seven Angels, with
seven other plagues, which were to fall upon the World, but chiefly upon the
Beast and his obsequious Servants; and they be the last Plagues that shall fall
upon them, because in them the wrath of God is executed to the full.

2. And methought I saw a Sea of Glass, or something like unto it, mingled with
fire, and the 144000 that obtain Victory over the first Beast, and over his
Image, and over his mark, or which is all one, over the number of his name,
stand at the Glassie Sea as the Israelites heretofore, when they had gotten
Victory over Pharaoh and his host, stood at the red Sea with the harps of God
in their hands, to praise the Lord therewith.

3. And they shall sing a song of praise for their Victory over the Beast,
after the Pattern of the song, which Moses and the Israelites did sing upon
their Victory over Pharaoh and his host, and they shall add to that song, the
song of Jesus Christ, in which they shall praise God to this effect. Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy dealings
with the Sons of men, thou King of Saints.

4. Who shall not fear thee, and give Glory to thy name, for thou only art
holy, and none besides thee, therefore all Nations shall come and worship thee,
for thy Judgments are manifest, and all the world may see that they proceed
from thee.

5. And after this I looked, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of
Testimony, the Holy of Holies, the special place of Gods presence in Heaven
shall be opened.

6. And out of it shall come the seven Angels, which have the execution of the
seven last Plagues, very gloriously apparelled with pure and white linen, and
girt about the paps with Golden Girdles.

7. And unto the seven Angels shall be given seven Golden Vials, full of the
Plagues and wrath of God which lives for evermore.

8. And the Temple it self shall be filled with smoke, in token of Gods heavy
wrath and vengeance, which shall be so terrible, and unsupportable, that none
shall be able to enter into the Temple, where the representation of Gods wrath
shall be, until the seven Plagues of the seven Angels shall be executed to the
full.

CHAP. XVI.
The Prophecy of the first Vial.
1. THEN the seven Angels shall have Commission from God, to pour out the seven
Vials of his fierce wrath upon the people of the earth, successively one after
another.

2. And the first Angel shall pour out his Vial upon the dry Land, and
thereupon a very grievous, noisome, painful, malignant ulcerous sore shall fall
upon the men, which shall take the oath of Allegiance to the first Beast, and
receive his mark, or yield obeisance to his Image, as heretofore there fell a
grievous sore upon the Egyptians, Exodus 9. 8, 9, 10, 11.
but this which shall fall upon the Beasts obsequious Servants, Deuteronomy. 28. 35.
shall be far more grievous, painful, and malignant, then that which fell upon
the Egyptians.

The Prophecy of the second Vial.
3. And the second Angel shall pour out his Vial upon the Sea, Exodus 7. 17. 18,
19, 20, 21.
and it shall be turned into blood, and that blood shall be like the putred
blood of a dead man, Rev. 8. 8.
after it has been for certain days out of his body, and every creature which
lives in that Sea shall dye.

The Prophecy of the third Vial.
4. And the third Angel shall pour out his Vial upon the Rivers, Exodus 7. 17,
18, 19, 20, 21.
and Fountains of Waters which run through the Beasts Dominions, Ps. 105. 29.
and they shall be turned into blood, Rev. 8. 10.
as the Waters of Egypt were. Rev. 14. 17.


5. And the Angel which has power over the Waters, hereupon shall say,
righteous art thou O Lord, and holy, because thou bring such Judgments on
them as are suitable to their sins.

6. For they shed the blood of thy Saints, and Prophets, and thou shall give
them blood instead of Water to be their drink.

7. And another Angel shall also say, right so O Lord, right so it is and ought
to be, just and righteous are thy Judgments, very fit and suitable for such
bloody persons, be thy Plagues.

The Prophecy of the fourth Vial.
8. And the fourth Angel shall pour out his Vial upon the Sun. and yet the Sun
shall not be the object of Gods wrath, but the instrument thereof, and it shall
be given to this Angel, or to this heavenly body to torment men with fiery
heat, and they shall be the objects of this Vial, and the Plague thereof is
burning heat.

9. And they shall be tormented with scorching heat from the influence of the
Sun, and blaspheme that potent God, who has power to inflict such exquisite
Plagues as these upon them, and shall inflict them at this time, and yet their
hearts shall be obdurate as the heart of Pharaoh was, and shall not repent them
of their sins, and give God glory, as by these Plagues they should have learned
to do.

The Prophecy of the fifth Vial.
10. And the fifth Angel shall pour out his Vial upon the imperial Seat and
Throne of the Beast, and his Kingdom shall be full of darkness, Exodus 10. 21,
as the Land of Egypt was, and it shall be such a darkness as shall be felt,
and they shall gnaw their tongues for the grievous pain thereof.

11. And blaspheme the God of Heaven, because of their pains, and their sores,
so exquisite, vehement, and malignant shall they be, and yet for all this,
repent not of their deeds.

The Prophecy of the sixth Vial.
12. And the sixth Angel shall pour out his Vial upon the great and famous
River Euphrates, and cause the Water of the River to be dried up, as the River
Jordan, and the red Sea heretofore were; and this shall be done for this end
and purpose, that a broad and dry way may be made and prepared for the Kings,
which be on the East side of Euphrates, to pass over to the West side thereof,
to their own destruction.

13. And when the Devil and the first Beast, and the second Beast, Act. 1^. 6.
the false Prophet or Magician, shall perceive that a broad and easy way is
made for them to pass over, they shall call for three unclean Spirits, which
shall be ready at their call, and come as easily unto them, as it is for them to
speak and call for them.

14. And these unclean Spirits be in truth the Spirits of Devils, and very
Devils indeed, working miracles as they go, to persuade men the better to do
what they would have them do, and they be to go to the Kings of the earth, and
of all the Country, and Nations Eastward that be up in Arms, to this end and
purpose, that they may gather them together to destroy the Jews at one blow;
but God shall turn it to their own destruction, and they shall all of them be
overthrown themselves in the last Battle they shall fight, which hereupon is,
and shall be called the Battle of the great day of God Almighty.

15. Now look unto your selves, ye People of the East Country, that ye join not
with these Warlike men against the Jews, to your own undoing; for behold what
Christ says unto you, I will come suddenly upon you, as a Thief comes
suddenly on a man when he least of all thinks on it, blessed is he that
looks to himself, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
and does not join or go along with these men to his own destruction. 2 Chronicles.
20. 35, 36, 37.


16. So these unclean Spirits shall prevail with these Kings and Nations of the
East Country, and persuade them to pass over Armed to the other side of
Euphrates, and go along together to this great Battle, and they shall gather
themselves together to a place, which at the accomplishment of this Prophecy,
and for ever afterward, shall be called in Hebrew Armageddon, Rev. 19 20, 21.
where what shall become of them, and what shall be the issue of this matter
shall be declared in the next Vial.

The Prophecy of the seventh Vial.
17. And the seventh Angel shall pour out his Vial into the air, and all that
is to be done, shall now be done before this Vial ends.

18. And first of all, there shall be thunders, and lightnings, and a great
earthquake, the like was not known before, since men were upon the earth, so
mighty an earthquake, and so great.

19. And the great Imperial City of the Beast shall be divided into three
parts, and the Cities of the Nations fall, and great Babylon shall come into
remembrance before God, that he may give her to drink of the bitter cup of the
fie^ceness of his wrath, which shall now, and not till now, be put in execution.

20. And every Island in the* Sea shall be removed out of his place, and the
Mountains in the main Land shall not be found.

21. And a great hail shall fall from Heaven upon men, and every stone thereof
shall be about the weight of a Talent, and yet for all this, they shall not
repent them of their wicked deeds, but increase their sins the more, and
blaspheme the God of Heaven, because of the hail, for the Plague thereof shall
be exceeding great.

Disputation. XI.
1 Quest. Whether the Prophecy of the seven Vials shall succeed the Prophecy of
the Harvest, and the Vintage, in the fourteenth Chapter?

Ans. 1. The last Plagues succeed the first, but the seven Vials are the seven
last Plagues, Rev. 15. 1. and therefore the Harvest and the Vintage of the
fourteenth Chapter, are the first.

2. The Virgin Company obtain Victory over the Beast, before any of the Vials
do begin, Rev. 15 2. and therefore the seven Vials do not begin the ruin of the
Beast, but it was begun before, and the seven Vials are added to it to bring up
the rere, and put a final end unto him.

Ob. The sixth Trumpet puts an end unto the Beast, Rev. 11. 13. and therefore
the seven Vials which put an end unto him too, do contemporate with it.

Ans. I deny the Antecedent, for the seventh Trumpet puts an end unto the
Beast, and not the sixth, Rev. 11. 18. Rev. 19. 19, 20, 21. Secondly that
destruction chapter 11. v. 13. is but of 7000 men, and no more, and therefore it is
but a partial destruction of the Beast, and not a total.

Ob. But whether it be total, or partial, it is before the Harvest, and the
Vintage of the fourteenth Chapter, and therefore the Harvest, and the Vintage
are not the first Plagues.

Ans. This is very true, if the Beast be the same, and the heads the same in
both places, but it may be questioned, whether the Beast ch 11. be the same
with the Beast, chapter 14. v. 9. and if they be, yet the destruction chapter 11. may
befall the Beast in the time of one head, and the Harvest, and the Vintage, chapter
14. in the time of another head.

Ob. The wound which the Beast received, chapter 13. v. 3. is before the Harvest,
and the Vintage, chapter 14. and therefore they be not the first Plagues.

Ans. That wound does not belong to the ruin of the Beast, but was a stop and
a hinderance to his settling for a time, but no part of his destruction after he
is risen. 2. That wound is before the 42 months of his prosperity, but after
they are ended, the first beginnings of his ruin are the Harvest, and the
Vintage, chapter 14. and the seven Vials which follow after, are the consummation
of it.

Ob. The Harvest is the end of the World, Mat. 13. 39.

Ans. The general Harvest at the day of Judgment is the end of the World, and
that is the Harvest Christ means, Mat. 13. 39. but the Harvest Rev. 14. 15. is
a particular Harvest of the Beasts men, and no more.

Ob. The Harvest, and the Vintage are both one, and therefore they succeed not
one another.

Ans. The general Harvest, and the general Vintage are both one, and the
reapers are the Angels in general, Mat. 13. 39. but the Harvest chapter 14. is a
particular Harvest, and the Vintage, a particular Vintage, and one Angel has a
hand in reaping of the harvest, and another in gathering of the Vintage, Rev.
14. 14. 17.

2 Quest. Whether the Prophecy of the seven Vials be literally, or mystically
to be understood?

Ans. 1. A Revelation cannot be a mystery, for a Revelation is a manifestation
of things that before were hidden and secret, Dan. 2. 28.
but a mystery is, Mat. 10. 26.
when things are hidden, Luke 8. 17.
and secret still, Romans 16. 25, 26.
but the Prophecy of the seven Vials, Co^. 1. 26.
is a special part of a Revelation.

2. Where there is a mystery in the Revelation, it is usually interpreted, as
the first Chapter, and the seventeenth do demonstrate, but here is no
interpretation of any mystery in the Vials.

3. No Scripture is mystically to be understood, sine evidente necessitate,
without evident necessity, but here is no necessity, much less an evident one,
so to understand it.

4. Where a literal sense may stand, that which is furthest from the letter is
the worst, but here a literal sense may stand. For 1. It is not repugnant to
any Text of Scripture. 2. It is not contrary to any Article of the Christian
Faith. 3. There is no iniquity therein. 4. There is no absurdity at all does
follow therefrom, therefore it is literally to be understood.

5. The Plagues of Egypt are literally to be understood, but the seven Vials
are for the most part the same for kind with the Plagues of Egypt. The first
Vial answers to the Boil breaking forth with blaines upon man and Beast, Exodus
9. 9.
throughout all the Land of Egypt; and what man will say that that Boil is
mystically to be understood? The second and third Vials answer to another
Plague of Egypt, where all the Water in the River was turned to blood, Exodus
7. 20, 21. and what living soul will say that that is mystically to be
understood? The fifth Vial answers to the darkness, which fell upon the Land of
Egypt for three days together, Exodus 10. 21, 22, 23. and what understanding is
so dark, as to understand that darkness mystically? The last Vial answers to
the hail which fell upon the Land of Egypt, Exodus 9. 22, 23, 24. and who will
say that that hail is mystically to be understood? only the fourth and sixth
Vials differ in kind from the Plagues of Egypt, but the rest that are
mentioned in this Chapter, are the same with theirs.

6. From the mystical interpretation of the Vials, many absurdities will
follow. As 1. It makes the Prop^ecy but a common Prophecy, and to speak of
things ordi^ary and accustomed; when as the literal sense makes it a Prophecy
extraordinary, and to speak of things not usual nor accustomed, such as never
were but in the Land of Egypt, and they that were in Egypt though the same
for kind were not so grievous as these Vials are like to be. 2. It makes the
Scripture a nose of Wax, which a man may turn which way he will, one may turn
it one way, and another may turn it another way, and there be well nigh as many
interpretations of the mystical sense, as there be writers on the Revelation.
3. It subjects the Scripture to our vain lusts, and humors, and gives every
one liberty to interpret it as his humor leads him. 4. It makes the Scripture
mean not what it speaks, but what men would have it mean. 5. It makes men
interpret the Revelation of themselves or of their own party, and of the times
wherein they live, and the good things they think are spoken of themselves, and
the evil things of their enemies. 6. It turns the Scripture into nonsense, what
sense is it to say, that by the earth in the first Vial, is meant the lowest of
the People, as if an Ulcer could not fall upon the highest, as well as upon the
lowest? What sense is it to say, every living soul died in the Sea, that is, in
the extent and compass of the Papal power and Jurisdiction, when as there be
five Vials to fall upon some men afterward? What sense is it to say, that the
darkness in the fifth Vial is meant of spiritual darkness, as if they were not
spiritually dark before that or any other of the Vials did begin? What sense is
it to understand by the Kings of the East in the sixth Vial the Kings of the
West, and by the River Euphrates, which is a River in the East to understand
the Popes revenues in the West, and by the drying up of that River, to
understand the draining away the Popes revenues in the West? these and many
more absurdities do follow from the mystical interpretation of the Vials.

Ob. If we take the Earth, Sea, Rivers, and Fountains of waters etc. in a
literal sense, how should a Vial of wrath poured out on these, be any (...)
more prejudicial (without a miracle) to Gods enemies then his Friends, who
partake of the benefit of these in common with the other?

Ans. 1. Did not Moses sprinkle the ashes of a Furnace toward Heaven, and it
became dust upon the Earth, and after that a boil breaking forth with blanes
upon man and Beast, Exodus 9. 10. and was not this more prejudicial to Gods
enemies then his Friends? Again did not Moses smite the waters in the River, Et
quaecunque Ioannes discit ulus Domini vidit in Apo^alypsi, inven^et casdem
plagas universaliteraccipere gente^, quas tunc particulatim acci^it Aegyptus.
Ire naeus adversus Haereses, lib. 4. c. 50.
and they became blood, Exodus, 7. 20, 21. and was not this more prejudical to
the Egyptians, then to the Israelites? So thirdly did not Moses stretch forth
his hand toward Heaven, and there was a thick darkness in all the Land of
Egypt three days, Exodus 10. 22, 23. and was not this more prejudicial to Gods
enemies then his Friends? And Lastly, did not Moses stretch forth his hand
toward Heaven, and the Lord rained hail upon the Land of Egypt, Exodus 9. 23.
and was not this more prejudicial to the Egyptians then the Israelites? And if
God could do all this, and much more in Egypt in a literal sense, why can he
not do the like in other Countries without prejudice to his own People? 2.
Whereas it is said (without a miracle) we say that God in every one of these
Vials works a miracle, as he did in Egypt; and we further say, that God has
promised to do the like again in other Countries, According to the days of thy
coming out of the Land of Egypt, will I show unto him mavelous things, the
Nations shall see, and be confounded, etc. Micah. 7. 15, 16. 3. Whereas it is
said that they partake of the benefit of these in common with the other, it is
nothing so at this time, for the Saints do not live in the Beasts Dominions at
this time, or in that part of them where the Vials f^l, for they were either
slain or fled out of his Dominions before any of the Vials did begin. Rev. 12.
6. 14. Rev. 13. 7. Rev. 16. 6. Rev. 18. 4.

Ob. Did ever Rivers and Fountains of waters literally shed the blood of
Saints, or did God ever in way of revenge give them blood to drink?

Ans. Did men never read the Book of Exodus? Did ever the Rivers and Fountains
of Egypt literally shed the blood of the Israelites? Yet God turned them to
blood as a Plague on the Egyptians, Exodus 7. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. and no other
is the meaning here. The third Angel poured out his Vial on the Rivers and
Fountains of Waters, and they became blood, v. 4. and wherefore is this done,
but in way of revenge upon the men, that they might not have the benefit of the
waters, as heretofore they had, and that because they (that is the men which
drank of those waters) shed the blood of the Saints, and the Prophets, and thou
have given them (that is the men) blood to drink.

Ob. The Book of Exodus is a History, but the Revelation is a Prophecy, and
therefore may not be compared each with other.

Ans. A Prophecy may be compared with a History, Mat. 2. 6. 18.
in respect of the matter, Mat. ^. 3.
though not in respect of the time, Mat. 8. 17.
for the matter of a Prophecy, may be the matter of a History when it is
fulfilled, Mat. 21. 5.
like as the matter of a History was the matter of a Prophecy before it was
fulfilled, the difference many times is not in respect of matter, but in
respect of time. A Prophecy is the relating of a thing to come, and a History
is the relating of a thing past, but the thing related may be materially the
same in both, 2. The Book of Exodus is both a History, and a Prophecy; for the
words in Exodus 7. 20, 21. are a History of turning the waters into blood, but
the words, v. 17, 18. are a Prophecy of it before hand. So again the words in
Exodus, 9, 10, 11. are a History of the Boil which fell upon the Egyptians,
but the words v. 8, 9. are a Prophecy of the Boil before it came to pass. So
thirdly the w^rds in Exodus 10. 22. are a History of the darkness that was
(...) Egypt, but the words v. 21. are a Prophecy thereof, and therefore the
comparison in all the three places with the Vials of the Revelation is very fit
and suitable each to other.

Ob. How can a Vial be poured on the Sun, and not on the Saints which live
under it? or how can the Sun torment men with fervent heat, and the Saints not
be tormented by it?

Ans. 1. The fire which flew the men which-cast the three Children into the
midst of the burning fiery Furnace, did no hurt to the three Children which
were cast therein, Dan. 3. 22 25. 2. The Lightning from heaven may slay one
man, and not another; yea, two men may Travel in the Field together; and one of
them be slain by Lightning, and the other not; one House may be set on fire by
Lightning, and not another; and one Tree may be blasted at such a time, and not
another. 3. One man and his Family may be visited with a Fever in a hot Summer
season, and his next neghbours House or his Family may escape. 4. The Psalmist
says, the Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night, Ps. 121. 6.
this strikes the objection quite dead, one man may be smitten by the Sun, and
not another, though they live both of them near together. 5. The Sun is more
predominant in one Country then another, so that the Beast and his men may be
scorched by the Sun, and the Saints which are fled out of his Dominions, may
escape. 6. The Beast would not suffer any of the Saints to live in his
Dominions in peace, he slew as many of them as he could come by, and after they
were dead, and the rest fled away, these Vials fell upon them. 7. They that
in^erpret the Vials mystically, say that by the earth one sort of men is meant,
by the Sea another, by the Rivers and Fountains of Waters a third, and by the
Sun a fourth, yet all of these be wicked men: now if the Vials can distinguish
between one wicked man, and another, so that one wicked man is punished under
one Vial, and not another, why can they not as well distinguish between a
wicked man, and a good, though understood in a literal sense? 8. The Angels are
the pourers forth of these Vials, and they can so order and dispose of them,
that they shall fall only on the wicked, and not upon the good. 9. And lastly
the persons plagued in these Vials be not expressed in the first words, but in
the last; for instance, the first Angel poured out his Vial on the earth, the
persons plagued be not denoted in these words, but in the next, and there fell
a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the Beast. So in
the second Vial, the second Angel poured out his Vial on the Sea, and it became
as the blood of a dead man, the persons plagued, be not included in these
words, but in those which follow, and every living soul died in the Sea, and so
onward of the other Vials except the fifth, the last words express the persons
plagued, and the first express the Creature or the Instrument which it pleased
God to use in bringing of the Plague upon them.

3 Quest. Whether the Kings of the East be the Jews?

Ans. 1. The Jews are no where called Kings, Because here is mention of
Euphrates, and the Kings of the East in the sixth Vial, it may probably be
gathered from thence, that the Vials shall be poured out upon the People which
dwell on the other side of Euphrate^ Eastward, and the Plagues of the Trumpets
shall fall upon the People which dwell on this side of Euphrates Westward.
much less the Kings of the East in all the Scripture, and therefore, why
should any one think they are here.

2. The King of the South is so called, Dan. 11. 6. because he lives and Reigns
in the South, and the King of the North is so called in the same place, because
he lives and Reigns in the North, and therefore the Kings of the East are so
called, because they live and Reign beyond Euphrates in the East: now the Jews
do not Reign there, neither do they live there at this time, for Judaea where
they now are, Rev. 14. 1. I mean at the execution of this Prophecy) is not
beyond Euphrates in the East, but on this side of Euphrates in the West, Mat.
2. 1.

3. The Kings of the East, as the words import, be many Kings of many Nations,
but the Jews are but one Nation, and no more.

4. The Kings of the East are in prosperity, but the Jews are in adversity at
this time, and shall not be settled in prosperity until the Battle of the great
day of God Almighty shall be over.

5. We read Ezekiel 38. 8, 9. After many days thou shall be visited, in the
latter years thou shall come into the Land that is brought back from the Sword,
and is gathered out of many People against the Mountains of Israel which have
been always wast, but it is brought forth out of the Nations, and they shall
dwell fafely all of them, thou shall ascend and come like a storm, thou shall
be like a Cloud to cover the Land, thou and all thy bands, and many People with
thee. Therefore the Kings of the East be not the Jews, but rather they be some
of those Kings, that shall join with Gog and Magog against the Jews after their
Conversion.

6. We read Joel 3. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. I will also gather all Nations, and will
bring them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there
for my People, and for my Heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the
Nations, and parted my Land. Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles, prepare War,
make up the mighty men, let all the men of War draw near, let them come up.
Beat your Plow-shares into Swords, and your Pruning hooks into Spears, let the
weak say I am strong. Assemble your selves, and come all ye Heathen, and gather
your selves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down O
Lord. Let the Heathen be w^akned and come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for
there will I sit to Judge all the Heathen round about. And this does also show
that the Kings of the East be not the Jews, but they be the Gentiles that shall
set themselves against the Jews after their Conversion.

7. We read Rev. 19. 19. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and
their Armies gathered to make war against him that sat on the Horse, and
against his Army. Now against whom were these Kings gathered but against the
Jews? Therefore the Kings of the East be not the Jews, but they be the Kings of
the Earth that shall join with the Beast and false Prophet, against the Jews in
the last expedition they shall make against them.

8. I urge the Text where the Kings of the East are expressly spoken of, Rev.
16. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates,
and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might
be prepared. Now who be these Kings of the East? Read the next verses and they
will tell you. And I saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs, come out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of
the false Prophet. For they are the Spirits of Devils, working miracles, which
go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to
the Battle of that great day of God Almighty. And he gathered them together
into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. Therefore the Kings of the
East be not the Jews, but they rather be the Kings of the earth, and of the
whole world, or some of them whom the Frogs are sent unto, to gather them to
the Battle of the great day of God Almighty. And it is likely that the case may
stand thus. The Armies of the Beast and false Prophet being overthrown in two
onsets, which they made against the Sealed Jews in the latter end of the
fourteenth Chapter; they know not how to raise another Army to make a third
onset but by calling other Kings to help them, therefore as soon as they have
notice that the waters of Euphrates are dried up, they send in all have to the
Kings of the East which are beyond Euphrates to assist them, who finding a
commodious passage through Euphrates, the waters of the River being dried up,
they consent unto it, and join with the Beast and false Prophet, against the
Jews in this last expedition.

Ob. But against this exposition of the Kings of the East one objection may be
made, and it is this, the Prophet Esai says, that they which pass over
Euphrates, be the Jews, Esa. 11. 15, 16. And the Lord shall utterly destroy the
Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand
over the River, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over
dry shod. And there shall be a high way for the remnant of his People which
shall be left from Assyria, like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up
out of the Land of Egypt. Now is not this Prophecy the same with St. John's? Is
not this River which Esai speaks of, the River Euphrates? Be not the men
which shall pass over dry shod, the remnant of his People that shall be left
from Assyria? And who be they but the Jews?

Ans. This Argument were something worth if this Prophecy of Esai were the same
with St. John's? Or if the River which Esai speaks of were Euphrates, but we
have cause to think that that River is not Euphrates, but the River Nilus, as
may appear partly from the seven streams which Nilus is known to have, and
partly from joining it with Egypt, where it is known that River is, so that the
meaning of the Prophecy is, that the River Nilus shall be dried up in the seven
streams thereof which run through the Land of Egypt, and the Tongue of the
Egyptian Sea, that is, of the Red Sea near unto the Land of Egypt shall be
dried up too, as it was in the days of Moses, Exodus 14. 29. to this end and
purpose that the Jews which are in those Countries may pass into Judaea without
impediment, so that this Prophecy is not the same with St. John's, but is very
likely to come to pass before St. John's does, and before any of the Vials shall
begin.

4 Quest. Whether Babylon and the Throne of the Beast be all one? If they be,
whether the Beast be in possession of it at the time of the destruction of it?

Ans. 1. The Throne of the Beast came in remembrance before God, at the
execution of the fifth Vial, but Babylon came not in remembrance before God,
till the execution of the seventh Vial.

2. The words in the seventh Vial. And great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, It is likely that the Throne of the Beast mentioned in the fifth Vial, is
a City beyond Euphrates in the East: Babylon is a City on this side of
Euphrates in the West.
to give unto her the cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath. v. 19.
imply that no Plague fell on Babylon till the seventh Vial, and the words Rev.
18. 7, 8. imply the same, but a Plague falls on the Throne of the Beast in the
time of the fifth Vial, v. 10. and therefore Babylon and the Throne of the
Beast be not the same.

3. The great City mentioned in the seventh Vial, and Babylon there mentioned
likewise, are two distinct places, and it is very likely that the great City is
the Throne of the Beast mentioned in the fifth Vial, and Babylon is some other
place.

4. The Beast that is mentioned in the fifth Vial, and the Beast that is
mentioned, c. 17. are not the same Beast as has been showed by probable
Arguments, c. 13. q. 1. page 16^ and therefore it is likely that their Thrones
are not the same.

5. But suppose the Beasts be the same, and their Thrones the same, yet a
Question may be made, whether Babylon be in the Beasts Possession at the time
of the destruction of it, and that for these reasons.

1. The Friends of a King are not enemies to the Kings Throne and Possessions,
but the ten Kings who are the Beasts Friends, are enemies to the City of
Babylon, Rev. 17. 16.

2. The Friends of a King, do not War against the Kings Throne and destroy it,
but the ten Kings, who are the Beasts Friends shall make War against the City
of Babylon, and destroy it, Rev. 17. 16.

For answer whereunto I think the case may be determined thus: The Beast may be
considered in three distinct points of time, was, is not, and shall ascend,
Rev. 17. 8. Now in the first point of time, when the Beast was, it is likely,
or rather out of Question, that Babylon is in the Possession of the Beast
mentioned, c. 17. in the second point of the time when the Beast is not,
Babylon is not in the Possession of the Beast while he is not, in the third
Article or point of time when the Beast shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit;
the Beast shall seek to have his Throne again, but the City shall oppose it,
and by that means shall be destroyed, of which more largly in the next Chapter.

5 Quest. How long the Vials shall continue?

Ans. 1. The Vials be the last Plagues of all, Rev. 15. 1. therefore they be
long in coming, and quick in going away.

2. All the time of the Dragons abode on earth after his casting forth of
Heaven, is but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. and the Vials are but part of that
short time.

3. The Plagues of Egypt were of short continuance, and were all executed in a
month, as Bishop Usher has showed in his Annals page 20, 21. and Doctor
Willet, on Exodus c. 7. q. 29. p. 72. Now the Vials for the most part are the
same in kind with the Plagues of Egypt, and therefore are of short
continuance, as the Plagues of Egypt were.

4. Miracles are but for a short time, but in every one of these Vials, God
does work a Miracle.

5 The men which were Plagued with a noisome sore in the first Vial, are alive,
and complain of the pain of that sore in the time of the fifth Vial.

6. The last Seal is the longest Seal of all, for it contains under it all the
Prophecies in the Revelation, from the beginning of the eighth Chapter, to the
end of the Book: so the seventh Trumpet is the longest Trumpet, and comprehends
under it all the Prophecies in the Revelation, from the fifteenth verse of the
eleventh Chapter to the end of the Book; and so thirdly, the last Vial is the
longest Vial, and all the Prophecies in the Revelation, from the seventeenth
verse of the sixteenth Chapter, to the end of the Revelation belong unto it;
and when I say the Vials are of short continuance, it is to be understood of
the six first Vials, and of so much only of the seventh, as reaches from the
seventeenth verse of this sixteenth Chapter, to the beginning of the twentieth.

CHAP. XVII.
The Prophecy concerning Babylon, and the destruction of it.
1. AND one of the seven Angels which had the effusion of the seven Vials in my
Vision, and shall have the execution of them when they are to be executed, came
unto me in my Vision, and talked with me, saying, come hither, and I will show
thee the destruction of the great Whorish City, which at the commencement of
this seventh Vial, shall rule over many Nations, and who they be that shall
destroy her.

2. With whom the Kings of the earth shall commit Idolatry, and the Inhabiters
of the same shall be made drunk with her spiritual, and also with her corporal
Fornication.

3. So he took me aside, and carried me in a Vision of my mind into the
Wilderness, where I saw a woman representing not what was then in being, but
what shall be hereafter, sitting upon a Scarlet colored Beast, full of names
of Blasphemy many ways committed against God and Jesus Christ, and the Beast
had seven heads, and ten Horns, representing what should be hereafter.

4. And the woman which I saw, was arrayed in costly apparel of Purple and
Scarlet color, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, and she
had a cup of Gold in her hand, (representing still what should be hereafter)
full of abominable sins and wickedness, and also most grievous and loathsome
Fornication.

5. And in her forehead she had a name written, declaring what manner of City
she should be, not perspicuously, but in a mystery; Babylon the great, the
Mother of Whoredoms, and vile abominations of the earth.

6. And besides all this, I saw the Woman exceeding drunk with the blood of the
Saints of God, and of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ; and when I saw she was such
a one, I wondered greatly, with exceeding admiration, what this Woman should
mean.

7. And as I was thus wondering in my mind, the Angel said unto me, wherefore
did thou wonder and continue in so doing* I will tell thee what is meant by
this wicked woman, and what is meant by the Beast that bears her, which has
seven heads and ten Horns.

8. The Beast which thou saw, is a King which shall have a Crown, and loose
it, and obtain his Crown again, and then go into Perdition, and never have a
being any more; he shall have a Crown before the seventh Vial shall commence,
he shall loose it a little after the commencement of it, and obtain the same
again, and go into Perdition too, before this seventh Vial shall be ended, and
all the Inhabitants of the earth, which were not elected to Salvation, shall
wonder at it, when they see the Beast which shall have a Crown, and loose it to
obtain his Crown again.

9. And this is the sense and meaning of the Vision, the seven heads, be seven
Mountains, upon which the City shall be built.

10. And they do also signify seven Kings, five of them shall fall and be
dead, and gone before the seventh Vial shall commence; the sixth shall be alive
at the commencement of that Vial, and the seventh is then to be expected, and
when he comes to the Crown, he shall enjoy it but a little while.

11. And the Beast which shall have a Crown and loose it, he shall be the
eighth King, and succeed the seventh, and yet be of the number of the seven
too, and go into Perdition, and be no more forever.

12. And the ten Horns which thou saw the Beast to have, do also signify
ten Kings, which as yet have not received a Kingdom, nor shall have any one
before the Beast has lost his, and recovered it again, and then they shall
receive power to Reign as Kings in one Kingdom one hour with the Beast, and
this shall be when the seventh Vial shall commence, and in the time of it, and
not before.

13. And though they be ten, yet they shall have but one mind, and adhere unto
the Beast with one consent, and give their Warlike power and strength to the
assistance of the Beast, till the rebellious City be destroyed.

14. And yet we may not think that they be Christian Kings, for after this is
done, they shall fight against the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them in
the War, and though they be Kings themselves, yet he is a greater King then
they, even the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and they that be with him, and
on his side be chosen, and better Soldiers then any the ten Kings have, and
also Faithful to him too.

15. And the Angel also told me, what is meant by the waters upon which the
woman sits, and he said unto me, that they do signify multitudes of People,
and Nations of diverse Languages.

16. And the ten Horns which thou saw the Beast to have, be they which shall
hate the Whore, not for her Religion, but for her Rebellion against the Beast,
and make her desolate and naked without Inhabitants, and slay her People with
the Sword, and burn her Houses with fire.

17. And that which shall make them do it is, because God shall put it into
their hearts to fulfill his mind and will, and agree together to give their
Kingdom to the Beast, until the City be destroyed, and no longer.

18. And the woman which thou saw, does signify the great imperial City,
which at the commencement of this seventh Vial, shall have Dominion over the
Kings and Nations of the earth, and then it shall be known by name, what this
wicked, Idolatrous, and Blasphemous City is.

Disputation. XII.
1 Quest. Whether Babylon be the City of Rome?

Arguments for the Affirmative,. 1.
1. The City which sits on seven Hills, is Babylon, as appears v. 9. but Rome,
and no other City in the World sits on seven hills, the names of them are
these, the Capitoline, Palatine, Caelian, Aventine, Esquiline, Viminal, and
Quirinal, therefore

2. The City which has seven heads, that is, seven kinds of Governors
successively one after another, is the City Babylon mentioned in this place, v.
10. but Rome, and no other City in the World has seven heads, that is, seven
kinds of Governors succeeding one anther. First Kings, Secondly Consuls,
Thirdly Dictators, Fourthly Decemvirs, Fifthly Military Tribunes, Sixthly
Emperors, Seventhly Popes, therefore

3. The City whose five first heads were fallen in the Apostles time, one then
was, and the other not then come, is the City mentioned in this place, v. 10.
but Rome and no other City in the World had five heads fallen in the Apostles
time, First Kings, Secondly Consuls, Thirdly Dictators, Fourthly Decemvirs,
Fifthly Military Tribunes, one then in being to wit the Emperors, and the
other not then come, that is the Popes, therefore

4. The City which in the Apostles time, reigned over the Kings of the earth,
is the City that is meant in this place, as the last verse does demonstrate,
but Rome, and no other City in the World reigned over the Kings of the earth in
the Apostles time, therefore Rome, and no other City in the World, is Babylon
mentioned in this place.

And these be the Arguments for the Affirmative, which to my thinking, are very
fair ones, and somewhat probable, insomuch that the Jesuits themselves have
confessed, that by Babylon, Rome is meant. Ribera says thus, Scriptores qui
aliter interpretati fuerant, veritate ipsa coguntur nobis facere Roman esse
hanc urbem fornicariam vastandam and evertendam. Ribera in cap. 17.. 20. 22.
that is, the Writers which had otherwise interpreted before, are compelled by
the truth it self, to make Rome to be this whorish City which is to be wasted
and destroyed. Bellarmin also says thus, Babylon urbs illa magna sedens super
septem montes and habens imperium super reges terrae est Roma. Neque enim alia
civitas est quae Johannis tempore imperiam hab^ierat super reges terra quam
Roma, and notissimum est supra septem montes Roman aedificatam esse. Bellarmin
lib. 2. de Pont. Romans cap. 2. that is, Babylon the great City sitting upon
seven hills, and Reigning over the Kings of the earth, is Rome; for there is no
other City which in John's time Reigned over the Kings of the earth, but Rome,
and it is very well known that Rome was built on seven hills, so he
notwithstanding the confession of these men, and the probability of the former
Arguments, I think it my duty not to rest here, but that I may deal impartially
in this point, and discover to the reader what may be said against it, as well
as for it, I crave leave to set down such Arguments as have come into my mind
for the Negative in the next Section.

Arguments for the Negative,. 2.
1. This Prophecy was written in behalf of Asia, and should in all likelihood
belong to them, but what has Rome to do with Asia? it neither stands in Asia,
nor on the borders of it, nor has any thing to do therewith, and if it be said
that Constantinople is not in Asia neither, hear what Scaliger says of it.
Europae imposita haec Asiaeque objecta potenti, Limes utrique olim, nunc
utriusque caput. In Europe set, against potent Asia placed, of old the bound
and now the head of both.

2. Where shall we find seven Hills in Rome, and no more? Heathen Rome had so
many, whose names are reckoned in the former Section, but besides these, there
were three more added to the City afterward, whereof the first was called
collis hortulorum the Hill of Gardens, the second mons aureus the Golden
Mountain, the third Paticanus the Vatican Mountain, so that Rome first and last
had ten in all, and as for Papal Rome that now is, it has but two, and no more.

3. Is there no City in the world which has seven Hills, but Rome, if there be
as indeed there is, for Constantinople stands on seven Hills at this day, and
so man other Cities too for ought we know, therefore let not men be too
peremptory in this point, but consider what they say.

4. The seven heads be seven Kings, but where shall we find so many Kings in
Rome, and no more? For if we take Kings properly, and understand thereby so
many Monarchs as the ten Kings, v. 12. are taken properly for so many Monarchs,
where shall we find so many Kings in Rome, and no more? Heathen Rome had Kings
and Emperors before Popes began, but they were more then seven, and Papal Rome
has not one.

5. Suppose by seven Kings be meant seven kinds of Governors, as it is commonly
interpreted, where shall we find so many kinds in Rome? For Heathen Rome had
not so many, and Papal Rome has but one, and it is not likely that Heathen
Rome and Papal too, should be meant in this place.

6. But let us join them both together, and take Rome in its latitude, as it
compriseth Heathen Rome, and Papal too, yet where shall we find so many kinds
of Governors in Rome? Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Military Tribunes,
Emperors, and Popes make not up the number. For the Dictators differed not
from Kings but in name, Godwins Antiquities. p. 171. 174, 175.
and in continuance of their office, and the Kings differed not from Emp^rours
but in name, and if these three be but one kind of Governors, where then be
the other six?

7. There is a great difference between the Roman Beast, and the Roman State;
now it is true, the Roman State had many heads, but the Roman Beast, that is,
the Roman Empire had but one, and that is the Emperors, and no more.

8. None of the seven heads which the Prophecy speaks of did live and rule
together, but the Dictators lived and ruled with some of the Consuls while they
stood, Helvicus, page 60. 68.
and also with some of the Tribunes while they stood, and therefore the
Dictators and the Consuls be none of the heads which the Prophecy speaks of.

9. Every one of these heads which the Prophecy speaks of, be long lasting
heads, and of long continuance, except the seventh, but the Dictators were but
for half a year, and they were never chosen, but when the commonweal was in
some great trouble or danger, and at half a years end under pain of Treason,
they yielded up their office.

10. Every one of these heads, be the heads of a Beast, that is, of an Empire,
for that's the meaning of the word Beast, as appears Dan. 7. 17. 23. but the
Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, and Military Tribunes were not the heads of an
Empire, but of a Commonweal, for Rome was not an Empire till the Emperors
began, and the first of them was Julius Caesar.

11. Every one of these heads were supreme heads, and not subject to the power
and authority of others, but the Consuls, Dictators, etc. were subject to the
Senate, and under their Command; and therefore they be not the heads here
spoken of.

12. None of these heads did rise again after they were fallen, except the
eighth; but the Consuls whom they reckon for the second head did rise again
after they were fallen: For first, the Decemvirs did succeed them for two years
or thereabout, and when they were ended, the Consuls rose again: next the
Military Tribunes came up in their places, and that more then once or twice,
and as often as they fell, the Consuls rose again. See Helvicus, page 66. 68.
Sleidan de quaetuor Summis Imperiis, lib. 1. page 45. 47. 48.

13. It is said, v. 10. Five are fallen, that is, say they the first five, and
that in the Apostles time, before he was in Patmos, but this is not so, for the
Consuls were not fallen in his time, for when Domitian was Emperor there were
Consuls still, as Helvicus sets them down by name, page 86, 87.

14. What if the Words five are fallen be not meant of the Apostles days, as
indeed they are not, for the Apostle written a Prophecy, and not a History, and
in what ^ense soever he speaks, he is to be understood Prophetically, and not
Historically, thus when it is said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Rev. 14. 8.
the meaning is, not that it was fallen in the Apostles days, for that is false;
but the meaning is, that it shall fall hereafter in the time of the seventh
Vial, and therefore chapter 18. 21. the same thing is spoken of in the future
tense, with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be
found no more at all. In like manner when it is said five are fallen, the
meaning is, not that five are fallen in the Apostles days, but the meaning is,
that five are fallen before the seventh Vial shall begin, and so whatever is
spoken in that verse, has reference to the seventh Vial, and not to the days
in which the Apostle lived.

15. The seventh head is to continue but a short space, v. 10. now the Pope
whom they reckon for the seventh head has continued a long time, and how much
longer he shall continue, who can tell? And if it be said that this time is
called short in the sight of God, or in respect of eternal happiness; to this I
answer, that it cannot be the meaning of it, for the other six heads did
continue but a short space in the sight of God, or in respect of e^ernal
happiness, but of none of the seven heads is it said that they continued a
short space but only of the seventh, and therefore the meaning is, that the
seventh head shall continue a short space in respect of the other heads, but
now the Popes have continued a long time, much longer then any of the other
heads, and therefore they be not the seventh head.

16. The Beast here spoken of, is not the seventh head, but the eighth; now the
Pope is usually counted for the seventh head, and therefore he is not the Beast
that here is spoken of, and if he be not the Beast, where shall we find the
Beast at Rome? Some to salve the matter, say that the Gothish Kingdom is the
seventh head, and the Pope is the eighth, but this does mar the matter quite;
for if the Gothish Kingdom be the seventh head, the Pope must have a quietus
est, for then he is none of the seven heads that here be spoken of, and if he
be none of the seven, then he is not the eighth, for the eighth is one of the
seven, as appears v. 11.

17. One of the seven heads fell and rose again, and so became the eighth head,
v. 11. but of none of the former mentioned heads can it be said that they fell
and rose again, and so became the eighth head, and therefore they be not the
heads here spoken of. The Popes did not fall and rise again, and so become the
eighth head, neither did the Emperors fall and rise again, and so become the
eighth head, and as for the Consuls it is true, they fell and rose again, but
they be not the eighth head, and therefore where shall we find the eighth head
at Rome? And if the eighth head be not there, Rome is not the City that is
meant in this place.

18. The ten Horns be ten Kings which have received no Kingdom as yet, but
receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast, v. 12. but where shall we find
ten Kings belonging to the Pope, and rising when he did? Diverse men have
stretched their wits to find them out, but with very ill success; for what one
says another does reject, and what another says, a third does contradict, so
that none can tell who they be, and if this cannot be done, why may not men
suspend their Judgments, and take more time, and respite before they give their
verdict against the City of Rome, so peremptorily as they do. And if it be said
that they of the Negative part can no more tell who these ten Kings be, then
they of the Affirmative, to this I answer, that the case is not alike, for they
which are for the Affirmative do hold the Prophecy, v. 12. to be past already,
and that the ten Kings have received a Kingdom with the Beast already, and
therefore it concerns them to tell who these ten Kings be, but they which be of
the Negative part, do hold the Prophecy v. 12. to be Future, and that the ten
Kings have not yet begun to Reign, and therefore it cannot be expected that
they should tell who these ten Kings be, before the Prophecy come to pass.

19. These ten Kings whoever they be shall hate the Whore, and give their
Kingdom to the Beast too at the same time, v. 16, 17. but where shall we find
^en Kings which shall hate the City of Rome, and give their Kingdom to the Pope
at the same time?

20. The words in the last verse are not meant of the Apostles time, but of the
time of the seventh Vial, so that we are not to look what City reigned in the
Apostles time, for that was Heathen Rome, and not Papal, but we are to look
what City reigne^ in the time of the seventh Vial, and that is the City which
here is spoken of.

21. Babylon is not to taste of the cup of Gods wrath till the seventh Vial does
begin, Rev. 16. 19. but Rome has tasted of that cup many a time, but
especially in the time of the Goths and Vandals, by whom it was taken four
times, and brought to such a desolation by them, that not a man woman or child
could be seen therein for forty days together, as Mr. Cotton on the thirteenth
Chapter of the Revelation does confess, page 35.

22. Babylon is one of the greatest Cities in the World, Rev. 17, 18, and 18.
18. but Rome at this day is but a little City, in comparison of other Cities,
and but the tenth part of what it was before. See Mede on the Revelation, page
152, 153.

23. Babylon is one of the strongest Cities in the World, Rev. 18. 7, 8. but
Rome is but a weak City in comparison of other Cities, and was seldom besieged
but 'twas taken.

24. Babylon is one of the most prosperous Cites in the World, and shall never
know sorrow till this destruction comes upon her, Rev. 18. 7. but Rome has been
a doleful City many a time, and though she has had her days of pleasure and
prosperity very many, yet she has had her days of sorrow and affliction too,
and that in a very heavy manner, which Babylon never had, nor is to have but
once, and that is when this destruction comes upon her, and not before, Rev.
18. 7, 8. 10. 17. 19. 21.

25. Babylon is the last City that shall be taken, insomuch that she shall
think that it will never be, Rev. 18. 17. but Rome has been taken many a time,
but especially by the Goths, and Vandals, and she cannot think but that she may
be taken again.

26. Babylon is Seated near the Sea, and the Merchants of the earth have a
great Trade and Traffic with her by Sea, Lithgo^s Travels, p. 14.
Rev. 18. 3. 11, 12, 13. 15. 17. 19. but Rome is seated at least twelve miles
off from the Sea, and there is no great Trade nor Traffic with her by Sea,
neither indeed can there be, for since she became Pontifician the mouth of the
River Tiber has been stopped up for fear of invasion, so that no Ships of any
great magnitude can pass thither. And these be the Arguments for the Negative.

Lastly, the Arguments for the Affirmative are not so valid as men do think
they are, and as at first sight they seem to be, which that it may the better
appear, give me leave to tell you what may be said unto them in this manner.

To the first one may deny the Minor, Peganius in his genuine explication of
the Visions of the Revelation, page 145. 193 and 33^. leaves out the Tribunes,
and puts the Triu^virs in their room, and if the Triu^virs be a head, then the
seven heads in the second Argument for the Affirmative be not reckoned right.
and that for three reasons. First because Constantinople stands on seven Hills
at this day, as Doctor Prideaux does confess, lect. de Antichristo page 178. 2.
Because Rome though heretofore it had but seven Hills for a long time, yet in
process of time there were three more added to them, which made the number ten.
3. Because the City of Rome that now is, stands on two Hills, and no more, and
it is this new City which men count for Babylon, and not the old.

To the second, one may deny both the Mayor, and the Minor, First one may deny
the Mayor, for as the seven Mountains, be not seven kinds of Mountains, but
seven individual Mountains, and no more; so the seven Kings be not seven kinds
of Governors, but seven individuals of one kind of Governors, and no more. 2.
One may deny the Minor, for the Dictators, Kings, and Emperors made but one
kind of Governors, differing in name, but not in form of Government, and
therefore all that be reckoned in that Argument, be but five, and where t^en be
the other two.

To the third, one may deny the Mayor, for the Apostle does not mean that five
were fallen in his time, for the Consuls were not fallen then, but the meaning
is, that five are fallen before the seventh Vial shall begin, so that what is
spoken in that verse has reference to the execution of the seventh Vial, and
not unto the Apostles time.

To the fourth, one may deny the Mayor, for the Apostle does not write a
History but a Prophecy, and therefore he speaks not of the City which reigned
over the Kings of the earth in his time, but he speaks of the City which is to
Reign over the Kings of the earth at the time of the seventh Vial, and look
what City that is which reigns over the Kings of the earth at the execution
of that Vial, that is the City which is meant by Babylon in this place. The
present tense in Prophecies has the signification of the future, as appears
Rev. 11. 7. the Beast that ascends, that is, which shall ascend. so v. 8. of
this Chapter. the Beast which thou saw, was, and is not, that is, shall be
not, and afterward shall be again, so v. 11. he is the eighth, that is, shall
be the eighth, and is of the seven, that is, shall be of the seven, and goes,
that is, shall go into Perdition. so v. 12. And the ten Horn^ which thou
saw, are ten Kings which have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive, that
is, shall receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast, and therefore we may
well put this construction on the last verse, the City which reigns, that is,
which shall Reign over the Kings of the earth at the execution of the seventh
Vial, i^ the City which is meant by Babylon in this place. To which may be
added that when St. John speak of the time in which he lived, he speaks in a
tense which has the signification of the praeter perfect tense, and not in the
present tense, as (...), I was in the Isle that is called Pa^mos, I was in the
Spirit, he carried away in the Spirit, Rev. 1. 9, 10. Rev. 4. 2. Rev. 17. 1.
and in many other places.


And thus good Reader, I have acquainted thee with the Arguments for the
Negative, as well as for the Affirmative, but because so many men, and they as
well Papists as Protestants, have and do hold that Babylon is the City of Rome,
and are of this mind to this day: I will not positively determine of the point,
but leave it to thy Sager Judgment to consider of it, and weigh the Arguments
on both sides impartially, and the Lord give thee understanding to take the
right.

2 Quest. Whether Babylon be Heathen Rome past, and the destruction here
Prophesied of, be meant of it?

Ans. In the former Question, I disputed whether Babylon were the City of Rome
or no, and though I would not adventure to say it is not Rome, yet I will be
bold to say, it is not Heathen Rome past, and that for these reasons.

1. No destruction did befall the City of Rome, till after the death of
Constantine, now in the days of Constantine, Rome ceased to be Heathen, and
became Christian.

2. The City here to be destroyed has seven heads, that is, seven Kings or
Emperors, and no more, Rev. 17. 3 9. but Heathen Rome had more then seven
Pagan Emperors, whereof Julius Caesar was the first, and Maxentius was the
last.

3. When should the destruction here spoken of come to pass, but in the time of
the last head? Now there was no destruction of the City of Rome in the time of
Domitian, and yet he is reckoned by some, for the last head here spoken of.

4. If this be a Prophecy of the destruction of Heathen Rome, when should it
come to pass but in the time of the Heathen Emperors? Now the Ci^y of Rome was
so far from destruction in the time of the Heathen Emperors that it was
neither taken nor besieged during their time, but (...) a Queen, and saw no
sorrow.

5. Such a destruction is here Prophesied of, as makes the City desolate, and
never to be Inhabited any more, Rev. 17. 16. Rev. 18. 2. 8. 21, 22, 23. but in
the time of the Heathen Emperors the City was Inhabited by Pagans, and since
that time it has been Inhabited by Christians, and remains a stately City to
this day.

Lastly, no destruction of any City is like the destruction of this City, and
the wrath of God is not so heavy upon any City, as on this, Rev. 18. 18. Rev.
16. 19. therefore the destruction here spoken of, is not a partial destruction
of the third part of the City only, nor a temporal destruction for a time only,
but a total destruction and a final, which is not yet come to pass.

Ob. The ancient Fathers by Babylon understand Heathen Rome, Aug. de civ. Dei.
lib. 18. c. 2. Tertul. adversus Mar. l. 3. c. 13. Jerome ad Algas. q. 11. and
Ep. 47. ad Marcellam.

Ans. They that lived in the time of Heathen Rome before the Emperous were
Christians, might perhaps so understand it, but they that lived since and ^aw
the Emperors become Christians, their own eyes might teach them to understand
it otherwise. 2. But what of all this? The Jesuits by Babylon understand
Heathen Rome, yet withal, they hold that the destruction here spoken of, is yet
to be expected.

Ob. St. Peter by Babylon means Heathen Rome, 1 Pet. 5. 13.

Ans. It is not likely that St. Peter speaks of the same Babylon that St. John
does, seeing he writ his Epistle before the Revelation was revealed to John,
and therefore there want not some which say that St. Peter speaks literally,
and St. John mystically. Certain it is, that St. Peter speaks of that Babylon
which the Church was acquainted with when he wrote his Epistle, but neither he
nor John, nor any other knew what mystical Babylon meant at that time, Rev. 17.
6. 7. but there were two other Babylons in the World which the Church was
acquainted with, the one in Chaldaea, the other in Egypt, from either of which
St. Peter might write his Epistle, and not from Rome, as is pretended, and we
have cause to think that he writ it from Babylon in Egypt, because St. Mark
who was then Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, is joined with him in the
Salutation, 1 Pet. 5. 13.

Ob. The seven heads, be seven Kings of Heathen Rome, which are to be counted
in this manner, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, be the five that were
fallen, Vespasian in whose time these Visions were committed unto writing, is
the sixth, and Titus the seventh, that was to stay but a little while, reigning
but two years, and two months, and the Beast which was, and is not, and is the
eighth, is Domitian, who exercised the office of the Emperor, and was called
Emperor at Rome, when Vespasian was gone into Judaea, and after his return,
became a private man again, delivered up the Empire to him, and so was and is
not, and is the eighth.

Ans. This were something to the purpose, if these were all the Emperors that
Heathen Rome had, but we find that Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula
were Emperors of Rome before Claudius, and therefore Claudius was not the
first; and if it be said that they had not to do with Christians, and upon that
account are left out: to this I answer, that Galba, Otho, and Vitellius had not
to do with Christians neither, and should be left out upon the same account
too, which we see they are not. 2. Nerva, Traian, Adrian, and others down to
Constantine, were Emperors of Heathen Rome after Domitian, and therefore he
was not the last, and if it be said that St. John recknons only those that had
to do with Christians, to this I answer, that Traian, Adrian, and others of the
persecuting Emperors had to do with Christians, as well as Domitian or any
other that went before him, and therefore he was not the last on that account
neither. 3. These Visions were not committed unto Writing in the time of
Vespasian, as has been proved before, Disp. 1. q. 1. and therefore he is not
the sixth, or the One that is. 4. Galba reigned but seven months, Otho but
three months, Vitellius but eight months, and therefore Titus who reigned two
years and two months, cannot be the seventh King, who was to stay but a little
while, in respect of the other Kings, seeing he reigned longer then three of
the former, though we put them altogether. 5. Titus the elder Son, was saluted
Emperor after his Victory in Judaea, as Suetonius reports in his life, yet
this made ^im not Emperor at that time; and so, though Domitian were called
Emperor at Rome upon Vitellius death, yet this made him not Emperor at that
time, and if it did, Vespasian was not the next Emperor to Vitellius, as the
objection makes him, and all Authors say he was. 6. If Domitian did exercise
the Office of the Emperor upon Vitellius death, yet this does not argue that
he was the Emperor at that time, it argues rather that the place was void and
undetermined; and it argues too that Domitian was an arrogant and ambitious
man, and did usurp the Office, and took upon him more then became him, or was
allowed him to do, to which may be added, that the objection makes Vespasian
the next Emperor to Vitellius, and not Domitian. Now Domitian did not usurp
the Office of the Emperor after his Father was settled in the Empire, but
before, as may be gathered out of Tacitus, lib. 3. c. 15. and lib. 4. c. 1. and
c. 16. but be it before or afterward, the objection makes Vespasian the sixth
head, and not Domitian; and if he were not the sixth head, he is not the
eighth; for the sixth head and the eighth head are both one. 7. When it is said
v. 8. The Beast was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit,
this does imply some extraordinary way or means whereby he came unto the Empire
after he had lost it, but Domitian came unto it but once, and that was in an
ordinary way upon his Brother Titus death, and as his Brother Titus did. 8. For
the Beast to fall and rise again, to be and not to be, and after that to be
again, was a matter of admiration and astonishment, and indeed a miracle, v, 8.
but for a man to be saluted Emperor, and exercise the Office of the Emperor
in the inter regnum or time of vacancy, and (...) to miss of the place for that
bout, and be made Emperor twelve years afterward or thereabout, is no ma^ter
of admiration, but may come to pass by ordinary means, and no other is the case
here: Vitellius being dead, and a successor not chosen in his room, Domitian
is saluted Emperor at Rome, and executes many things belonging to the
Emperors Office, as Mutianus and Antonius Primus also did until Vespasian was
come home, and chosen Emperor indeed, some nine years after this Vespasian
dies, and Titus is made Emperor in his room, and reigns two years and two
months; then Titus dies too, and Domitian is made Emperor indeed, what
admiration is there in all this? 9. Upon the reckoning which they make Domitian
shall be the ninth head, and not the eighth, as appears thus: Claudius the
first, Nero the second, Galba the third, Otho the fourth, Vitellius the fifth,
Domitian the first time he was Emperor, the sixth, Vespasian the seventh,
Titus the eighth, Domitian the last time he was Emperor, the ninth. 10. When
should the destruction here spoken of come to pass, but in the time of the last
head? now there was no such destruction as here is spoken of in the time of
Domitian, and therefore what they talk of Heathen Rome, is a mere Chimaera and
no more.

3. Quest. Whether this Prophecy were fulfilled in Italy, in the time of the
Goths and Vandals?

Ans. 1. They that be of this mind do hold that Babylon is a Heathen City, but
in the time of the Goths and Vandals, Rome was not a Heathen City, for she
ceased to be Heathen in the days of Constantine, and became Christian.

2. The destruction here spoken of shall befall the Governors of the City, and
by Babylon we are to understand the Governors of the City, and not the common
People only, Rev. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. 6. 18. now in (...) destruction of Alaricus
the Gothish King, Honorius the Emperor of Rome, and Innocentius the Bishop did
escape.

3. The destruction here spoken of shall come to pass at once, and not at
several times far distant each from other, Rev. 18. 8. 10. 17. but the
destruction made by the Goths and Vandals was at several distant times, one by
Alaricus, anno 412. another by Gensericus, anno 456, a third by Totilas, anno
548. and there was above forty years distance between the first destruction by
Alaricus, and the second by Gensericus, and well nigh a hundred years distance
between the second destruction by Gensericus, and the third by Totilas, see
Carions Chron. p. 299.

4. The destruction here spoken of shall come to pass on a sudden, like a
Millstone that is cast into the Sea, and sinks to the bottom on a sudden, Rev.
18. 10. 17. 20. but the destruction by the Goths and Vandals came not to pass
on a sudden; for Alaricus bid besiege the City two years before he took it, and
Totilas did besiege the City a long time before he took it, see Carrion p. 287.

5. The destruction here spoken of is a total destruction, and not a partial,
and by Babylon we are to understand the whole City, and not a part only, Rev.
18. 2. 4. 10. 11. 17. 10. 21. but the destruction by the Goths and Vandals was
a partial destruction, and not a total, and Totilas who destroyed it most, did
not destroy it quite, but left a part remaining still, see Cavion p. 294.

6. The destruction here spoken of is a final destruction, which puts an end
unto the City for evermore, Rev. 17. 16. Rev. 18. 2. 8. 11. 21, 22, 23. Rev.
19. 3 but the destruction by the Goths and Vandals was not a final destruction,
but a temporary, for it was repaired afterward, and remains a stately City to
this day.

Lastly, No City like to this City, no destruction like to this, and the wrath
of God is not so heavy on any City, as on this, Rev. 18. 6, 7, 8. 18. Rev. 16.
19. but the destruction of Jerusalem did far exceed the destruction of Rome by
the Goths and Vandals, and the destruction of old Babylon did far exceed the
destruction of Jerusalem, and yet neither of them comes near the destruction of
this City, see the destruction of Jerusalem described Math. 24. and the
destruction of old Babylon described Jer. 25. and compare it with the
destruction in this place, and it comes not near unto it, therefore here is no
ordinary destruction such as the Goths and Vandals made, but an extraordinary
which is not yet come to pass.

Ob. The ten Kings be the barbarous Nations that lay on the North of the Euxine
Sea, and of Danubius and the R^ine, as the number of them will sufficiently
evince: Procopius reckons them up to that number of ten, Ostrogothi, Wisigothi,
Vandali, Gepidae, Longobardi, Heruli, Burgundions, Huns, Franks, Saxons. Of
these it is said v. 12. that they had not yet received a Kingdom, within the
Roman territory, but receive power as Kings with the Beast, i. e. join and
comply and act with the Beast, assist Heathen Rome in persecuting Christians,
but that was only (...), one hour, a small short while in the time of
Dioclesian.

Ans. Who can with any confidence believe, that these barbarous Nations be the
Men that shall hate the Whore, and eat her Flesh, and burn her with fire? here
be ten Nations, but where be the ten Kings, or what were the Kings names that
did it? 2 How many of these barbarous Nations did take and spoil the City of
Rome, except the Herules, Goths, and Vandals? 3. What Kings of these Nations
did take and burn the City of Rome besides Alaricus, Odacer, Gensericus, and
Totilas, and where be the other six to make up the number ten? 4. Who can
believe that the Kings which the Apostle speaks of, had a Kingdom in the
Apostles time on the North of the Euxine Sea, and of Danubius, and of the
Rhine? and not rather that they be called Kings prophetically, because they
were to be Kings hereafter, as appears v. 12. where the time is set down when
they should be Kings, namely, when the Beast himself should, but receive power
as Kings one hour with the Beast. 5. W^o can say that when it is said v. 12.
have received no Kingdom as yet, the meaning is within the Roman territory, and
not rat^er in the world? 6. Who can conceive that the latter part of v. 12.
shall come to pass before the first? as if to receive a Kingdom, and to receive
power as Kings were not all one? 7. Who can believe that to receive power as
Kings with the Beast, is to join, and comply, and act with the Beast in
persecuting Christians, and not rather to have Kingly power bestowed on them,
which they had not before? 8. Who can think that (...), one hour, does note the
continuance of the Kingdom which these Kings were to receive, and not rather
the time when their Kingdom should begin, namely, when the Beasts does? and it
will be a hard matter for these men to find out ten Kings, whose Kingdom did
begin the same hour with the Beasts. Lastly, If to receive power as Kings, be
to join, and comply, and act with the Beast in persecuting Christians, when
should this be done? here they cannot find a time when this should be, but in
the days of Dioclesian; but how comes Dioclesian to be the Beast now, which in
the former question was Domitian? these things are (...), and cannot stand
together.

Ob. The destruction here spoken of, is of the third part of the City only,
Rev. 16. 19. and so much as this came to pass in the time of the Goths and
Vandals.

Ans. Much more than this came to pass in the time of the Goths and Vandals,
and therefore the dividing of the great City into three parts, cannot be meant
of them. 2. To be divided into three parts, does not note a destruction of the
parts, but a partition only, the parts remaining still, Math. 27. 35. 51. Mark
1. 10. Act. 7. 56. 3. There be three degrees of punishment in that Verse,
whereof that which shall befall Babylon is the greatest, and that which shall
befall the great City is the least. First, It is said the great City was
divided into three parts, this the least degree of punishment, it does not
betoken a destruction of the City, but a partition only, or a separation of the
parts each from other. Secondly, It is said the Cities of the Nations fell,
this is a greater punishme^^ than the former, it notes a sudden downfall of
their Cities, no parts of them standing. Thirdly, It is said that great Babylon
came into remembrance before God, to give her the Cup of the Wine of the
fierceness of his Wrath, this is the sorest punishment of all, it note, some
extreme evil to befall her, no pity to be taken on her. Lastly, these three
degrees of punishment do also differ in respect of time, for they shall not
come to pass altogether in the same moment, but the great City shall be divided
into three parts first, and the Cities of the Nations shall fall next, and
great Babylon is reserved to the last, that she may have a punishment far
exceeding all the rest.

Oo. The burning here is an allusion to Dan. 7. 11. his Body destroyed and
given to the burning flame, which yet signified no more than the translating of
the Monarchy from the Seleucidae to the Romans, and proportionably here the
subduing this Heathen City to the faith of Christ, which was the effect of this
blow that befell Rome.

Ans. That by the Beast, Dan. 7. 11. is meant the Monarchy of the Seleutidae, I
deny. 2. But what ever Monarchy be meant thereby, when it is said his Body
destroyed and given to the burning flame, a total destruction is meant thereby,
and not a partial. 3. The City of Rome was a Christian City in the days of
Constantine, before the War of the Goths and Vandals did begin. 4. By the
damnation of Cities and Kingdoms in the Scripture, is not meant the subduing of
them to the Christian Faith, but a destruction of them in their corporeal
substances, and that either of the Inhabitants by a corporal death, or else of
the buildings of the City by consuming fire, and both of these are meant in
this place, Revel. 17. 16. See Pareus disputing against Alcazar in this point,
Revel. 14. 8.

Object. The throwing the great stone into the Sea, Verse. 21. alludes to Jer.
51. 63. Thou shall cast a stone into the mid^^ of Euphrates, and say, Thus
shall Babylon fall, and not rise, etc. And yet Babylon long continued a great
City, though the Dominion of it was translated from the Chaldeans to the Medes.

Answ. But who told them, that no more is meant by that Prophecy of Jeremy,
then was acted against the Chaldees, by the Medes and Persians. Read the 26,
29, 37, 43, 62, 64. Verses; and read also Jere. 50. 3, 13, 39, 40. and you
shall find much more, and that is a perpetual desolation of the City; which
though it were not quite fulfilled by the Medes and Persians, yet it came to
pass afterward, and we see it verified at this day.

Object. The voice of the Harpers, etc. V. 23. alludes to Jere. 25. 10. I will
take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride; the sound of the Milstones, and the
light of the Candle, and yet Judea, of which that is spoken, still had people
inhabiting it.

Answ. It is true, that Judea had a few poor people remaining in it still after
the captivity; but yet Jerusalem, of which, that is spoken, had not any. 2.
Compare the Prophecies both together, and you shall find a great deal more in
the Revelation then in Jeremy; for in Jeremy it is said, I will take from them
the voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride, the sound of the
Milstones, and the light of the Candle; but he does not say, that this shall be
for ever, yea, it is said in the next Verse for seventy years; but in the
Revelation he says, The voice of Harpers, etc. shall be heard no more at all
in thee, and no Craftsman of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in
thee, and the sound of a Millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; and
the light of a Candle shall shine no more at all in thee, and the voice of the
Bridegroom, and of the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee. And
therefore a perpetual desolation is spoken of in this place, never to be
repaired any more. 3. If as much be intended in the Revelation, as was done by
Nebuchadnezzar in Judea, or by the Medes and Persians in Chaldea, this Prophecy
was nothing near fulfilled by the Goths and Vandals; for the Civil Polity of
the Jews was quite taken away by Nebuchadnezzar for seventy years, and the
Monarchy of the Chaldees was quite demolished by the Medes and Persians, and
never restored afterward; but the Civil Polity of the Romans was not quite
extinguished by the Goths and Vandals, nor their Monarchy quite destroyed, but
the Roman Territories were shreudly wasted, and their City fired for the
greatest part of it, yea, and their Monarchy ceased in the West, but continued
in the East, and their Territories were regained afterward out of the hands of
the Goths and Vandals, and their City was repaired and remains to this day.

4 Quest. Whether the Beast himself may not hate the Whore, and destroy the
City in the time of the eighth head; and what may be the cause thereof?

Answ. It is said Verse. 13. that the ten Kings shall give their power and
strength unto the Beast, but we do not read that they shall give their power
and strength unto the Whore; and therefore it is possible, if not probable,
that the Beast and the Whore may be at odds.

2. It is said Verse. 16. that they shall hate the Whore, but we do not find
that they shall hate the Beast at all; and therefore the Beast and the Whore
may be parted each from other.

3. We do not read that the ten Kings shall revolt from the Beast, as Men do
think they shall; but on the contrary we read, Verse. 17. That they shall give
their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled: Which
words do not imply a revolt, but an adhearing to the Beast, and a cleaving to
him still.

4. Until the words of God shall be fulfilled, they give their Kingdom to the
Beast; but the words of God are not fulfilled until the City be destroyed, and
therefore they shall give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the City be
destroyed; and how can that be done, unless the Beast and the City be at odds
at that time?

5. What is the cause, why they hate the Whore? Is it not because they love the
Beast, and give their Kingdom to the Beast; as Verse. 16. compared with Verse.
17. does declare: And does not this demonstrate, that the Beast and the City be
at odds? To make this plain by a comparison: Suppose a Man should say, The
Scotchmen shall hate Oliver Cromwell and his Army, for God has put in their
hearts to give their Kingdom to the King. Does not this imply, that the King,
and Oliver Cromwell and his Army be at odds? In like manner, when it is said,
The ten horns shall hate the Whore, etc. For God has put in their hearts, to
give their Kingdom to the Beast. Does not this imply, that the Beast and the
Whore shall be at odds; so that the cleaving to the one, does cause the hatred
of the other.

6. The Beast which carries the Whore, and is in love with her, does not reach
unto the eighth head, but to the seventh, and no further, as appears Verse. 7.
And therefore it may well come to pass, that all the seven heads may carry the
Whore, and be in love with her; but the eighth head (which is the Beast we
speak of in this Question) may hate her, and not carry her at all: And if it be
said, that the eighth head is of the number of the seven. To this I answer: So
long as he is of that number, and under that notion or relation, he is one of
them that carries the Whore, and is in love with her; but when he comes to be
the eighth head of the Empire, he has then a new relation, though he be the
same man, and does not carry the Whore at that time.

7. It is likely, that the sixth head is the same person that the eighth head
is, and shall be deposed by the City, while he is the sixth head, and the
seventh head shall be placed in his Throne; and in this respect it is, that the
Beast was, and is not, and shall be; he was, in the time of the sixth head; he
is not, in the time of the seventh, for he is desposed by the City, and the
seventh placed in his room. And from hence it is, That the Beast, and the City
be at odds, the ten Kings shall take part with the Beast against the City, and
the City shall take part with the seventh head against the Beast, but the
Beast, and the ten Kings shall prevail and destroy the seventh head, and the
City both together.

Thus I have gone a way which no man went before, that I know of, if I be in
the right, it is thy part gentle Reader to go the same way that I have gone;
but if thou find, that I am in an error, and gone out of the right way, and
can discover a better to me, I will follow thee therein.

5 Quest. What use may be made of this Exposition of the Revelation, in respect
of War and Peace with Papists?

Answ. We may not begin a War with Papists, thinking thereby to fulfill the
Prophecies of the Revelation, and see an end of them, and their Religion in our
days, and that upon a trebble account.

First, We have proved already, Disp. 1* q* 3. That the chief scene of the
Prophecies of the Revelation, is not Europe but Asia; and therefore we may not
look for the whole or chiefest accomplishment of the Prophecies in Europe,
where the Papists are, but in Asia rather, where the Papists are not.

Secondly, We have also showed by diverse Reasons, Chap. 17. q. 1. That it is
very uncertain, whether Babylon be the City of Rome, or no; and therefore we
may not begin a War with Papists, thinking thereby to fulfill the Prophecies of
the Revelation upon that account: For put the case, that such a War were begun,
and it should prove, in the end, that Babylon is not the City of Rome, as we
thought it was, would we not be ashamed of such a War? Do not the Kings of the
Earth bewail her, and lament for her; when they see the smoke of her burning;
and would not this be our case, if we should begin a War with Rome, thinking
her to be the Babylon which the Revelation speaks of, would we not be sorry,
if in the issue, it should fall out otherwise? Hear what the Wiseman says,
Prove. 20. 18. Every purpose is established by counsel, and with good advise
make War. Prove. 24. 6. For by wise counsel shall thou make thy War, and in
multitude of counselors there is safety. Let us therefore consider of the
matter, and examine the point a little better before we begin a War upon an
uncertain ground, and repent thereof when it is done.

Thirdly, Suppose it to be true, that Babylon is the City of Rome indeed; yet
for all this, we may not begin a War with Papists, thinking thereby that we
fulfill the Prophecies of the Revelation, and shall see an end of them and their
Religion in our days; and that for these Reasons.

1. We are commanded to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 6. But how
can we pray for her Peace, if we will have Jerusalem begin a War with Babylon?
Are not these two contrary each to other? For when we pray for Peace, we are
verbally against War; but if we will have Jerusalem begin a War with Papists,
we are really for War, and not for Peace, which two ought not to be.

2. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God,
Matthew. 5. 9. Therefore cursed are the War-makers, for they be the children of
the Devil, 1 King. 22. 20, 21, 22, 23. Revel. 16. 13, 14. and 20. 7, 8.

3. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men,
Romans 12. 8. But how can we live peaceably with all men, if we begin a War with
Papists? And how can it be said that we be for Peace, as much as lies in us,
if we be the first beginners, fomenters, and contrivers of a War, and will not
be at Peace when we may?

4. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness; without which, no man shall see
the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. But how do we follow Peace, if we begin a War with
Papists, thinking thereby that we fulfill the Prophecies of the Revelation,
before we know what the true meaning of them is? To which I will add another
saying of the same Apostle, Romans 14. 9. Let us therefore follow after the
things which make for peace. Therefore Peace is not only to be admitted, when
it may be had, or when it is offered to us and brought unto our doors; but we
are to follow and seek after it our selves, when it is gone away from us; and
not only so, but we are also to follow after the things which make for Peace,
and conduce thereunto, and which may be a means to bring Peace to pass.

5. He that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from
evil, and his lips, that they speak no guile. Let him eschew evil, and do good,
let him seek Peace, and ensue it. 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11. Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14. But
how can we love life, and think to see good days? If we be the first that begin
a War, and will not leave it off, till either all or most part of Christendom
be destroyed; for the Papacy does take up the greatest part thereof.

6. From whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of
your lusts that war in your members? Jam. 4. 1. Therefore, though men pretend
the accomplishment of the Prophecies of the Revelation, yet it is rather to be
thought, that libido dominandi, a desire to rule is the cause of War, and a
greedy mind after other men's possessions, is the cause thereof; and it is not
the accomplishment of the Prophecies of the Revetion, but the Revenues of the
Church which has an inlet to such a War as this is.

7. And then shall that wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall utterly destroy with the brightness of
his coming, 2 These. 2. 8. Now, who is the man of sin? You will be ready to say
it is the Pope, but what is meant by the spirit of his mouth? But the Preaching
of the Gospel, Isai. 11. 4. Hos. 6. 5. Heb. 4. 12. Revel. 2. 16. Therefore the
man of sin shall not be consumed by War, but by Preaching of the Word. To which
I may add that which S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. For the weapons of our
warfare are not carn^l, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. And Heb. 4. 12. For the W^rd of God is quick and powerful
and sharper then any two edged sword, (...) even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart. Here be the Weapons by which Christians should fight,
and by which, the man of sin shall be consumed; and that is, by the Word of
God, and by the spirit of his mouth. And as for the time when this shall be
accomplished, it is at the brightness of his coming; and what is meant by the
brightness of his coming, but the day of judgment? And therefore the man of sin
shall not have a final end, until the day of judgment, when Christ shall come
in person and destroy him; and if any man does think that he shall live to see
it done before, he feeds himself with vain hopes, and has no ground to think
that it shall come to pass. See M^^lius Accomplishment of Prophecies, page 148,
166, 167.

8. And when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascend^^
out of the bottomless Pit shall make War against them, and shall overcome them,
and kill them, Rev. 11. 7, 8, 9. Therefore the two witnesses do not begin a War
with the Beast, but he begins with them and prevails therein; this were enough
to deter us from seeking or beginning War with Papists, lest we meet with the
same Catastrophe that the two Witnesses are said to meet with in this Prophecy;
for if God delivered them into the Beasts hands, who were his peculiar Prophets
and had such eminent power to work Miracles as they had, v. 4. 5. 6. What hope
or ground have we to think that he will not deliver us if we begin a War with
Papists, and will not be quiet when we may? To which may be added, that when
the two Witnesses revived and returned to life again, they did not renew the
War with the Beast, neither was the Beast or any of his men slain by them, or
by their procurement that we read of; but by an Earthquake which it pleased God
to send amongst them, and when the tenth part of the City fell, it fell by
reason of the Earthquake, and not by their means or procurement, and in the
Earthquake were slain seven thousand men and no (...) which makes not a total
nor a final destruction of the Beast, but a partial and a temporal only.

9. And it was given him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them,
Rev. 13. 7. Here you see the Beast begins a War with the Saints, and not the
Saints with him; and there is a time set by God in which the Beast shall
prevail against the Saints, and this time is said to be forty two months, v.
5. but can we tell that this time is over, for if it be not over we may not
think to prevail, and if we think it is over, what ground have we for that? we
had need be sure of it before hand, lest instead of overcoming we be overcome.
Perhaps it may be said that the Vials are begun already, and that is some
ground to think that the forty two months are ended; to this I answer, no,
following their own interpretation of the Revelation, for they think themselves
(but falsely) (...) the Vials were begun in the time of the Witnesses when they
wrought their miracles, Rev. 11. 5. 6. and yet they were slain after that; so
put the case that the Vials be begun already, yet the forty two months
according to their interpretation may not be ended for all that. It were more
material to the business, if they could show us that the Vials were expiring,
for then the (...) of the Beast were near at hand indeed; but where have they
any certainty of the near expiring of the Vials? how far they have proceeded,
and how much of them is yet behind and unaccomplished, what man among them can
determine?

10. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity; he that kills
with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. Rev. 13. 10. Therefore we had
need take heed how we begin a War with any, either with Papists or any other,
since so little benefit comes thereby, and the success is so various and so
doubtful; he that has the best of it at one time, has the worst of it at
another time, which may be the cause that the Saints are exhorted unto patience
in the same Verse, Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. A man may reap
some good by patience, but by War he shall have none; put the case he prevail
at one time, yet mischief may befall him at another time; therefore Christ's
advice to Peter is very seasonable and suitable in this case, Put up again thy
Sword into his place, for all they that take the Sword shall perish with the
Sword, Math. 26. 52. see also 1 King. 20. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21. and 2 King. 14. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

11. What Commission have we to begin a War with Papists in all the Revelation?
Read the Commission and consider of it, Come out of her my People, he does not
say, begin a War with her my People, but come out of her my People, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4.

12. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
Prison. And shall go out to deceive the Nations which are in the four quarters
of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to Battle; the number of
whom, is as the Sand of the Sea. Revel. 20. 7, 8. Therefore Satan is the
procuring or fomenting cause of War, and not the true Religion; and sometimes
he stirs up wicked men to begin a War against the Church, as is evident in this
place; and in that other place, Revel. 16. 13, 14. And sometimes he excites the
Church to begin a needless War against the enemies thereof, as is plain in
Ahabs Case, 1 King. 22. 20, 21, 22, 23. And which of these ways soever he takes
his aim, is to destroy the Church of God thereby: And we may not think that God
is the cause of War in any other sense, then as he is the cause of death; and
that is only as the punishment or effect of sin; and if there had been no sin,
there had been no death, and, because no Death, no War; for God made not death,
as the Wiseman says. Wisd. 1. 13. And Canonical Scripture says so too, Romans
5. 12. And because he made not death, he made not War, which brings death
inevitable both on good and bad; but ungodly men with their works and words,
have called it to them. Here is the true cause of Death, and of War too; but
God is the first original cause of neither, but will destroy them both in his
appointed time. When Sin and Satan are destroyed, then Death and War shall be
destroyed together. These are my Reasons for the Negative, now let us see what
may be said out of the Revelation for the Affirmative.

Object. And I saw, as it were, a Sea of Glass mingled with fire, and them that
had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his mark,
and over the number of his name, stand on the Sea of Glass, having the Harps of
God. And they sing the Song of Moses, the servant of God, and the Song of the
Lamb, etc. Revel. 15. 2, 3.

Answ. Suppose we, that the Pope is the Beast which here is spoken of (for so
we must at this time,) yet this gratulation and rejoicing Song, is not for the
final overthrow of the Beast, but for some particular victory which they
obtained against him: And this victory does not import, that they begun the War
with him, but that he begun with them, and lost the day against them: And so
stands the case with us, if the Papists begin a War with us, we may defend our
selves; and if it please God to give us victory, we may, and must rejoice, and
praise the Lord as these men did; but to begin a War with them, and expect to
see an end of them, and their Religion, before the day of Judgment, is more
then can be gathered from this place.

Object. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River
Euphrates, and the Water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the
East may be prepared, Revel. 16. 12. Now what is meant by Euphrates? But the
Revenues of the Popedom? And, who be the Kings of the East? but such Kings as
God will stir up in these parts to be her ruin and overthrow; the great
defense which is in the River of worldly wealth, being taken away, as sometimes
Euphrates was drained, whereby Babylon was taken by Cyrus and Darius, Eastern
Kings. And because the wealth of Spain is so great a means to strengthen this
Kingdom, yet I think it not amiss to bring that in also within the compass of
this great River. Dr. Mayer on the Revelation, page 475.

Answ. Theologia symbolica non est argumentati^^ Mystical Theology is no
sufficient argument for our faith and practice: The literal sense of Scripture
is, That we must go and walk by, that is the only rule both of faith and
manners; and it is the literal sense by which we must be judged at the last
day. Now what says the literal sense of Scripture. Thou shall not covet they
Neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, nor his manservant,
nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy
Neighbors, Exodus 20. 17. And who is our Neighbor Is not every man? Though some
be nearer Neighbors then other, yet every man living is our Neighbor, and we
may not do wrong to any man, whether he be within the Church or without, 1
These. 4. 12. Yea, Luke 10. 29, 30, etc. Christ shows by a Parable, that a man's
enemy is his neighbor, 2. I say, that by the River Euphrates is not meant the
Revenues of the Popedom, or the wealth of the King of Spain, but by it, is
meant the River it self; and by the Kings of the East, is not meant the Kings
in these Western parts, but the Kings of the Earth spoken of, Verse. 14. which
are beyond Euphrates. They are much mistaken who think Euphrates was the
strength of Old Babylon, it was rather the nakedness of the City to have
Euphrates pass through it, then any way the strength thereof. Cyrus found an
easy way to drain away the Water, and that being drained away, he had an easy
passage in; whereby it does appear, that the Walls and Gates were the streng^h
thereof, and not the Water; for the Walls and Gates kept him out, but the Water
being drained away, let him have a passage in.
And the meaning of the Prophecy is, that the Water of Euphrates shall be d^ied
up by a special providence of God, that the Kings which are beyond the River,
may pass over and help the Beast and False Prophet in their Wars. So that here
is no Commission for the Kings within the Church, to begin a War with Papists,
and take away the Popes Revenues, or the wealth of the King of Spain. But here
is a Prophecy, That the Kings which are without the Church, shall join with the
Beast and False Prophet, and war against the Church to their own undoing: And
this Church is not any Church in the Western parts, but the Church of the Jews,
after their conversion: So that this Prophecy shall be fulfilled then, and not
before.

Object. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate
the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire, Revel. 17. 16.

Answ. Suppose we the City of Rome to be the Whore, that here is spoken of,
which is very uncertain, as was said before; yet we are to know, that this
destruction of the Whore, who ever she be, shall not come to pass in our days,
but in the time of the seventh Vial, not long before the day of judgment; and
they which think it shall be accomplished in our days, and begin a War on that
account, may do well with the men of Issachar, to understand the times a little
better, before they put themselves on such a hazard, 1 Chronicles. 3. 32. I knew a
Divine, an old Man, not far from the place where I live, who was persuaded in
his life time, That the Pope should have an end in the year 1654. And he would
wager half the estate he had, that it should come to pass; but he lived to see
his Prophecy come to naught: So they which thought the Beast should have an end
in the year 1666. did the like. And they which expect the destruction of the
Whore, in our days, thinking that they shall live to see it done, may look till
their eyes be out, and not see it come to pass. 2. Who ever the Whore be, yet
this destruction shall not put an end to the Whores Religion; for after this is
done, the Kings which committed fornication with her are alive still, and
bewail her ruin, Revel. 18. 9. Which they would not do, if they were not of
her Religion still; and because they cannot commit fornication any more in that
particular place, they shall seek to do it elsewhere. 3. Though this destruction
puts an end unto the Whore, yet it shall not put an end unto the Beast; for
after this is done, the Beast shall continue still, and find another ^est, as
the Popes have done already; some of whom, had their seats at Avignion in
France for seventy years together, and yet were Popes of Rome while they were
in that place; yea, after this is done, the Beast shall have a puissant Army
still, which shall put the Church in such a hazard, that Christ himself shall
come in person and destroy him, Revel. 19. 20. 4. Suppose we all this to be
true, viz. That Babylon is the City of Rome, and the Pope, the Beast that here
is spoken of. Suppose we also, that this destruction shall come to pass in our
days, and put an end unto the Beast, in respect of Temporals and Ecclesiastics
too; yet when all this is granted, a Question may be made, What Commission had
these Kings to patronise this War, and what they do therein, for this Prophecy
gives them none: It is a Prophecy, what shall be de facto, not what shall be de
jure; it tells us what shall come to pass actually, by main force and violence,
not what shall come to pass legally, according to the Law of God. And when it
is said Verse. 17. That God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will. We
may not think that this is meant of his commanding will, but of his decreeing
will, and so the original words do signify, (...) his pleasure, sentence, or
decree. Now it is the first of these, which gives Commission for the doing of a
thing, and not the second; and it is the first of these, that we must walk and
act by, and not the second. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Nebuchadnezzar did fulfill the Will of
God, that is, The decree of God in destroying of Jerusalem; but yet he sinned
against God in doing it, for want of a Commission from the Will of Precept. And
no other is the case of these Kings, for God has put into their hearts to
fulfill his will, that is, his decree; but as for his Will of Precept, they
fulfill it not. 5. This War is not undertaken by the ten Kings, in behalf of
Religion, but for some politic end or other; and it may be questioned, Whether
the Beast himself has not a hand in this War, and whether the Beast and the
City may not be at odds at th^^ time; and whether the ten Kings shall not give
their Kingdom to the Beast on that occasion, and so destroy the City upon that
account. Read the 16 and 17 Verses, and consider of it. 6. The Churches
troubles are not ended, when this War against the Whore is over. Is not the
Turk as great an enemy to Religion as the Pope, and as potent too? And put the
case the Pope were dead, and the City burnt to ashes, what shall we do unto the
Turk when this is done? Shall we think to destroy him too, as we do the Pope?
Let us consider first, which shall be destroyed first; for if the Turk shall be
destroyed first, why begin we with the Papist, and let the Turk alone? but if
the Pope shall be destroyed first, then mark what will follow. First it will
follow, that the Pope is not the Beast, for the Beast shall be destroyed last
of all, Revel. 19. 20. Secondly, it will follow, that the troubles of the
Churches are not ended, when the Pope is dead; for the Turk is still alive, who
has made more havoc of the Churches in the East, then ever the Pope did in
the West. 7. Put the case once more, that the Whore were destroyed by the ten
Kings, what think we of the Turk, when this is done? shall not he have an end
too? And if he shall, why do we not war with him too upon presumption, that we
be the persons that shall put an end unto him? Is it not rather to be feared,
that if Christians war with Christians, and destroy one another, the Turk may
become Master of the West, as he is already of the East, especially if we
consider, that he came unto this height in which he is, by the wars of the
Christians among themselves. 8. If it be lawful to have Peace with the Turk,
why not also with the Pope? I suppose they will not say, but that our Peace
with the Turk is a lawful Peace, and why not also with the Pope? Pax cum
hominibus, cum vitiis bellum, is a true and safe rule to go by, we may and
ought to be at Peace with the Men, and at War only with the false Religion of
the Men Hear what Aretius says of making War upon Papists. Judaei expulerunt
jure Cana^^oi impi^^ gentes: Ergo and nobis licet Papistas idololatras
expellere, non scquitur quia dissimilitudo est. Illi mandatum habuerunt, nos
non habemus. Problem. Part. 2. page 995. The Jews did rightly expel the
Cananites, those wicked Gentiles; therefore we may also expel the idolatrous
Papists, it follows not because the case is not alike. They had a Commandment
to do what they did, but we have none. And a little after he says, Elias
sacerdotes Baal occidit, 1 Reg. 18. Ergo nobis sacrificos Papisticos occidere
licebit: Non valet, quia illic extat Dei Spiritus impellens qui vim mandati
habet nos nullum tale (...). Elias slew the Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18.
Therefore we may slay the Popish Mass. Priests; the consequence is of no force,
because he had the Spirit of God to enforce him to do what he did, which is as
good as a Commandment; but we have no such thing. Samuel Agag Regem occidit,
non tamen idem faciet Minister Christi. Samuel slew King Agag; yet a Minister
of Christ may not do the like. Judaei prophanis gentibus ultr^ debuerunt
infer b^llum; ergo nos Turcis and Papistis: Non sequitur qui^ illic mandatum
est quo nos caremus, page 1000. The Jews might make War upon the profane
Cananites of their own accord, not being provoked by them: Therefore we may
make War upon the Turks and Papists, though not provoked by them, by no means,
because they had a Commandment to do what they did, which we have not. Aretius
Problems loco de Exemplis veteris Testament, page 995. and page 1000. in Octavo.
.

Lastly, What if the Turk should take the City of Rome, as he has taken Candy?
What would he do with it? Would he destroy the City, as Nebuchadnezzar did
Jerusalem? Would he not rather inhabit it, as he does inhabit Candy? And if
that should come to pass, as it is possible it may, God permitting it to be
done, for the punishment of Idolatry; for which sin, Jerusalem was taken by the
Chaldees, and so may Rome be by the Turk: And if that should come to pass, what
would they think of Rome then? Would they think that she is Babylon, and the
Turk the Beast? Would they not rather take off their thoughts from Rome, and
seek for Babylon in some other place?

Object. Reward her as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double,
according unto her works, in the Cup she has filled, fill to her double,
Revel. 18. 6.

Answ. It is something dubious to whom these words be spoken, whether to the
ten Kings, which shall destroy the City, or to the people of God spoken of,
Verse. 4. If they be spoken to the ten Kings; the answer is, That here is no
Commission to be cruel, but a Permission only, like as when it is said of the
Assyrian, I will send him against an Hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath, will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the street, Isa. 10. 6. But if
this be spoken to the People of God, the answer is, That th^s is no Precept for
revenge, but an Exhortation to rejoice at Gods revenge made by the hand of
others. Piis non imperari vindictam, sed laetitiam de vindicta, says Paraeus.
The godly are not commanded to revenge themselves on Babylon, but to rejoice at
Gods revenge, as appears Verse. 20. But to whomsoever this is spoken, here is no
Commission to begin a War on her, but here is leave given to defend our selves
against a War (...) on us, which cannot well be without offending them: And so
stands the case betwixt us and Rome, if they assault us, we may assault them;
if they begin with us, and will not hear of Peace, we may defend our selves,
and offend our foes, until they be minded to be quiet, and agree on Peace, or
safe Terms, and firm Foundations: But if any one does think that we may begin a
War with Rome, hoping thereby to fulfill the Prophecies of the Revelation, and
put an end to her, and her Religion, before the day of Judgment, he feeds
himself on vain hopes, which shall not come to pass. And this is as much as
need be said to this Question, I conclude with the Doxology of the Heavenly
cho^e of Angels. Luke 2. 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth peace,
good will toward men. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata sic Corrigenda.
Page 5. l. 10. r. Proclaimed openly now. p. 9. l. 25. r. and not John. p. 9.
l. 26. r. c. 18. and 19. p. 12. l. 5. r. saw the Revelation for it. p. 12. l.
17. r. manifest. p. 13. l. 32. r. Helvicus. p. 17. l. 23. r. meaning is not.
p. 31. l. 10. r. mine. p. 35. l. 30. r. is not, that. p. 45. l. 17. r. (...) p.
45. l. 18. r. half a Bushel, or as some say four Gallons and a half. p. 52. l.
10. r. a Mad. p. 53. l. 21. r. Persons. p. 61. l. 14. r. Si^ge it self. p. 71.
l. 13. p. 71. l. 24. p. 113. l. 2. r. Battle. p. 87. l. 23. r. O the wonders.
p. 93. l. 15. p. 95. l. 1. p. 107. l. 11. p. 107. l. 21. r. epoch. p. 105. l.
12. r. unto. p. 116. l. 14. r. destruction. p. 117. l. 8. r. rule. p. 118. l.
7. r. their. p. 119. l. 2. r. fixth. p. 119. l. 21. r. made of Sackcloth. p.
132. l. 29. r. their own bodies only. p. 133. l. 9. r. or. p. 141. l. 32. r.
where he. p. 143. l. 19. r. he. p. 148. l. 9. r. shall not flee. p. 150. l. 12.
r. of. p. 159. l. 8. r. Greek. p. 162. l. 30. r. to find out the other number.
p. 176. r. the last eight lines thus, for if you write the word perpendicularly
in this manner -- (...) every letter is a numeral, and the total is 666, but if
you write the word collat^rally in this (...) manner (...), the letters are not
numeral, but syllabical, and they serve to make up (...) ^ word, or the name of
a man, and not 666, nor any other number, (...) by it self is 30, (...) and
(...) is 31, but (...) is nothing, and (...) is nothing, and so join the whole
word (...) all together, and it is nothing else but the name of a man, and not
any number (...) ^t all. p. 178. l. 3. r. name indeed? p. 179. l. 6. r.
trouble. p. 180. l. 8. r. Antichrist. (...) p. 186. l. 10. r. wherefore. p.
202. l. 12. r. whit. p. 202. l. 17. r. blains p. 203. l. 9. r. fall. p. 207. l.
2. r. wakened. p. 209. l. 24. r. page 167. p. 215. l. 31. r. terrae. p. 216. l.
30. r. may. p. 218. l. 29. r. the Apostle writes. p. 218. l. 30. r. tense. p.
221. l. 9. r. reigns. p. 223. l. 31. r. carried me away. p. 224. l. 5. r.
sat. p. 239. l. 17. r. pi^rcing. p. 239. l. 29. r. Moulins. p. 239. l. 32. r.
ascends. p. 241. l. 5. r. ruin. p. 243. l. 25. r. argumentativa. p. 244. l.
1. r. neighbor. p. 245. l. 25. r. nest. p. 249. l. 6. r. begun on us.


