AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THAT Poisonous and Fundamental ERROR OF THE QUAKERS,
Denying the same Numerical true and real Manhood of Jesus Christ in Heaven, a
place remote from the Earth.

In two SERMONS Preached at Hartford, By W. H. CHRISTOPHILUS.

ISA. 4.2. In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and Glorious,
and the fruit of the Earth shall be Excellent and Comely, for them that are
escaped of Israel. ISA. 53.2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender
Plant, and as a Root out of a dry Ground: He has no Form nor Comeliness: and
when we shall see him, there is no Beauty that we should desire him. London,
Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1676.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To his much Honored FRIEND, Sir John Hartop, Baronet.
SIR,
THAT which gave the Occasion of my thoughts pitching upon this subject matter,
viz. Christ's Manhood in Heaven, was that Dispute betwixt Mr. Hicks, and Mr.
Pen, at London, concerning the same. I being there present, am satisfied by the
Quakers fallacious management of that Discourse, that they deny the same
Numerical true and real Manhood of Christ in Heaven, as a place remote from us.
Since that I have had Discourse with a Neighbor Quaker, William Bates, who
frequently said, He did not believe that the Humane Nature, that which was
taken by Christ of the Virgin, had now any being. I have three Witnesses of
this, whom I can produce if need be.

Sir, I may boldly say, That neither you, I, nor thousands more of Christians
in this Nation, ever thought that we should live to see that day, wherein so
many thousands, pretending to Christianity, in this Nation, should be so
Brazen-foreheaded as to disown Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah; yet so it
is. O Tempora, O Mores! The Ends of the World are come upon us. My Spirit being
stirred within me at the hearing of this grand Fundament al Error, I thought
it my duty to the Lord Jesus Christ, to Antidote the poor Country, as much as
in me lies, against these damnable Delusions; it made him speak that was dumb
before, when he saw his Fathers Life in danger. So what Babe, what Novice will
want a Mouth, a Tongue to speak, a Hand, a Pen to write, when the Man Christ is
struck at by ungodly Seducers? Therefore I, though the least and most unfit of
my Brethren, have Printed my Notes, Preached (you know) at Hartford, and humbly
present them to you, Sir, as to one whom I know to be a sincere lover of the
One Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and of his Evangelical
Truths. Pray, Sir, vouchsafe to read them, and heartily bear with what may not
be so congruously worded in so sublime a Mystery. The Lord by his Spirit
establish, settle, strengthen you, in this and every Truth, and preserve you
and your Elect Lady, both as Vessels of Honor, to his heavenly Kingdom, there
to behold the Man Jesus Christ in his Glory, which is best of all.

Your Servant for Jesus sake, William Haworth.

AN ANTIDOTE Against that Poisonous and Fundamental Error OF THE QUAKERS, etc.
1 PETER, 3.22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the Right hand of God.

THE Apostle Peter is here speaking of the Grounds of Comfort to the guilty
Consciences. One is in Verse. 21. The Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The answer
of a good Conscience through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

He rose again for our Justification. He being acquitted by the Father then,
His Members are acquitted now.

A second Proposition in order to the Answer of a good Conscience is, The
Ascension of Jesus Christ, and his sitting at the Right Hand of God; all things
being made subject to him. To see by Faith our Head exalted into Glory, and
there Advocating for us, and Ruling for us, is a very comfortable thing.

In the 18 Verse, he is speaking of Christ's being put to death in the Flesh,
but quickened by the Spirit, (i.e.) the Divine Power: Then descends to speak of
his Resurrection, as the true solid Ground of the Answer of a Good Conscience;
and from this Resurrection descends to speak of his Ascension. So then, That
same Jesus that was put to death in the Flesh, and Raised by the Power of God
from the Dead; That same is gone into Heaven.

It Is plain then, that he was put to Death in his fleshly Body, and in This it
was that he Rose again: Why then, in This is he gone into Heaven, and in This
is he at the Right Hand of God. (...), it speaks a Motion from one Place to
another, a Change of the Place: Now, Whither went he? Into Heaven. Heaven is
not every where, as some say, and so this Change is only a Change of State: But
Heaven is a Place where God does manifest most of his Glory: It Is called, the
Heaven of Heavens, and the third Heaven, whereunto Paul was wrapped up. 2 Chronicles.
6.21. Hear thou from thy Dewlling Place, even from Heaven. It Is called here,
and 1 Kings 8.30. Gods Dewlling Place.

John 14.2. It Is called the Fathers House; In my Fathers House are many
Mansions: I go to prepare a Place for you. [ And is on the Right Hand of God.]
An Allusion to the Custom of Kings, who were wont to take their Favorites and
place them on their Right Hand, as Solomon placed his Mother at his Right Hand:
And as Zebedee would have had her Sons at Christ's Right Hand in his Kingdom.
It is a Place of Honor, Glory, Power and Authority.

Learn this Truth from the Words.
That the Same Jesus Christ that was put to Death in the Flesh, and did Rise
with that Same Flesh again; That Same Jesus, in that Same Flesh and Manhood is
now in Heaven; which is a Place, not a State only; there he is at Gods
Right Hand in Power and Glory: So that, as to that Humane Nature he is not upon
Earth.

I will prove this; That Jesus Christ is now a true real Man in Heaven, and so,
Is not here on Earth as he is Man.

That ever Jesus Christ was a true real Man, some have denied, and have held,
That it was only an Appearance or Spectrum, in the shape of a Man: And some are
of this mind now. But we will take this for granted, That Christ was once here
on Earth, a real true Man; but that he is so Now, the Quakers deny.

A Man consists of these two Essential Parts, viz. Soul and Body: Both these
Christ had. Heb. 10.5. A Body have thou prepared me. That which was taken by
the Virgin, which consists of Flesh and Bones, Luke 24.39. A Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have.

2. A Soul he had, Matthew. 26.38. My Soul is sorrowful even unto Death.

That both these Essential Parts, Soul and Body, are now in Heaven, I am now
about to prove, a Place remote from us, so that he cannot be said, as to his
Corporal presence, to be here on Earth.

Though we believe that this Soul and Body is in Union with the Godhead in
Heaven, and so he is Mediator in both Natures; take this by the way.

That the Quakers may not deceive you by their Juggles; Christ was a Person
before he took Man's Nature. They may grant to you, that Christ is a Person,
and yet deny his Manhood; and grant a Manhood, and yet deny the Fesh in which
he was to be in Heaven.

1. That his Soul is in Heaven, see Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit.

What is become of that Soul that Christ had when he came to Die? Surely it did
not vanish and perish, but he commends it into his Fathers hands, as into a
safe depository, to be laid up, kept and preserved; Luke 23.43. To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Was not that Heaven? Now he spoke this as to his
Soul it is plain; for, as to his Deity, he was always there; as to his Body,
that remained in the Sepulcher two days.

2. His Body that is in Heaven, that Flesh, and those Bones that were handled by
his Disciples at the Resurrection. And he himself says, A Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones as ye see me have. Behold my Hands (Luke 24.39.) and my Feet,
handle me and see. And they handled him, 1 John 1.1 Whom our hands have
handled, of the Word of Life. Now this Flesh and Bones, those Hands and Feet,
that were handled, are now in Heaven.

And, Luke 24.50, 51. He led them forth as far as Bethany, and he lift up his
hands and blessed them. And it come to pass, while he blessed them, he was
parted from them, and carried up into Heaven. This Body was the proper Object
of their sight; The Soul they could not see, this was parted from them, this
was carried up into Heaven. Act. 1.9. While they beheld, he was taken up. If he
had secretly ascended, more doubts might have risen what was become of him; but
he did openly-and visibly Ascend, having many Witnesses of the truth and
reality of it, that it might be out of doubt.

Now if it be asked whither he did ascend? the Angels give an accoutn, Verse.
11. This same Jesus which is taken up [ into heaven] and observe how they
speak, This same Jesus, as you have seen him go; They saw him with their Carnal
Eyes; they were Eyewitnesses of this thing.

Other Scriptures opened to prove this, Acts 7.56. Behold, I see the Heavens
opened. Stephen's sight was strengthened in a wonderful miraculous way, so that
he pierced to the very heavenly Glory with his Eye. This was more than what was
natural, no doubt, for the other that stood by saw nothing, but he saw as much
of the Heavenly Glory as he could bear; I see the Son of Man, denoting Humane
Nature, when here on Earth, that he had it then at that time after his
Ascension. 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifested in the Flesh; And the last Phrase of the
Verse, received up into Glory; that flesh wherein God manifested himself, was
received up into Glory. Acts 3.21. Whom the Heaven must receive, until the
restitution of all things. Peter had been preaching the Resurrection of Christ,
now here he tells them what is become of him since; why, He is in Heaven:
thither should their minds be lifted up by Faith; and this Heaven having
received him, should contain him until a certain time, then he will appear.

Therefore Beza says, (...), is here put for (...), by the Antecedent we may
understand the Consequent; it is so to receive him as to contain him.

Therefore all those places where you read of Jesus Christ by Name appearing,
are not to be understood as if Christ in Body came down from Heaven, but either
they saw him, the Heavens being (as it is said of Stephen) opened, or it was in
Ecstasy.

Matthew. 26.11. For you have the poor always with you, but me you have not with
you always. Therefore he speaks frequently to his Disciples of his Departure,
that he would go away from them: Yet a little while and I am with you, John
14.2, 3. I go: and if I go to prepare a place. And now, Whither went he? He
tells us, John 17.11. And now I am no more in the World, but these are in the
World. I come to thee, Holy Father. Now this must needs be as to his Manhood,
for the Father and He were one as to his Godhead, in Essence; and so he was
with the Father from Eternity, John 1.1. In the beginning the Word was with
God. Prove. 8.22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his wayer, before
his works of old. Verse 30. Then I was by him, (i.e.) before there was any thing
created or framed.

You see by th^se Scriptures, he removed from the Earth and went to Heaven, and
there he is.

Yet farther, What else must we understand by that of the Apostle, Paul, 2 Cor.
5. Absent from the Body: present with the Lord. While we are at home, we are
absent, or Pilgrims from the Lord. Now Christ as God, is immense, as to his
presence, he is every where, and as to his Saints, he is with them always, and
in them by his Spirit; then must it needs be spoke as to Christ's Bodily
presence.

So in another place the Apostle says, I desire to be dissolved; and to be
with Christ. He must needs speak this as to his Soul, for Paul's Boyd was to
sleep in the Grave till the Resurrection. But was not Christ present with Paul?
Yea certainly, as to his Spirit; so he says, 2 Timothy 4.17. The Lord stood by
me; What then was this being with Chirst, but to be as to his Soul, upon
departure from the Body, in some certain place where the Soul and Body of
Christ were, they could not be every where, for then this desire of his was a
vain desire, and he withal wishes his Soul to be every where, and so to be
Infinite, and to be God, which is absurd.

In Ephesians. 1.20. he is mentioning Christ, and says, Whom he raised from the
dead, and set him at his own right hand. Now what ever was raised, was set at
the right hand; The flesh of Christ was raised; He here tells us what it is for
Christ to sit at Gods right hand, viz. to have power over all things, to have
all things put in subjection to him; which is taken from Psalm. 8.4. where
observe what is said, What is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of
Man that thou visitest him? This state of Exaltation in Heaven is applied to
him as Man, he is a Man in Heaven. 1 Timothy 2.5. Out Mediator betwixt God and
man, the Man Christ Jesus: That Man that gave himself a Ransom (for that
follows immediately) that Man is the Mediator betwixt God and man; therefore
none of any sort but may have hopes of being saved by him, upon Faith on him.
Heb. 4.14, 15. Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is [passed
into the Heavens.] We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we are. He that
was in all points tempted as we are, and so can be touched with the feeling of
our Infirmities, that same is our High Priest, now passed into the Heavens, and
that must needs be as to his Manhood, for his Godhead was not capable of such
temptations.

Phil. 3. From whence (that is, from Heaven) we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body. We see plainly from this Scripture, that Christ has a
Body, and that it is now in Heaven; from thence it shall come, when the time
is, according to the Faith and Expectation of the Saints.

Here follows the Properties of this Manhood of Christ, from what has been
spoken, and what may be spoke.
1. IT is a real and true Body, as any man on earth has; It is not, as some
have thought, an Aerial Body, or so a Spiritual, that it remains not still a
humane Body, it is that very Flesh and Bons that Thomas felt, and the Disciples
felt and handled.

2. It has the same Form and Figure that it had when here upon Earth, else how
could the Disciples know him after the Resurrection, which is a glorious state
of the Body.

3. It is now since the Ascension the Object of Sense; It is visible, has been
seen with the bodily Eye, and may be seen; Stephen, its evident, saw the Body
of Christ; and Paul saw him with his bodily Eye, 1 Chr. 15.18. Last of all, I
saw him, and at length, Every eye shall see him, coming in the Clouds of
Heaven, Rev. 1.7.

4. It is a smite body, if it were infinite it would be God and not Man, so
then, there would be another God, in time, that was not before, because another
infinite being, and that must needs be God. Moreover, if Infinity can be
attributed to it, why not Omnisciency, Incorporiety, Simplicity, and so all of
Gods Attributes; for where any one of Gods Incommunicable Properties is
ascribed, there all the rest may be.

5. It is then circumscribed, it must be still in some one certain Place or
other, not limited or confined to any one Place or corner (as it were) of
Heaven, but still in one place or other in the highest Heavens. If Bodies are
not some where circumscribed, they cease to be Bodies, and so are no where, and
so not at all.

6. It is an immortal, an incorruptible, impatable Body; Such thoughts we ought
to have of it, not that it can suffer any thing now, but that it did suffer,
and so Christ knows how to pity us, and does pity us, neither Death nor
Corruption can come upon this Body, it saw Death before, but no Corruption.

7. It is a very glorious Body, Phil. 3. Like unto his glorious Body. How
gloriously it is represented and painted out to us by Daniel and John in the
Revelations, more bright than a thousand Suns.

8. The Saints may do, and ought to worship the Humane Nature of Christ in
union with the Deity, we do not worship it by it self apart, nor for it self,
but as in union with the Deity, this is the last term of our Worship, with one
and the, same Worship we worship him that is God and Man; but the cause and
foundation of that Worship is the Deity; He received worship from several, when
he was here on the Earth in the Flesh; John worshipped him in the Visions he had
as appears in the Book, of the Revelations, and there we read likewise, that
the Angels and Elders round about the Throne, fell down and worshipped the
Lamb, that was Christ.

9. This Flesh of Christ this Humane Nature is such as gives Life to our
Souls, in quickening of us to Righteousness, to our Bodies in the Resurrection
State, to Souls and Bodies Eternal Life at last in Heaven. Except you eat my
Flesh and drink my Blood, says Christ, John 6.53. you have no Life in you.
Likewise the Scripture says, Our Life is hid, with Christ, in God. Now how is
the Flesh of Christ a Life procuring Flesh?

1. As the material Cause of Life; Sin the Cause of temporal, spiritual, and
eternal Death, was expiated in the Flesh of Christ, Romans 8.3. And for sin
condemned sin in the Flesh: By the offering of the Flesh of Christ sin was
taken away; so that Righteousness and Eternal Life, we may say, was, and is in
the flesh of Christ, i. e. in a way of merit; it is quickening Flesh.

2. It is quickening Flesh as it is secondarily an efficient Cause of Life,
Christ as Man does concur to the quickening of his Members, us he is a Man he
gives forth of his Treasures and spiritual Riches, and this Life is a great
part of these Traasures and Riches; But now there is a different Action in this
efficiency of the Flesh of Christ, and a different way of working, then when we
are said to be quickened by the Deity, Christ as Man, now he is in Heaven,
quickneth efficiently.

First, by his Intercession, the virtue of his Sacrifice pleads for this, and
obtains this Life for us.

Secondly, Because he has a Will as he is Man, that we should be quickened.

Thirdly, As he obtaines the Spirit by which we are Regenerated, and Faith by
which we are united to that Fesh of his.

Fourthly, When we are thus (...) to us his Flesh, and what is in that Flesh
(...) and Eternal Life. Thus we are quickened by the Flesh of Christ, it is the
Organ of the Deity, but so, as it is an understanding living Organ of the
Eternal Word, in (...) ther^: and it has or proper actions of own, (...)
Actions of the Deity: Yet it is the Actions of the Deity that perfects all good
for us and in us. The Actions of the Humanity complete nothing without this:
There must be Blood, and there was Blood, there is the Humanity, but then this
Blood is the Blood of God, Act. 20.28. that gives the virtue and energy to it:
thus the Flesh in John 6.63. profits nothing, (i.e.) alone, but in
Conjunction with the Deity, we have all Life from it.

Objections against this Truth Answered.
1. Object. The Apostle faith, Ephesians. 4.10. That be ascended far about all
Heavens: Therefore Christ is not in Heaven in his Manhood.

Answ. Therefore Christ as to his Manhood is not in any of these Visible
Heavens for he passed through these, and went into that invisible most supreme
Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, as it is called, far above the other Heavens.
Psalm. 68. It is said, He ascended on high, which interprets this place, or far
above all Heavens (i. e.) all heavenly Powers, all Angelical Nature and
Perfection, he is above them all.

2. Object. It Is said, in Ephesians. 4.10. That he might fill all things. How then
is he contained in Heaven; if so he then is every where, and, as some Jay, in
every man.

Answer. This filling all things is either his giving gifts to his Church, He
is speaking of this in the 8th. verse, When he ascended, be gave gifts to men:
it is spoke so generally here and universally [ all things] because the
Gentiles as well as Jews were now of the Church, and all filled with gifts from
Christ in Heaven.

Otherwise I answer thus fulfilled all things, for so the word will bear, he
fulfilled all things that were written of him, and that were required of him to
do.

3. Object, Christ said to his Disciples, Matthew. 28.20. I am with you always,
(...) the end of the World, How then can he be in Heaven?

Answ. This he speaks in reference to the presence of the Spirit in the hearts
of his People working in their Souls, and giving gifts to his Minister, by this
Spirit, and succeeding them in their Labors with his blessing but it cannot be
spoke of his humanity, for of that he had said, Me you have not always. And in
another place, Do this till I come: which implies his bodily absence.

4. Object. It Is said, 1 Cor. 15. Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; Therefore Christ is not there as to his Manbood.

Answ. Flesh and Flood unchanged, and so mortal, corruptible cannot, but
changed, and so immortal, incorruptible, may and can; and so was Christ's Flesh
upon his Resurrection, and so he entered into Glory. The Qualities are changed,
but the very same Substance remains.

5. Object. It is said by Christ, when here on Earth, John 3.13. The Son of
Man, which is in Heaven: By this it appears that Christ was in Heaven when on
Earth, and so every where when on Earth, and so now.

Answ. This is spoken by a communication of Properties: that which is only
proper to one Nature, is spoken of the other Nature: He was not in Heaven as to
his Body, it is only true as to his Deity; but he attributes Omnipresence to
his whole Person by this figurative way of speech, as that, Acts 20. The Church
of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. How can Blood be attributed
to God but by this way of speaking? So likewise, 1 Cor. 2.8. Crucified the
[Lord of Glory,] is spoken in the same way.

Reasons of this, viz. Christ being now a Man in Heaven.
Reason 1.
If Christ be not now a Man in Heaven, then there is no Intercession for us,
and so there is no Mediator; Christ is Mediator and Intercessor according to
his Humane Nature, as well as his Divine Nature, take away the Humane Nature,
and he ceases to be an Intercessor. Under the Law they had an High Priest, that
was a Man like themselves, who when he had offered the Sacrifice for the Sins
of the People, went into the Holy Place with the Blood, to appear there in
their behalf, this was a Figure of Christ's Priesthood, therefore the Apostle
speaks thus in Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made
with hands, which are the Figures of the true, but into [Heaven it self] now to
appear in the presence of God for us. Now (as I said) this Intercession is
quite nulled, if no Humanity remained, so that all the Saints remain still full
of Wants, Weallnesses, Fallings, Infirmities, and there is none to Advocate for
them, but they must Plead for themselves, and how can we of our selves draw
near to such an Infinitely Glorious Majesty, and have not a Mid(...) all our
Prayers would be lost, and we should be utterly (...) up. Let it then be (...),
how sad a thing it would be to the Highest Ground of a Christians Triumph,
which is this, viz. That Christ rather fits on the right hand of God; That
there is none now to bear our Names before the Father, as the High Priest under
the Law bare all the Names of the Tribes upon his Breast. The Faith of this
has been, and is daily sweet unto the Saints, and therefore the Church is
brought in Praying, Set me as a Seal upon thy Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm,
Cant. 8.6.

Reason 2.
If Christ be not a Man now in Heaven, then is there no entering into Glory and
Heaven for any; as there was upon the Fall of Man a Church placed with a
Flaming Sword at the Gate of Paradise so that there was no entering any more for
Man. Why so? by reason of the Sin of Man there was no entering into Glory,
because of God's Flaming Justice, had not the Man Christ entered in and made way
for us, all that ever entered into Glory entered by Virtue of Christ's entering as
Man. John 14.2. I go to prepare a Place for you: his going thither did prepare
the Place for us. Heb. 10.19. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter
into the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus. Ver. 20. By a new and living way,
which he has consecrated for us, through the Vail of his Flesh. The People
under the Law were not to enter into the Holiest, only the Highpriests alone
by the Blood. Christ our High Priest has now entered into Heaven by his Blood,
and has thereby made us a Royal Priesthood, so that now we may enter into
Glory, therefore are we said. Ephesians. 2. to be set down with him in Heavenly
Places. He being our Head, and having entered, we being united are entered
also: In him we have a pledge and first Fruits of Glory; but if he be not
entered as Man, we have no hopes of Glory.

Reason 3.
If Christ be not a Man in Heaven, then is not the Spirit, not any Gifts
thereof upon any, What ever is of the Spirit upon any, it is by virtue of
Christ as Man entering into Glory. That pouring out of the Spirit that we read
of in the second of the Acts, was by virtue of Christ's Ascending into Heaven in
his Manhood, Verse 33. Therefore being at the Right hand of God exalted and
having received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth
this which ye now see and hear. As Christ is Man, and so Mediator, all things
come first into his ha^^^ (...) from him to us; therefore he has received and
shed forth this. The Prophets and Saints had the Spirit before his Ascension,
but they had it by Virtue of this his Ascension; therefore when it is said, The
Spirit was not yet given, because he was not yet glorified, John 7.39. It
speaks of a more plentiful beffosion of the Spirit, this plentiful effusion was
reserved till this time of his Ascension, to seal up the fruits of his Death
and Resurrection. All the Gifts for the Instruction and Edification of the
Church comes this way, viz. by virtue of Christ's Ascension as Man into Heaven.
Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
Captive, and gave Gifts unto men. Which is taken from Psalm. 68.18. There it is,
he received Gifts: He received them not for himself, but on purpose to give
them to his Church, as Kings on their Coronation days bestow gifts upon their
Subjects, so here, this was reserved till now for the honor of Christ:
Therefore Verse 10. it is said, He ascended that be might fill all things (i.e.)
all the Church with the power and virtue of the Spirit. Therefore he said upon
his departure, It is expedient that I go away: if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come with you: but if I depart I will send him unto you, John 16.7.
You see, to deny Christ to be a Man in Heaven is to rob the Church of the great
Gift of the Spirit of God it self, and all the Gifts thereof.

Reason 4.
To deny Christ to be now a Man in Heaven, it is to deny Christ to be King and
Lords it is to deny Christ's Rule, Power, Authority and Dominion. Psalm. 110.
Sit thou at my Righthand, (this must be spoke as to Christ's Manhood, as to
his Godhead, he had always Majesty and Power) it follows, till I make thine
Enemies thy footstool. This sitting at Gods Right Hand is called reigning, 2
Cor. 15. He must reign till all his Enemies become his Footstool. It Is spoke
of in Ephesians. 1.20. And set him at his own right hand (that must be as to his
Manhood) far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion,
and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but in that which is to
come. Verse. 21. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be Head
over all things to the Church. Phil. 2. Has highly exalted him: This must be
as Man: And given him a Name above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow. So in this place of Peter, He is gone into the Heavent, and is
at the Right Hand of God: Angels, Authorities and Powers being made subject to
him. It is very comfortable for the Saints to consider, that Christ is exalted
on purpose to sit as King, to Rule over all the Enemies of the Church, Death
and Devils, for their good: gathering his Saints by degrees to himself, and
that at length all the Governments of this World will be subservient to him;
Acts 2.36. God has made that same Jesus both Lord and Christ. You may see by
the scope, he was thus upon his Ascension, in verse. 34. Christ was Lord before,
but now was there a clearer manifestation of it, his Manhood being exalted: now
from hence is our defense and safety in our Warfare.

Reason 5.
It is to deny Christ Jesus his second coming, and being Judge of the World,
Acts 17.31. Because he bath appointed a day in which he will judge the World in
righteousness, by that [Man] whom he has ordained: wherefore he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the Dead. He has
ordained the Man Christ to be Judge, and that Man that was raised from the
dead. Acts 1.11. It Is there said, This same Jesus, which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven:
Now he went away Visibly, so he shall come. Therefore Rev. 1. Every eye shall
see him (i. e.) every eye of Man: He cannot be seen with a Carnal Eye, as to
his Deity, and the wicked cannot see him with a spiritual Eye: How then shall
every Eye see him but in the sense we speak? Heb. 9. Vlt. So Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many: And unto them that look for him, shall [he
appear the second time] without fin, to salvation. Observe, he that was offered
will appear. Now he was offered as to his Manhood: Matthew. 24. They shall see
[the Son of Man] coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Isa. 40.5. All [flesh] shall
see his Glory: Now this is sweet to the Saints to consider that we shall be
judged by Christ our Savior.

Reason 6.
If Christ has not now a Humane Nature, then has he no Sympathy with his
Members in their Afflictions; But Christ has a fellow-feeling with his People
in all their straits. Heb. 4.15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin. He had all our Infirmities when here upon Earth,
Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Sorrow, Fear and Dread of Death, but without Sin;
and he had them for this end, that he might know how to pity us in our State,
he being now gone into Heaven, and having the same Soul and Body, in which he
suffered, these things, he remembers how it was with him here upon Earth,
therefore he gives the Reason of this Pity and Compassion, because he was in
all points, (...), in or through all, (...), which Bez^ renders similiter; For,
(...) like as we are. To the same purpose does the same Apostle speak, Chap.
2.17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren,
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest. If he has not now a
Humane Nature in Heaven, he does not retain these two Essential Qualities of an
High Priest, viz. Mercifulness and faithfulness. Now those that deny this,
would rob us of this sweet Consideration in our Afflictions, in our Poverty,
Sorrows, Imprisonments, Hurries and Temptations by Satan: Why Christ was poor
in this World, hurried up and down by the Devil, suffered the Contradictions of
sinners, abused by wicked Men, afraid of Death, in an Agony, forsaken of God,
and is now gone into Heaven, in that same Humane Nature in which he felt these
things, and remembers how it was with him, and has a fellow-feeling with us,
and pittieth us. Hence came that Voice of his from Heaven, when Saul was making
Havoc of the Church, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me?

Lose not this Comfort.
Reason. 7.
The Consideration of the Manhood of Christ now in Heaven does give a boldness
and access in Prayer. God has rendered himself much more familiar to us this
way. We are very apt to be swallowed up with the abstracted thoughts of the
Deity; we being poor ones, full of infirmities, know not how to bear the
Majesty and Glory of the Son of God: But now we draw near with boldness, and
Pray with more sweetness, where we know, that He to when we pray, is Man as
well as God.

It was a great help and comfort to the Jews, that they had a Priest that was a
Brother, one of themselves, that was to Pray for them, and Offer for them, that
was familiar with them, and they could have access unto him. Now the Apostle
having to do with them in this Epistle to the Hebrews, lest they should be
confounded with the thoughts of the Majesty of the Deity of the Son of God,
having asserted that he was very God, and all the Angels worshipped him; tells
them withal, That he took Flesh and Blood, and was a Brother, one of us, in
the latter end of the second Chapter. And thereupon in the last Verse of Chap.
4. he encourages them to go with boldness to the Throne of Grace; For we have
not an High Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all things tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore
come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace
to help in time of need.

Luther has often this Direction to praying ones, that are at a loss how to go
to God; Go to the Man Christ, and Pray to the Man Christ. And without doubt the
Man Christ may be, and should be, and is worshipped in conjunction with the
Deity, though our Worship is terminated upon the Deity.

Use 1.
If Christ is now a Man in Heaven, O let our Minds and Affections be raised
thither from off the World, and all things therein, Col. 3.1. If you then be
risen with Christ, in Regeneration, as Members of the Head, seek those things
that are above, (Seeking denotes intensness and vehemence of Mind) where Christ
sits on the Right Hand of God: Set your Affections on things Above, not on
things on the Earth.

By things on the Earth, he chiefly means Ceremonies, Traditions of Men, Works
of the Law, which he is pleading against, in the point of Justification. You
may put in the Light within, or any other thing that any other Religion pleads
for: They are all but things below on the Earth; but Christ is not there, He is
Risen and gone into Heaven, and is at the Right Hand of God, in Power, and
Glory interceding. Our Hearts and Affections should be there, all our happiness
being treasured up in him; and while we are here, we should be as Pilgrims and
Strangers, longing to be with him; and till that time come, we should be
conforming our selves to him. Luke 12.34. For where your Treasure is, there
will your hearts be also. Now Christ is our Treasure in the Heavens, infinitely
full of Spiritual Riches. God is in Christ in Heaven; the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him. Besides this, as he is Man, the sweetest man that ever
was, full of Grace and Truth; O let us love him, adore him, trust in him, long
to be with him, for he is worthy; Let our minds be taken off these poor, low
nothings, not so much looking after them, and seting our affections on them.
Christ is the best thing of all, other good things are for his sake.

Paul therefore said, He desired to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
best. To see him face to face, to behold his Glory, What on Earth comparable to
this: let us look, and pray for power and virtue from him, to raise our minds
and affections up unto him.

Use 2.
See what an Error of the Wicked it is, to deny this Truth, in which is wrapped
up so much of the Comfort of the Saints. It is in a manner denying the whole
Christan Religion.

How can the Quakers be Christians, that have said in my hearing, That what was
taken of the Virgin (and that was the Body) had now no more being? 2 Pet. 3.17,
18. Te therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware, lest ye
also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. To him be Glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

Postscript.
THere is a Pamphlet printed by Christopher Tailor, a Quaker, Entitled A true
and faithful Witness to the Light. At the end whereof there is a Post script
charging me with base Lies and Reflections; the weakness and impertinency
whereof is a sufficient Confutation of it self to any judicious Reader, and I
have been counseled by my Friends to slight it by silence, as that which has
nothing in it that is worthy of Animadversion. But not to gratify that
boasting humor that this Man, C. T. and all others of them are highly prone
to, when any thing of theirs lies at our door unanswered, though to this day
my whole Book is at their door unanswered, I thought good to give this brief
Reply.

There are Five Principal things [to wave all the bitter Invectives against me]
that are mentioned.

1. That I charged Christopher Tailor, that he said, That the Doctrine of
Election was a Devilish, Damnable and Blasphemous Doctrine: This be this a
notorious Lie.

Answ. I offer at any time two substantial Witnesses to prove that he said it,
if he dares come to the trial, and that no such thing was affirmed by me, viz.
That God ordained men to be wicked before they were born. God ordains to
effect nothing but what is good; He wills to permit evil by denying Grace,
which would prevent it, yet this evil is from a man's self, and God is not the
author of it, because he does not effect it. How can God be the Efficient Cause
of that which is a privation? Can the Sun be the cause of Darkness, yet
Darkness is the Consequent of the Suns with drawing. If Christopher Tailor
pleases I will enter the Lists with him to make good this Assertion, That
there is no Evil in the World but the Lord wills to permit it.

The second thing is, viz. Christopher T. with others contended against
Original sin. To which he says, That the Devil is the Original of sin in
Mankind, and that be understands not how Infants can be guilty of sin in the
Womb. Nay he says, That it is a cruel unnatural Doctrine to condemn Innocents
(as be calls them) yea, an ungodby uncharitable Doctrine, etc.

Answ. That the Devil is the Original of sin in Mankind ( i.e.) the first
tempter to sin, is a Doctrine we learned from Moses, not from the Quakers. But
what is this ad rem? Ergo, There is no Original sin except it be the Devil, A
strange Argument. By Original sin we mean, the Birth-sin, that which man brings
with him into the world, is from his first beginning and Original, and
contracted from him that was the Original of Mankind, the first Man Adam, and
is the Original of all actual sin. That all Infants have this sin upon them, I
will prove from the Scriptures against C. T. and the rest of the Quakers, only
let it be observed, that my Charge is true by his own Confession there in
Print; I give but three Scriptures: Romans 5.12. In whom, (i.e. the first Man)
all have sinned: Then Infants they are in him naturally. Nevertheless Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not finned ofthe similitude
of Adams Transgression, Verse 14. These are Infants here spoke of, that had not
actually finned as Adam, yet Death reigned over them though they had not
actually transgressed Moses Law, as in the Verse before is implied. How comes
it to pass that Death is inflicted upon Infants, if they have no sin? Nay,
violent Death. Is there any unrighteousness with God? in Romans 5. And Death by
sin. Were there any Infants drowned in the Deluge? or, any burned in the fire
in Sodom and Gomorrah? The third Scripture is Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature
Children of wrath even as others. If Paul and all the Corinthians were Children
of wrath by Nature ( i.e.) by Birth [as in another place he says, We who are
Jews by Nature, Gal. 2.15. ( i.e.) by Birth, Parent, Original;] then were they
sinners by Nature, Birth, Original, from their Parents, otherwise they could
not be righteously the Objects of wrath: but by this Scripture it appears, they
were by Nature such, Ergo. Let Christopher Tailor answer this. If he says that
Christ took away this sin from all Infants, then none are Children of wrath by
Nature, and this Scripture is made a lie, then are all Children of Grace, as
they come into the world, till by actual transgression they render themselves
obnoxious to wrath. Whereas, he says we condemn the Innocent, is a begging of
the Question in hand: And let the Reader judge, if in this he writes not too
much like an Innocent? But this is the fruit of following the Light within, and
forsaking the Scriptures; Nature will never discover its own guile and
defilement, and the Light within, that every man has, is no more than Nature.

3. I charge him for preaching the Covenant of Works in opposition to the
Gospel, by frequent repeating in his Discourses to the People that saying, viz.
Do this and live. He says to this, That be directed to Christ Jesus when he
said so, and to his Light within, that through Faith in him, the true Light,
People might be saved.

Answ. Observe, that first he does distinguish Christ Jesus and the Light, and
then immediately makes them one and the same: Christ Jesus and his Light
within. It follows, that through Faith in him, the true Light that lighteh
every man, etc. Now then this Light within every Man is Jesus Christ, according
to this man's Divinity, and Jesus Christ is nothing else but this Light, (if
any thing besides, let them declare what.) But the Scripture says, this Light
within every Man, is nothing but the Law of Moses written in the heart of Man,
Romans 2.15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts. So then it
remains good what I said, That C. T. did preach the Law in opposition to the
Gospel, in using that expression so much, Do this and Live. It will not serve
to say as he does, that he did not press People to the observance of the Law of
Moses, in the Letter, only for Life; implying, that observance to Moses Law, in
the Letter and Spirit both, is sufficient for Justification unto Life in the
fight of God; which is the Quakers false Doctrine, and another Gospel; and
renders Christ's personal Righteousness, his Obedience and Suffering altogether
in vain. It is not our observance of Moses Law in the Spirit, that is the
matter of our Justification in God's fight, but that observance that the person
of Jesus Christ sixteen hundred years since yielded to the will of the Father
in doing and suffering in the behalf of the Elect, in their room and stead,
being imputed to them. May not I say, Are not the Quakers willingly ignorant of
this, going about to set up their own Righteousness? That Abraham, the Father
of the faithful, observed Moses Law in the Spirit as well as the Letter, yet
this did not justify him unto Life in the sight of God. Romans 4.2. If Abraham
was justified by works he had whereof to glory, but not before God, his works
done in the Spirit were not sufficient. Romans 4.6. Even as David also describes
the blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputed Righteousness without Works,
what Works? Done by the Spirit surely, for such were David's Works; he places
this blessedness of Man, with all his observance of the Law of Moses, in the
Spirit, in Forgiveness of Sin. Implying this, that there is need of
non-imputation of sin in the observance of Moses Law in the Spirit in our best
works. Did not Isaiah observe Moses Law in the Spirit? And yet in that place of
Isaiah 64.3. (which Christopher T. produces in a jeer) calls it, fiilthy
Rags, as to Justification. Did not Paul observe Moses Law in the Letter and
Spirit when a Christian? An Apostle Rim. 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God
after the inward man. Was not this to keep it in the Spirit? He kept it in the
Letter before his Conversion; Phil. 3. Touching the Law, Blameless; and this he
counted Loss for Christ, Verse. 7. when he was converted to Christ: Nay, not
only so, but he counted all things loss for the Excellency of the knowledge of
Jesus Christ; and then surely his observance of the Law of Moses, in the
Spirit, in the point of Justification, for this is but his own Righteousness,
not the Righteousness of him that is God, the personal Righteousness of Christ,
God and Man, which is to be received by Faith. I call Christopher to answer to
these things, and not to use that expression any more in that manner to the
People, thinking it enough to say, that he preached the obedience of Faith;
whereas the obedience of Faith taken in a found sense, is quite contrary to
that Doctrine that is held forth in that Phrase, it is twice quoted by the
Apostle, in the 5th. of the Romans and 10th. v. and Gal. 3.12. and in both as
opposed to the obedience of Faith, yea, in the latter, it is written plainly,
the Law is not of Faith, they are contrary in the business of Justification. To
that which he charge me with, viz. that I should say, Though a man was
regenerate, yet this was not sufficient. I own it, do but add that which we
were certainly speaking of, viz. in Justification. He asks me what else must
be added? I answer, The personal Righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed, yea,
and this alone, and singly nothing but this, has any merit in it for my pardon
and acceptance in Gods sight. The other of Regeneration, is but the making me
meet for the Inheritance and Kingdom, which is given for the sake of Christ's
Righteousness, and this making meet is also for the Righteousness-sake of
Christ: To this very thing, and why I call inherent Righteousness the
Righteousness of the Law, at which the Quakers storm, I have given sufficient
Reasons in the Books I have written, which the Reader may enquire for,
remaining still in the same mind, That the holy Law of God requires all the
Righteousness that the best of the Saints have within them, or without them;
therefore no more but the Righteousness of the Law, by which we are not
justified in God's sight.

4. He writes, That I told him, Will. Pen affirmed to a friend of mine, That
George Fox was as good a Prophet as Isaiah the Prophet: and that Christopher
Tailor being asked, likewise affirmed the same. Here my charge remains, for
he does not deny it, but pleads for it, only says, That Will. Pen, to the best
of his knowledge, said no such thing.

Answ. If Will. Pen pleases, I will produce my Friend, who shall testify it
to his face; and let C. T. and the Quakers in the mean time please themselves,
making such wife and just Comparisons, concluding that George Fox, and Isaiah,
are equal: G. as good a Prophet as Isaiah.

To the Last he writes, that I asked him, Whether the Man Jesus Christ were in
him, and that he answered affirmatively: which he does not deny, only puts his
own Interpretation upon it: That by the Man Christ, he understands not the Body
of Christ, but the Spiritual appearance of Christ.

Answ. I have in these Lines of C. T. observed much deceit, as here and
elsewhere: in that he does not truly repeat my Words, but rather adds
something of his own, or curtails and cuts off some of mine, or changes some
for others. The Question was, Whether the whole Christ was within him, and he
answered it affirmatively: My assumption was, Then the Man Christ, to which he
replied, The Man Christ was, then what is this Answer of his but mere evasion?
neither is the Godhead alone simply considered, the whole Christ, nor the
Manhood alone, but both together: The whole Christ is God and Man; Now if the
whole Christ be in Christopher Tailor, not only Christ in his Spiritual
Appearance, but as to his Manhood, that Soul and Body that is in Union with the
Godhead. But why may not this be asserted by him without any absurdity, while
the Quakers deny that Christ has any true real Manhood. There is a Jesuitical
insinuation in the end of all: as if he had more against me than he had writ,
or was willing at present to write. You may read the Kidney of this man by
this: O how tender have the Quakers been of mine, Mr. Faldo's, and Mr. Hicks's
Credit: How much engaged we are to them, that by their Tongues and Pens, they
do not take our good Names from us; but they are known to be a self-denying
People in this thing, witness C. T's. dreadful cursing me when in Prison, and
his railing upon me openly in the Street at Hartford, calling me Dagon, an
Enemy to God, etc. I know the modesty of this man, that he would think no pains
too much to scrape in the Kennels and Dunghills of mine and my Brethrens daily
Infirmities, that he might have but a little Dirt to throw upon us but the Lord
pardon him; for, he knows not what he does, nor what he writes; and bring him
to the sound knowledge of the Man Christ Jesus, and his personal imputed
Righteousness for Justification, which I know he and all the Quakers are
Enemies unto.

2 Timothy 3. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the Truth: Men of corrupt Minds, of no Judgment concerning the Faith.


FINIS.

