A COLLECTION OF THE Christian Writings, LABORS, Travels and Sufferings, OF
THAT Faithful and Approved Minister of Jesus Christ, Roger Haydock.

To which is added, An Account of his Death and Burial.

They that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Star's for ever and
ever,

Dan. 12.3. London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street, 1700.

TO THE READER.
THis little Treatise, of and concerning Roger Haydock, is Recommended to thy
Serious Perusal, and Christian Consideration; and whatever therein thou find
of Benefit, Comfort and Instruction unto thee, give the Praise and Glory to Him
that made the Instrument what he was; and Called him by his Grace, Fitted him
by his Power, Commissionated him from on High to Preach the Everlasting Gospel
of Life and Salvation, and Endued him with his Wisdom, and Guided him by his
Counsel; and, I am satisfied, in Mercy has taken him to Himself; who is worthy
of all Praise, Honor and Glory for ever.

His Christian Character, Exemplary Conversation, Sound Judgment, Fervent Zeal,
Great Labors, Many Travels, Godly Care for Christian Discipline, in the
Churches of Christ, Faithful Testimony to the Truth, and Sufferings for the
same, with his Earnest and Pious Endeavors, that in Faithfulness and
Simplicity it might be kept to, by all the Professors thereof, in all its
several Branches; that there might not be a Swerving from the same in any
thing; but in WORDS, HABIT, CONVERSATION, SPIRIT, FAITH and TESTIMONY, there
might be a diligent keeping thereto, is largely Testified by many Witnesses;
his great Love to the Brethren, and Concern for the Preservation of Unity; his
Sympathizing with the Exercised and Afflicted, his Tenderness over Them, his
Strengthening the Weak, and Comforting the Mourners, Admonishing and Reproving
the Careless and Disorderly, are also Testified unto by those that knew him,
and had intimate Conversation with him, and opportunity to make their Remarks
thereupon.

And therefore I shall not Enlarge, but Recommend thee to the following
Testimonies and Collection; desiring, as thou find them Agreeable to Truth,
and Corresponding with the Testimony thereof, Recorded in Holy Writ, thou
may receive them in Love, and use thy utmost Endeavors, through the
Assistance of the Grace of God, to follow the same; and him, as he followed
Christ: That so, through Faith and Obedience unto God, and a constant and
sincere Continuance therein to the End, thou may finish thy Course, keep the
Faith, and receive a Crown of Righteousness, from God, the Righteous Judge.

So to Him I Recommend thee, that is the blessed and only Potentate, the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality, dwelling in the Light
which no Man can approach unto, whom no Man has seen, or can see; To whom be
Honor and Power Everlasting. Amen.

Thy Sincere Friend, and Hearty Well-wisher, John Field.
The 14th of the 10th Month, 1699.
THE CONTENTS.
AN Epistle to Friends of Blackrod-Meeting. page 1 The Skirmisher confounded:
Being a Collection of several Passages, taken out of some Books of John
Cheyney's, who styles himself, The Author of the Skirmish upon Quakerism, etc.
p. 5 A Hypocrite unvailed, and a Blasphemer made manifest: Being an Examination
of John Cheyney's false Relation of his Dispute with the Quakers, at Arley-Hall
in Cheshire, the 23d of the 11th Month, called January, 1676. Published in his
Book, entitled, A Warning to Souls, etc. p. 27 A Salutation to Friends of the
Men and Women's Meetings. p. 162 To Friends in Holland. p. 166 Concerning Roger
Haydock's two Imprisonments in Lancaster Goal. p. 177 Roger Haydock and Heskin
Fell's Letter to the Judge, concerning their Sufferings. p. 180 A Copy of his
Answer tendered to the Chancellor, in the Consistory Court at York, the 23d of
the 2d Month, called April. p. 183 Justice Bradshaw and Penington's Warrant of
Commitment. p. 185 Roger Haydock, Heskin Fell, and Alice Haydock's Letter to
the Bishop of Chester. p. 190 A Brief Account of the Life, Travels, Sufferings
and Death, of Roger Haydock. p. 201
Advertisement.
THere is lately Published, a Book entitled, God's Protecting Providence,
Man's Surest Help and Defense, in Times of the Greatest Difficulty, and most
Eminent Danger. Evidenced in a most Affecting Narrative of the Surprising
Danger, and Remarkable Deliverance of Robert Barrow, with diverse other Persons,
from the Devouring Waves of the Sea; amongst which they suffered Shipwreck: And
also, from the cruel Devouring Jaws of the Inhumane Canibals of Florida. Sold
by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street.

Eleanor Haydock's TESTIMONY Concerning her Husband Roger Haydock.
Dear Friends,

MY Spirit has been, and is, bowed under a deep sense of my great Loss and
Exercise, in the Removal of my Dear Husband, whom it has pleased God, in his
Wisdom, to take away from me; who was Comfort to my Life, and Joy to my Days,
in this World; being given me of God, in great Mercy and Loving Kindness, and
so has been enjoyed by me in thankfulness of Heart, to the Close of that time
God had appointed; and now is taken from the World, with all its Troubles and
Exercises; as also, from all his Labors and Travels, which were great amongst
the Churches of Christ; which, with me, have no small Loss in his Removal: But,
What shall I say? Wise and Good is the Lord, who does what he will in Heaven,
and in Earth, and amongst his Churches, and his Chosen; he can Break and Bind
up, Wound and Heal, Kill and make Alive again; that the Living may see his
Wonders, and magnify his Power in all, through all, and over all, who is God
Eternal, Blessed for ever, Amen.

And now, dear Friends, I being sensible of the Wise Conduct, and Virtuous
Life, of my dear Husband, whom God has seen meet to divest of this Earthly
House and Tabernacle, that he might possess a most sure House and Building with
God, Eternal in the Heavens, that glorious Mansion, which the blessed Lamb,
whom he faithfully followed in his Day, has prepared for him, where he now
rests from his Labors, and his Works follow him. And as one that had full
Knowledge of him for many Years, cannot but commemorate something of my
Experience, as a Mite amongst many faithful Brethren, cast into the Treasury,
and left upon Record, as a Testimony for him; and can say, He was a Man of
Virtue from his Youth, although of a Child I knew him not, he being in Christ
before me; yet nigh from the Time of my Convincement, which has been for the
space of Twenty Six Years, and more; he being at the first Meeting I was at,
when I received the Truth, although I cannot say I was begotten into the Faith by
him as a Father, yet can say, he was to me a faithful Instructor, and a
Furtherer of me in the Work of God, as well by Conversation as Ministry: His
Love to me was great in those days, for the Work's sake which God had begun in
me.

He, with James Harrison, had drawings to visit Meetings in Cheshire, and I
went with them; which Journey was of great Service to me in my young Days, and
indeed a Time of Service to many in that County; many were Convinced that
Journey, and many young ones strengthened and refreshed; many drawings about
that time had he had into that County of Chester, and of great Service it was;
the Lord wonderfully blessed his Labors, and there remains many Seals of his
Ministry; amongst which, was my dear Brother John Low, who was Convinced of the
Truth, and lived and dyed in It, a faithful Man; also his dear Wife, Children
and Servants, besides many that way; at which the Priests began to Rage, and
prepare War, because many refused to put into their Mouths, and could Buy their
Merchandise no more, receiving the Invitation that was free; Come, buy Wine and
Milk, without Money and without Price: It was a glorious Time indeed; and by
the plenteous Preaching of the Gospel, the Lord opened many Hearts to receive
it, as he did the Heart of Lydia of old, and the Word of God grew in our
Hearts, that had received it in Love; and the Lord opened my Mouth, and touched
my Tongue as with a Live Coal from his Altar, that I might testify to that
Word of Life, that Converts the Heart, and gives Understanding to the Simple:
In this Time was he very Helpful, and of great Service to me; being always
ready to lend an Hand of Help to weak ones, to promote every good Word and Work.

About that time, I with my Cousin, Elizabeth Hodson, went to visit Friends in
some parts of Yorkshire, and he brought us on our way as far as Bradley, where
we had a good Meeting, where William Ellis, and some others, were Convinced;
there he left us, and we traveled some Weeks in that County, and had good
Service for Truth; and returned, Truth prospering, and Zeal and Fervency for it
in our Hearts increased.

About this time the Lord raised a Concern of Love in our Hearts, each to
other, relating to Marriage; In which Concern, we felt the Lord's special Hand
to order us: It continued betwixt us for the space of five Years; we never
Created Opportunities to discourse it, nor any Journey on purpose was made
about it, during that Time; yet in the Way of Providence we met together
sometimes, in which we had some Discourse, the Lord still evidencing to us his
good Pleasure therein; in which time we labored in our respective Gifts in the
Work of the Ministry, being truly united in Spirit, and daily sensible of one
another's Exercises; though much absent one from another outwardly, he being
concerned in Travels, in the Labor of the Gospel; though much a Prisoner, yet
the Lord made way for the Work's sake, that he traveled in many Parts of this
Nation, both North and South; as also through the Nation of Ireland, where he
took Sickness, which was then some Exercise to me, being at such a distance,
but the Lord showed me that at that time he should not Dye; and (blessed be the
Lord) he returned well, with the Reward of his Labors, Peace and Satisfaction.

After that, he stayed a while, and visited the Churches up and down in
England, where the Lord wonderfully blessed his Labors, many were convinced,
and turned to Christ Jesus their Teacher; and the Convinced were strengthened
and built up together in that most holy Faith, which gives Victory over the
World; and when clear of these Services here, he went up to London to the
Yearly Meeting, and found drawings for Holland and Germany; which after the
Yearly Meeting was over, he faithfully answered, together with Roger Longworth
his Companion at that time; the Lord greatly blessed his Labors, and made them
effectual to many; the same time I was at London with him, at the
Yearly Meeting, where we were refreshed together, being devoted to the Work and
Service of God, which the Lord blessed, and us in it. I, with dear Mary Warrel,
traveled from London westward, through several Counties; as, Hampshire,
Dorsetshire, Devonshire, as far as Plymouth, so back to Bristol, and homeward:
The Lord was with us, and blessed our Labors, and we returned in Peace.

After our return Home, my dear Friend returned back from Holland that Winter;
and about this time the Lord gave us to understand our Concern of Marriage was
near to be accomplished betwixt us, in which we had regard to the Lord's Hand
and Counsel: It was completed the Spring following, the 6th Day of the 3d
Month, 1682. before many faithful Friends, and others; the Lord's glorious
Presence and Power was with us, as a Crown upon his Ordinance: And as we had
evidence in our selves of the Lord's hand with us, guiding us in that Affair;
so the Lord raised up his Testimony in the Word of Life in others. And, I may
further say, The Lord who joined us together, blessed Us when together, so that
we lived in great Love and Peace, 14 Years and five Days, in which time we were
never straightened one toward another, always of one Heart, and of one Mind,
purely knit together in the Covenant of Life, so that the Grave has not broken
our Fellowship, it goes beyond the Grave, where we can enjoy the Spirits of the
Just; the Separation that is made, is only of Bodies, not of Spirits, Praises
to God therefore.

My dear Husband, as he was a faithful Man, so was he a growing Man, doubled
his Talents, and increased his Gifts, both as a Minister, and as a Help in
Government in the Church; who being very Skilful, and Wise therein, settled
many Affairs comfortably in the Church, not only in our own County, but
Neighboring Counties: I may say of him, He was wholly redeemed from the World,
altogether the Lord's, in all Respects given up to him; I saw his Growth daily,
and sometime rejoiced in it, yet in my Joy there was some Heaviness, looking he
was nigh the Perfection of his Gifts, and in a little time must go to his
Rewards. The sense of this came upon me with Sorrow, when he was last in
Holland, which occasioned me to turn over all Affairs, to see whether I had
given the Lord occasion to withdraw so great a Blessing from me; but, blessed
be the Lord, I found all Accounts straight, and no Rebuke upon my Spirit any
way, having always given him to the Lord, according to that Promise I made
before I took him by the Hand, before so many Witnesses; which was, To give him
to the Lord, as long as he lived; which the great Lord, before whom only I
promised, helped me to the performance of, so that my Heart was never strait
there, through our time; and I may further say, as freely as I gave, so freely
was I given to the Lord; my dear Husband often expressing his great Love to me,
above all Visibles, as the best of enjoyment he had in this World; yet would
say, I was not too dear to give up to serve the Truth, because in it, I was
made a Blessing to him, more comfortable every Day than other; he would often
express it, and truly so was he to me, every Day, every Way, and in every
Respect; no Tongue nor Pen can relate the full of that Comfort and Joy we had
in God, and one in another: Yet we find such has been the Pleasure of God
concerning them he has loved, to try them in the most near and dear
Enjoyments, that it might be manifest he was loved above all, that no Gift, or
Gifts, may be preferred above the Giver; but that he may be all in all, and
over all, who is, and is to come, God blessed for ever and ever. And truly
there has been great Care and Watchfulness, one over another, and over our own
Spirits, to see that our Love, though great, was bounded and kept within its
Compass, the Truth being its Original, the Alpha and Omega also: Although it
has been the Pleasure of God to try me, in the removal of so great a Blessing
from me; sure it is, that I may be the more inward to him, and have his Love
always in my Remembrance, who gives, and takes away, and in all, Bless his
Name. My Soul travels that I may always follow his footsteps, of Self-denial,
in all things, that I may finish my Course in this World, to the Glory of God,
as he did, and have my part in that Mansion of Glory with him, eternal in the
Heavens; though it be my Lot to stay for a time in this World of Troubles, yet
I have hope in Immortality and Eternal Blessedness, when time in this World
shall be no more.

My dear Husband was a Man very Laborious in his time; though he had several
long weak Fits of Fevers and Agues, yet when a little well, regarded the
Lord's Business above all: Besides his Travels about home, and here in England,
he traveled through Scotland, and twice in Holland and Germany, since we were
Married; and had great Services for the Lord in many Places, as I doubt not but
Accounts may be given, and through Mercy, for two Years last had his Health
well, and is gathered to his place, like a Shock of Corn in its due Season, and
rests with the Lord for ever.

I have sometimes considered the suddenness and manner of his Removal; although
it was ordered by Providence, that I was far remote at that Time, in in the
Service of Truth, which was with his free Consent and Approbation, being
brought on my Way by him, so far as Talk-Hill in Staffordshire, where we parted
in great Love and Sweetness, the Glory of the Lord resting upon our Spirits; in
which, Breathings ascended up to the Lord for each other: And though I saw not
his going away, yet have seen in what he went, that it was full of Zeal and
Fervency in the Love of God, and Life of Righteousness.

So in pure Submission to the Will of God, I conclude this short, but true
Relation, of my Worthy Dear Husband, whose Name and Memorial is blessed, and
will live, and be of a sweet Savor in the Hearts of the Righteous through
Ages: I am Truths Friend, and a wellwisher to the Souls of all People,

Eleanor Haydock.
Penketh the 15th of the 3d Month, 1697.
Ashort Testimony to the Lord's Kindness, and to the Life, Ministry,
Sufferings, Services and Death, of our Worthy Friend, Roger Haydock, who
departed this Life, the 11th Day of the 3d Month, 1696.
WE are deeply affected and bowed in Soul, in a sense of the Lord's free Love
and Goodness unto us, in looking upon, and visiting us in the time of our
Uncleanness, when we were unworthy of the least of his Mercies; Oh! then was
his Arm revealed for our Help, Redemption and Salvation; a Work of so great
Kindness as ought ever to be had in Remembrance, in that neither we, no^ any of
the Children of Men, can sufficiently set forth so great a Favor; the Concern
is of great Moment, the only begotten Son of God laid down his Life to effect
it; We Travel in our several Measures, that we, and all the Lord's gathered
People, may ever dwell in a Worthiness, that we may be in the Lords hand,
Instruments to work the appointed work of our Day: And under this tender sense,
we found our Hearts open to give the Salutation of unseigned Love to all our
dear Friends, where these may come, with this brotherly Exhortation, That you
may all stir up one another to the Duty you owe unto the Lord; that as a Church
and People of our God's peculiar gathering, you, and we, may be presented to
him without Spot or Wrinkle. And dear Brethren, the dealings of the Lord with
his Instruments, and faithful Servants, and the removing of them from us, has
considerable Weight upon our Spirits, and raises a holy Desire in us, that we,
and you, may not abate, but increase our Zeal, Diligence and Labor, that the
Lords good Work begun, may not stop, but go on and prosper, and that the great
Lord of the Harvest may never want faithful Workmen.

Next hereunto, O Reader, We recommend to thy perusal, this following Account
of our said Friend, Roger Haydock.

First, As touching the manner of his Life, we having several of us known (and
conversed with) him from the time of his Convincement, can say of it, His
Conversation was without Covetousness, of Self-denial he was a good Pattern, in
Habit Plain, in Meats and Drinks very Temperate, and in his Actions and
Concerns Careful, that what he did might answer the better Part in all, and
justly offend none; Walking (he would often say) he preferred before Talking,
and labored that others might walk as they had Christ for an Example.

Secondly, As to his Ministry (though we need say little, because it was known
in most places where these may come) We have from good Experience this Account
to give, That he preached the Gospel freely, both in this and other Nations,
always possessed with a Care that Life and Virtue might put him forth, and
manifest him to his Auditors; very weighty and deep things did often drop from
his Mouth; and although he had sometimes sharp Arrows to shoot at Babylon, and
against all Hypocrites and Double-Minded, yet many times a Living Sweet
Consolating Stream was conveyed through him, to water the tender Plants, and
very often a Morsel to the Poor and Needy. Very tender and kind to his
Fellow Laborers; yea, to the least Child, that from a right Concern opened a
Mouth for the Lord; and for the sakes of such, did many times sit whole
Meetings through in Silence, very kind in that Respect to Strangers; yea, such
was the Care of this good Man, that Friends might truly reap benefit in their
Meetings, that in many of our Weekday Meetings he used to wait amongst us in
Silence, that none might too much depend upon Words, or be surfeited through
the multitude thereof: And when at any time he had upon him a Concern to visit
Churches in remote Parts, his manner was to lay before, and wait for the
Concurrence of this our Meeting, which many times occasioned a weighty Sense of
his Service to spring among us. Many were convinced by him: We have not heard
of any of his Travels, but some became Seals of his Ministry; in all this, as
he did, so do we, attribute the Glory to God, whose chosen Vessel he was.

Thirdly, As this our said Friend was called to Believe, and to Receive, a part
of the Ministry, so did he joyfully embrace Sufferings, as a part of his
Calling, and on the account thereof; we, several of us, having been his
Fellow Prisoners, can with much certainty Testify, that he never turned his
back, or gave ground to Truth's Adversaries in his Testimony, but cheerfully
suffered Bonds, as well as Spoil of Goods, as the Lord permitted him to be
tried therein: We can further add, that all his Sufferings he underwent with
great Simplicity, as well as Patience, the Lord's hand alone without Carnal
Contrivance, being truly regarded, eyed, and depended on, for his Enlargement,
so that he was made to Triumph in the Lord for his Deliverance.

Fourthly, The next part in which he was evidently manifested to us, to be a
Workman who needed not to be ashamed, was his singular Care and watchfulness
over the Flock of God, amongst whom he was not only a good Apostle, a Minister
of the Spirit, but a careful Over-seer, an Instrument to Prune, Dress, Fence
in, and keep Clean, that the Church of God might be kept in its Beauty, and
wear its own Livery, even even the White-Linnen without Spot or Wrinkle. We are
truly sensible his Care and Labor tended to this. He was a very seasonable and
constant Attender of these our Meetings, as well as others; oftentimes was he
opened amongst us in a short Testimony, in God's Wisdom, suitable to the
occasion; Cautious, that neither he, nor any amongst us, might obstruct the
Days Service by enlarging therein. Weighty and Clear he was in handling the
Concerns of Truth; yea, studious to propagate its Interest with all his
Strength; very Zealous that nothing might remain in the Churches, either to be
a Stumbling Block, or occasion our Posterity to enquire why these things were
left. All Superfluities of Meats, Drinks, Apparel and Furniture, as well as
Feastings at Births, Marriages and Burials, and other needless worldly Customs,
he lived to see put a stop to, and which he in the Lord's hand was made an
Instrument to effect. He would with Gravity, Clearness and Plainness, go
through weighty matters, and in handling was very Righteous; for, though he was
of an humble Condescension, to hear the mind of the least Member, yet would he
not submit the justness of a Matter, or lessen his Judgment, or the Stroke of
Truth upon it, for the Interest of either Friend or Brother; and as ready he
was to submit himself, where he either mis-apprehended, or was misinformed: In
this manner (we cannot forbear to tell it) was he conversant amongst us, a good
help in Government, for which sake we truly honored him; and on behalf of the
Concern the Lord had laid upon him, relating to the Discipline of the Church,
we can say to the Praise of God, that what he recommended to Friends Practice
in places abroad, as he fell in their Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings, not
taking effect, to be complied with in his Lifetime, has since his departure
from us, been put in Practice by them, and a Benefit found thereby; so that
being Dead, he yet Sp^aketh; his Life and Spirit, Bent and Inclination, have
still their Motion in the Minds of many. Much more might be truly said, to the
Praise of that Virtue that dwelt richly in him; but our design was Brevity in
this Undertaking, and our only Aim therein, the Exaltation of that Grace, by
which he was what he was, to God, his Church and People.

Lastly, As to his Death, It was sudden and surprising to us, in that not above
three Days before it, he seemed in full Strength, both of Body and Mind, and
bare amongst us a living Testimony to that Universal Grace, and Sufficiency of
it, by which we were called, and in which, all have Life, Salvation and Peace,
and exhorted Friends to avoid every thing that would gender to Bondage, etc.

The Day following he fell Sick (as was supposed) of a malignant Fever, which
continued violent upon him for about two days and a half, and then dyed in the
Presence of many Friends. His Body was accompanied by a great number to Friends
Grave-Yard in Penketh; after the interring of the Corpse, was a very large
Meeting, many more than the Meeting House could contain, several Testimonies
were born, and a solid Weight of Divine Goodness over-shadowed the Meeting, so
that we may say, Precious in the Eyes of the Lord is the Death of his Saints.
And now, though our loss of so faithful a Friend and Fellow labourer cannot but
affect us very nearly, yet in this we are satisfied, that in the good Pleasure
of God he is taken from us: And though he might according to the Course of Nature
have lived many more Years; yet as to his Growth and Ripeness, we can say of
him, He died in a good Old Age, having lived to behold his Ministry and
Services crowned with the Conversion of many to the Faith, and Establishment
therein. And we are under a full satisfaction, that his Rest is glorious
amongst his Fathers, even faithful Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the Followers
of the Lamb, there to Sing Praises to God on high, who is Worthy for ever and
ever.

Given forth from our Mens-Meeting at Hartshaw, the 18th of the third Month,
1697. Signed on behalf of the Meeting, by, Richard Cuttan, William Barns,
George Burch, Joshua Crosby, John Bispham, Robert Tompson, Robert Haydock,
James Laithwait, Henry Mollineux, John Burch, Joseph Coppock, John Johnson,
Richard Tarbuck, Gilbert Thompson,


A few Lines, by way of Testimony, from Friends in Cheshire, concerning Dear
Roger Haydock, Deceased.
THough we believe that many Testimonies will be given from several Faithful
Friends, concerning that good Man, yet we that have reaped so great a Benefit
from his Labors, in Testimonies, and other ways, cannot keep wholly Silent
concerning him: For soon after he had received a Gift for the Ministry, he
found himself concerned to visit This County, and where, in his first
appearance, he was very gladly, received; for he proved very Serviceable to
many that waited for the Redemption of Zion; and greatly helpful, in
strengthening and encouraging those, whose Faces were turned thither-ward. Thus
meeting with so pleasing a Reception in his early Visits, found himself engaged
to come often amongst us; and he greatly grew, and was filled with the Life and
Power of God; and his Service was much enlarged, and very many were awakened,
that had fallen asleep in a kind of Self-security, who were ready to cry out,
What shall we do to be saved! For they were pricked to the very Heart. So
prevalent was his Testimony, so powerful was Truth.

And indeed several were Convinced, and with great gladness received the
Testimony of the Word of Life; who, with those many more, that were greatly
supported and strengthened by his Labors, as Living Epistles, can set to their
Seals, to the Truth of his Apostleship.

Now our County being thus alarmed, and stirred up, and the beauty of many
pleasant Pictures fading, and Truth prospering and enlarging it self in many
places: The Men of the Long Robe begun to be angry (for now some Member or
Members withdrew from their Assemblies, and joined themselves to the poor
despised Quakers) This so enraged them, that they made their Pulpits ring with
the Noise of the Danger of the Growth and Infection of Quakerism, and Exhibited
their Black Charges against us, and our Principles, at random, to frighten poor
People from receiving the Truth of God.

Some of which being taken notice of, occasioned several Public Disputes in
this County: And in Vindicating of our Holy Profession, against these our
Opposers, this our Friend, of whom we are writing, did more particularly
appear. And truly the Lord's Presence and Power appeared with, and so enabled
him, that he not only cleared up those Truths, clouded through their Envy, but
so manifestly returned their Charges upon themselves, that some were Convinced
by those opportunities, and several Confirmed: In all which, he behaved himself
as a Man for God. The Remembrance whereof is very sweet to many of us, to this
moment. And indeed all along to his end, he forgot not his Fatherly Care over
us; so that above many others, we are really indebted to his Memory, who has
been greatly Serviceable to us, and has done Valiantly.

His Travels have been considerable, in this and foreign Nations; of which we
might enlarge, but shall leave it to other Pens; as also, to speak of his Parts
and Accomplishments, which were very considerable; And not to be tedious, shall
only add, He Lived well, and so he Died; and his Work being finished, was taken
from us in the strength of his Age, of whom the World was not worthy: And was
attended to his Grave by some Hundreds, and many good and public Testimonies
were born, to the Praise of that Power, that had raised him up to be so
serviceable to the Churches of Christ, to the great Comfort of those many
Mourners present at his Interment; and he being Dead, yet Speaks.

Signed, at our Quarterly Meeting at Nulon-juxta, Middlewich, the 14th of
September, 1697, on the behalf of the Friends of this County, By us,

Thomas Welsh, Sen. John Crosbey, Thomas Rowland, Richard Yarwood, William
Janney, John Kennerly, John Bradley, John Bancroft, Ralph Brock, Thomas
Buckley, John Hobson, Henry Murrey, Joseph Maddock, John Finnerley, John Lamb,
Thomas Hyld, Thomas Pott, John Walker, John Hough, Shadrach Welsh, William
Harrison, John Merrick, William Crames, John Jarvis, Thomas Butter, Samuel
Traford, Thomas Welsh, Jun. Joseph Towers, Peter Pricksley, John Lorrance,
William Hancock, Richard Davis, Jacob Lawrance, Hugh Buttler, Esther Hall. Mary
Gandy, Mary Hall, Mary Bangs, Eliz. Maddock, Elinor Hyde, Hannah Ashton, Eliz.
Williamson, Elin Fornelly, Ann Welsh, Mary Merrick, Esther Crosbey, Rachel
Butter, Rebekah Traford, Ann Davis, Katharine Lamb, Martha Lamb, Samuel
Rilence, Joseph Endon, Hugh Burgis, Tho. Williamson, Roger Roe, John Dutton,
William Hyde, Richard Parkey, Henry Maddock, Benjamin Bangs. Mary Peacock,
Maible Hancock, Rebekah Pritchley, Tabitha Ardern, Rebekah Backley, Ann Eaton,
Eliz. Ashbrook, Eliz. Lawrance, Martha Broadhurst, Eleanor Cook, Esther
Merrick, Nehemy Bradley, Hann. Littlemore, Mary Worthington, Margaret Garsell,
Elizabeth Welsh, Alice Rowland.


The Testimony of Thomas Camm, concerning our dear Deceased Brother, and
Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, Roger Haydock.
IT is such as Die in the Lord, who are Blessed; being gathered to their
Eternal Rest, with the Spirits of Just Men made perfect; and freed from Tears
and Sorrows, and manifold Sufferings, Travels and Labors, and whose Works
follow them; whose Names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life, amongst the
Living, and is a sweet Savor and blessed Memorial to after-Ages: And though
we, that are yet left behind, may have loss, in that they are outwardly removed
from us, yet ought therein to be content, since it is the good pleasure of the
Almighty, and the great Gain of them who are swallowed up in the Joy of the
Lord unspeakable; of which number, it is my present Sense and Testimony, our
dear Friend and Brother, R. H. is one, and has finished his Course here with
Joy; who, in his day, was a Man of God, a faithful Man for the promoting the
Interest of God, his Truth and Righteousness; given up to spend, and be spent,
in the Service of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, in all Faithfulness and
Sincerity, as well as plentifully Furnished thereto, by him that has the
Infinite Treasures of Wisdom and Divine Knowledge, and gives freely thereof to
the Humble and Sincere in Heart; and richly was this dear Man of God furnished
for the Work of the Ministry, which he was called to, and found Faithful in,
for many Years, to the finishing of his Course here; and a Blessed Effect his
Living and Powerful Ministry had upon the Hearts of many, not only in turning
them to the Lord's Way and Truth, but also in Confirming, Building up, and
Establishing many therein: Being one of those Scribes, commended by our Lord,
who are well instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, and brings forth out of
his Treasure things New and Old, for the Instruction, and Building up others;
many in this Nation, and many others, where he Traveled, can Testify and bear
Witness unto: Who are the Living Seals of his Ministry, having good cause, with
thankful Hearts, to bless the Lord on the behalf thereof.

It Is not with me to enlarge into the particular Travels and Labors of this
Faithful Servant of the Lord, in this and several other Nations; supposing that
may be the Work of others: But as I well knew him, and had an intimate and
inward Acquaintance with him, from the time that it pleased the great God of
Eternal Glory, to call, sanctify, fit and furnish him to the Work of the
Ministry (which is most of Thirty Years) by our often and frequent Travels
together in that Work and Service, in most parts of this Nation: So that which
I have in short, to say and testify herein, with respect to God's Glory,
Service of his Truth and People, and Discharge of Duty, to and on the account
of so Dear, so Faithful, and so greatly Beloved a Friend, Brother and
Companion; is from Tried, and long Experience, and certain Knowledge, as I felt
it to spring and live upon my Mind, in that Love and Life, in which my Heart
was firmly United to him, as was Jonathan's to David. Very shortly after I had
the Heavy Tidings and Sorrowful Account, of his being taken out of the Body,
and so removed from us, as to outward Appearance; under which Exercise I could
not but mourn, and say, Ah my Brother! I have a Loss of thee, the Flock and
Family of God has a Loss of thee, and other Worthies, at this time removed: The
Lord be entreated to pour out a double Portion of his Spirit upon us, lest
behind, and raise up many more; that so his Work may become Prosperous in the
Earth, Amen.

Oh how Comfortable is the Remembrance of that perfect Love, Nearness and
Unity, that we enjoyed together, without the least Jarr, which made our Service
and Labor together very easy and pleasant, and our Conversation together very
sweet! And know, that he was Open-hearted, Free and Faithful to his Friend; a
great Lover, as well as Promoter, of Love, Peace and Concord amongst Brethren;
able in Advice, sound in Judgment, tender and kind to the Weak, every way ready
to serve and help the Needful in every respect; of a truly Humble and Lowly
Spirit, giving Preference to others, especially Elders; although a Man that had
a kind of Greatness or Presence, in a Manly Carriage or Deportment; from which
some might mistake him, that knew him not in the Root of Life and Truth;
Fervent in Spirit, Zealous for the Promotion of the Interest of Truth, in a
Godly-Discipline and Gospel Order amongst all Friends; and his Care and Labor,
that all might be found in the Practice of the pure Religion professed, That so
Zion might become Glorious, the Praise of the whole Earth; and the Church and
Family of God be kept Pure and Chaste, to shine forth in her Splendour; the
Eclipsing whereof, in any respect, I know was ever his Exercise; and under the
Exercise thereof, have simpathized with him in Sorrow and Mourning, whom I knew
esteemed of, and preferred the Peace, Prosperity, Welfare and Increase of the
Glory of Zion, God's People, far above his own. His Natural Parts were great,
and augmented by a good and liberal Education: All which being Sanctified, as
well as Enlarged, by the Power of Truth, made him both Honorable and
Serviceable in the Church of Christ, in many respects. And though he be Dead, yet
Lives and Speaks amongst us, and is Enjoyed in that Life which never Ends. And
as he has turned many to Righteousness, he now shines as a bright Star in the
Firmament of God's Power; and his Name will be of Lasting Remembrance amongst
the Living.

T. Camm.

H. M's Testimony concerning our dear and faithful Friend, Roger Haydock,
Deceased.
AMongst many of the Lord's Worthies, whom, in this our Day, Age, and
Generation, he has endued with Wisdom, Courage, Valor and Prevalency, in
Innocence and Righteousness, to make War, without Carnal Weapons, against the
Spiritual Enemies of God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, the Lamb without
Blemish, that takes away the Sin of the World, this our dear Friend Roger
Haydock was not one of the least; who, before I knew him, was (at the
Challenges of Priests, that opposed the Truth, to which he bore Testimony)
several times engaged in Disputations, as Defendant for the Truth, professed
and lived in by him, and the People called Quakers, against the false Charges
of the Priests: One Passage whereof being related to me, by one of the party
adverse to him, when I was a Stranger to the Truth, and to Roger Haydock,
tended to my Convincement; and in hopes it may likewise be of good effect to
others, I shall here insert it, viz. My Neighbor told me, he had been at a
Dispute between Mr. Cheyney (as he called him) and a Quaker, whom I have since
known to be Roger Haydock, and and that Cheyney (among other things) charged
the Quakers for not using Baptism of Infants: Then I asked him, how the Quaker
answered to that? He said, Indeed the Quaker behaved himself very moderately
and civilly, in his way, and answered, That there was no Proof in the
Scriptures of Truth for it; and that it was only Men's Invention, and by Man's
Tradition that they held it; and considering how they used it, who professed
the Scriptures to be their Rule, which did not warrant them therein, it
appeared in them to be ridiculous, both before God and Man. Then I asked him,
What Proof Cheyney brought for it? He answered to this effect, That he did not
understand that Cheyney brought any Proof for it. This Relation induced me to
seek for what Proof could be found for it; because I had been taught, that my
Infant Baptism was the Foundation of my Christianity; thereupon diligently
searching the Scriptures, and after that, reasoning with my Teachers, I plainly
saw there was no Proof from the Scriptures, nor Authority from Christ, to be
found for it; and that therefore my Foundation was unsound, and the Building
upon it dangerous and ruinous: Therefore in a deep Sense of my want of a
Foundation that could not be moved, I left the Builders upon Infant Baptism,
and earnestly sought unto the Lord, who, in his own time, Revealed in me that
Foundation which stands sure, even the Rock of Ages, the Foundation of all
the Generations of the Righteous; that great Mystery hid from many Professors,
which is Christ in Believers, the Hope of their Glory, who Baptizeth them with
Spiritual Water and Fire; a Manifestation of whose Spirit is given to every Man
to profit withal; which inwardly Reproves the Disobedient, but Comfort the
Faithful, who in it have true Unity and Fellowship one with another: And in
this I was in the Lord's time acquainted with this my aforesaid dear Friend and
faithful Servant of Christ, whose Service the Lord made of good effect to me,
by the aforesaid Relation, of one that was as an Adversary to him, and that a
considerable time before I knew him; for about the time that I left the
aforesaid Builders, my Teachers, he was concerned in the Lord's Service in
Ireland, in the Year 1680. He was Laborious in the Service to which the Lord,
by his Grace, had called him; and for which he had fitted him, in giving him
largely to know and understand the deep Mysteries of his Kingdom, and filling
his Treasure with the durable Riches and Righteousness thereof. And as he
plenteously and freely received of the Lord, so it was his delight, and great
Concern, in the Counsel of God, freely to give and impart Spiritual Gifts to
others, that many might be enriched with the same. And therefore through great
Travels, Sufferings and Exercises, he cheerfully went in the Lord's Service,
who blessed his Labors, so that he was Instrumental in the Lord's Hand for the
turning of many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God. He was
neither sparing of Himself, nor his Substance, to serve the Lord the Giver, who
blessed him as well with Temporal as Spiritual Blessings; of both which he was
very free, in the Love of God, to communicate; having an especial Care over the
Poor, that none might want; and a tender respect to the least appearance of
Good in any, that it might be encouraged: He was concerned for the general Good
of all, but especially Serviceable in the Church of Christ; being as a Pillar
in the House of God, firm and stable, supporting the Weak, and edifying the
Household in Love: His Ministry, attended by the Lord's Power, has often hit my
Condition aright, to my benefit, satisfaction and comfort: He was a Skilful
Labourer in God's Vineyard, knowing as well how to refresh, water, and gather
in due season, as to prune and keep up the Fence: He was a Skilful and Valiant
Soldier of the Lamb, in Innocence, shooting God's Arrows aright against
Babylon, and his Bow abode in its Strength: He was not afraid of the Archers
that shot at him, having on the Shield of Faith, which repelled their envious
Darts: His Fighting was not with Carnal, but Spiritual Weapons, under the
Banner of Christ, his Captain, which is Universal Love; in which Love he was
rooted and grounded, and flourished like a fresh and fruitful Tree, more and
more to the end of his time. I was with him at a Meeting the day next before
his Sickness began, being but three days before his departure; in which
Meeting, the Lord's Wisdom and Power in a great measure appeared with him,
opening many excellent things by him; and his Service therein was great,
treating very fully and clearly of the sundry Dispensations of God toward
Mankind, in the several Ages of the World, according to the several States and
Conditions thereof; in order that Mankind, that had been in a lost and
estranged Estate, in Transgression, might come again to be reconciled unto, and
acquainted with God, their Creator, and with him enjoy Everlasting Peace and
Happiness: Showing also, That God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners,
by his Angels and Prophets, spoke unto Mankind formerly, has in these last
days spoken to his People by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all
things; by whom also he made the World; who, in the fullness of time, came in
the Body prepared for him, Born of the Virgin Mary, in which he spoke and did
many excellent things, and suffered many things, yea, even unto Death; leaving
to all that should believe in him an Example, that they should follow his
steps; who laid down his Life for their Reconciliation to God, and Redemption
from all Iniquity. And also, according to the Scriptures, he very clearly and
largely declared and testified, That the largest, clearest, and most general
and excellent Dispensation of God's Love, in his Son Christ Jesus, is (as it
was in the Apostles time) in this our Age and Generation, in and by the Light
and Spirit of Christ, manifested in and unto his People, who walk in
Faithfulness and Obedience thereunto, to which he Exhorted all; and the Praise
and Glory of all he ascribed to God, whose Honor he sought, and not his own.
The substance of which sound Declaration, and living Testimony, by the Lord's
Power that attended it, was so Imprinted in my Mind and Memory that day, that I
believe I shall never forget it: So the Lord, who had made him comely, both
outwardly and inwardly, and adorned him with a meek, low, and quiet Spirit, and
with Wisdom, clearly to discern the deep things of God, in a great measure, and
to divide the Word of Truth aright, in tender Love and sound Judgment, was with
him to the end of his time; and when he had accomplished his great Service,
which the Lord called him unto, and accompanied him in, and blessed with
success, to the good of many, he, having fought the good Fight, and kept the
Faith, and finished his Course, laid down his Head in Peace, and Died in the
Lord, the righteous Judge; whose Cross in his time, he having cheerfully born,
now enjoys the Crown of Everlasting Life and Righteousness; and being at rest
from his Labors, his Works follow him; and the Testimony of his Works,
Writings, and Services may be of Benefit and Service in the Generations to
come, and his sweet Memorial will Live with the Just for ever.

He Departed the 11th Day of the 3d Month, 1696.

Henry Mollineux.
Given forth the 19th of the 8th Month, 1697.
Christopher Winn 's Testimony concerning Dear Roger Haydock, Deceased.
AS touching this my dearly beloved Friend, I cannot easily be silent, but
express something in Testimony concerning him, for a three fold Reason:

First, Because the Lord made him an Instrument to Preach the Word, by which my
hard and unbelieving Heart was reached and tendered; for although I had heard
the Truth preached before, by some Friends, yet it was no more than a Wonder to
me, remaining still in gainsaying; until it pleased God by his Ministry to open
my Heart, to receive the Word spoken by him; by his explaination of that Prayer
our Lord taught his Disciples, and showing who had right to call God Father,
was I convinced; at which I often marvelled, remembering my Zeal (in my young
Years) for the repeating of it, according to Tradition; yet so it seemed good
to the All wise God, in whom I have believed; and do reverently Bless his Name,
for sending his Messenger of Glad-tidings, to Proclaim the acceptable Day, and
Preach the Gospel; for which, at that time, he suffered Bonds and Imprisonment,
having only obtained Liberty for a little season, which he bestowed in visiting
the Churches. I am (through Mercy) amongst others, a Seal of his Ministry,
which he was careful, as well as prudent, to adorn in Conversation, using
sometimes (in familiar Discourse) to say, He that Preaches abroad, let him
Preach at home.

He was self-denying for the Truth's sake, he was always in a Care, and often
in Admonition, lest any should dishonor the Truth, by out-going, or disorderly
walking, whose Expression (sometimes) was, To Walk in Truth, was better than to
Talk of it.

Secondly, Because of my knowledge of him, after my Convincement; it falling to
my lot, of later time, to be a Member of that particular Meeting he belonged
to; in which time he showed, that in him had God settled a Care, as well to
Build up in the Faith, as to beget to it; helpful to further and promote Virtue
in us all, and in no wise Censorious as to the Testimony of young Friends, nor
frowning, whether they appeared before or after him: Yea further (without
boasting) I may say, he was a Man greatly fearing the Lord, apt to Teach,
prudent to Advise, as well as able to do it: I observed (in difficult matters)
few too hard for him, but by that Wisdom that was in him, he had strength to go
th^ow it: So that his Death was a Surprisal, as well as a felt and known Loss,
to the Churches amongst whom he frequently conversed; and because thereof, was
their Hearts affected with Sorrow. It may appear by his Journal, he made use of
his time, leaving Wife and Children, and Temporal Affairs, to visit the
Churches in these and other Nations.

My Third and Last Reason that has been a motive to give this brief Relation,
is, That near and true Respect I bore toward him in his Service amongst us; in
so much, that with a tendered Mind, I now remember him; and a sense of his
Spirit, my Heart tenders: And though to him to Dye is Gain, yet to us Loss. But
who may say to God, What do Thou? Or, Why is it Thus? But rather strengthen
our selves in the Lord, that we may, according to our Membership, be more
capable to serve the Lord and his People, as we had him and others for
Examples; it was a Portion of the Lord's Spirit that made him a Worthy in
Israel; that has made me at this time thus Testify of him; so that I can say,
He being Dead, yet speaks. God by his goodness grant to raise many such helps
in Israel, to the dignifying of his Name, which this our dear deceased Friend
sought.

Since I have known Truth (above twenty Years) and observed the Conversation of
such as were in Christ before me; I have beheld few (if any) more remote from
self-Praise or Exaltation: I believe (while in this Tabernacle) I shall not
forget his Advice to me, the first opportunity I had with him, after I was
convinced by him (viz.) Not to Attribute any thing to Man, but give God the
Glory; and with what Reverence and Gravity these things were expressed; his
Humility at that time reached the better part in me, and I hope will remain as
a Nail fastened in a sure Place: My Prayer to the Lord is that he may raise many
such Ministers in his now Israel; to the furtherance of his Name, Truth and
Holiness; and that many may be willing (as he was) to spend and be spent, to go
to and fro, that Knowledge may be increased.

What I have already testified of this my Father and Friend (for in his Bonds
he begat me) has eased my Spirit; I loved him dearly in his Life, and no less
at his Death, whose Savor reached to People of all sorts, and his Death
lamented. I was several times with him in his Sickness, and was concerned in
Mind to go down a little before his Departure, so that with many good Friends I
was present, and saw him put off this outward Tabernacle, though to our Sorrow;
yet in a full persuasion that he died the Death of the Righteous, prepared for
that future felicity, which a numberless Number is following after, which
neither Hell, nor Death, Beast or false Prophet, shall be able to hinder. Amen,
Amen.

Although I could further Amplify and Enlarge this my Testimony, yet shall
desist, with Real and Ardent Desires to the Lord, that he may order our
Conversation aright; and that all that names the Name of Jesus may depart from
Iniquity, and be sanctified to reign with the Righteous World without End,

Christopher Winn.
Penk^th, near Warrington in Lancashire, the 3d of the 3d Month, 1697.
William Ellis's Testimony concerning dear Friend, Roger Haydock,
I Have much in my Heart, concerning our dear Friend, Roger Haydock, though I
cannot express to the full what I know of him; but, however, I shall say the
less, not questioning but that there are Testimonies in the Hearts of many
Friends, to his Worth, and Faithfulness, and Service, in the Blessed and Holy
Truth, wherein we have believed, and felt the Blessed Effects of our Faith, to
the great Comfort and Consolation of our Souls.

It was about twenty one Years, the last 3d Month, since I was Convinced of the
Blessed Truth: And though I have since that day had many Instructors in Christ,
yet I have not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus was I begotten, by him,
through the Gospel, and the Operation of the Holy Spirit, which did Effectually
open a door of Entrance in my Heart, as it opened a door of Utterance unto him:
It was at a Meeting at Bradley, near Skipton, in Yorkshire, where he declared
the Day of God, which was broken forth in this Age, in great Splendour to
Enlighten Mankind; he spoke many things which reached the States of many in
that day, alluding from the State of Israel of old, who passed through the Sea,
and saw the wondrous Works which the Lord wrought for their Deliverance, yet
some forgot him, and made themselves Idols of their Jewels and Earings; saying,
These be thy Gods, O Israel, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; and
then sat down to Eat and Drink, and rose to Play: With many more precious
Words, wherewith he did sound forth the glorious Gospel; I was abundantly
satisfied that day, with what I had felt and heard: So I took heed unto the
Word in my Heart, unto which I had been directed by him; and it grew and
Increased, and my Faith Increased, and I became, according to my small Measure,
obedient thereunto; and my Soul was in love with the Truth, and the Followers
thereof, especially with him who had been the Instrument of publishing the same
to me; his Feet was indeed beautiful unto me, and I could say in Truth, Blessed
be him that Comes in the Name of the Lord: I saw his Zeal, and was sensible of
the Sincerity of his Heart, and Endeavors in his Lifetime, to promote, to his
utmost, the great Name of God.

And when (through Providence) I came to be more Intimately Acquainted with
him, I was confirmed in my sense of him, and his Love to God, and Zeal for the
Truth, and have in many private Opportunities with him, been abundantly
satisfied in the sweet Society and Fellowship we have enjoyed together; and I
am fully persuaded that his Root was in the Truth, and that he was sensible
that the Root bore him, and he grew therein; and labored much to bring People
to be established upon the Sure Rock, Christ Jesus, the Root of Life, upon
which the True Church is Built: And I know his Labors in that Respect was
great, and the Lord saw his Faithfulness, and poured out upon him the Spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding, and of a sound Mind, to promote Good Discipline and
Comely Order in his Church; that She might be like the True Church of Old,
which John spoke of, under the Similitude of A Woman, who was clothed with the
Sun, and had the Moon under her Feet: Which Glory did far Excel the Glory that
attended Solomon in his best State; for the sake of which, the Queen of the
South came far, and was overcome with the Sight thereof.

Thus did he Labor and Travel in his Day, spending himself, that the Church
might be adorned with the Comely Attire and Ornaments of the Holy Spirit, and
that the Name of the Lord Jesus, her Head, might spread to the Ends of the
Earth.

Blessed be the great God of Heaven and Earth, that raised up him, and many
more, who could hold the Sword, and be Expert in the War; like the ( Cant. 3.7,
8.) Threescore Valiant Men of Israel, who kept the Bed of Solomon: Or, like the
(Judges 20.15, 16.) Men of Benjamin, who could Sling to an Hairs Breadth, and
not miss.

The Lord Raise up more such Faithful Laborers in his Vineyard, and give them
Wisdom and Zeal, to Train up those who shall believe in the Truth, in sound
Discipline, as well as in Word and Doctrine, that he may Restore unto the
Church (...) 1.26.) Judges as at the First, and (...) as at the Beginning; that
Men may call them, The City of Righteousness, The Faithful City,

William Ellis.
London, the 20th of the 6th Month, 1697.
A Short, Plain, and True Testimony, for and in the behalf of (...) ^ceased
Friend, Roger Haydock.
ALthough I heard that some Friends had Intentions to Write something by way of
Testimony, as a Memorial of this Servant of Christ, above named; yet upon
Consideration, I did not find my self clear and easy (though delayed for a
time) except I did cast in my Mite amongst the rest, having had knowledge of
him, since he was convinced, and received the Truth, which was in the Year
1667, since which time, I observed that he was still in a growing Condition in
the Truth, to his last End, as a Tree planted near the River of Life, in God's
Garden, which was always Green, whose Branch withered not, but spread over the
Wall, that they without might be induced to come in, to be made partakers of
the Fruit of the blessed Vine, Christ, (in due season) as faithfulness to the
Call and Gift of God was lived in.

He was a Man that had good Will for all, and true Love, especially to the
Household of Faith, Poor or Rich; was no Respecter of Persons in those Cases,
but had an Eye to the Inward State and Condition, so that as Truth did increase
and prosper in any, his Love increased; for it was his great delight to see
Truth prosper, and Friends in it, for he loved Friends for Truth's sake: God
endued him with Wisdom from above, that he had a sense of Inward States, so
that he could divide the Word aright; Bread, and sweet Wine for Obedient
Children, and Judgment for the Rebellious: But with such Wisdom and Moderation,
that gained upon many of them, so as to consider what it was they rebelled
against, even the Light of Jesus Inwardly, discovering that which is Evil.

He certainly learned of Christ to be Meek and Low in Heart, very clear from an
exalted Spirit, but ready to be a Servant to the least Child: I believe it was
pleasant to him to be doing Good; he was a Man given to Hospitality himself,
and very Careful of the Poor; I heard him once say in a Meeting, upon occasion,
We have enough, let not the Poor want.

He was a Man of good Utterance in his Declaration, and the Gospel he preached,
he lived in, and preached it Freely, as he had Freely received it from God; it
was the Power of God, that comes over the Power of Satan, in Man: His Doctrine
dropped as the Dew and small Rain, to the refreshing of the tender Buds and
Branches in the Vine, Christ, and comforting the stronger that did abide
therein; he was an Help and Support to the Cast-down, of which I have some
Experience; and although he was younger than I, yet I had a great esteem of him
for Truth's sake, and did honor him as an Elder; yea, with double honor, for
he was worthy; who ruled his own House well, and took care of the Church of
Christ: I have been often upon occasion in his Family, and never law better
Government in any Family, wheresoever I came, than there: He has left a good
Example behind him to his dear Wife, who observes it diligently.

He was faithful in that Work God caled him unto, which many are Witnesses of,
in his own Native Country, besides his Services in other Nations, as, Scotland,
Ireland, Holland and Germany.

He has been several times a Sufferer for Truth, but never daunted, but
reigned in Authority, in the Power of God, as a King, over the Power of
Darkness and Persecution, which was no more to him, than a little Dust under
his Feet.

I was with him in a Meeting, where some in Office (as was said) assisted with
a great Company of Rude Fellows, with great Staves, making a noise like Mad
Men, finding him at Prayer, had like to have pulled him off his Knees, but were
something restrained, of which he too^ no notice; but when he did rise, they
laid hold on him, and hurried him away out of the Meeting, with an howling
noise, like a Company of Wolves that had made a Prey upon a Lamb, for so he
behaved himself; all which did not so much touch nor hurt him, as to alter his
Countenance, as I perceived: But after the Rude People were gone, Friends
continued their Meeting; and there being some from several Meetings, we had a
good Meeting; for the Power of Darkness was driven away, and the Enemies
blinded. And this was at Freckleton, in the Fylde, where there is now a settled
Meeting, and has been for several Years. He was also Prisoner for the Truth at
Lancaster-Castle several times.

Now, in as much as I am fully satisfied that his Spirit is Crowned with Life
Eternal in Heaven (where my Spirit, in some Measure, has unity with him, as he
is brought to my Remembrance) Why should not his Name, which is precious, be
kept in a living Remembrance from one Generation to another, for the stirring
up others to follow him, as he followed Christ? That over all, God may have all
the Honor, the Glory, and the Praise, who alone is worthy; for this my Friend,
in his Life time, never sought it to himself, but sought the Honor of God only.

He was of excellent Service in these parts where he lived, upon Truth's
Account; but what he did, it was by the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit and
Grace given unto him, so nothing to be attributed to Man, though he was a good
Man; for out of the good Treasure of his Heart, he brought forth good things.

He was of a Noble Spirit, a Person Prudent in Matters, and the Lord was with
him; his Company was Pleasant, and his Discourse Profitable.

I may hope that none will be offended with me, that I give so much
Commendations to God's Workmanship, both Inward and Outward, that God may have
the Honor and Praise of his own Work: And when he, according to the Will of
God, had finished his Course, the Lord was pleased to favor him with but a
short Sickness: He had his Accounts ready, he laid down his Head in Peace, and
dyed in the Faith, the 11th day of the 3d Month, 1696.

Isaac Ashton, Sen.
Given forth the 21st of the 7th Month, 1697.
James Laithwait 's Testimony concerning Roger Haydock, deceased.
OUR Faithful and Well-beloved Friend, Roger Haydock, was Born of honest
Parents, who were of good Repute in the World; and concerning him I have this
Testimony to bear, from a certain Knowledge I had of him, for I knew him soon
after he was Convinced, and received the Knowledge of the Truth; and I then
took great notice of him, he appearing in great Humility, and under a great
Inward Exercise and Travel of Spirit, before he appeared in a public Testimony
for the Truth, which was about the Year 1669. At which time, a great Power and
clear Life was shown forth in him, in the beginning of his day, it being a day
of the Revelation of the great Power of God, and of his Powerful Word of
Eternal Life; of which, this our faithful Friend was a Minister; to which work
the Lord by his Grace had called him, and he freely gave up, and devoted
himself to that Service; for which the Lord had well fitted and qualified him,
and made him of great Ability through the Spirit, giving him sound Knowledge,
and deep Discerning, to find out the Mysterious Workings of the Enemy of
Mankind, so that he was very skillful to divide the Word of Truth aright. And
at that time there was great Service to be done for the Lord, for then many had
tender Desires after the Knowledge of God, and were Seeking and Enquiring after
the way of Truth, which leads to Eternal Life; and to such he was an Helper,
and faithful Instructor in the Lord Jesus; and being zealously Careful that he
might complete the Work and Service that the Lord had called him unto, and
promote the Interest and Honor of God, and be Instrumental for the good of
many of the Children of Men; He went under a great Concern and Exercise of
Spirit, through great Travels, Sufferings and Labor of Body, preaching the
Gospel of Christ freely, that many might be turned to God, and gain the
Knowledge of him, and be gathered into the one Fold and Pasture of Eternal
Life, out of the By-Ways, and Dark Paths, and Vain Religions of the
worldly-minded; and so might know a coming out of Darkness, and a walking in
the true Light, and way of Life and Righteousness, that they might please their
Creator, and answer the end of his Love, revealed in his Son, and manifested in
the Light: And the Lord, who employed him in his Service, blessed his
endeavors therein; for many received his Testimony, and thereby were turned
from Darkness to Light, and out of the Paths of Error, into the Way of
Righteousness.

His Labors and Travels are in part declared by his Journal, which shows his
Travels in several Countries and Nations, and sometimes amongst People of a
strange Language: A blessed work he went through in faithfulness unto the End.

He was a great Helper, and of great Service in the Church of Christ, and his
Labors and Ministry therein were very successful; he was often prevalent to
end Differences and Discord, where the Enemy had sown any amongst Brethren: His
Doctrine received of the Lord was sound, and deep Matters were often opened by
him, and it was his delight to do Service for God, and to help the good Work
forward in any; he being earnestly concerned that all that knew God, might
Glorify him as God: And the Lord blessed him, whilst here, with such Mercies
as appertain to the making of a Man's Life Comfortable in this World, which the
Lord saw (no doubt) he was worthy of; who richl^ recompenseth all those that
Love him, and Seek his Honor, and the Welfare of his Church, as this our
faithful Friend did, and his Memorial will be long upon the Earth amongst the
Generations of the Righteous.

I might write much concerning him, and his Virtuous Life, which was Comely and
Honorable, and of a loving and friendly Behavior amongst Men: His Company was
Pleasant and Profitable, and many were sorry to part with him.

But though his Removal hence be a loss to many, yet I am well assured that he
has gained thereby, and is in the enjoyment of Peace, and of an endless
Treasure in Heaven, amongst the number of the Blessed, with Christ in his
Kingdom; and being at rest from his Labors, his Works follow him: And it is my
earnest desire, that we who are left behind (which is but for a little space)
may so improve our Time and Gifts, that in the end, we may have a Share of the
same Reward, that is laid up for all the Faithful.

James Laithwait.

A Brief Account, etc.
An EPISTLE to FRIENDS of Blackrod- Meeting.
IN Love unfeigned do I Salute you, and in the Fear of God Exhort you to
Faithfulness, and in the Word of the Lord Counsel you, To be Watchful in your
Meetings, that the weighty Work and Service of God, which he has concerned you
in, be not slighted by any of you, through Unfaithfulness, and want of
Watchfulness.

Friends, The Seed which God has sown is good; if you be watchful, it will
grow and prosper, and cover the Ground, and the Earth will be blessed: But if
you sleep, the Enemy will sow Tares, which will grow up with it, and choke it;
so the Ground that affords them nourishment will be cursed. This is the Word of
Truth unto you; so as in Love to the Seed which is good, and in Bowels of
Compassion to your Immortal Souls, which are of great Price in the sight of
God, desiring the Seed's Prosperity, and your Souls Good, in the sense of its
Suffering, and of the Deprivation of God's Love unto you, who, in this
Incumbent Duty of Watchfulness, have been negligent; it has been upon me many
times, in the Motion of God's Spirit, to Reprove your Negligence, and likewise
Exhort and Admonish you to Faithfulness, in that Duty, whilst conversant with
you; even so, since remote from you, outwardly separated, and under Bonds
restrained, the sense of the Nonperformance of that so weighty a Duty, on your
behalf, who are herein concerned (whereby God's Righteous Soul has been vexed,
and the Spirit of the Upright and Sincere-hearted to God, amongst you, have
been made sad) has sometimes come before me, to my grief; and yet remains in
my view, to the saddening of my Spirit, who am truly a well-wisher of Zion, and
one (though outwardly confined) yet travels for the Prosperity of Jerusalem, in
Spirit, which is at liberty (which Man cannot confine.) Therefore it entered my
Heart, in the Word of Truth, to signify God's Counsel unto you, That ye be
watchful, that the good Seed which God has sown may grow deeply, having depth
of Earth, even room in the honest Heart; that it may bring forth, in some
Thirty, in some Sixty, in some an Hundred fold; but in all of you, some to his
Praise; lest the Enemy sow his Seed, and it grow, (and the Ground be nigh unto
cursing) whose end is to be burned.

And Friends, another word has often run thorough me, when present with you,
That you Love one another; and the same word is in me, though I be from you,
whereby I know the Cause yet remains in you: And truly I may take up a
Lamentation for you, who are concerned, who will not be counseled: How often
has the Lord striven with you? How, often has his Word been spoken unto you?
And how often has his Servants labored amongst you? And do you yet live in
Strife and Contention? Truly I am sorry for you, and that the precious Truth is
dishonored by you; it is a grief upon my Spirit, and upon the Spirits of the
Upright-hearted among you: If therefore you have an Ear to hear, hear; put away
Strife, Envy and Contention, and labor a Reconciliation in the Love, if so be
the Lord's Anger may be appealed, which is kindled against you, because of
these things, and you perish not in his hot Displeasure.

And Friends, You who are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful (for a Remnant of
such I know there is amongst you, who keep your Garments unspotted of the
World, answering the Pure in all) Dwell you in the Feeling of the weighty Life,
which has seasoned you, that in it you may Read me, Feel me, and Embrace me,
in the Arm of my Father's Love, even as you are Read, Felt and Embraced; that
though outwardly separated, yet in that Inseparable Bond of Unity; in which we
are One, and our place One, even with the Son, to behold his Glory; we may lie
down together, and Solace our selves together, in the Overcoming of our
Father's Love, whose Care is over us, and whose Love flows toward us: To whom
be Glory for Ever and Ever.

Your Brother in true Love, R. Haydock.
Lancaster-Castle, the 2d of the 8th Month, 1674.
THE SKIRMISHER CONFOUNDED:

Being a Collection of several Passages, taken out of some Books of John
Cheyney's, who styles himself, The Author of the Skirmish upon Quakerism.

In which is the Baseness, Wickedness, Contradictions, Lies, Hypocrisy,
Unbelief, Confusion and Blasphemy of that Skirmishing Priest Discovered, and He
Laid Open, to the View of every one who shall read with a Single Eye.

Collected by a Friend to the Truth, and a Well-wisher to the Souls of all
People, ROGER HAYDOCK.

Isa. 54.17. No Weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every
Tongue that shall rise up in judgment against thee, thou shall condemn. This is
the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord; and their Righteousness is of me,
says the Lord. Psalm 7.15. He made a Pit, and dug it, and is fallen into
the Ditch which he made. London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, 1699.

THE SKIRMISHER Confounded, etc.
JOhn Cheyney, in his Book, entitled, A Call to Prayer, etc. in the Preface to
the Reader, says thus, I would be loath to fasten any Error upon any Person,
which I can perceive him not to hold; and I would Heartily Interpret all Words,
so far as I can, with Conscience and Justice to the Truth.

The next Page, of the same Preface to the Reader, thus, I do not know (...),
by their Opinion of the Light within, Devils and Damned Souls may be saved.

In his Book, entitled, The Skirmish, etc. p. 4. Penn 's Position does
justify the Irish Rebellion, the French Massacre, the Marian Persecution, the
Ten Persecutions of the Primitive Churches, the Gunpowder Treason.

P. 13. of the same Book, I would be glad to make the best I can of your
Position.

Auimadversion, Can there be greater Baseness, than under pretense of Candor,
to be thus Absurd? Is it not great wickedness, in this Skirmisher, to make such
Ungodly Consequences of so Harmless a Position, and yet afterward say, He
would be glad to make the best he can of it?

Here follows the PRIEST's Contradictions.
John Cheyney The Skirmisher against OR, fighting John Cheyney, Himself.

Assertion.
1. CAll to Prayer, p. 117. I dar^ say, let the Light within alone, and say
nothing to it, and it shall never move any Quaker, or ungodly Soul, to pray,
till Death, or the Flames of Hell, shall awake them.

2. P. 119. A Quaker, or any other, may live a secure Flesh-pleasing Life all
his Days, and never have one effectual Motion to Prayer, if he be ruled by the
Light within.

3. P. 119. The Quakers could hardly devise a more sin-pleasing Doctrine, than
never to pray without a Motion from the Light within.

4. P. 109. Their grand Principle of the Light within, is not consistent with
Right Prayer.

5. P. 76. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of Supplication, he commands and moves
to Prayer. p. 20. The Spirit does intercede in us -- we could do nothing
without the special Help of God's Spirit -- without the special Help of God's
Spirit we can do no Spiritual Work.

6. Quakerism Subverted, p. 18. The Light within tells me, there is a God.

7. Skirmish. p. 13. The Light within, which should be Man's Guide, takes part
with the Flesh, and Satan against God.

8. Call to Pray. p. 111. They are no People of Prayer, and make no use of
Prayer. P. 101. A Prayerless People, of a Prayerless Religion. -- Prayerless
Pretenders to Holiness.

9. Skirmish. p. 13. If the Scriptures go, farewell God, and Christ, and
Heaven, and all Law and Rule.

10. O Lord, thou know that I am what I profess my self to be, Thy Servant,
sincere and upright,

John Cheyney,

Contradiction.
1. CAll to Prayer, p. 119. For though the Light may move, yet it will be but a
weak Motion, and the Motion of the Darkness, or Fleshly Part, will overcome.

2. P. 119. That which should Move them to Prayer, the Light within, is
overpowered by the Darkness.

3. P. 118. I Will tell thee what keeps me from Prayer; when my Conscience, and
the Light within, moves me to Prayer, my Sloth and Laziness, my Deadness, want
of Life, and Hunger, and Spirit in my Soul.

4. P. 3, 4. Right Prayer is not mere Words, nor a mere Work of Nature, nor
bare Humane Industry and Striving, without the special Grace and Concurrence of
God.

5. P. 115. Their great Assertion, that Prayer is not to be done without the
Motion of the Light within -- some have confessed, they never Prayed without
the Motion from the Spirit of God. P. 98. You need no Motion of the Spirit to
tell you when to feed and cloth your Bodies; but you need a Motion from the
Spirit, to put you upon to dress and feed your Souls.

6. P. 101. Trust not that blind deceitful Guide within you, the Light within
you, left it lead you into Everlasting Darkness.

7. P. 61. When God and Conscience have called to this Duty, a lazy, carcarnal,
self (...) Mind has kept us away.

8. P. 114. If Report be true, when they do Pray; for I have heard and believe,
that sometimes they Pray.

9. P. 62. Must a hungry Man need a Scripture to tell him how often he must
Eat? No more does a hungry Soul need a Scripture to tell him how often he must
Pray.

Besides these Contradictions, out of his Books, I shall add one more, out of
two Manuscripts, written with his own Hand; which I think he will not deny (and
I am certain in this he has no cause to blame the Printer, as sometime he did)
but if he denies it, I can both produce and prove it:

10. Given forth by a weak Believing Christian, and Disobedient Servant of
Christ,

John Cheyney.

I shall here set down some of his Confessions to the Light, Grace and Spirit
of God; and then discover his Lies, etc.
Page 120. THE Light then prevails Habitually, and there is a kind of continual
Exercise of the Soul, by Internal Prayer.

Page 122. The Soul and Heart of Prayer is within, seen to God.

Page 4. There is a great deal of Praying outwardly, which is not right and
sincere Praying, outwardly Balling and Canting.

Page 90. He that turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer
shall be Abomination.

R. H. queries, Is not the Law Light? And where is this Law, and the Ear also
that should be turned to it, witho^ (...), or within Man?

Page 7. All right Prayer must be in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ -- The
bare naming of Christ is not enough.

Page 12. Whilst there is Grace in the Soul, there will be a Root of Prayer.

Page 28. What is God to me, if I have no Life or Spirit in me, wherewith to
seek him, and apply my self to him?

R. H. queries, Whether all Men have not need of Life on Spirit in them (as
well as Priest Cheyney) wherewith to seek God, and apply themselves to God? And
if so, Why ^oes this Priest t^l the People, The Quakers mangle God and Christ,
and cut them in pieces, because they say. God has given People a Measure of
Life, Light and Spirit, wherewith they may seek after, and apply themselves to
God?

Page 20. The Spirit does interoede in us, by a kind of a continual restless
Motion and Importunity toward God.

Page 57. Wicked Poople, were it not to still their Consciences, they would not
pray that little which they do.

R. H. queries, Does not the Light in the Conscience move them to Pray? Is it
as a drunken negligent Coachman? Or rather, Does it not do its Office truly,
and is clear of the Priest's wicked Charge? Hear him farther:

Page 84. This is the Language and Practice of Worldliness, Stand by, God;
stand by, Christ, and Eternal Life; cense Conscience, away Spirit, let my Soul
sink.

R. H. Sure God and Christ, the Light and Spirit, are not to be blamed, since
they are bidden, Stand by; and are turned from, before the Soul can sink. But
what a Strait does this bring the Skirmisher into? who, in his Book, entitled,
Quakerism Subverted, p. 31. tells us, If the Light be blameless or in effect he
says, (for his words admit of the Consequence) If there be any thing in Man,
though of God, and not of Man, that is Innocent and Blameless before God; then
the Quakers are in the Right, and all that he has writ, as also his Skirmish,
must fall to the Ground, and he must acknowledge himself to be utterly
defeated, and to have lost the Day.

Now, that there is something of God in Man, he also grants, p. 28. of the same
Book, in these words, There is something of God, something of Satan; Flesh and
Spirit, Light and Darkness.

Now, to the Conscience of the (...) in the sight of God, do I leave it, (...)
Judgment may be given betwixt the Skirmisher and the Quakers, whether the
Skirmisher be not utterly Routed. Hear him farther:

Call to Prayer, p. 103. So dangerous is it to resist the Spirit of the Lord,
and to imprison the Truth in Unrighteousness, and to go about to salve an
Vlcerous Conscience, by false Cures; they may serve for a while; but the day is
at Hand, when God will search in all.

R. H. The Priest grants the Spirit of the Lord may be resisted, and the Truth
in Unrighteousness imprisoned. Now I query, Whether this Resisting the Spirit,
and Imprisoning the Truth, be within Man, or without him?

Page 41. A Gracious Man (says the Priest) may silently Worship God, and Speak
to God, and so as none may hear but himself, and yet be most fervent in Prayer.
And yet this Priest scoffingly says, p. 101, 102. How many dumb and silent
Meetings have you, without either Prayer or Preaching? P. 19. Men may give us
Words and Forms to use, but they cannot give us the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication. P. 17. (...) ^ows how to pray to God, further than God shall
teach and enable him?

R. H. querieth, Whether it be not safe for all then, to feel God's Spirit with
them, to teach them in Prayer? Hear what the Priest himself says:

Page 21. When the Spirit of the Lord is from Man, he can do nothing; Prayer
sticks in his Mouth like Choak-Cheese.

Thus much by the Priest, in Honor of the Light, Grace, and Spirit of God, in
Prayer.

I shall here add some of the Priest's Lies, and so proceed.
Page 122. The Quakers declare themselves to be Hypocrites.

Page 50. Christ answers, Get you gone, away with you (to wit, the five foolish
Virgins) ye are Workers of Iniquity, I never knew you.

Page 140. I am passed through the Red Sea, Egypt is behind me; I am escaped
out of Sodom; I am from under the Bondage of spiritual Pharaoh, the Devil, who
once was my Father and Master.

Skirmish, p. 2. The Quakers Prof^ build their Religion and Hopes upon, the
Scriptures.

Call to Prayer, p. 15. God hears wicked Men in their distress, and grants them
many good things, in answer to their Prayers.

Answ. This contradicts the Scripture, If I (said David) regard Iniquity in
my Heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm 66.18.

Besides these, there are many other forged Lies in his Books; which, for
Brevity sake, I pass by at this time.

He tells the World. p. 115. That he has discoursed with some Quakers, who
have confessed to him, that they never Pray without a Motion from God's Spirit.

R. H. queries, Why should they pray without God's Spirit? J. C. himself
confesses elsewhere (as I have hinted before) That nothing can be done in
Prayer, without the special Help of God's Spirit; yet he blames the Quakers for
refusing to Pray, without the Spirit move them: But had they not better do so,
than go before or without the Spirit, and have their Prayer stick in their
Mouths, like Choak-Cheese, as said John Cheyney before? But in this I have
reason to suspect Forgery, That (...) Quakers should confess to him, They, in
many Years, have not had a Motion to Prayer. Now, if his Tale be true, let him
give us the Names of such; if it be false, let his Iniquity stop his Mouth, and
let Shame come over him. But to proceed:

Call to Prayer, p. 42. God is a Spirit, and he requires Spirit in every
Performance, and nothing but the Life and Spirit, and Zeal and Fervency, in all
our Duties and Services will please him. Mal. 1. and last, Cursed be the
Deceiver, which has a Male in his Flock, and voweth and sacrifices unto God a
corrupt thing.

R. H. Well, enough for the Downfall of this Skirmisher: The Priest confesses,
he has a Male; asserts, God requires nothing else; neither will he be pleased
with any thing else, but Spirit, Life, Zeal and Fervency: He grants, That the
Deceiver, who has a Male, may sacrifice to God a corrupt thing, to wit, A
Cold, Distracted, Lifeless, Dead Prayer; and such Prayers, Offerings and
Sacrifices are Abomination to God; no more pleasing to him, than was the
cutting off of a Dog's Neck, or offering Swines Blood; and unto such Deceivers
the Curse is due.

Now, how near this Priest (...) Prayers are thereunto, read in his own Words,
published to the World, which need little Animadversion, because they speak
fully of themselves; he ought not to be angry with me for repeating them, since
he has caused them to be printed; if he be ashamed of them, let him call them
in, and recant; and what I have in my custody, he shall have freely. But to the
Matter, in order to show his Hypocrisy:

Call to Prayer, p. 45, 46. We all come under Reproof for our Coldness and
Deadness in Prayer; there is much detestable Hypocrisy and Coldness committed
by us in our solemn Prayers to God, both in secret, in private, and in public.
Does not this speak forth it self? But hear him further: What is this but to
mock the Almighty God, and to sport with Consuming Fire, and dally and play
with Everlasting Torment, and be in jest and complement with Heaven and Hell,
and make a light matter of Sin and Eternity? What is this but a Profanation of
God's Name, and going to Hell upon our Knees, and a Provoking God to deny us
those Mercies which we so faintly beg? -- Why do we pray like canting Beggars,
like Dreamers and Sleepers?

Page 135. O my God, forgive me all my Omission of Prayer, all my Coldness,
Deadness, Lukewarmness and Distractions in Prayer.

Page 139. I am distracted in Prayer, I am soon weary, I come poorly off, my
Foes are too hard for me -- Why go I mourning all the Day long, when the
Comforter, which should relieve my Soul, is gone from me?

Page 145. It is a great Misery, as well as Sin, to be Lukewarms in Prayer -- I
Tremble to have my Lukewarm Prayers abhorred by God, and spued out of his
Mouth, and cast in my Face, like Dung. -- If I get to Heaven, it must be by
this Trade of begging.

Page 143. This Priest Cheyney tells us, If he be idle in Prayer, he shall have
but a ragged tattered Soul: Mark, he says, I shall not be able to cover or
conceal my Wickedness from the World.

R. H. querieth, Whether this be not a Hypocrite indeed; who, by Distracted
Prayers, thinks to hide his Wickedness from the World? Hear him further:

Page 47. O loitering Souls! Unprofitable and unfruitful Servants all of us to
our Heavenly Master! Let us be ashamed of our Doings, and mend our Prayers,
lest God spue them out of his Mouth.

Page 131. Had thou, O my Soul, but a right Sense of God, thou could not
but be fervent in Prayer! Thou prayest, but how? Exceeding coldly.

R. H. The Priest grants, he has not a right Sense of God, and that he prays
exceeding coldly; yet in page 141. he says, But the Lord is with me, and shall
preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom. But mark Reader, what follows in the
same page: But yet my Soul is much sadded, and cast down, when I consider what
Strivings and Fightings there is in my Prayer, against it self; one part in me
would be more Holy, and another part contradicts it, and would be as I am,
and have leave to be Unholy; one side is for God and Heaven, and the other side
favors Earth, and is all for the Flesh, and grudgeth every painful Sigh for
Heaven: O how is my Soul tossed between these two Contenders! And I am
compelled to pray Hypocritically, and Dissemble with God, and utter Untruths
unto him that searches the Hearts, and delights not but in upright Lips.

But this is not all (though enough to confound this Skirmisher) Yet he shuts
up himself in Unbelief. Hear him: But either it must be so in part, or there
will be no Praying in this World.

R. H. querieth, Must there either be Hypocritical Praying, Dissembling with
God, and uttering Untruths to him that searches the Hearts, or no Praying in
this World? God forbid: Let this Lying, Dissembling Hypocrite's Mouth be
stopped; the Spirit of God inditeth better Matter; it teaches all the Sons of
God, who are led by it, to pray with it, and with Undestanding, (not rude or
distracted, like Priest Cheyney) but to offer to God, what God has prepared;
for he prepares the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice, which as sweet Incense
is accepted of him: He hears his own Spirit, and another spirit he will not
hear. Hear what he says to their Congregations:

Call to Prayer, p. 30. O how little of Prayer is there in our Congregations?
Indeed there is Praying in many Congregations, but it is rather a Mocking of
God, most Vile Hypocrisy; so often as the public Prayers are read and
repeated by the Minister and People, so often the Name of God is taken in vain
exceedingly, by many Hypocritical Ministers and People. And yet the Priest
says of himself, p. 142. I am the most Rude and Unskillful of all thy Ministers.

I shall now touch his Confusion, and so discover his Blasphemy.
Call to Prayer, p. 16. Prayer is a Holy and Reverend Communion of sinful Dust
and Ashes, with the great and glorious God.

Page 108. He tells of a Quaker, that had so much of Christ's Spirit and
Religion Outwardly in Him, as to pray.

Page 52. I think there are but few Hypocrites that keep up a constant Course
of Prayer; and yet I cannot say, but there may be some, and Many.

Page 145. Though Christ be not present upon Earth, Corporally and Carnally, he
is truly present by his Spirit, and he dwells in his Saints. This latter is for
the Quakers.

Page 66. The Priest says, Behold we are lean, exceeding lean, like blasted
Corn; there is Husk, but no Corn.

Page 72. Thence it is that we are like raw Flesh, unsodden Christians,
Milk-sops.

Quakerism Subverted, p. 27, 28. The Priest says, In every Man, since the
Fall, there is something of God, and something of Satan; Flesh and Spirit,
Light and Darkness. P. 34. he says, This Light (which is something of God, by
him placed in Opposition to Satan, Spirit in Opposition to Flesh) is guilty of
all Sins of Omission and Commission, which the Soul is charged with, and guilty
of; it has a Hand in all Thought-Sins, Tongue-Sins, Life-Sins: This is the
Language of this Blasphemer. Hear him further:

Page 21. The worst of Men has a Light within him; and so we say, That Jesus
Christ is the true Light, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the
World, John 1.9. P. 23. He calls this Light within, The Quakers Diana. Call to
Prayer, p. 112. The Quakers Dagon. In Blasphemy of the true God and Christ:
once more hear him:

Quakerism Subverted; p. 33. The Light goes down with the Soul into Hell. p.
34. The Light within, in Hell, is turned into a Self-tormenting Light. What is
this but to say, The Light of Christ tormenteth it self in Hell: Confusion and
Blasphemy!

But for all this, this Skirmishing Priest would not be called a Deceiver,
Liar, Hypocrite; no more would his Generation, the Scribes and Pharisees of
old: Yet he tells us himself, Call to Prayer, p. 113. I could bring many that
could not endure such Ministers as I. No marvel, Skirmisher! Many see thee to
be a Cloud without Water. But if this Priest means his own Generation, it is no
wonder; for though it be not very long since he turned Parson, and crept in
among the Chemmarims, or Men of the Back Robe (for formerly he he was a
Justice's Clerk, and thirsted eagerly after the Quakers Money, but as yet I
hear not that he returned them their Money again) yet in this short time he
has defiled his own Nest, charged his Brethren with Vile Hypocrisy, styled
them Hypocritical Ministers; yet of himself says, I am the most Rude and
Unskillful of all thy Ministers. Has he not marked his own Nose? What
constrained him to Pray Hypocritically, Dissemble with God, and Lie to the
Almighty? Not the Truth, for there is no Lie of it; not the Spirit of Truth,
for that leads into all Truth: He has been acted by another spirit. Well, he
is seen by many to be what he is, an Hypocrite.

And whereas he says, Many will not endure such Preachers as he: I add, No
doubt. But from henceforth some that have heard him, and approved of him, being
simply betrayed by him, now seeing him, will hear him no more, but quite turn
their Backs on that Rude, Distracted, Hypocritical, Dissembling, Lying
Minister; all which, his own Confession proves him to be; also, a Base, Wicked,
Confused, Blaspheming Priest; all which his own Works prove him to be.

Now if any moderate Enquirer shall ask a Reason, Why I heap these things upon
him? I answer, I am only an Instrument in the Lord's Hand, and the God of
Heaven is pouring Contempt upon him; he has lift up himself, and not by the
Lord, and therefore the Lord is casting him down. For the Truth's sake, and for
the sake of the Simple-hearted, where this may come, have I collected these
passages out of his Works, giving the Title of the Book, and Page, in which
whosoever desires, may in his Books read them more at large. Many gross things I
have passed by in his Books, especially Quakerism subverted; as also in his
Skirmish; the latter being fully answered already. It is for Truth's sake, and
the sake of People's Souls, which are misguided, that thus far I have run
through his dirty Channel; what I have written I commend to every Man's
Conscience in the light of God, who am Truth's Friend, and the Soul's Friend,
but an Enemy to that which misguided,

Roger Haydock.

A HYPOCRITE UNVAILED, AND A BLASPHEMER Made Manifest:

Being an Examination of John Cheyney's False Relation of his Dispute with the
Quakers at Arley-Hall in Cheshire, the 23d of the 11th Month, called January,
1699. Published in his Book, Entitled, A Warning to Souls, etc.

Wherein John Cheyney's Lies and Slanders are Detected, his Hypocrisy is
Unvailed, his Confusion and Blasphemy is Manifested, which he has Published in
his foresaid Book: That the Simple-hearted People may see John Cheyney, the
pretended Gospel-Minister, is No Minister of Jesus Christ.

By a Disciple of Christ, Roger Haydock.

Isa. 28.15. We have made Lies our Refuge, and under Falsehood have we hid our
selves. Verse 17. The Hail shall sweep away the Refuge of Lies, and the Waters
shall overflow the biding-place. Obad. 1.3. The Pride of thine Heart has
deceived thee. Rev. 13.6. He opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to
Blaspheme his Name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in Heaven. A HYPOCRITE
Unvailed; AND A BLASPHEMER Made Manifest,. etc.
IT is not a Narrative of the Dispute I had with John Cheyney, at Arley-Hall in
Cheshire, upon the 23d Day of the 11th Month last past, that in this Treatise I
am purposed to give; for that would require an impartial Reiteration, and
faithful Relation, of all that was spoken on both parts; which Task I am
unwilling to undertake.

First, Because I have not John Cheyney's Crutch, which he leaned upon at the
said Dispute; I mean his Notes, which he Disputed by (he may well bear the
Repetition of his own Expression, published to the World in his Sermons of
Hypocrisy, p. 203, and 204. where he says, Such as do use Notes in public,
it is but as a Lame Man, that makes use of a Crutch, or as a Weak-sighted Man
of Spectacles: And that he made use of his Notes in that Public Dispute, it
was evident to some Hundreds of People) which Notes I having not, cannot relate
every thing that was spoken by J. C. in his assaying to prove his false Charges.

Secondly. Because something of what the Lord gave me that day to speak in
defense of the Truth, is not now in my Remembrance, it being some Months since
the Dispute; and I had not Notes to Dispute by, like J. C. neither did I put
Pen to Paper concerning it, or premeditate before hand what to say; that not
being Truth's Way, nor according to Christ's Command, but expressly contrary,
Mat. 10.19, 20. Take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be
given you in that same hour what ye shall speak: For it is not ye that speak,
but the Spirit of the Father which speaks in you: But I was resigned in the
Will of God, and stood in his Counsel; and it was given me of God (whose
Presence was that day with me, who blessed my Undertaking concerning that
Dispute; to him alone be the Praise) what to speak in Defense of the Truth;
whereby the Truth was cleared, the People called Quakers, and their Religion,
defended, from John Cheyney's wicked Charges against both, and J. C. proved a
Liar and a Deceiver. Something of what was spoken-by-me, which had then its
Service, is not now in my Remembrance, so as to give a particular Account of
every word I then spoke: Therefore it is not a Narrative of the Dispute I
intend, but an Examination of J. C's false Relation, given concerning the said
Dispute, is chiefly hereby intended, in order to detect his Lies, that the
Truth may appear, in which Examination I shall relate something of what was
spoken; and, for clearing things to the Reader, shall further declare my fence,
as the Lord opens things in me.

But before I come to Examine J. C's Relation of the Dispute at Arley, I must
entreat the Reader's patience (by the way) to go along with me, in the
Examination of J. C's Account, given of a Dispute at Croton in Cheshire,
between Mr. B. Minister of Wareham, and Roger Haydock, a Quaker.

I think it expedient, for the opening the Matter, to give the Reader a brief
Relation how this Dispute was occasioned; that it may appear, I did not
Challenge a Dispute with this Mr. B. (as J. C. calls him) whose Name is John
Barber; a thing I am clear of, though of late I have been twice concerned in
Disputation (yet as Defendant) through the daring Challenges the Priests have
given, amongst whom this J. C. of all others, has exceeded; of which something
more hereafter.

About the middle of the 4th Month, 1676. I was in Cheshire, at a Meeting of
God's People, at a place called Kingsley, where there were some People lately
Convinced of the Truth; some of which were Parishioners, and had lately been
Hearers of the said J. B. Priest of Wareham; to which said Meeting also
resorted several of the said Priest's Hearers.

After the Meeting, I went that Evening with some Friends to Croton, being
about a Mile distant from the place where the Meeting was; where a Friend, late
one of J. B's Hearers, did acquaint me, That J. B. raged sore against the
Quakers. I replied to the Friend, It was the manner of some Priests so to do,
where Truth spreads, and where such as had been their Followers were convinced,
and turned from them. The Friend did farther acquaint me, That J. B. railed in
his Sermons against the Quakers, charging them to be led by the spirit of
Antichrist; and that it was the spirit of Antichrist they directed People to;
or words to this purpose; and that some who heard him, being dissatisfied
therewith, did afterward speak of it; and John Barber being spoken to, he did
assert it again, and challenged to make it out against any Quaker that would
meet him before a Congregation of People. After I had heard the Friend, I spoke
something to him, as not to mind what the Priest said; for I hoped he, and the
rest, who were convinced of the Truth, were satisfied the Priest's Charge was
false: He said, He was satisfied; but some, who had heard of the Priest's
Challenge, were desirous he should be met: Farther adding, That if he should
not be met, he and many others would boast, as though the Quakers durst not
Dispute with them. I would have put the thing still from me, it being cross to
the Inclination of my own Mind; and I being engaged for several Days in Truth's
Service, which was the occasion of my being in Cheshire at that time (though I
was not altogether easy concerning it) so I left it that Evening, not giving
the Friend farther answer. Next Morning it was upon my Mind, and the Friend
again spoke of it; so it resting pretty much before me, I bid the Friend write
down what he heard the Priest say, which he did; and the words were to this
effect, John Barber says, He has said it, and will say it again, That the
Light and Spirit the Quakers are led by, and direct People to, is the spirit of
Antichrist; and that of any of the Quakers would meet him, he would eng age to
prove, it by Disputation, before an Assembly of People. The Friend that writ
had also heard J. B. repeat and vindicate it.

When I had read it, it was in my Heart to write a few words under it, which
was to this effect:

Friend, if this be thy Assertion, and that thou will, according to thy
Challenge, undertake to-prove it by Disputation, before an Assembly of People,
against any Quaker that will meet thee, then Subscribe thy Name to it; and I do
undertake, on the behalf of the Light and Spirit the Quakers are led by, and
direct People unto, to meet thee, and stand by the Defense of the Truth,
against thy wicked Charge; leaving to my Friend John Low, the Bearer hereof,
with thee to agree of Time and Place: To which I subscribed my Name.

Time and Place was agreed upon, betwixt J. B. the Opponent, and my Friend J.
L. on my behalf, who was to be Defendant, which was to be at Croton, the 20th
of that Instant, the 4th Month, 1676.

To which Place appointed came John Barber, in order to prove his Charge, and
to his assistance John Davis, Priest of Fradsham, and John Cheyney, Priest of
Burtonwood-Chappel; these were Opponents.

John Cheyney gives some Relation himself, of his coming to this Dispute, in p.
1, 2. of his Warning to Souls; how he was in suspense what do; he says, He
sought the Lord -- determined to go, though not without some doubts in his
Mind. Which gives ground to any wise Man to believe, he had not an Answer from
God, nor a Command to go; for, if so, what needed he to have doubted? But when
he comes to the place, he says, He was no ways engaged in the Dispute, but came
as an Hearer, where at present I leave him.

John Davis was the first of the Three Priests that I heard speak, who offered
to be a Moderator, in the Dispute, betwixt John Barber and me: When he ceased,
I had a few words upon my Mind (...) speak to the People; when I had spoken
them, J. D. said, He has spoken well. Afterward I read J. B's Charge,
asserted in to be False, and put him upon the Proof thereof.

J. B. Propounded an Argument for Proof, viz. That the Quakers asserted God Man
to be in them: But, failing in Proof, he Argued again, That the Quakers
asserted the Totum Christum, or the Whole Christ, to be in them; and that they
denied the Lord that bought them.

I denied his Proposition, That the Quakers asserted the Whole Christ to be in
them; and asserted his Conclusion to be false, saying, The Quakers do not deny
the Lord that bought them; yet I owned that Christ was in us; to which J. B.
replied, Either the Whole Christ, or No Christ: Such was J. B's Ignorance.

I shall (...) some Scriptures, which agree with my owning Christ to be in us,
Col. 1.26, 27. Even the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, but (...) is made manifest to his Saints. To (...) what is the
Riches of the Glory of this Mystery amongst the Gentiles; which (...) Christ In
You, the Hope of Glory. 2 Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek is Proof of Christ Speaking
In Me, which to you ward is not work, but mighty In You, Verse. ^. Examine your
selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your selves: know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is In You, except ye be Reprobates? John 17.23. I
In Them, and th^^ in me. John 14.20. As that day ye shall know, that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I In You. 1 Pet. 1, 11. Searching what, or what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was In Them did signify, when it
testified beforehand the Suffering of Christ, and the Glory that should follow.

I might add many more Scriptures, but these may suffice for the Reader's
Information and Satisfaction, if unprejudiced.

To J. B's Assertion, That either the Whole Christ, or No Christ was in us; I
replied, That the Whole Christ or No Christ is in us, I deny: For the Heaven,
and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Christ the Lord; how much less then
should the Whole Christ be in us? Yet unto us God has given of his Spirit by
Measure, and the Earnest of his Spirit is in our Hearts.

And is not this according to Scriptures? Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 3.9. John 1.3. All
things both in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible, were created by
Jesus Christ; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. 17.14. and
19.16. 1 Timothy 6.15. Behold the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
thee, 1 Kings 8.27. And is not Christ and God one? John 10.30. and 14.9, 10,
11. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and In You
all. Bat unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the Measure of the
Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.6, 7. Romans 12.3. 2 Cor. 10.13. The Manifestation of
the Spirit of God is given to every Man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. God has
given the Earnest of his Spirit unto us, In our Hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5.
He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things, Ephesians, 4.10.

J. D. said, I deny that God has given of his Spirit by Measure.

I replied, Then thou deniest Scripture. To which J. D. answered not.

Now I further add some Scriptures, that the Reader may take notice thereof,
and see J. D's Folly: John 3.34. For God gives not the Spirit by Measure unto
him, (viz. Christ Jesus.) Col. 1.19. and 2.9. In him it pleased the Father all
Fullness should dwell. But unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the
Measure of the Gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7. 2 Cor. 10.13. Hereby know we that we
dwell In Him, and he In Us, because he has given us of his Spirit. 1 John
4.13. And of his Fullness have we all received, John 1.16. [Mark] Of Christ's
Fullness have we all received, of his Spirit he has given us, and Grace
according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ. Observe, We have received but
Measurably of Christ's Fullness, of his Spirit, according to the good Pleasure
of God, the Giver; some of us more, other-some less; yet of the same Fullness,
of the same Spirit: And though given to us Measurably, it is the same with the
Fullness, it is of the Spirit; and whether a larger or lesser Measure or
Manifestation of the Fullness of the Spirit, be by one or another of us
received, yet still it remains undivided from the Fullness, from the Spirit,
which is invisible: Neither is the Measure, Manifestation, or Gift of the
Spirit of God, the Fullness, dissected or parted from the Fullness, but is really
of the Fullness; One in us all, proceeding from the Fullness; One through all,
and over all, abiding in the Fullness, and so of the Godhead; which cannot be
divided into Particles, nor cut into Shreds or Pieces; for, to assert that,
were Blasphemy: Which Assertion our Adversaries have unjustly labored to force
upon us, being blinded through Envy, and altogether ignorant of the Glorious
Mystery, Christian Man the Hope of Glory. But they have all come short, and we
are clear from any such Assertion; and farther hold forth, That God is an
Infinite Spirit, Omnipresent, an Immense God, Immensurate, yet Measureably does
he manifest himself unto us, and gives us to partake of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1.4. And so we are in Christ, and Christ dwells in us, and walks in us,
according to the Measure of his Gift, given us of his Spirit; and we daily grow
up in Grace, from Stature to Stature, from one Degree of Holiness to another, a
Habitation for God and Christ through the Spirit: And is not this according to
the Scriptures? And is not J. D's Holly, as well as J. B's Ignorance,
discovered? Let the Reader judge.

Then spoke John Cheyney, and said, Every Man is so far enlightened with the
Light and Spirit of Christ, as that he is left without excuse. This was J. C's
grant: Which Light and Spirit the Quakers are led by and direct People to. This
grant, or rather assertion, of J. C. overthrew J. B. and cleared the Quakers of
his false Charge, as was noted to the People: It being according to the
Doctrine the Quakers preach, That Christ, the true Light, lights every Man
that comes into the Wo^^^, John 1.9. What said J. C? Every Man is so far
enlightened with the Light and Spirit of Christ, as that he is left without
excuse. In this J. C. said what is true. But has not J. C. by asserting every
Man to be enlightened with the Light and Spirit of Christ, done more against J.
B. (I suppose without his leave, for this was before he says, He gave him
leave to propound an Argument) than by the Argument he propounded, he was able
to do for him? I leave the Reader to judge. Only adding, for his Information,
That it is the Light and Spirit wherewith Christ lights every Man that comes
into the World, which the Quakers direct People to: This is evident by their
Books and Doctrine. J. B. asserted this Light and Spirit to be the Spirit of
Antichrist: J. C. affirmed it to be the Light and Spirit of Christ; saying,
Every Man is so far enlightened with the Light and Spirit of Christ, as that he
is left without Excuse. But J. B. in the closure of this Assertion of J. C's,
excepted against Heathens being so enlightened. So these three Priests, all
Episcopal Priests, differed in Principle amongst themselves. J. D. denied the
Spirit to be given by Measure: J. C. asserted, every Man was enlightened with
the Light and Spirit of Christ: And J. B. denied Heathens, who are Men, to be
so enlightened. Again, J. D. denied the Light of Christ to be Saving; but J. C.
and J. B. acknowledged the Light of Christ to be Saving. These Contradictions
of the Priests were noted down, and so kept since the Dispute. And upon these
Points at the Dispute I told them, They were like the Scribes, Pharisees and
Saducees, who differed among themselves, yet joined together against Christ;
and so they joined together against us, yet differed amongst themselves:
Therefore said I, Go, and be Reconciled amongst your selves; to which J. D.
replied, Reflect not; I answered, What I said is true.

The Reason which induced me to give this short, yet true Relation, is, To
inform the Reader what Arguments J. C. says, we were canvassing about the
Light within; in which he says, Many Quakers spoke beside R. H. and would make
his Reader believe on the other side, none spoke but J. B. until J. B. gave him
leave to speak; when as in the canvassing of this Argument there were J. B. J.
D. and J. C. Besides what was spoken by the Standers by, on their part, as well
as that there were some others besides R. H. who spoke on our part.

To give a Relation of much of what was spoken either by one or other, or
either sides, is not my purpose. But since John Cheyney, over the Heads of John
Barber and John Davis, seems to assume a Glory of Conquest to himself,
concerning that Dispute, and would be somebody; therefore he never mentions
John Davis, and only makes mention of Mr. B. as he styles him, that he may
shortly tell his Reader what he has done; therefore I thought meet to hint a
little of what each of the three aforementioned Priests, as well, J. C. as the
other two, said; that the Reader may not only hear they spoke, but see
something of what was spoken by every one of them (and I thought in most safe
to publish what was noted down, and kept since the Dispute) in which I have
been as short as I well could (...) and that the Reader may also perceive the
Dis-ingenuity of J. C. who would have his Reader to believe. That many Quakers
spoke besides R. H. and yet on the other side none spoke but J. B. and that
until J. B. gave him leave to manage an Argument, he was silent; which was
utterly false.

Now I shall examine J. C's Account of this Dispute, which is as follows:

That J. B. giving him leave to manage an Argument, for proof, That the Spirit
by which the Quakers are acted, is not the Spirit of God; that (...) upon J. B.
to prove.

Reply, John Cheyney has clipped the Charge; the Charge was (and that which
lay upon J. B. to prove) That the Light and Spirit the Quakers are led by, and
direct People to, is the Spirit of Antichrist: This being the Charge, i^
appears by John Cheyney's account, That John Barber had not proved his Charge
but it lay upon him to prove. The wrong J. C. has done us (...) this^ (...)
clipping the Charge. But to bring them (...) near together. The Quakers are led
by the same (...) by which, they are acted; and to the same Spirit by which
they are led they direct People. This then says J. C. as stating J. B's Charge,
The Quakers are not acted by the Spirit of God; then not led by the Spirit of
God, then direct not People to the Spirit of God; therefore that the Spirit the
Quakers are acted by, led by, direct People to, is the Spirit of Antichrist:
This then lay upon J. B. to prove, viz. his Charge; and having stated it upon
J. B. at the latter end of the Dispute, and since laid it in writing before
him, that his Charge was false; and in a few lines cleared the People called
Quakers of it; I shall at present acquiesce in J. C's grant, that it lay upon
J. B. to prove, and shall now examine what he has done in proof thereof.

J. C. tells his Reader, He propounded an Argument* That the Quakers deny the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, and his Holy Ordinances, and so we not
acted by the Spirit of God.

Answ. If propounding of an Argument were proof, that the Argument propounded
were true, then J. C. has done something, in telling his Reader, He propounded
an Argument, to prove the Quakers are not acted by the Spirit of God. But if
propounding of an Argument be not proof, as sure it is not, that the Argument
propounded is true, then J. C. has done nothing, as to proof, in telling his
Reader, He propounded an Argument to prove the Quakers are not acted by the
Spirit of God; so his Argument ends in nothing.

But J. C. tells his Reader, He proved the Ministers, whom the Quakers do
utterly condemn, and separate from, to be Christ's Faithful Ministers, by this
Argument: They teach sound Doctrine, lead Godly Lives, are duly Called to the
Ministry, have their Call and Commission from Christ; and he Seals and Confirms
their Ministry with the Conversion of Souls. And if his Reader will but take
his word for it, he says, He made evident all these Particulars, and took off
all their Cavils and Exceptions: And yet further, if his word may but find
credit with his Reader, In the judgment of all equal Hearers and Standers-by,
the Quakers were clearly overthrown.

Answ. If J. C's telling his Reader ^e proof, that those Ministers the Quakers
separate from, are Christ's Faithful Ministers; or if his saying be made
evident. All those particulars, which was his Argument, That they teach sound
Doctrine, lead godly Lives, were duly called to the Ministry, had their Call
and Commission from Christ; and that he seals their Ministry with the
Conversion of Souls, were full proof, or any proof at all, against the Quakers;
then, in the judgment of J. C. his Reader might acquiesce, That the Quakers
were overthrown: But if J. C's telling his Reader, He proved; and saying, He
made all those Particulars evident, not showing in the least wherein; be
neither full proof, nor any proof at all, as sure it is not; then in the Eye of
any Impartial Reader, the Quakers cannot be overthrown.

This, Reader, is the substance of what J. C. has done, to prove what lay upon
J. B. to prove: First, He propounded an Argument. Secondly, he says, He proved
it. Thirdly, he says, He made evident all those Particulars. But what wise Man
will believe him? Lastly, he says, The Quakers were overthrown, if thou can
credit him; but whether thou can or no, this is all the proof thou must have;
for he quickly tells thee, He will forbear to make farther mention of this
Dispute.

Well, what J. C. confessed lay upon John Barber to prove, lies still upon J.
B. to prove, for all that J. C. has either said or done; and not only upon J.
B. but upon J. C. and; who, by thinking to ta^e the Thorn out of J. B's Hee^
has struck one full as deep in his own. His proprounded Argument signifies
nothing, but to discover his Folly; his saying, He proved it, is a meet Say-so,
and no more, for he proved no more than J. B. proved, and that was just nothing
at all. With Conversion of Souls, of which J. C. boasts so much, it was not
confirmed that Day, That J. C. was Victor, and the Quakers Overthrown, but on
the contrary, Truth that Day gaining, and the Priests ^ing, and that none of
the meanest or weakest of their Hearers, in the account of some of them, in
whom God's Witness being reached that Day, since separated from them, and
joined to the Quakers, through believing in the Light, wherein Fellowship with
God is, and with the Brethren also. Therefore J. C. is a Ly^ who says, The
Quakers were overthrown. And although upon the fore recited Particulars, I was
not principally engaged with J. C. but rather my Friend Alexander Lawrence; the
matter being taken from J. B. and me; yet I give Testimony (...) my Testimony
is true, having the Evidence of God's Spirit with me, That J. C. thereby to
assume a Glory of a Conquest to himself, has Lied wickedly, in saying, He
proved his Argument; and that the Quakers were clearly overthrown: Therefore
let his Iniquity stop his Mouth, and shame come over him, and let his Lies
perish, that Truth may stand over his Head, and take place with all Impartial
Readers.

Since J. C. has at least charged us to be revolted from the true Ministers,
and I may also say, At the most, but charged us; for he has proved no such
thing: I might write pretty largely, to manifest, That neither he, nor any of
his Brethren the Priests, from whom we have turned away, are faithful Ministers
of Jesus Christ, neither are truly called to the Ministry, nor have Commission
from Christ. But because it is only the Examination of this Account concerning
that Dispute at Croton, I here intend, and finding no Tract of his, further to
prove, that he and his Brethren are faithful Ministers of Christ, duly Called
and Commissionated by Christ, but his bare Word, which is of little esteem with
many; and it is nothing, though it be so; for I know not how that Man, who
plays the Hypocrite, and Dissembles with God, and utters Untruth to the
Searcher of Hearts, should have esteem with good Men; for if he will lie to
God, he will lie to Men; and what Credit shall be given to his Word?

And because several Brethren, whose Books are extant in the World, in which
these things are thoroughly treated of, have fully proved these things, which
may be seen by such as read them; I say, many have written, and coplous and
plentiful are the Books, in which sufficient proof of these things may be seen,
by any who reads them with a single Eye; yet I refer the Reader, who is
desirous to be informed, to a Book entitled, The Priests and Professors
Principles; and also to William Gibson's Book, entitled, The Life of God,
which is the Light and Salvation of men, exalted; which is an Answer to six of
John Cheney's Books, in which, whoever reads, if simple-hearted, may be rightly
informed; and in page 10. of the said W. G's Book, may read J. C's. own
Testimony concerning his Church, which agrees not with his forecited Boast, of
their Ministry and Doctrine, but contradicts himself.

So I shall leave the Dispute at Croton, that I may examine J. C's Relation of
the Dispute at Arley; in which I expect to find him the same J. C. to boast of
Victory, though he fled the Stage; which if so it prove, it will something
resemble the running Bird, which, when got home, crows aloud upon his own
Dunghill.

J. C. in p. 1. of his Warning to Souls, says, For sundry Reasons he is
purposed to make a brief Relation of his Dispute with the Quakers at Arley.

Reply, In this the Man is well nigh as good as his word; for of that whole
confused Treatise, which contains twenty five pages, I think there is not above
four pages, if collected, of what was spoken at that Dispute; and of those four
pages, so far as I perceive, not thrice four lines of what J. C. says I spoke;
and of those lines; I think not six lines of what I spoke; which Lines, had
they been left out, then had J. C. according to his word, made a brief Relation
of his Dispute.

For his Relation made, together with his whole Treatise, I find not the
recital of a word spoken by any Quaker in that Dispute but R. H. So that if the
thing intended was a Relation of a Dispute with the Quakers, herein J. C. has
come short; for Roger Haydock is not Quakers: but if it was, as I rather think
(though mist in the making) intended to be a Relation of his Dispute, to tell
his Reader what he said, and what he did, and what a Conquest he made, and how
the Quakers were overthrown (though indeed it was quite otherwise) much like
his Account of the aforementioned Dispute at Croton, in which there is not one
word of what any Quaker said; then J. C. has on that hand overreached;
especially in telling his Reader, that R. H. spoke what he spoke not; nay, what
he ever abhorred to think, viz. That God did no where command us to walk
according to the Scripture, page 21. of his Warning, etc. To which at present,
I say, It is a Lie, and a wicked Slander; and concerning it, I shall say
something more hereafter.

This is one Character of his Relation, and no question, but if he have that
Impudence, as to make R. H. speak as he would have him, he will have Confidence
enough to speak what he pleases for himself in composing his Relation, in order
to persuade his Reader, R. H. was confuted and silenced, and the Quakers were
overthrown.

But if his Reader be a Wise Man, he will not judge of things before the time:
Lies are said to be light, and often spread far, and False Reports often get
the start, and go before; and sometimes that side has cried, Victory, which
has run away; Fools have believed them; but Wise Men have waited to know the
Truth, who got the Day; and to such, the first Report to be false (and the
Folly of them that believe it) was made manifest in due time.

But to come to J. C's Relation, in order to examine it, so soon as I can reach
thereunto, it is my purpose; but by the way, John Cheyney mentions a Paper,
which I came to him with, the day after the Dispute at Croton, which, he says,
was written to prevent a Brother of a Godly Acquaintance, who was inclining to
Quakerism; in which Paper he says, He had charged their Religion to be
Antichristian and Damnable.

Reply, This Paper J. C. mentions, was showed me by a Friend several Days
before the Dispute at Croton (or that I knew to have a Dispute with J. B.) who,
for the sake of the Young Man, then lately Convinced, desired me to write
something in answer to it. I perused it, and found the Charges very wicked; but
there was no Name subscribed to it; so I gave it to the Friend again, looking
upon it to be no other than a Reproachful Libel. The Friend told me, He
believed J. C. writ it, and was very urgent upon the Young Man's account to
have it answered: Whereupon I said, Let some Friend show it to J. C. and if he
own it, and will subscribe his Name to it, something then may be done. So the
Friend took it with him.

After the Dispute at Croton, I went for Lancashire, and in Warrington met
providentially with some Friends, who were about to go to J. C. with the Paper;
they desired me to go along with them, at whose request I took the Paper, and
went with them, showed it to J. C. who read it over, afterward owned that he
writ it, but would not subscribe it, neither give it me again, but alleged,
the Paper was neither Ours, nor His, but God's; and Providence having ordered
it to his Hand again, he would keep it: I told him, Whereas he had wronged us,
if he would acknowledge it, we would pass it by: He desired, after some debate
about the Paper which he had in his hand, to read it over again; he read it,
that the standers by did hear it; afterward he said to one of his Friends, who
stood by him, He thought there was nothing in it but what might be stood by;
his Friend assented to what he said: I told J. C. It was very unlike a Minister
of Christ, to give forth a Paper as a Minister, and afterward desire to read it
over, to see whether he could stand by it or not; he ought to have considered
that, before he gave it forth: Yet still he refused to subscribe, until some of
our Friends would first draw him a Copy of it: If he would have subscribed it,
after the second perufal of it, I promised he should have a Copy of it, before
it went out of the Room; but he refused: So I having a Journey before me, could
not well stay longer, but came away, the Paper still unsigned; yet left with
Friends, that if he did sign it, to send it to Alexander Lawrence (who was the
day before engaged with him in the Dispute) because I had a Journey to go, and
was uncertain of my return home. J. C. did afterward sign the Paper, and
Friends sent it to me; my return home being sooner than I expected, I met with
it, writ to J. C. reduced the whole into seven Heads or Charges, which I shall
here insert.

First, The Quakers Religion is New, and so new that (he says) he can remember
since first it came up. 2dly, That it is Worldly and Fleshly. 3dly, That it is
Bred and Fed by Ignorance and Pride, 4thly, That it is Uncharitable. 5thly, Its
Principles are contrary to Truth and Godliness. 6thly, It is against God's
Spirit, the Scriptures, and Christ's Ministers. 7thly, That the Quakers are
such as are described by Paul, Romans 16.17, 18. who serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Bellies, and by good Words, and fair Speeches, deceive
the Hearts of the Simple, etc.

These seven Charges I put him upon the proof of, and to give me his essayed
Proofs under his hand: He writ to me again, evading Proof; I replied; and
several Letters past betwixt us: I put him upon Proof by Writing, his Charges
being written; he shuffled, one while counting it great cost to buy the Quakers
Books, and great labor to study them fully and elaborately to confute our
Cause; by which I told him, it appeared he could Charge deeply without buying
our Books, or studying them, even at all Adventures; but his Mouth was more
open to Charge, than Prove: Another while urging a Disputation, it being a
short way to put an end to Religious Strife, occasioned by his Paper: I
replied, He would have less than full Proof to serve us; and slubber things
over, which is a common thing, when People grow weary of what they have
undertaken.

I would have kept him to the proof of his Charge by Writing, but he absolutely
refused, and challenged a Dispute, which was consented to, and agreed upon, to
be at Arley, as before: When we came upon the Stage, he would have excused
himself, saying, He did not Challenge the Dispute; which was a wicked Lie, as I
shall make appear: All Lies I know are wicked; but his Wickedness in this
exceeded; that though he was guilty, he would have rendered me to be the
Challenger of the Dispute, and himself clear: Upon this I earnestly urged the
reading of what Letters had passed betwixt us, which would have decided that
matter: He refused; I told him, if he was not ashamed to stand by what he had
written, let the Letters be read; for they would manifest who challenged the
Dispure: He still evaded, alleging, together with some of his Abettors, It was
but a Shuffle in me: I reminded him of his Promise, which was, That the Letters
should be read, which would give People an Inspection into the Matter; to which
I engaged him in the embracing of his Offer of Disputation; he regarded not his
Promise, but broke his Covenant, still declining the reading of them, and
labored to persuade the People, it was Evasion in me, to keep from the Charge:
Whereupon I replied, John Cheyney, confess thou challengest the Dispute, and I
will pass by the reading of the Letters, and come to the Paper or Charge, to
which he granted; yet the Auditory being large, many did not either hear him,
or so apprehend him, as afterward I was informed. But though at the Dispute he
absolutely denied, at the first, that he challenged the Dispute, yet in his
Relation, p. 3. he says, He provoked me to a public Dispute; and that the
Reader may understand how he provoked me, I shall give some Citations out of
his Letters, in which I will not wrong him one Tittle.

In his Letter, of Date July 24. 1676. he begins thus, Roger Haydock, if thou
be able to defend thy Religion, John Cheyney calls thee forth to maintain it.
-- And in the same Letter, I would have thee and me to Dispute it out: Why art
thou not as forward to Dispute with me, as with John Barber? -- Again, in the
same Letter, I am constrained by the Unreasonableness of a declining shuffling
Adversary, who calls for Proofs in Writing, and will neither say Yea nor No, he
will Dispute or no, as distrusting himself, or his Cause, or both. -- Once more
in the same Letter, even to a Tautology, But what the matter is, I cannot tell,
Roger Haydock will not yield me an Answer, pro or con, he will or he will not.

Likewise in his Letter, of Date August 28, 1676. I being under restraint for
my Testimony, he writes thus; If thou can not procure thy Liberty, send to
any one of thy Brethren, -- Choose out any one, or one for one day [Mark] and
another one for another day, -- and when thou art at Liberty, send to me, and I
shall be ready for thee also.

These, Reader, are some of his daring Challenges; I shall not trouble thee
with my Answers thereunto; my intent chiefly being to give thee to under stand,
that J. C. [and not R. H.] challenged the Dispute; and who reads this, that
heard J. C. that day affirm, he did not challenge the Dispute, but R. H. if not
biased in judgment, can do no less than conclude, That one of the first things
J. C. insisted upon, was a Lie, viz. That R. H. challenged the Dispute.

That J. C. is a Liar, his Mouth and Pen both bespeak him so to be. (Reader,
the words, Lie and Liar, thou may bear, being plain English words, and used
in Scripture) For he has spoken and written as many Lies and Contradictions as
ever any I have heard or read of, who have assumed to themselves the Title of
Gospel Ministers; if they were all collected which I have heard from his own
Mouth, and read in his Books and Papers, the Catalogue thereof would fill up
several Pages; some of which Lies and Contradictions may be seen in the
Skirmisher Defeated, by W. P. The Skirmisher Confounded, by R. H. The Life of
God, which is the Light and Salvation of Men, exalted; by W. G. which Book of
William Gibson's, so entitled, is an Answer to J. Cheyney's six Books and
comprehends a great part of his seventh Book, entitled, A Warning to Souls,
etc. especially concerning some of the Heads we disputed on, which makes my
Work the shorter, otherwise I should fully have handled every particular Head;
but being laid down in his Sermons of Hypocrisy, and other Books, already
answered by W. G. I shall briefly (...) through them, recommending (...) to the
Reader for further Inform^ And though in the three for^mentioned Books, many of
his Lies and Contradictions be published; yet in this Treatise also shall I add
some more of his to the number thereof.

J. C. again, before he comes to give his Relation, in the third Page, says,
If R. H. could have been quiet, and let him alone, he had not said or done any
thing after the said-Dispare at Croton ended.

Reply, By this J. C. would persuade his Reader, that R. H. and the Quakers
have lost by meddling with him, and that they have brought this Stuff to their
own Head. But sure it is, the Quakers have not lost, but gained. Truth
prevailing; but the poor Unskilful Skirmisher (both Rude and Distracted, and
that by his own Confession) has lost by meddling with the Quakers; this is very
evident to many sober Impartial People: I may say to some, that once looked
upon J. C. to be what he was not, viz. a Minister of Christ; but having
discovered him like a Serpent in the Grass, have turned (...), whom the
Quakers, both (...) and Writing, have pro^ (...) and Deceiver, and this is
(...) him; yet this proud Vain boast^ (...) and hardened in Error, drowned in
(...) ^^ceit, which is as a Consumption to him, wasting his Reputation amongst
many sober Men, and spurred on with Envy and Malice against the Truth, and the
Friends of it; he is crying, Conquest and Victory, like a Man besides himself,
as well as the Truth, a distracted Man; Why not distracted in this as well as
in his Prayers? Would any but either a For, or a Man distracted, after he had
left the Stage, being sufficiently proved, before he went, a Liar and Deceiver,
be so ^dacious, and desperately Wicked, as to publish to the World, that he had
over thrown the Quakers? But what if a Man should query, Has John Cheyney with
running away overthrown the Quakers? A Fool might quickly Answer, Yes; but sure
a Wise Man would be more deliberate; he would not believe that such a Victory
could be obtained by him that fled, but rather the contrary; not a Conquest to
him that perks up, and cries, Conquest, before he begins; nor yet he that runs
away, and cries, Victory, when he is gone; but rather he, who having (...)
Encounter, and defeated his (...) ^nds his Ground when his Ad^^ fled.

Now, that the Quakers were not overthrown, there are some Hundreds of People
can witness, who were at that Dispute, and know it right well; who likewise
knew that R. H. (however it was with J. C.) did not forsake the Stage, and
leave his Opponent thereupon. And if I should not have put Pen to Paper, I am
satisfied there are some Hundreds of People, who were there that day, would not
believe the Relation J. C. has published of that Dispute, but judge him to be
a Liar: You for the Truth's sake, and for the sake of many Simple-hearted
People, who were not there, but may take things upon Trust, and judge my
Silence a Consenting; that J. C's Relation is true, therefore as briefly as I
may, without wrong to the Truth, I shall examine his Relation, being now come
to it.

J. C. p. 3. says, He divided the matter of his Dispute and Charge against the
Quakers, into, 1st, Matters of Doctrine; 2dly, Matters of Practice.

I think it pertinent to the matter, here to insert the Charge I ^t J. C. upon
to prove, viz. That the Quakers Religion is against God's Spirit; this was the
first Branch of one of the seven Changes recited before.

To prove this Charge, J. C. asserted, That the Quakers Religion held forth
Blasphemy, viz. That the Soul of Man is God; and to prove it, quoted G. F's
Great Mystery, p. 90, and 92.

Reply, I denied that the Quakers held Man's Soul to be God, and renounced that
Doctrine as Blasphemy, whereof G. F. and the Quakers Religion are clear.

Now J. Cheyney in his Relation says, Having nothing that they could object,
but only that Fox does not expressly say, that the Soul is God.

Reply, In this J. C. is a Liar; G. F.'s words I owned, and said, they did
admit of no such consequence, as that Man's Soul is God. But I told him, he
wrested and perverted G. F's words and meaning, as he did the Scriptures.

G. F. queried of the Priests, Is not the Soul, coming from God, Infinite?

I affirmed, the Breath of Life, which God breathed into Man, the Life and
Spirit, which came forth from God, the Life of Man's Soul, or by which Man
became a living Soul, was infinite; and G. F's words, as intended, were sound.

J. C. affirmed, There was n othing come forth from God, which is infinite and
without beginning.

I replied, The Son of God came forth from God, yet the Son of God was
infinite, and without beginning; to which J. C. was silent.

This my Answer was according to Scripture, John 8.42. Jesus said, I proceeded
forth, and came from God; this was he who said, John 17.5. O Father, Glorify
thou me with thy own self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the
World was. Verse 24. For thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World.
John 16.27, 28, 30. For the Father himself loves you, because you have loved
me, and have believed that I came forth from the Fathar, and am come into the
World. Again, I leave the World, and go to the Father; by this we believe, that
thou came forth from God.

Again, J. C. asserted, There was nothing in Man that is infinite.

I replied, The Breath of Life breathed into Man; the Spirit of God in Man, is
Infinite.

This was according to Scripture, Genesis 2.7. And breathed into his Nostrils the
Breath of Life. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Mat. 10.20. The Spirit of the Father
which speaks in you.

Mark, The Spirit of God was in Men, dwelt in them, spoke in them; so,
according to the Scriptures, God's Spirit, which is infinite, dwells in Man,
and speaks in Man; even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father,
John 15.26. So there is something in Man that is Infinite.

Now, Reader, is not J. C's assertion, There is nothing come forth from God,
which is infinite, and without beginning; and that there is nothing in Man
which is infinite, plainly manifest to be contrary to Scripture? Has not J. C.
denied the Son of God, who came forth from God, to be Infinite, and without
Beginning? Has he not also denied the Spirit of Trust which proceeds from
the Father, to (...) Infinite, and without Beginning? (...) is not J. C. a Liar
against the ^criptures, a Liar against the Son (...) and a Liar against the
Spirit of Truth? And is not this Blasphemy to deny Christ, the Son of God, who
came forth front God; and the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the
Father, to be Infinite, and without Beginning?

For J. C. said expressly, There was nothing came forth from God, which (...)
and without Beginning. And is not J. C. a Blasphemer, in denying the Son of
God, who came forth from God; and the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from
the Father, to be Infinite; and without Beginning? Let the Reader judge.

I have examined J. C's Relation. In this particular, the substance whereof is,
The Quakers do hold Man's Soul to be God; and that they had nothing they could
object, but only that Fox does not expressly say, The Soul is God.

As to the first, the Impartial Reader may plainly see, it is a false
Accusation: And as to the second, It is a Lie; which Lie does stand deservedly
upon J. C. who either was so buste pondering upon (...) Notes, and gathering up
his Papers, (...) he minded not what was said, or (...) not that any more was
spoken but what (...) relates; a thing scarce possible in a Dr^^utant, if he
was not distracted; or else it is wilful Ignorance, and desperate Wickedness,
in him to say, Having nothing else that they could object, etc* But he that is
so impudent, as not only to play the Hypocrite, and Dissemble with God, and
utter Untruths unto him, but publish it to the World, as in his Book, Call to
Pra^, p. 141. I may not question but such a Man has impudence enough to Lie
against the Quakers, and publish his Lies to the World. But God will judge the
Lying Tongue.

Friendly Reader, As for John Cheyney's Cavil against G. F. concerning the
Soul, it is already lately and soundly Answered by William Gibson, in his Book,
entitled, The Life of God, which is the Light and Salvation of Men, exalted;
which Answer, take as follows, for thy further satisfaction: It is judged
meet to give thee the Advantage of seeing it here, because, when this Book
comes to thy hand, it may be thou may not have the opportunity of seeing his.

Concerning the Soul of Man.
JOhn Cheyney, thou quarrellest at G. Fox's words, where he says something
concerning the Soul in his Book, entitled, Great Mystery; thou, and some
others of thy quarrelling Brethren, would insinuate, as though he did hold or
affirm, That the Soul is God; but who reads his Treatise in the said Book upon
that subject, without Prejudice, in the Fear and Love of God, such may see that
he distinguishes plainly between Christ, God, and the Soul of Man, see Great
Mystery, p. 91. where G. F. has these words, viz. The Soul being in the Death,
in Transgression, so Man's spirit there is not sanctified -- And the Soul is in
Death -- Again, in the same Page, after he has uttered many words in answer to
the Priest, about the Soul, he has these words, viz. So the living of the
Soul, and the Spirit sanctified, that diligent hearkening is come to, where the
Counsel of God is stood in, his Voice heard, his Hand felt, that the Soul is
come up in that which comes from him, from God; that is Living and Immortal,
and gives a Creature its feeling and sensibleness through things, and so the
Covenant of God comes to be received, wherein the Soul lives -- In the same
Page he has these words, viz. Now where the Light is hated, that of God within
transgressed, that does pertain to the righteous Law of God, and answers it;
(there) the spirit of Man is not sanctified, and Man's understanding darkened;
the Higher Power is denied, the Soul comes into Death, transgressing of the Law
is known; the Witness buried, which should guide the Mind, whereby the Soul
should live in the diligent Hearkening; thereby comes Man to be defiled, and
his Spirit, and Body, and Mind, whereby he glorifies Not God in his Body, and
Soul, and Spirit. -- Again, in the same Page, thus: And every one that comes
into the World having a Light from Christ, the Second Adam, the Bishop of their
Souls, Christ, the Power of God -- Again, in the same Page, thus: So every Man
that comes in the World, having a Light from Christ Jesus, the Way out of the
Fall, the Second Adam -- Receiving the Light, they receive their Redemption and
Sanctification, whereby their Spirits, Bodies and Souls are sanctified.

J. C. Here G. F. speaks of the Soul of Man in several States and Conditions;
first, in Death and Transgression. It is very certain that G. F. does not
believe, That God ever was or can be, in Transgression. And therefore it is
certain, that when he speaks of the Soul's being in Transgression, that
therefore he does not mean or intend, that God's Essence or Being, in any
measure, is in Transgression, or ever can be to.

Again, He speaks of the Living of the Soul, and the Spirit Sanctified; and
says, That a ligent Hearkening is come to, where the Counsel of God is stood
in, his Voice heard, his Hand^felt; that the Soul comes up into, where the Soul
lives. Note, J. C. here he speaks of the Souls Living, and of its Hearkening.
It is evident here, That G. F. does, not mean, and, or believe, that God should
hearken unto himself or that by not hearkening to himself, that he should come
into Transgression and Death, or that, by hearkening he should be Redeemed or
Sanctified, for G. F. -- (...), that God is unchangeably (...) ^^hout any
Variation or Mutabilit^*

(...), G. F. speaks of receiving God's Counsel, and standing in it, by which
the Soul comes to live, Now it is certain, that G. F. believes not, that God
could possibly, go on act against his own Counsel, and so come into
Transgression and Death; but it is (...), that G. F. believes, that when God's
Counsel is not stood in by Many who was made a Living Soul, that then he (...)
into Transgression, and his Soul comes into Death and this was fulfilled in the
first Adam (who was made a Living Soul) by his going out of the Counsel of God,
he became a Transgressor, and his Soul was brought into Death thereby: But as
the Apostle says, The Second Adam has made Spirit; which Second Adam is
Christ, the Promised Seed, which bruiseth the Held of him that first led Man
out of the Counsel of God, whereby his Soul was brought into Death, who
believes in Him, who lights every one that comes into the World, he raises
the Soul out of Death, being the Captain of its Salvation, and the Bishop of it.

Again, Soul being taken, for Life, as sometimes it is: God is the Life of
Lives, or great Original Soul of Souls; being that One Infinite Being, by which
all other Beings in the beginning of the Creation were brought forth; and by
whose Word, Life and Power they e^ift, and are upheld. And G. F. speaking in
answer to the Priests about the Soul, says, God breathed into Man the Breath
of Life, and He became a living Soul; for that which came out from God, was the
cause that Man became alive, A Living Soul. Upon the afore-cited words in
Genesis, G. F. p. 68. querieth of the Priest thus, And is not this of God? And
God, who bath all Souls in his Hand; here, and in this latter sense it does
appear, that G. F. takes that word Soul for Life, or that Breath by which Man
lived, or was made a living Soul; and the Breath of Life by which Man lived, or
became a living Soul, Is of God, thus G. F. and the Quakers believe; and also
that this Breath of Life cannot Transgress, or be in Transgression, though the
Motions of it in the Soul may be quenched, and it grieved; for so it is when
Man hearkens unto, and takes Counsel at the Serpent, who first drew Man from
God's Counsel; and thus, as it is written, God is grieved with the Wicked every
day. His displeasure or grief is, because he would have Man to hearken to his
Voice, and be saved; but Man will not; as God complained of old, They rejected
all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof.

In this latter sense, taking the Soul for that Life or Breath, by which Man
lived, or became a living Soul; this, as G. F. says (p. 68.) is infinite;
which he must needs intend, as his own words do import, being taken in their
own proper and gennine sense.

It appears in G. F's Controversy with the Priests about the Soul, that he
takes up the word Soul, and speaks of it under three Considerations, 1st, The
Soul of Man in Transgression, in Death; 2dly, The Soul of Man in the
Restoration, in Life; and 3dly, He speaks of the word Soul, as being that
Breath of Life which came forth from God, by which Man Lived, or Became a
Living Soul, which Breath and Life is of God's Being, and Infinite, as I said
before.

Thus it appears, that the Spirit of God, the Light of Christ within, the
Breath of Life, and the Quakers Religion, and G. F. are all clear from J. C's
wicked Charge, and J. C. is a Liar, whose Work has been, both by Disputation
and Writing, to prove that the Quakers assert Man's Soul to be God, and so
charge God to be guilty of Sin; because Man's Soul Sins, therefore God Sins:
This Wicked Blasphemous Assertion and Consequence (he would have fastened upon
the Quakers, which) we do utterly deny. But J. C. has failed in his purpose,
and the Quakers are clear of holding Man's Soul to he God; and J. C's false
Charge, That the Quakers Religion is against God's Spirit; remains unproved,
and like to remain unproved. What J. C. has done, is this, He has brought one
wicked Charge to prove another by, and both alike are utterly false: And what
J. C. intended Unjustly to have fastened upon the Quakers, is it not in a great
measure justly fallen upon his own Head? For, whereas he says, The Quakers do
plainly hold Man's Soul to be God, therefore when Man's Soul Sins, God Sins; is
it not clearly evident, that J. C. plainly holds the Light within, the Light of
Christ in Man, wherewith Christ lights every: Man that comes into the World,
John 1.9. something of God in Man, Light and Spirit, to be Man's Soul, to have
a hand in Sin, to be guilty as being himself, and in Hell to be a
felf-tormenting Light? I shall give some Quotations out of his Book, entitled,
Quakerism Subverted, and query a little thereupon, and so leave it to the
Impartial Reader to judge. Page 21. of the said Book, J. C. says, Every Man
has a Light within him; and so we say, that Jesus Christ is the true Light,
which enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, John 1.9. P. 28. Has
not every Man a Light within him [Mark] given him to be his Guide, his Monitor?
P. 27, 28. In every Man there is something of God, and something of Satan,
Flesh and Spirit, Light and Darkness, Upon which I query, If something of God
in opposition to Satan, Spirit and Light, in opposition to the Flesh and
Darkness, is it not the Spirit of God, who is a Spirit? John 4.24. Is it not
Light of God, who is Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all? 1 John 1.5. J.
C. says, it is something of God, Spirit and Light, is it not then the Light and
Spirit of God, according to Scripture? 1 Cor. 12.7. Page 34, 35. he says, If
the Light within never did err, nor can err, it is the same to say, the Soul of
Man never did err, nor can err: P. 35. When we say, The Light smites or
convinces, excuses or reproves, it is but the same to say, The Soul does
return upon it self. Upon which I query, Whether that which Convinces and
Reproves the Soul for Sin, be not the Spirit of Truth which reproves the World
of Sin? According to John 16.8, 10. And if the Spirit of Truth, which
Convinces and Reproves the Soul for Sin, then whether he does not plainly
hold the Spirit of Truth to be Man's Soul? Page 34. he says, The Light has a
Hand in all Thought-sins, inward Heart-Sins, Tonguesins, and Life-sins. Page
36. Every Sin I commit, the Light within is guilty, as being myself. Page 34.
The Light within in Hell is turned to a self tormenting Light. Is it not
clearly evident from these Quotations, out of his Book, that J. C. has
asserted the Light within, the Light of Christ in Man (wherewith, according to
John 1.7. Christ lights every Man that comes into the World) something of
God in Man, Light and Spirit to be Man's Soul? To have a Hand in Sin, to be
himself guilty of Sin, and in Hell to be a self-tormenting Light? And is not
this Blasphemy? And is not J. C. a Blasphemer? And if J. C's Religion hold
forth and maintain this Doctrine, Is not J. C's Religion guilty of Blasphemy?
And if J. C's Religion be guilty of Blasphemy, Is not J. C's Religion against
God's Spirit? And has not J. C made a Pit, and dug it for the Quakers and
their Religion, and is not J. C. and his Religion fallen into the Ditch which
he made? Let the Reader judge.

The next thing in J. C's Relation, that here I shall take notice of, is in
page 6. he says, The Quakers do utterly make void the Scriptures; this (says
he) was proved at the Dispute.

Reply, Was ever any pretended Gospel-Minister more void of shame, than is this
J. C. to publish such Lies to the World? What Is more false, than to assert, we
make the Scriptures void? And, What Is less true, than to say, he proved it? O
wicked Man of slander in the one, and shameless impudent Liar in the other. I
do believe I might have the Testimonies of some hundreds of People (who were
Auditors at the said Dispute) that J. C's Relation is false, if I needed
thereunto: But it may be he thinks the Title of a Minister of Christ, will give
him Credit, where his Lies are broached, with People, to believe what he says
is true; especially against R. H. by him styled a Sect-Master: R. H. expects to
fare no better from him, than the Disciples of Christ did from his Generation,
the Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, who called them pestilent Fellows,
Seducers, Enemies to the Law and Scriptures; all which J. C. is guilty of
against the Quakers, as the Generation he is of was against the Disciples; so
it is evident, he is in the footsteps of that Generation: J. C. might have
remembered, the Truth was by his Forefathers (in whose steps he is, resisting
the Holy Ghost (Holy Spirit) as they did) called a Sect; and no doubt but the
Apostles were accounted Sect-Masters by J. C.'s Predecessors, as well as R. H.
is stilled a Sect-Master by him; for the Truth's sake (which prospers and
prevails) R. H. can bear it; and J. C. has discovered Himself, and manifested
his Folly: But perhaps he thinks, whatever he says or writes, whether Slander,
Lie or Scoff, his Coat will bear him out; but if so, his thoughts will deceive
him; for there are many will not so take things upon trust, neither from him,
nor any of his Brethren, either because of their Black Coat, or White Coat, but
him will reprehend and judge for his Slanders, Lies and Scoffing. Sure I may
say, a lying spirit has entered him, and acts him (and it is against that
spirit my controversy is, I have Love and Good will to the Creature) for the
Scriptures were that day owned by us, in their place, as they have ever been by
us since we were a People to God's Praise.

J. C. had Will enough to have proved all he has said, but he wanted Power;
Truth being stronger than all: Neither had he so much Skill as Baseness, nor
Honesty as Impudence. He labored by indirect means to accomplish his wicked
End; but fell short, and instead of Glory, reaped Shame. And why may I not use
his own Expression, published to the World (only instead of the word Foes, put
in Opponent) and say, In this J. C. came poorly off, as when he prayed, his
Opponent being too hard for him?

There were several that Day (his Baseness and Wickedness being discovered, and
laid open) cried against him; and one called aloud unto him, and openly
asserted, J. C. to be a Liar, and offered to prove it to his Face, and said, He
was No Quaker. But when J. C. had produced the Baptist's Book, which he would
have made the People to have believed, was one of our Books, out of which he
brought a Quotation; I asked to see the Book, he refused; I pressed again to
see it, not so much questioning the Book, as that he had wronged the words in
reading them; he again refused: I promised, if he would let me have our
Friend's Bood, to read the Quotation my self, I would do the like for him, with
any Book I produced, if requested; when he saw I would not be satisfied, but
pressed still to see the Book, then he confessed, It was the Baptists Book, and
impudently asserted the Quotation was right, and that they had truly stated our
Friends Assertion. But his dis-ingenuity thereby appeared, he being laid open,
and many saw him baffled in his Undertaking. He also gave other Forged
Quotations, which he would have had the People believe were our Friends
Assertions; yet all would not avail, to prove the Quakers Religion was against
the Scriptures. A Second Branch of the afore-cited Charge, which, in order to
prove, he asserted, That the Quakers made the Scriptures useless, and utterly
void; alleging, That if the Scriptures were not the Rule of Faith, they were
useless, and utterly void; quoting the Second of Timothy, 3.16.

To which I replied, I deny the Quakers do make void the Scriptures; but that
they own them, I affirm; and that they are profitable to the Man of god: But
there is no Man of God, without God's Spirit; it is the Spirit of God that
makes a Man of God; and it is the Spirit of God, which was the Rule to the Man
of God, before the Scriptures were written; and that which was the Rule to the
Man of God, is the Rule to the Man of God; that which gives Faith, is the Rule
of Faith; and that is the Spirit of God which gave Faith, and was the Rule of
Faith, before the Scriptures were written: Yet this makes not the Scriptures
useless; for the Man of God, who walks according to this Rule, the Spirit,
lives the Life the Scriptures declare of: And to such a Man the Scriptures are
profitable; though he cannot set the Scriptures above the Spirit, which gave
them forth; yet owning them in their place, has a more real esteem for the
Scriptures, than that Man who cries them up for his Rule, yet walks contrary
thereunto, and short of the Life the Scriptures testify of.

John Cheyney says, in the same Page, R. H. would not say, that the Scriptures
were no Rule at all -- But he affirmed, that they were not the Rule.

Reply, This grant of J. C's proves, I did not make the Scriptures useless and
void. I asserted, as before, That the Spirit is the Rule of Doctrinal Saving
Faith; for that which is more universal than the Scriptures, which was the Rule
of Faith before and ever since the Scriptures were written (to wit) of saving
Faith, is the Spirit which gave Faith, and ruled it, and gives Faith, and rules
it; for, what it was, it is; and what it is, it will for ever remain, because
unchangeable. And I further add, That that which the Saints walked in, was
their Rule; and that was the Spirit, Gal. 5.16. Walk in the Spirit, etc. Yet is
not the Scriptures made void, but fulfilled: This is but a false Suggestion of
J. C. That Scriptures are either the Rule, or useless; for he that walks in
Spirit, comes in measure to know the Scriptures fulfilled.

It is the Spirit of God which gives saving Knowledge; and that which gives
saving Knowledge, is the saving Rule; One to all God's People, throughout all
Ages of the World, since Adam was created; his Rule before he fell, his Rule as
he came up again in the same Life from which he fell; Enoch's Rule, in which he
walked with God, before the Scriptures were written; the Prophets Rule, who
spoke forth Scriptures by God's Spirit, who were Prophets before the Scriptures
they spoke forth (by God's Spirit) were written; the Evangelists Rule, who set
forth a Declaration of those things which were most surely believed amongst
them, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, Luke
1.1, 3. Mark, they had perfect understanding of all things they writ, before
they writ them; the Apostles Rule, who were Apostles before their Epistles were
written; the Rule of all the Holy Men of God since the Apostles days; for there
is no Holy Man of God, without God's Spirit: He that has not the Spirit of
God, is none of his, Romans 8.9. He that has the Spirit, is to walk in it, Gal.
5.16, 25. He that walks in the Spirit, it is his Rule; he asks Counsel of
God, as by Vrim and Thummim, has an answer from God, takes Counsel of God, and
is covered with a Covering of God's Spirit; such have comfort in reading the
Scriptures, being come in measure to the fulfilling of them, in measure
witnessing what their Elder Brethren, the Prophets and Apostles, declared of
their Experiences, as they did tread in their Footsteps; for One is the Way
for the Righteous in all Ages, Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, John
14.6. No Man comes to the Father but by him. In the same Way, and by the same
Rule, viz. the Spirit, in and by which they walked, who had not the Scriptures,
walked they who gave forth the Scriptures; not only before they gave forth the
Scriptures, but afterward, in the same Way, and by the same Rule have they
walked, do, and shall they walk, who have come, do, or shall come to live the
Life the Scriptures declare of; and not one of these, who lives the Life the
Scriptures testify of, make the Scriptures void, as J. C. falsely suggesteth;
who thereby has manifested his Ignorance, both of the Scriptures, and of the
Power of God; being one of those unlearned, who wrests the Scriptures to their
own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

And for his saying, The Scriptures were proved the Rule; it is false: For the
Spirit was proved the Rule, and yet the Scriptures not made void.

J. C. in page 10, 11. to prove W. P. and R. H. confute themselves (and so
(says he) down goes the whole Body of Quakerism affirms, That Saving and
Historical Faith are not two Faiths, but one entire saving Faith: Historical
and Saving Faith are not opposite; wherever there is Saving Faith, there is
Historical; and the Rule is one and the same. There is the same Law and Rule to
wicked Men as to godly Men; the same Scripture which breeds Historical Faith,
breeds Saving Faith; but neither one nor the other without the Spirit of God.

Reply, Now if this Tale he true, that Historical Faith and Saving Faith are
not two Faiths, nor opposite, but one Faith; and that upon this point, Down
must go the whole Body of Quakerism: Then I argue thus,

He that has Historical Faith, has Saving Faith, if they be one, as J. C.
says they are, and not opposite; then there is no difference betwixt a Dead
Faith, and a Living Faith; a Faith without Works, and a Faith that has Works:
J. C. says, They are not two, nor opposite; wherever, says he, there is
Saving Faith, there is Historical; and the Rule is one and the same (Is it not
as broad as long?) wherever then there is Historical Faith, there is Saving
Faith; for, says J. C. They are not two Faiths, nor opposite, but one Faith;
and the Rule is one and the same. But does not this contradict the Scripture,
and give the Apostle James the Lie? Who says, Thou believe that there is one
God, thou do well; the Devils also believe and tremble. But will thou know, O
vain Man, that Faith without Works is dead, James 2.19, 20. What says J. C?
Historical Faith, and Saving Faith, are not two Faiths, nor opposite, but one
Faith. What is this but to say, the Faith of vain and wicked Men, and the
Belief of Devils, and the Faith of God's Elect, are not opposite, not two
Faiths, but one Faith? J. C's assertion plainly holds forth this Doctrine, That
there is no difference nor opposition between Historical Faith, and Saving
Faith; Faith without Works, and Faith which has Works; Dead Faith, and living
Faith; the Faith of Wicked Men, and the Faith of God's Elect.

I will not say J. C. is a Ranter in Practice: But let the Reader judge,
whether J. C. be not a Ranter in Principle: For, J. C. cannot deny but that
Devils, and wicked Men, believe there is a God, and that the belief of Devils,
and wicked Men, is not saving; and that wicked Men, whose Faith is not saving,
but vain, believe the History of the Scriptures. Now, whether the historical
Faith of vain and wicked Men, and the saving Faith of God's Elect, be not
opposite, be not two Faiths, but one entire saving Faith, let Truth in all
People judge.

Likewise, observe how grossly J. C. contradicts himself; for he says, Neither
the one nor the other does the Scriptures breed without the Spirit of God.

If they be one and another, they are two; if they be two, J. C. gives himself
the Lie, who before said, They were not two, but one; and he makes God's Spirit
the Author of them both: And again he says, The Spirit in both concurreth, and
makes use of the Scriptures; in this he concludes them to be two; for J. C.
says, In both, that is, in both Faiths, Historical and Saving. Again J. C.
says, Saving and Historical Faith are not two Faiths, are not opposite. Now
the Verb (are) is plural, and speaks of more then one: So all along though J.
C. deny them to be two, he concludes them to be two Faiths, and woefully
contradicts himself; and instead of throwing down the whole Body of Quakerism,
is sadly confounded: Historical Faith is one thing; the Drunkard, Liar,
Whoremonger, Deceiver, may have it; or he that has made shipwreck of that
Faith which is saving, and of a good Conscience, may yet have historical Faith;
that is, he may acknowledge there is a God: But Saving Faith is another thing;
this Faith all Men have not, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. but God visits all with his Spirit
and Power, in order to give saving Faith; but many resist the Visitation of
God, and perish in their Gain saying; the Destruction of all such is of
themselves, and the Lord God is Clear. Of historical Faith, the History may be
a Rule; but of saving Faith, the Mystery is a Rule: The Spirit gives saving
Faith, and the Spirit is the Rule of it; and this will stand over the Head of
J. C. and his Ranting Principle: And in his bold attempt, he has neither hurt
W. P. nor R. H. nor the Quakers; but has manifested his Distraction, and given
himself the Downfall, and his Confusion is laid open, that the Reader, if
unprejudiced, may see what an Unskilful, Confounded, Babylonish Builder J. C.
is.

J. C. says, page 15. The Quakers prefer their own Writings above the
Scriptures, and call their own Writings by this Title, The Word of God. This
was another thing asserted by J. C. at the Dispute, to prove the Quakers
Religion against the Scriptures.

Reply, I answered at the Dispute, and again say, The Charge is false; the
Quakers do not prefer their Writings above the Scriptures of Truth, nor call
them, The Word of God; neither did any place in their Books, which he read and
were owned, nor Quotation which he has given in his Relation, prove any such
thing: I owned, and we own and dearly esteem the Scriptures of Truth.

Friendly Reader, This false and malicious Charge of John Cheyney's, is lately
clearly answered by William Gibson, in his beforementioned Book, entitled,
The Life of God, which is the Light and Salvation of Men, Exalted; which Answer
take as follows: By which thou may see clearly, that the People called
Quakers do not prefer their own Writings above the Scriptures.

Concerning the Holy Scriptures, or Bible; and concerning the Quakers Books.
JOhn Cheney, in thy 8th and 9th page of thy Premonition to thy Sermons of
Hypocrisy, thou chargest the People called Quakers, That they esteem their
Books and Writings to be of Equal Authority with the Scriptures or Bible.

Answ. We truly and dearly own the Scriptures, or Book called the Bible; but
the words contained in that Book are not all of equal Authority one with
another. See thy own Testimony concerning the Scriptures or Bible, which is as
follows, The Scriptures are not God, Christ nor the Spirit; but Laws and
Doctrines, Histories and Reports, given by the Inspiration of God.

I say, The words which God spoke unto Man, saying, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thine Heart, and thy Neighbor as thy self; Were and Are of
greater Authority, than those words which, as History or Relation, declare of
the Wars and Battles of the Jews, and other such Historical Matters; and of
greater Authority to and among Christians, than those words that related to
Circumcision, the Blood of Bulls, Goats and Rams, and the Ashes of an Heifer,
etc. these being Shadows, and to pass away.

And the words of Christ, who said to his Disciples, I am the Vine, ye are the
Branches; as the Branches cannot bring forth Fruit except they abide in the
Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me: And without me ye can do nothing
-- My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed -- Except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you.

These words are of greater Authority than the Relation or Histories of the
Apostles outward Travel by Sea or Land; and they are of greater Authority than
those words that speak of Paul's Cloak, that he left at Troas, mentioned in 2 Timothy 4.13. and all other such Historical Matters.

The People called Quakers do prefer and esteem the Book called the Bible, or
Holy Scriptures, above any outward Writing or Book extant upon the Earth,
because of the Verity and Plenty of deep heavenly Sayings, uttered by God unto
Moses and the Prophets, through the several Ages of the World; and particularly
and eminently through the heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, who was anointed with the
Oil of Gladness, above his Fellows, and filled with the Spirit without measure.
Nevertheless, we do affirm, that the Spirit of God in this Age, has moved
several of us to write Books, which have been Instrumental in his Hand for Good
unto many, with respect to their Immortal Souls. God the Holy One changes not,
neither is he to be limited; and all our Books and Writings are not of equal
Authority one with another; some treat of our inward Experience of the Work of
God, in which are contained words that do direct Man and Woman to the
Manifestation of the Spirit of God, which is given them to profit withal; to
the Grace of God, which brings Salvation; to the Light, wherewith Christ
lights every one that comes into the World. Some others of our Books do treat
of our Sufferings, and outward Exercises, etc. which though all of them be
true, yet some are of greater weight than others. And Destruction comes upon
People because they do not believe in and obey the Light, Grace and Spirit of
God, which he has given them, to lead them out of Sin, into all Truth. Those
who read our Writings without Prejudice, may receive Good thereby, as by
Instruments which God makes use of; and such who do so, they will return the
Glory to God, as we do: And those who read our Books in Envy and Malice, the
Murdering Spirit blinds their Minds, and God does condemn such.

And for J. C's saying, He proved by Arguments the Scriptures rightly to be
called by this Title, The word of God: Here the Reader has no more but his say
so, which I deny to be any proof at all; neither did he prove it, but in this
also is a Liar. J. C. says, The Quakers acknowledge the Scriptures to be the
Words of God; by their own Confession, every Scripture Word is God's Word.

Reply, This is a dark Consequence J. C. has drawn: Though we own God's Words
in the Scriptures to be his Words, yet this does not follow, that we own every
word in the Scripture to be God's Word. For in the Scriptures there are words
of the Serpent, who is called the Devil and Satan; words of wicked Men, as well
as God's words, and words of good Men: And has not J. Cheyney here manifested
his Falsehood? Let the Reader judge.

J. C. further says, R. H. in the Dispute denied all Scripture to be given by
Inspiration of God; and would read the words, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture given
by Inspiration of God is profitable, leaving out Is, etc.

Reply, J. C. himself grants the word [ is] not to be expressed in the Original
Text; but that the Original Text is read thus, All Scripture given by
Inspiration of God, etc. the word (is) not being expressed; why then should R.
H. be blamed for reading it according to the Original Text, which was before
the English Copy or Translation? Yet there is extant some old English Bibles,
in which this Scripture is thus read, All Scripture given by Inspiration of
God, is profitable, etc. And the word (is) and also the Conjunction (and) about
which J. C. quarrels so much, are left out. But it seems J. C. will rather
skirmish with his own Shadow, than have nothing to do: For, what he grants to
be true, R. H. must, if he can reach it, be stigmatized, as some Blasphemer.
But this way of skirmishing will never hurt R. H. nor stain his Reputation
amongst good Men. R. H. acknowledged, and does acknowledge, All Scripture given
by Inspiration of God, to be profitable, etc. But J. C. is Angry with him,
because he will not say, All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, though
he grants the word (is) not to be expressed in the Original Text; therefore R.
H's Reading is true.

And that all Scripture, which is as much as to say, All Writing, is given by
Inspiration of God; I think J. C. himself, If considerate, will not assert; for
All Writing contains or comprehends every Writing that is written; not only in
the Scriptures of Truth, the Books of the Prophets, Evangelists, the Epistles
of the Apostles, and other Writings of Truth extant; but all other Writings
extant, of what matter or subject soever they treat. If J. Chayney grants this,
that all Writing, viz. all Books, of what nature or kind soever, that are
written, printed and published to the World, are not given by Inspiration of
God, as sure he will; then he grants, all Scripture is not given by Inspiration
of God; for, All Scripture, comprehends all Writing; and all Writing, includes
all Books, that are written; and all Books that are written, are not profitable
to the Man of God for Doctrine, etc. Then he must needs grant the Apostles
Meaning was according to the Original Text; with which the old English Bibles
agree, (to wit) All Scripture given by Inspiration of God, is profitable, etc.
This sense the Original Text will bear, without any wrong to the Truth, or the
Apostle who spoke it forth: To this the Apostle Peter alludes, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
No Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation; (Mark) for the
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of Man, but holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. The Apostle here speaks of the Prophesies of
the Scripture, what was spoken in the Motion of the Holy Ghost: Now that all
that was spoken, and is written in the Bible, was spoken in the Motion of the
Holy Ghost (there being something spoken by wicked Men in the Bible, which was
my assertion) J. C. does not affirm. But J. C. will have it, That every word in
the whole Bible was given by the Inspiration of God, to the Holy Penmen, who
were inspired to write them.

Reply, This alters the state of the Controversy betwixt us, which was about
speaking forth what afterward was Recorded in Scripture, viz. what the
Serpent, and wicked Men spoke, who called Christ Beelzebub, a Samaritan, and
said, He had a Devil, etc. It was not the Historical Relation that we were
about; but of its being spoken before Recorded, we were arguing: I said, The
Serpent, the Devil, and wicked Men spoke words which are recorded in
Scriptures, and none of them spoke those words in the Motion of God's Spirit.

But though it be a little beside the matter, I query, How J. C. will prove
(yet I deny not that the holy Pen Men of Scriptures had God's Spirit, and were
assisted by it in the recording the words of wicked Men) that every Penman
that writ of the Scriptures, writ not a word but what was opened in him by the
Inspiration of God, which he neither heard of Man, nor received from Man, but
in the Immediate Revelation of God received it, and by Inspiration writ it? Or
whether some of the Penmen saw not with their outward Eyes several things
which they writ of, and heard not with their outward Ears several words which
are written in the Scripture, which they heard of Men? According to Luke 1.1,
2, 3, 4. Acts 1.1. and 23.16, to 23.1 Cor. 1.10. 11. Gal. 2.11, etc. Genesis
42.29. and 45.9, to 28. Judges 16.17, 18. 2 Samuel 1.5, to 17. and 18.10, etc.
Esther 4.

J. C. in page 21. says, R. H. in the Dispute, did openly affirm, That God did
no where command us to walk according to the Scriptures, and the Laws and
Doctrines of the Scriptures; but all are to walk in the Spirit, and after the
Spirit, and according to the Spirit; wickedly opposing the Spirit, and his Holy
Laws: He was quickly silenced, etc.

Reply, In this I may truly say, John Cheyney has far exceeded, not only the
bounds of Truth, but Honesty, in forging Lies, and publishing a false
Accusation and Slander against me, to render me odious in the sight of good
Men: But sure I am, notwithstanding J. C's wicked Lies, false Accusation and
Slander (which I hope will find no more acceptance with good Men, than his
Hypocritical Praying, Dissembling and Lying, has with God, as in his
Prayer Book, p. 141.) that I never so said, neither ever so intended: For,
first, it is against my Principle; the Spirit of Truth leads into all Truth,
such who stand in the counsel of it, and are freely given up to be led by it:
This Spirit is in the inward parts, and that is some-where; and God by it, in
our inward parts, commands us to walk Holily, Righteously and Godlily in this
World; to observe his Precepts, and keep his Commandments; love God above all
things, and our Neighbors as our selves; and to do to all Men as we would they
should do to us; this is the Law and the Prophets; and to own the Precepts,
Doctrines, Laws and Commandments, contained in the Scriptures; and fully to
believe, That God, who by his Spirit gave them forth through his Prophets,
commanded that People should keep them, and walk in his fear, and be Witnesses
of the fulfilling of them, and walk and live in that Holy Life the Scriptures
declare of; and this walking is according to the Scriptures. Secondly, It is
contrary to my Practice: But, lest J. C. or any other, if I should speak what I
might speak in the Truth, concerning it, should judge me to boast concerning my
Practice; I shall say thus much, It is such as in measure becomes the Gospel,
fearing God, eschewing Evil; and this is according to Scripture. And for my
Conversation in the World, to them who know me, and know it also, I shall leave
it, for them to speak further thereof, as they find cause; whether it be not in
measure according to the Conversation of those, who in times past walked not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. I did, and I do assert, (as
before) That the Spirit of God is the Rule of Saving Faith; and that the
Apostles did not direct People to the Scriptures, to be the Rule of Saving
Faith; or say, Walk in the Scriptures, they are the Rule: For, although the
Apostle commended the Noble Bereans for searching the Scriptures, etc. so did
he for receiving the Word with diligence; but he did not direct the Bereans to
the Scriptures, to be the Rule of Saving Faith: But the Apostle, and Apostles,
directed People to the sure Word of Prophecy, which was nigh in the Heart, 2
Pet. 1.19. Romans 10.8. And turned them from Darkness to Light, from Satan's
Power, to the Power of God, Acts 26.18. To the Unction of the Holy One, the
Anointing within, which teaches all things, 1 John 2.27. To the Spirit,
thereby to mortify the Deeds of the Body, that they might live, Romans 8.13. To
walk in the Spirit, Gal. 4.16. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
Lusts of the Flesh: I say, because I thus asserted, and also proved the Spirit
to be the Rule of Saving Faith, and not the Scriptures; and the Apostles
directed to the Spirit for the Rule, and not to the Scriptures to be the Rule;
and that they did not say, Walk in the Scriptures, they are the Rule; but, Walk
in the Spirit: I say, because I did prefer the Spirit to be the Rule of Faith,
before the Scriptures; yet owned the Scriptures in their place: Therefore J. C.
has impiously charged me, that I said, God did no where command us to walk
according to the Scriptures; yet in Contradiction to himself, he grants I
affirmed, All things are to walk in the Spirit, after the Spirit, and according
to the Spirit; all this is very good; and if I said it, I own it: But here is
his Contradiction, in allowing I said, All mast walk in the Spirit, and after
the Spirit, and according to the Spirit; which are Scriptural Expressions; he
grants I affirmed, All must walk according to the Laws and Dctrines in the
Scriptures; for the Spirit, which he grants I affirmed all must walk in, after,
and according to, (viz. the Spirit of Truth) commands and leads to keep those
Doctrines, and observe those Laws and Precepts in Scripture, which concern a
Holy Life. This is so evident a Truth, that whosoever has an Eye to see with,
may run and read.

And for his saying, We wickedly oppose the Spirit, and his Holy Laws.

I say, He wickedly Belyes and Slanders us; for we own the Spirit in its place,
and the Scriptures in their place, not opposing them.

And whereas he says, He quickly silenced me.

It is a Lie, like the rest; and he that published it is a Liar; whom, having
rebuked for it, I leave it.

J. C. page 18. says, As to Matters of Practice, he did before all the
Assembly charge and prove them to be such as Paul describes, Romans 16.17, 18.
Men that serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly; and by good
Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple.

Reply, That J. C. did charge the Quakers to be such as Paul describes, etc. I
grant, it being the second of the seven Charges (in his forecited Paper of
Charge) that was disputed upon that day; but that J. C. proved the Quakers to
be such, I deny; and at the Dispute did sufficiently clear the People called
Quakers from that wicked Slander and impious Change, wherewith J. C. most
impudently Charged them.

But J. C. relates the Argument, whereby he proved (as he vainly imagines) the
Charge against us, in that we are Apostates, and Turn-coats from the true
Faith. This is his Argument.

Reply, That we are Apostates, and Turncoats from the true Faith, is a Charge
as false as the other, which he intended this to have been an Argument to
prove; and this has been J. C's accustomed way, in essaying to prove his
Charges against the Quakers, viz. One false Charge by another Charge, no more
true than the former. The true Faith is the Gift of God, this we are not turned
from; it is delivered unto us, as it was delivered unto the Saints; it was
their Victory, and is our Victory, even our Faith; our Faith stands in God's
Power, we live by it; The Just shall live by Faith, Hab. 2.4. This is the true
Faith, by which the Just lives; we are turned from such as have not the One
Faith, Ephesians. 4.5. For all Men have not Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. And from such who
having in some things the Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof,
according as the Apostle exhorted some in his day, 2 Timothy 3.5. And we are
justified by the Lord in so doing. So that J. C's Argument is a false wicked
Charge; we are not turned from the true Faith, but from such as have it not.

But J. C. says, He did with sober compassionate Zeal, and a warm affected
Heart, make Challenge to R. H. to give any one Reason for their Apostasy.

Reply, Sober Compassionate Zeal, etc. J. C. might well have omitted to
mention, who rather appeared sometimes that day like a Stage Player, than a
sober Disputant: I might say, like one acting the Fool's part in a Play, at
times, he rather behaved himself, than like a moderate Man; such words as these
(in an airy spirit) he vented forth, I Will be with thee anon: Thou had better
have kept that word in: Thou have now put a Weapon into my Hand I never thought
of; with these, and the like Expressions, stirring up some People to Laughter,
and putting them into an Expectation, he would do some great Matter: But alas!
Their foolish vain Hopes, with his fond Conceit, were both frustrated; for when
he had room to speak, he acted but like a Fool, with his wooden Sword, made a
Vapor, but effected nothing, save Shame to himself.

Now, as to his Challenging me, to give any one Reason for our Apostasy: I
answer, No wise Man can expect that I should give any one Reason for our
Apostasy, who are not Apostatized, but have the Evidence of God's Spirit, that
we have the Faith delivered unto us, that was delivered unto the Saints; for
that were to give a Reason for what we are not: Nay, I am persuaded, none but a
Novice, or a Fool, would require it. But this is not the first Distraction,
besides his being Distracted in Prayer, J. C. has run into.

J. C. says, R. H could give no Reason at all, nor had any mind to argue it,
but shifted it off, That the Quakers Religion, Ministry, Worship and Churches,
were opposite to theirs. And if his Reader will take his word for it, he says,
He has given R. H. and his Fellows, an Argument at Croton, which could not be
answered or gainsaid by any of them then, nor can they ever answer it.

Reply, That the Quakers Religion, Ministry, Worship and Church, are opposite
to J. C's Religion, Ministry, Worship and Church, J. C. has asserted; and if
he do believe it, what needs further Proof? But would not J. C. have been
shifting from the Charge, and broaching new Matter? He would sometimes have
been begging the Question, to have wrested me from the Charge; but keeping him
to the Point, not giving him leave to Catechize me, having put him upon the
Proof of his Charge, I kept him to it, not suffering him to start new Arguments
to lead from it, he failed in Proof, and came off with Infamy.

As to the Argument at Croton, it was there gainsaid and answered (therefore
J. C. is a Liar, who said, It could not be answered or gainsaid) the
Invalidity of which Argument may be seen in the former part of this Treatise,
where I have run it through.

J. C. says, He repeated the same Argument at Arley- Dispute, but that I
declined the Arguing of it, and was utterly unable to maintain my own Religion,
and to take off the Charge, That the Quakers are Belly-gods and Flesh-servers.

Reply, I declined not the Argument for the Validity of it, but because it led
from the Charge J. C. had undertaken to prove, viz. That the Quakers were
Bellygods, etc. And it being gain said and answered already, I shall pass it
by, only note to the Reader, that J. C. said at Croton, You owned the Doctrine
which was according to the Ten Commandments, Lord's Prayer, and Creed. To which
I replied, The Doctrine of the Commandments, which is, To love God with all the
Heart, with all the Soul, Might and Strength, is owned by us; and the Doctrine
of the Lord's Prayer; which is, That the Will of God may be done in Earth, as
it is in Heaven, we also own. But that you, who preach this for Doctrine, live
up to it, we deny; and therefore are turned from you. And as to the Creed, we
believe in God and in Christ. To this J. C. replied not.

I suppose, that in all his Notes, he had nothing writ in Defense of his Cause
in this point; and perhaps being accustomed to lean upon his Crutch, he would
not venture to go without it: But however it was, whether he would not, or
could not, I shall leave it with the Impartial Reader to judge: Yet sure I am,
his Silence was so far a Consent to my Assertion, that all unbiassed Hearers
could do no less than conclude, he wanted a Reply thereunto.

And his Charge that Quakers are Belley Gods and Flesh-servers, is a false
impudent Charge; no further either at the Dispute, or by his Relation of the
Dispute, proved, than to say, They are so: Or, that the Quakers are what they
are not, in order to prove them so; which is no proof at all; yet so would he
prove one false Charge by another. The Quakers were cleared from it at the
Dispute, and before and since the Quakers were and are clear of it, and J. C.
the Liar, who falfly accused, belyed and slandered them; and our Religion was
maintained against all his false Charges, for the clearing whereof I did appear
by Disputation; and the Lord blessed my Undertaking, to him alone be the
Praise. And for the Truth's sake, and right Information of the simple-hearted,
I do appear again in the Examination of J. C's Relation of the Dispute, and
shall leave the event to the Lord.

Further, J. C. says, page 19. Solomon Eccles, an audacious Quaker, a day or
two after the Dispute, sent me a bold Challenge, by Authority from God, to Fast
with him five Days and five Nights, without Meat, Drink, and Sleep, etc. But
the Quakers have no other Way to evade my Arguments, being rationally and
unanswerably proved, to be such as Paul describes, Romans 16.17. making their
Belly their God; devised this Shift for a cover of their Nakedness and
Hypocrisy. -- If People will venture their Souls with such Cheats and
Impostures, let them.

Reply, That Solomon Eccles did Challenge J. C. (who had charged the Quakers
with making their Belly their God, and asserted, that their Belly was their
God) to Fast with him five Days and five Nights, not to Eat, not to Drink, nor
to Sleep, till the five Days and Nights were faithfully performed before the
Lord, for a Trial of J. C's Faith, viz. Whether his Faith was in God and
Christ, yea or nay; and whether J. C's God, whose work he had done in charging
the Quakers to be Belly-gods, etc. or the Quakers God, was the true God; and
whether of them was a Member of the true Church: I having seen a Copy of a
Paper of Solomon Eccles to this effect, do believe it is true; and I am
persuaded that S. E. did not give forth this Challenge as a vain Scribe, but as
one having Authority; and that the God of Heaven (if J. C. had accepted of the
Challenge, and come upon Trial with him) would have strengthened him to have
performed it faithfully before the Lord, to the manifesting of J. C. to be a
Liar, his Charge against the Quakers to be utterly false, and the Quakers God
to be the true God; that as by Disputation God appeared with us, to clear us
from this, and the rest of J. C's wicked Charges against us, and manifest J. C.
to be a Liar, etc. so by the Trial of J. C's Belly, God would have appeared on
our side, for to have made J. C. further manifest to be a Liar, etc. And if J.
C. refused to trust his God with his Belly, this is not a true Character that
his Faith is in the True God and Christ; and if his Faith be not in the true
God and Christ, he is no Member of the true Church.

But J. C. in refusing to Fast with S. E. for the Trial of his Faith, and of
his God, has come behind the Prophets of Baal, who embraced the Offer that
Elijah the Prophet of the Lord made, and came upon the Trial of their God, 1
Kings 18.21, etc.

But if J. C. did believe that S. E. had no Authority from God concerning that
matter, Why then did not he prove S. E. and manifest him upon Trial? That sure
was too hard a Way for J. C. to go, because his Crutch, viz. his Notes, would
have done him little service in that Exercise: And may I not conclude that J.
C's Faith failed him in that way of Trial?

But yet J. C. would lay all at the Quakers Door, as that they devised this for
a Cover of their Nakedness and Hypocrisy, having (as he says) no other way to
evade his Arguments, being rationally and unanswerably proved to be such as
Paul describes, making their Belly their God. To which I say, J. C's
Disingenuity does much appear in this matter: Truth needs no devised Shifts for
a Cover; it can appear with open Face: The Quakers (as I said before) were
cleared from this wicked Charge, and J. C's Nakedness was laid open, and his
Hypocrisy made manifest at the Dispute, as hereafter I shall make appear. But
is not this a devised Shift of J. C's, to Cover his Nakedness and Hypocrisy
withal, who was proved a Liar and Deceiver at the Dispute? Yet would he
persuade his Reader, That because a Quaker challenged to Fast with him (for the
Trial of his Faith, and of his God, that it might appear by Fasting, etc.) (as
well as that it had been made manifest by Words, viz. by Disputation, that the
Quakers did not make their Belly their God, but were clear of J. C's wicked
Charge, and he made manifest, etc.) therefore against the Quakers it was
rationally and unanswerably proved at the Dispute (says J. C.) that they make
their Belly their God. If J. C. has devised this for a Cover for himself, it
is too narrow; for there are some Hundreds not called Quakers, who were at the
Dispute, who notwithstanding this Covering, will see his Nakedness. But no
doubt J. C. would have all to believe, that the Quakers were unanswerably
proved to be such as make their Belly their God; which is both a gross Lie, and
wicked Slander; yet out of his Study, J. C. has thus sounded and published it
to the World. But what will that Man stick to say, who links his Heart with
Satan? For in page 158. of his Sermons of Hypocrisy, J. C. says, It is much
easier to Confute a Quaker, than to Confute Satan and My own Heart. Has not J.
C. linked his own Heart with Satan? Sure such who have Eyes to see with, may
see him, if wilfully they do not shut their Eyes rather than they will see him;
and such as do see him, and yet will follow such a Hypocrite (I shall forbear
to call him Cheat and Impostor, how deserving soever he may be thereof, though
he has called us Cheats and Impostors very undeservedly) and venture their
Souls with him, and believe his Lies, Slanders, and Impious Charges, against
the People called Quakers, rather than the Truth; I shall not say as J. C.
does, Let them: But earnestly desire that they may Return, Repent and Live, and
also walk in the Light; which if they do, Peace will be upon them: But if they
do not, I having put Pen to Paper rightly to inform them (though their Sin be
upon their own Heads) I shall be clear.

I have hitherto examined what J. C. has related concerning the Proof of his
Charges against the Quakers, and signified how many of the seven Charges, in
his recited Paper of Charge, he assayed to prove, which were only two; the
other five he makes no mention of in his Relation, neither at that time would
he assay the Proof thereof, though he had promised to prove every one of them:
But he vainly supposing my Charge against him, viz. That he was a Liar and a
Deceiver, could not be proved, he was very urgent with me to prove my Charge
against him, and vehemently called out for proof thereof, and would not assay
further to prove the remaining part of his Charges, before I had proved my
Charge: I hearing this, the Zeal of the Lord being upon me, it was in my Heart
forthwith to prove my Charge against him; which I did to the full, as in the
further Examination of the remaining part of his Relation, I shall clearly
manifest.

J. C. in page 16 says, All that ever he had to say was from a Passage or two
in my Book of Quakerism Subverted, and a few words in my Book of Prayer, page
141.

Reply, This is a notorious Lie, and he that publishes it is a notorious Liar;
for before I had produced either of his Books, we had discoursed some Hours,
and gone through what I have already examined of the Dispute; in which no Man
of Candor can possibly judge, but that I spoke something in Defense of the
Truth, the Quakers and their Religion, in order to clear them, and prove J. C.
a Liar. J. C. himself, in Contradiction to himself, in his Relation, confesses
I said something, and something of what I said he has written, which gives
himself the Lie; and likewise something that he says I said, which I am sure I
never spoke, as I have cleared before; all which was before his Books were
brought forth: And yet he is not ashamed to say, All that ever I had to say,
was from some Passages in his Books. Sure if a Catalogue of this Man's Lies and
Slanders were taken, I am satisfied from my own Observation of his Books and
Papers, they would fill up some Sheets of Paper, for many Pages in his
Pamphlets are stuffed with them.

I know J. C. was much concerned, whilst I was speaking, in looking up his
Notes, and receiving Papers from the Hands of some one or other of his
Abettors; and it was observed by many, that he took little notice of what I
said, or replied little directly to it, but disputed by his Notes; and when his
Notes were gone through, he had done: Yet sure, if he heeded not, he could do
no less than hear that I spoke something before his Books were produced, though
not in favor to his Cause; therefore I have ground to believe, that what he
heard and took notice of, he has wilfully omitted to relate. But to the
Passages in his Books.

J. C. relates, That in his Book, Quakerism subverted, he says, If the Light
within be altogether blameless, the Quakers are in the right. And elsewhere in
the same Book, There is something of God in every Man, and something of Satan
and the Flesh: But (says he) if by something of God, he thinks I mean a
Measure or Part of God's Essence or Being, I renounce any such Exposition as
Blasphemy.

Reply, It Is right J. C. says in page 31. of his Book, entitled, Quakerism
subverted, If this be true, that the Light within by the Quakers owned,
promoted and asserted to be the Life of God (and by J. C. no where confuted)
which is the Light of Men, John 1.4. with which every Man is enlightened (as J.
C. has asserted, page 21. of the same Book) be utterly blameless, the Quakers
are in the right, and all that he has written against them falls to the
Ground, and he will confess himself utterly defeated, and to have lost the Day.
And in p. 27, 28. of the same Book, he says, In every Man there is something
of God, something of Satan, Flesh and Spirit, Light and Darkness. Mark, Reader,
J. C. has not confuted our Assertion, That the Life of God is the Light of
Men, etc. but has affirmed, That the Light within is the Light wherewith Jesus
Christ, the true Light, enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, page
21. as aforesaid; which Light (within) he says is something of God, Spirit,
Light.

Now God is a Spirit, John 4.24. God is Light, 1 John 1.5. Observe, he does not
say, something of God's, or that may be called his; but something of God,
Light, Spirit; which something of God, being Light and Spirit, must it not
needs be something of God's Essence or Being, whose Essence or Being is Light,
Life and Spirit? For it cannot be the entire Fullness that is in every Man; and
therefore must it not needs be something of the Fullness, a Manifestation of the
Spirit, according to the Scripture? 1 Cor. 12.7. Col. 2.9. For in him dwells
all the Fullness of the Godhead Bodily. John 1.16. Of his Fullness have we all
received, and Grace for Grace.

But though J. C. has asserted something in every Man, yet before he will
grant it to be any thing of God's Essence or Being, fearing the Consequence (to
wit) his Overthrow, and that he should be utterly defeated, and lose the day,
he will deny God to be Omnipresent, and count it Blasphemy to assert that there
is any thing of God's Essence or Being in Man. But if this were Blasphemy to
assert, then were J. C. guilty: For (that he may appear the same contradictory
J. C.) though in page 16, and 17. he counts it Blasphemy to affirm that there
is any thing of God's Essence or Being in Man; yet in page 4. of the same Book,
viz. A Warning to Souls, he affirms, That God's Essence and Essential Presence
is every where; and I am sure in Man, for he is somewhere; therefore God's
Essence is in Man, according to J. C's Assertion; and if so, whether
measurably, or in Fullness, viz. something of the Essence of God, or the whole
Fullness of God, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, let the Reader
judge. But I deny it to be Blasphemy to say, That something of God's Essence is
in Man; and affirm it to be Blasphemy to deny any thing of God's Essence to be
in Man (of which J. C. is guilty, and yet affirms God's Essence and Essential
Presence to be every where, which is flat Contradiction to himself) for God is
an infinite Spirit, whose Presence fills Heaven and Earth, who is exempted from
no place, but is present every where, therefore in Man, his holy Spirit in Man,
his Essence or Being in Man, his Light and Life in Man, which is holy and
blameless for ever, according to Scriptures, 1 Cor. 3.16. Mat. 10.20. James
1.13. and never consented to Sin; therefore all that J. C. has writ against it
(viz. the Life of God, which is the Light of Men, John 1.4. and the Quakers the
Friends of it) by his own grant falls to the Ground, and he is utterly defeated
(and so was at the Dispute in handling this Point) and (as he words it) lost
the Day: Yet he is not ashamed, in his Relation, to tell his Reader, I had
nothing to say against any of his Arguments there: He is the same J. C. a Liar,
and one that makes Lies his Refuge, and under Falsehood would hide himself; but
the Hail will sweep away the Refuge of Lies, and the Waters will cover the
Hiding Place, Isa. 28.15, 17.

J. C. says, in page 17. As to my words in my Prayer Book, thence he would
conclude me a Hypocrite out of my own Mouth.

Reply, It is true, I did conclude, and also prove J. C. at the Dispute, a
Hypocrite out of his own Mouth: I shall lay down his words, as spoken by him,
and published to the World, in his Book of Prayer, page 141. I am compelled to
Pray Hypocritically, and Dissemble with God, and utter Untruths to him that
searches the Hearts, and delights not but in upright Lips. These are J. C's
words, word by word: Upon which I thus argue, He that says he prays
Hypocritically, Dissembles with God, and utters Untruths to the Searcher of
Hearts, confesses himself a Hypocrite, a Deceiver, and a Liar. But J. C. says,
He Prays Hypocritically, Dissembles with God, and utters Untruths to the
Searcher of Hearts; therefore John Cheyney confesses himself a Hypocrite, a
Deceiver, and a Liar; and was so proved out of his own Mouth.

My Charge against him, That he was a Liar and a Deceiver, was by me at the
Dispute, proved to the full; and stands over his Head to this day. And it seems
J. C. at the last has cried Peccavi. It is much for so hot a Skirmisher to
retract any thing he has spoken, and especially to publish his Recantation to
the World; he tells his Reader, If those words were out of his Book, they
should not so be in; judging it an Incommodious Expression, which he should
have avoided; and wishes, It had not been said. Yet he queries, What if these
Words, and the Book, had not been writ?

Reply, Taking it for granted, that by these words, and his Book, he is proved
a Hypocrite, a Deceiver, and a Liar; yet I say, before this Book was written,
he was a Hypocrite, a Deceiver, and a Liar; and so I could have proved him, if
this Book had never been written. But J. C. sure concludes, because I took this
way, I had no other; but that is false. Yet taking this way for proof of my
Charge, I may truly say, I needed no other; sufficient Proof being made.

What fuller and clearer Proof, that a Man is an Hypocrite, to the satisfaction
of an Auditory, can be made, than his own Confession? Though we may not believe
a Man to be every thing that he says he is, or every thing that he says of
himself, to be true; yet sure when a Man says, He is what he is, and says of
himself what is true, we have just ground to believe him.

J. C. says, He Prays Hypocritically, Dissembles with God, and utters
Untruths to the Searcher of Hearts. And in page 45. of the same Book, There is
much detestable Hypocrisy committed by us, in our solemn Prayers to God, both
in secret, in private, and in public. He says in page 130. I am distracted in
Prayer; I am soon weary; I come poorly off; my Foes are too hard for me -- Why
go I mourning all the day long, when the Comforter, which should relieve my
Soul, is gone from me? Also, in page 145. I Tremble to have my Lukewarm
Prayers abhorred by God, and spued out of his Mouth, and cast in my Face as
Dung. And several more such like Confessions to his Hypocrisy, which in his
Book of Prayer may be seen; which, for brevity sake, I pass by.

Now, I do believe, that what J. C. has confessed and said of himself is true,
That he Prays Hypocritically, Dissembles with God, and Lies to the Almighty;
that there is detestable Hypocrisy (the Character of an Hypocrite) committed
by him in his Prayers to God; that he is Distracted in Prayer; that the
Comforter, which would relieve his Soul, is gone from him; and that he may
tremble to have his Lukewarm Prayers abhorred by God, and cast in his Face
like Dung: And why any impartial Man should believe to the contrary, I see no
Reason. It is a Maxim in Law, grounded upon Reason, That a Man's Evidence may
be believed against himself, though not for himself. Neither does J. C. himself
retract any thing he has said of his detestable Hypocrisy, Distraction, and
Lukewarmness in Prayer; which are signs and tokens of an Hypocrite; nor of the
Comforter being gone from his Soul, which is a deplorable State; yet this seems
not so much to be his Trouble, as that he has not so worded the matter; but
that every one, who believes what he has said of himself to be true, must
conclude him a Hypocrite, a Deceiver, and a Liar, out of his own Mouth: And
though he be all this, and has both confessed and published it to the World,
yet he would not be so accounted.

Further, J. C. after his Recantation, says, If R. H. and his Friends, would
but read that Book with the same Spirit that it was writ, this had not needed.

Reply, R. H. does not believe that Book was writ by the Inspiration of God;
for then there had been no need of a Recantation. But J. C. wishes, That some
Words had been left out, and some Expressions in his Book had not been said:
Does he not therefore Repent they were written? And R. H. desires not to read
either that Book, or any other, with that confused lying spirit, which acted
him that writ that Book; but with the Spirit of God, which tries and judges all
false spirits. The Lies, Contradictions, Slanders, Confusions and Blasphemy,
that is broached in that Book, is proof sufficient, that it was not written by
the Inspiration of God; but that a lying blaspheming spirit has entered and
acted him that writ it; and the Spirit of God in and through R. H. and his
Friends, judges the Book, and that spirit by which it was writ. But would not
J. C. if he could, persuade R. H. and his Friends, to believe, That Book was
written by Inspiration, and that he was Inspired by God to write it? if this be
the thing he aims at, he has evidently manifested his Folly, who has denied
the infinite Spirit of God to be in Man; and yet would he have us to read his
Book with the same Spirit by which it was writ: Does he not mean the Spirit of
God? If not, then would he not have R. H. and his Friends, read his Book with
another Spirit than the Spirit of God? And so might they be blind and deluded
like himself; and call Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; put Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light: But if at this he aimed, he is like to come off with Shame.
For R. H. and his Friends, can join to no other Spirit but the Spirit of God,
which searches all things, even the deep things of God; by which spirit they
judge him, and that wicked spirit that acts him, and the works of both.

J. C. in page 18. concludes, There is no Prayer made, but there is
Contradiction between the Heart and the Tongue -- he queries, Do thou
perceive none? If not, thou art a graceless, proud, unhumbled Soul, and
altogether a Stranger to God, and to right Prayer; if yea, then there is
something of Hypocrisy in thy Prayer.

Reply, No manvel if J. C. be distracted in Prayer, for he is distracted about
it, and indeed about the most of the things of God he meddles with, which are
too high for him: Does he not conclude him to be a Stranger to God, and to
right Prayer, a graceless, proud, unhumbled Soul, who prays without Hypocrisy;
and that not to be right Prayer, which has not something of Hypocrisy in it;
or that there is no Prayer made wherein the Heart and Tongue perfectly go
together? This is in order to justify his hypocritical Praying, Dissembling
with God, and uttering Untruths to him that searches the Heart; for he says,
Far be it from me to say, There is nothing of corrupt Nature within me,
defiling my Prayers. What J. C. both before and here has said of himself, I
believe; that his Prayers are defiled, and that there is Hypocrisy in them; in
this J. C. and R. H both agree: But that Right Prayer is not without
Hypocrisy, and that he is a Stranger to God and right Prayer, who Prays
without Hypocrisy; or that he is a graceless proud Soul who feels no
Contradiction between his Heart and his Tongue, but his Heart perfectly goes
along with his Tongue in Prayer, I deny; and assert, that right Prayer is
without Hypocrisy; and that he that Prays right, his Heart and Tongue
perfectly go together; and he is not a proud unhumbled Soul, neither a Stranger
to God and right Prayer, who perceives no contradiction between his Heart and
his Tongue. This is so evident a Truth, that none, who pray with the Spirit and
with Understanding, can deny. John Cheyney, though in contradiction to himself,
has largely confessed hereunto in his Book of Prayer, page 76. he says, The
Spirit of God commands and moves to Prayer. Page 7. All right Prayer must be in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; which is not so to be understood, as if the
bare naming of Christ were enough. Mark, the bare naming of Christ is not
enough; for all right Prayer must be in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now,
if so, that God commands and moves to Prayer by his Spirit, and that all right
Prayer is in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, as certain it is; then all
right Prayer is without Hypocrisy: For God moves not by his Spirit to
Hypocrisy, neither is there Hypocrisy in the Name of Christ.

Page 17. he says, Who knows how to pray, to God farther than God shall teach
and enable him? Page 20. We could do nothing in Prayer without the special Help
of God's Spirit. Here again J. C. grants, that none knows how to pray to God,
further than God teaches them; and that nothing can be done in Prayer (I
suppose he means right Prayer) without the special Help of God's Spirit. Now it
is plain, that God does not teach any to Pray Hypocritically, and nothing being
done in right Prayer without the special Help of God's Spirit, there can be
nothing of Hypocrisy in right Prayer; for right Prayer is performed by the
special Help of God's Spirit; and the Spirit of of God is not the Author of
Hypocrisy.

And since the Spirit of God cammands and moves to Prayer, engaging both Man's
Heart and Tongue therein; it therefore follows, that through the special Help
of God's Spirit, the Heart and Tongue of Man do perfectly go together ^n right
Prayer; otherwise the Prayer cannot be said to be right, neither acceptable
unto God.

But such as would pray without God's Spirit, and would have others not to wait
for the Motion of it (like J. C. who though in his Book of Prayer he has largely
confessed to the Spirit of God in Prayer, and affirmed, That nothing can be
done without the special help of God's Spirit in Prayer; for the Spirit of God
commands and moves to Prayer: Yet in his Sermons of Hypocrisy, page 218. he
says, Do not tarry; till the Spirit moves you to Prayer; but when you have
Time and Place convenient, provoke your selves unto. Prayer) no doubt but such
have Hypocrisy in their Prayers, and are such as draw near to God with their
Tongues, but their Hearts are far from him, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8.

J. C. styles himself a Gospel Minister, and would by others be accounted a
Minister of Christ; yet he counsels People, not to tarry till the Spirit moves
them to Prayer, etc. But sure the like Counsel was never given by any faithful
Minister of Christ; for they knew they could not Pray as they ought, but by the
Spirit of God, Romans 8.26.27. And J. C. himself says, page 20. of his Prayer
Book, Without the special help of God's Spirit we can do no Spiritual Work; and
right Prayer is sure a spiritual Work or Exercise, and therefore not to be
performed or done, but with the Spirit of God.

Again, p. 21. he says, When the Spirit of the Lord is from Man, he can do
nothing; Prayer sticks in his Mouth like Choak-Cheese. And yet this pretended
Gospel-Minister would put People upon to Pray without the Spirit; instead of
tarrying (as he says) till the Spirit moves them, they must provoke themselves
to Prayer. This indeed is the Way to make them Hypocrites, like himself; and if
I mistake him not, he would not have People be sincere and throughout
Christians; Is it not then some Medium that he would bring them to? Read him
thy self, and give judgment; in his Sermons of Hypocrisy, p. 225. he says, I
had almost said, Either be Sincere and Throughout Christians, or keep where you
are; but by no means Do Neither. Does J. C. think it would hurt People to be
sincere throughout Christians? If not, Why must they by no means do so? Would
he always keep them Learning, and never have them come to the Knowledge of the
Truth and be saved? They who have Eyes to see with, may see the end of this
Ministry is to keep People in Sin, though he may in words speak against it:
For, though he has not altogether said, Either be sincere and throughout
Christians, or keep where you are; yet he has positively said, By no means, Do
Neither: And since to be sincere and throughout Christians is the one state,
has he not said, By no means be sincere and throughout Christians; since he
has absolutely said, By no means, Do neither? This I apprehend to be the drift
of J. C's Advice, that he would have Christians to have some corrupt Nature in
them, whilst they are here, defiling their Prayers; and not to be holy, as God
has commanded, and perfect as the heavenly Father is perfect; which was the
Command of Christ, Lev. 19.2. and 20.7. Mat. 5.48.1 Pet. 1.16.

Would not J. C. have the best of People, whilst in this World, to Pray
Hypocritically, Dissemble with God, and utter Untruths to him that searches
the Heart? This he confesses to be his own state; and further adds, in the
same page, But either it must be so in part, or there will be no praying in
this Word. And must there either be Hypocritical Praying, Dissembling with God,
and uttering Untruths unto the Searcher of Hearts, or no Praying in this World?
God forbid. The Spirit of God prepares the Morning and Evening Sacrifice,
which as sweet Incense is accepted of God, who hears his own Spirit. The
Spirit of God inditeth good Matter, not Hypocrisy; it teaches all the Sons of
God, who are led by it, to Pray with it, and with Understanding also, according
to Scripture, 1 Cor. 14, 15. Therefore J. C's Unbelief, as well as Hypocrisy,
is hereby made manifest, who says, Either it must be so in part, or there will
be no Praying in this World.

I do believe it is so with J. C. viz. He Prays Hypocritically, etc. and that
it will be so with him and his Generation, so long as they resist the Holy
Ghost, the Holy Spirit of God; and that the best of their Performances is Sin,
according to his confession; That Distraction and vile Hypocrisy are and will
be in their Prayers; even in those they call their Solemn Prayers to God. This
we saw to be in that Generation, which caused us to separate from them, that
the Lord might receive us. But although it be so with J. C. and his Generation,
yet it is otherwise with the Children of Light, the Sons and Daughters of God,
who walk in the Light of the Lamb, having Fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ; who, walking in the Light, as he is in the Light, have
Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
them from all Sin, Rev. 21.24. 1 John 1.3,7. -- But J. C. who despises the
Light of Life, cannot believe, though a Man declare it unto him: See Acts 13.41.

J. C. in page 19. of Warning to Souls, etc. boasts of the Testimony of his
Conscience, That by the Grace of God he has had his Conversation in the World;
and that he would not be in the Condition that a Quaker is in, any of them all,
for Ten Thousand Worlds.

Reply, A Pharisaical Boaster indeed J. C. is; to the Grace, Light and Spirit
of God and Christ, he is a professed Enemy; and that he has had his
Conversation in the World according to it, his Practice, in wrongfully taking
the Quakers Money, proves the contrary; which, as some can testify, when he
had got it, he said to some of hs Acquaintance, Let us Drink it, or Spend it;
for it will never do good. It would have done good, if J. C. had either not
taken it from them, or restored it to them again: The Grace of God neither led
him to take it, nor spend it.

The Light or Grace of God, J. C. has called Diana, Dagon, a Dumb Idol,
compared to a Drunken Coachman; accused it to be guilty of all Heart-sins,
Tonguesins, Thought-sins, and Life-sins; charged it with the guilt of All Sins,
whether in Angels or in Men; and in Hell, to be its own Tormentor: Indeed he
has exceeded all Men that ever I read or heard of, in Blasphemy against the
Grace, Light, Life, or Spirit of God and Christ. And for his saying, He would
not be in the Condition a Quaker is in, any of them all, for Ten Thousand
Worlds; I answer, The Time is coming, and hasteneth, that he would be glad to
be in the Condition of the least of them, who really are in Unity with the
Light, viz. the Spirit of Christ, which Ten Thousand Worlds cannot purchase for
him.

Now, Reader, I have gone through his Relation of the Dispute, and by way of
Examination have given thee an Account, That at the Dispute at Arley-Hall, in
Cheshire, I cleared (by the Help of God, to whose Power I leaned, and to whom
alone my Soul ascribes the Praise) the Quakers, and their Religion, from J. C's
wicked Charges against both; and also proved J. C. to be a Liar, a Deceiver,
and a Hypocrite; after which time, his spirit was much under, for the Power of
God was over him; and he sought for an opportunity to be gone. And it was
observed by some, that he might think time tedious, whilst he stayed, and that
he might take more thought to get off the Stage, than to prove the remaining
part of the Charges, which were five in number. And though he had boastingly
said, One for one day, and another one for another day; and I will be for thee
also when thou art as liberty; yet it plainly appeared, that one piece of a day
gave him enough; for, having got the opportunity looked for, he forsook the
Stage, and left me speaking thereupon; and since that time would never look me
in the Face, to make further Proof of his Charges. His Preparation to be gone
was noted by many of the Auditory before he went; and when he turned his back
on me, a Friend said to him, Stay and prove thy Charge; and one of his
Brethren, a Priest. who had stood with him, lifted up his Stick against the
Friend, and threatened to knock him down, if he would not hold his Peace, etc.
By this the Reader may observe in what a spirit they went away.

I kept speaking (after the Priests were gone) to the Auditory remaining, and
some other of my Brethren after me, for some time; and the Power of God was
over all, and the Testimony of Truth got room in many Hearts; and the Event
has proved, That that Day's service tended to the Honor of Truth, which
prevailed, and was advantageous to many simplehearted People in those parts;
who since have turned their Backs on the Priests, and inclined their Ears to a
better Teacher, even the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth; which
causes the Priests to rage, and some People to cry out, (as common Fame is)
They will all turn Quakers.

Reader, I shall observe to thee some of J. C's Lies and Slanders against the
People of God, called Quakers, out of his Book, in which he has given his
Relation of the Dispute; which Lies and Slanders are so gross and wicked, that
I think no wise Man will believe them: Yet, for the sake of the Simple-hearted,
lest any should stumble thereat, I shall not only note them down, but like wise
speak something concerning them.

John Cheyney, page 21. charge the Quakers, That they teach plain Treason and
Rebellion. A gross Lie, and wicked Slander.

In the same page, That they make void the Fifth Commandment.

In the same page, That they Abolish the Scriptures.

In page 22. That they do utterly Subvert the Rule of Duty, by which Christian
Husbands and Wives are to walk, etc

In the same page, That they quite Subvert all the Rules of Duty between
Ministers and People, etc.

In the same page, That they pluck down Prayer, Root and Branch.

In the same page, That by the Quakers Doctrine, we may all pray none, or pray
Curses and Blasphemies.

In page 22. again, That the Quakers Religion does pluck up by the Roots all
the Doctrines and Rules of Knowledge, Worship and Obedience, touching God, etc.

In page 13. That the Quakers say, Every Man may make as good, if not a better
Bible than this we have.

In page 17. That the Quakers are guilty of affirming, The Light in every Man
to be a part of God, as a drop of Water fetched from the Ocean is part of it.

In page 23. That there are no People do more Oppose and Subvert the Spirit,
than the Quakers.

In the same page, That if the Quakers should practice their own Doctrine, they
would pass all that ever have been before them in Wickedness.

All these are gross Lies, and wicked Slanders, whereof the Quakers, and their
Religion, are clear. And that no Lie may remain upon the Truth, the Light, and
Children thereof, I add, That the Light of Christ within Man, wherewith Christ
the true Light lights every Man, is the Life of the Word, the Light of Men,
John 1.4. The Spirit of God given to instruct them, Neh. 9.20. Ezekiel. 36.27. The
Manifestation of which Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12.7. The Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, John 15.26.
Reproves the World of Sin, John 15.8. And makes manifest all things that are
reproved, Ephesians. 5.13. For that is the Spirit of Truth which reproves and
convinces of Sin; and the Spirit of Truth is the Spirit of Christ; for Christ
is the Truth, John 14.6. And the Spirit of Christ is the Spirit of God; for the
Son and the Father are One, John 10.30. and 5.18, to 27. One Lord, one God, and
Father of all, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. Christ and God is Light, John 1.4, 9. and 8.12.
and 9.5. 1 John 1.5. The Lord our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.4. God is a Spirit,
John 4.24. The Lord is that Spirit which gives Life, 2 Cor. 3.6, 17. The
changing of Man from Death to Life is by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. I
the Lord search the Heart, and try the Reins, even to give every Man according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doing, Jer. 17.10. The Spirit
says, I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts, and I will give unto every
one of you according to your Works, Rev. 2.23. The Spirit searches all things,
1 Cor. 2.10. Hereby it is evident, the Spirit of God is one with God and
Christ, and so God Infinite, Omnipresent, who is One Lord, and his Name One,
Zach, 14.9. who sees all things; there is nothing hid, or can be hid from God's
Spirit, all things being known and seen by the Spirit of God; Man's Thoughts
are showed and told by it; and whatsoever thing is reproved, it shows and
makes manifest; And that which makes manifest, is Light, Ephesians. 5.13.

Well then, the Spirit of Truth is the Light of Christ within Man, which makes
manifest and shows whatsoever thing is reproved by it; which declares to Man
the Thoughts of his Heart, and gives to every Man according to his Works,
which reproves and convinces Man of Sin, and leads into all Truth; in which,
we called Quakers have believed, and walk in, even in the Light and Spirit of
God and Christ, and so witness the Blood of Jesus Christ cleansing us from all
Sin, and the Light and Spirit of Christ leading us on together into all Truth;
in which blessed Light we have Fellowship with God, who is Light, and one with
another, 1 John 1.5.7. And so are of that pure Religion which is undefiled
before God, and unspotted of the World, James 1.27. This blessed Light, or
Spirit of Christ within, leads us to do unto all Men that which is right in the
sight of God; and all of us that walk in in it, walk according to the Precepts,
Doctrines and Commands of God, contained in the Scriptures, and witness in
measure, the fulfilling of what is therein written for our Learning, that the
Man of God may be Perfect, etc. And the keeping of the great Commandment, which
is Love. So then this blessed Light, or Spirit of Christ within, born witness
to, and walked in, by us called Quakers, which indeed is both our Rule and Way,
does lead and guide us not to oppose God's Spirit (for then we should oppose
our Rule and Way, which is the Spirit of God) nor to pluck up by the Roots all
the Doctrines, Precepts and Commands of Knowledge, Worship and Obedience
touching God, contained in the Scriptures of Truth, as J. C. has slandered us;
but to live and walk therein, and up thereunto, and manifest both our Love and
Honor to the Spirit of God, and Esteem for the Scriptures of Truth, in living
that Holy Life the Scriptures declare of, and the Spirit of God commands; which
Holy Life lived by us through the Spirit, fulfils and justifies the Scriptures
of Truth, and exalts and glorifies the Spirit of God over all; for God alone is
worthy for ever and ever.

Neither does the Light and Spirit of Christ, wherein the Quakers walk, and by
which they are led and taught, lead them to teach Treason and Rebellion, which
J. C. most wickedly has charged the Quakers withal; but the Light teaches and
leads them to live peaceably and quietly under the Government where they are
placed, and to seek the good of all Men, to Pray for Kings, and them which are
in Authority, that under their Government, they might live in all Godliness and
Honesty, a Quiet and Peaceable Life, to Exhort one another to Love and good
Works, and to teach Fidelity and Obedience to the Governments, and Governors,
appointed by God; that both Magistrates and their Governments may be submitted
unto, and obeyed (by all People that there-under live) by doing or suffering
what cannot for Conscience sake Godward be done; and that whoever may answer
the King and his Government in suffering for Conscience God-wards, not to seek
Revenge, nor the Hurt of the King or his Government; but to leave Judgment to
God alone, who disposes of Kingdoms and Thrones, Government and Kings, at his
pleasure; and to Pray to God, to persuade the Hearts of Kings to fear him, to
be Encouragers of Piety and Godliness, but to Discourage all Wickedness, and to
Honor Christ, the Lord, the true Light over all, (who purges the Conscience
from dead Works, and fills it with the Mystery of the living Faith) that over
Conscience Christ may only Rule and Govern, whose Right it is; that in so doing
their Government may be blessed, to their Comfort, and the Benefit of the
People, and the Honor and Glory of God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, the Almighty God, blessed over all for ever, and for evermore.

So then the Quakers ever were, and are clear from teaching Rebellion or
Treason against the King or his Government: And is it not plain their Principle
and Practice is to do good unto all Men, whether Rulers or Ruled, as much as in
them lies? And is it not plain, that J. C. who thus wickedly slanders and
belyes the Quakers, is a Man of that spirit, who would drink up the Quakers
Blood, and remove them out of the King's Government, if it were but in his
Power? But Limits are set for the proud Waves, and the high Thoughts of the
Hypocrites shall perish; and they that walk in the Light shall be saved, and
all their Goings established.

The Light and Spirit of Christ, wherein the Quakers walk, by which they are
taught and led, leads and teaches them to fulfill the fifth Commandment, by
giving Honor to Parents in the Lord, and obeying them in all things that is
wellpleasing to the Lord, in which they feel the Promise of God, Eternal Life;
and so they make not void the fifth Commandment, as J. C. wickedly says.

Neither does the Light and Spirit of Christ, wherein the Quakers walk, by
which they are taught and led, teach them to abolish the Scriptures, nor
subvert the Rule of Duty between Masters and Servants, between Husbands and
Wives, between Parents and Children, between Ministers and People, as J. C.
has slandered the Quakers: But the Light leads and teaches the Quakers to live
the Life the Scriptures declare of, to the fulfilling of them; and to inform
Masters and Servants, Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Ministers and
People, of the Rule of their Duty to God, and one another, by turning their
Minds from Darkness to Light; that God placing his Fear in their Hearts, and
ordering them all by his Light and Spirit in their inward Parts, they might all
know the Rule of their Duty, and walk in it one toward another, and so exalt
it by walking in it, and living the Life of it before one another; and to
exhort them that are turned to the Light, to walk in it, and do their Duty to
God and one another fully, that the Life of Love and Purity may shine through
them all, over all, to the Glory of God. And therein (to wit, the Light and
Spirit of Christ) Masters walking, will forbear threatening their Servants, and
do unto them that which is just and equal, knowing their Master is Christ, with
whom there is no Injustice nor Oppression.

Servants therein walking, will be obedient to their Masters in all things, not
with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the
Will of God in singleness of Heart, knowing that of the Lord they shall receive
the Reward of the Inheritance, Peace with God.

Husbands therein walking, will love their Wives as their own Body; for he that
loves his Wife, loves himself.

Wives therein walking, will submit themselves unto their Husbands, and to them
be subject, as it is comely in the Lord: And both Husbands and Wives will then
live together in Love, as they are Heixs together of the Grace of Life, 1 Pet.
3.7.

Parents therein walking, will not provoke their Children to Wrath, but bring
them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

Children therein walking, will obey their Parents in all things that is
wellpleasing to the Lord.

Ministers therein walking, every one as they have received the Gift from God,
will minister and speak as the Oracle of God, that God in all things may be
glorified, and be blameless, and pure, holy Ministers of Christ, without
Rebuke, shining as Lights in the World.

People therein walking, will be at Peace among themselves, and patient toward
all Men, and have the Ministers of Christ in Esteem and Love for their Work's
sake, who admonish and labor in the Power of God amongst them, and declare the
Word of Truth to them, over whom they have a Care and Oversight in the Lord,
being of that Faith which gives Victory over the World, the end of whose
Conversation is Eternal Life.

So then, in the Light and Spirit of Christ all that believe and walk, perform
their Duty to God, to one another, and to all People, and honor and exalt the
Everlasting Rule, in living a Life unspotted of the World, and so of God are
abundantly blessed.

Neither does the Light and Spirit of Christ, wherein the Quakers walk, and by
which they are taught and led, lead and teach them to pluck down Prayer, Root
and Branch, or pray none at all, or to pray Curses and Blasphemies, as J. C.
wickedly slanders them. But it ( viz. the Light) leads and teaches the Quakers
to pray to God aright, to pray in the Holy Ghost; for of themselves they know
not how to pray, as they ought to pray, but the Spirit it self makes request
for them according to the Will of God, and they do pray to God in Spirit, and
with an Understanding; and God, who is Light, who is a Spirit, hears them, and
answers their Prayers, and is a Father unto them, and daily gives them that
thing which is convenient, and feeds them with the Bread of Life, which is
their Meat indeed, whereby they are strengthened to perform in all things the
Will of God; and renews their Love and Obedience to God, the earnest of whose
Spirit is in their Hearts, assuring them of an Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ; for the full enjoyment and possession of which, they daily pray to God
in his Spirit to preserve them, and keep them worthy to the end, that they may
fully inherit that Crown of Glory, which God in his appointed time will put
upon all them that sincerely and fully love him. And so Prayer by the Quakers
Doctrine, and also by their Practice, is to God, to be put up and offered in
the Spirit of God, by all that truly fear God; and the Rule of that Prayer
which God hears, and answers, is God's Spirit; and in the Spirit of God, the
Rule, all that pray to God, bless God, and speak well of his Name, and exalt
God, the Light, the true Light, Lord of all, over all, and finds with God
Acceptance, and are of God, blessed with Eternal Life.

Neither does the Light and Spirit of Christ, wherein the Quakers walk, and by
which they are led and taught, lead and teach the Quakers to say, Every Man may
make as good, if not a better Bible than this we have; or affirm, The Light in
every Man to be a part of God, as a Drop of Water fetched from the Ocean, is
part of it, as J. C. falsely accuses them; but the Light leads and teaches
Quakers to say, The Light in every Man, wherewith Christ has enlightened all
Men, is the Life of the Word, the Spirit of God and Christ, proceeding from
God, of God's Essence, not divided from God, as a Drop of Water may be from the
Ocean: For the Essence and Godhead cannot be divided, but remains indivisible
over all, through all, and in you all, as says the Apostle. And that every Man
is enlightened with the Light of Christ; and that the Light of Christ in every
Man is perfect, not liable to mutation or alteration: And although every Man be
lighted with the Light of Christ, which is perfect, yet every Man loves not the
Light, neither believes in the Light; and because every Man has not Faith in
the Light, every Man cannot please God; for, without Faith it is impossible to
please God; and every unbelieving Man, who loves his evil Deeds, hates the
Light, because it manifests his evil Deeds; and he that hates the Light, can
neither speak nor write by the Inspiration of God; and he that speaks or
writes, and not by the Inspiration of God, can neither speak forth, nor write
better, or so well, as the Prophets and Apostles of God and Christ, who gave
forth the Scripture of Truth, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So then
every Man cannot make so good, much less a better Bible than that which we
already have. This the Quakers affirm; and so J. C's Slanders and Lies are
turned upon his own Head, and he noted for a gross Liar.

The Light and Spirit of God and Christ, wherein the Quakers walk, and by which
they are taught and led, leads and teaches them to practice that Doctrine
maintained by them, and to do unto all Men, as they would all Men should do
unto them; and to love God and Christ, who is Light, with a sincere Heart
fully, and to love their Neighbors as themselves; and one by one, and every
one of them called Quakers [who steadfastly walk in the Light and Spirit of God
and Christ] do practice that Doctrine maintained by them, and show it forth in
Life and Conversation, as well as Word; and yet are clear (and in the Light
ever shall be clear) of J. C's wicked Slander, viz. That if the Quakers should
practice their own Doctrine, they would pass all that ever have been before
them in Wickedness. And in the Light (which has manifested, and yet will
further manifest J. C. and all such lurking Hypocrites) the Quakers shall shine
forth in Doctrine and Practice, to the Praise and Glory of God, who is in them,
and over Heaven and Earth, blessed for ever.

Again, J. C. in page 14. says, Supernatural Verities and Mysteries are
punctually set down in the Scripture, and no where else; and that there is
nothing within us, or without us, that does or can make known to us such
Supernatural Verities without the Scriptures, and what is derived from them.

Reply, To say, That supernatural Verities and Mysteries are punctually set
down in Scripture, and no where else, is contrary to the Scriptures; for God
has put his Law in his Peoples Inward Parts, and writ it in their Hearts,
according to his Promise, Jer 31.33. Supernatural Verities are written upon the
Table of Man's Heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. And the Mystery of Faith is held in a pure
Conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. And whatsoever is to be known of God, is manifest in
Man, Romans 1.19. So was before the Scriptures were written, and after part of
the Scriptures were written, yet unknown, Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles,
which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which shows the Work of the Law
written in their Hearts. Now the Gentiles, who had not the Law, doing the
things contashed in the Law, does hold forth and prove, that they knew
something of God manifest in them; and plainly show forth the Works of the Law
written in their Hearts. And so then it is clear, that supernatural Verities
are punctually set down elsewhere than in the Scriptures, and that the Mystery
of Faith is held in a pure Conscience. But J. C. affirms, without any
limitation, That supernatural Verities and Mysteries are punctually set down in
the Scriptures [ and no where else] and this is false Doctrine: And yet J. C.
has in another place contradicted it, and given himself the Lie; for in page
8. of his Skirmish, he speaks of Precepts contained in Nature; and else where
in his Books, of the Law of God being writ in Men's Hearts (which is somewhere
else besides the Scriptures.) But Contradictions, Lies and false Doctrine, are
so frequent in his Books, and the strength and substance of them answered and
laid open in several Books lately printed, in answer to seven of his confused,
self-contradictory and Blasphemous Pamphlets; this cuts my Work the shorter to
the said Answers: I refer the Reader for further satisfaction, to one
entitled, The Life of God, which is the Light and Salvation of Men, Exalted;
another, Skirmisher defeared; and shall yet further reply to the remaining part
of this Position, which is as follows.

J. C. says, There is nothing within or without us, that does or can make
known to us such Supernatural Verities without the Scriptures, and what is
derived from them.

Reply, That the Scriptures (much less any thing derived from them) are God
(who is Omnipresent and Omnipotent, which the Scriptures are not) I deny; For
God is a Spirit, an Infinite Substance, an independent Being, whose Being is of
himself, who was God Omnipresent before the Scriptures were written, and is God
Omnipotent, who without the Scriptures, can do of himself whatsoever he
pleases; and who shall say unto him, What do thou? Now God being a Spirit,
Omnipresent (present every where) Omnipotent, he can make known supernatural
Verities without the Scriptures, and what is derived from them. But J. C. has
affirmed the contrary in his Position. Whereupon I thus argue:

He that affirms, That there is nothing within, or without us, that does, or
can make known to us such Supernatural Verities without the Scriptures, and
what is derived from them, denies God, who is Omnipresent, to be Omnipotent,
and is a Blasphemer:

But J. C. has affirmed, That there is nothing within, or without us, that
does, or can make known to us such Supernatural Verities without the
Scriptures, and what is derived from them.

Therefore J. C. denies God, who is Omnipresent, to be Omnipotent, and is a
Blasphemer.

J. C. says, p. 24. Because I have some Portion of the Genuine and Catholic
Spirit of Holiness, I am mortally Hated by them; and yet I am as ill, or more,
if more can be, Hated of many of mine own way, who agree with me in Opinion.

Reply, Hypocrites formerly had high Conceits of themselves, Luke 18. verse 9.
to 13. of whose Generation this J. C. both by Disputation and Writing, has
been, and is manifested to be one; and his Fruits plainly show of what spirit
he is: For in his Prayer Book, in page 139, 141, 143, 145. he says, I Tremble
to have my Lukewarm Prayers abhorred by God, etc. -- Alas! My Hands are feeble
in Prayer; often do I compel my self unto it -- I am Distracted in it; I am
soon weary; I come poorly off -- I am compelled to pray Hypocritically, and
Dissemble with God, and utter Untruths unto him -- I shall not be able to cover
or conceal my Wickedness from the World; if I get to Heaven, it must be by this
Trade of Begging. Here observe, Dissembling with God, and uttering Untruths
unto him, praying Hypocritically, Lukewarm Prayers, Distraction in Prayer,
Compelling himself to Pray, that he might conceal his Wickedness from the
World; has been J. C's Practice, whereby it is apparent, J. C. was not
partaker of the Spirit of Holiness, nor acted by it in such services, but is of
another spirit than the Spirit of God.

That the Quakers mortally hate J. C. is a false slander; for the Light in
which the Quakers have believed and walk, has taught them to have true Love to
God, and good Will to all Men; but to oppose wicked spirits, and deny all
Wickedness. Now that spirit whereby J. C. has been acted in Dissembling with
God, and uttering Untruths unto him, in Dissembling with God, and uttering
Untruths unto him, in belying the Light, and the Children of it, together with
their pure and undefiled Religion; in Blaspheming the Light of Christ (the
Spirit of God) calling it, Diana, Dagon, a Dumb Idol, comparing it to a Drunken
Coash-man, etc. is a wicked spirit, which, together with J. C's Wickedness,
viz. his Lies, Slanders, Hpocrisie, Confusion, Blasphemy, etc. The Fruits
thereof, the Light (which shines in Man) has shined in and through the
Quakers, the Children of Light, plentifully to discover and ^lay them open to
the Readers view; which wicked Spirit, together with its Fruits, the Quakers
are Enemies to, and perfected ly hate.

And that many of J. C's own Way who agree with him in Opinion, Hate him, is no
new thing; for formerly the Lord set the Enemies of his People one against
another, and one helped to destroy another, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. And the Lord is
the same, who for his Israel's sake, is dashing the Potsherds of the Earth one
against another, and has appeared, and is appearing against this J. C. (who
has hardened his Heart (as Pharaoh and the Egyptians hardened their Hearts)
and set himself against the Light, and Children of Light) to close again the
Flood (which has been divided by the mighty Power of God for the Children of
Light to pass through) and overwhelm J. C. that as he does appear to many to be
a Minister of Death, he may likewise so appear to all People.

For the Truth's sake, that no Lie may rest upon it, and for the sakes of the
simple-hearted where this may come, is this written; that such who can see, may
see, that John Cheyney's Tongue has risen up in Judgment against Israel, and
God has confounded him. And what I have written, I do do commend to every
Man's Conscience in the sight of God: And concerning this J. C. do thus
conclude, That in him these Scriptures are fulfilled, Psalm. 7.15.16. He made a
Pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch which he made; his Mischief
shall return upon his own Head. And to God, who is on our side, who has taken
the Wicked in his own Craftiness, and fettered him in his own Net, my Soul
ascribes all the Praise, to whom be Glory for ever and ever.

A Salutation to Friends of the Men and Women's Meetings.
DEarly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, with whom my Soul has precious
Unity, in the Seed of God, and pure Fellowship in the Life of Righteousness;
unto you all, beloved of God, and right well beloved of my Soul: In the abiding
Love of God, am I your dear Brother, in the Tribulation and Patience of the
Lamb, in Life drawn forth to write unto you, and express something of that Life
and Love that is upon my Heart, in a living, as well as fresh remembrance of
you, to whom I give the endeared, and truly cordial Salutation of right
brotherly Love: My very Heart is knit to you, and in Spirit I am present with
you, beholding your comely Order: I am verily refreshed in your Life, and
abundantly comforted in abiding Love; my Soul honors you in the Lord, you
Elders of Israel, and for your Humility, my spirit says, That you are worthy
of Praise. Your Condescension one unto another in the Truth, and to the Truth,
in whomsoever it appeared; your giving way, has been, and is clear
demonstration to me, you have sought Truth's Honor, and not your own, and
therefore my Soul praises God, let it be so for ever; the greatest amongst you
serving the least, the younger submitting to the elder, submitting also one
unto another: Indeed, your remembrance has lived much upon me, since I parted
with you, and Breathings to the God of my Life have run thorough me for your
preservation, and increase in Unity with the Lord God, and one another: And my
dearly beloved, a consideration of your preferring one another in the Truth,
whereby the Truth has gained the Pre-eminence, has even melted my Heart into
tenderness of Spirit: I have said, Let it be so for ever.

Of a truth I can say, to the Praise of God who has honored you, The good
Order of the Gospel is amongst you; and where ever yet I have Traveled, and
what Methods soever I have veiwed, in the midst of all, I on your behalf have
blessed God for his Wisdom, wherewith he has endowed you: I hope, finding you
praise worthy, without offense I may speak thus much of you: I can bear my
Reccord, you having Wisdom, have done justly; and having Mercy obtained, have
Mercy showed; and that which is a Pearl indeed, you have walked humbly with
your God: If I may live again to see you, and in a measure of the fullness of
the Gospel come unto you, in the full performance of the same Duty, let my Soul
find you. In the mean while, dearly beloved, in humility dwell, and the Grace
and Peace of God be daily multiplied upon you, and let your fervent breathings,
and earning desires be for one another; and in a tender healing Spirit be you
always found, and evermore live together in Love; and for me, your younger
Brother, who am outwardly separated from you, and bound in Spirit for Travel in
the labor of the Gospel, Let your breathings in Life, to the God of Life be.
That God will be pleased to give me a door of Utterance, and prosper the work
in his hand, He has called, and yet is calling into, to the Praise of his own
Glory.

Dear Friends, a long Epistle I intend not; you are Elders, ruling well, to
whom double honor for the Works sake I can freely give. Having eased my Heart
a little, not questioning but to be rightly understood by you, and in Life's
Record more fully so be read by you: My Life greets you all together, and my
Soul salutes you one by one with a Kiss of Love; the God of Israel overshadow
you with his Glory for ever: My dear Companion salutes you all: And by this you
may know, that in a few Days we intend to leave this City, and pass to
Graves-end, where we purpose to take Shipping for Holland, having a Concern
upon us to visit the Low Countries, etc.

Things here at London are pretty well: William Rogers and his Party are here;
we had a Meeting with them Yesterday, which lasted nigh 12 Hours, and about 7
this Morning begins again; the Lord's Power was over all, Glory to his Name for
ever. So with my cordial Love, once more Saluting you all, I am your Faithful
Brother,

Roger Haydock.
London, 28th of the 2d Month, 1682.
DEar P. H. J. A. C. M. C. J. K. E. K. and all my Beloved Friends in Holland:
To you all in the Covenant of Light, who are Called and Chosen of God, to be
Heirs of Salvation and Life, is the tender Salutation of my Love ever to you;
who are the Circumcision, to whom the Adoption and Covenant appertains, who are
bound to keep the Law (of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus) your Circumcision
being that of the Heart, and of the Ear, that you may hear and do the Law of
God, which is written upon the Tables of your Hearts, and be Witnesses of the
bringing in of the better Hope; which makes perfect, as appertaining to the
Consciences, upon each of you: Beloved in God and Christ, my Love opens freely,
my Life greets you often; your Remembrance lives with me, you are near me in
Life; and in abiding Love is your Remembrance refreshing to me. As a Brother my
Heart is open to you; the Breathings of my Life are for you, that the
Circumcised, Adopted and Chosen amongst you, may keep the Everlasting Covenant
God has made with you; that you may not only be the Called, but also the
Chosen Faithful and True, who continue to the end, and be saved, through the
Effects of the Hope brought in; which, whosoever has it, purifieth himself,
even as he (the Author of the Hope and Salvation) is pure: For, my Beloved
Friends, we are not ignorant how that many have made their Circumcision
Uncircumcision, being turned with the Dog to their vomit, and with the Sow
that was washed to the wallowing in the Mire; and that too too many have broken
Covenant with the Lord, and cast his divine Law behind their backs; being
turned from the Grace of God into Lasciviousness, and from Truth into a Lie;
and in the Lasciviousness and Lie, have stood up to oppose the Grace, and
gainsay the Truth; their end will be Destruction, their Damnation slumbereth
not. We think it not strange, that we meet sometimes with Exercises of this
kind; to wit, Perils amongst false Brethren, Satan's Transformings; and the
falling away of some who are gone out from us: For the Apostle speaks of a
Falling away, that the Son of Perdition should be made manifest; and again it is
said, They went but from us, that they might be made manifest, that they were
not of us. When Eve and Adam fell away from God, they died the Death; the Devil
and Satan was made manifest: When Man went or fell from Truth, to the Lie, the
Liar was made manifest; when Judas fell away, the Son of Perdition was made
manifest: And there has been a falling away from Truth to the Lie, from God to
the Devil, from Christ to Belial; and through the falling away is the Lie,
Devil and Belial, made manifest in their Flesh, whose Spirits fall away. Now as
through their falling away, the Son of Perdition is made manifest, so are they
made manifest to us to be Sons of Belial, who are in the Gall of Bitterness,
and Band of Iniquity; and from the Gall which they are in, bitter Fruits are
brought forth by them, being Men of corrupt Minds; as to the Faith, Reprobates:
And as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these Men resist the Truth;
they are Enemies to the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I doubt not, my Friends, but that you have had your share of Exercise with
some who are gone out from you, or from the Truth, which is your Life; who
probably may yet for some time have Assembled with you, that they might give
you the greater Exercise; who, themselves being of corrupt Minds, have
endeavored to corrupt others; and, Judas like, with a Kiss betray Truth into
the Hands of Sinners, and draw the weak and unstable into the Snare with them;
making the Weak to err, and turning the Feeble out of the way; which is a grief
to the Upright-hearted: Not but that they see, that as Judas's Kiss could not
cover his Treachery, no more can their Kisses cover their Treachery; for of all
the Faithful, whose Eyes are in their Head, Christ, they are seen and judged:
But for the sakes of the Weak and Feeble, deluded by them, and of the place it
gives to the Devil, and great occasion to the World, to Blaspheme God, his
Truth and People; it has made sad the Heart which God. has not made sad:
However, my Friends, in and through these, and all other your Exercises, God
has been with you, sanctifying Tribulations to you, and confounding those that
have set themselves against you; on the one hand, and on the other, have they
fallen that troubled you: To God, who is on your side, be all the Praise. What
now remains to us, who know the Righteous God pleads our Innocent Cause, and
that our Righteousness is of the Lord, but that each of us who stand, take heed
lest we fall; and that we use all diligence to make our Calling and Election
sure, before we go hence, and be no more seen? Let the feeble Knees amongst you
be made strong, that not one that is halting may be turned out of the way; and
let the strong of you be more strong: You Fathers and Elders, that know him
that was from the beginning; and you young Men and Brethren, who are strong,
who have overcome the wicked One in you; the Word of God abiding: Being as the
Watchmen in Israel, amongst the Circumcision; and as Saviors upon Mount Zion,
unto the hindermost of them who worship God in Spirit.

And all of you, who are Abraham's Children, to whom Circumcision was given,
who was to Circumcise himself, the Males in his House, his Sons, and his
Servants bought with his Money: Be you all Circumcised; and when all Filthiness
of Flesh and Spirit is done away, then keep you Covenant with God, whose the
Circumcision is, who has given you the answer of a good Conscience: For as
Circumcision in the Flesh appertained to the First Covenant, and they that were
Circumcised, were bound to keep the Law of the First Tables; so Circumcision in
the Spirit appertains to the Second Covenant, and the Circumcised are bound to
keep the Law of the Second Table. And those that will lose their Life, they
through Death shall come to have Life: And such are Witnesses, that the New
Creature avails; so that all the Circumcision may have that which avails, the
New Creature, which is Created after God in Righteousness and perfect Holiness;
for as it was said, Neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails, but a
New Creature. Now where this New Creature is known, the Old Man with his Deeds
is put off; the Old Man, and Old Creature put off, and changed; the New Man is
put on; and the New Creature, which bears the Image of the Heavenly, comes up.

Now where any have a foolish pity to the First Birth, being bent to save its
Life, there is in them an averseness to the cutting off of the foreskin of the
Heart, for the sake of your Blood; these are like him that pitied Agag, whose
Life God had required, they spare that which God would have cut off: Therefore
let no ones Eye pity, not Hand spare, but let the fore skin of all Hearts be
cut off, that all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit may be done away; and that not
only in the Fathers, Elders, young Men, Brethren, but in them of younger Years,
and less growth: And concerning this, let the Elders, Fathers and Brethren, be
careful that all the fore-skins of the Hearts of Abraham's Household, of his
Children, who are of the Household of Faith, be cut off, that they may all
know the Circumcision: And in Heart and Ear being circumcised, may all keep the
Law of God; in keeping of which Law, there is a great Reward: And the more set
them be careful, that all be Circumcised, and that the Circumcision be kept,
lest it becoming Uncircumcision in any, and being winked at, it becomes like a
spreading Leprosy upon them that have been Circumcised, drawing a foreskin
over their Hearts again, as a covering to their Filthiness, whereby their
Circumcision is made Uncircumcision, and their latter end worse than the
beginning; For it had been better, says the Apostle, they had never known the
way of Truth, than after they had known, to turn from it.

And Dear Friends, provoke you one another, and be provoked one by another to
Love, and to good Works: Be all steadfast in the Faith; speak all by one Spirit,
and you will speak one thing; be Encouragers in what is Good, a Praise to them
that do Well, but a Terror to Evil Doers: If there be Tatlers, Busybodies
amongst you, Mark such, and reprove them: Let none strengthen Evil Doers, but
appear in Judgment against their Evil Deeds, for that is the way to do them
Good: If any has done Evil, let such Repent, and do so no more, but come and
do their first Work, lest God smite them with a Curse: If any Friend be
overtaken with Weakness, restore such an one in the Spirit of Meekness and
Love; and let such a one be easy to be entreated, for why should any Man
despise his own Mercies? It Is a Mercy from God to Offenders, that Men fearing
God, come to them in the Love of God, to tell them their Sin: This Mercy David,
though a King, rejected not, when Nathan said, Thou have slain Uriah the
Hittite, and taken his Wife; but acknowledged, saying, I have Sinned: Nathan
replied, God has taken away thy Sin, thou shall not Dye. But Alas! how few are
of David's Mind, when for their Offenses they are spoken to?

Let all, Dear Friends, be Watchful, and let your Light shine; put not your
Candle under either Bed or Bushel; let not your Sleep be over it, nor your
Merchandising be above it, but let your Candle stand in the Candlestick and
Shine, giving Light over all: You are Light in that part of the World; so
Shine, that Men seeing your good Works, may be occasioned to bless God on your
behalf: You are a City upon that Continent, you cannot be hid; you are the Salt
of that Earth, therefore season you that part of the Creation: They have Eyes
upon you, looking for good from you; their Ears are sometimes attentive to you,
to reap of the Good proceeding from you; Good is with you, for God is with you;
and for the Good proceeding from you, they shall glorify God: Preach you
Righteousness to them in a holy Life, and be before them Patterns of Piety, in
a Godly Conversation; Christ your Life, your Light, shining in you and through
you, being both your Righteousness, and exceeding great Reward; so do, that you
may convince them of their Righteousness, which is a Righteousness of their
own, which they are going about to establish; which is but as filthy Rags, and
as a menstruous Cloth, in Comparison of Christ's Righteousness, which they have
rejected; that so they may see and be ashamed; Repent, and find Mercy with the
Lord, that they may be healed.

Finally, my Brethren, and all Dear Friends, live in Love, that God who is Love
may dwell in you; that Grace, Peace, and all spiritual Blessings, in heavenly
things, may be multiplied upon you, from God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.

As opportunity offers, give the Salutation of my Dear Love, to all Dear
Friends in Frizeland, at Frederickstadt, Hambrough, and other places upon your
Continent, where I have traveled; and the God of my Life, who is the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve the Gathered every where, in Faithfulness; and
of his Infinite Love, build them all up in the most holy Faith, which gives
Victory over the World, that they may be a People to his Praise: And I pray God
increase his chosen amongst you, and add to your small number every where, even
daily such as shall be saved.

My love flows to the Seed in those parts, my life tenderly greets God's
Offspring, the Blessing of Jacob, of Jesus, of God, the Father of Christ, be
upon you all, and upon God's Heritage every where. Amen.

I am your Brother, Roger Haydock.
Warrington, the 25th of the 11th Month, 1686.
Concerning Roger Haydock's two Imprisonments in Lancaster Goal.
ROgen Haydock of Coppal (three Miles from Wigan) in the County of Lancaster,
Yeoman, was sued in the Bishop's Court at Chester, by Ralph Briddock Priest of
Standish, and Bishop of Chichester: He was cited (as they say) in the
Steeple-House at Standish, to appear at Chester, because he appeared not
(having not certain knowledge of it) he was judged a Contemner of the Law, was
apprehended, the 3d day of the 3d Month, 1674. committed to the Goal at
Lancaster, remained Prisoner until the 12th of the 11th Month following; then
released through an Appeal to York, grounded upon the unlawfulness of their
Proceedings; but for want of appearing in the said Court personally, when he
had appealed thither, was again committed to the common Goal at Lancaster, and
was apprehended the 2d of the 8th Month, 1675. by James Worthington, Constable
of Coppal, where he remains a Prisoner still. The name of the Judge for the
Bishop's Court, was John Wainwright.

The pretended Cause was for 10 Thrave of Oats, not of his own, but of his
Brother's, (John Haydock) worth about 30 s. by them valued to 3 l. and
something for smoak-Penny, and Tithe of Hen and Geese, which they pretend to be
due for his Brother's Estate: The said Roger Haydock is an unmarried Man, and
as a Steward to his Brother.

Lane. ss.

FOr as much as Roger Haydock, Heskin Fell of Copply, and Thomas Catterall,
Gent. within the Parish of Standish, within the County aforesaid, and Diocese
of Chester, have disobeyed and contemned the Process of the Ecclesiastical
Court, by not appearing at Days and Times appointed; to answer, in a Case
depending in the said Court. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name,
straightly to Charge and Command you, and every of you, forthwith, upon receipt
hereof, to Apprehend and Take the Bodies of them, the said Roger Haydock,
Heskin Fell, and Thomas Catterall, and bring them forthwith before us, or the
one of us, or any other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, within this
County, to find sufficient Sureties for their, and every of their due Obedience
to the Process, Proceedings, Decrees or Sentences, of the Ecclesiastical Court:
And if they, or any of them should resuse so to do, That then you forthwith
Convey him or them so refusing, to the common Goal at Lancaster, there to
remain, until him or them shall willingly do the same. See you fail not herein
at you Peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals, at Eccleston, the 21st day of March, Anno
Dom. 1674. Christopher Bannestre, Henry Houghton.

In like manner was the Proceedings against Heskin Fell, of Coppal,
Linnen-Weaver: He was Apprehended the 7th of the 3d Month, committed to the
Goal, remained Prisoner until the 12th of the 11th Month, released as before.

The pretended Cause was about 1 s. 8 d. for Hen, Hay, House, etc. for about
three Years: This Thomas Catterall was no Friend: It is supposed he paid what
they demanded.

The said R. H. and H. F. belong to Blackrod-Meeting.

Coppul, the 28th day of the 1st Month, 1675.

The Warrant was directed, To all Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, Sub-constables,
but more especially, To the Constables of Coppul.

Roger Haydock and Heskin Fell 's Letter to the Judge, concerning their
Sufferings.
Friend,
LEt not the plainness of our Style, in this our Address unto thee, turn away
thy Ear from hearing our just Complaint; but be pleased at least to view, and
according to the persuasion of thy own Heart, to do to us the Justice which the
Law will afford us: We hope, as sitting in the place of Judicature, thou have
not only Power, but likewise a Mind to Right the Wronged, and Relieve the
Oppressed, if Innocent; which makes us, having some experience of thy Clemency,
the more freely to lay the Nakedness of our Case before thee, hoping thou will
heartily interpret our words, having an eye to the merit of our Cause. We have
been Prisoners at this Castle about twenty Months, for refusing to take an Oath
(called, Juramentum de ma^iti^ non Committando, in the Consistory Court at
York; which Oath we are informed (though tendered by an Ecclesiastical Judge)
is neither Matrimonial nor Testamentary; but contrary to a Statute made in the
13th Year of the Reign of the King that now is; which Statute does prohibit
Bishops, Chancellors, and all other Ecclesiastical Ministers and Officers, to
Administer the Oath Ex Officio, or any other, etc. Be pleased therefore to
consider, that the damage we have sustained in being hindered in the
prosecution of our Appeal to York, from the unjust proceedings in the
Consistory Court of Chester, has not been small (being, as we are informed,
Illegally forestalled and prevented by the said Oath) but we leave it to thy
Judicious Censure; as also our Imprisonment for twenty Months or upward;
instead of having Right done us for our nine Months Imprisonment before the
admittance of our said Appeal, which has been no small Charge and Loss unto
us; and upon consideration thereof, we hope thou will see we have just ground
to lay our suffering Condition before thee, and to make our Grievancs known
unto thee; not that we seek Revenge, but that our future Liberty is desired;
having confidence in thee, that if proceeding against us be as Illegal as we
are informed, and have here hinted, by thee our Liberty will be granted. Be
pleased also to view over the enclosed, being a Copy of our Answer, tendered to
the Chancellor at York, whereby thou may further inspect into the cause of
our Sufferings, and how that thus far we have suffered Innocently. So having
simply, and in short, laid our Condition before thee, we leave it with thee,
subscribing our Names hereunto,

Prisoners at Lancaster-Castle. Roger Haydock, Heskin Fell.

A Copy of my Answer tendered to the Chancellor in the Consistory Court at
York, the 23 d of the 2 d Month, called April.
WHereas, I am required to take the Oath, called, Juramentum de malitio non
Committando; the Substance of which, I understand, is to Swear that in my
Appealing to York, I have done nothing out of Malice, etc. I Answer, It is
several Years since I could Swear at all; Swearing being expressly contrary to
Christ's Command, who said, Swear not at all: But my Yea, has been Yea; and
Nay, Nay; according to Christ's Doctrine, Let your Yea, be Yea; and Nay, Nay:
But I can very freely speak the Truth; and if I say Nay to (or deny) the Truth;
or Yea, affirming that for Truth, which is a Lie, I desire the same Penalty may
be laid upon me, which is due to them that forswear themselves.

I therefore affirm, I have done nothing out of Malice to Ralph Briddock in
Appealing to you, nor is there any Malice in my Heart against him: The cause
why I Appealed, was, That I who had suffered nine Months Imprisonment in
Lancaster Goal, for disobeying (as says the words of my Mittimus) the Process
of the Ecclesiastical Court of Chester, might come to Trial, that the Truth
might appear, I knowing my self to be clear; for I never saw, not had knowledge
of any Process: And that I might be quit of the Injury done me by Ralph
Briddock, who sued and imprisoned me, because another Man would not pay Tithes
(can the like be paralleled?) I having no Corn of my own, nor any liable
within his Precincts: And also of the Injustice done me by the Illegal
proceedings of the Bishop's Court at Chester, who decreed me guilty of
Contumacy, wherein I had not offended, as was clear by the Records of that
Court, whereupon my Appeal was admitted: This was the very cause of my
Appealing; and therefore I do defire Justice at your hands, which if you do
refuse to do me, I Appeal to the Righteous Judge the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
to plead my Innocent Cause. And so I rest a Friend to Truth, and a Well wisher
to the Souls of all People,

Roger Haydock.

Justice Bradshaw and Penington 's Warrant of Commitment.
Lanc. ss.

WHereas,we whose names are subscribed, two of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, within the said County, the one of us being of the Quorum; having
received a Certificate under the Seal of the Consistory Court of York, bearing
date the 23d of April, 1675 declaring unto us, that, whereas, by virtue of a
certain Information, Certificate or Complaint, from the Right Worshipful John
Wainwright, Doctor of Law, Vicar General, and Official Principal, to the Right
Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of Chester, to Christopher Bannestree
and Henry Houghton, Esqs and other his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, of the
said County, directed; wherein it was declared, That one Roger Haydock of
Coppal, in the County aforesaid, had contemned and disobeyed the Process of the
Ecclesiastical Court, by not appearing at Days and Times, appointed him to
answer Ralph Briddock, Clerk, Doctor of Divinity, of a certain Cause of Tithes,
depending in the said Court.

The said Christopher Bannestre and Henry Houghton, by Warrant under their
Hands and Seals, did Apprehend or Take, or cause to be Apprehended and Taken,
the Body of the said Roger Haydock, and committed the same to Prison, viz. to
the common Goal of Lancaster, there to remain, until he had given sufficient
Surety for his due Obedience of the Process, Proceedings, Decrees and Sentences
of the Ecclesiastical Court, according to a certain Act of Parliament in that
behalf made and provided.

And, whereas, afterward the said Roger Haydock appealed to the said
Consistory Court at York, from the said Decree, of Certifying him, the said
Roger Haydock, to his Majesty's Justices of Peace aforesaid; and complained of
the Injustice, Nullity and Invalidity of the said Decree; and alleged he was
never cited, nor any lawful Certificate thereof made: By virtue of which
Appeal, and the Admission of the same, the Force and Effect of the said Decree
was suspended, to the Intent the said Roger Haydock might be free from all
Constraint, and have free Liberty and Power to Prosecute his Appeal.

The said Consistory Court at York did will and require the Justices aforesaid,
to set at Liberty the Body of the said Roger Haydock, during the dependence of
the said Cause, in the said Court, which was done accordingly.

And, whereas, afterward the Court rightly proceeding in the said Cause of
Appeal, decreed the said Roger Haydock to be cited, personally to appear in the
said Court, at a certain time and place assigned him, to take and undergo his
personal Oath, commonly called, Juramentum de malitio Committando, in the said
Cause, and issued a Citation under the Seal of the said Court, in that behalf;
by virtue whereof, he was cited; and for his Contempt and Contumacy in not
appearing in the said Court, at the time and place assigned him; according to
the Tenor of the said Citation, was by the said Court propounded Contumacious;
and for his Contumacy in not appearing, nor presenting the said Appeal by such
ways and means as the Law in that behalf provides, the said party appealed, was
desired to be dismissed from the said Appeal; and the said Roger Haydock was
desired to be certified to his Majesty's Justices of the Peace aforesaid, as by
the Acts and Records of the Consistory Court aforesaid; and the said. Warrant
and discharge, in that behalf made, reference being thereto had, more fully and
at large it appears: All which the Consistory Court of York does Certify,
Inform and Signify unto us, and do require our Aid and Assistance to order and
reform him, the said Roger Haydock, for his Contempt and Contumacy aforesaid,
according to the Tenor and Effect of the abovementioned Act of Parliament,
made in the 27th Year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, of famous Memory,
containing an order for payment of Tithes: We therefore in Obedience to the
said Significavit, and Pursuance to the said Act of Parliament, do straightly
Charge and Command you, That you, or some of you, do forthwith upon receipt
hereof, take the Body of him, the said Roger Haydock; and him convey, or cause
to be conveyed to his Majesty's common Goal at Lancaster, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize; until he shall find sufficient Surety, to be bound
by Recognizance, to the Use of our Sovereign Lord the King, to give due
Obedience to the Process, Proceedings, Decrees and Sentences of the Consistory
Court of York, made against him as aforesaid; fail not herein at your Perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals, the 8th day of May, Anno Reg. Dom. Car.
Secund. Anglia, etc. xxvii. Annoque Dom. 1675. Roger Bradshave, Nicholas
Penington.
To all Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, sub-Constables, and to all other his
Majesty's Sworn Officers; but more especially to the Constables of Coppal, and
every of Them, These.
Roger Haydock, Heskin Fell and Alice Haydock 's Letter to the Bishop of
Chester.
Unto thee (who subscribes thy Name Ralph Chester) there is a few Words upon
our Minds, to impart, which are as follows.

Friend,

BY thy Letter to the Jailer, and also by an Information from thee, to the
Judge at the last Assizes, in order to Confine me, with some other of my
Friends, to the common Goal here at Lancaster:

We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, do understand that we are Prisoners
at thy Suit, having so been for the space of twenty Months, and upwards; for
the accomplishing whereof, thou say it has cost thee 30 l. Now, Friend, in
a plain Style, for I may not give thee any flattering Titles (not having so
learned of Christ) but in words of Truth and Soberness unto thee, who art
called a Bishop; it is with me to write, and that upon good Ground, as also
having sufficient Reasons inducing me thereunto, Love to God, and love to thy
Soul, and that my Conscience may be Clear, and that by way of Query; leaving it
to thy serious Consideration, and to the Witness of God in thy Conscience, to
give an Answer thereunto: Whether it was not an Unchristian Act of thee, to
cause us to be cast into Prison, for no other cause, but that we (who own
Christ Jesus to be come, who is our Priest, and the Bishop of our Souls, who
oversees us, and takes care for us, and gives us freely, without Money, and
without Price; and because we cannot destroy our Faith in him, nor lay waste
our Testimony concerning his Coming, and the free Teachings of his Spirit)
could not with a safe Conscience, and therefore refused, to pay thee Tithes;
knowing of a Truth, that the Levitical Priesthood, to which Tithes were due, is
changed; and that Christ Jesus, who is made a Priest, not after the Law of a
carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an endless Life, A Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchisedeck, has disannulled the Commandment, as is clear
from Hebrews 7? And whether thy writing to the Jailer, and incensing the Judge
against us; not only to infringe our Liberty, but if possible, deprive us of
Life also, be not very Unchristian? Whether did ever Christ give ye any such
Command, that said, Freely ye have, received, freely give? Or, the Apostles
show thee any such Example, who said, We Covet no Man's Silver, Gold, nor
Apparel? Or, whether thou that have taken upon thee the Office of a Bishop,
which the Apostle Paul said, was a good Work, be in the Practice of those
things which the said Apostle gave in Charge to Timothy, concerning Rishops,
that they should be Blameless, Vigilant, Sober, no Striker; nor greedy of
filthy Lucre: Not a Brawler, not Covetous; that he be not lifted up with Pride,
lest he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil? Also the same Apostle to
Titus, A Bishop must be Blameless as the Steward of God, not self willed,
(mark) no Striker, not given to filthy Lucre, one that holds fast the Faithful
Word, that he may be able by sound Doctrine (mark, by sound Doctrine) to Exhort
and Convince gainsayers: And whether or no, if thou have been in the footsteps
of these Primitive Bishops, to whom Paul writ, supposing us to be without, to
wit, Gainsayers, instead of spending 30 l. to cast us into Prison, and of
threatening the Jailer, and stirring the Judge against us; would thou not
rather have labored by sound Doctrine (mark, by sound Doctrine, and not by
casting us into Prison, whom thou have not so much as given the least word of
Exhortation unto) to have convinced us? But I query of thee, Whether did any of
the Apostles or Ministers of Christ Jesus cast any Man into Prison for denying
to pay Tithes, or of whom did they ask the Tenths of their increase? If thou
can, show me such a President in the Scriptures of the New Testament: Or,
whether they did freely receive, and freely give, Yea or Nay; if Yea, then
whether Imprisoning People, who cannot give their Money for that which is not
Bread, be not a very unchristian Practice, and too much like the way of Cain,
who was a Persecutor, resembling the Error of Balaam, who loved Gifts and
Rewards? And whether such as are in the Practice thereof, be not in the
footsteps of those Prophets Micah spoke of, that bite with their Teeth, and he
that puts not in their Mouths, they prepare War even against him; and of such
as looked every one for his gain from his quarter?

Friend, Christ said, Every Tree is known by his Fruits; And if thou be a
Minister of Christ, the words of Christ will not offend; he said, Not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that
does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven: Such, as when he was Hungry,
gave him no Bread to Eat; when he was Thirsty, gave him no Water to Drink; when
he was Naked, did give him no Clothing; when Sick and in Prison, did not visit
him; such were shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven: For said Christ, In as much
as ye did it not unto them, ye did it not unto me: Now, if such were shut out
of the Kingdom, who did not these things unto Christ in his Members (mark) if
such as did not visit Christ in his Members in Prison, were shut out of the
Kingdom of Heaven; What then will become of such who Imprison Christ's Members?

Now, Friend, consider thy Ways and thy Actions; Have thou done unto us, as
thou thy self would be done unto? Or, have not thou rather broken the Righteous
Law of Christ? If by thy Works thou be not Justified, shall not thou by thy
Works be Condemned, since every Man must receive according unto his Deeds, be
they Good, or be they Evil?

Now, If a Bishop should bite with his Teeth, and prepare War against an
Innocent People, because they cannot put into his Mouth, and cast them into
Prison (some of which, neither owes him any thing, either according to the Law
of God, or any Law of Man, as is known to some of his Agents: The like of
which, I think, cannot be paralleled by all the Impropriators and Priests in
England: Besides, yet done by, or at least in the Name, and at the Suit of the
Bishop) and threatens the Jailer with severe Punishment, if he suffer them to
have any Liberty at all; and likewise stir up the Judge to straiten their
Bonds, that if possible, he might have the Lives of such, for whom Christ dyed,
and bring the Guilt of their Blood upon his Head.

I say, if a Bishop have thus done, I Query, Whether this be the way for such a
Bishop to stand approved in the sight of God, and to be manifest to the
Conscience of all People, and to have a good Report of them which are without;
or, rather the way to fall into Reproach, and the Snare of the Devil, and bring
the Wrath and Judgment of God upon his Head?

So let the Witness of God in thy Conscience Answer to these things: And the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, the Righteous Judge of all the Earth, whose
Judgment is Just, Judge betwixt thee and us: And unto him we Appeal, with whom
there is no respect of Persons; who Judges the Cause of the Poor, and the
Cause of the Rich; and to his faithful Witness in thy Conscience, we also
Appeal in this matter, Whether it be not more Christian like, more according to
Truth, the Example of Christ and his Apostles, who gave Commandment unto the
Church, That they should walk as they had them for Examples in Christ; which
all true Christians ought to follow, to ser us at Liberty, than to keep us
Prisoners until Death (having contrary to the Law ensnared us) and bring the
Guilt of Innocent Blood upon his Head?

But, now Friend, if thou shall say, It is because you will not pay Tithes: I
Answer, One of us, being one of the three thou imprisoned, and writ against, in
order to straiten our Bonds, has nothing according to the Law of the Nation
Titheable, therefore wrongfully imprisoned, according to that Law, and so
detained; and as to the other, who for Conscience sake refused to pay them, if
thou can make good by the Scriptures of the New Testament, that Christ or his
Apostles sued any Man for Tenths or Tithes, and cast them into Prison if they
would not pay them; give us Chapter and Verse for this, and let us see where it
is so written, that Christ Jesus, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given
unto him, made such a Law, and gave it to his Disciples, Apostles, Ministers,
Ambassadors and Evangelists; and if so, let us see where it is written in the
New Testament, and where his Disciples and Apostles did practice any such Law;
show this plain Scripture unto us (and we, to wit, who have any thing
Titheable, will pay thee Tithe) But if thou can not, art not thou a
Transgressor of the Command of Christ, that said to his Disciples, Freely ye
have received, freely give? So to be one that Transgresses, and abides not in
the Doctrine of Christ, as thou may see in the se, cond Epistle of John, and
the ninth Verse.

And, did ever Christ or his Disciples force any to hear them, and come to
their Church; and if they would not, cast them into Prison? And did ever Christ
and his Apostles force any that were not of their Church, to give them
Maintenance or Tithes; and if they would not, cast them into Prison, and
threaten the Jailer to keep them Clofe? Now we desire thee to satisfy us out
of the New Testament, and give us Chapter and Verse for these things, which
thee, and you practice, and let us see where it is written; for the Apostle
tells you, you are not to presume above what is written, as thou may see in
1 Cor. 4.6. for thou being a Bishop, ought to satisfy us in a Scripture
way: And so we thy Prisoners, desire thy Epistle, and satisfaction from thee,
by the Scripture of the New Testament.

For our not paying thee Tithes, the Lord knows is not for Covetousness or
Rebellion, but for Conscience sake to our God; knowing that Christ said to his
Disciples, Freely you have received, freely give; as thou may see in Matthew.
10. And what was set before them, that they might Eat; and if thou, or any of
thy Ministers, if they be Ministers of the Gospel, and abide in Christ's
Doctrine, we will receive them, and thee, into our Houses, and set before you
Meat and Drink; and you shall freely Eat and Drink of our Carnal Things, if you
have any Spiritual Things to minister to us. And did ever Christ or his
Apostles cast any into Prison without Admonishing of them, as thou have done
us? Let us see where it is written. So we leave our Cause with the Lord: And as
we are thy Prisoners, having laid these things before thee, whether thou will
give thy Epistle, and show us Chapter and Verse for thy Practice; or, if thou
can not, be silent: Or, whether thou will continue us, or set us at Liberty,
we leave them with thee, and rest satisfied: For though in the World we have
Tribulation, yet in him that overcame the World, we have Peace, which the World
cannot take away; in which we rest, whose names are, Roger Haydock, Heskin
Fell, Prisoners.

The third Person by them imprisoned and complained against, because she had
Liberty, who by course of Law was released; yet a Suit depending, and therefore
a Sufferer for her Testimony, who with us, we join in what we have writ: Her
name is,

Alice Haydock
Lancaster. Castle, the 17th of the 8th Month, 1676.
A Brief ACCOUNT, Of the Life, Travels, Sufferings and Death, of Roger Haydock.
I Now having before me the Account at large, of what Observations my dear
Brother, Roger Haydock, in Manuscript had writ down, with his own hand, from
the time of his Convincement, to the day he was visited with Sickness; could
not omit communiating to all, to whom this may come, an Abstract thereof, to
manifest the Sovereignty of that Power, Light and Life, which made him what he
was, endued him with Understanding and Zeal, and carried him along through his
Pilgrimage, both at home and abroad, by Sea and Land; and preserved him from
the Depths of one hand, from the heights of the other hand, in that love which
bears all things, suffers through all things, and reigns over all things.

In the 9th Month, 1667. Roger Haydock was Convinced of the Truth, and received
it in the Love and Warmth of of it. In the 2d Month following, he and I being
at a Meeting with Friends, in Bury in Lancashire, upon the 5th day of the said
Month, were then, with five other Friends, taken Prisoners, and had before
Robert Holt, called Justice, who by Mittimus committed us to the common Goal of
Lantaster (we Conscienciously refusing to give Bond to appear at the Sessions,
etc.) where we remained till the 28th of the 5th Month following, and then were
released.

Upon the 22d of the 11th Month, 1669. he was apprehended, and brought before
the Justices at the Quarter Sessions at Manchester, and by them, for being at
three Meetings in Bury, fined 15 l.

And upon the 12th of the 7th Month, 1670. he had the exercise with his Mother
and Brethren, of Burying our deceased Father.

In the 9th Month, 1671. he had a Concern in the Spirit of Christ, to go into
Cheshire, to visit several of Friends Meetings there, and then returned to his
place.

In the 4th Month, 1672. he was drawn forth to visit several of the Churches in
Yorkshire, and returned. Afterward, 1672, and 1673. his Service lay sometimes
in Yorkshire, Lancashire and Cheshire, but in Cheshire and Yorshire more
particularly: The Lord blessed his Service and Travels amongst those Churches,
for several People were convinced.

Upon the 3d of the 3d Month, 1674. he was apprehended, and sent to the common
Goal at Lancaster, for nonpayment of Tithes; there remained until the 12th of
the 11th Month, in the same Year, then released.

In the 5th and 6th Month, 1675. he visited several Churches in Cheshire,
Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Worcestersheir, Herefordshire, Shropshire, and
returned: And the 23d of the 6th Month, for being at a Meeting in Boulton, in
Lancashire, he was fined 20 l.

The 15th of the 7th Month following, he was committed Prisoner to the common
Goal at Lancaster, for non-payment of Tithes, by Ralph Bridock, Bishop of
Chester.

In the 8th Month following, he did go to visit several Churches, and returned.
In the 10th Month following, he visited the Churches in Westmorland, and
returned.

The 20th of the 4th Month, 1676. he had liberty to go into Cheshire, where he
had a Dispute with Priest Barber, and returned. In the 6th Month following, by
the Instigation of the said Bishop, he was confined close Prisoner, and it lay
upon him to write to the said Bishop, after which his Bonds were not so strait,
during the Bishop's Life. The 23d of the 11th Month following, he had liberty
to go into Cheshire, where he had a Dispute with John Cheyney, Priest at Arley
Hall, which the Lord blessed with Success, for several were Convinced: He writ
that Year a Book, entitled, The Skirmisher Confounded. And in 1677. another,
entitled, A Hypocrite Unvailed: Or, a Blasphemer made manifest.

In the 9th Month, 1677. he was many days under great Exercise and Travel of
Spirit, but in the end, the Lord did reveal his Will, unto which he submitted:
After he returned out of the North, from visiting Friends there, in the 5th
Month, 1677.

The 13th of the 12th Month, 1678. after the Bishop's Death he was released, so
that he was a Prisoner from the 15th of the 7th Month, 1675, to the 13th of the
12th Month, 1678. Three Years, four Months, and twenty nine Days, save what
Liberty was allowed him; which Liberty he greatly improved to the Honor of
God, who alone shall have the Praise. In the same Year he was drawn to visit
many of the Churches of Christ in the South, to and again to Bristol, and so
for London, and back into the North; and so was constant in publishing the
Gospel, and bearing witness to the Light and Truth within, in many places in
this Nation; bearing also a faithful Testimony against that Spirit which led
into the Separation from Truth, and the Unity of Friends, and those tainted
therewith; having thereof a clear discerning, as many can bear witness.

The 30th of the 3d Month, 1679. he passed for London, and through several
Counties, to and again in the South, visiting the Friends, and returned into
Lancashire: In the 5th Month following, he went for Notinghamshire; after
which, he traveled visiting many Meetings in England, till the 3d of the 3d
Month, 1680. at which time he took Shipping for Ireland, and landed at Dublin,
visiting the Churches there, and in the South part and Mid-land of that Nation;
and returned to Dublin the 13th of the 5th Month following, at which place he
was taken extremely Sick, and lay four days; then recovered, and traveled into
the North, and visited several Meetings there; but at Lisnegarvy was taken
Sick, yet passed to Belfast and Knockfergus, where his Sickness increasing,
grew to a violent Fever, so that he was nigh unto Death in the view of most
that saw him; yet the Lord restored him, blessed be his Name: After which, he
assayed to Travel to Lisnegarvy and Lurgan, where being weak, he rested till
stronger, and so came to Dublin, where Friends gladly, received him: Staying
some Weeks there, having good Service, he left the City, took Shipping in the
7th Month following, and landed at Leverpool, in the North of England, where he
visited Meetings to and again, till the middle of the first Month, 1681. at
which time he traveled the Country, visiting the Friends to Bristol, and so to
London, where he took Shipping at Gravesend, and past to the Brill in Holland.
The 5th of the 4th Month following, he visited the Churches in Holland,
Westfriezland, Groningland, Frederickstadt, Hambrough, Saxony, Germany,
Palatinate. An Order was sent from the High Court at Altry, by which he was
brought before the Chief Magistrate there, who kept him Prisoner eleven days,
being twice brought to the Ant-house, and there examined, and at last released,
and so returned, visiting the Churches; came to the Bril the 17th of the 7th
Month following, by Packquet Boat came to Harwith, and so along visiting
Friends Meetings to London, and through part of the South, and so into the
North, where he traveled, visiting the Meetings of Friends.

And according to the good Order of Truth, practiced in the Church, he took to
Wife Elianor Low, the 6th of the 3d Month, 1682. and after stayed in
Lancashire and Cheshire, till the latter end of that Month, and then traveled
for London, afterward through the South part to Exeter, visiting the Churches
to Bristol, and so into the North, where he settled his Wife at Warrington, in
the South of Lancashire, in the 7th Month following.

The 20th of the 6th Month, 1683. he was, for being at a Religious Meeting,
committed to Lancaster Goal, and kept Prisoner till the 26th of the 3d Month,
1684. then set at Liberty.

The 24th of the 5th Month, 1684. he was, by the Lord's Assistance, Serviceable
to Friends in Staffordshire, and returned to Warrington very Sick, which proved
a Fever, which continued twenty Days; and the weakness that followed, forced
him to keep home till the 28th of the 7th Month following: Then he passed
Northward, and visited Friends Meetings to and again, and returned back: And
the 10th of the 10th Month following, was at the Burying of his Mother. The
29th of the said 10th Month, he was by the Constables of Warrington, John
Tailor and William Carter, apprehended and brought to Lancaster Goal; and at
the Assizes brought twice before Judge Atkins, and continued Prisoner until the
19th of the first Month, 1686. at which time, he and several other Friends were
by the King's Pardon released: So that from the 29th of the 10th Month, 1684.
to the 19th of the first Month, 1686. he was a Prisoner. In the 2d Month
following he spoke to the Earl of Darby, about Friends Sufferings in the Isle
of Man, who was moderate toward the said Friends, and then took his Journey to
visit the Meetings along the several Counties, through Wales to Bristol, and so
along to Cornwall, and so to London to the Yearly Meeting; afterward by
Colchester to Harwich, where he took Shipping on Board the Hope, and landed at
the Brill the 11th of the 4th Month, 1686. and came to the Yearly Meeting at
Amsterdam; where, by Friends, he was gladly received; and afterward traveled
those Countries to Hambrough, to and again in Germany, Groningland, Friezland
and Holland, visiting the Churches: And at the Brill took Shipping, and landed
the 26th of the 5th Month following at Harwich, past to Colchester, so to
London; and after visiting the Meetings, past along the Counties for the North,
and came to Lancashire in the beginning of the Winter, where he passed the
Winter over; and at the Spring following, visited the Meetings further North,
and passed into Scotland by Douglass, Glasco, and to Edinburgh to a Yearly
Meeting there; then to Rosse, Aberdeen, Kinmuck, and returned by Edinburgh; and
after having visited the Churches in Scotland, returned to England; and by
New Castle, through Bishopric, Cleaveland, East part of Yorkshire, then to
York, at the Yearly Meeting there. Thus having visited the Churches along,
passed for Lancashire to his Wife and Family, which he removed from Warrington,
to Brick-hall in Penketh, in the 5th Month, 1687. and there settled them. In
the 6th Month following he was visited with Sickness, which continued some
time, but after he recovered, he visited Friends Northward, and returned into
Staffordshire and Cheshire, where he was taken Sick again, and in the 10th
Month returned to his House not well, and kept his Bed several days. The 11th
Month after recovered, and past to Lancaster Quarterly Meeting, from thence
returned unwell again, which continued sometime; so that he traveled not much
because thereof, save only to Meetings in the South part of Lancashire and
Cheshire, till the 2^th of the 3d Month, 1688. at which time he traveled for
London, to the Yearly Meeting, and returned to Lancashire, the latter end of
the 4th Month following, and traveled to and again, visiting the Meetings, and
about the Churches Affairs in the North, the Winter and Spring following, and
till the beginning of the 6th Month, 1689. A violent Fever then took him, which
brought him very weak, yet blessed be God he recovered: And in the 7th Month
following (the Tithe-takers broke open his Gates, being locked, and took his
Corn; against whose doings he appeared in Testimony, and got Cold) grew weak
again, and so continued all Winter, till Summer following, in which, upon the
29th of the 4th Month, 1690. he got to Franley Meeting, it being the first
after his Fever took him, which was the 7th of the 6th Month, 1689. so that his
Weakness made him unfit for Travel near eleven Months; afterward he traveled
at times to visit Meetings, and about the Churches Affairs Northwards, that
Summer and Winter following; and latter end of the 3d Month, 1691. he traveled
for London to the Yearly Meeting, and so through several Counties, visiting
Friends Meetings in his return for Lancashire, and to and again that Summer,
and till latter end of the 12th Month he traveled visiting the Friends in the
North, at which time he got a Surfeit and Quotidian Ague, which continued nine
Weeks; in which time he was assessed 20 s. for a Preacher, and had Corn taken
by Thomas Tailor and Thomas Clare, worth 28 s. and the second time assessed the
like Sum, and had Wheat taken for it.

A Dispute agreed upon by him, in the latter end of the 12th Month, 1692. and
had with John Hide, a Priest in Cheshire, the 16th of the first Month, 1693.
which alarmed the People of that County, and was of Service to Truth:
Afterward he took his Journey through many of the Southern Counties, through
Wales, by Bristol, Weymouth, and so to London at the Yearly Meeting: After
returned to Lancashire, and Lancaster Quarterly Meeting, and to Penketh, and so
again into the South, visiting several Meetings in several Counties; and in the
8th Month following, returned to Lancashire, where he traveled to and again
that Winter in the North, in visiting the Meetings, and about the Affairs of
the Church.

At the Spring, 1694. he was at London at the Yearly Meeting, giving a full
Visit through that City, to the several Meetings there, and then returned to
Lancashire, and to York Yearly Meeting, and after visited some Meetings in
Yorkshire; then to Penketh, and visited the Meetings in the South part of
Lancashire; then to Lancaster Quarterly Meeting, and after that returned to his
own House; but staid but a while, for he traveled to and again in Lancashire
and Cheshire, till the 11th Month, and then went to Lancaster Quarterly
Meeting, so to Kendal at Quarterly Meeting, then visited some of the Meetings
in those parts, and then came back for Penketh.

The 20th of the first Month, 1695. took his Journey to the Yearly Meeting in
Wales, and then visited the Churches in several places therein, so to Bristol,
visited the Meetings there, and staid the Yearly Meeting; then visiting the
Meetings in several Counties Southward, came to London at the Yearly Meeting;
from whence to Colchester and Harwich, took ^hipping the 26th of the 3d Month,
^anded in Holland the 29th, lying Wind^ound 36 Hours, came to Amsterdam at
Yearly Meeting, then visited the Churches in Holland, Westfrizeland, Groningen,
Embden, to Frederickstadt, Hambrough, and so along those Countries, visiting
Friends to Amsterdam and Roterdam; afterward took Shipping, and landed at
Harwich the 28th of the 5th Month, 1695. and so by Colchester to London, still
visiting Meetings along as he traveled, and then for the North, where he
traveled to and again at times, until the 25th of the 12th Month, 1695. and
then took his Journey for Bristol, and was at the Marriage of William Penn with
Hannah Callowhill, and back. After his return, he visited Meetings to and again
in the North, till the 29th of the 2d Month, 1696. he with his Brother's, John
and Robert Haydock, accompanied the two Wifes of Roger and Robert, on their
Journey to Talk-hill in Staffordshire, John Haydock and two Women, being on
their Journey to visit the Meetings of Friends in the South of England, and
there they parted from John, and the two Eleanor's, and returned back to
Penketh. Fifty Three Years Old he was the first of the 3d Month, 1696. and
having been at Hartshaw Monthly Meeting for Worship, the 8th Day day of the
said Month returned back, and the day following, being the 7th day of the Week,
and 9th day of the said Month, was taken with Sickness, which was supposed to
be a Malignant Fever, and upon the 2d day next departed, whose Body was buried
at the Burying-place, belonging to Friends, at Grayston in Penketh, in the
South part of Lancashire, many Friends and other People being present.

And thus have I abreviated the Journal of my Fellow Laborer in the Gospel,
and dear Brother according to the Spirit, and Brother also according to the
Flesh; whose Unity and Fellowship in the Light was precious, being of one Mind
in things relating to Truth, and the Discipline in the Church of Christ; as
also, of the Doctrine and Precept of Christ, being joined in the Truth, which
is but one, and bound up together in the Bond of Life and Love in our Souls, to
be one, and in the one Eternal Spirit, and Light of Life, together sealed: And
although he be removed from the House of Clay or Dust, which moved to and fro
in the Counties, Islands, Countries and Kingdoms here below, wherein he bore a
faithful Testimony to the Light, the Truth, the Life manifest within, in which
he was supported and carried along in that weighty Work and Service in his Day,
yet the Fruits of his Labors and Travels show forth the Praise of God; and his
Faithfulness, Uprightness and Zeal, to God and his Truth, is sealed in many
Hearts by the Spirit of Christ. From the time of his Convincement, to the time
he was first moved by the Spirit of God to visit the Churches of Christ, and
Children of Light, was four Years; in which time Sufferings by Imprisonment he
passed through, being young: Our Father's departure the 10th of the 7th Month,
1670. and burial the 12th of the same; and other hard Exercises which he past
through, I at that time being in Ireland, in the labor of the Gospel, had but
small past thereof. From the first of his going abroad in the Work of the
Ministry, to the time of his departure from hence, was twenty four Years and a
half; in which time, not with standing his Imprisonment, Sickness, and Weakness
of Body and Family, he traveled by Sea, and by Land, by Computation, Thirty
Two Thousand Seven Hundred, Twenty Seven Miles; and ministered in Two Thousand
Six Hundred and Nine Meetings or Churches, as his Journal plainly makes appear,
which he writ down with his own hand from Day to Day, Weekly, Monthly and
Yearly, to that very Day he was visited, which was the 9th day of the 3d Month,
1696. as aforesaid: And now having finished the Account (I give) taken out of
the Manuscript of his Sufferings, Travels, Services and Zeal, as aforesaid, add
this furthur Account.

This my Friend, departed, was my younger Brother, begot by one Father, and
brought forth by one Mother, and Born in Coppul, in the South part of
Lancashire, brought up, whilst a Child, at School, and had some Learning; who,
whilst a Scholar, had an Exercise of Mind by the in-workings of the Light; but
at that time attained not to the Knowledge of that good Spirit of God in his
Heart, which was then at work in him; so that after it pleased God the Father,
in the 7th Month, 1667. to visit me by his Light in the inwards of my Heart, by
which he powerfully worked in me, until my Will was brought down, and subjected
to the Will of God, and my Heart so fitted, that in it I saw Christ the Light,
and Word of Eternal Life, and believed: After this, my said Brother coming to
my Father's House, was by our Mother put on to Discourse with me, she being a
Professor, and inclined to the Presbyterian Way, but quickly he was put to
Silence, and confounded; so that being gone from me, in private, our Mother
blaming him because he so quickly let me alone and left me, said to her, ' It Is
Truth, I dare not say against it: Thus what had before worked in him whilst a
Scholar, to wit, the Light and Life of God, worked now so powerfully and
effectually in him, until he came to the Vision and work of it, even Life
Eternal revealed in his Heart, and so in God believed, and became a faithful
and true Witness (to the Eternal Life, which is the true Light that lights
every Man) both in Sufferings by Imprisonments and Loss of Goods, which he
never shunned, neither sought out an easier way, than that of the Cross,
continued Travel, Love-Services and Charity; he was greatly concerned in
Watchfulness for the Welfare and Peace of God's People; He was found in the
Faith, of a blameless Conversation, Instrumental in turning many to Christ,
Zealous for Improvement of Church Discipline, that all Superfluities might be
at an end; and so the Church and Family of God appearing in brightness, might
occasion many eyes to look after that God that lives for ever and ever.

And although he was not the first that labored through the Heat of
Persecution, yet in his time he stood faithful in those Trials he met with; He
had a great esteem of such as were in Christ before him, and never grudged to
let such have the Preferrence; always esteeming Elders that ruled well, worthy
of double Honor; but if any sought themselves, or their own Repute, more than
the Repute of Truth, this grieved him; but he having learned to bear,
oftentimes left the remainder to God, who opened his Way: He had sometimes
opposite Spirits to deal with, and such as were not willing to be yoaked with
the Yoke of Christ, who were for Liberty and Ease to the Flesh: Yet, under a
seeming tenderness, at times would Nip the tender Buds: However, the Lord stood
by him and helped him, so that his Testimony shined to the end, and the
Remembrance thereof lives: O! how precious was that Spring of Love and Life
that arose in him when the Rubish was dug through, and the Philistine's
Nature divided, and the Well's Mouth opened; surely he was one that made use of
his Staff, and leaned upon it, and dug with it until Water flowed forth, to
the Watering the Flocks of God, to the Melting of many Hearts.

My Unity with him many a time was sealed in my Heart, by the Resurrection of
Eternal Life; His Life was Christ my Life: Our Life, Christ, arising in us,
made us manifest one to another, in the warming Beams of his Glory, to be one
in Christ. He is gone a way, and left the Tabernacle below, and is entered the
Tabernacle above, having already ceased from his Labors, to enjoy the
Perfection of Peace and Glory for ever and ever. I yet remain to to fulfill what
is behind in the Tabernacle below, waiting for my passage from hence, which I
hope God the Father will make easy to me in the time appointed, and give me
fully to enter the Tabernacle above, to enjoy the Perfection of Peace and
Glory, and my Brother therein, with the Saints and Angels of Light for ever and
ever,

John Haydock.
Coppul, 15th of the 2d Mouth, 1697.
A POSTSCRIPT.
My Brother, about 1674, or 1675, being at a Meeting at Freckleton in the
Fylde, in Lancashire, was apprehended and brought to Preston, before Edward
Rigby, called Justice, who treated him very Roughly, and gave him many
opprobrious Speeches, calling him, and one taken with him, Traitors, etc. and
fined him 20 l. for Preaching. This said Rigby endeavored to lay the Fine upon
the Hearers; but my Brother told him, he had Goods of his own, better than 20
l. and therefore none ought to be imposed upon because of his Fine; Rigby said
he would have them.

Several Years after, this same Rigby, with others, was, in King James's time,
apprehended and sent from Preston to Chester, by Warrington; at which place,
neither at Inn-houses (many Soldiers being in Town) nor at private Houses,
could they get Entertainment, until my Brother took this Rigby, and some others
of them into his House, then other private Persons gave Entertainment to the
rest. After this my Brother did go to Chester, and in Prison there, did visit
this Rigby and the rest; so that after they were released, upon their return,
this Rigby gave an Account how kind a Quaker had been, in giving him
Entertainment, and Visiting him, and c. in Prison, whom he formerly had been so
Unkind unto, and dealt so Unchristianly with: So that this my Brothers
Hospitality to him (who exercised Cruelty when he had Power) in the time of his
Distress, did demonstrate my Brother to be a true Follower of Christ, and one
that had learned to do Good, and to extend Charity to such as had been
Evil-minded, and greatly made their Cruelty manifest. This Account I received
from Friends,

John Haydock.
Coppul, the 16th of the 2d Month, 1697.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, near the Market, 1700.
A Collection of many Select and Christian Epistles, Letters and Testimonies,
written on sundry Occasions, by that Ancient, Eminent, Faithful Friend and
Minister of Christ Jesus, George Fox. The Second Volume.

The Rector examined, about his Book, scandalously styled, An Antidote against
the Venom of Quakerism, by John Meriton, who calls himself A. M. Rector of
Boughton in Norfolk; and his Observations remarked, and the Christianity of the
People called Quakers reafferted and vindicated, from his Perversions and
Aspersions. By George Whitehead. Price 6 d.

God's Protecting Providence, Man's Surest Help and Defense, in the times of
the Greatest Difficulty, and most Eminent Danger; evidenced in the Remarkable
Deliverance of Robert Barrow, with diverse other Persons, from the devouring
Waves of the Sea, amongst which they suffered Shipwreck: And also, from the
more Cruelly Devouring Jaws of the Inhumane Canibals of Florida. Faithfully
related by one of the Persons concerned therein, Jonathan Dickenson. Price 8 d.

(...) Epistle of Farewell to the People of God called Quakers, wherever
scattered or gathered in England, Ireland, Scotland, Holland, Germany, or in
any other parts of Europe. By W. Penn. Price 1 d.

The Poor Mechanics Plea, against the Rich Clergys Oppression: Showing, Tithes
are no Gospel Ministers Maintenance. In a brief and plain Method, how that
Tithes (as now paid) are both inconsistent with the Dispensation of the Law,
and Dispensation of the Gospel. Also, how they were brought into the Church,
many Hundred Years after Christ, and testified against by several Ancient
Christians and Martyrs. With several Sober Reasons against the Payment thereof.
By John Bockett. Price 3 d.

A Light Shining out of Darkness: Or, Occasional Queries submitted to the
Judgment of such, as would Enquire into the True State of Things in our Times.
The whole Work revised by the Author, the Proofs Englished and Augmented, with
sundry Material Discourses, concerning the Ministry, Separation, Inspiration,
Scriptures, Humane Learning, Oaths, Tithes, etc. With a brief Apology for the
Quakers, that they are not inconsistent with Magistracy. The Third Edition.
Price Bound 1 5, 6 d.

Some Account from Colchester of the Unfairnes and Dis-ingenuity of two
Rectors, and two Nonconformist Ministers, and five other Persons, in their
Account against the People called Quakers, Price 3 d.


