Jackson's Recantation, OR, THE LIFE and DEATH OF THE NOTORIUS HIGH-WAY-MAN,
NOW HANGING in CHAINS AT HAMPSTEAD DELIVERED

To a Friend, a little before Execution; Wherein is truly discovered the whole
Mystery of that Wicked and Fatal Profession Of PADDING on the ROAD.

LONDON, Printed for T. B. in the Year, 1674.

JACKSONS Recantation.
HOw vain are the thoughts of such, who whilst Youth and strength accompany
them, never consider they are a mere Statue of Dust kneaded with Tears, and
moved by the hid Engines of restless passions; a Clod of Earth, which the
shortest Fever can burn to ashes, and the least shower of Rheums wash away to
nothing; instead thereof they bounce so high, and make so great a noise in the
World, as if both the Globes (those glorious Twins) had been unwomb'd from the
formless Chaos by the Midwifery of their brain. Such was my disordered Fancy,
and my actions being attended still with successes, answerable to my desires, I
thought my self (notwithstanding my vicious practices) one of Heavens
Favorites, and by the eloquence of my own vanity, persuaded my self that the
Machinations of my Brain were able to unhinge the Poles. But Heaven thought fit
I should no longer reign in pride and arrogance, and therefore committed me
into hands of Justice, to be punished to the demerits of my Crimes. Being here
confm'd in this Terrestial Hell, surrounded with horror and despair, my
conscience started out of her dead sleep, and demanded a severe account of what
I had done; guilt instantly did stop my mouth, and having not a word to say for
my self, I withed my production (as my actions) inhumane; such was my
deplorable destruction, that I thought I heard the howls and hollow groans of
damned Souls, which added weight to one another perpetual misery; Whilst I was
in the greatest Agony imaginable, a Minister, or rather a charitable Physician
for my sin sick Soul, came to visit me, who knowing me a notorious Offender,
advised me to repent, for as yet it was not too late; hereupon he propounded
several questions, endeavoring to disburden my overloaded conscience, by
extracting from me an ingenious general Confession of what enormous Crimes I
had committed; finding this pious man had no other design then for the benefit
of my Soul, and knowing withal, the impossibility of my escape, by reason of
so many Indictments alleged against me; I plainly laid open the whole course
of my Life, not omitting any circumstance remarkable. Having put a period to my
Narrative, he seemed all wonder, I perceived quickly that his amazement
proceeded from the strange History of my wicked Life and conversation; this
wonder was soon converted into pity and commiseration, that a man so young
should be thus weeded out of the Garden of the World, just as he is entered into
the blooming Spring time of his Age: After he had thoroughly made me sensible of
the danger that attend these wicked courses (applying his Corrosives before his
Cordialls) he then acquainted me with the benefit of true repentance; in short,
it will take me up too much time to give an account of every thing which was
alleged either for information, contrition, or consolation, delivering that
divine message with so much power and efficacy, that the obdurateness of my
heart was able to hold out no longer, but melting into tears, I was willing to
have its flintiness broken by the Hammer of sacred Scripture. Finding me in so
good a temper, he left me to God and my self, for the perfecting that great
work he had so hopefully and happily begun. I now condemned a saying, which I
once applauded, used much by some of my desolute companions; he is more
sorrowful then is necessary, that is, sorrowful before there is necessity: for
had Sorrow taken place, where Pleasure sat Regent, and justled out all
consideration of the dreadful effects that attend our evil facts, doubtless we
should not be made a shameful spectacle to mankind, and a heartbreaking to our
dearest Relations; that saying of Seneca, I wish I had practiced as well as
registered in my memory; When I was young, I studied to live well; when aged,
how to dye well. As I was in the midst of these serious contemplations, my
heavenly Physician came again to visit me, to know and inquire into the
condition and temperament of my Soul, feeling in what manner did beat the Pulse
of its affection. Finding the constitution of my better part indifferent sound,
and that there was great hopes of a perfect recovery, he rendered thanks to the
Almighty for his infinite mercy in looking down with pity on poor sinful
creatures, whom, when the Law has cast them off, and banished them from this
lower world, out of his mere infinite goodness receives them into his own
blessed protection. To give this holy man some real testimony of my unfeined
repentance, I showed him the abstract of my Life, drawn up a little before my
apprehension, and did intend to have published it, resolving at that time to
have abandoned all those destructive desperate courses which I formerly
followed by Padding on the Highway, which resolution had I kept, my Country
would have received the benefit without any further detriment to me either in
Life or Reputation. Now, since I have no other means left to satisfy in part
the injuries I have done my Countrymen, let this ensuing Discovery not only
extenuate my manifold offenses, but more especially be the medium of preventing
the like hereafter: in the first place give me leave briefly to acquaint you
with some remarks in the series of my short Life, and in the next place, let me
lay down some notable instructions for your future caution, and preservation
against High-way-men, those devouring and destroying Caterpillars of a corrupt
and polluted Nation. I say little of my Parents more then that they were too
indulgent to me, supplying my youthful extravagancies with money continually,
in such superfluity, that my invention was frequently puzzled to find out ways
for quick dispatch. These unnecessary expenses took up so much time, that there
was little lest for my Study, so that I became as deficient in acquired
learning, as my Parents grew indigent in their Estate by my profuseness and
debaucheries: whilst with tears they lamented their poverty, occasioned by
their foolish indulgence, and deploring my future sad condition, foreseeing or
fearing the dismal catastrophe which inevitably attends such irregular pranks
and wild practices. Death in pity came and closed their eyes, that they might
not see what otherwise would break hearts. By the loss of their breath, I found
the want of their kindness, and having not that supply of money, the sole
composure of that Flambeau, which light me to all those several extravagancies
my disorderly passions, my disorderly will prompted me to go to, I then did
cast about what course to steer. My scandalous deportment made me an exile to
civil society, and the frequent disobligations I threw on my nearest relations,
made me an absolute stronger to their Families, whereby I was reduced to great
extremity, so that necessity the Mother of ingenuity, was constrained to pump
every day for some new Stratagem to appease a Stomach in an uproar for the want
of sustenance. Which wanting the accustomed pampering even to saciety, made me
frequent the eating society so long, till I had eaten quite through my credit,
and devoured my clothes to boot. My Breeches were so jag'd and tattered (that I
may say without offense to the Reader, though jocosely) they looked somewhat
like those that are now called a la mode, and seemed as if my Arse, according
to the Proverb, was hung with Points: my Hat broad brim'd, broader than the
broadest once in fashion, in pure love and kindness would have flapt ore my
shoulders, to have hid the shame and confusion my face was in, that my own eyes
(as well as others) should see my Coat becullendred, or like a Wellboat, and
though it had as many holes, or more than Argos had eyes, yet wanted one to
find out some pitiful Soul that would intend relief to a wretch so miserable.
Had not this misfortune befell me, I should have thought it a thing impossible
for a man to live so well, and so ill, in that short Registry of time. But now
when nothing but despair attended me, being altogether unfit for humane
society, and so out of conceit with my self, that I thought my self unworthy of
a foreign Plantation, and therefore to that end would not apply my self to
some Merchant; nay I could not think Hells Imp, a Kidnapper, would take of me
any cognizance; as I walked very early (for the hardness of my lodging would
not suffer me to lie long, and modesty would not permit to be seen lying on or
under a Stall, unless the Sun had been up to have warmed my chilly limbs,
benumbed by committing incest with my Mother Earth. I say, being thus early up,
I timely met with a long Purse lying neglected in the Street, whose entrance
was on the middle like a Wallat; and diving into the bowels thereof, I found at
one end some yellow dirt or excrement, and the other white, at the sight
whereof my body was seized with a general convulsion, so that I feared each
member would become a Traitor to each other in the discovery of this prize to
the right Owner, and by that means be deprived of that wanted benefit. I first
consulted my hands in the concealment of this Treasure, in order thereunto it
was conveyed into my Pocket-holes, but I forgetting my Pockets were bottomless,
it dropped quite through, which I soon snatched up, and then betaking my self to
my trembling legs, I got into the Fields with an inquisitive eye and panting
heart, and under an Hedge found in this Purse ten pound in Silver, and fifty
Guynies; burying all this money, but fifty shillings, in the Earth, I went and
bought an ordinary Suit ready made, and this I did for fear of being suspected
how I came by the money, being indifferently accoutred, I removed my hidden
Treasure, thinking it not safely trusted any where but about me. Now did I
think I might confidently enough take a lodging, remote from those who knew me,
and having furnished my self with a Chamber, I pretended to be a Country
Gentleman's Son, who came up to London about a Suit in Law, and behaved my self
accordingly, not discovering the least symptom of any former debauchery,
observing very early hours for bedtime; but not contented with that condition,
I was dissatisfied till I was in another habit, more splendid, and that I might
do it more boldly and safely, I framed a lie to my Landlord, that I had cast
and recovered a considerable sum from one of my Fathers Creditors, and doubted
not in a very little time to overthrow the rest. This gained me a great
reputation in the house, especially seeing my money, and bespeaking a gentile
Suit of Clothes, with all necessary appurtenances befitting persons of quality,
as silver Sword, etc. I now scorned the thoughts of associating my self with
those narrow-soul'd-plebeian-Snippers, whose Parents being neither able or
willing to see their Sons go in a garb out-shining commonalty in the time of
their Apprenticeship, or if there be ability and propensity thereunto, or the
morose Master hindering it, to obstruct their Servants pride and vanity, yet are
these Bondmens boundless desires such, that though to the ruin of themselves,
and the breaking of their Masters) they will have these gaudy outsides to Pimp
for their Leachery and other sensualities, having moneys in their Pockets
(though none of their own) to pay for it. For their habiliments they purchase
by exchange of their Masters goods one with another, and the money they purloin
out of the Box, or one of the Snipping Crew shall convert a Piece of Goods for
him, into ready money, and go his share. The Mercer deals with the Draper, and
a Tailor perhaps, who has Ship-wrackt his conscience, deals with them both;
and the Linnen-Draper, Hosier, Goldsmith, etc. with such like ornamental
clothing Trades, are respected as very material instruments among them, nay,
they will stoop so low sometimes to chaffer for Belly-Timber of the choicer
sort, and will bid fairly to a Drawer for a Flower. I might amply enlarge my
discourse concerning the Locusts, as how they insinuate into the Maids favor,
to let them out at unseasonable hours, and stay up for them, till it be early,
to the great prejudice of their Masters Business the next day, and at length,
the Wench will find for the reward of this notable place of night service, a
great Belly, and when she expects to find relief from the Caterwowling Father,
the Plot is discovered, and they both turned out of Doors, to their utter ruin
and destruction. I shall desist saying more on this subject, but only advise
the Master to have a prudent and careful eye over his Servants, checking by
times any looseness he discovers, so shall he find his business done, when
requisite, and they the benefit of their fidelity, by performing their trust at
the expiration of their time.

Now to return where Heft off: being gallantly equipt, I soon got new
acquaintance, the most of which were intimately acquainted with the humors of
the Town, were incomparable at the Art of wheedling, which some call
Complaisance, neither were they unpractised in any sort of Game, but more
especially Cards and Dice, both which pernicious Tools, they have labored with
more, and taken as much pains to understand, as a seven years Student has done
with Aristotle's Organon. One of these whom I judged had somewhat better
principles then the rest, I daily accompanied, and grew in a little time, to be
so familiar, that we embosom'd the Arcana's of each others concern, without
restriction or suspicion, and having tried each others fidelity, we agreed upon
a lasting league of Brotherhood, and knowing that contiguity of bodies is the
speediest confirmation of a desired friendship, we resolved to lie together.

Now were our thoughts and actions like the Air to all, as free to one another,
and although in love there should be no competitor, yet such has our freedom
been, that frequently the subject of our amors, has been one and the same
person, whom he first knew and loved (as he said) beyond any of her Sex, and I
wish he had still loved her without me, then had not those resistless charms
enthroned in every Feature of her Face, so bewitched and infacinated my reason,
that I undervalued the greatest danger for her sake, nor did I scruple to
undertake any thing for her satisfaction, as I shall hereafter declare more at
large, for the Readers satisfaction, but to my great grief, she being the cause
of mine, as such loose ambitious women are of thousands of men's ruin and
destruction.

My new acquaintance finding me but raw and ill experienced in the crafts of
this subtle world, undertook to be my Tutor, and read his Lectures to me every
day: what his mouth did not inform, his actions instructed me in. When I was
abroad; I observed his deportment to a hair, and took wonderful delight in
imitating his insinuations, whereby I had rigled my self into what
Tavern-credit I pleased, without being great with the Vintner, though much in
his Books, but by being inwardly acquainted with his Wife or ingratiating my
self into the favor of his Daughter, if Bar-keeper; for then I knew the moneys
going all through her hands, she might perform her part well enough in the Art
of Conveyance, as well as the most experienced Scrivener about the Town, and
with lesser noise and trouble. The Purchase of these favors, though at first
they cost a considerable sum, yet I found by computation, the annual income
recompensed the cost.

He made it his business to inquire out impotent men, who had bucksome lusty
Wives, if Shopkeepers, he commonly bought commodities of them as an
introduction for his dealing in one not to be sold, because, the Master keeps
it for his own use, and so according to each several Trade or Profession, he
squared his designs, so that frequently they took effect, unless the premises
were prepossest by a brother of the same Quill.

The next thing he taught me, was to Game, and made me so great a proficient at
it, that I could Nick the Nicker sometimes, by which means I was taken for a
Brother at the Ordinary, and, by frequently dining there, and conversing, and
practicing with the Rooks, I went my share in a Bubbling, and had an interest
in several Taverns near the Ordinary, where the poor Cully was inveigled in,
and afterward under the pretense of great kindness, then wheedled into Play,
and in a thrice the Woodcock deplum'd, and not a souse left to give a Link-boy
to light him home.

In this sort, I as greedily hunted after prey; as the Devil does after Usurers
Souls on their Deathbeds. Nor was the Ordinary the only Pond I Fisht in, for I
found a Playhouse sometimes convenient for my purpose, also Cockpits,
Bowling-Greens and Ally's, neither must a Brothel be omitted, my Tackling was
so good, and my Hooks so well barb'd, that after I had struck a Gudgeon, I was
sure to hold him, though I suffered him to play a little in the Stream.

If at any time, I casually fell into the company of any young
Country-Gentleman, whom his rich Father had sent up to the City, to learn
somewhat more than the ruder Country can afford, I and my companion (that
Brother of mine in iniquity) did first study what humor he was of, when that
was known, we had an excellent Art in suiting ours to his in every thing, this
Artifice so indeared us unto him, that loans of money, engagements, and such
easy requests (as we called them) were seldom denied; and least at any time,
he should repent him of those excesses, in expense and high debaucheries, we
constantly drew him ^to by any serious reflection upon what was past, we kept
him by turns, always in a high pitch of drinking, and like a careful Guardian
to some wealthy Heiress, we could not endure he should be out of our sight,
least falling into other company he might be snatched out of our hands, by some
other Craftsby, and so we loose our expected booty.

Having thus, by much sweat and industry adapted, and wrought him to such a
soft and waxen temper, that we could make him wear what impression we pleased
to lay on him; we then boldly venture abroad with him, having taught him to
wear fine Clothes, and to leap out of one Fashion into another, so often, till
he had quite lost the knowledge of himself, and the latest habit, A la mode.
Having made our youngster believe himself in Elysium, and thought that he
enjoyed more delights than the Turks believe their Paradise affords after
death, we then bethink our selves how to conclude the Play, the Prologue to
which, are these, our seeming kindnesses, and you would think them not small,
when you shall see us strive who shall first lend him money, upon his least
pretense of want thereof; carry him to very handsome lovely women, and then
with leaving him alone to the full fruition of his amourous desires: assist him
in all quarrels, but most of them of our own making; if challenged, secure him
and his honor safe, whilst we pretendedly fight for him, and it may be return
from the supposed Field to his Chamber (where he waits till the danger is over)
with a hand bound up in a Scarf, where his Rogueship, my beloved Brother,
begins a formal and serious speech, telling him, what bloody work there had
like to have been, how strenuously and resolvedly his cause was fought, to the
loss of some blood on his side, but it was no matter there is more still left
at his service, and such like fair deluding pretenses; hereupon this Country
Cock-brain, transported with the consideration of such great effects of
friendship, expresses how much he is obliged, nor can the obligation be
cancelled, however he will study to be grateful, and in the first place
promises to pay the Chyrurgion liberally to cure a wound (was never made;) next
gives him a Silver Sword to weat for his sake, which the Receiver promises
shall be worn on no other account, then for the defense and preservation of the
Giver; these and the like were but the petty forerunners of greater kindnesses
we expected to receive, which must be effected in their proper time and season.
As thus, when we prompted him to change of Apparel, the Mercer (who trusted
him) knowing his Father to be wealthy, and he Heir to the Estate, gave us
Credit also upon his account; and now and then, by a whisper in the Ear, he was
advised to remember Mistress B --, or Miftris F -- a Petty-coat or some such
thing she wanted, which was done accordingly, and delivered into our hands, but
went not out of them without a consideration. By this you may understand our
Gallant also was instructed in the Art of Whoring, and so exact an Observator
of his Mistresses, that he was forced to keep a Common-place-book, wherein he
writ-the Names of those Bona Robas Alphabetical digested, and that he might
presently recall to his memory their several complexions, he affixt to each name
a little Lock of Hair which he took from the person, in perpetuam rei memoriam.
When all his Money is spent, his Credit gone and destroyed, and his Father
hearing of his extravagancies, and what desolute, desperate Company he keeps,
then we think it is time to vanish, or disappear, and leave out Cully in his
Fools Paradise, to be handled at the discretion of his Creditors.

Whatever we got, by these indirect courses, we equally shared, and thus
continued a twelve month together, acting many Rogueries not all of a
complexion; for we were now through paced in all manner of Villainy; nor could
it be expected, that our actions should always meet with success; for we were
several times in Goal, and once I had like to have lost my life, for robbing a
Coach near Barnet, and without question the Law had then put a period to those
evil practices, had I not restored the Major part of the Money and Goods to the
right owner, on this condition, at my Trial they should forbear bringing any
evidence against me, and so I was then acquitted by Proclamation.

So fair a warning, one would think should have put a stop to such proceedings,
but it signified nothing to me, I rather think it was the cause of my hardening,
for I thought with my self, why may not I escape another time in the same
manner, and that which much augmented this senseless security, was the frequent
Pardons granted to the most notorious Malefactors, not once or twice; so that
from thence grew a kind of proverbial saying, amongst the Scout-Masters of the
Road, he cannot be hanged without Treason or Murder) who has five hundred
pounds at his command. Besides, the impudence of my fellow Prisoners, did much
increase my own, and made me boldly look upon my Irons, and presently stare my
Friends in the face, who came to see me without a blush.

Being abroad again, I thought of nothing but my profit and pleasure, but
pursued them with two much precipitancy; no villainy lay fairly in my way, which
I did not think my self sit for; and was still encouraged to go on, by my
Comrade; and was commonly in the Van, upon any desperate exploit, having the
knowledge of my VVeapon, and could use it as well as the best experienced
Master of the Science in the Town.

Now as ill Luck would have it, my constant Companion died, leaving little
behind him, but his VVench, whom he bequeathed to me, enjoining me to have a
special care of her he so highly prized in his life time, I accepted of the
Legacy, and took possession immediately, without a forcible entry; for she made
presently a willing surrender; It Is pily she is a Whore, for impartially, I may
say it, her Beauty is scarcely to be paralleled, nor her disposition being
highly ambitious, sensual and insatiate; to oblige them all in some measure, I
performed as much as I could, expending all I had then by me, unlawfully
gotten, and fearing I might loose her beloved society, for want of continuing
my wonted kindnesses to her, by Presents, Treats, and Dalliances, I made the
last serve for all, till I had found out some less dangerous, expedient, than
Padding, to satisfy her enlarged desires, and that which pricked me forward,
was her coldness more than usual to me, which coldness did increase my fire,
making me resolve the perpetration of any thing, then to be treated by her with
so much indifference.

In the first place, I went and renewed my acquaintance with an Ordinary, shall
be nameless, and there I rookt sometimes at one Table and sometimes at another,
but by reason of the scarcity of fair Gamesters, little was to be got, many
times I waited an hour or two before I could see one strange face come in, and
if there did immediately at his appearance, the Rooks are all alarmed, and
though before they were busily pecking at one another for a shilling, they
shall now desist their thoughts, being wholly employed, who shall first make
prize of him. Now by reason of late sittings up there, and in an adjacent
Tavern, I frequented, in hope of Booty, I was quite tired out, and resolved to
go thither for the time to come upon a double account, the first was to win by
play; secondly, if little could be got that way (for I was generally known an
expert Nicker) I might then observe who carried off good sums of money, and by
following them in the dark, take my advantage in some convenient place, and
there dispossess them of it, which I have frequently done, making choice of the
darkest nights for my purpose) for Winter is the proper time for a Gaming
Ordinary.

I found it unsafe to take this course any longer, yet now and then got a
considerable booty, which when I carried as a Tribute of Love to my fair
Mistress, no Frown could sit upon her Brow, all feigned Anger was banished from
her Countenance, but she was all complaisance, and but that I loved her in a
more than common manner, her over loving and petulant deportment, would have
raised in me a humor, rather loathing, than loving.

So various and villainous were the Pranks I committed daily, that now I was
forced, like a Bat, never to flutter or stir abroad till the dusk of the
Evening; if I did, it was the greatest caution imaginable, and then too, I
never staid long in a place, for fear some or other had dogged me, in order to
my apprehension; thus did I skulk here and there like the Dogs in Egypt, as it
is reported, who when by thirst, they go to drink of the River Nyle, lap here
and there, and dare not stay long in a place, for fear the Crocodiles, that lie
lurking within the Banks, should pull them into the Current.

My Wench, seeing what straights I was put to for her maintenance, which was
none of the meanest, for the Whore, if she dined, with me, without something
extraordinary and Wine to boot, I had better at night to have lain in a
Tumbril, and if my over much kindness had pampered her to high with Meat or
Drink, that was provocative (being of her self naturally solacious) with more
ease I might have lain between the sheets with red-hot Proserpine, and
therefore, when I perceived some symptoms which I used to mark, appear, I
disappeared, and sometime after sent her word I should not lie at home: I say,
my Miss seeing all my Stratagems would not answer her expectation, she resolved
to desert me when I least dreamed thereof; and now I cannot choose but rail at
her whole sex, for her sake, rewarding my kindness with so much baseness and
ingratitude; for as she carried away all I had left, so she left me something
that was none of my own, a swinging Clap, which laid me up in pickle above six
weeks before I was cured. At the the expiration of which time, walking in
Hatton Garden, I met with three or four of my old acquaintance, Knights of the
Road, and all of a Gang, men of such undaunted resolution and irresistible
courage, that threats of death, or extreme torture (I am confident) would no
ways dull the edges of their stout and matchless spirits.

After a few ceremonies, at first meeting, it was concluded, we should drink a
glass of Wine, and the next Tavern must be our Councel-Chamber, where in
private we might consult, what was best to be done. I was demanded, how I had
spent my time since my first Jail-deliver; I told them, who blamed me much for
my undertaking such mean things, as pilfering up and down, and making serzures
of such petty things, a generous bold Soul would scorn to take notice of; they
condemned me not for keeping my Whore, but that I did not keep her more under;
the thing is laudable said one to have a Miss, though he has a very handsome
Wife of his own, and is agreeable to the custom and honor of the times, and
should we throw any approhium upon it, it would reflect upon our selves.

Come said another, we trifle away time, let us fall to business, it is a good
while since we shared a Booty, let us lie no longer idle, and if our Brother
will accompany us, instead of picking up here and there Crowns and Angels, (a
thing beneath us) let us resolve at Have at all; a five hours Adventure may
make us possessors of five hundred pounds.

I told them I was unprovided of an horse, and other appurtenances necessary
for the design; they presently told me I should be supplied, and so I was
accordingly, and as well provided for our intended expedition as any of them.

The first Robbery that I committed, I told you was on a Coach near Barnet; The
second was this, we were four in Company, and took our Road toward
Maidenhead, more for intelligence sake than for any present Booty; in
Maidenhead we dined, and toward four a clock in Summer time we traveled on for
Redding, making a little halt by the way at Maidenhead Thicket, expecting there
to light upon some prize; having waited an hour or more to no purpose, we
proposed to distribute our selves, and Ride into Redding singly, and that two
should lie in one Inn, and two in the other, for the better benefit of
observation.

My other two Comerades lay in an Inn where they were intimately acquainted,
and were winkt at by the Master of the House, the Servants also being at their
Devotion; by whose means they understood that there was a Gentleman in the
house who was the next morning with his Man, would set out for Malbrough, and
that it was thought by the weight of a small Port-mantue, that it must be money
that caused it to be so heavy. We on the other side could make no discovery
till after Supper, and then we heard what our hearts desired.

An Attorney was in the company, and amongst other talk, he said he was bound
for London to be there at the Term, and asked the Master of the House (who was
acquainted with him) whether he had any service to command him thither, for in
the Morning he would set forth: whereupon said I, composing my countenance, I
am sorry I have not the happiness then to morrow to have your company, for I
must ride a contrary way to Bristow; say you Sir, said he, you seem a civil
Gentleman, and I am sorry too; and as a stranger, I wish you so much good will,
have a care of Malbrough Downs, there are a parcel of whipper Snappers have
been very busy there of late, hereupon I startled, and seemed to be very much
concerned, the Attorney perceiving that, called me, and told me if I had a
considerable charge, he willed me to secure it some way or other for I should
certainly lose it; I thanked him somewhat coldly, as if I suspected him some
subtle insinuating spy, he thereupon to free me from any such jealousy, put
his hand in his pocket and pulled out a Bagg wherein were an hundred and fifty
Guinnies, saying, these I will so conceal in the Saddle I ride upon that I will
defy all the damned High-way-men in England to find them out, I have past them
several times in this manner, with good sums about me, and for your further
belief I will show you in what manner.

I gave him a thousand thanks and assured him I would follow his advice; now
did I not know without suspicion how to get out and inform my Comerades of this
discovery; just in the interim a note came from them to meet them at such a
place, and so pretending business in the Town I went to them, where we
concluded that I and my fellow should rob the Marlebrough Traveller, and they
two should rob the Attorney; which the next morning was performed, the Attorney
thinking the Devil had given them information where his treasure lay; we came
not off so well, for though we gained the booty, which was six score pound in
silver, yet I was shot in the arm, and so stiffly opposed by the Gentleman and
his man, that had we not shot his Horse in the Head, and so fell instantly
dead, they had either killed or taken us Prisoners; this being done we met at
the place appointed the last night for our general Rendezvous.

The next time that we went upon the same account we met with a pleasant
adventure, for after we had robbed several to the making up of a sum above one
hundred and eighty pound, we were all strangely robbed of it by one.

Hearing some Seamen were to be paid off at Chattham such a day, and knowing
that London is the Center that attracts and invites them to spend their hard
gotten money, we went down to Shooters-hill and hovered thereabouts till
evening, but got little booty; the next day toward the afternoon we picked up a
great many straglers and robbed them of their money, some more and some less,
but when there was four or five in a body, nay, if but three, we shunned them as
much as they would have done us, had they known what we were. At length a
Parson coming from London fell in amongst us, whom we robbed without any
respect to his Coat, neither could we have judged by the meanness of his habit
and the poorness of his horse with the shortness of his journey, that he could
have had above an Attorneys retaining Fee about him; but thinking to make some
speedy sport with him (and so dismiss him) by searching his Pockets, the
attempt was no sooner slightly made (and had never been prosecuted) but that he
roared like a Town Bull, he was utterly undone, then did I search him
thoroughly, and from that time afterward in all my Robberies I learned to
search so strictly, that sooner might the Pope turn Quaker, then for any of
them to conceal a penny from me; and seeing what severities my unconscionable
and cruel companions used to those Seamen, who had ventured their lives for
their King and Country, and at last to be deprived of their long looked for
reward, taught me to be as deaf too when the poor Traveller cried I am undone,
and my heart in process of time grew flinty and not to be moved with sighs and
tears.

This Parson had fifteen pound about him, all which we took from him, but
returned him twenty shillings, if he would engage on his word, nay swear that
he would inform none he met with what had happened, or following us by Hue and
Cry, or by general raising of the Towns about us near adjacent.

The Parson minding more the loss of his money then the breach of his Oath
meeting with a Seaman (as we were informed afterward) advised him to turn back
if he had any money, for but a little before there were a parcel of Rogues that
just now robbed him of 15 l. and will infallibly do the like to him if he
proceeded farther. The resolute Seaman would not believe the Parson, thinking
it some idle Chymera of his own invention, and so went on his way, and the
Parson on his: coming up to the Seaman we bid him stand; who asked us what we
meant, we told him that we wanted money; alas Gentlemen, said he, it is true I
have some, which I received for my pay in his Majesty's service, and therefore
it is pity to take that from me which I am carrying home for the maintenance
of my poor Wife and Children. If he had persuaded an Angel to have been his
Orator and pleaded in his behalf, it would have been all one, for no other
sound pleased us but that of his money; when he saw that there was no remedy, he
delivered all that he had, which which was sixty five pound. Now Gentlemen said
he, let me beg one request of you, and that is, since I dare not go home to my
Wife, and at present know not what course of life to steer, admit me into your
company, you see I am limbed well enough and I have courage and strength enough
to quallifie me for your occupation. We asked him whether he was in earnest, he
swore a hundred Oaths he was in earnest, and was ready to be tried at that
instant; insisting farther, that he was greatly in love with a Trade that could
get as much money in six minutes, as he could do in three years.

I was then Purse-bearer; and finding we had done enough for that day, we
appointed a place to meet at, and so distributed our selves for the present;
only I had the charge of the Seaman, who was wretchedly mounted, and therefore
I needed not to fear him: Besides, as we rid along, I bound him over and over
again, by Oaths, to stand to what promise he had made us. At length, riding in
a Lane, suspecting nothing in the least, he turns his little Hobby upon me, and
siezing my Bridle before I was aware, claps to my Breast a little ugly
Brass-barrel'd Pistol, and swore as bloodily, as if he had been one of the
Trade above twenty years, if I would not instantly dismount, he would send a
Bullet to my Heart. I saw by his frightful countenance that there was no
dallying, so I dismounted and gave him my Horse; and he in kindness bid me take
his: such a Beast I never saw on a Common, so poor, so weak, that I was
thinking to commit my safety to my own, and not to his legs.

You may imagine what a sweat I was in being thus dismounted, for having
committed so many Robberies that day, should I be met by any of the Country,
they would conclude me one of the Robbers, seeing a man so splendidly
accoutred, riding on a Beast hardly fit to feed Crows and Ravens.

The night coming on favored me, and I got among my Associat^^; and now I
shall give you leave to guess, whether their laughter or sorrow was greatest?
First, that a stout Thief (for so I was accounted) should be robbed by a
Hobbyhorse and a Pot-gun. And secondly, so much Money lost, when secured
beyond the probability of retaking.

We heard the Seaman, after he had paid himself, summoned in such Brethren as
had been robbed by us, and none else (but the Parson) and returned them their
Money.

Should I enumerate all the Rogueries and Robberies I committed, either singly,
or with others, relating in what manner they were done, I shall waste too much
time, and miss of that design which I purposed to my self, which is the general
good of my Countrymen: wherefore I shall pass them all by, not so much as
mentioning the last Robbery I was guilty of near Colebrook, when persued by the
Country, opposed and apprehended by them, to the loss of our own, and the Blood
of some of them; the manner whereof is too generally known to be again
repeated, and therefore leaving this, and the like stories, I shall insist on
as is more profitable; and therein discover, first, what a High-way-man is; how
bound by Oath; what Order is prescribed; in what manner they Assault; and how
they behave themselves in and after the Action. In the next place my best
endeavor shall be, to dissuade these Desperadoes to desist Robbing on the
Highway, by showing them the certainty of their Apprehension one time or
other; and though they may a long time prosper in that vile course of life,
spending high, and faring deliciously, yet every bit is attended with fear;
neither is their sleep less unquiet, starting ever and anon by some horrid
Dream; so that I cannot say, when they go to bed, they go to take their rest;
but only to slumber out the tedious minutes of the gloomy night in horror and
affrightment. I shall insist on other disswasions, by showing them the misery
of a Prison; by putting them in mind of their wretched and cursed Ends, which
they vainly jest at, by presuming on some Examples of Grace; and the Reward of
their Wickedness in the World to come. Lastly, Instructions, not only for the
honest Traveller that he may pass in safety, but for the Innkeeper to
distinguish High-way-men from Guests that are honest. All these I shall with
sincerity run over particularly.

High-way-men for the most part are such, who never were acquainted with an
honest Trade, whom either want of Money or Employment prompt them to undertake
these dangerous Designs; and to make their Persons appear more formidable, and
to gain respect, they dub one another Colonel, Major, or at least a Captain,
who never arrived to a greater height than a Trooper disbanded, or at the
utmost a Life-guard-man casheer'd for misdemeanour.

Having made up a Party, e're they proceed to act their Villainies, they make a
solemn Vow to each other, that if by misfortune any one should be Apprehended,
he shall not discover his Accomplices; and that if he be pressed hard to
particularize his Companions, he must then device names for men that never
were, describing their persons, features, and discovering their habitations,
but so remote one from another, that the danger of the Trial may be over e're
sufficient enquiry can be made.

And further, to procure mercy from the Bench, there must be a plausible
account given, how you fell into this course of life; fetching a deep sigh,
saying, That you were well born; but by reason of your Family falling to decay,
you were exposed to great want, and rather then shamefully beg (for you knew
not how to labor) you were constrained to take this course for a subsistence;
that it is your first fault, which you are heartily sorry for, and will never
attempt the like again.

Having taken a solemn Oath to be true one to another, their next business is,
to acquaint themselves by Tapsters, Hostlers, Chamberlains, or others, what
Booties are stirring, how contained, and whether bound. But before they attempt
the siezure, if any Novice be in the Company, then are they instructed by the
more experienced, as I was at first, after this manner.

In the first place, you must have variety of Periwigs planted in your
Lodgings; and the like you must carry abroad, if occasion require the necessity
of changing the color of the hair: neither must you be without your false
Beards of several colors; for want of them, you may only cross your locks
athawrt your mouth, which is a good disguise: Patches contribute much thereto.
And least your Voice should be known another time by him that is robbed, put
into your mouth a Pebble, or any such like thing, which will alter your tone
advantagiously to your purpose.

Being thus provided, a Watchword must be framed, wrapped up in some common
question, as, What Is a Clock? or Jack, What shall we have for Supper? to avoid
putting the Traveller into suspicion; which as soon named, you must instantly
fall to your work, siezing with your left hand the Bridle, and with your right
presently a Pistol: This so terrifies, that he delivers instantly; for who will
trust a Pistol at his Breast loaded with a brace of Bullets, and a mouth
discharging at the same time volleys of Oaths, that if he deliver not
instantly, he is a dead man? But here in you may choose to believe him, for he
will be very cautious of Murder, for fear of provoking the Law to an
implacability; unless it be when he is beset, that rather than run the hazard
of hanging, he must endeavor his escape by the death of one or more of his
Assistants.

Having over mastered them you set upon, then do you carry them into some
Covert, where you search so severely, that nothing can be hidden from you; If
in the strict enquiry Gold be found privately quilted in a Doublet, or
Waste-band of his, Breeches, I can hardly forbear smiling, when I think, in,
what manner these Rogues will slaye the poor man, with V^^ain, cheating Rascal,
for endeavoring to preserve his own; whilst he has nothing else to say, but
that he is undone: which they regard with as little, as the Hangman will do
them at the place of Execution. Having changed your Horses for theirs, if
better than your own, the next thing you do, is to make them swear, neither to
follow you, nor to raise the Country with an Hue and Cry upon you. Thus having
the poor Traveller forlorn away, you ride to some strange place, or where you
are known and winkt at, and there you share what unlawfully you got, not
without the cheating one another.

Now here by the way, give me leave a little to descant on their Prodigality,
after an attempt that proves successful. London, the more is the pity, is their
best Sanctuary; and therefore after any Robbery, they commonly repair thither;
having as many Names as Lodgings, and both as changeable as a Whores dalliances
with variety of Persons. Their next care is, to buy variety of splendid
Apparel; and having bought his Wench a new Gown, and furnished her Pockets with
Guynnies, they then prosecute to the height all manner of Debaucheries, which
by a mistaken name they call, The Chief of Pleasures. And as their Whore, so
must their Host participate with them in their Gain, else all the fat is in the
fire; for the Vintner, Innkeeper, etc. knowing very well what they are, and
how easily they get their Money, will be sure to enlarge their Reckoning, and
make it swell prodigiously; neither must this be complained of, lest they
refuse to keep their Counsel any longer.

All the time they can spare from robbing and undoing poor harmless men, is
spent in Wine and Women; so that the Sunshine of their prosperity lasts but a
moment, not so long as to warm their hands by the blazing fire of their
Prodigality, before cold Death comes and siezeth them; and how can it be
otherwise expected, the Pitcher goes not so often to the Well, but it comes
broken home at last.

But before Death takes them from this to carry them before an higher Tribunal,
there to answer for all they have acted here on earth, there is a punishment
preceding this, which makes my soul startle at the thoughts thereof; it is a
Prison wherein are contained so many tortures, woes and pains, which I do think
were enough to punish without death the greatest of offenses; now since I
cannot describe the horror of this Hell on Earth, I shall admonish all to have
a care, that their evil actions compel them not to feel the pain, and let those
who have already endured the smart thereof, be deterred by those sufferings
from ever again espousing such pernicious practices which may venture them into
their former despicable and deplorable condition.

Having thus endeavored to fright High-way-men, by showing them the
intolerable torments of a Prison, besides the certainty and shamefulness of
Hanging, and hazard of Eternal Death hereafter. I shall here take another
course to scare them if possible, and therefore in the first place I shall lay
down Directions how to know them as they ride on the Road, with rules how to
shun them, or if Robbed, how to pursue and apprehend them when they think
themselves most secure.

In the first place when at any time you intend to travel, and cannot avoid
carrying a sum of money with you, let no person know what charge you have, or
when you will set forward. It is a custom I confess (but I can assure you it is
dangerous) for men the day before they begin their journey, to take their leave
of their Relations and Friends, drinking healths round to the happy return of
the Traveller, who suspects not the least harm in all this, whereas it has
been known that a Father this way has been betrayed by his own Son, a Brother
by a Brother, nay one pretendedly dear friend betray another, by discovering to
High-way-men, when and which way he rides, bidding them to prepare accordingly,
either to meet or overtake, and for the plot so laid he goes his share.

Another way of setting they have in this manner; the Gang shall ride before
out of sight, leaving one lusty fellow of their company behind, who shall ride
very softly expecting some person or other who shall overtake him; if three or
four, he will single out one he thinks has the most money, and pretending much
kindness, whispers him in the ear, saying, that he likes not those men, and
asks him if he knows them? if not, he advises him by all means to slacken his
pace, for certainly they are dangerous follows; this timorous piece of
credulity thanks him for his honest care, and takes his advice, and not long
after brings him to the place where his Confederates lie in Ambuscado, who upon
sight of them draws, bidding the other to do the like; and now begins a
dangerous Fight, as the Traveller imagines, who through fear of bloodshed
delivers his money, and persuades his Champion to do the like, who with much
ado at length condescends thereunto; having given him a private Item which way
they intend to ride, they set Spurs to their Horses, and are out of sight in an
instant.

Hereupon this pretender to honesty will straight persuade you to assist him in
making an Hue and Cry, in the carrying on of which to be sure he will be the
foremost as seemingly most zealously active in the apprehension of these
Robbers, to no other end then to lead you quite another way, till his Brethren
be out of all danger. I knew one notorious Rogue (but by his sly and crasty
deportment was looked upon to be a very honest Gentleman) suffered himself to be
robbed with three more, by four of his own Confederates, the Robbery being
committed between Sun and Sun, he with those three honest men sued the Country,
and recovered the money they had lost.

Whenever the Traveller designs his journey, let him consider the Sabbath day
is a time not only unlawful, but more dangerous for Robbing than any other. I
need not expatiate my selfon the illegality of the act, since there is a
special command forbidding the breach of that holy day of rest, the violation
whereof has been frequently punished by being robbed; for to speak the truth,
that day has been, and is still chosen by High-way-men for the best and
fittest time to commit their Robberies; first because they are sensible that
few Travel then, but such who ride about some eminent concern, and do suppose
to that end carry a considerable sum about them. In the next place, on that day
the Roads are most quiet, being undisturbed with great quantities of People,
and therefore rob with more ease and greater security. Lastly, they know the
Country will not be so forward to pursue them with an Hue and Cry, whereas they
cannot but be sensible that a judge will hardly be induced to make the Country
pay the reparation of a loss sustained by him, who ought to have staid at home
and perform those duties required from him proper to the day, and not wander
abroad and leave his Creators business undone, that he may do his own. If you
needs must travel, you have days enough in the week to follow your urgent and
important affairs, with more security, the Roads being then full of good
company, if you will make choice of a convenient time, and be cautious whom you
entertain into your Society.

The first caution is this, be shy of those who are over prone in prossing into
your company; it is more safe to entertain such who are unwilling to associate
themselves with you, or if they do it is with such indifferency, that there
need the urging of persuasions to effect it. Now to the intent you may
distinguish an honest man from a Thief or Robber, take these informations and
directions; first if you suspect your company, halt a little, and in your stay
observe whether they still hold on their course, or slack their pace, or it may
be alight and walk with their Horses in their hands, if you observe any of
these, you may conclude them the justly suspected marks of an High-wayman; but
these following are infallible, the putting on a Cypress hood or a Vizard Mask
upon your near approach, are signs they presently will bid you stand and
deliver, or if before they shroud their hellish looks with those disguises,
stare any of them in the face boldly, and if he turns his head aside, be thence
forewarned to stand a loof and provide for your preservation, neither is there
any more certain Indicium of a Robber, then the incongruity of his bushy Beard
and Face, his whispering or his more incivil paying and inquiry whether you are
traveling, or about what business.

Beware of joining company with one single on the Road, although you have a
friend with you; his pretense will be to insinuate himself into your good
opinion, that having a charge about him, he is over joy'd to meet with two
whose face and actions discover nothing but what is honest, and in a little
riding will presume to call you honest fellow Traveller, in a short time it may
be three of his Companions will over take you, at the sight of whom he shakes
and seems to be in the greatest agony imaginable; at length he says with
trembling, in troth Gentlemen, I doubt me we are waylaid, therefore stand to it
if you have any Pistols, otherwise if you have any store of money, the best way
will be to fly for it.

It may be you have those grim handfuls, Deaths speedy Executioners, and
minding well the number of those you fear will be so bold to assault you, and
finding no inequality, your courage probably may prompt you to an opposition if
cause require; but you will then find quickly you supposed friend turn Cat in
Pan, and be on the other side, and being thus over matched, must either yield
your moneys quietly or do worse.

Sometimes there will be one or more of these Trapanning Rascals, who having
attired himself every way like a Countryman, with rouls of Hay about his
legs, an old hat flapping over his eyes, with a broad Leathern Girdle about
his middle with great Buckles, riding aside on his Horse with a Goad instead of
a riding rod; I say this fellow shall ride in company with you, asking very
silly questions, and singing a Country Song to some horrible tune, all to raise
laughter, when by this means he has lulled you into a senseless security, and
not suspecting in the least any harm from him, he instantly assaults you and
his accomplices come instantly into his succor, who surprising you thus unawares
are without difficulty made a prey to their unlawful desires.

You see how dangerous a thing it is to Travel with a charge about you in the
day time, unless you have a very circumspect care not only in your Inn, but on
the Road, if therefore you cannot avoid Traveling, and that with store of
money, the immergency of your business requiring it, undertake your journey in
the night, for Highway men think that none will be so mad to ride at that
unseasonable time, unless they are miserable poor, besides, it is dangerous for
them to be abroad for fear of suspicion, and that is not all neither, for how
can they see to take their best advantage in the dark, not knowing how many,
what men, and how armed, they assault; besides, should they gain the better of
it, the obscurity of the night gives them the advantage of dropping their Money
into a Ditch, or other place convenient.

Now to advise you for the best, at what time soever you ride, take notice that
your High-Pads do always keep their station upon your greatest and most beaten
Roads, whereby they have the advantage of picking and choosing; now if you would
be safe, make choice of such Roads which are less frequented.

If you ride several in company, shun that idle custom of busling up all
together, when you come near any place noted for robbing, for by this means you
are all caught, like a Covy in a Net, at once; for these Rogues divide
themselves, and make several stands, and by this means they may set upon you
before and behind; but if you ride about an hundred paces distant one from the
other, I Will warrant your safety; for they date not set upon a scattered
Company, for fear that some escaping the Country should be alaim'd, and so
endanger their immediate taking.

Now should you perceive them divide as well as you, and each drawing near him
he intends to set upon, you have then fair warning, and running will hardly
avail any thing; but fight like men, you have two to one the odds, though not
in numbers, yet in a good conscience; which they wanting, their own guilt and
fear fights against them, and disarms them: whilst thus you contend with them,
there is hopes some may come in to your rescue.

By the way let me tell you, I have known when we have been thus engaged, that
some have come up to us, whom we have persuaded to keep on their way, and not
meddle with what they were unconcerned with; at which these base Coxcombs (nay,
now I must call them unworthy Rascals) have quietly rid away, and lest those
men to our mercies, or rather to exercise our cruelties upon; whereas had they
sided with them, we must have fled before them; for though we had courage (it
may be enough) yet we durst not fight it out, when we meet with those that are
bold and stout; for in so doing we not only fight them, but the whole Country,

By the way let me discover an egregious fault in some men, who will not only
yield patiently to be robbed, but are content to let the Thieves go clearly off,
nay wish they may escape, so that the Country may lie liable to make good the
Robbery, if they take them not by an Hue and Cry; nay, such is the baseness of
their principles, that they commonly double the sum, knowing that the Hundred
will be willing to compound, and thus abuse the Thief and Country too.

But notwithstanding all these cautions, should it happen so that you are
surprised by these High-way-men, overmaster'd, and that you must yield, give
them fair words, and without a compulsive search, deliver freely some part of
your Money, with a wish that you had more at their service, and it may be they
will trouble themselves no farther with you; however, if they offer, show no
dislike, for if you do, it will but provoke them to the severity of a more
rigorous search, to the discovery of what you had most cunningly concealed.

Have a special care that you let them not perceive you eye them too much, it
being of a dangerous consequence, for by this means they either think you know
some of them, or are taking some remarkable signs and tokens how you may know
them another time, which may endanger your life.

After the Robbery committed, their usual Charge is, Not stir from the place
they put you in, till they have time enough to be gone a considerable distance;
and that if they find you offer to pursue them, they will swear a thousand
Oaths to be your death; and being desperate, for ought I know, they may be as
good as their words: therefore be not too hasty in the pursuit, least it being
discovered, the foremost dropping into a by-Lane, starts out upon you, siezeth
you again, and if you escape cutting, you shall not binding, and so may be
bound in a Ditch till some commiserating Passenger release you. Wherefore
follow after at a distance, till you can procure a Hue and Cry, which you must
direct not straight on, but cross the Country, which is a subtle practice, and
their constant custom; by this means they have the benefit of resting
themselves, and refreshing their Horses before the lazy Hue and Cry can
overtake them. If closely pursued by it, they will freequently squat like a
Hare, and let the Hue and Cry pass them, and then ride back again to the place
where the Robbery was committed.

Be sure in your pursuit to scour the next great right and left hand Road, and
if you cannot unkennel them that night, set Spies, and a thousand to one you
shall see them come riding by the next morning.

If the purchase be great they siezed upon, you may be then confident they will
that night repair to their General Rendezvous here in the City, which is their
great Azylum, and chiefest place of Refuge and Security. The largeness of the
City, and the little cognizance one takes of another therein, is the main
reason why so many Robberies are committed nigh London, and so few remotely
distant from it. Now since twenty or thirty miles about London is the Stage on
which these High-way-men act their parts, I shall discover when robbed how to
pursue them with Hue and Cry.

If you are set upon and robbed in the Eastern quarter, take not that Road in
which you were to London, nor raise the Country thereabout, for it is to no
purpose; but ride with all speed to Holbourn, Strand, St. Jameses, or
Westminster, and there search with all diligence. If you are robbed toward the
North, never search any place in the City, but make all convenient speed to the
Bank-side, Southwark, Lambeth, or Fox-hall; by thus planting themselves, they
know, or think at least, they are sufficiently secure, having the City between
them and you.

And now, e're I proceed, let me take notice of a great folly and abuse of the
Country men: When report is brought to a Justice of a Robbery done in such a
place, presently a Watch is ordered to stand at that place, at the charge of
the Country; is any one so senseless, to think those High-way-men will
voluntarily ride into the mouths of those who are appointed to apprehend them?
however, admit they should continue scouring that Road, the Watchmen are
constantly fixed at one place, so that but a little way out of their sight, the
High-way-man may do what he list, and meet with more Booties than if the Road
lay unwarded; for all Travelers will cover to ride that way in which is placed
a Watch; for who can imagine Thieves will be so bold as to rob near them? which
they do to choose; for well they know, that those Watchmen are silly old
decreeped men, and though a douzen of them, I have seen stand with Halberts in
their hands, yet have we robbed before their very faces, and they stood still
the while, not daring to oppose us in the least; it may be when we were gone
out of sight, they would make an Outcry, and pretend to pursue, though to no
purpose.

Once we resolved to set upon the Watch, which was done so effectually, that we
disarmed them; and having taken them aside out of the way, bound them; after
this we personated them in their places, and standing with our Brown bills, as
with authority, we stopped whom we pleased, and having Robbed them, bid them to be
guarded by the Country-watch, and to secure them, bound them in like manner.

It is now high time to inform the Innkeeper how he shall distinguish
High-way-men from honest Travelers; in the first place observe their curiosity
about their horses, in dressing and feeding them, next you will find them
asking of questions, as who owns that horse, and who the other, what their
Masters are, whither Traveling, and when will they set out; these are
infallible signs of a Highway-man; nor must I omit this remark, let the Hostler
poise their Cloak-bags, and he shall find them empty, which they carry only for
show, and not to burden their Horses.

Next, let the Chamberlain take notice, when he shows them to a Room, that they
will soon dismiss him, and after that, let him lissen a while, and he shall
hear the gingling of money, and if he can but get a peep-hole for his eyes, he
shall see them sharing their booty.

It will be very requisite to enquire severally each ones particular name, and
let your Servants do the like, by this means you find them tripping, for they
may easily forget a name they borrowed that very day.

At Supper time, let some one knock furiously and hastily at the Gate, then
mark them well, and you shall see them start, their countenances change, and
nothing but fear and amazement appearing in each face, by which you may
positively conclude them what you before did but imagine and suspect.

If in the day time they come into your Inn, you may guess what they are by
trifling away their time, and staying somewhat longer then is requisite for
baiting; you shall observe them sometimes looking out of the Window, sometimes
standing at the Gate, for no other end but to mark what Passengers Ride by; if
they perceive any person of Quality to Ride that way, or the Garb discovers any
thing of a Booty, you shall have them presently in all have, as alarmed to
Horse, mount presently, as it some dear Friend or near Relation was just Rid
by, whom they must endeavor to overtake.

At Night they will come dropping into an Inn severally, in divided companies,
thereby to cross the number in the Hue and Cry, and will, when met subtly,
take no notice of one another, nay, to blind the eyes of suspicion, they will
enquire of the Host, what Country Gentlemen their own Companions are, whether
he knows them or not, and if it be convenient to join in Company with them; if
you find they have no jealousy of them, they will as strangers complement one
another whilst any eyes are on them, but withdraw and watch them well, and you
shall find them fall into their usual familiarity, and will not only rejoice at
the success of their designs, but laugh at the credulity of their Landlord.

Much more might be written on this subject, but since it is impossible to
discover the whole Art and Mystery of the Highway trade, let this suffice, for
according to the Proverb, new Lords, new Laws; so all new Gangs have new
Orders, Plots and Designs, to Rob and Purloin from the honest Traveller.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, let me assure thee this is no fiction, but a true relation of Mr.
Jacksons life and conversation, Penned by his own hand, and delivered into mine
to be made public for his Countrymens good, in compensation of the many
injuries he has done them. The Introduction he writ whilst in Newgate, after
sentence of Condemnation, and desired me to Apologize for it, seaning he had
neither writ large enough of his true penitence, nor had laid down sufficient
dehortations from the commission of the like offenses; the disorder he was in,
lying under the horror of a speedy and more than common Execution, may plead
his excuse: the plainness of his Style may admit of this Plea, that he aimed at
(as he confessed to me) nothing but the good of his Countrymen, and that as he
had picked their Pockets, he thought it needless to tickle their ears with the
gilded straws of Rhetorical expressions. God I hope has forgiven him his sins,
and may we all amend by his Errors, for which he now hangs in Chains at
Hampstead, a sad and dreadful Spectacle to all Beholders, and hoping you will
pass by the faults of his Writing and the Press, I subscribe my self a
well-willer to all,

Samuel Swiftnicks.


