A LETTER FROM PARIS, GIVING An Account of the Horrid Design OF POISONING And
the REBELLION threatened in France.
The Prince of Conde's retiring from Court, in Discontent, to Languedoc; The
Imprisonment of Luxemburgh; And other TRANSACTIONS of the highest importance.
Sent from a French Chevalier, to a Friend in England.
4. Feb. 1679/80 DEAR SIR,
THe Devil that has for some years been so busy with you in England, has, it
seems, a mind to divert himself now for a while in this Kingdom; and indeed he
has good reason to afford us his Visits: for it is thought that never Nation did
better serve his Infernal Interests than we have done of late. Our Fashions and
our Faith, the one the Magazine of Vanity, the other the Quintessence of
Treachery, have been equally destructive to the Repose of Christendom. Like
Knights-Errant, we do our business as much by Love as Arms and our Pistoles
have been more useful than our Cannons It Is now a long time since we grasped at
universal Empire, and by the Imprudencies and Neglects of our Neighbors, have
bidden fair for it; which inevitably destroys and grubs up the Protestant
Religion throughout the World. What fatal and miserable Stu^idity would it be
then in all Princes and States of that Profession, if they should not speedily
and firmly unite to prevent their common Ruin! Nay, I will say more; it is the
true Interest of his Holiness himself, and the Roman Clergy, to curb the
growing grandeur of such an haughty Monarch. It Is not a Fable of St. Peter's
Delegated power that will keep him in awe, when Master of Europe, who long
since ruffled Old Infallibility, Hectored the Conclave, and made truckling Rome
Erect publicly to his glory, a Pillar of her own Ignomony. When once the Most
Christian becomes the Grand Seigniour, poor Odisehachi must be but his Curate,
and all the Scarlet College his humble Vassals.

Yet hitherto we have gone on and prospered; for we believe that what others
call violence, is but a just Precaution; that Conquerors ought to provide for
the future, by destroying whatever may hurt them: That we ought to acknowledge
no Law but the Sword; the Appetite of Governing, and the glory to be had of
Aggrandizing our selves at the Cost of our Neighbors. That Piety is not a
Quality for a Prince, and Pity a Cowardly Virtue, which overthrows a Crown,
whose best support we say is Fear, and Impiety its Foundation. That Power gives
Right; that Justice is a Phantasm, Reason a Chimaera, Marriage, and Vows at
Holy Altars, all mere Trifles. The Faith of Treaties an Illusion; Peace but a
Bait; Oaths rattles for sucking Politicians, a Trap to catch Cullies with, and
a Charm for Fools.

These are the Maxims of our Conduct; nor are we less Tyrannical at home, than
injurious abroad. With our Blood and Sweat, we at the same time increase our
Taskmasters pride and our own misery. In his Conquests we do not gain
Subjects, but more Companions of Slavery; and do but make our Chains more
glittering and strong, not at all lighter or more easy. Our Princes of the
Blood have been forced to truckle and be observant to the extremest degree of
Adulation. Our Ministers of State mere spunges, that first sucked up the vital
Spirits of the Commonalty, and then were squeezed to replenish with ill gotten
Prey the Royal Coffers. But above all, the poor Protestants, whom we nickname
Hugenotes, have endured with incredible patience, all kind of severities, had
any of them a Suit in Law, how just soever his Cause, it was thought Merit to
Cast him, merely for his Religion, without the least charge of Disloyalty or
Misbehaviour; they have been made incapable of any Office or Preferment; their
Academies destroyed, their Temples generally demolisht, and all their
Liberties, both as Men and Christians, though confirmed by solemn Edicts, and
repeated Vows, Invaded, Abridged, and Annihilated.

Yet notwithstanding all these Usurpations, we now begin to hope the day of our
Redemption from Slavery draws near, and that Providence will break those
Chains, which so long have been preparing for Christendom. Universal Monarchy
has for some Ages been a Stone, that has crushed to pieces all that have
attempted it: The Austrian Family were long lifting at it: But how strangely
were their Hopes defeated! And some such Catastrophe seems at present to
threaten all our Endeavors. Our Babel-buildersare like to be Confounded amongst
themselves. A most Hellish Device is lately Discovered of POISONING, wherein a
multitude of Persons of the Highest Quality, are found to be concerned. Not to
tire you with a List of LadiesNames, that are none of your Acquaintance, and
who have followed this horrid Trade for many Years, whereby Thousands in this
City have been made away; Let it suffice to tell you, that the famous
Luxemburg,under whom you did such signal Services, when lately he was General
of our Army in Flanders, is Charged as an Accomplice, and secured; many others
are fled, a great Number taken into Custody: Nor can any body here imagine,
where the Discovery of the late erected Chamber of Justice will end. This is
generally concluded, that Persons of their Quality would never engage in such a
matter, without some great Design, which is supposed to aim at no less than a
Revolution of Government. This fills our Councils with astonishment, and what
increases their Fears, is, that it is said, The Prince of Conde is retired in
discontent into Languedoc, where Thousands make their Applications to him, and
put him upon venturing once more at the old Game. So that it is believed, that
those mighty Forces, designed for the destruction of our Neighbors, may find
work in our own Bowels, such are our present Apprehensions; but for
particulars, it is neither easy nor safe to relate them. When Occurrences grow
more ripe and fit to be Communicated, you may expect further Intelligences. In
the mean time, may that Adorable Wisdom and Omnipotence, who brings Good out
of Evil, regulate all things so, as may make most for his own Glory, the
Preservation of his People, and the public Tranquillity of Europe; So prays,

PARIS, February 5. New Style, 1680. Sir, Your most humble Servant, T. de Hay.

FINIS.

