THE Floating Island: OR, A NEW DISCOVERY, RELATING The strange Adventure on a
late VOYAGE, FROM LAMBETHANA TO VILLA FRANCA, ALIAS RAMALLIA, To the Eastward
of Terra del Templo: By three SHIPS, Viz. The Pay-naught, The Excuse, The
Least-in-Sight,
Under the Conduct of Captain Robert Owe-much: Describing the Nature of the
Inhabitants, their Religion, Laws and Customs.

Published by Franck Careless, one of the Discoverers.

-- Longis erroribus actus
Qui mores hominum --
Printed in the Year 1673.

To the Reader.
READER.
LEt me beg thee not to cavil with the name of this ensuing Treatise, since the
nature of it is not to reflect on any particular person; and therefore it is
expected that you will be less offended at any thing herein contained, than at
the late Theatrical Entertainments, which are the severe Anatomies of these
licentious Times, and the harsh characters of the follies of some Janties, who
(one would think) should be deterred from the Commission of them, if for no
other reason than to avoid the hard censure of this over critical Age.

It is well observed by the Remarker of the Humors and Conversation of the
Town, that all are content to be taken in pieces at a Playhouse, and to be
exhibited for divertisement on the Stage. I hope these my Reflections may be
accompanied with as little exception, or displeasure My intent herein was not
grounded on private revenge, occasioned by any animosity to one or more
persons, but following the just Laws of Writing, I have insisted on those
errors and fopperies, which may convey insiruction and admonition to others. I
have only lasht the debauchery of a Fop-Jaunty Suburbian; it being indeed a
shame the City should be made by every Cap'ring Fancy, the continual Subject of
insufferable abuses.

I will step ere long into the Country, aed observe what vices are there most
predominant, whether they are communicated from us to them, or have their
derivation from their own sourses and Fontinels. I question whether there be
among them that Innocence in affairs and pastime, which is pretended; but that
under every Hedge and little Village, Vice and Vanity walk as bare faced as in
Holborn, Strand, etc. But I only promise you this Description with this
proviso, that you like my present Discovery. It was penned last long Vacation,
when all I had to do, was to hide my self from the Inquisition of my cruel
Creditors; for which purpose I lodged in Ram-alley for the benefit of the
Temple Walks, which I call the Rum Stampers under the Blowers, and for the
daily converse of such as were equally indigent and indebted as my self: In
which place to divert my self and boon associates, I formed this supposed
Voyage from Lambeth to the Bridge on one side, and back again the other,
recounting all remarkables between the two Shores; the one whereof (on the City
side) I call the Christian, on Southwark side the Turkish or Barbarian.

Toward Cape-verd (or Greens-wharse near Chairingcross) I have somewhat
sharply censured the idle humors of some; but I protest none but such who
deserve the severest censure: Men that are so only in appearance, and
Gentlemen by their gaudy apparel; who having little to live on but their
shifts, employ all the time they can spare from Drinking and Whoring, in
racking their Wits to indulge their sensuality by any means whatever. Coming to
Ramallia (which I call Villa Franca, because there is a place so named in the
Indies, which is a Sanctuary to all persons whatsoever) I say coming thither
under the pretense of describing the nature of the Inhabitants of that famous
Kingdom, (which is now different from what it was) I give an account of the
Condition of a poor Debtor, and what shifts he is forced to use to preserve his
Liberty.

As for their Laws (which I have comprehended in some few cases) I hope none
will cavil at, since they were never intended to be cavil'd with; and he that
shall put himself under the administration of them, shall (I hope) reap loud
laughter, instead of long vexation: in short, if this meets with a total
dislike, very shortly I shall endeavor to please you better,

Farewell.
THE New Discovery: OR, A VOYAGE FROM Lambethana to Villa Franca, alias
Ramallia.
THe Term being ended, and a long Vacation ensuing, a Council was held of
Indigent persons, and such who were both Indebted and Insolvent: wherein it was
debated what course might be the most expedient, for the present relief, and
future prevention of such insufferable mischiefs, which daily threatened the
utter ruin of the poor and distressed Society, called the Owe-much, or
Bankrupt.

Then did this Council of Safety sit, when the Scrivener at Temple Bar had no
other employment, but making of pens, writing of blank Bonds, or texting of
Bills for letting of Chambers in Chancery lane. The Vintners and Cooks were now
possessed with a humility more than usual; with the one you might drink, and with
the other eat, without the perpetual din of an ill tuned jarring Bell, or the
incessint hauling of a peek-wide mouth, half roasted with the scalding hot
dripping of its own greasy substance.

Now had the Hostlers of Holborn, and the Strand, more than ordinary care to
lay up their Guests Boots, not so much out of observance to their Masters (as
they call them) as out of fear of their slipping out of Town, without their
knowledge; for they well knew that a Country Attorney could no longer endure the
unwholsom air of an eight penny Ordinary: and now was the time when we (as well
as others) thought it fit to withdraw, or hide our selves from the horror of a
dreadful Judgment, and irremediless cruel Execution.

I Robert Owe much, by the unanimous voice of the whole Society, was elected
President of this Council, in that my name did so correspond with my debts;
they knowing I owed as much as the whole Company besides: the names of the
Persons then present, were Solomon Trust-all quondam Mercer. Oliver Pride
Draper. Giles Sweeting Confectioner. Luke Vander Goose Tailor. James Standish
Stationer. Tobias Bottom Weaver. William Whiting Colour-man. Timothy Mould
Button-seller John Bushel Meal-man. Jonathan Sawyer House-Carpenter. Samuel
Dash Vintner. Humfry Holland Linnen-Draper.

Various were our consultations for the general good, without any result, till
at length one James Standish, a man very fluid, and a notable Penman stood up;
and having before bound up his opinion in some studied expressions, unclasping
his thoughts he thus opened his meaning.

The Speech of James Standish Stationer, at a special Meeting of the Society of
Owe-much.
Friends and Brethren,
THe old saying, Solamen miseris Socios habuisse dolor pleads not greater
antiquity, than comfort for to be miserable alone is insufferable; our
affliction is so much the more extenuated, by how much others are interested
therein; now therefore in civil policy it concerns us to be so much the more
industrious, as we are become numerous above former Ages; and no endeavor can
be so beneficial, and honorable, than the enlarging of our Territory by
Discovery, and plantation in parts habitable and agreeable with our debitory
disposition, where we may disperse our Colonies with more convenience and
advantage, than at this present: for which purpose it will be very requisite,
that immediately two ships be fitted out, Viz. The Least in Sight, and the
Excuse, and that the Paynought (that approved, and well appointed Pinnace)
shall accompany them; and that the charge and command of them be committed and
confirmed on Robert Owe-much, who shall man them with persons best qualified in
the Art of Insolvency, the greater part whereof the said Robert has known, and
tried to be men of much Trust, being his own Creditors, and Creatures of his
own making, and that he requite some of them, by bestowing on them Employments
under his Command; for Example, let his Mercer be made Master of the Least in
Sight, and his Baker, Boat-Swain; as for his Vintner, because he bestowed many
a shot upon him in his prosperity, let him be made Master-Gunner in adversity;
and that he may make his Enemies to Smoke, let his Tobacco-man be
Gunner's-Mate; let his Tailor (having the best Stomach for action) be made
Steward and have charge of the Victual for the Voyage. I think a Purser we need
not, since it is held among us to be a very foolish thing to keep Accounts,
where there is no purpose of Payment.

This Speech was generally approved of, nemine contradicente; and thereupon
many hands were set at work for the fitting out these Ships for the Discovery.

The Winter Season being over, and the Spring advancing, we got all things in a
readiness; and on Monday, being the first of March (and S David's Day) the Wind
at West South-West, we Sailed fron Lambethana, keeping our Course East and by
North: we Sailed few Leagues, before the Weather grew hazie, at length the Air
became very thick and foggy, insomuch that the Pinnace lost sight of the
Admiral, and could not have recovered her, but for a Leek that was placed in
her Stern, in the place of the Lanthorn, by the sent whereof the Pinnace
recovered sight of her again by break of day the next morning.

The Second day the weather was very variable, and stormy; this day we met with
a Western Brigantine who kept us company in peaceful manner, till by an unhappy
accident, the Fleet had like to have been utterly ruined, and thus it was.

One of our Ships Crew was a Welch-man, who in honor of his Country and S.
David (whose Festival was the day before) told many wonderful, and incredible
things, in praise of his heroic Countrymen: but more especially he averred
that the Welsh (the ancient British Stock) were never conquered by the Romans;
it is true (said an unlucky Crack) but you may thank your policy for that; for
when Caesar had slain the major part of the flower of your youth, and still
pursuing his Conquests; and that you saw no remedy but that the rest of you
must likewise fall into his hands, ye then raised a long Bulwark, not so much
to oppose, as to surprise him, for ye took a vast number of your long bearded
Goats, and fastened them at a convenient distance, causing nothing to appear
above the Rampire, but their heads and beards, and then retired your selves
into the mountains; Caesar about to make an assault, was hindered by the dismal
cry of the poor Goats, one ecchoing to the other Baw, baw; whereupon that
valiant Commander withdrew, saying, let it suffice we have slain the Youth, and
let us not fall on their old doting Grandsires, who now cry to us for mercy:

This story did not create so great a laughter in us, as it did fury in the
Western Brigantines, who thinking we had cried baw in derision to them,
discharged upon us a broadside of stones, repeated so often, that had we not
been excellent Sailers, we had not escaped without considerable loss.

The third and fourth day we spoon'd onward for most advantage, and met with
several Fishermen, but not an Hollander among them, it seems they have other
fish to fry.

The fifth day about eight a Clock we met with a floating Hulk without a man in
her; we boarded her, but for our lives we could not rummage her Hold, as we
would; however we made a shift to carry off some Eels, but no other fish,
though there was variety and plenty, which fresh provision was a great
refreshment to our sickly Landmen. The Enemy from the Turkish shore perceiving
this, made out to us, but their Oars came short of our Sails.

The next morning about ten a clock, my Pylot (which formerly had been a
Spectacle-maker) descryed a Sail making toward us; coming up, we vilely
suspected him by his flag to be the Water Cannibal of Troy-novant.

Whereupon I called a Council aboard, to consider what was to be done in this
imminent extremity. Some advised, that it was most fit to make to Land, if any
knew where to touch without-hazard: Others of more undaunted Spirits, and
higher resolution, advised to run the risk of an engagement, and to draw our
number out of sight into the Hold, the more to encourage the Enemy to a nearer
approach; which opinion was generally approved of, and allowed.

Presently I gave order for the Sublimation of every Spark aboard, and for the
exhilerating their Spirits, that an extraordinary allowance be made instantly;
viz. That one ounce of Tobacco be divided between every two; and as for
liquors, let every man that has them drink what he please out of his own
Guarde Vines.

Looking about me, not without some fear, raised by the apprehensions of
danger, a Tailor (who had formerly been a Creature of mine) addressed himself to
me, whose Conscience being more tender than his Stomach, would needs be
resolved in two points concerning his Souls health, before the fight should
begin.

The first was, whether the Cause, and Quarrel they were to undertake, were
justifiable or not, since that he ever held Ludgate, more worthy than Newgate,
in diverse respects?

And the next was, whether (in case he should miscarry in the action) Limbus
Patrum and Infantum were not under his own Shop-board?

My Chaplain over-hearing the Tailors conscientious propositions (although he
was formerly a Vinegar man, yet still a fellow of excellent sharp apprehension)
and straining to answer these Scruples, he could not be heard for the
insufferable noise of a Confectioner, and Sugar-baker, who nothing but bawled
up and down (to the great disheartning of our men) Sweet meet must have sour
sauce, I see; whereupon to still their clamouring. I was forced to command
Bushel (the Meal-man) to sow them up in two sacks, and to let them breath no
otherwise, than through the holes the Rats had eaten, and so keep them
Prisoners till the Fight was ended.

The Enemy approaching nearer and nearer, every one applied himself to his
charge; and now just as the Master-Gunner was ready to let fly (I do not mean
for fear) we perceived our supposed Assailant to be a friend, coming from the
Canaries, and bound for Fox-hall; the men were all very jolly, though some of
them a little Sea-sick; they need not hang out any Colors, what was in their
Faces was sufficient to declare them what they were: whether they arrived safe
to their intended Port I know not, and indeed it is doubtful; for all of us
judged the Vessel to be over laden, of which they themselves were not
insensible, for we perceived them ever and anon to cast over board.

Leaving this Canary-man, we stood away still to the Eastward, but night coming
on, and our Pilot careless, it happened that the Excuse was Stranded: whereupon
the whole Fleet was forced to wait upon her till the next Tide, at the approach
of which she got off, with greater fear than damage.

Having again doubled the former allowance (for the better encouraging our men)
we sailed onwards, and in two Watches we discerned Firm land, lying upon the
Savoyans Eastward from Lambethana.

I immediately manned out my Longboat and sent it ashore, who in a little time
returned, and informed me, that they believed it a spacious Continent, fit for
Plantation at four degrees Westward from Terra del Templo.

Hereupon I resolved to take most of my men with me, and make a further
Discovery; I soon found the nature of the climate, it being very temperate, and
all accommodations most excellent, as long as we had Silver to barter for their
Commodities, of which they had plenty of all sorts.

The Inhabitants little differ from Europeans, and are (like them) very
covetous, being over greedy of Silver and Guinny Gold, for which we might
purchase any thing necessary, or desirable, either on the Coast, or brought
down from the Up land Countries.

The Palace is a very stately Fabric, and has been formerly employed for
charitable uses, and still serves as an excellent Refuge, and Sanctuary for
such, who are either forced by banishment, or voluntary Exile, to desert their
native or long loved habitations, where they may live obscurely, and yet take
their pleasure abroad in the Countries round about, by the means of those
several convenient Avenues belonging thereunto, viz. for sporting on a brave
River, the Stairs; for the Land, the Great Gate butting Norwards and separated
but by a very small Channel from Excestria. To the Eastward there is an outlet
which leads two ways, the one on the left into the Duchy, the other turning
a little on the right, into Somersetania; by the first you have a conveyance
into the Country called Maypolia, and so have the whole Country before you to
make choice of, by the last a safe passage by water, or a conduct short and
commodious through the Provinces of White-Hart into Hortensia (vulgarly called
Covent Garden) from whence you may travail through the whole Kingdom.

The Slavonian-women supplied us with Fish, and fruits of all sort, which they
bring down in abundance from the Vpland Countries; in so much that we could not
fear want of Provision, so long as we had Money; nor question our Security,
whilst we did put our selves under the Protection of this place, or of the
Duchy Liberty.

There have been some private assaults to infringe the ancient privileges
hereof, but the Enemy most commonly came off with considerable loss; some
hardly escaping with their Ears.

Some have endeavored to surprise the place by a Special Warrant and a Staff,
under the pretense of detecting Fellons, Traitors, etc. but when it has been
discovered, that this was only a stratagem to betray a poor Debtor, into the
merciless hands of his cruel Creditor, the Beacons have been instantly fired,
and by only saying, an Arrest; the whole Country has been alarmed, and the
treacherous underminers of this Countries ancient Privileges have been all
shamefully put to flight:

I cannot but commend the Inhabitants for so doing, they acting herein both
charitably and Christianly; although some conceited Zealots may accuse them of
Heathenism, for imitating Ethnic customs in the strange elevation of a
May Pole, which say they, is the same with those ancient Wooden Pyramids
dedicated to the honor of the Goddess Flora.

Here among the Savoyans we left, Humfrey Holland, Linen Draper, and Luke
Vander-Goose, Tailor, with several others, to Winter it, and the rest returned
aboard with me; Hereupon I presently ordered our Anchors to be weighed, having
before given notice, by loosing my fore-topsail, that I intended to depart
speedily: here we were in a little time under a fresh Gale of Wind, Steering
due East; but the wind chopped about in our teeth, which made us alter our course
for Cape-verd, or Greens Wharfe, where landing we forraged it quite through on
both sides.

This Country is very pleasant; the Inhabitants near the Shore, are a borish
clownish fort of people, having few sparks of Civility among them, and yet but
a little way from them, their Neighbors I may call them, are great Pretenders
to good breeding.

Now since I have touched in general on the Character of the Inhabitants, give
me leave to discourse in particular, their Humors, Natures, and Dispositions.

My stay being not long in this place, I shall lay down my observations as
brief as I can, and therefore the first thing I shall acquaint you with is, As
some of them are over affected with fashions, and fine clothes, so they are
extraordinary conceited of their own ingenuity. In the speculation of their own
good parts (as well Male, as Female) every thing appertaining to them, seems
far better then it is, like a Microscope multiplying any minute thing to forty
times its bigness; so opinionative they are, that where ever they appear, they
conceive all men's thoughts very idle, that are not busied about them: in short,
they know themselves so well, that they do not know themselves at all. They are
great pretenders to wit, nothing being now more a la mode, than to be accounted
ingenious, if for no other reason, than that this Age has outdone all former
Ages in producing a Society of Virtuosi; and yet for all this, they look not on
learning as the fuel to the fire of that wit they pretend to, and so having
but a little, spend upon the main stock, and in a little time become Bankrupts.

They are hugely addicted to quibbling, and will dart out on a sudden, that
which if taken, whilst warm, may be laughed at; but if suffered to cool, worth
nothing.

Some of them when they have arrived to the height of writing a Song, or Poem
(I speak of the Women, as well as the Men, for in this witty Age, women's wit
does pester too the Stage) I say if their fancy sore so high, as to be guilty
of a measured line, they never go without it, and in all Companies read it, as
if they were inspired or raptured; then rail at the ignorance and foppery of
some late ingenious drammatick Writers; and although they can give no reason
for their Censure, yet they think it commendable enough they have done it, and
thereby have added much to their own reputation.

I observed among these witty men, that nothing must stop a Jest when it is
coming, nor friend nor danger, but out it must, though their bloods follow
after. In short, they think their life is but to laugh, and I think to be
laughed at, being Wits in Jest, and Fools in Earnest.

Another sort there are, whose whole delight consists in Whoring, Drinking, and
Dancing: if any mischief escape these men, it is not their fault, for they laid
as fair for it as they could. They think that day misspent, in which they go
sober to bed; and if they have not made some new bawdy discovery that day, they
can give no account on it.

There is nothing that they hate more than a serious, or a melancholy thought,
and if at any time it seize them, it sends them to be drunk again, delighting
in no other company but Wine, Wenches, and Chyrurgeons.

Another sort of people I observed, whose soul and its faculties consisted in
rigging or dressing themselves to the best advantage; and that they might not
lose either the benefit of nature or their extraordinary labor, they omit no
opportunity to visit such public or private places, where a good shape and
habit is best shown: the pointing of their discourse is new studied Oaths,
being as curious of them as their fashion: their talk is generally of Ladies,
and such like pretty Toys, and do take a wonderful delight in repeating some
passages in Plays, which with a grace they utter, even to self-admiration.

I wonder these people are not deafned with the continual noise of Coaches, the
dead of night being not exempted from their confused rattling; since I have
read that the fall of Nile (called the Cataracts) deafens with its noise the
people seven miles round: these Coaches are almost as numerous as the people.
But they have another way of carriage called a Sedan, which I should highly
commend for its easiness, were I as Gouty and Pocky as their first Founders.

I will not detain you with more Characters, only I will tell you how
afrighted I was upon my first coming ashore, meeting with a thing in glorious
habit but with a face as black as Hell; I took her to be some She-Devil had
lost her infernal Sweetheart, and thought to have found him here in some
carnal disguise; had she cried bough as I came near her, she had undoubtedly
frightened my wits from making these discoveries; but let us leave her with a
soul as black within, as her face is without, shrouded by that Diabolical
invention the Vizard-mask, the absolute Pimp to her secret leacherous
contrivances.

Lastly you are to take notice, that this place (besides other goodly beasts of
all sorts) is famous for Hearts, whose horns are of the comliest branch and
spreading that can be; whose dimension and extension is unfathomable, so that
in memory of them, we agreed to call the lower part of this Country Hearts born
Alley.

To give this place its last encomium, let me tell you, that the constitution
of the Air agrees best with such that are in a single condition: the youth
here have an unlimited freedom, especially such who are known and tried to be
men of great natural parts, although they have but slender understandings:
whereby some of them can afford to spend five hundred pounds per Annum,
although their whole generation before them never saw so many shillings of
their own: and that their strength may be thoroughly discovered, and their
native vigor known before they are admitted as Menials for venerial Service,
some Chambermaid must take them to task, who shall make report what mere
Nature has performed, without the help of jellies, or any such like
provocations.

Likewise before they are admitted into this lulling, yet laboring employ,
Tobacco, and frequent Drunkenness is absolutely forbidden by their Mistresses,
they well knowing how much the one exhausts the radical moisture, and the other
weakens and debilitates the strongest constitution.

Men that are married live here very well too, provided they have obtained the
gift of seeing, and not seeing when they please; and such who give the greatest
freedom to their wives to be courted abroad, shall have at home the greater
in-some. This is held as a Maxim among them, the handsomer the wife, the
greater trade, and if she be a grain too light, with prudence and good
management, it will add weight to her husbands concerns, And therefore an
handsome woman standing at the door, will attract more Customers than a gaudy
gilded sign, fettered with a Tun of Iron, which cost the value of a rising
Scavenger's whole Estate.

But we have dwelt too long upon this subject, and in this place, and therefore
it is time to give you a farther account of our Voyage.

From Cape-Verd we sailed, keeping our Course due South, and about four days
after our departure, we made Land, but could not tell what part of the world it
belonged unto, at length we espied floating Timber, with deal boards piled on
the Bank-side, which made some of us conclude it was Norway; but that opinion
was soon blown away by the sight of a monsirous tall bulky thing, which seemed
to us to wave his hat about his head, and that way induce us to come ashore;
whilst from his guts proceeded a confused hideous noise, but from the found we
could not understand a word* the more we stared hereon, the more did our
admiration increase; fear made us stand at a distance, and yet we were so near
that we could look into his very entrals, his belly being wide open, and could
perceive a very strange motion within, whilst his arms were continually
agitated circularly, we knew not what to think, but at length it was agreed on
all hands, that this Country must be Denmark, and that this monstrous creature
was one of the Issue of the Giant Colbron, who there stood with his arms
abroad, bidding defiance to all that past that way.

Fear did so wing our flight, and the wind so largely contributed its
assistance, that in a little time we found our selves not in a condition to be
harmed or prejudiced by that Giganttick Scarecrow: had we had as much valor
as there was in Don-Quixot, one assault would have proved him a mere airy
flash, and could do nothing but cry, saw, saw.

We were no sooner freed from this sight, but we encountered another, which
appeared no less terrible than the former at first sight; but approaching
somewhat nearer, some of our men having seen it before, knew it to be a
floating Island, called the Summer Island, or Scoti Moria; it is an Island not
so great, but that in less than four and twenty hours we sailed it round; it is
much longer than it is broad, but how many leagues the length may be, I cannot
tell, for I took not its dimension: it lies in the midst of Golpho de
Thame-Isis: The Christian-shore lying to the Norward, and the Turkish-shore to
the Southward, bounded to the Eastward with Pont-Troynovant, but to the
Westward thereof, you may sail up the Streights till you go as far as
Maidenhead, and farther, crossing the Equinoctial-line.

In our circumferating this Floating Summer-Island, we took special notice of
its ingresses, but with our strictest indagation we could find but two, one
lying to the Southward, and the other to the Westward, for the more convenient
reception of the Christian and Barbarian Amazons, who in the Summer time
constantly repair thither, to meet with their Bully-Huffs and Hectors to
generate withal.

A Council was held to consult which Port was safest to land at; the one we
found guarded with Knights of the Blewapron, with Pet-guns mounted, and
charged, and their noses like Linstocks were ready to fire them; hereupon we
stood off, and made to the other Port, whereupon we espied a white Apron, as a
Flag of Truce, displaying it self over the belly of a delicate woman, who came
thither Procreandi causa; that color we looked on as the Emblem of Peace, and
thereupon hoisting out my Longboat, I selected some of my principal men
aboard, and went ashore, where I was received with all demonstrations of
Civility and Respect.

Their Language, I and my Company understood very well, for it was the Lingua
Franck which they spoke.

The greatest thing that I wondered at was, that instead of treading on the
surface of their Earth, we immediately entered into the bowels of their
Country; it somewhat startled us to think where we were going, and now I thought
of Aeneas his descent to Hell, and wished we might escape but half as well.

My Myrmidons followed me close at heels, but Oh how we shook when we heard the
Thunder from above, and we had lightning too before we went from thence.

I asked them the reason of this sudden thundering noise, hearing not the least
without? Sir, said one, The Naides are above playing at Nine-pins, and you may
make one if you please: I in modesty refused, as thinking my self unfit company
for Gods and Goddesses.

Looking about me I saw a lovely face, and every thing (to outward view)
thereunto corresponding, I presently imagined her one of the Cyprian Dames
waiting Gentlewoman, who had given her Lady the slip, to enjoy her greater
liberty and freedom; upon which suggestion I accosted her, and found her
pliable beyond expectation, and therefore gave her an invitation into my Tent.

I asked her diverse questions, amongst the rest, whether she were an Inhabitant
of this Isle? she answered no, but a Westmonasterian; the resolution of my
question made me more inquisitive than before, to know what this Monasteria
was, and where it lay: but according to the Custom of Lambethana, I thought it
civility first to drink, before we entered further into Discourse; whereupon I
called one of the baser sort of people to me, and bid him procure me some of
the best Liquors of their Country, if they would take Moneta Carolina in
Exchange; gladly, gladly, said this Scoti Morian, and in a trice brought me a
Liquor, that differed not at all in taste, from what is brewed at Lambethana,
and every whit as small: the Vice Roy of the Isle condescended so low, as to
bring me ( propria persona) a Bottle of Red stuff; when I tasted it, methought
I could have sworn it was Claret, that is flat: I bad him bring me some other
Wine, which he did, but I found it was a Spaniard racked to death.

I soon gathered from this pitiful pimping Vice Roy, that his whole Country
could not afford one drop of strong Liquor, but what was imported to him at
extraordinary rates, by Merchants of other Countries; nay, he had scarce any
Water in his whole Dominion, but what flowed about it; for which cause he had
concav'd his whole Isle, and turned it, as I may say, into a Cellar to contain
what comfortable Liquors, and other things should be brought him: What
Commodities he returns in exchange I know not; for I saw none, but what were
wrapped up in Silken petticoats, which like a Pig in a Poke you must buy, or not
at all.

Well the Inhabitants are a lazy sort of people, and not given to Tillage; and
yet sometimes they will plow with another man's Heifer.

They are to be commended for Lovers of Pasture, and yet you shall not see a
green spot in their whole Land, but what covers the belly of the Vice Roy's
Lady, or his Billiard-Table.

In short, they are a wicked people, delighting in, and living on the sins of
others; so lazy, that they will not work; their whole employment is drinking;
Tobacco serves to air them after a washing, and is their only breath and
breathing while.

The entertainment of the place I liked not, and therefore I resolved to hasten
from thence, only I first desired to be satisfied as to the Country aforesaid,
called Westmonasteria; whereupon I demanded of this Lady Errant an information
herein.

Sir, said she, It lies to the Westward of Pallatium Regale, which place is
too splendent for common eyes to behold, and too virtuous for vulgar breath to
profane.

This Westmonasteria (although the place of my nativity) I cannot describe
perfectly, only I can tell you, it pleads great antiquity, and is very famous
for a wonderful structure once called the Temple of Apoll, besides it is
beautified with the stately structures of many Noblemen.

The Gentry live in all manner of pleasure imaginable, but the Plebeians
delight is very uncertain, being always upon the extremes, having either too
much business to do, or too little.

For there are four Seasons of the Year, which are as so many Marts for the
Westmonasterians; the chiefest Commodity that then is sold there, is only
Words, only the Buyers and Sellers bestow their Money now and then in somewhat
that is more substantial, to keep out the wind.

These Seasons are called Terms, at which times there is great resort of people
coming from all parts of that great and glorious Kingdom, called formerly by
the name of Druina, of which Troynovant is the Metropolis.

These people repair to a great and famous structure, called Aula
Westmonasteriensis, and are distinguished by several names and titles: Their
habit is as strange as their Speech, and both concur to amuze, and amaze the
people.

They are very litigious, and never better pleased than in a hurly burly of
cavils and dissentions: ever more delighting to fish in troubled Waters.

One would think that there is a great analogy between the profession of these
men, and a Tailor; for they are excellent at making Suits, which some after
endeavoring to mend, mar them quite: some know how to begin a Suit, but are
ignorant how to finish it.

Or they may in some respect be compared to the Camelion, since no creature
lives more by the air than they; for as there are a sort of people (according
to report) which can sell a wind to a Sailer; so these men will not part with
their breath without a reward.

Having bauld themselves out of breath, and half swelter'd to death, some of
them withdraw into Hell, there to cool and refresh themselves; one would think
it a very improper place for that purpose, and yet it is true, where such good
entertainment is to be had, that this Hell has ever had a greater estimation
than its neighboring Heaven; I have been in 60th, and had rather eat
Barley-broath in the one, than drink Canary in the other.

She would have proceeded but that this Amazon was called away, and so we lost
the benefit of a further Discovery: having paid the Customs of this Floating
Summer-Island, we departed: I call it a Summer-Island, because it is never seen
in this Golpho de Thamisis in the Winter; for cold frosty weather will be the
ruin of it, and therefore as Swallows and Cuckoos are never seen in this
Country, but in Summer, so this Island always takes its choice of the Summer
season for its appearance.

And as some fishes retire into the Concaves of rocks, upon the approach of
cold weather, so this Scoti Moria absconds or hides it self within some narrow
gut of the Inland-Country, and crawls out again in fair and warm weather.

Not long after our departure, the Air serene and clear, and the wind at West,
we descried a Sail; hereupon I ordered the Decks to be cleared, and the
Hammocks to be cut down; and having quartered my men most advantagiously for
fight, we bore up to this supposed Man of War, and hailed her; at first they
returned us very rough language, but in fine, they told us they were a people
called Sanguinarii, and came from Holbornia, and were bound for Vrsina, called
by the Natives the Bear Garden, in Barbary.

Being desirous to make farther Discoveries, we agreed to bear this Ship
Company to this strange Land: by the way we asked them what they intended to do
with those Smithfieldian Lions they carried with them; they told us, that it
was customary for the Vice Roy of Vrsina frequently to issue out his
Proclamations, summoning, or inviting all strangers whatsoever to come freely
into his Territories, and there participate with him in such sports, as he has
appointed for the Recreation of the People.

This report encouraged us to proceed, and having a fair wind and a fresh gale,
we quickly arrived at our intended Port.

Landing, we forth with directed our course to the famous Vrsina, in our way we
overtook great droves of foreign Nations, resorting to this place to act their
parts with Staff and Tail; here were the Barriers of Holbornia, and Chapel
Blanck; the Sanguinaries of the Forum near Nova Janua (by some called the Whit)
and of the Forum near Via Lactea, commonly called Milk-street: hither also
repaired the People of Cheap Orient, as also the Smithfieldians, and
Fieldlanians, with Ruffins, and Ragga-Muffins, all which, or most, are subjects
unto a Slavenian King, called Brute.

We had not traveled far, before we espied a Larg Flag to give notice to
strangers, where the Games were to be celebrated; coming to the Gates of
Vrsina, we could not get entrance, till we had paid the Tribute the Vice Roy
was accustomed to demand.

It seems this Vice Roy has little other revenue, than what comes in by this
Tax or Tribute; and therefore, not so much for sport, as profit, he often
publishes his Proclamations to congregate the People, and so concur with him
in his Bestial Entertainments.

Before the Sport begins, the Vice Roy treats at their own charge, whosoever
will come into his Cellar, where the charge and shot of five shillings is as
quickly dispatched, as the discharge of a Pistol.

The People being all placed in this Amphitheatre, as many almost, and as
strange Beasts are let out promiscuously, as were formerly in the Ark. There
was a great and strong beast called by the name of one of the Signs of the
Zodiac, Taurus; a creature far more terrible than the Colchester Bull of old:
for as he stately walked defying all opponents with his horns, so on a sudden
came an cruption of fire from his side, with a report, as if his Ribs had been
converted into Carbines: Phalaris his Bull was never half so hot as this
appeared, to all the Spectators admiration; at the same time two Creatures
(which borrowed their names from two Constellations, Vrsa Major, and Vrsa
Minor) to avoid the fire, ran full drive at two Cornucopians (vulgarly Staggs)
who endeavoring to shun by flight the approaching danger of these ill shapen,
terrible Creatures, had like to have dismounted Monsieur Simea, that little
dapper Gentleman, who was carelessly acting his Buffoonries in this
Amphitheatre; his Horse having more understanding than himself (and being very
apprehensive of the danger) did presently rise before, and yerking out his
hinder legs to keep off the Cornucopians from goring his sides, gave poor Tom
Dove such a bang on the Ribs, that he roared like the Lions in the Tower: this
noise alarmed the Canes and Caniculi, (a sort of dogs whose names I cannot well
remember) who came running in, and without asking what is the matter, fell in
tooth and nail; Luponi seeing this, was at his wits ends, not knowing what to
do, or whither to fly; but Vulpone being the craftier of the two, skulkt into a
by Corner, keeping himself out of harms way, nor could any means remove him
from his resolved Station. The Vrsinians, with Bear-herds and others, did now
begin to bestir themselves, being as much busied as their Beasts, and every
whit in as stinking a condition: after a great Cry and little Wool, with a
great noise to little purpose, the Company was dismissed, and every man had
permission to repair to his own Country, excepting only such as were reserved
for a Prey, for the great White Lion, belonging to the King of Marshelsia; the
cruelty of which Tyrant we had sufficiently heard of, which made us with
greater speed to remove out of his Territories: whereupon we all went on board,
not missing a man, and standing away to the Eastward, we sailed so far, till we
came to a Ne plus ultra, and by the great fall and hideous noise of the Waters,
we concluded we were arrived near that Gulf, which Sir Francis Drake shot,
when he went to visit the Antipodes: as for my part I had not finished my
business in this World, and till that was done, I had no mind to visit another.

All under my command were of the same opinion, and therefore we resolved to
return; and to favor our design, the Wind veerd about to South and by East;
hereupon we shaped our course Norwards, without discovering any thing
remarkable for a great while, only we met with by the way some Turks coming
from Jetland, and bound for Cole-Harbour.

The nineteenth of June we met with several Men-Mermaids, swiming and sporting
up and down: We were informed that they are Amphibii, and will live both on the
land, and in the Water.

Here we only saw the Males of these Sea-wonders, but up higher in the Straits
mouth, there are Female Mermaids, which take their opportunities to delight
themselves in swiming, but are mighty shie, and therefore choose the night for
their pastime.

Whilst I was in a serious contemplation of these Creatures, one of our men
cried out, Land, at which we were all over joy'd: and that we might be
certainly assured hereof, our Pilot (the aforesaid Spectacle-maker) drew out
his Perspective, with which he confirmed our joys.

Hereupon we directed our course to this Land, and in three Watches we came to
an Anchor in White-Fryars Bay, and soon after landed, and were very civily
received by the Inhabitants, who attended us on the shore.

We asked them the name of the Country, who told us that formerly it had been
called Lupania, or by some Vulpinia, but its later and truest appellation was
Villa Franca, or Ramallia; but the Dutchmen call it Ramy-kins.

The grumbling of our dissatisfied guts, would not permit us to ask more
questions, and indeed if we had, we should not have been heard for their
croaking noise; which the Inhabitants understanding without more ceremony
conducted us to their Metropolis or chief City, where by the Governor and his
Assistants, we were very well entertained.

The next day we were shown the Antiquities, Curiosisities, and strength of
this City.

And now give me leave to acquaint you with my Observations. Villa Franca, or
Ramallia, lies contiguous to Terra del Templo, the Fleta lying at some
distance thereof to the North-East: In the Description of this Ramallia, I must
look into Terra del Templo, but shall not pry into its Court, nor any the
standing houses, the Housekeepers lodging nor into the menial precincts of the
Inns of Court, farther, than they stand for Refuge and Relief of the
neighboring Privileges about them.

And indeed (since the general purgation by fire) the first, and chiefest of
all, which for advantage of ground; for fortifications, for Water works,
Posterns, Passages, Supplies, and provisions by land, or otherwise, is that so
far famed and so fitly named Ramallia: In it are several Garrisons of old
Soldiers, every one of the which is able to lead a whole Army of Younger
Debtors.

They call their Muster-role in the Round Church, which might more properly be
called their Corpse du Guard; then they draw them out into the Cloisters, and
either exercise them there, or in the Garden, which is an excellent Military
Spot for that purpose; but under the Blowers in the Rum Stampers (called the
Kings Bench walks) they pitch their set Battles, where every evening that
ground (which was listed in, and levelled for their use) is filled with men of
desperate or undaunted resolution.

The first work in Ramallia, is raised and contrived in the form of a Ram;
there is no other reason I can render for it, but that Rams were of great use
in the Jewish Discipline, for Batteries, as you may read in Josephus his
History more at large.

This work is of reasonable strength; in former times it had a watch Tower in
the similitude of a Cobblers shop adjoining, from whence all the forces about
are called together, upon the least approach of the Enemy.

There is another, called the Maidenhead, and is impregnable, where the Enemy
dares not come within shot, and is the nearest to the confines of Terra del
Templo.

There are other pretty contrived Platforms, as Test Royal, the Falcon, Mitre,
etc. and these in the fashion and form of Cook-shops; where if a Setter or Spy
chance to peep in at them (though very dark) they will make him pay for the
roast, before he depart.

To this Ramallia, or Ramy-kins, belongs a very great Fleet, consisting of many
Sail, well manned, and are a great preservation to the Ramy-kins.

This place, according to the late Geographieal Map, as well as the report of
ancient Writers, cannot possibly be so besieged, but that they within may go in
and out at their pleasure, without impeachment; for at the Middle Temple Gate,
they issue in spite of the Devil; at the Inner Temple Gate, they fear no
colors in the Rainbow; and at the Postern of the Ramy-kins, in case they
cannot make over to Fetter-lane, but discover Ambuscado's, they need only draw
their bodies within guard of Pike, turn faces about, and retreat through the
Mitre.

Now admit they stand for Rio del Plata (commonly called Fleet street) and be
so intercepted that they cannot recover the Ramy-kins, all that is required in
that case, is but to mend their March; fall downward, as if they gave way,
suddenly discharge their right hand file, and fall easily into Sergeants Inn;
where by ancient Treaty had between this famous place, and Terra del Templo, it
was agreed, That the parties in such distress might (paying a small Fee) have
convoy and conveyance without the re-hazzard of any of their persons.

If at any time they had a mind to Forage, they are no sooner out of the
Middle Temple Gate, but there is a threefold way to defend them; the Bell-Inn,
the Bar Gate, and Shire-lane. The passage through the Rum Stampers under the
Blowers, is a most excellent safe way for close contriving and retriving:
neither is the Gardners Wharsage (as the Tide may serve) any ways
inconsiderable.

To speak the truth, the nature of Ramallia is much altered in few years,
neither is the place so much frequented as formerly by Foreigners for Refuge,
the Inhabitants slighting or being careless in the preservation of their
ancient Privileges.

This place in former time was very populous, in such sort, that they were
forced to send their people abroad into Foreign Plantations, of which they
had, and have still some very considerable, for Example, Milford-lane, Fulwoods
Rents, Baldwins-Garden, Great St. Bartholomews, the Friars, Mountague-clese,
with diverse others; I shall thus run them over, as I have named them.

Milford-lane was at first taken by indigent Officers and their Companies, who
coming hither and liking the situation, did there erect diverse works, both to
the Land and Water side, for their security.

As they came in by conquest, so they hold it by the sword, and not
withstanding their title has been much disputed heretofore, yet they have now
commuted the matter, proved Plantation, and have withal reduced it to a most
absolute Hance and free Town of it self, without dependency.

The chiefest benefit they have for securing their persons, is by Water, for to
the land there is little safety, when they are once without their works.

Fulwoods Rents I could never well approve of for a place of Refuge, it lies so
on the Main Continent, and therefore requires the stricter watch, and yet with
the greatest care cannot lie safe.

At the upper end of these Rents, and at the very Portall of Purpool Palace
westward, was a most excellent piece of work begun, which had it not been
interrupted by those that Played upon it from Above; questionless it had been
the strongest and surest Hold that ever was raised within the Continent for
this purpose.

The Back-gate into Graies-Inn lane, with the benefit of Bauldwins Gardens is
of excellent use; but the passages through certain Inns on the Field-side, are
not attempted without hazard, by reason of the straggling Troops of the Enemy,
who lie Purdue in every Alehouse thereabouts.

The safest way of Sally, is that through the Walks, from whence the Red-Lyon
in Graies-Inn-lane receives them with good quartering, and passes them through
the back way into the Main Land.

Bauldwins Gardens is a Fortress of considerable strength, being much
embellisht of late, and the Pavement near the Battlements is renewed, so that
the Defendants may march much more commodiously to the Breast-works; the
Canniballs or Tenter-hooks have made several attempts to storm this Fortress,
but have commonly come off with considerable loss, and though notable Shavers
have not come off so trimly, but that they were forced to make their escape
through the Bog-house.

There was a famous Citadel belonging to the Ramy-kins, but long since
surprised and taken in by the Enemy, it still retains the name of Great St.
Bartholomews, upon whose Platform a whole Army of Borrowers and Book-men might
have been mustred and drawn out in length, or into what form or figure it had
pleased them to cast themselves.

What works, yea what variety of Art and Workmanship was within it? What an
excellent Half Moon was there cast up without it, for defense to the Eastward?
What excellent Sconces, in the fashion of Tobacco-shops and Alehouses in all
parts of it.

But alas these are demolisht, for the most part, the old Soldiers discharged,
and all delivered up into the hand of the Enemy upon composition.

The frequent assaults that have been made upon St. John of Jerusalem, have
rendered the place incapable of holding out longer, so that the band of
Borrowers there billeted are disbanded and dismissed.

The Friars Augustine and Cruciate, Black, White and Gray, had all their Cowls
pulled over their heads, and were for the most part led into the City captive,
where they remain to this day.

It is believed by most of the Swordmen thereunto belonging, that these places
had never been lost, had they not suffered those of the freedom to dwell among
them, who increased and multiplied after that wonderful manner, that by their
general planting, they supplanted the Nobility and Gentry which upheld their
Liberties, and in the end engrossed all the power of Office, Trust and
Authority into their hands, and thereby did set open the Gates to let the
Military men of the Mace to enter and surprise all.

The Commanders of the City were only content upon Treaty, to article and agree
with those of the Blackfriars, that not withstanding they so entered upon
Conquest, yet the old Companions, especially the English Feather makers, the
Scotch Tailors, and the French Shoo-makers, with some Foreign Forces, should
enjoy their ancient privileges without molestation or interruption, or any
other that will manfully fight for their ancient rights and customs.

To the Northward of the Blackfriars, lies a very strong and formidable
Citadel belonging to the Enemy, standing on the brow of an Hill, which scours
all the whole Country about.

This Citadel is guarded like Marselles wi^h Bloodhounds, who almost daily
bring in a great number of Prisoners upon horses, called Duce facias's.

This place is so remarkable I cannot pass it by without a small description.

It is much like the Apples of Sodom, better for sight without than in; Its
who^e prospect from within, are Iron grates, where through every Transen, the
forlorn Captives may take a view of the Iron Age; there is one single entrance,
which like Hells Gate, lets many in, but few out, turn once the Ward -- Et
vestigia nulla retrorsum. The Cimmerians in their dwellings resemble these in
their lodgings, only their lights are different; those receive some scattered
beamlings by their Mountain Crannies; these by their disconsolate loopholes:

Yet from above, the Inhabitants may take a view of all those places which
club'd to their restraint: and be reminded of the loss of time which brought
them thither. The Governor here of is careless whence they come, but
infinitely cautious how they go away; and if they go away without his favor,
they are in great danger to break their necks for their labor.

This place holds as much as the world; all its inhabitants are either good or
bad; here is a good Prisoner, and he makes contemplation his refection; nothing
can confine him, because he finds nothing fit to entertain him which Earth can
afford him: here is a fat sensual Prisoner, who is content with any place that
may belul his clowdy understanding in a careless sleep, freedom and bondage are
indifferently equal to his fruitless pilgrimage; here is the lean Prisoner, who
one would think had procured such a divorce from his flesh, as if he had only
entered into covenant with his spirit; whose weak exhausted feature proceeding
from the defective reversions of a trencher, merits pity, bearing the
Characters of his renury in the dying colors of his Physiognomy. To be out at
Elbows here is to be in fashion, it being a great indecorum not to be
threadbare.

Every man shows here like so many wracks on the Sea, here the ribs of five
hundred pound, here the relick of a shop well furnished, and a good portion
with his Wife. The Company one with the other, is but a vying of complaints,
and the causes they have to rail at fortune and fool themselves, and there is a
great deal of good fellowship in this. The mirth of this place is but feigned,
where over a large dose they endeavor to keep themselves from themselves, and
so drown the torment of thinking what they have been. They huddle up their
lives as a thing of no use, and wear it out like an old suit, the faster the
better; and he that deceives the time best, best spends it.

In the next place, I should speak some what of Mountagues close, but that I
think it does not properly belong to the Ramy-kins, and therefore I shall
desist, and give you an account what the nature and disposition of these people
are which appertain to Ramallia, or the Ramy-kins, with the Territories
thereunto belonging, as also what those people are that fight against them.

The manners and dispositions of the Ramallians, with their Religion, Laws, and
Customs.
THey are a wandering sort of people who like the Tartars, never abide long in a
place, but remove often, carrying all that they have about them.

They are very fearful and cautelous, and dangerous to be dealt withal; and
you cannot affront them worse, than to bring any Mace by way of barter, for
they hate it worse than a Jew Swines flesh.

You may know them from any other people by these marks following.

If any of them have occasion to walk into the Imperial City, to be sure at the
lanes end he looks behind him, and after he has turned out of sight he mends
his pace in an extraordinary degree of footmanship, till he has gained some
ground of the followers; and then he makes another stand, to take notice
whether any of them have arrived thither with more than ordinary speed, or
precipitate himself at the coming about at the Lanes end, which he knows to be
the certain sign of the Enemies besetting him.

He loves variety of apparel, and hates (if he have it) to be known long in a
Suit; ask him the question, and he will give you an account of all the Taverns
with back-doors, especially such which lead to the water side; and envies the
increase of the Moon more then the decrease of his Fortunes.

He is a great enemy to idleness, for he loves not to see one leaning on a
Stall, or looking about him, and cannot endure whistling after Candle light.

They may be paralel'd with the Jews, who are a mixed people born in several
places, yet coming from one stock, and are as much Inhdels occasioned by the
Infidelity of others.

They pray not in common form, but that the Commons may meet in form asoresaid;
and no sin sticks so close to their Consciences, as that they ever paid any
thing to their Creditors in part.

As for their Religion I can speak little of it; only this, they believe
liberty to be Heaven, Money the Guardian Angel that conducts them thither: They
hold there is a local Hell, which is placed in the Center of a Prison, and
their Creditors the Devils which torment them; they believe there are several
Purgatories, the principal whereof do lie in Woodstreet and in Grocers Alley,
where Paying instead of Praying gives deliverance.

And now it is high time to relate who are the Enemies to these Ramy-kins or
Ramallians, who implacably assault them upon all occasions.

Within London there are two Regiments of Macemen, the one is encamped in the
Poultry, the other in Woodstreet; at both which places there are great numbers
attending their Colors, where they are ever ready to sally upon the Alarm or
signal given; others of them guard their Colonels person by turns; the rest are
appointed and exposed as follows.

Some of the best able and most trusty of the Cavalry (as their service
requires, and especially in Term time) are planted at Test Royal, near
Chancery lane end, to make good that place, and to cut off such as issue out of
the works on the other side, or come down from other parts to put themselves
under the protection of Terra del Templo, and the places thereunto nearly
adjacent.

Of these Chancery-lane-end men, (if the design do deserve it) some two or
three of them are drawn out to defeat the passage between the Middle Temple and
Bell yard, or the Bar-gate, but this is upon especial occasion, and therefore
seldom attempted, but when they have intelligence of some extraordinary booty
coming that way.

Others of them are quartered in Smithfield, where every Monday, Wednesday and
Friday they stand charged and cockt, ready to give fire at every poor Butcher
in the Graziers quarrels; and these are of their Infantry.

Others are on every Market day commanded for Leaden Hall, where they serve one
day under the Tanner against the Shoo-maker, another day under the Butcher
against the Tanner, and sometimes the Scrivener against both.

Others are appointed to several other Markets, where rather than not be
employed in service, they will bear arms against the very Butter-wives (enough
to make their very hearts to melt with the very thought on it) who wont be
satisfied without a greasing in the fist.

The eldest sort of them, such as hold charge rather for their advice than
ability, are laid at the Exchange, where though the service be daily, and the
Nations against whom they serve are a stubborn stomachful people, meeting ever
at dinner and supper time, yet the danger is but small, in regard they have the
Country round about to befriend them.

The only Desperveio's among them are severally appointed to the several Gates,
where they secure and keep clear the passage to the Bars being the utmost
extent of their works.

For stratagems of War they are most excellent; to gain a Conquest by surprise,
they sometimes wear a Porters Frock, and with a pretended Letter effect their
purpose.

A Lawyers or a Parsons Gown is sometimes of singular use, (lates quod non
patet.)

The habit of a Country Bumpkin sometimes will not do amiss, especially if
booted and with dirt bedaubed; they have a thousand tricks besides, but so
cunningly intricate, that I cannot describe them.

It may be expected that I should say something of the Discipline of the
Bailiffs, but to say the truth, I hold them not worthy to be discoursed of, nor
to be ranked with men of the Mace, and therefore, by my good will, I will have
nothing to do with them at any hand.

It is time to return to Ramallia, and give you a further account of that
place; I have already discourst the nature of the Climate and the people, with
a geographical description of that Country and the Plantations thereunto
belonging, not omitting their strength within themselves, and the form of their
Adversaries without; the next thing I shall treat of is the several Schools of
Learning contained herein, as also an account of their Laws and Customs.

As there are several Schools, so there are several Arts and Sciences studied.

Some moody Souls there are here, who will drink till they are Maudling drunk,
and then weep their Liquor out as fast as they drink it, these men are said to
study Hydromancy.

He that walks up and down a room smoking whilst the rest of the Company is
sitting, is styled a Peripatetick.

He that prattles perpetually, interlining every sentence with a causless
misbecomming laughter, is a Naturalist.

He that in his Cups falls into theological disputes, or builds Castles in the
Air, studieth Metaphysics.

He that cannot drink a little extraordinary, but presently vomits to ease
himself and offend the Company, is a young Practitioner in Physic.

He that boasts of his Travels, and impudently professes to have been in
places he never saw but in a Map, is called a Cosmographer.

He that has attained to the Art of Wheedling, and can by a word or two wind
himself into credit among strangers (for he that knows him will not trust him
for a sarthing) this man is ftiled a Rhetorician.

He that by the overflowing of his Cups perpetually sings tunes a la mode, and
so saves his reckoning, is one of the Quire, or a Musician.

He that can so insinuate or wriggle himself into the affection of some wealthy
Maid, Wise, or Widow, as to have his necessities supplied from time to time by
a liberal and generous contribution, is a perfect Logician, having gotten
Piscator in Ramum by heart.

He that by specious pretenses and subtle persuasions has gotten largely into
a Vintners score, and for some special kindnesses has borrowed so much money
of his wise to cancel the debt, without the least mistrust of an overflowing
familiarity, is a Merchant Adventurer, and a singular good Accountant.

He that falls down on his back with a Pipe of Tobacco in his Mouth, fast
asleep, is a proficient in Astronomy.

Lastly, He that reels in the streets, as if they were too narrow to contein
him, is a Geometrician.

Their Military School.
THere is one very famous Military School which is held in great estimation, in
that it brings the Students to a great proficiency in a very little time, and
thus the Students therein concerned are rankt according to their Qualifications.

He that fl^ngs a bottle down stairs, to no other intent than to double the
Files, and inflame himself as well as the reckoning, is styled Marshal of the
Field.

He that found out that crafty knack of calling for a Gill of Canary, and
thereby meant a Pint, and so an half Pint a Quart, by which the intemperance of
a compacted jovial Crew was muffled up from the knowledge of their serious
Relations, I say this man they call Master of the Ordnance.

He that runs all the Town over having no other bufiness than to find out so
much Liquor as will send him drunk to bed, is called Scout-Master-General.

He that drinks three Glasses in a hand, is Master-Gunner.

He that in a hot dispute of headstrong resolute Bacchanalians gets first drunk
in the Society, is made Captain of a foot company, and he that is last drunk is
Lieutenant.

He that is quarrelsome in his Liquor, and upon the least occasion delivers his
box about, is Marshal of the Regiment.

He that will not fight upon just occasion given, but turns his revenge upon
the Innocent Drawer, is a Drum Major, but he that draws upon every body is a
Sergeant.

He whose indigency makes a mere hanger on, and being a Low Country Soldier, is
made Gentleman of the Pikes.

He that makes two Pence serve for his expense in company, though the stay be
very long, is Lanspresado, or Powder-Monkey.

He that will not let any small trifling thing escape his hands, but instantly
secures them, as Knives, Handkerchiefs, Gloves, etc. is termed a Suttler.

He that will drink eight and forty hours without sleep, or if he should chance
to catch a nap, he lies rough, this man is called an old Soldier.

Their Court of Admiralty or Navy. Office.
HE that bears briskly up in the turbulent waves of an Ocean of Liquor, is
Master or Pilot of a Ship.

He that spills his Liquor on the table, and then leans and lolls his elbows in
it, is Swabber.

He that will never let the glass stand still; but when it lies at his
Neighbors door, out of a covetous principle, steals it from him, is a Dutch
Caper, or Pirate.

He that is suddenly taken with the hickup, is Gunners-Mate; He that is
perpetually smoking, Cook; and he that belcheth or breaks wind backwards, is
Trumpeter.

In what manner the Inhabitants hold their Lands.
WE have already shown you what kind of Philosophy and Soldiery is professed and
practiced in Ramallia; we shall describe next, how the Inhabitants hold their
Lands.

Imprimis, He that by impertinent foolish discourse or apish gesture makes
himself a laughing stock to the whole Company, is Tenant in Fee-simple.

He that watches all opportunities to kiss his Landlady, her Daughter, or her
Maid, so that he stick to one only, is Tenant in Tail special.

He that kisseth all that come nigh him without distinction of persons, is
Tenant in Tail general.

He that is half Seas over ( i. e. three quarters drunk) yet will run madding
after Mutton, without the consideration of its being sound or rotten, is Tenant
in Tail, after possibility of Issue extinct.

He whose head is lop heavy by too large a Grace-cup, and takes a nap, is
Tenant by the Courtesy of England.

If a parcel of merry Wives frequently meet at a Tavern or elsewhere to drowned
the troublesome thoughts of having pevish aged impotent husbands, they are
Tenants in Dowr.

He that has heels much lighter than his head, holds in Soccage; and he that
has an head much lighter than his heels, holds in Capite.

He that drinks with his hat off, Tenders in homage; if on the knee besides,
does his fealty.

He whose Wife will not suffer him to be drunk, unless she may be drunk with
him, either in the same company or elsewhere, is a Freeholder

He that sneakingly capitulates about the reckoning, till some franck generous
soul has discharged it, is a poor Copyholder.

Lastly, That mean spirited thing which suffers it self to be dragged home by
his Wife from the Alehouse, with railing reproachful speeches, is Tenant at
will, and deserves to be kick^d over his own Threshold.

I might enlarge my self upon this subject: let this suffice for any rational
man to guess at the rest. I shall in the next place tell you what are the
qualifications of their principal Officers.

The Principal Officers of Ramallia, and their Qualifications.
AS Arts and Sciences are not attained unto, but with great labor and study,
so high Titles are not commonly obtained without singular worth: but in this
sensual drunken Country the worst of men have the best preferment; for be that
drinks much and talks little, is a Judge.

He that will not drink an health by any means, and yet will make an hard shift
but will go to bed intoxicated, is a Justice of Peace.

He that continually clacks with his Tougue, so that no other talk can be
heard, is a Barrester.

He that forcibly puts his friend or acquaintance into the Tavern or Alehouse,
is a Counter Sergeant.

He that being proud of his parts, and very opinionative, will engross all the
discourse to himself, is Fore man of the July.

He that bawls and wrangles in his liquor, is Crier of the Court.

He that drinks in hugger mugger, is a Bencher.

He that is lost in his own argument, is a Mooter.

He that scorns to baulk his Liquor, is a hopeful young Student.

He that takes the tale out of another man's mouth, is a Public Notary.

He that talks he knows not what, a Solicitor.

He that is tediously long in telling his own stories, is a Register; and he
that is ever kind and complemental in his Liquor, is a Civilian.

Be pleased to take notice, That he who calls his Landlady Whore, puts in his
Declaration; he that is melancholy or sottishly drunk is said to demur upon the
Plantiff; he that pays the whole reckoning suffering none else to pay a
farthing, Pronounces Judgment; he that sumbleth in his pocket till the
reckoning be paid, is quit by Proclamation, and he that gives his Landlord a
bill Obligatory, under hand and Seal to stop his mouth for the present, is
saved by his Clergy.

Special Cases in the Law of Ramallia, as they have been argued privately,
between Mr. Simon Spend-all, Son to Sir Ferdinando Sackbut; and Philip Philpot,
Son and Heir to Giles Spiggot.
The first Case.
If a Debtor at any time be frighted by a Capias, or any other Writ, and he fly
for safety, it shall be free for him to enter forceably into the next Tenement
adjacent, without trespassing, especially if the Door or Window be checquered
with blew or red, and all because when the Landlord demanded Quo Jure, or by
what right this Entrance was made, it was answered Liberate probanda; in this
Case the Landlord shall by a Dedimus potestatem, give him entertainment if the
Defendant please usque diem clausit extremum, after the expiration of which
time the Defendant paying the Fees of the House, shall remove himself by virtue
of a Habeas Corpus where he list, but in default of payment, the Landlord may
stop him by a Writ, called a Ne Exeat Regnum, provided the Defendants heels
prevent not the Attachment.

The second Case.
If three Gentlemen, boon Associats and true Topers, purchase twenty bottles of
Canary to themselves and the remainder over in Fee to their servants; if these
men grow intokicated ( Anglice drunk)before their Masters without issue, the
remainder reverts ( i.e. returns) as Escheat to the Donor, and the surviving
Purchaser (his fellows being defunct to all out ward appearance)goes away with
the whole, which he may alienate to the next commer in, or to whom he pleases,
non obstante the Statute of Alienation.

The third Case.
If there be two Brethren, the one whereof (the elder) is seized of a Noble in
Credit, and shall be made dead drunk, the younger Brother may enter as the next
Heir upon the Noble in Demesne, and presently convey it over in Fee to the
Landlord; but unless he please, the Noble shall not descend, because the Elder
brother dyed not seized.

A fourth Case, very remarkable.
In case of Linen, it has been adjudged, that if three good fellows and
constant Companions have but one shirt between them, and that these three
(seeing none of their other shifts will do them any good) jointly consent this
shirt shall be sold, it shall be lawful for them to expose it to sale, vended
and condemned for the common good of three, and that forthwith the money be
spent in the cherishing that blood that retired from the extreme parts, being
chil'd with the fright of parting with so dear and near a friend.

A fifth Case.
If any Student having a mind to follow his book close call to a Servitor to
bring him a book, and he bring him a Decimo sexto for a Duodecimo; an octavo
for a quarto, or a vicessimo quarto for a pot folio; although the Student turn
it over for instruction sake, yet if his choler be moved by a dislike of the
volumn, he may lawfully knock it about the Servitors ears, and may beat
learning into his pate till he break the cover of the book, or his coxcomb, and
afterward justify it by a Decree made by the Masters of Brazen Nose.

A sixth Case.
If three poor Scholars happen to visit a School in the Suburbs, and having
viewed the Library therein, where are books of the old English character, and
having studied a while, are called to an account for their learning, and thence
arise a hot dispute, insomuch that the Library keeper is soundly beaten for his
pains, they may by force of Common Law depart in the heat of that dispute,
scot-free, and shot-free.

A seventh Case, no less admired for its antiquity as for its obscurity.
After that old seignior John had heard of the unkind dealing of Edmund toward
Marmaduke, when that Nicholas came to entreat Roger to go to Nathaniel to
certify William that Jeffery was at variance with Anthony, not withstanding
that Joseph was arrested by Henry at the suit of Ralph, he comes unto Robert to
certify Randolph, that Ambrose would be revenged of Leonard for the love he
bore to Silvester, whereupon Jaspar had like to have slain Theophilus, which
when Edward espied, he made it appear both to Luke and to Francis, that Rowland
was the cause of this falling out, and all was because Samuels bald Nag was put
into Martins stable in the dead of the night, by Thomas, Andrew and Ahsolon,
and that they would not deliver him out to Hugh unless James and Giles became
bound unto Christopher, whereupon Philemon drew his knife at Oliver the
Hostler, and had like to have slain him, had not Peter and John held his hands
whilst Gabriel and Isaac ran for Matthew and Thomas the two Constables of the
Town, but before they could return, oln Father Adam, by the help of Philip, had
so far pacified the parties as to come to a good agreement, or else compremise.
Quere, who is in fault?

The eighth Case.
It so happened, that whilst Jenkins was on the Ladder thatching of an house, a
Sow that was bent on Mischief, ran her head through the rounds of the Ladder,
nor could this be avoided, notwithstanding he was admonisht of the danger
approaching, by Alexander his faithful servant; Lewis observing this unlucky
accident, cried out Murder, the noise whereof a wakened Jeremy out of a drunken
sleep, who instantly laid hold on Edgar, swearing bitterly if Charles did not
immediately run and setch Endimion, Walter should hold up his hand at the Bar;
this so enraged George, that Andrew with a quarter staff did let drive at Josua
in such sort, that had not Richard interposed, Hubert had undoubtedly been
knocked on the head; Valentine was all this while eating hasty pudding for his
breakfast, the sight whereof so sharpened Benjamin's revenge, that snatching the
pudding out of his hands, eating up the one half, he threw the rest scalding
hot in the face of Tobias; hereupon Moses and Jacob rubbing their eyes did very
much condemn the sauciness of Simon; at this up starts Ezechiel and Gregory,
protesting they could no longer endure the lewd and insolent carriage of
Phineas, which caused Fredrick to acknowledge, that Nehemiah was in the right;
how can that be, said Ferdinando, since it is well known to Zachary, that
Simon, Humphrey and Daniel were all concerned in the conspiracy of the
aforesaid malicious Sow, in the taking away the life of the poor Thatcher.

A ninth and last Case.
Whilst Martha was frying Tripe for Dorothies dinner, in came Susan and
assaulted Barbarah a young widow, Jane hereupon took the drying pan and threw
it about the house, and it so happened that a broad piece of Tripe fell so
exactly all over Judiths face, that Ann could not see the way out of door to
call in Jone to the assistance of Frances, who by this time had her face so
plastered with boiling hot Custard, by the cruel dealing of Lucy and
Elizabeth, that it was verily believed by Alice and Mary, that Priscilla the
Virgin would go near to miscarry upon it; hereupon Sarah was much troubled that
the patience of Grizel should exceed that of Elenors in suffering Esther to
knock down Cassandra with a Churmstick into the dripping pan, Beatrice seeing
this, did with violence thrust Sisly up to the armpits in a pan of hot
codlings, in the mean time Deborah and Thomasin had pulled off each others head
gear, and had so clawed one the others face that they could not see how to put
an end to the present difference. Quere, what must be done in both these Cases?

FINIS.

