THE English Rogue

Containing a brief Discovery of the most Eminent Cheats, Robberies, and other
Extravagancies, by him Committed, etc.

To which is added a CANTING Dictionary Words now in use with Beggars and
Gypsies.

Two mounted highwaymen, one firing a pistol at the other and that one
brandishing a sword at him Read, but take heed that you such actions shun
For Honesty is best when all is done.


Licensed according to Order.

printed for J. Blare, at the Looking-Glass, on London Bridge, 1688.

THE English Rogue, etc.
An Introduction to the following Discourse.
OUr Witty Extravagant (of whom this following Tract is to give Relation of,
and whose Matchless Contrivance, tending to all manner of Vice, Gusman,
Lazarillo de Tormes, and all others Remarkable for such like Villainies, are
compelled, as being outdone, to strike Sail) was Born of English Parents,
whose care was great in the bringing up of this their hopeful Son; but the
Planet Mercury was so predominant at the hour of his Nativity, as presaged him
not to be cut out for Plow-Jobbing (such as his Ancestors were) but for more
Politic Designs; who now having attained the Eighth Year of his Age, we will
give him leave to relate all his Knight, Errand Attempts from his own Mouth.

CHAP. I. Showing how he served his Fathers Turkies, his Cheating a Woman of a
Basket of Cherries, his being placed in a Boarding-School, and his mischievous
Transactions there.
My first Martial Attempt was this; My Father keeping several Turkies, one
above the rest generally Assaulted my Bread and Butter, for Revenge, I
contrived this Stratagem; I tempted him with Bread and Butter in my Hand, to
the Orchard Gate, holding it so as for the Turkey just to put his Head through,
holding the Bait for him to catch at, which no sooner done, but clapping the
Gate, surpised my mortal Foe, and with my Cat-stick soon beat his Brains out;
which done, I deplum'd his Tail, sticking the Feathers in my Cap, as a glory to
my Tryumphant Conquest: At another time (coming through a Market) observing a
Woman with a Basket of Cherries; I ask't her what she would have for as many as
I could take up in both my Hands? she answered Two Pence; so I gave it her, and
took up Bassket Cherries and all, and walked away: the Woman amazed, followed
me, making a great Our cry; at last, a Gentleman examining the Matter, I told
him the Contract, who admiring my Policy, gave the Cause (it being left to his
decision by consent) on my side, but withal, paid the Woman the whole worth of
her Cherries. Thus being encouraged, I tenter-hook't my Inventions to please my
Appetite, continuing my daily Waggeries, as Robbing of Orchards, pulling the
first and seconds of 40 or 50 Geese at a time, milking the Goats or Cows into
my Hat, and so drink the Milk, and then at Night haunting the Hen-roosts, where
if the Hens cackl'd too much, I made their Eggs satisfy for their Heads. If at
any time Geese came in my way, our came my short. Stick with a string and
Bullet at the end of it, which twirling about their Necks soon brought my Prey.

For the speedy conveyance away of all these things, I had a trusty-Trout, an
Alehouse Keeper hard by, who giving me now and then sixpence for that which
was worth a Crown, and feasting me withal, made it a very good Recompense to
me: But this Trade was too hot to hold, for the daily Complaints made by the
Neighborhood, so incensed my Parents, that (to prevent my future
Misdemeanors) I was straightway placed in a Boarding-School, under the Tuition
of a stern and rigid Master; neither could this deter my Natural Inclinations,
for (having new matter to work on) I soon became a Book-Worm, having so many
ways to Metamorphize a Book, that the Owner thereof should not know it again;
if New I would gash their Skins, if much used tear out all the Remarks,
painting their old Faces, and so make Sale of 'em, having my Factors for these
as well as the beforementioned Merchandises. At last, what with Complaints
from the Scholars, the daily Admonitions of my Mother, and the hourly
Bastinado's from my Master, I resolved to quit this my
not-to-be-endur'd-living, and to seek my Fortune as the Fates should direct.

CHAP. II. He runs away from his Parents, Enrolls himself in a Gang of Gypsies,
and gives you the choicest of their Canting Words, with the meaning of them in
plain English.
It Was in the Month of July I took my intended Progress: the first Dinner I had
was upon Black-berries; Night approaching, I began to wish for the Fleshpots,
together with a soft Feather-bed to refresh my weary Limbs on; but these wishes
were in vain; no food but Black-berries, and such like, no Lodging but what a
Barn presented; when entering therein, I beheld a great many strange Creatures,
and talking in a Language I understood not: we were all equally surpised, at
last they told me, that they were Gypsies, and if I would be of their Gang and
take part of their Fortunes, they would be glad of my Company; to which I
consented, and the next day being stripped out of my Holy-day-Habit, into Tatters
and Rogs, I became one of the Fraternity, having my Face so be-daub'd with
Green Wallnuts, that I looked as much like a Gypsy as the best of 'em: And that
I might be perfect in their Canting Words, I had a Scroll given me of the most
material things necessary to be known by those of this Profession; which take
as follows. AUtem mort. A Married Woman. Boose. Drink. Bouzing Ken. An
Alt-house. Boarde. A Shilling. Bounge. A Purse. Bufe. A Dog. Bleating Cheat. A
Sheep. Betty. An Instrument to break a Door. Budge. One that steals Cloaks.
Buckle and File. Pick Pocket and his Mate. Cove. A Man. Cuffin quire. A Justice
of Peace. Cramp Rings. Bolts or Shakles. Chats. The Gallows. Crackmans. Hedges.
Couch a Hogs-head. Go to sleep. Cackling-cheat. A Chicken. Cassan. Cheese.
Crash. To Kill. Cloy To Steal. Cly the Jerk. To be whipped. Clapper-dudgeon. A
Beggar born. Cully. A soft-pated Fellow. Duds. Goods. Doxy. A Wench. Dueswins.
Two pence. Fambles. Hands. Famble-Cheats. Rings or Gloves. Flag. A Groat.
Fogus. Tobacco. Glimmer. Fire. Gilt. A Pick-Lock. Harmanbeck. A Constable.
Harmans. The Stocks. Heave a Booth. To Rob an House. Half-board. Sixpence.
Hearts-ease. A twenty Shilling piece Ken. An House. Knapper of Knappers. A
Sheep-stealer. Kate. A Pick-lock. Lowre. Money. Libben. A House to lie in.
Maunder. To beg. Margery Prater. An Hen. Make. An Halfpenny. Mint. Gold.
Prancer. An Horse. Prigger of Prancers. Horse stealers. Rome-Padders.
High-way-padders. Togeman. A Cloak.


Thus have I given you a taste of the Canting-Tongue, and having continued with
'um a small time, I abandoned their Company to seek out other Adventures.

CHAP. III. He leaves the Gypsies and begs by himself, a Merchant likes him and
takes him Apprentice, he gets the Maid of the House with Child, and then goes
for Ireland.
Thus quitting my Canting-Crew, I resolved to set up for my self; when coming
to London, and getting Acquaintance with a sturdy Beggar we straight went to a
Boozing-Ken and bubb'd rumly, concluding an Everlasting Friendship: he having
instructed me in the Maunding-Trade, next morning we took our Stands in
More-fields, some distance from each other; where I soon began, With a God
bless you Master, and let Heaven Reward what you have here done on Earth; with
these and such like Speeches did we get store of Money from Charitable Persons:
when one day as I was begging, a Merchant coming by and observing me to be a
stubbed Fellow, offered me a Service if I would live with him; to which I soon
agreed, came to his House, was stripped from my stags, good Clothes put on, and
soon after was bound Apprentice to him, with whom I might have lived in a happy
Condition, but that my too forward Lechery was the unhappy cause of my
Misfortune; for scarce had I served four Months of my Time, but that I had so
far insinuated into the Maids favor, as to become now and then her Bedfellow;
but this our Nocturnal Dalliances was of small continuance: for she coming to
me one day when I was alone, after many Heart-fetcht Sighs, told me, That she
was with Child; I thought I should have died with this surprising News;
however, to set the best side outward, I bid her be of good cheer, and that I
would take such care as she should not be disgraced, telling her I had Wealthy
Parents living in the Country (far enough you may imagine) where I would in a
short time send her, there to lye-Inn, and that I would quit my Service soon
after, come down into the Country and marry her, not questioning but to live
well together, advising her to lace her self very straight, and keep down her
growing Belly with two or three Busks: the poor Soul not imagining the Denom
which lay under these fair speeches, in keeping her in suspense, until I had an
opportunity to rub off, which soon after happened; my Master and Mistress being
absent, it fortuned that I took for Wares that day about Threescore Pound
Sterling; overjoyed with this Success, I pack't up Bag and Baggage, resolving
for Ireland, far enough out of my Masters reach: All things favoring my
Design, in three Weeks I arrived there, when changing my Name as well as Habit,
the next Chapter makes mention of my Extravagant Transactions.

CHAP. IV. In Ireland he was Cheated of all his Money, the ways he had to get
more, he comes into England again, and turns Highway-man.
THE next day after my Arrival in Ireland, I sent for a Barber to Shave my Hair
off, buying a Periwig contrary to the color of my own Hair, in order that if I
met any one that was of my Acquaintance, or fatal Messenger from my Master,
they might not know me: the truth o'nt is, in this Disguise I knew not my self;
for when my Landlady where I lodged, called me by the new Name I gave my self,
I either star'd upon her, or looked another way, (thinking she had spoke to
some body else) at last, fearing this would betray me, I pretended my self
Deaf, which Apology took away all suspicion. In this manner I lived a Month,
frequenting Taverns, Alehouses and Brothel-Houses, when in one of those places
I met with a person who bubbl'd me at Hazard (a certain Play with Dice) not
leaving me one Penny, but withal he was so kind (curse of his favor) as to
discharge the whole shot. Now I leave any one to judge the deplorableness of my
Condition, who had neither Moneys, Friends, nor Credit, and in a place utterly
unacquainted with their Language. But (though Fortune frowned at this Juncture,)
yet in a turn I was on the top of her Wheel again, for now being reduced to
stretch my Wits, I thus put them in Practice. Wealthy and Aged Widows, or
Thrifty Maids, who had laid up what they had gotten in Service, as a Bait to
procure an Husband, such did I daily hunt out and visit 'em by turns: I was not
sparing of Amorous Expressions, by which means I deluded several, some I was
forced to give Earnest to for their Goods, before they would trust me with what
they had: This course I followed 'till I was taken notice of for a grand
Deceiver.

Having now gotten a round Sum of Money by me, I resolved to return into
England, this place being now too hot for me: so crossing St. Georges Channel,
in 24 hours I landed at Chester; the next day proving Marketday, I bought an
excellent Gelding, with Sword, Pistols, and other Furniture. In this Equipage
mounted, I took leave of the place, intending to be a Knight of the Road; I had
not rode far, before three mounted rode by me (I found them afterward to be
the Vanguard) having as many more in the Rear. At the bottom of an Hill they
before faced about, bidding me Stand, in the interim those behind came up, so I
saw 'twas in vain to resist, but told them, I wondered they would rob one of
their profession; when they searching me, and finding good store of Money, they
asked me where I had it? I answered, 'Twas not an hour since I met with a
Booty, this being it, and that, if they pleased, I would willingly Enrol my
self in their Fraternity; They seeing me well Armed, and of a portly Stature,
consented, and away we rode to the next Inn, to make merry at my new Admittance.

CHAP. V. He and his Companions commit two Robberies, he dislikes their
Company, and Robs by himself.
COming into a private Room, they pulled off their False-Beards, Vizards,
Hoods, Patches, Wens, Muffles and Perriwigs with other Disguises, so that they
appeared as other Men, which done, Come, says the Master-Thief, I perceive you
are a fresh Man and therefore want some Instructions as well as Disguises,
which he imparted to me in a plentiful manner, and after that I was adopted a
sworn Brother: Fraught with these Devices, and well liquor'd with Sack, we all
resolved to attempt some Enterprise that Evening: so about six a Clock we
planted our selves in a convenient place, and I only was sent out for a
Discoverer: not rightly understanding my Trade, I rambled too far, however I
met with a single person whom I bid Stand, which he would have done, and
surrendered his Purse, only he was on a Stone horse, I on a Mare; the word was
no sooner spoke, but his Stone horse wheeled off and came in the rear of me
(for there was something it seems under my Mares Tail very powerful, which I
then thought not of; I led him round several times, till the poor Gentleman
(fearing he had provoked me by these delays, which his Horse was the cause of)
cried out, Worthy Sir, take what I have and spare my Life; at that very instant
his Horse reared his two fore Feet upon me and my Mare, insomuch that I thought
he said, I Will take both Life and Money too presently; fear had then rendered me
so incapable of performing the Office of a Thief, that putting spurs to my
Mare, I fled for safety, notwithstanding the Stone-horse was still close at my
Heels; thus disorderly flying, one of my Pistols went off, which I thought my
back-friend had discharged at me, which made me roar out for Quarter; he on the
other side cried out, As you are a Man show yourself merciful, saying, Good Sir
stop, I thinking he called after me, hold him, stop him; do what I could, his
Horse leayt upon us: at which time (by what means I know not we all came
Headlong to the ground; I expected now nothing but Death, but recovering, and
finding my Adversary upon the run, I could have hanged my self to think I
should be accounted a Man, and yet wan^ the Courage answerable: however, I soon
overtook him, made my self Master of his Wealth, and so sent him packing.
Whilst I was framing a Lie to tell my Comrades how Daliantly I behaved my self
in this Encounter, they were all on a sudden at my Elbow, applauding my
Courage for running away at the sound of Good Sir be merciful, and several
other Ieers; I should never have stopped their mouths, had I not showed 'um what
I took from him, which was very considerable. About twilight w^ met with
another prize, but different from the beforementioned; for we four meeting
with five Men, and bidding them Stand, they stoutly resisted, which put us hard
to it (...) one of our Company being Wounded, yet we overcame 'em, driving them
into a Wood I at that time learning to search with such care, that not a penny
or anything valuable could be kept from me; with these Booties we repaired to
our Inn, where our Host calls lustily for Sack, which the Drawer doubles in the
Bar; the Hostler must be one of the Company too, who expects a snack, which we
dare not deny, lest he betray us: their with what we are obliged to give the
Servants, and offered up our Sacrifices to the Landlady for some small favors
received, we find in conclusion, we rob for them and not for our selves; which
I perceiving, and having now some Experience, I resolved to set up for my self.

CHAP. VI. He gets a Farmers Daughter with Child, and Robs her Father of all
his Gold, etc.
SCouring the Road, I met with a Young Maid with a Milk-Pail on her Head,
observing her to be more than ordinary handsome, I fell into some Discourse
with her: As she was opening a Gate to Milk her Cows, I followed, dismounting,
tied my Horse to a Hedge, begging her Excuse for my rudeness; I at last sat
down by her, and after many powerful persuasions, tending to Love affairs, she
suffered me to crop her Dirgin-Fruit: We then grew something more familiar, but
the burden of the Song was, I had undone her, which I leave to any reasonable
person to judge; we concluded she should go home, and at night I was to come to
her Fathers House, pretending I was a stranger on that Road, and had lost my
way, desiring a Lodging for that Night: all things performed accordingly, her
Father gave the Entertainment for that Night, which was spent in sweet Embraces
with his Daughter, contrary to the good Old Man's expectation. When the morning
appeared, I was put to my Shifts how to contrive a longer stay, at length, with
the Daughters Advice, I was to pretend Indisposition of Body, and not able to
Travel, which I did, and was desired by the old Folks to stay as long as I
pleased: but fie on ill Luck, the next night discovered the Intreague. The
Daughter and I staying up till the rest were in Bed, and being too imprudently
hasty in the Kitchen, stumbled against two Barrels, pil'd one upon another, so
that they fell; the Old Man not being asleep, imagining Thieves had broke in,
so that before we could get dis-engag'd, he took us napping, by the light of
some ^^all Fire left in the Chimney: I desired him to be silent, and not spread
his Daughters disgrace, for in a few days I would Marry her: I stayed
afterward about some three days to color the matter, but 'twas chiefly to
know where her Fathers treasure lay, which I so cunningly sifted from the
Daughter, that I soon had it in my possession, and so marched off incognito.

CHAP. VII. He lights of a Female Robber in Man's Habit, he goes to her House,
and agrees to Rob with her.
THus abruptly taking my leave, of the Farmer and his kind Daughter, I rid a
long time, meeting with nothing worthy of observation; being weary, I struck
into an Inn, where refreshing my self, and the Evening approaching, I mounted,
and so put on; when passing by a small Coppice, in a bottom between two hills,
a Gentleman (as I supposed) started out upon me, saying, Stand, and deliver;
With that I drew a Pistol and fired at him, he doing the same by me, and so
till we had discharged two at each other; which last Shots happening o^ our
Horses heads, they became so unruly, that we were forced to alight and draw our
Swords, when my adversary making a direct thrust, I put it by, closed with him,
and, upon the hug, threw him with much facility: I wondered much at it (which I
need not have done, since his nature (as afterward I understood) was so prone
to it;) Sir, said I, this will teach you hereafter to beware on whom you set;
With that, unbuttoning his Doublet to find if there was any Gold quilted
therein, I wondered to see so large a pair of Breasts, and much whiter than any
Man's: at length going to search his Breeches, and proffering to remove his
Shirt from between his legs, he suddenly cried out (striving to lay his hand
there) I pray Sir be civil: imagining that some choice treasure lay there
obscured, I pulled up his Shirt ( alias Smock) and found my self not much
mistaken: this sight surpised me, but after a little pause, I unbound her, and
taking her up in my arms, Pardon me, most Courageous Amazon, says I, for thus
rudely using you, 'twas nothing but ignorance in me; and since I find so much
courage in a Woman, for your sake I shall ever retain a good esteem for the
worst of Females. She told me the place was not proper for Complements, but if
I would follow her she would retaliate my kindness: I soon agreed, and being
led thorough many obscure passages, we came to a Wood, in the midst whereof
stood a house; at our approach, the Servants were all in a hurry who should
first obey Mrs. Virago's commands, but wondered to see St. Gorge, and his
trusty Esquire on foot, for our Hor^^^ were killed; where after Supper, Bottles
and Pipes supplying the place of the Dishes, she laid her self open to me,
having before made my self acquainted with her greatest secret.

CHAP. VIII. He commits some Robberies, is taken and put into Newgate, is
Transported, but makes his Escape.
THere were in this place three Sisters, whereof my Virago was one, they having
arrived to a ripe age, were all Married to Shopkeepers, whose insiped Noddles
not brooking those Heroic Spirits, was the occasion of many fallings out, at
last these three Sisters, having provided Furniture accordingly, and putting on
Men's Clothes, unanimously agreed to Entitle themselves Squires of the Pad,
Robbing with what advantage they could, and so take their fate: this course had
they followed for above three years, when my late adventure brought me to their
House, and I being mightily pleased with their Company, I agreed to stay and
Rob with them for some time: After a great many Contrivances, this we agreed
on, one of the Sisters was to be in Man's Apparel, the other two in Women's, and
so to Ride double as Men and their Wives to prevent suspicion: so having got
Pillions, Safeguards and short Swords for the Famales, we set forwards: Upon
the Rove about five that Evening, overtook us four Gentlemen, coming close up
to us, our two subtle Gypsies showed great fear of being Robbed, speaking withal
so loud, that one of the Gentlemen hearing, rid up to us, bidding her not be
afraid, for they were Londoners, riding out for their pleasure; and that they
would venture their Lives in our defense: and Ride before to stand between us
and danger: I was glad to hear they would lead the way, for now our work was half
done: my Brother, as I called him, coming up close to me, I gave him directions
that at the foot of such a Dill, he should out with his short Truncheon, and
make sure work with one, at which instant I would be sure to do the same by
another; we watched our opportunity so exactly, that we soon accomplished our
design, for accordingly at the foot of the Hill with our Truncheons discharged
upon two of their heads, they came tumbling to the ground, (the other two being
a pretty way before knowing nothing of it) Our Women, dismounting as swift as
Lightning, soon made them incapable of rising again, whilst we, setting Spurs
to our Horses, soon overtook the other two who was before, who much admired to
see our Swords and Pistols in hands ready for Execution, however we soon put
them out of their doubt, for compelling them to deliver, we dismounted them,
and cutting their Girts and Bridles, we conveyed them to a secret place,
putting the Horses into a field, the Men we Gagged, bound their hands, and so
drove 'um into a Wood, our Females having served the two other in the same
manner; Having a booty answerable to our desire, we mounted, and returned to
our old Quarters:

With them I continued a considerable time, living in all manner of Debauchery,
so that being satiated with excess I resolved to leave them, which I soon did,
by pretending a little private business abroad, and so Rode clear away: But I
soon repented it, for attempting to Rob a Gentleman, there came immediately
five or six more to his rescue, so that do what I could, I was taken, clapped up
in Newgate, at my Trial the Evedence being clear, I was only ordered for
Transportation: In our passage we suffered Shipwreck, but as the Proverb goes,
He that is born to be Hanged shall never be Drowned, so I escaped though many
others perished; When getting ashore I was soon out of reach of my Guardian,
and now am I put to my Shifts once again, which shall be related in a Second
Part, according as this finds acceptance in the World:

Vale.
Thus being Banished from my Native Land,
The Second part shall let you understand,
The grand Intreagues I used beyond the Main,
Till I returned to England back again.

FINIS.

