Imprimatur,

Mar. 9. 1686. H. Maurice Rmo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiepiscopo Cant. a Sacris.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of BERKELEY
GOVERNOR, And the Company of Merchants of England trading into the Levant Seas.

At St. Peter's Church in Broadstreet Ian. 30. being Sunday, 1686/7.

By William Hayley M. A. Fellow of All Souls College in Oxon; and Chaplain to
his Excellency Sir William Trumbull Ambassador to Constantinople.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith at the Prince's-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1687.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of BERKELEY GOVERNOR, And the Company of
Turkey Merchants.
Right Honorable, etc.
AS I cannot think you could have any other Motive to command the publication
of this Discourse, than your customary Civility; so I am sufficiently sensible
that it brings nothing along with it that can deserve your acceptance, but the
entire submission I show to your Orders, in an instance so contrary to my
private inclinations.

I could have been extremely pleased to have had an opportunity of
acknowledging your obligations, without exposing the weakness of my services;
but even this way I must confess I am not without some satisfaction, in
declaring publicly the sense I have of your unanimous kindness in the ready
choice you made of so unworthy a Servant, and the pleasure I take in being
related to a Company, whose Members are so considerable in themselves, and
whose Commerce is so beneficial to the public.

This is an honor which all my Predecessors in this Employ have been sensible
of; but I must acknowledge it yet a more particular advantage to my self, since
it gives me a capacity of continuing in a Family, in which I have lived so much
to my content, since I had the happiness of being admitted a Member of it,
wherein I have seen so much exemplary Virtue, so frequent Charities, so
constant and regular a Devotion, and so profound a respect for all things that
are Sacred, that as it must be esteemed by all good men, so it cannot but be
especially desirable for a Divine.

Concerning the Discourse it self I have nothing to say but that it is a plain
persuasive to a Virtuous and Religious Life, and does not pretend to affected
ornaments or beauty of style, that it designs to profit rather than delight,
and so bears some resemblance to its Author, whose services, though they cannot
be pompous, yet shall always be faithful, whose constant prayers shall be for
your temporal prosperity and eternal happiness, and who shall make it his
business to endeavor to supply his want of Abilities, by acquitting himself
with all fidelity and diligence as becomes

My Lord and Gentleman,

Your most obliged and most humble Servant, William Hayley.

PROVE. 8.18. Riches and Honor are with me, yea durable Riches and
Righteousness.
THat Virtue and Piety secure our Eternal concerns, and that a good Life is the
only means to assure us of happiness beyond the grave, is a thing that every
one confesses who believes a Future State, or is persuaded that he has a Soul
within him capable of Immortality: No one is so unreasonable as to contend that
the sublime Joys of Heaven ought to be the portion of him that drowns himself
in the base pleasures of sin, or that they are the most likely persons to be
made companions of Saints and Angels, who render themselves unfit for the
society of Men, and are debased into the number of the Beasts that perish.

Nay, that whatever is true and substantial happiness even in this Life, has a
necessary dependence upon Morality and Religion, is the observation of all that
pretend to study the mind of man, and the nature of things, and is denied by
none, but by those who will either give themselves no time to think at all, or
else will employ their thoughts upon nothing that is serious and profitable.

How troublesome, how unsatisfactory, yea and how pernicious too all our
worldly goods are, is too too evident, when they are not directed by prudence,
enjoyed with sobriety, and managed according to the dictates of Justice and
Charity; and particularly Wealth and Riches, which are so eagerly prosecuted by
mankind, as the instrument of all our necessaries and conveniences, are indeed
but heavy encumbrances and unprofitable lumber, if they are not made use of to
reward the good, to excite the diligent, and to relieve the oppressed. The poor
man that enjoys quiet, repose and content in a mean estate, that neither wishes
for wealth as a means to gratify his lusts, nor gazes on it as an object that
moves his envy; that fears God, loves his Neighbor, and relies upon the
blessing of Providence, and the fruit of his Industry, is not only confessed by
all considerate men to enjoy the Truest Riches, but is even frequently envied
by those who find themselves surrounded with abundance and superfluity.

But that Religion should be the path that leads to Wealth and Substance, and
that to be good is the way to become rich, this seems to be a Paradox contrary
to the sentiments of mankind, the experience of all Ages, and the common voice
of those who reflect upon the irregularities of the World, who have no one
greater subject of complaint, than that the rewards of Virtue are possessed by
Vice, that baseness, flattery, and hypocrisy, are provided with superfluities,
whilst Goodness meets with nothing but empty applauses, and starves whilst it
is commended.

Piety indeed may comfort us in our wants, and support us in our afflictions,
and we may find help in God when we have none from men; nay, it may be an
excellent Steward even of Riches themselves when they are once gotten, to lay
them out for a greater purchase than Earth will afford, to manage them so, that
they may neither rob us of our innocence, nor God of our hearts; but that it
should be the best Factor to gain them, and store them up, that Riches should
dwell with Virtue, and durable Riches with Righteousness, is an Assertion so
opposite to the persuasion of the World, that it seems to be rather the wild
affirmation of a person desirous to defend a Novelty, than the Doctrine of one
that would inculcate a serious and a sober Truth.

The practice of the Age discovers to us very different means for the heaping
up of Treasure; Craft and Subtlety, Fraud and Circumvention, Oppression and
Rapine, Fawning and Hypocrisy, and other methods too shameful to name are,
alas! the approved Arts of those who make most have to become rich, and all the
Channels in which Wealth is found to flow, seem to be such to which Piety and
Religion are utter strangers, so that it may be the duty, and perhaps the
happiness of good men, to despise Riches, but it is not like to be their fortune
to gain or enjoy them.

But how repugnant soever the practice of the World may be, and however unfit
Religion and Virtue may at first sight appear for the procuring of Wealth and
Substance, yet upon a nearer view, and a fuller consideration, we shall find
that they do really lead and conduct us to the most ample even of those
enjoyments, that they are all glorious within, and that their Clothing too is
of wrought Gold; that Piety is of that nature, that it need not affright us
from her embraces by an apparent Poverty, that it does not only invite us by
proposing the most real contentment, the most lasting delights, and the most
sublime enjoyments of the mind and better part, but that even the avaricious
may here find wherewith to content himself, and gratify his most lavish
desires: For so we are told by one of the greatest of men, seated in the most
advantageous prospect, in possession of the greatest wealth and abundance, and
what is more, inspired by God himself with a Divine judgment and understanding,
and therefore certainly one who was most able to judge what is the best method
of acquisition, by him I say we are informed that Piety is the surest and
straitest way to wealth, for as he tells us in the words of my Text, Riches and
Honor are with her, yea durable Riches and Righteousness.

The Relative Me in my Text has relation to Wisdom, whom Solomon introduces
speaking in the 12th verse of this Chapter; and by Wisdom is generally meant in
this Book of Proverbs, that which only deserves the name of True Wisdom, i. e.
Virtue and the Fear of God: For so the wise man explains himself when he says,
The Fear of the Lord is the beginning, or (as the Original rather signifies)
the perfection of Wisdom, and therefore the sense of the words is what I have
already hinted it to be, viz. With Piety are Riches and Honor, yea durable
Riches and Righteousness.

There is nothing more usual in the Writings of Solomon, than to reiterate the
same Assertion in substance with some variation of phrase. So at c. 12. v. 28.
it is said, In the way of Righteousness there is life, and in the pathway
thereof there is no death. And c. 5. v. 22. His own iniquities shall take the
wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins. And in
conformity to these and many other places of the like nature, I take the two
parts of my Text to signify one and the same thing, and that the different
expression is only to set off the Truth more advantagiously, and the repetition
to inculcate and impress it the deeper upon the minds of men: So that Riches
and Honor in this place signifies the same thing as Riches and Righteousness,
and the difference lies only in the addition of durable, to make the latter
part of the sentence more elegant and pathetick.

Now Righteousness signifying most frequently in Scripture, especially when it
is joined with Riches, that part of general Righteousness or universal Justice
which is opposite to Avarice, and is usually called Liberality and Charity, the
sense of the latter clause will be, that Piety gives durable Riches, and
dispositions likewise to make a liberal and charitable use of them; and
consonant to this the Honor in the first part of my Text must denote that
honor which arises from such a bountiful management of Riches, and so is the
consequent and effect of Righteousness, which is nothing else but that due
management. And thus the whole sense of the words seems to be briefly comprised
in these three particulars. That Piety is the most effectual means, 1. To gain
Riches certainly. 2. To enjoy them durably. And 3. To use them honorably.


But this last Proposition, that Piety teaches to manage Riches honorably, is
that which will at first sight be granted by all men of reason; since if Honor
be taken in the true notion, it is nothing else but the Testimony that is given
to virtuous and good actions, and therefore cannot arise properly from any
thing that is not guided by Piety. Nay, nothing is more dishonorable and
detestable than to use Riches as the Idols of our affections, or the
instruments of our vices, to covet them, dote upon them, and put our trust in
them; or to make them subservient to gratify our lusts, oppress our
neighbors, or obstruct the course of Laws and Justice. I shall therefore wave
this as granted on all hands, and confine my present Discourse to the former
parts of my Text, which seem more to stand in need of proof and illustration:
Namely, that Piety is the most effectual means to gain Riches, and to secure
and perpetuate the possession of them.

The most effectual means, I say; for before I proceed further, I must premise,
that all the sentences that occur in this Book of Proverbs are not universally
infallible, and incapable of any exception, but that the Book does chiefly
consist of such Observations as are generally true, and such Rules as Prudence
would commonly dictate: To give an instance of each, it is a Rule given, c. 22.
v. 26. Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are Sureties
for Debts. And it is an Observation, c. 10. v. 27. The fear of the Lord
prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened. Now the former
of these is not so to be understood as if all Suretiship were utterly unlawful,
and that there could never happen a case in which Love, Gratitude or Charity
might require it at our hands; but that it is very prudential not to engage in
it commonly, nor without due caution, and previous consideration. Nor is the
latter to be taken in that sense, that God does never call a good man to
himself before he arrives at Gray hairs, or that the wicked are always cut off
in the vigor of their youth, but that in the ordinary course of things, and the
common dispensation of Providence, the fear of the Lord does tend to the
prolongation of life, and wickedness and debauchery hasten our dissolution.

Now agreeably to these and such like places, the meaning of my Text is not
that good men are always favored with Wealth and Riches, or that they never
lose them when once obtained; nor that it is impossible for very vicious persons
sometimes to be raised to Fortunes and Estates; but that however God in his
extraordinary Providence may dispose of things, however he may sometimes in his
Wrath let sin flourish to make up the measure of its wickedness; may let the
ungodly be lusty and strong, secure from the misfortunes of other men, and
prosperous till their Eyes swell with fatness, and they do even what they list:
And however on the contrary it may please him to deny Riches to the good and
virtuous, or to deprive them of those he had formerly given them, either to
manifest his own Power, to try their patience, to divert their minds from the
World to better things, or by an act of the greatest mercy to deliver them from
the temptation, when his Omniscience foresees they would be ensnared by them:
Whatever, I say, may be the extraordinary dispositions of God's Providence, yet
ordinarily speaking, and according to the common course of things, Virtue and
good living does promote our temporal advantage, Piety does contribute in its
own tendency to the acquisition and enjoyment of Wealth, does naturally exert
both her Bounty and her Power, does first enrich, and then protect her Votaries.

1. To begin therefore with the first, that Piety is the most effectual means
to obtain Riches. Now the truth of this will appear from these following
Considerations.

1. That Riches are the gift of God; that they are not the goods of Fortune, as
Fortune is taken for Chance or Accident, but as it is taken for the overruling
Providence of God himself, who as supreme Lord and Master of the Universe,
disposes of all things in it according to his own good will and pleasure.
Whatever means man's desire can propose to it self, or his industry make use of,
have all their being dependent upon this great Governor of the World, and
their success owing to his blessing. Do thou depend upon the work of thy
hands, or the contrivance of thy thoughts, thy bodily strength, or the labor
of thy mind? both these are the power of that God who formed the one, and
inspired the other, who by one single disease can enfeeble the limbs, and blind
the understanding, can convert the most active force into trembling and
weakness, and the most excellent judgment into frenzy and dotage. Do thou
promise thy self full Barns, and except increase by the crop of thy fields?
It Is the same God that gives the former and latter Rain in its season, and who
can make a fruitful Land barren, when provoked by the wickedness of those that
dwell therein. Art thou happy in the favor of thy Prince, and persuaded thy
self thou shall be enriched by his bounty? reflect that it was the Lord who
gave Joseph and Daniel favor in the sight of their Masters, and that in his
hands are the hearts of Kings, and he turns them as the Rivers of Waters. The
stream of these earthly Gods affection flows from the heavenly one, and thou
must have first gained his favor, before thou can hope to reap any good from
that of his Vicegerent. Do thou go down to the Sea in Ships, and occupy thy
business in great waters? even there thou may see the Providence of God, and
his Wonders in the deep; the stormy Winds are at his command, and the
destruction of all thy substance depends but upon the breath of his mouth; thou
reliest in vain upon the strength of thy Vessels, and the skill of thy Pilots,
if his mercy deliver thee not from the rage of the deep, and bring thee to the
Haven where thou would be.

And indeed whoever does believe that there is a God, and consequently a wise
and provident Governor of the World, must be forced to grant that the success
of all human enterprises depends upon his disposition of things; but lest we
should not read this Lesson plain enough in the Book of Nature, and so look no
farther than our selves, and sacrifice to our own Nets, lest we should admire
our wisdom and management, and pride our selves that we have worked out our own
Fortunes, there is scarce any thing that we are more frequently put in mind of
in Scripture, than that Plenty is the gift of Heaven, and that it is the
blessing of the Lord that makes rich. I shall instance only in that one place
of Deuteronomy. 8.11, 12. and following verses; Beware that thou forget not the Lord
thy God, in not keeping his Commandments, and his Judgments, and his Statutes,
which I command thee this day, lest when thou have eaten and art full, and have
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein, and thy flocks and thy herds multiply,
and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is
multiplied; then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God --
and thou say in thine heart, My power and the strength of my hand has gotten
me this wealth, but thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is He that
gives thee power to get wealth.

If therefore it be the blessing of God that makes rich, and our increase be
but the gift of his bounty, what can give us a more probable expectation of it
than Piety and Virtue? These are the things that are grateful in his sight;
persons that live according to these Rules, have the honor of God's own
approbation, and he calls them his good and faithful Servants; Nay, what is yet
more, they have the glorious character of his Friends and Favorites; and who
then should more reasonably hope for his gifts, than those that serve him
religiously, and endeavor to please him? If they are the Favorites of the
Almighty, they may expect them as signs of his love, if they be his faithful
Servants, as rewards of their fidelity.

2. But if we are too short-sighted to discover the supreme original and
fountain of all our enjoyments, if the hand of God reaching out unto us our
acquisitions be not sufficiently visible to our mortal Eyes, yet let us in the
second place consider what Piety is, examine it in its self, and in its
consequences, and we shall find it to be naturally productive of Riches and
Plenty.

Piety in its latitude is nothing else but the habitual practice of Moral and
Divine Virtues, and if we do but reflect upon those, we shall find that there
is not one in the whole Catalogue, but is either of an evident and immediate
tendency, or proves at least mediately instrumental to the enriching of its
followers. For instance, Industry or a vigorous prosecution of the works of our
Calling, not the least considerable of Moral Virtues, is the very Parent of
Wealth and Plenty. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the
hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove. 10.4. Industry is a noble sort of
Chemistry, which extracts Oar out of the most mean and unlikely matter; and
there is scarce any Employment so low, any Capacity so weak and shallow, but,
if diligence be not wanting, affords and procures not only what is necessary
for life, but also a convenient provision for dependencies. Temperance does
more than one way contribute to the same end, it preserves the health of the
body, and the vigor of the mind, two things highly necessary for the
facilitating any of our designs; it saves and preserves that time to add to our
store, which its contrary vice would employ, or rather lose in diminishing it;
it is a Virtue of a double consequence, it secures our possessions, and
increases them, and like the Builders of Jerusalem, with one hand raises the
Wall, and with the other is armed against those that would demolish it.
Humility inclines the mind to think nothing is below it which is a part of its
duty, and so provides for it self by descending to those Offices which the
fastidiousness of Pride would starve rather than put its hand unto. Peace,
Concord, and Brotherly Love, how do they tend to the enriching of the public,
and the prosperity of all! Wealth flourishes and grows only where it is
cherished with the soft gales of Peace, the rough storms of War with its
attendants, Wast, Rapine and Plunder, blast and destroy it. Concord has always
had the reputation of increasing the smallest Estates, and Discord and
Quarrels, of ruining the greatest; and then Brotherly Love, and Mutual Help
makes every person of a double strength, and interchangeable kind offices and
good turns help to exalt all together without the downfall of any.

Liberality and Charity, whose office seems to be only to dispense and lay out
what Providence and Industry bring in, even these themselves, which is
something surprising, have not the least share in enriching us: By Liberality I
mean that Beneficence which respects others as they are Servants and
Inferiors; by Charity that which has regard to them as necessitous and in
distress.

For first, Liberality excites the affections, strengthens the hands, and
redoubles the diligence of those that serve us, adds love to their duty, and by
that active principle makes them break through the greatest difficulties,
rather than lie under the shameful imputation of insensibility and ingratitude:
So that what a man lays out liberally is as politickly as it is generously
disposed, the fruit of it will abundantly answer the expense, and the seed sown
in all probability produce a plentiful crop.

And secondly, Charity which dispences its goods for the deliverance of the
oppressed, the sustenance of the poor, and the comfort of the miserable, will
be so far from exhausting our stores, that its returns will at last be as
ample, though perhaps not so immediately visible as those of Frugality it self:
Not to mention the prevalency of the prayers of an afflicted Soul with Almighty
God, which are importunate cravers, and generally successful intercessors for
blessings upon the charitable, the virtue it self, even in its natural
consequents, will not be unaccompanied with considerable advantages.

For Charity affects and warms the heart of those who receive it, as well as
their miseries do the bowels of those that dispense it; and as it moves their
Tongues in prayers, so will it likewise their Hands too in services and
acknowledgments. Besides, it is not a single person that is gained by a single
act of Charity; all that are poor and miserable look upon themselves as a
certain Fraternity, and he that obliges and relieves one, is blessed by all the
rest; they all think themselves bound to consult his advantage, to do him
service, and to endeavor the increase of his riches, who they see is ready
upon occasion to dispense them to their use. Now the most Rich do depend upon
the ministry of the Poor, it is their hands that gain Riches who possess the
least of them; the winning therefore of these to our service, which is the
natural consequence of Charity, is the drawing in of more hands to our Aid, and
consequently the addition of more matter to enrich us.

Throw therefore thy bread upon these waters, and it shall return to thee after
many days: Charity is a fountain which at last flows into the Sea with a much
greater current than that it at first received from it; what is thus bestowed
shall be given back with ample interest and advantage, for the charitable man
shall still have abundance, and the liberal soul shall be made fat.

It would be too long to enumerate all the rest of the Virtues in particular,
and to show the apparent influence of some, and the certain, though unseen
concurrence of others to advance the Fortunes of those that exercise them:
These I have instanced in sufficiently make good the assertion, that Virtues
have a natural tendency to enrich good men, and that they who seek the Kingdom
of God and its Righteousness, are in a fair expectation of having all these
things added to them. I shall therefore hasten to my third Consideration to
evince this truth, and that is this.

3. Credit and Reputation in the World have a very great dependence upon
honesty and an upright life, and they are things absolutely necessary for the
promotion of our wealth and worldly interest. A good name is not only more
precious than gold, but it is that which is instrumental in the obtaining of
it. Riches arise from a multiplicity of business, and that is never so apt to
flow to any, as to him that has the reputation of just and faithful: No man
loves to concern himself with a person in whom he can have no confidence, and
confidence can never arise but from our own experience, or other men's
attestation of the fidelity and honesty of him with whom we have to do.

This is so apparent, that whosoever wrongs a man in his credit, is reckoned to
be more injurious to him, than he that robs him of his goods; since the one
only takes away what he has at present, but the other deprives him of the means
of ever getting more; and accordingly all persons that have any commerce in the
world, make it their greatest business to conserve a good name and a fair
reputation.

But certainly the only solid foundation of a good name is Piety and Virtue;
for how can he be thought to be just to his Neighbor, who will rob his God of
that honor that is due to him; or to have any concern for the goods of another
man, that has not the least care for his own Soul? This is so well known, that
they who are not truly virtuous, are yet forced tacitly to confess the
prevalency of Piety, and to counterfeit that in appearance which they want in
reality.

But without doubt, if the outside and image of Virtue be at all effectual, the
substance of it must be much more so, must be a more certain, a more solid, and
a more durable foundation of credit and a good name. Hypocrisy stands upon a
very slippery ground, it is a difficult thing for it to be so quick-sighted as
to take all its steps and measures aright, and yet the least trip discovers the
design, unmasks the deceit, and proves the downfall of the Hypocrite. Besides,
dissimulation puts the mind and thoughts to a kind of rack; it is a constant
torture always to stifle ones real sentiments, and pretend the contrary: Now
it is next to impossible that Nature should continually endure this violence
without ever exerting it self, the Heart is too active not sometimes to master
the Tongue and Hands; and whenever this happens, whenever providence,
heedlesness or prevalency of passion lays open the intrigue, the hypocrisy
serves but to make the man more ridiculous and detestable; and the paint is but
the more loathed for the resemblance it had to a real beauty.

But true and intrinsic worth is an easy and a stable foundation of repute,
the good man follows his own natural course, and makes no turnings to blind his
designs, he is never afraid of the nearest search, nor ever stands in need of a
subtle contrivance; time it self that defaces all things, and discovers
Hypocrites, does but add to his luster, makes his Righteousness as clear as the
light, and his just dealing as the noonday: The roots of his reputation are
sound, as well as its branches flourishing, the longer it stands, the more
substantial it grows, and its very old Age is blooming and fruitful. Since
therefore Virtue does so certainly produce and conserve a good name, it must be
also the Parent of Wealth and Riches, which depend upon nothing more than a
general confidence the world has in us, and an universal reputation of honesty
and fidelity.

4. And lastly, That Piety and Virtue are the most effectual means of obtaining
Riches, will hence appear, in that they direct to the use of those methods
which are honest and lawful, and abominate all such as are false and unjust:
Now that the laudable and allowed means of acquisition must be likewise in
their own nature the most efficacious and successful will certainly be
confessed, if we consider that they are such as are chalked out, allowed and
commanded by Almighty God for this end, and the contrary are but the
suggestions of the Devil, and the inventions of vicious men; if therefore the
honest means of gain are not also such as are really and in effect the most
productive of their end, one of these absurdities must necessarily follow,
either that God Almighty did not know what were the fittest means, or that he
is not able to make them successful, or else that he delights in the
disappointments of mankind; the first of which would be a blasphemous robbing
of God of his Wisdom and Omniscience, and would make the Father of Lies more
prudent in his contrivances; than the Father of Spirits; the second would be a
ridiculous denial of his Omnipotence and Power, and would make the efficacy of
Divine Wisdom outdone by the wicked policy of the worst of men; and the last
would prove too undecent a reflection upon his Justice and Goodness, and would
infer that God himself constantly does, what the height of human Tyranny and
Cruelty seldom arrives to, please himself with the pains and troubles of the
innocent, and the fruitless toils and labors of the industrious.

And indeed if we would but reflect calmly and impartially, we should find that
not only Reason, but Experience too confirms this assertion, that the honestest
means are generally the surest; and if we could but persuade our selves to make
our observations of the occurrences in the World without envy, malice, or
satyr, we should discover more instances of Families raised, Estates gained,
and Fortunes made, by diligence and labor, justice and truth, honest dealing
and fidelity, and by actions truly noble and generous, than by slight, tricks,
hypocrisy, perjury and baseness; so that if we would either follow the light
of Reason, or the conduct of Example, we must walk in the plain path that God
lays open to us, and never consult our own vicious inclinations for
by-discoveries, must be diligent in our Callings, and honest in our designs,
despise any helps that are shameful and base, and trust to Providence for
happiness and success.

2. Piety therefore is in its own nature the most effectual means of obtaining
the goods of this World, and the virtuous man is most likely to be rich; yet
still all Riches are but transitory things, they make themselves wings and fly
away; can Virtue change their uncertain nature, and make that which is so
slippery become firm and stable? yes even in this respect too the prevalency of
goodness is very conspicuous; though it does not pretend infallibly to assure
our temporal enjoyments, and to make its acquisitions as eternal as it self,
yet it brings along with it the greatest security such things are capable of;
durable Riches are with her, she does not only assist her Votaries in their
pursuit, but confirms them likewise in a lasting possession, which is my second
particular.

Now the securing of Riches, or making them durable, may be considered in a
double respect, either (1.) In relation to our selves, or (2.) In relation to
our posterity.

1. In relation to our selves; Piety contributes to the securing of Plenty and
Riches to their present possessors, or to those that gain them; and here though
the matter be capable of very ample illustration from several Topics, yet it
being an approved Maxim, that all things are best preserved by the same means
they are produced, having already proved that Virtue is the best method of
acquiring Wealth, I need not spend much time to evince that it is the best means
of preserving it likewise; to omit therefore the Arguments which may be taken
from the blessing of God which surrounds his Servants with his Providence, from
the love and kindness of men which is a natural product of goodness, from the
hatred and envy that constantly attends those who raise themselves by undue
means, from the unconstancy of Vice it self, and consequently of all that
depends upon it; to omit, I say, these and several other such like heads of
discourse, I shall confirm this present Proposition only with these two
Considerations.

1. That whatever is got by means that are repugnant to Piety, is not to be
kept, but must be parted with; Repentance is a severe sort of Physic, and must
purge away all our acquired corruptions, before it can restore us into a state
of spiritual health; restitution of what we have unjustly gotten from our
Neighbor is absolutely necessary in order to our reconciliation with God; that
must be returned by compassion and charity, which was extorted by rapine and
oppression; whatever was got by flattering or assisting others in their
debaucheries, must be employed in that which shall promote Piety, and encourage
the virtuous; the fruits of perfidy, fraud and deceit must be all amassed
together, to make a Free Will Offering for the sins that gained them, and we
must wash our hands of the product, if ever we would have our Souls washed of
the guilt; what a miserable sort of delusion is this, to make haste to heap up
Riches by such means, that if ever we consider we must make more haste to
refund them!

Whereas he that scorns any ill means of increasing his store, and makes his
desires still move in obedience to his duty, he that lays hold on nothing, but
that to which Justice gives him a right, nor consults the Devil and his lusts
to gain that which is the gift of God, such a man finds himself secure in his
enjoyments, he can show his title to them by the grant of the King of Kings,
whom he has faithfully served, and by whose bounty he has been enriched, can
with Samuel challenge the whole world to lay claim to any thing in his hands,
he can look on his own Fortune, without reflecting on his Neighbors ruin, and
as he gained honestly and without sin, so he can enjoy securely and without
remorse.

2. My second Consideration to prove that Virtue contributes to the securing of
Riches, is that all Vices have a natural tendency to impoverish mankind, and
were not the gains of impiety to be refunded, yet its own sinful offspring
would devour and consume them. To instance in some few, Ambition treads upon
Wealth, if it be to mount to honor, and will make it self really poor only to
have the vanity of appearing great; Luxury and Riot know no bounds, and the
revenue of Nature it self will scarce satisfy the appetite of that person that
gives himself over to the dominion of his palate; Lust and Debauchery destroy
Body and Estate together, and the greatest comfort they afford, is that they
ruin the Person as fast as his Wealth, and the man is not like to survive his
Poverty; Idleness and Sloth does constantly waste without any acquisition, and
lets that rust and corrupt through disuse, that should be preserved and
improved by action and management; Anger, Envy and Malice engage in enmity and
quarrels, chargeable always in the carrying on, and in the consequence
generally pernicious; and Faction and Disobedience expose the Authors to the
vengeance of the Magistrate, and their Fortunes fall a Victim to Justice.

Even Avarice it self which locks up and guards what it has withheld from its
own nourishment and the wants of the distressed, does not only rob it self of
the use of what it has, and so in effect makes it as if it were not, but seems
also to provoke the whole world to engage in its ruin; the avaricious person
is looked upon as a common enemy, and every one rejoices when he is either by
subtlety or force spoiled on his beloved Mammon, he invites Thieves to rob him,
the cunning to deceive him, and generally even his nearest Relations to cheat
and circumvent him; in short, he has the constant torment of being always
watchful and never secure; so that Virtue must needs be an admirable
preservative of our Fortunes, in preventing so many spoilers which our lust,
passion or folly do naturally produce, in securing us from all that might
impoverish us from within by humility, diligence and temperance; and defending
us from all that may hurt us from without, by the exercise of kindness,
obedience and charity.

2. But the efficacy of Piety is not bounded here, it reaches beyond the grave,
and entails its blessings upon future generations; posterity is secured by it
in the enjoyment of the Fortunes of its predecessors, and the good man is a
Benefactor as well as a Parent even to remote successions, which is the last
thing I am to show.

It was well observed by the Poet, that the third Heir has seldom cause to
vaunt of an Estate unjustly gotten, the curse of God goes along with it, and a
secret worm eats and devours it; as the means of getting it were shameful, and
could not bear the light, so the ruin of it is wrought by an invisible hand,
and we see the downfall even when we cannot discern the blow. Though God
Almighty may sometimes, for reasons best known to his Divine Wisdom, not only
suffer the ungodly to flourish like a green Bay Tree, but to have Children
likewise at his desire, to die in peace, and leave the rest of his substance to
his Babes, yet the next that goes by observes that his Family is gone, he seeks
him, but his place can no where be found; the vain hopes of calling the Land
after his own name are soon vanished, and there is now no means left to know
that there ever was such a person, but the greatness of his ruins, or the
cursed memory of his oppressions.

But the generation of the faithful shall be blessed as well as himself, riches
and honors are established in his house, and his righteousness endures for
ever. God is pleased for the encouraging of Virtue, to take care not only of
good men themselves, but likewise of that which is their greatest concern,
their Children and Posterity, and so to show mercy unto thousands of them that
love him and keep his Commandments; even wicked persons themselves have been
spared, blessings continued, yea and Kingdoms prolonged in a Family, for the
sake of an Abraham, an Israel or a David. Besides, if Riches have been obtained
by laudable means, the same Piety which regulated their acquisition, will mould
and instruct those that are to inherit them, and will make Parents as
sollicitous of propagating their Piety as their Being to their posterity, and
so support their Family with the double foundation of their descendants Virtues
and their own; so that he that shall begin his observations young, and continue
them on to a good old age, yet shall scarce ever discover in all the varieties
of the world, one righteous man forsaken, or his seed begging their bread.

By what has been said I hope I have in some measure evinced the truth of what
I at first proposed, namely, that Piety and Virtue, though they are not
infallible and never-failing means of raising a Fortune in the world, yet are
in their own nature and according to the common course of things, the most
probable means of acquiring Wealth and Riches, of securing their possession to
our selves, and continuing their descent to our posterity, and that therefore
riches and honor are with them, yea durable riches and righteousness.

From the preceding Discourse there may be several very useful Inferences
drawn, to which I cannot now speak particularly; As (1.) We may hence discover
the infinite love of God to us, in endeavoring to win us to our duty by two
Motives so agreeable to human Nature, as the enriching our selves, and
providing for our posterity. (2.) The great folly, as well as wickedness of
pursuing unjust gain, or using unlawful means of acquisition. (3.) The
unreasonableness of retaining what Piety, Charity, or any other part of our
duty calls upon us to dispense. (4.) The imprudence as well as sinfulness of
spending that time which is set apart for devotion and the service of God upon
our private employments. And (5.) The unhappy mistake of too many Parents, in
thinking they have made a good provision for their Children, when they have
taught them cunning and policy, and instructed them in an Employment, without
imprinting in their minds the Rules of Virtue, and the Principles of Religion.
But not having time to prosecute these, I must content my self barely to have
named them, and must recommend these, and such other Inferences that arise from
what has been said, to your own private meditation.

Now to God the Father, etc.

FINIS.

