ADVERTISEMENT.
REmarks upon the Trials of Edward Fitzharris, Stephen College, Count
Coningsmark, the Lord Russell, Colonel Sidney, Henry Cornish, and Charles
Bateman. As also on the Earl of Shaftsbury 's Grand Jury, Wilmore 's Homine
Replegiando, and the Award of Execution against Sir Thomas Armstrong. By John
Hawles, Barrister of Lincoln's Inn.

Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXIX.

A REPLY TO A Sheet of Paper, ENTITLED, The MAGISTRACY and GOVERNMENT OF
ENGLAND VINDICATED: OR, A Justification of the English Method of Proceedings
against Criminals, by way of Answer to the Defense of the late Lord RUSSEL'S
Innocence, etc.
Sic est. acerba fata Romanos agunt,
Scelusque fraternae necis,
Ut immerentis fluxit in terram Remi
Sacer nepotibus cruor.
Hor. Epod. 7. Written by John Hawles, Barrister of Lincoln's Inn.

LONDON, Printed for Israel Harrison at Lincoln's Inn Fore-gate, and Jacob
Tonson at the Judges-Head in Chancery Lane near Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIX.

A REPLY TO THE MAGISTRACY and GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND VINDICATED, etc.
HAving read and considered a sheet of Paper Entitled, The Magistracy and
Government Vindicated, or a Justification of the English Method of Proceeding
against Criminals, by way of Answer to the Defense of the late Lord Russel' s
Innocence, etc. I could not but wonder at the Imprudence of the Publisher, and
of those who applauded it, it being far from a satisfactory Answer; and in
truth in serves only to refresh the Memory of things which the criminally
concerned in have reason to wish forgotten. It must likewise be remembered, that
whoever justifies what is generally taken to have been, ill done in the former
Reigns, in consequence accuses the present Government of Injustice, the setting
things right, which supposes them to have been out of Order, being the true
reason and support of the present Government. I do not say that any thing
heretofore supposed to have been ill done, or that any Person supposed to have
had an hand in those things, supposed to have been ill done, ought therefore to
own himself, as he is reputed, to be an ill Man; or that the matter condemned
as a wicked and illegal thing, ought therefore to be so conceded by him, as
that he should not vindicate himself from the Aspersion of having an hand in
the Matter he is supporsed to be guilty of; or if he had an hand in it, that he
should not defend himself, by showing the Matter was no Crime. But I am sure
the Person who vindicates himself ought to be very circumspect in so doing.
There is a very great difference between pardoning all Criminals, and declaring
that no Man supposed a Criminal has done any thing amiss; the first is an Act
of grace, the last argues the Persons guilty of Injustice, who suppose a Man to
be a Criminal, which Opinion they afterward retract, and own themselves in an
Error. I know it is a very inviduous thing to look back and see all the things
which were ill done for about nine years past; all that at present I Will say is,
that of all the illegal Prosecutions, the Prosecutions in Capital matters
justly gave most Offense; and if my Lord Russel was not illegally prosecuted,
rudely handled, and without such Cause as the Law says is good Cause, put to
death, I will agree that there was no reason to find fault with any thing done
before the first of December 1688. I do not say but that the Injustice to
Stephen College, Colonel Sydney, and Mr. Cornish was more palpable, but I say
the usage of my Lord Russel appeared to be equally unjust: all which the Author
of the abovementioned Sheet thought to slurr over, by insinuating it was the
English Method of proceedings, which he calls a justification of the English
Method of Proceedings in Criminal Matters, etc. And by those words at first
sight one would think that the Author writ to some Foreigners, or if they were
Englishmen, to Persons who did not understand the English method of
Proceedings; and if so, it would have been fit for him to have set down what
the English Method of proceedings was, which he does not: and if he intended
the Paper to be the English method of proceedings against the Lord Russell
vindicated, he ought to have expressed what the method of proceedings against him
was, and have showed the Objections, and vindicated it, by showing the Reasons
of those proceedings, which he has not done. The truth is, instead of treating
of the matter according to the purport of the Title, he only falls on those who
find fault with those proceedings, and ventures on a Point of Law, which he
pretends is the result of the Evidence given against the Lord Russell, without
showing what Crime the Evidence against the Lord Russell proved him Guilty of.
I will not in this place show the unfair Proceedings, nor how far the Evidence
against him proved him guilty, nor what Crime the Evidence amounted unto; it
will come more properly in where it is said his Relations were satisfied with
the justness of his Trial. In the intended Reply to this Answer, I thought it
better to repeat the very words of the Answer I intended the Reply to, that it
might not be said I wrested the Sense of the words of it; and if I omit some
Clauses of the Answer, it is because they are only Reflections on the Persons
pretended to be answered, and do not go to the Matter or Repetitions of that
said before, and therefore are not worth taking notice of.

In the present Age, when the variety and multiplicity of new Prints is such,
that the Money and time required for their purchase and perusual, is more than
an ordinary Gentleman can reasonably allow; it may deservedly be thought a
nuisance to the public, to have their numbers increased, especially since the
complaint of the ingenious Author of the Trimmers Character, that for this very
cause he could almost have wished himself unable to read; but yet the support
of Magistracy and Government is a noble Theme, so useful to the public, and so
generally agreeable to the humor of Mankind, that the mere Subject will (I
presume) be an excuse for this Publication if any thing can be so.

I agree the Prints of this present Age are very numerous, and I can give my
self no other reason for it but one of these four, The exposing to view the
Irregulatities, not to give them an harsher name, in the two former Reigns,
which naturally provokes an Answer by way of Justification, and vice versa,
which I reckon for two of the Reasons; the Authors Profit, which I reckon for a
third; or else a certain Matter said by a suspected Madman of late years in
the Court of Chancery, which I reckon for a fourth Reason. The Story was this,
A certain elder Brother, being reputed a Malignant in the late times, his
Estate was liable to Sequestration: His younger Brother had been of the other
thriving side; so it was agreed between them two, that the Elder should fain
himself mad, and the Custody of him and his Estate should be begged by the
younger. It was done as agreed: The King returning, the elder would needs be
compos mentis, which the younger would by no means admit, but kept him? in
private and in the dark. By accident the elder found a way to discover the
Oppression to a Friend, and desired him to consider how to relieve him:
Accordingly the Friend suggested this matter to the Chancery; which Court made
an Order for the youngers bringing the Elder Brother into Court, which was
done: the poor man being relieved from imprisonment and darkness, and having
not conversed with any person but the above Friend for a long time, and that
but once during his Confinement, was overjoyed, when in Court, and consequently
very lavish of his Tongue; of which the younger Brothers Council took notice,
and said, My Lord, you may easily see what this Man is in his Understanding by
his much talking. To which the suspected Madman replied, as to the Council,
Sir, if you had been restrained from speaking so long as I have been, you would
be glad to make use of the liberty of your Tongue when allowed you: upon which
the Custody of him and his Estate was discharged: but I own it was the saying
of a suspected Madman, and therefore not worth regarding or applying. I
confess I should have guessed that one of those four Reasons had been the
Motive of writing this Sheet of Paper (for I cannot call it a Book, and I will
not be so unmannerly as to call it a Libel or Pamphlet; because if if it was
not written, yet it was perused and appoved of by all the Criminals in my Lord
Russells Sufferings) but that the Author himself gives us the reason of writing
it, by way of excuse, that it was for the support of the Government he writ it.
It is true, he says, the support of the Magistracy and Government is a noble
Theme, so that the Words made one hope he intended his Discourse of Magistracy
and Government in general: But in that he as much deceives the Reader as in his
Title Page; for there is not one word in his Discourse more of Magistracy or
Government, than that Encomium. But I find he intended nothing but the
Justification of the Government in the particular Act of putting the Lord
Russell to death; and therefore If I had been his Adviser, he should never have
made so large a Porch, but made it suitable to his House, and entitled it The
Magistracy and Government of England vindicated, in condemning and executing
the Lord Russel: and if the Author had a mind to it (tho he needed not) I would
be content he should have added by way of Answer to the defense of the late
Lord Russells Innocence, etc. the Paper in no part of it pretending to more
than what that Title fully comprehends; and being so, is one of the hightest
Atfronts that ever was put upon the Legislative Power; which, out of a Sense of
that Lords Innocence, and of the Irregular Proceedings against him, so
cunningly couched, that it was at least doubtful, whether by any ordinary
Course of Law right might have been done to his Memory and Children, have
thought fit by an Act for that purpose, to reverse the Attainder.

At this time of day none would have thought that a necessity should happen of
writing upon such a Topic, when every English Protestant was entertaining
himself with the pleasing prospect of Impartial, due, and indifferent
Administrations, when Authority was becoming amiable and easy to the People,
when the People were inclining to a zeal and affection for the Honor of
Magistrates; in short, when the Law was recovering its clouded credit: in this
Conjuncture none expected to see all the Pillars and Posts in the Town dawbed
with plentiful Title Pages (like so many Histriomastrix's of Will. Prynn's)
directing their Spectators to Books of Obloquy and Reproach, not only on the
Persons and Opinions, but the Authority of Judges, when neither of the three
are corrigible, or so much as censurable, any otherwise than in and by a
Parliament; much less was it expected, that Gentlemen of the Long Robe would
appear in Print for to ridicule their own Profession, and expose our Law even
to the scorn of Foreigners. It would not have been so very strange to have seen
a Doctor of the Commons exercising his Wit and Raillery on the Common Law
Proceedings, when he saw his dearest Diana, I mean, his Excommunication-Process
in danger of becoming useless, and a fair occasion given him for such an Essay
from the Disgust of the People against Westminster Hall.

Had any thing of this kind been done in the time of the Government, which this
Paper pretends to vindicate, it was ten to one but that he had taken a walk
from Aldgate to Newgate for it, and from thence to Tyburn, and it was well if
he escaped a swing there: it might have been High Treason within the Stat. of
Edw. the 3d. for it scandalized the Government, consequently alienated the
Affections of the Subject from the king, which tends to an Insurrection or
Rebellion, consequently is compassing and imagining the death of the King; and
so the last is as natural a consequence from the first, as King Pepin is from
Napkin Nipkin. But this Author had the good Fortune to write in a better time,
when we are not only entertaining our selves with the Prospect of, but we are
well assured impartial Justice will be administered, etc. But for all the
Authors lushious commendations of future times, methinks he a little forgets
himself; for if Authority is but becoming amiable and easy to the People, and
the People but inclining to Zeal for the Honor of Magistrates and the Law but
recovering its clouded Credit; there was a time when Authority was not amiable
or easy to the People, nor the People inclining to Zeal for the Honor of
Magistrates, and the Law clouded: and if he admits that, it will be hard for
him to vindicate the Government in those times; and even against himself he
shows a necessity of enquiring into the reason of those things. We do not
applaud but accuse the negligence or wretchlessness of that man, who recovering
out of a great sickness, be it a Feavor or the like, does not consider what
threw him into that Distemper, whether it was a Cold, a Surfeit, or what else,
to avoid the like Disease another time: And it is plain, that Persons that can
stand by and see others, though their nearest Relations, desected, do not do it
as taking pleasure in seeing the Corpse of their deceased Friends mangled, but
to know what carried them out of this World, to prevent the like disaster, if
they could, in the surviving. What has been may be again: It is fit therefore
at this time to see the Cause why Authority was not amiable to the People, and
why the People had not an affection for the Magistracy and Government, when it
is so agreeable to human kind, and how the Credit of the Law came to be
clouded, and even at this time, when we are recovering at least, if not
recovered out of the Disease. When we desponded of a Recovery, it was as
foolish to think of the Causes, as it is of a dying man, past hopes, to bethink
himself what brought him into that Sickness. It is a vain thing to say that the
Authority of Judges exempts them from an enquiry into, and censure of their
Opinions: A Judge is omne exceptione, major in respect of the Suitor; so that
he cannot except against a Judge as he may against a Juror, but his Opinion is
censurable by all, and punishable if he act against his Knowledge: and as I
think his Opinion is censurable, so I think his person ought to be pointed at
and named in Justice to the Innocent, least a Person Innocent should be
suspected or concluded to be the man whose Opinion is censured. I confess when
I read the Character of the Trimmer, wherein the Author says, he could almost
have wished he could not have read, I cannot but remember that there was a time
when I could have wished I had not read a Word of Law; for it was impossible to
think how many men lost their Lives, and were ruined in their Estates, not only
without, but even against Law: but those that saw it, must not only commiserate
them, but in some sort bear a part in their Sufferings: And the matter went a
little further, for none was secure, but it might be his own turn at some time
or another, and his being a Lawyer no way secured him, it rather endangered
him; for he was capable of being a Spy and a Discoverer, and in that respect
the most Ignorant, which the Lawyers call Lay Gents, were the most unconcerned;
they still thought there was some sort of Justice, and that if they were
innocent they were safe. And on this Rock the Lord Russell, Colonel Sidney,
and Mr. Cornish split. When the Lawyers and better advised fled, I think it is
not only excusable, but the Duty of Lawyers, to discover the Erroneous
Opinions, and much more the wilfully illegal Practices of Judges and of Persons
of their own Profession, who were indeed authorized and sworn to execute
Justice, but practiced the contrary, their Patents neither did nor ought to
exempt them from censure more than it does from punishment. If they have done
according to Law, or according to the best of their Understandings, the first
can do them no harm, and the last ought not to be inflicted on them; but if
they have acted contrary to both, I think they ought to be discovered and
exposed; nay, I think a Lawyer is not safe in concealing them. If it were so
fatal to the Lord Russel, which as the Author says, was so much pitied in his
Fall, to be knowing of matters treated of in several Consults, and not discover
them to the Government, a Lawyer may well suspect that it may be as great a
Crime in him to know several Persons, tho of his own Profession, guilty of
actions more heinous than the matters treated of in those Consults, and not
discover them. If a Lawyer should be guilty of Murder, and another of his
Profession should know it and not discover it, would it be an excuse for him to
say that that other was a Gentleman of the long Robe? And what reason is there
for the Gentleman of the long Robe to be so Civil to these Criminals, though of
their own Profession? Were not they the Persons who in affront to the Inns of
Courts, and in defiance of the Law, hanged up two of their own Profession
before the Gates of three of the Inns of Court; and if the fourth Inn escaped,
it was not for want of good Will but Opportunity? And had they not till of late
hanged up the parboiled Quarters of two Persons at Temple Bar, whereof one was
a Barrister at Law, in affront to the two Neighboring Inns of Court, to show
the power of these Criminals, rather than their knowledge in the Law, to the
reproach of their Profession, and exposing our Law to the scorn even of
Foreigners? The Doctors of the Commons have been but little to blame; their
Oppressions, if any, have been very modereate; theirs never extended farther
than the restraint of Persons, ours have been loaded with Fetters, and
generally ended with Blood; and therefore I will not use the Person of a Doctor
of Commons to ridicule, expose, or accuse the Proceedings of the late Times,
but I will set up John a Styles and John a Nokes, the ordinary Plaintiff and
Defendant in our Law, to accuse, expose, ridicule, and defend Dialogue wise,
the late Proceedings in Capital Matters; the last Part of this Paragraph being
best answered in that manner. But beforehand I must tell you their Characters;
John a Styles is a Man no way concerned in the Proceedings of the late Times,
and is a mere Lay man; that is to say, a Man who understands nothing of Law,
but reasonably sensible, and has the Curiosity to read all Pamphlets and Books
which come out in Print. John a Nokes was a Common Lawyer of no great note or
understanding, but zealous to vindicate the Law; they were acquaintance, often
met and discoursed at a private Table in a Coffee-house: And John a Styles
began.

J. S. Having nothing else to do, I have read over some printed Trials of
Persons who suffered, particularly of Edward Fitzharris, Stephen College,
William Lord Russell, Colonel Sydney, and Mr. Cornish, and the Charge to and
Discourse with the Grand Jury which passed on the Earl of Shaftsbury, and I
cannot but wonder that so many wise Heads as have been laid together to frame
the Common and Statute Law of England, should make or allow it to be so very
uncertain as it is, and even in the Matters of greatest concern, I mean Capital
Matters, which I thought had been certain: For I remember Howell in his
Dodonaes Grove, wherein he makes use of our Names in Civil Matters, commends
the English Method (as a late Author has called it) of Proceedings against
Criminals at an high rate; but to me nothing seems more uncertain, and between
you and I, I hope those Prints may never light into Foreigners hands, for if
they do, it will expose our Professors of the Law, and even the Law it self to
their scorn.


J. N. I own the uncertainty of the Law is the greatest Reproach you can give
it, though a mighty advantage to the Professors of it. There is a Liberty given
by it of giving Judgment any way they please, and still they have an Authority
or Precedent to bear them out; and where the Law is doubtful, you cannot blame
a Judge, if he takes Instructions, and a Gratuity for his pains in private: But
I do not admit our Law is uncertain, I challenge any Man to show me out of the
Trials you mentioned, or any other Printed and Licensed, that the Law is or was
uncertain.


J. S. To satisfy you, look here on Fitzharris's Trial; Is it not the positive
Judgment of the Court, that no Freehold is a good Challenge of a Juror in a
Trial of Treason? is it not as positively resolved in the Lord Russell's and
Colonel Sydney's Trials, that it is no good Challenge in Trials of Treason? Is
it not as plainly the Resolution of the Court in Fitzharris's Trial, that the
Court has a power to put off a Trial in Treason to another day, without the
Consent, and even contrary to the Prayer of the Attorney General? And did not
the Court as expressly resolve in the Lord Russell and Cornish their Trials,
that they could not put off their Trials, no not till the Afternoon without the
Attorneys Consent? Is it not as plain in the charge to the Lord Shaftsbury's
Grand Jury, that the Court said that designing to Levy War was not Treason by
the Statute of Edward the Third, but was made High Treason by the Statute of
King Charles the Second? and yet was not designing alone to Levy War, allowed
to be High Treason by the Statute of Edward the Third in the Lord Russel's
Trial? Was it not agreed by the Court in Colleges Trial, that Prosecutions for
High Treason on the Statute of Car. 2. ought to be within six Months after the
Fact Committed? Was it not denied in the Lord Russels Trial that the Statute of
Car. 2. confined the Prosecutions for Treason on that Statute to any time. I am
indeed weary of enumerating the several Contradictions in those Trials; and
even by the same Persons being the Judges in those Trials, I cannot think my
self or any Man safe, who is subject to such an uncertain Law.


J. N. I own all the things you mention are true, but that does not prove the
Law uncertain, but the Person of the Judge.


J. S. I care not where the fault lies, but I am sure the Subject is in a
miserable Condition; and I am sure it is not only fit, but necessary to make
both Judge and Law certain.


J. N. The last is certain already, but how to make the first certain, is what
no Age has found an Expedient for.


J. S. Make a Law, they shall be certain in their Judgments.


J. N. The Law is so already, though of late days they have made bold to dispense
with that Law.


J. S. Then make a Law they shall be punished if they do not observe it.


J. N. The Law is so already.


J. S. Why then are they not punished?


J. N. Because they are not thought generally to be punishable or censurable
any where but in Parliament, and we have not had any for some years.


J. S. Why is not a Parliament called then?


J. N. That is the Kings Prerogative to do, and he has not thought fit to do
it.


J. S. Why is not there a Law then that the King shall call a Parliament in the
returns of some convenient times, as once a Year, or the like?


J. N. The Law is so already.


J. S. Why then does not the King, who has often promised to Govern by the
Law, and to have frequent Parliaments, call a Parliament?


J. N. He is advised that he is not bound by those Laws; but the calling a
Parliament being left to him, he may call a Parliament or let it alone.


J. S. At that rate, for ought I perceive, he will never call a Parliament; for
though he is resolved, if he is by Law obliged, to call a Parliament, he will do
it; yet if it be but a Discretionary Power in him he will not do it: for, as
the Matter is at present apprehended, the sitting of a Parliament is an Eclipse
of the Regal Power.


J. N. I do not say it is a Discretionary part in him, but I think it is a
thing he ought in Justice to do, as much as constituting Judges, and the like,
or suffering the Terms to be kept, which by the King's Command may be
Adjourned, or put sine die, as we Lawyers talk.


J. S. I am sorry to hear this, for then we Subjects are in a miserable
condition; for at this rate the Judges at Westminster Hall may be as Tyrannical
as the December Viri amongst the Romans; and there is no Redress, for they are not
punishable but in Parliament: And some tell the King, and he so believes them,
as it is reasonable for him to do, because they skill the Law better than he,
That he is not obliged to call a Parliament, notwithstanding the Statutes: and
he will not do it for the above Reason; and consequently they will go on in
their Oppressions in infinitum.


J. N. You are mistaken in the Law and the Fact, for though they advised the King
He was not obliged by those Statutes to call a Parliament, they meant He was
not punishable if he did not call a Parliament; and that a Parliament could not
meet without His Call, they did not mean that in Justice (the word Honesty is
beneath the Honor of a King) He was not obliged to call a Parliament: They
own, that where a Power is lodged in the King, in point of Honor, as the
Calling of a Parliament, or Disbanding an Army, as was the Disbanding the
Hounslow-Heath Army, He ought to do it according to the words and intent of the
Acts of Parliament, by which He was obliged to Disband that Army: And they
owned that it was a Reflection upon, I do not say an Injustice in the King,
that He did not perform the Trust reposed in Him by those Acts: And you very
well remember that That Regal Power of Disbanding an Army, because it was found
the King did not perform His Trust, was afterward given to some Subjects.


J. S. But suppose such Subjects should not execute the Powers given them; or
should, as you call it, break the Trust reposed in them, Are we poor Subjects
in a better Condition than we were before?


J.N. Not at all: You do not consider the condition of all Sublunary Affairs;
you would have all perfectly Easy, perfectly Safe, perfectly Certain, whereas
you know we are subject to Diseases, subject to the Malice of other Men,
subject to the Treachery of other Men, influenced by their Advantages.


J. S. But cannot this be remedied?


J. N. Yes; I think it may, if the Judges were safe in the just execution of
their Offices; and censurable if they acted contrarily: which can never be,
unless their Offices be grantable to them for their lives, and the sitting of
Parliaments be effectually secured.


J. S. But what will you do for the past Matters?


J. N. Forget them all.


J. S. I cannot possibly do it: I have read Horace lately, and there are some
Verses run scurvily in my mind. Auro repensus scilicet acrior,
Miles redibit. Flagitio additis
Damnum, neque amissos colores
Lana refert medicato fuco:
Nec vera virtus, quum semel excidit,
Curat reponi deterioribus.



J. N. There is no reason to mind them, they are Verses of an Heathen Author.


J. S. But he seems to me to be an Author of great sense: But you and I have
wandered extravigantly from the first subject matter proposed: What have you to
say why your Law is not certain?


J. N. It is your fault; you have served me as the Persons in Ovid's
Metamorphosis were, drawn me from one matter to another; and I humored you in
it, in order to give you a satisfactory Answer; and I think I have done it: for
I say, the Law is certain; the Expounders of it have been uncertain.


J. S. Why then you would vindicate the Law by aspersing the Judges, whom you
call Expounders of it: But, pray, if the Law be so for calling Parliaments, as
you have laid it down, why would any Persons advise the King, He was not
obliged to call One.


J. N. In the last part your Question you seem to have lost your Memory, you
said some Persons had done amiss; I owned it, and said they were punishable for
it in Parliament: and I dare say, neither you nor I, if we were in their
Circumstances, would have given any other Advice to the King. And, as to the
first part of your Question, if you will think of it again, you will be of my
Opinion, That when the same Man, on the same Fact and Law, is of different
Opinions it is the Man, not the Law, is uncertain: and that I take to be a
Vindication of the Law; which was the thing I undertook.


J.S. There is some Reason in what you say, and I Will consider of it, and tell
you what I think the next time I meet you here.


Since the Press seems open, and Lawyers Books are published without a License,
another may assume the same Liberty with equal Authority, and with more reason,
when his Province is only to correct the misrepresentations of things, actions
and persons, though made by Authors of Age, Experience, Figure and Learning (I
will not say Candor or Honesty) especially since they are private Men, and
having vented their own thoughts in print, they remain no longer theirs, but
are equally exposed to be Censure or Applause of every Reader. Besides, it is
generally presumed, that an Author expects a public Animadversion, or
otherwise he would never have become such. He presumes his Arguments
irrefragable, and then an Answer does him no mischief; and if they are
otherwise, he deserves it. And surely he stands as liable to be corrected by
others, as others were to be censured by him. And it is more warrantable
certainly to Write and Print for the Vindication of former Proceedings, than it
can be either candid or gentile to arraign or expose them; especially since to
do so, is and must needs be mischievous to past, present, and future
Governments, as Experience will unquestionably teach us; but the other is, and
will be of service to future Administrations, by maintaining the Reputation and
Credit of Judiciary Proceedings.

It is well known, that the Lord Russel being so unfortunate as to fall under
the Accusation of Treason, was the most pitied of any under those
Circumstances, by all who knew either his Family, or personal Character; great
expectations were then had of the issue of that Trial, the event gave great
occasion for Discourse afterward, and almost ever since; the Printing of his
last Speech, with the several Answers to it, did much augment the talk. It
cannot but be remembered how various and different the Sentiments of most were
upon that subject; the Debates concerning it, generally concluded in a pity to
his Person and Relations, as a great Misfortune upon both, and in truth, upon
the Nation, that a Gentleman of such Qualifications should be guilty of so much
Inadvertency (to say no worse) as to engage so frequently in such Consults as
he unhappily did. Some blamed the Jury, most censured the Witnesses, but very
few arraigned either Council or Court: and in truth, the fairness and
indifferency of that Trial was such, that his own Relations were pleased, and
his Enemies angry with those that then sat upon the Bench; and thus is
continued till the present Revolution.

I think it is not warrantable to Write or Print for the vindication of former
Proceedings, if by those Proceedings are meant the Proceedings against the Lord
Russel, Colonel Sydney Mr. Cornish, and seveal others; and I think it is not
only candid and gentile, but the Duty of every Subject who knows them to be
illegal (as I do) to arraign and expose them, and the rather, because tho it
may be mischievous to the past, yet I am sure it is beneficial to the present
and future Governments; as Experience has and will unquestionably teach us;
and I am well satisfied that the discrediting the Judiciary Proceedings of
those Times will be a service to future Administrations; for we well know that
illegal Presidents which have past sub silentio, have by length of time gained
Credit. The Lord Russell was indeed unfortunate to have lived in those times,
when he thought it was his Duty to be active for the Protestant Religion,
Liberty and Property, and every knowing Man was sensible that at that time it
was impossible for him to escape an Accusation of Treason, and being accused,
to escape a Condemnation for that pretended Crime. The honest, but ignorant in
the Proceedings of those times had indeed great expectations of the issue of
his Trial, but the Tories as well as honest Lawyers, who knew the Proceedings
of those times, which the Author of the Sheet would vindicate, made no doubt
but he was a dead Man, from the time he was seized. After his Speech came out
there were no various Sentiments of the subject, all agreed he was Innocent,
none pitied him; for that which was before pity in the honest, was turned into
anger; and all the rest were enraged to find a Man reproach his Enemies in his
Grave: and therefore I cannot but remember some passages of two Books; the one
called, The Antidote against Poison, wherein the Author charge the Paper,
called The Lord Russel 's Speech, That the Reader would not find the Ingenuity,
Sincerity, or plain Style of a dying Gentleman in it, but the Dialect of an
Artist, used to shadow Truth with ambiguous Expressions; and handles it as if
he were to take Exceptions to an Answer in Chancery: it is true, he pretends the
Speech was composed by another Person, and not his Lordship; but since his
Lordship owned it to be his, it was the same thing as if he had composed it
himself: and that Book charge his Lordship with Folly and Falsehood at the
same time. The other called, Succinct Remarks on the Speech of the late Lord
Russel, wherein the Author treats his Lordship as one of the Modern Traitors,
and challenges all the Jesuits in Europe, to stuff a Speech with such
Equivocations as the Protestant Jesuit, the Lord Russel had his; and Jesuit,
Traitor and Hippocrite, Coventry-blew, Protestant-Lord, and the like, was the
Dialect of that Pamphlet.

Besides Jack Ketch's Vindication for giving so many strokes, which it was
plain the Duke of Monmouth, as well as other Persons, thought was done by
design; and therefore warned Ketch not to give him so many blows as he did the
Lord Russel; but he fared never the better for the warning: So that he is not
lamented by all, as is persuaded.

How far the noble Lord engaged in Company, where some matters, as he said,
were discoursed with more heat than prudence, I know not; (the word the Author
gives them of Consults, he borrows from the Popish Plot, and this pretended
Plot was to ape that;) few or none blamed the Jury, but all honest Men
arraigned both the Counsel and Court, as in truth they had reason, the
Unfairness and Partiality of that Trial was such, that his Enemies laughed to
consider what Tools they had made of some who sat on the Bench, to bring about
what they had so long desired, and resolved to effect; but if his own Relations
were pleased; I am sure it is to be imputed to their ill Nature, or Ignorance,
if the Lord Russel was such a Person in his Qualifications, as the World and
the Author represent him to have been; (as for my self, I neither knew him,
nor was known to him, nor knew, or was known to his Relations, so much as by
sight; their Fortunes perhaps carried them above the necessity of studying the
Law, and their Business would not permit them leisure to read the Prints of the
Trials, usually sold about Streets in those times; but if they had known, or
been but credibly informed how different the Carriage of the Court and Counsel
was in the Lord Russel's Trial, from what it was in other Trials; how
different the Resolution of the Court and Counsel in points of Law, in order to
bring the great End about; how very partial they had been in giving, and
permitting Evidence to be given by Hearsay against the Prisoner, which they
would not permit to be given in his Defense; and if they had been convinced of
the Truths of all herein before said by J. S. in relation to the Lord Russel's
Trial, I am sure it was not possible for them to avoid one of the above
Censures, if they had been, or yet are pleased with his Trial.

It could not be for the sake of the Government; for it can never be deemed a
politic Service to rake into old Sores, when lenifying and moderate methods
are more advisable; and if every thing should be republished which has given
disgust to the People, few would escape the lash; the righteous themselves
would scarcely be saved; for abundance of them have tript, either in their
public or private conversation, and some in both, and that notoriously too: I
name no body. Besides, the Government must of necessity never allow the
Doctrines divulged in this Pamphlet, unless it is intended that its Being and
Continuance shall be as precarious as a Beneplacito Judgship, and as dependent
upon the People's Humor, as that is upon the King's: Nor can any Government
countenance and encourage the Arraignment of a considerable number of wealthy
and worthy Citizens, with the printed Censure and Insinuation of their being a
parcel of corrupt, ignorant, injudicious, dishonest, and partial Fellows, and
this is done to the full, when said, that the contrary would have sworn to a
Not guilty, or at leastwise they should if the Auuhour had been there. But most
of his Readers are of another opinion, notwithstanding the second Letter, page
7.

If Bodies Politic are like Natural Bodies, as some have said, it is fit to
search the bottom of the Sores, before the Medicine be applied to it, for
Lenitives are not proper for all Sores; it makes some worse; whilst they make a
seeming Cure, they at last break out into dangerous Imposthumations, and for
some Sores Corrosives are the best Medicines: Private Conversations do not
disgust the People; it is the public Enquiries, and of those the bloody ones
do most distaste them, and of those none more than the Execution of the Lord
Russel, who they upon just Reason thought dyed a Martyr for the Protestant
Religion, their Liberties and Properties, and in gratitude mourned for him
whilst alive, and require an account of his Death of those who brought him to
the Block. I am sure all Governments, which do not depend on the Peoples
Good Will, must be as precarious as a Beneplacito Judgship, and be held by a
force which a Prince can never be sure of, of which we have had a late Example;
and I am sure those who think they are injured in themselves, in their
Relations, or in their Fears; what inflicted on those that suffered, being
justly feared by all the honest men, who by Friends or Rewards escaped, are as
yet unsatisfied, and which are the greater number, the late Revolution plainly
showed; and whether it is better to gratify those who are proud of the Spoils
of their Neighbors, and confident enough yet to bid them defiance, and
threaten to act the same things over again, as soon as they arrive at Power
enough so to do; or else to do right to the Injured, who are by much the
majority, I leave to better Judgments to determine.

I am not for arraigning the wealthy, worthy, or any Citizens, as the Author
does, p. 2. but for placing the Saddle on the right Horses backs, the Judges
and Counsel, whom the Author in the same page endeavors to excuse; It is
true, it is cunning in them to insinuate Fears in all to gain a Party, that at
least number may defend them; but enquire narrowly into the matter, the number
of those who have done those Wrongs and Mischiefs which the Nation is sensible
of, as were never acted amongst any People in so short a time, are very
inconsiderable; and truly, I think it were well if some person, to make the
Government sensible of their weakness, would single them out. A.B. Bancroft
could never make K. James I. sensible of the inconsiderableness of the
puritanical Party, as they were then called, who boasted themselves to be the
majority of the Nation, till he gave the King a List of their Names, and the
number of their Heads; which being few, the Party became after despicable.

Was it a Secret to the World, that a variance between the Indictment and the
Evidence might be alleged on the general Issue? Did no Man in Town know that
Treason, and the Misprision of it, are different Crimes? Is the distinction
between them such a new invention, and so very useful, as to be an equivalent
for the want of Counsel in capital Trials? as the Preface and Letter do
insinuate, if they do any thing. Who ever doubted, but that proofs of Treason
must not be by hearsay or argument only? Was it ever a question for this
hundred years, but that every Indictment of Treason must contain an Overt Act?
Or that less than two Witnesses was allowable for proof of that Crime? Or did
any Man ever scruple by that Keble 's Statute-Book contains a true Copy of the
13 Car. 2. cap. 1. which requires Witnesses credible? Now if these Questions
must be answered in the Negative; how can the advice of these Letters be
assistent to a better Defense, than was known long since?

It was not a secret to the knowing part of the World, that variance between
the Indictment and the Evidence might be alleged on the general Issue; nor
that Treason and Misprision of it were different Crimes; nor that proofs of
Treason must not be by hearsay, or argument only; or that less than two
Witnesses were not allowable for proof of that Crime; but the contrary of those
were so frequently practiced and imposed on the Juries, unknowing in the Law,
by persons whose Characters imported Integrity and Knowledge, though their
Practice contradicted their Characters, that it was fit to let the World know
what the Law was in vindication of it. I am sure it is very fit for the Liberty
of the Subject to have the Law established certain, and those who are against
it, and would have it as arbitrary as in the late time it was, do it with a
design to have the present Government as odious as the former, and then they
know, by the late Example, that it will be as easily subverted; but if
Conspiracies to levy War are not Capital crimes, are they therefore
unpunishable? Surely they are not. It is true according to the Doctrine of the
late times, nothing but hanging and quartering, or tantamount, was thought a
punishment. There are such things as Fines and Imprisonments; which are pretty
severe punishment; and upon occasion; there is a power in the Legislative
Authority to make such Crimes capital, even after they are committed, but that
Authority did not think fit to vest such a power in the ordinary Courts of
Justice.

The Assertions are two, that there was neither Charge nor Proof, that the
Indictment and Evidence were both insufficient.

I must confess, that it would be a mighty Addition to the Liberty of the
Subject, to have the Law established, and declared to be what the late Judge
does argue it is; for then there would be a freedom for Malcontents to
endeavor their own satisfaction by Conspiracies and Consults, and that with
impunity. But as the Law was, and always has been taken to be, an English
Subject has very little color for his pretense to such a privilege as that
Doctrine gives.

The Indictment is, That at such a place and time he did compass and imagine
not only to deprive the K. of his Government and Royal State, but to kill and
put him to death, and to procure a miserable slaughter among the K's Subjects,
and to subvert the Government of Engl. and to raise a Rebellion against the K.
Then follows, That to fulfill and perfect these Treasons, and traitorous
Imaginations, he, together with other Traitors, did then and there with them
traitorously consult, conspire, conclude, and agree to raise a Rebellion, and
to seize and destroy the Guards of the K's Person, contra, etc. Now whether
these last acts be not a natural and genuine Evidence of the former, let any
rational man judge: But I will particularly prove, that this Indictment was
sufficient to warrant the Judgment which the Court gave and pronounced upon a
Verdict, that the accused was guilty of that Fact in the Indictment, and then
answer the Objections.

1. There is a sufficient Treason alleged. 2. Here Is a sufficient Overt Act;
both these I Will agree are necessary, and if either were wanting, the Indictment
was naught. Now it must be agreed to me, that the first is clear and plain; for
by the Law to compass or imagine the death of the K. Q. or their eldest Son, is
high Treason. It is true by the same Law some open act, of which humane Justice
can take a Conusance, is requisite to be proved; the very words of the Statute
do expressly require it; and in truth it is no more than what must have been,
had no such words been used; for thoughts are secret, and can never he
arraigned, proved, or censured any otherwise than as they are discovered by
some Overt Act; so that that Clause requiring an appearance of the Compassing
and Imagination by some Overt Act, or open Deed, is no more than would have
been impliedly requisite, had the Clause been omitted. It Is the Imagination and
Compassing which is the Treason, that alone is the Crimen laesae Majestatis,
which is prohibited and condemned; the Overt Act is not the Treason, that is
only a necessary circumstance, without which no Court can ever take conusance
of the other. And it is necessary to allege some such deed, a necessitate rei,
without respect to the words of that Statute. I insist the longer upon this,
because it is used as an Objection, that the Clause of provably attaint by,
etc. is restrictive, whereas it is not so; for it is only to make that first
specified Treason of Imagination and Compassing to be a thing intelligible and
triable; and farther to prove this, it is considerable, that this Requisite of
the Overt Act is of use and necessity barely, and only in the case of that
which is first mentioned, viz. Compassing; for the other sorts of Treason are
Acts themselves, whereof notice may be had, as levying War, violating the Q's
Bed, and the like; and in an Indictment you need only allege the Facts
themselves, as that there was a War levied, there was a carnal knowledge had,
and the like. And this farther appears from the very form of Indictments used
ever since that Statute; for there never was an Indictment (and if there were,
it could never be good) barely averring an Overt Act without an express
allegation of the Compassing.

Then the Matter results solely into this Question, Whether the Fact here laid
be naturally and necessarily declaratory of the Parties Imagination to destroy
the King; for if so, the Indictment is undoubtedly good; and it can never be
called a constructive Treason, or a Thing devised by the Judges Interpretation
of the Statute; for they adjudg no more Treason than what the Statute declares,
and that is an imagination of the King's Death; now whatsoever is signicative
of a man's Intention or Imagination, is a sufficient Overt-deed to demonstrate,
that that Man had such an Intention or Imagination; and whatsoever is
expressive or significative of a Man's intending, compassing, or imagining of
the King's Death, is a sufficient Overt Act to prove and make such a Man a
Traitor within this Law. Now that a Consult about, and an Agreement and
Conclusion actually to seize the King's Guards, and raise a Rebellion, are a
natural and genuine declaration, that the person who did so consult, agree, and
conclude, did compass and imagine the Death of the King, is surely plain
enough; for a Rebellion, if successful, can determine in nothing else but the
King's Death, either Natural or Civil, which is all one within this Law; now he
that designs and intends the necessary means naturally conducing to a
particular end, that Man may certainly be said to intend and design that end.
Causa causae est causa causati. If the Deed tend and conduce to the Execution
of the Treason, that is a sufficient Overt Act, says Coke, 3 Inst. 12. and in
the same Book, fol. 6. he has these words, That he who declares by Overt Act
to depose the King, is a sufficient Overt Act to prove that he compasses and
imagines the Death of the King; and so it is to imprison the King, to get him
into his Power, and to manifest the same by some Overt Act; this is also a
sufficient Overt Act for the Intent aforesaid.

Having trackt the Author thus far to very little purpose, still expecting
what he would say in Justification of the English Method of Proceedings against
Criminals, particularly against the Lord Russell, with which I can by no means
be reconciled. I was a little surprised to find him begin with a Justification
of the Indictment; I expected he should have said something to justify the
clapping that Lord up close Prisoner, without letting him know why or
wherefore; the bringing him to his Trial as soon as he was indicted, not giving
him the respite of an hour to prepare himself for his Defense; and have shown a
Reason why no Freehold was no Challenge to a Juror in his Case, which was
allowed to be a good challenge in Fitzharris his Case; have shown a reason why
hearsay was not as good Evidence for the Prisoner as it was against him; and
why the Court permitted hearsay to be given in Evidence against him, and would
not permit it to be given in Evidence for him; these, and twenty other things
complained of in that Trial. By the Title of the Paper one would have expected
that the Author would have vindicated the manner of proceedings, rather than
the opinion of the Judges construing such or such Facts to be such or such
Crimes: But since the Author, as he had reason, has thought fit to pass by
all the irregularities of the Trial, and ties himself up only to prove the
Indictment good and legal, and the resolution of the Judges to be Law; I shall
therefore only speak as to those two matters.

The Indictment was for compassing and imagining the death of the King, and
conspiring to levy War, which was compassing and imagining the Death of the
King, and as an Overt Act they consulted and agreed to raise a Rebellion, and
to seize and destroy the Guards of the King's person: That there is a
sufficient Treason alleged in the Indictment, I agree; but that there is a
sufficient Overt Act of the Treason alleged, I deny: For though the death of
the King is sometimes a consequent of a Rebellion, yet it is not always, much
less is it a consequence of a Consult, Agreement, or Conclusion to raise a
Rebellion; and to say truth, it is ridiculous to say that a Conspiracy to do
one thing, is an Overt Act of a Conspiracy to do another; and the Author
himself, in effect, owns it to be true, when he says an Overt Act must be
something done, but if an Agreement to raise Rebellion, and seize the Guards,
should be called something done; yet it not being a necessary declaration of
the parties imagination to destroy the King, as it is not, it is not an
Overt Act of that Treason. The truth is, the Author in this matter uses
abundance of words to the same sense, which at the first sight looks like
arguing, but if considered have nothing of reasoning in them: He says it is a
natural, genuine, necessary, Declaration, etc. but gives no color of Reason,
more than abundance of words, to prove the consequence; but because I would put
the Author in the right way of reasoning this matter, in which there is
nothing of Law, but common sense, and of which every man of equal natural Parts
is as good a Judge as the best Lawyer. I say, there are two sorts of Overt-acts
of a Man's Intentions; some prove themselves, and are direct Evidence of the
Intention; as for Example: if a man cuts another's Throat, though that other
does not dye of the Wound, yet it is an Overt Act of an Intention to kill him,
some are Overt-acts and not direct Evidences of the Intention; but the
Intention, as well as the Overt Act, must be proved; as if a Man should be hid
in a place where the King usually comes, armed with unusual Weapons, this is a
good Overt Act in the Indictment, and good Evidence on the Trial, if the
Prisoner can give no good account of his being so lurking, and so armed. And
though I will not say that these are all the sorts of Overt-acts that may be
laid in an Indictment, yet at least I show the Author, that Overt-acts are
capable of a Reason, and since he has offered none for his Overt-acts, I
suspect he could give none; but if a Conspiracy to seize the Guards be an
Overt Act of compassing, etc. I pray what were those guilty of who said the
Guards were illegal, when there was no apparent cause for keeping them on foot?
Was not the suppressing them a pretty genuine consequence of such an Opinion?
and then you know, Causa causae est causa causati; and so it follows as
naturally as the Soldiers Posture did on the Beat of Drum.

In 3 Inst. p. 12. it is held, that a Preparation by some Overt Act to depose
the King, or take the King by force and strong hand; or to imprison him till he
has yielded to certain Demands; this is a sufficient Overt Act to prove the
compassing and imagination of the King's Death; for that this, upon the matter,
is to make the King a Subject, and to despoil him of his Regal Office; and so
be says it was resolved by all the Judges of England, Hill. 1 Jac. 1. in the
Case of the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, Watson and Clark, Seminary Priests; and so
he tells us in the same place, that it had been resolved by the Justices in the
Case of the Earls of E. and S. Now if we consider the reason why these are
Overt-acts of Treason, 'twill appear to be only because of their natural
tendency to the accomplishment of that particular Treason of compassing, which
holds the same in the Author's Case as well as in those there mentioned.

A Conspiracy with a foreign Prince is agreed by my Lord Coke, ib. 14. to be
Treason, if it be to invade the Realm; and an Overt Act of such practice to be
a sufficient Overt Act of a compassing the King's Death; and the reason is,
because such actions cannot be thought to be intended for any other purpose;
and yet that particular Act may be accomplished, and it may so happen, as that
the King's Death may not follow, and yet they are Overt-acts of that
treasonable Imagination, because of their conduciveness and tendency thereto.
The Case of Cardinal Poole was, writing a Book of the Pope's Supremacy, in
which were contained Incitements of Charles the Emperor to an Invasion of this
Realm; and that was held an Overt Act of imagining the King's Death. In the
Lord Cobham 's and Sir Walter Rawleigh 's Case, a Conspiracy, Consult, and
Agreement to promote an Insurrection and procure an Invasion, was held an
Overt Act, I Jac. 1. and their meeting, consulting, and agreeing, was laid as
an Overt Act, though discovered before the thing took effect. Dr. Story 's
Case, which is mentioned by the Lords Dyer and Coke, was no more than a
Practice and Persuasion to promote an Insurrection and Invasion, and the
Overt Act that was alleged was the writing of Letters for that purpose; which
is no more influential toward it, nor so much, as frequently meeting,
consulting and conspiring, and at last concluding and agreeing to make an
Insurrection. The Case of Mr. Coleman was no other; for whatsoever the
Indictment laid, the Evidence was only of Letters to the like effect (as to
this point) with those of Dr. Story; and that Case of Dr. Story was before the
13 Eliz. which made a new Treason during her Life; for the Trial was in
Hillary Term, and the Parliament did not begin till April following. A
Machination or Agreement to raise a Rebellion naturally tends to the
Destruction both of King and People; and an Advice to it has been adjudged so:
as in the Reign of Hen. 4. one Balshal going from London, found one Bernard at
Plow in the Parish of Ofley in the County of Hartford, Balshal told him that
King Ric. 2. was alive in Scotland, (which was false, for he was then dead,)
and advised him to get Men, and go to King Richard; in Mich. 3. Hen. 4. Rot. 4.
you will find this adjudged Treason. Throgmorton 's Case is as plain; for his was
only a Conspiracy to levy War within this Realm, he did not join in the
Execution; and the Conspiracy alone was declared to be a sufficient Overt Act
by the Judges: It Is no Answer to it, to say that a War was afterward levied,
for quoad him 'twas a bare Consult; his Offense was no more than that. In Sir
Henry Vane 's Case, meeting and consulting were alleged and held to be
Overt-acts. The Case of Constable mentioned in Calvin 's Case, was only an Act
tending to deposing the Queen, as dispersing Bills in the Night, that Edw. 6.
was alive in France; and held an Overt Act declarative of his compassing her
Death, and he was executed for it: and in the Report of Calvin 's Case you have
several other Cases mentioned, where endeavors to withdraw Subjects from their
Allegiance, have been adjudged Overt-acts of this species of Treason, the
compassing, etc.

The word Compass in the Statute is of a larger extent than only to mean an
actual Assault on the King's Person, and an endeavor to cut his Throat; it
most certainly implies any consult or practice of another thing directly which
may produce that effect, as dissuading people from their Fidelity: such was
Owen 's Case in K. James 1st's time, in the 13th year of that Reign: his Advice
was to this effect, That King James being excommunicated by the Pope, might be
killed by any man, and that so to do was no Murder; for being convicted by
the Pope's Sentence, he might be slaughtered without a fault, as an Executioner
hangs a Criminal condemned by Law: and for this he was hanged as a Traitor. He
that denies the Title to the Crown, and endeavors to set it upon another's
Head, may do this without a direct and immediate desiring the Death of him
that wears it; (so said Saint-John in his Argument against the Earl of
Strafford,) and yet this is Treason, as was adjudged in the Case of Burton, and
in the Duke of Norfolk's Case, 13 Eliz. This denying of the Title with Motives,
though but impliedly of Action against it, has been adjudged an Overt Act of
compassing the King's Death, as it was in John Sparhawk 's Case, Pasch. 3 Hen.
4. Rot. 12. The like was the Case of John Awater, who was indicted for a
Treason of that ture in Kent, and the Indictment removed into B. R. Trin. 18
Ed. 4. see Rot. 17. and he was thereupon afterward outlawed as a Traitor; and
so was Thomas Heber at the same time; and words significative of an actual
intention have been held so, as are the opinions in Yelver. 107. 197. Arthur
Crohagan 's Case, Cro. Car. 332. and abundance of others might be named, as
they are reported in our Law Books, but I do not particularly mention them, for
that their Authority in some of them is very slender, and may be ill used to
the straining of rash and unadvised Words into a signification of a man's
compassing, when perhaps the man never thought as he spoke: however, all of
them do evince, that advised and deliberate Preparations, moving to a danger to
the King's Person, have all along been held Overt-acts of a compassing his
Death; and some of them prove, that Preparatives and Motives to the levying of
a War, have been held Treason, as was Sir William Ashton of Suffolk, 31 Hen. 6.
mentioned in Cro. Car. 119. for making Ballads reflecting upon the King, and
writing Letters to the Men of Kent, exciting them to rise to aid the then Duke
of York, etc. ad guerram levandam; and no mention of any War actually levied.
Germain and Tailor 's Indictment has very little more in it mentioned than the
like Preparations and Incitements to a Rebellion; and yet the Treason there
laid was a compassing the King's Death, anno 2 Edw. 4. as at large appears in
the same Report of Cro. Car. amounts to no more than the Indictment in
question; viz. That he compassed the King's Death; and to accomplish that
Intention, he dispersed diverse Writings, etc. ad intentionem that the People
should rise, and levy War, etc. the Judgment in that Case, Drawing, Hanging,
and Quartering: the like is Collingbourn 's Case 2. Rich. 3. in the same Rep.
122, where he is indicted in like manner, for exciting and moving the People to
an Insurrection and War, and he incurred the like Judgment; which Cases are
infinitely short of this in question: and it cannot but be wondered that any man
who has read them should question whether a consulting and conspiring about
rising, and an actual agreement and determination to rise, be an Overt Act of
compassing the King's Death. In the very Trial of the Lord Stafford is it
affirmed by Sir William Jones (who was certainly of great Authority with the
Author) that the meeting and consulting together is an Overt Act, though the
thing agreed on be never put in Execution; and it is there resolved by the
Judges, that the same Treason may be proved by two Witnesses to several
Overt-acts, though one speak of Words or Actions that were spoken or done at
one time and place, and another speak of Words or Actions at another time and
place; which argues that Words, much more a Consult and Agreement, may make an
Overt Act. Even in the Case of Stephen College, in which though the Trial
has been censured, yet the Indictment never was, and in that Indictment the
Treason is laid as in this Case, That he traitorously imagined and compassed
the King to Depose, Kill and Destroy; the Over-acts are, That he armed himself,
and advised others to arm, and spoke several Words, etc. Here was no War
levied, only a Preparation, and yet that was allowed an Overt Act: and as for
the Words, if they are allowed to be one, with much more reason Meeting,
Consulting, and Agreeing to do.

As to the Objections; surely there is no weight in the first, which is Page
10. that criticizes upon the Word fait Act, and that it is only a meeting to
agree, and an agreement to do, but 'twas not done: Suppose they had concluded
and agreed to poison or stab, etc. according to the opinion in that Page, this
was no Treason; for it is only agreeing and concluding upon a thing to be done,
but it is not done. He does in p. 13. argue, that this can never be an
Overt Act of compassing the King's Death, because levying War is a distinct
species of Treason; and a conspiring to levy War is not a levying War; and even
levying War it self cannot be assigned as an Overt Act of compassing, unless
the Indictment were particularly for that: but surely another sort of Act, that
savours of another species of Treason, if it naturally conduce to the
accomplishing of the first species, viz. that of compassing, it may be assigned
as an Overt Act of it; and Sir H. Vane 's Case is quite otherwise, and there a
levying War was the Overt Act alleged of the compassing, and allowed by all
the Judges; and all the Indictments in the West upon Monmouth 's Rebellion were
so, and yet drawn by every good Advice; besides, what Answer can be given to
the Cases I have cited, where Consults, Conspiracies, Practices, Advices,
Letters, Persuasions, and other Motives and Preparatives to an Insurrection,
have been held Overt-acts of an Imagination of the K's Death, though no War was
levied, no Insurrection had.

It Is apparent from what has been said before, that to take the K. Prisoner, or
to seize his Person, is a compassing of his Death; and if so, then to sit in
Council to conspire the effecting of that, is an Overt Act of compassing the
K's Death; and this Case amounts to that, here was a Consultation to seize upon
the K's Guards, which could tend to nothing but the seizing of his Person; and
then the consequence is plain. The Author says, p. 14. If it had but been
alleged in the Indictment, that in pursuance of the Consult and Agreement,
there had been a view of the Guards, and a Report made, that the thing was
fecible, this would have been more to the purpose, how much more no man can
tell; for every Objection in the Book would have been as good against that as
this. The great Objection he seems to rely on, is, That the Law takes no notice
of them: for once I will suppose that it does not, and then let us observe if
any Argument can be drawn from thence: Perhaps the thing was not used or known
when the 23 Ed. 3. was made. Can nothing be Treason if the Plot laid to
accomplish it be concerning a thing not in esse at the time of the Stat.
Certainly it may. If several Malcontents should consult, and agree, and
prepare (in order to an Insurrection) to seize the Tower, Portsmouth, Hull, and
Plymouth Fort, would not this be an Overt Act of Treason? and yet our Law takes
no notice of any Garrisons there or any where else; they have no Relation to
the Militia, nor were there any Arms in those places in Ed. 3. his time, that
we read of in our Law Books; if this be otherwise, why did not the Author find
fault with Rouse 's Indictment, which was tried much at the same time with this
in question. Suppose all the Gentlemen-Pensioners, Grooms of the Stole,
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, and the like, killed in the Night, and the doors
in Whitehall broken up, and all the Swords, Muskets, and Pistols there taken
away, and yet it happened that the K's Person was left untouched; would this be
an Act of Burglary and Murder only? We have no Law Books that take notice of
Arms at Whitehall, or such Names as those Servants go by: and suppose, at the
same time, upon the Consult, that the Conspirators did move, discourse, debate,
and conclude of an Insurrection, would it not then be Treason? If not, nothing
can be so, unless the K's Person be murdered or seized; and the St. should not
have said compass or imagine, but seize or kill, etc. It suffices then, that
the Guards are in common understanding known to be used and employed for the
Attendance upon and Preservation of his Person. If common Sense and Reason be
judge; no man can think but that he who intended to move an Insurrection, and
seize the Guards, had a farther design upon the K's Person; and then it is
Treason: If otherwise, a King of England is in a worse Condition than the worst
and meanest of his Subjects; for a King must not, cannot in or by our Law,
assault, strike, seize, attach, or imprison in Person, and consequently cannot
defend himself; and shall not his Servants, Guards and Attendants (which are
all of the same nature) wear a Sword, or carry a Musket before him? If they do
so, is it not then known that they do it? if it be commonly known to be so,
does not he that seizes and destroys those Attendants, endanger the K's Person?
and if that be so, the Inference is easy. It can never be, it will never be
allowed for Law, that a seizing all the K's Guards is only a breach of the
Peace, unless we renounce the Law, and will judge more by Inclinations and
Partiships than by Reason and Precedents. As to the distinction between an
actul seizing them, and a Consult and Agreement to seize them, what I have
urged before overthrows it; and what the Author says does no maintain it, for
both have a tendency to the execution of the Treason intended.

I will not take the pains to remark upon all the Inconsistencies of the
Concessions and Denials in the Book, they are obvious to the Readers. As to his
Quarrel at the K's Guards as an illegal thing and terrible to the People,
somewhat of the French growth, I hope the K. will always preserve them for his
own personal Preservation, notwithstanding the Authur's Opinion. As to his
temporary Laws which declare Words Treason, most part of them were affirmative
of the old Law, and were made only in compliment to a new crowned Head, when
they prohibited nothing but what was before so: and for the rest, no Conclusion
could be made from them for the maintenance of his Assertion if the had
repeated them; which since he does not, nor will I.

As to the Cases cited by the Author of the Antidote (which I have mentioned,)
he agrees to Constable 's Case, but does not distinguish it in its reason, from
that in dispute. He denies the Authority and Law of Dr. Story 's Case, which no
body ever denied before him. He says that in the Lord Cobham 's Case there were
People assembled, but gives not any Answer to what the Antidote affirmed, viz.
that the Overt Act taken notice of in the little Book called, The Pleas of the
Crown, was only the conspiring to make an Insurrection. He does confess, that
in the Lord Gray 's Case, there was only a Conspiracy: He says, that in Sir H.
Vane 's and Plunket 's Case there were several other Ingredients to mount them
to Treason, but what they were no body must learn, at least not from the
Author, for he names none of them.

He consumes half a page in an Encomium upon the Judiciousness of that Court
which made a conscientious legal Scruple, whether the Murder of a Mistress by
her Servant were Petit Treason, by reason of the difference of her Gender? but
at last he tells us, That the Judges of the Common Pleas did, upon much
deliberation, satisfy those of the King's Bench, that Master and Mistress were
in effect but one.

The Indictment contained no new constructive Treason, but only that which was
plainly and directly declared in and by 25 Edw. 3. if the letters of it make
words, and the word sense, and one man may be allowed able to read them as well
as another.

Since the writing of the last Paragraph there came to my hands another
Pamphlet, written by a New Observator; but I suppose the Judges that shall be
will correct that sort of Licentiousness which he assumes in his Remarks: which
if they do not, they will have fine easy Places on it, as well as their
Predecessors, and much good may it do them.

Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Horat. The Truth is, the Indictment, though I think it was not good, yet it
was the least defective of any thing; in that whole prosecution the Evidence
was the most defective, (which the Author dares not bite at,) and yet the
Author does not pretend it amounted to more than an intention to levy War,
which is not Treason within the Statute of Edw. 3. he quotes indeed a great
many Cases to prove his Thesis, to every one of which something shall be
hereafter said, only at present I cannot but wonder at the assurance of any man
who pretends to understand the Law, when the Parliament, which is the supreme
Court of Judicature in the Nation, has so often adjudged, that it is not
Treason within the Stat. of Ed. 3. that he should think to confront and
overruled those Judgments by Judgments given at Westminster. or at the Assizes:
Surely it is as ridiculous, as if in any Court at Westminster. a Counsel should think
to ever-rule a Judgment given there, by the Authority of a Judgment given in an
inferior Court by a Steward, or a Bailiff; that Person was excusable, because
he did not, pretend to understand Law, who said in Parliament, that if they did
not do him right there, he would not abide by it, but would bring the Matter
into Westminster Hall. For is not the Stat. of C. 2. which makes a Conspiracy
to levy War during the King's life an express Judgmt. of the Parliamt. that it
was not Treason within the St. of E. 3. is not the St. of the 13. of the Q.
which made it Treason during her Life; another express Judgmt. in the same Case
to the same purpose. And is not the Judgmt. of the Parliamt. as it is the
supreme Court of the Nation, of more Authority than any Judgmt. in Westminster. Hall,
and much more than any Judgmt. at the Assizes or Sessions. Besides, consider
the Parliamt. which consists of all the Nobility, assisted with all the Judges,
and of the best of the Gentry, and assisted with Lawyers, and none can doubt
which Judgmt. ought to carry most authority with it. Consider the imputation
which is laid on the St. of E. 3 by such construction a St. seemed to be penned
with all Wisdom and circumspection imaginable, out of a sense of what the
Subjects had suffered by the uncertainty of the Law before, and which in all
ages has been applauded for the best penned Act to be found, and which in all
ages has been made the Standard of Treasons; for when out of Flattery, or in
compliance with the King, Treasons have been multiplied, out of a sense of the
mischief, they have afterward still been restrained to the St. of E. 3. and yet
by this construction, that St. is made guilty of an absurd tautologie; for if
conspiring to levy War be compassing the K's death, which by that St. was
Treason, it was absurd afterward to say, that actual levying War, should be
Treason; because a War cannot be actually levied, without a Conspiracy to do
it, though there might have been a Conspiracy to levy War, and yet not
afterward actually levied: And the true Reason of the difference, is this:
What tends to the mischief of the King's Person, every one knows; but what is
War, is not so certainly known. Those who went to throw down Enclosures, did
not think it to be levying War, though it were so; and it would be hard to make
their consulting to do it high Treason: I do not instance in this as a parallel
Case with the matter in question; but only to show, that what is War, or not
War, is not so easily known, as at first sight apprehended; and the Makers of
this Statute, who had smarted by pretense of levying War, were more strict in
penning the Clause of War, than they were in penning the Clause of Compassing,
etc. In the time of Henry the Fourth, in the Earl of Northumberland's Case, it
was doubted, whether his riding armed with a Force, for a private Revenge, was
not levying War? which was a Doubt so great, that it was resolved in
Parliament, to be only a Trespass. And if what is War is so uncertain, the
intention of levying it is more uncertain. Let any one but remember how
narrowly Blague escaped, but for talking of the feasibleness of taking the
Tower.

Now though I agree, That conspiring to depose or imprison the King, is high
Treason, within the first branch of the Statute of Edward the Third, because
they destroy him in his politic Capacity; it is no manner of inference to say
therefore, conspiring to levy War is high Treason within that Statute; because,
if the Conspiracy took effect, the Death, or Deposing the King, does not
naturally, much less necessarily follow; nay, it very rarely has so done: And
let any one examine our Histories, it will not be found to be a Consequence
once in forty times; whereas if a Conspiracy to depose or imprison the King, if
it take its effect, he is actually deposed or imprisoned. The first Conspiracy
is remote; the last is next the Deposing; (a distinction of great use in our
Law, and in Treason, as is to be seen in my Lord Bacon's Elements;) much less
does it prove, that the Consequence of a Design to seize the Guards, is to
kill, depose, or imprison the King: For time was, when the Kings of England
were very safe, and at at full liberty without Guards; and, to say truth, no
one instance, in our English Histories, can be given, That a King has been
killed, deposed, or imprisoned, for want of Guards. I know it has been
pretended, that King Charles the First had not went from White Hall, if he had
had Guards; but that is but a Conjecture: And it is a doubt, whether his
departure was forcible, or voluntary. Guards may defend a Prince from a sudden
Attempt, (and scarcely so; for Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth of France
were killed; the first in the midst of his Army, the last in the midst of his
Guards) but not from the violence of the People; a Prince is safe in the love
of his Subjects, and without it Guards are but of little use. There were two
late Kngs, who did not well know whether they were not Prisoners to their own
Armies; and Mahomet the Fourth, Emperor of the Turks, was a Prisoner for some
time to his own Guards, when he thought himself at perfect liberty; so little
difference there is between Guards for a Prince's safety, or his safe
imprisonment. I purposely omit speaking to the Cases of the Lord Cobham, and
Gray, Watson, and Clark, because I intend to answer them last of all, and for
the same reason I speak not of Sir Walter Rawleigh's Case, because it was the
same with the other, though the Author cunningly Musters them as distinct
Cases. The Case of the Earls of E. and of S. is reported short by the Author;
for their Indictment and Fact was for designing to take the Queen into their
Custody; and for that end assembled a multitude of armed Men, which is actual
levying War, and so makes nothing toward proving the Matter in Question, which
is a Conspiracy to levy War, without actual levying War. Cardinal Poole's Case
is to as little purpose; for in the Book that Cardinal Poole wrote, which was
in the 27th. of Henry VII. in which, as my Lord Coke says, 3 Instit. fol. 14.
from whence the Author had the Case, there was this passage, In Anglia nunc
sparsum est hoc semen, ut vix a Turcico internosci queat, idque authoritate
unius coaluit: And in the precedent part of the Letter names the King; and
though more Treasons in the Indictment than one are mixed together, yet the
Indictment did then, as it has of late, conclude contra formam Stat. which may
be interpreted, All, or any Statutes, precedent to that Fact enacting Treason:
And if the Author will look back, he will find it enacted by the 26th. of Henry
VIII. cap. 13. That to publish that the King was an Heretic, Schismatic, or
an Infidel, was High Treason; and I would fain know, whether the above passage,
is not a good proof of publishing that the King was an Infidel, and so it was
Treason within the above Statute: But nothing can be inferred from an
Indictment never pleaded unto, as was Poole's. The Case of Dr. Story is as
little to the purpose, who, as Cambden says, was to have been charged with
consulting with one Prestall, a Man addicted to Magical Illusions against the
Queen's Life, and always cursing her in his Graces, and for having conspired
the destruction of Her, and of the King of Scots, and showed the Duke of Alva's
Secretary the way to invade England, to which Indictment he would not plead,
and therefore was condemned: There is no doubt but the Indictment against Story
was legal, and standing mute, he was legally condemned; but whether his
accusation was only persuading the Duke of Alva to invade England does not
appear; nay, the contrary appears by Cambden, and my Lord Coke quotes the Case,
to prove Story being born a Subject, was not an Enemy, but a Traitor; besides,
it must be remembered, that at that time there were Acts of Hostility between
the Queen and the Duke of Alva, and so Story may well be guilty of Treason, by
the Clause in the Stat. E. 3. of adhering to the Queen's Enemies; and in the
exposition of that Clause does my Lord Coke cite Story's Case, as if he had
been attainted on that Clause: And though the Author quotes my Lord Dier; yet
the Case was put to the Judges, otherwise than the Author relates; for he says,
If a Subject beyond Sea invite a Prince to invade the Realm, and no Invasion
follow, that Offense that is; and if the Practice be for the death of the
Prince, what Offense this is; and how, and where it shall be tried; and these
Offenses, says the Book, were held by the Justices to be High Treason; for that
an Invasion with great Power cannot be, but that it will tend to the
destruction or peril of the Prince; but it is plain, that if the Judges did
deliver that as the reason of their Judgment, they needed not have done it, for
that Story's Accusation without that reason was High Treason, within the first
Branch of the Stat. of Ed. 3. it being for compassing the Queen's Death, and
was so put to the Judges: And it is plain, notwithstanding the report of that
Book, the Judges did not give that reason for their resolution; or if they did,
there was little credit given to it, for in April following, as the Author
says, it was enacted, That the intention of levying War should be High Treason,
during the Queen's Life, which was very absurd, if the opinion of the Judges
was such as reported; or if it were such, and it were believed, it had been
proper rather to have declared, That the intention of levying War was High
Treason, within the first Branch of Edward III. And it is plain, If the Opinion
of the Judges in Story's Case was such as reported, it gained no credit with my
Lord Coke, who takes notice of that Case; and yet expressly says, that a bare
Conspiracy to levy War is not Treason within the Stat. of Ed. 3. and takes
notice of the 13th. of the Queen, which says he is. Expired. The Case of
Coleman is well remembered to be for Conspiring to take away the King's Life by
other sort of ways than levying War; and to say Truth, there was such Proofs
and Suspicions of the thing confirmed, by what after happened, that the Author,
if but in tenderness to his Party, ought to have spared that Case. As for
Balshall's Case, I did not think it worth my time to look the record of it; I
find the Author has it out of a Paper, called, Animadversions upon the Lord
Russel's Speech; and that Author has it out of Dr. Nalson's Collections; and
to say Truth, the style of that and his Paper are so alike, that they seem to
be writ by the same Hand. I think the Author might have fitted himself with a
Case out of Baker's Chronicle, as much to the purpose, and of as good Authority
as this, where one Walker said, He would make his Son Heir to the Crown,
meaning his House, whose Sign was the Crown, and it was adjudged Treason, and
Walker hanged for it; a Case I as much believe to have happened, as the
Author's. The truth is, the Case is not put like a Lawyer: If he had said, That
the prittle, prattle between Balshall and the Plowman, had been adjudged
Evidence of an intention to levy War; and that such intention of levying War
had been in that Case adjudged Treason, he had said something to the purpose;
but to tell an idle story, and say, That that talk was adjudged Treason; if
true, would carry no Authority with it: I would fain know what part of it is
Treason; Was it Balshal's troubling a Man at Plow with idle talk, or telling
the Plowman a lie, or advising him to go to K. R. who was in another World,
which was as much as bid the Plowman hang himself, in order to go to R. 2. and
so sold him a bargain? I cannot indeed see against which Branch of the Statute
of Edward the Third the expressions were offenses. Sir Henry Vane's Case was
advising a War, which followed, and advising it while on Foot; and besides it
was expressly proved, as I have heard, that he advised the excluding the Family
of the Stewarts from the Crown. The Case of Constable, and all the other Cases
are to the same purpose; because, as the Author says, and so was the reason of
them, they directly tended to depose the Queen, as affirming Edward the Sixth
was alive, and pointing to such an one, as my Lord Coke says; which being
accompanied with other Circumstances, was good Evidence of his intention to
depose the Queen: And even that Case may answer Balshall's Case, in affirming
Richard the Second to be alive; for then Henry the Fourth was not rightful
King: But I am sure neither prove an intention to levy War to be High Treason;
but a repetition of a number of Cases makes a Mutter, and a Noise. It is
strange, that the Author should cite Throgmorton's Case, as a Case for him;
whereas it is against the express Authority of my Lord Coke, who quotes
Throgmorton's Case for his Opinion, That conspiring to levy War is not High
Treason; and the express Authority of my Lord Dyer, who reports that Case, and
gives the reason, That Throgmorton was guilty of Treason; because Wiat, with
whom he was concerned, actually levied War. If A advise B to kill C, who does
it, it is Murder in both; if B does it not, it is not Murder; yet A is
equally guilty of the Consult: the Author would do well to show the reason of
the difference between this Case, and what he puts. It is strange the Author
should say, Owen's Case was only for dissuading People from their Fidelity;
whereas he says himself, his Crime was his saying the King might be killed, and
it was no Murder: Are the Cases of Burton, the Duke of Norfolk, Sparhawkes,
Awater, Heber, or Crohagan to the purpose? when the Author confesses, their
Crimes were denying the King's Title to the Crown, and endeavoring to settle
it on another Head, which are direct Evidences of an Intention to depose the
King; which none ever yet denied to be Treason, though the Author mistakes; for
Burton was indicted on the 13 El. and it was for conspiring to pull down
Enclosures; the Duke of Norfolk was indicted for conspiring the Death of the
Queen, and adhering to Herris the Scot, and others the Queens Enemies; and for
that purpose is the Duke's Case cited, in my Lord Dier, and my Lord Coke: In
Sir W. Ashton's Case, nothing but the Indictment appears, and it does not
appear that any Judgment was given on that Indictment, and if there were, it is
plain, his Crime was endeavoring to set up the Duke of York, who had right to
the Crown, and depose Henry the Sixth. The Offense of Germain and Tailor, if
they were two Persons (but Tailor seems to me to be the addition of Germain)
was for endeavoring to Depose Edward the Fourth, and compassing his Death;
what the Evidence against him was, does not appear. Burett's Indictment was for
compassing the King's and his Eldest Son's Death, by Witchcraft and Necromancy;
and it adds likewise, That he endeavored to stir up War, by scattering
Ballads; where the scattering Ballads is rather an Overt Act of his intention
to levy War, than his intention to levy War an Overt Act of his compassing the
Death of the King, or the Death of his Son. Collingbourn's Case was for
compassing Richard the Third's Death; and adhering to the Earl of Richmond, and
other Traitors; and scattering Ballads to move an Insurrection. The Viscount
Stafford's Case was for compassing the King's Death, and the Evidence was of
Consults tending that way, and the Authority of that Case ought to have been
spared, for the same reason that Coleman's Case ought not to have been
mentioned. The Legality of Colledge's Indictment has been questioned, and was
questioned by College, as appears by his Trial, licensed by his Enemies; and
if those in whose Custody he was, had not robbed him of his Papers, he had
raised such Objections, that his Enemies, neither then, nor since, would have
been able to have answered: And though the Author says he armed himself, and
advised others to do the like; yet there was no pretense of Proof that he did
or advised others so to do on any other account, than to defend him and
themselves, which is indeed an Overt Act of an intention to defend himself, but
not of offending others, the first of which at that time was, though never at
any other time has been, construed High Treason: But how vain is the Author to
quote the Proceedings in that Trial, to justify the Proceedings in the Lord
Russel's Trial, when two of the Judges were the same which sat on both Trials.
What the Indictment against Sir Henry-Vane was I know not; and I did not think
it worth my time to enquire: It is plain, his Crime was making War, and
deposing the King, both which, as it is said, were proved against him: And if
in his Indictment, and the Indictments of Monmouth's Men, it was added, That
they compassed the Death of the King, it was only added as an additional
Treason; and the levying War, which was so expressed in all the Indictments in
the West, was not so expressed, as an Overt Act of compassing the King's Death,
but as a distinct Treason, within the Statute of Edward the Third; though if it
should be granted, that levying War is an Overt Act of compassing the King's
Death, it does by no means follow, that an intention to levy War, is an
Over-act of compassing the King's Death, which is what the Author is to prove.

And now after all the muster of words the Author has made, there is not one
Case he has cited, which proves, That the intention of levying War, is high
Treason: What Sir William Jones said in the Viscount Stafford's Case, I do not
remember; but it was plain, his Accusation was for compassing the King's Death
by underhand dealing: And though that taking the King Prisoner is high
Treason, yet the compassing it would not have been Treason, if the Words of the
Statute had not made it so; no more than if the Act had said, Killing the King
should be Treason; to infer therefore, compassing his Death should be high
Treason: For is it not begging the question, to say, Therefore consulting to do
it is high Treason? For where is the Consequence? Coining of Money is high
Treason, Does it therefore follow, that designing to coin Money, is high
Treason? And a much more remote Consequence is it to say, compassing the
seizing the King's Guards, is compassing the King's Death. I deny, that
designing to seize all the Forts in England, is high Treason, within the first
branch of the Statute of Edward the Third; nay, the actual seizing them, was
not thought high Treason within that Statute; and therefore the Statute of the
14 Eliz. expressly enacts, That the seizing or keeping of any of the Queen's
Castles or Forts from her, shall be high Treason during her Life; which shows
it was not Treason before. But if it were high Treason within the Statute of
Edward the Third, it is within the Clause of levying War, and not the Clause of
compassing the King's Death. To what purpose was it to find fault with Rouse's
Indictment? Was not he tried the day after the Lord Russel was tried, by the
same Judges? And I dare say, the Author does not think Rouse guilty of high
Treason: Rouse and Leigh were only tricking one another, in which Leigh was too
hard for him, and Rouse died for the same: But how vain is the Author to quote
the Judgment of the very same Judges in other Cases, to make good his Thesis in
the Lord Russel's Trial, when he cannot but remember, how exploded and laughed
at the Argument was of a certain Judge at the Old Bailey, when the question was,
Whether a Soldiers flying from his Colors, was Felony, without Benefit of
Clergy; (a Case too plain to bear an Argument either way;) who had nothing to
say for it, But that if the Law was not so, he had hanged many a Man
wrongfully. It is strange to find an Author, in so short a space as a sheet of
Paper affords, to be guilty of so many Repetitions; and it would be idle to
repeat the Answer to them. Where did the Author find, that by our Law the King
must not, cannot assault, strike, seize, attach, or imprison, in defense of
Himself? No Man said it before the Author: The Law were defective, if it were
so, and fit to be altered: It would be worse than binding the King to his good
Behavior. It is true, the King cannot execute the ordinary Offices of a
Magistrate, but remit them to be executed by some commissioned by him; but what
done in his own Defense, is a matter of a quite different nature. A Judge ought
not to strike a Man; but no Man said, That if assaulted, he might not fight in
his own defense, which he certainly may justify. It is one thing for a Judge
to strike by way of punishment, which he ought to leave to his Officers;
another thing to strike in his defense. And now is the Author in the repeating
strain of his Inferences; and I must leave it to the Reader to judge, whether
what he here or elsewhere has said, overthrows the distinction between an
actual seizing, and an agreement to seize the Guards: I am sure his closing
Reason, that both have a tendency to thing intended, edifies little. The King
cannot live, unless he eats; he cannot eat, without having his Meat dressed; he
cannot have his meat dressed without a Cook; ergo he that kills the King's Cook,
starves the King, and is guilty of high Treason. It is very odd for the Author
to think he can evade the Objection, that Words were not Treason within 25. Ed.
3. because enacted to be so for some time, by a saying, That that Statute was a
Complement to a new-Crown'd head; what can he say to the Statutes of Hen. 8.
and of the Queen, which were made when the Crown had been many years on their
Heads? And why should he say, That those Statutes, as to words, were
affirmative of the Old Law, when all the Judges in Hugh Pine's Case in Crook,
Car. on view of most of the Cases cited by the Author, adjudged, That no Words
were Treason within the Statute of Edw. 3. Constable, Sir Henry Vane, and Dr.
Story's Cases have been answered before. Plunkett was adjudged by some of the
Judges which sat on my Lord Russell; and I dare say, few believe Plunkett
guilty of the pretended Crime he died for; but it was to make the World
believe, that Justice was impartially administered; he was to be, and was hanged
ding, dong, against Fitz-harris, to keep Tyburn steady: It was feared, that if
Fitz-harris had hanged alone, Tyburn would have warped, or inclined to one
side; and therefore they were both hanged the same time, on the same Gallows,
to keep it upright. There remains but one Case to be answered; though the
Author would have them two Cases, which is the Lords Gray, and Cobham, and Sir
Walter Raleigh; which, I confess, is an exact parallel Case, in the truth of
the particulars of it, with the Lord Russell's Case, though not in the
Accusation, as I think, will be made appear. Every Man knows, because it was
but few years past, that the Lord Russell was a Person zealous for the
Protestant Religion, and an Enemy to Popery; he was for that Reason very active
in the matter of a Bill of Exclusion of a Popish Successor; and, as I have
heard, carried it up from the House of Commons to the House of Lords: He was
one who was for the prosecuting the Lord Viscount Stafford, who suffered death
for compassing the Death of the then Protestant Possessor of the Crown; the
then presumptive Heir of the Crown, was at that time eclipsed; but having
recovered his Power, and, as the Lord Holles observed in his Letter to Monsieur
Van Benningham, governing all at White Hall: Some few years afterward the Lord
Russell was brought to the Block, upon pretense of the Treasons mentioned by
the Author. The Case of the Lords Gray, Cobham, and Raleigh, was this: They
were all zealous for the Protestant Religion, and affectionate to the Person,
and the Service of the then reigning Queen; both which they thought in danger,
as long as there was expectation or probability of a Papist's coming to the
Crown, which would be as long as the Queen of Scots lived, and continued to
profess the Popish Religion: They well enough knew, that if the blow was
struck, the Law would be of the side of the Assassines: They had seen many
designs upon the Person of the Queen upon that encouragement; they saw a Storm
coming from Spain, which fell out in 88. and Protestant Subjects were not safe
in assisting, and had no encouragement to assist their Protestant Princess, as
long as there was fear they might be in danger of their being punished by a
Popish Successor; for which reason they were of Opinion, That the Popish
Successor might not only be excluded, but might and ought to be (the Law being
of their side,) removed out of the World, which was done in 1587; for which
when Davison was questioned in the Star Chamber, the Lord Gray was against his
being punished, and would have had him rewarded, for which he gave his Reasons
in a very eloquent Speech, remembered by Cambden. This, as it had reason,
provoked her Son, who was to be, and was the Successor to the Crown: Some time
after, the Earl of Essex having lost that Favor and Power which he thought he
deserved at Court, as it is natural, betook himself to the Successor; and
though it was concealed for some time, he became a great Favorite to K. James
the First. The L. Cobham and Raleigh were professed Enemies to the Earl of Essex,
who gave them a greater advantage over him, than they could have hoped for, by
breaking out into an act of open Rebellion; for which they took care he should
not escape. His Death was much regretted by K. James, though he durst not take
notice of it to the Queen. The Queen dying, those three Persons had reason to
fear punishment from the King; and therefore would have had (if they could have
prevailed) the King admitted on Articles; but being not able to carry that
point, the Lord Cobham and Raleigh thought to have made their peace, by meeting
the King on his Journey, congratulating his Succession to the Crown, and
offering him their Service, but were not permitted to come to him, and had Word
sent them, They might spare their labor, which presaged no good to them. The
King came to London in May, and in July following was the pretended Plot
discovered; and in November following, the pretended Delinquents were tried at
Winchester, together with Watson and Clark: Their Accusations were in general,
first to set the Crown on the Lady Arabella's Head, and to seize the King.
Secondly, to have a Toleration of Religion. Thirdly, to procure Aid and
Assistence from foreign Princes. Fourthly, to turn out of Court such as they
disliked, and place themselves in Offices. Of these the first Article is
Treason; what Crimes the rest are, is doubtful; what of them was proved against
the Lords Cobham and Gray, Watson and Clark, or how their Trials were managed,
does not appear: But Sir Walter Raleigh's Trial does appear, and is much like
the L. Russel's; and therefore of some Circumstances of it, I think, it is fit
to take notice. Instead of Consults, etc. in the L. Russel's Trial, the
cant-Words of the surprising the Bie, and the Main, were made use of in Sir
Walter's, interpretable as the Council thought fit; at least it was astonishing
to the Jury, which was all that was designed by the Council, and fatal to the
Prisoners. I have no mind to run through all the ramble of Sir W. Raleigh's
Trial, as it is printed before his History of the World, because the parallel
is too exact, and sticks too close to the Memory of Persons gone; only I will
say, That if Sir Walter Raleigh was guilty of the things he was accused of by
the Witnesses, though the Accusation did not amount to a legal Proof, it was
high Treason; but if the L. Russell was guilty of the things he was accused of,
he was not guilty of high Treason. But yet, I think, it is fit to take notice
of some extraordinary things in Sir Walter's Trial, particularly that when the
Prisoner said he was tried by the Spanish Inquisition, if he was tried by
Circumstances without two Witnesses; it was told him, that was a treasonable
Speech. It was told him by the Court, that the Statutes of the 25. Ed. 3. and
5. Ed. 6. were repealed, it was told him, that his Accuser need not be brought
face to face to him, nor subscribe his Confession; 'twas enough that there were
Hands of credible Persons to testify the Examination; it was told him, that a
Man might be condemned by the Testimony of one Witness; nay, even without a
Witness in Treason: He was accused, that he heard the Lord Cobham speak of
Pensions from Spain, he said he could not stop the Lord Cobham's mouth; he was
accused with having given the L. Cobham a Book, treating against the King's
Title to the Crown; he said he did not give the L. Cobham the Book; the Lord
took it off his shelf, and that himself never read it, or urged it; the
Attorney said that was cunning; Sir Walter replied, That all that made for him,
was called cunning, what made against him was probable: The Prisoner was told,
that by Law his Accuser not only need not be brought face to face to accuse
him, but the Witness ought not to be produced, lest he should recant what he
had said. One Dyer testified, That a Gentleman, he knew not whom, at Lisbon
told him, Don Cobham, and Don Raleigh, would cut the King's Throat before he
was crowned; the Attorney told him, he was by when the Earl of Essex dyed; Sir
Walter produced a Letter from the L. Cobham, wherein he acquitted Sir Walter of
all he had accused him of; the Jury found him guilty; Sir Walter said the Jury
must do as they were directed; he complained of the wrong the Attorney did him;
Brook said, that what he did in that matter, was to try faithful Subjects, and
that he had a Commission for so doing, but produced none: Sir Walter in his
Speech on the Stage, took notice of several Calumnies raised of him,
particularly that he had spoke dishonourably of the King to a Frenchman, and
had rejoiced at the Earl of Essex his Death, both which he denied. Now why the
Author quotes this Case as a Case for him, I cannot imagine, neither the Fact,
Accusation, or Resolution of it, in any point coming up to his purpose; for Sir
Walter and the rest were accused of the Main, which was the destroying the King
and his Cubbs, and setting up the Lady Arabella for Queen, or at least for
designing to imprison the King, till he yielded to their Demands; and therefore
what occasion was there for such a Resolution of the Judges, as is pretended,
that conspiring to levy War was high Treason within the Statute of Ed. 3. Nor
can I find in any Book, nor do I believe there was any such Resolution: My L.
Coke indeed says, in that case it was resolved, That a design to imprison the
King was high Treason; but in the same breath says, that a Conspiracy to levy
War, is not Treason. But if the Author intends to vindicate the late
Government, by showing that in former; as well as in later times, there have
been found Persons of the long Robe, who have by irregular means brought their
Fellow Subjects to the Block, upon whom their Princes frowned, I agree, he has
picked out a very parallel Case; but I am sure instead of vindicating he casts
a reproach on the late Government, in which the Case cited was tried; for nor
to mention all the might be excepted to, in the Trial of the Case cited, I
would know by what Law is the Deposition of a Person who might be brought face
to face to the Prisoner, read as Evidence; I would know by what Law it is
forbidden, that the Accuser should be brought face to face to the accused; I
would know by what Law Brookes's Deposition of what the L. Cobham told him of
Raleigh, was Evidence against Raleigh; I would know by what Law the story Dyer
told of what an unknown Man said to him at Lisbon of Don Raleigh, was Evidence
against Raleigh; I would know by what Statute the Statutes of the 25th. of
Edward the Third, and 5th of Edward the Sixth, are repealed, The Trial was so
very irregular throughout, that I would willingly believe it was not so as it
is related, but if it were so, I am sure none can defend it: And even for that
reason, if any such resolution was in the Case, as is cited, I am sure it ought
to carry no credit with it, and there is no reason to believe there was any
such Resolution, there being no occasion for it, the question being only Fact,
which Sir Walter denied. The Circumstances of his Trial, in which the Court
always overruled the Prisoner, were somewhat like the L. Russel's, he
complained of the ill usage of the King's Counsel, as well as the Lord Russel,
and both had reason so to do; Hearsay was admitted to be given in Evidence
against both; all either of them said for themselves, though very material, was
flighted; the one was put in Mind at his Trial of the Death of the Earl of
Essex, as the other was of the Death of the Viscount Stafford; both in their
dying Speeches vindicated themselves of those Aspersions; the Principal
Witnesses in both Cases had, before the Trials, affirmed they knew nothing
against them; they were both accused with having heard what other Persons had
said in their Company, and had not discovered it, they both gave the same
Answer, that they could not help other Men's talk. I think it is plain, at this
day, that of Sir Walter Raleigh's is thought a sham Plot, what the L. Russel's
is thought, let the Author say; I am loath to enumerate all, but if any Person
will give himself the trouble of reading, and comparing the Trial of the L.
Russel with that of Sir Walter Raleigh's, they will find them exactly paralled
in a number of other Particulars. And now after all the Muster of Cases, the
Author has (to little purpose raked together, he cannot show me one Case,
where the Accusation and Proof was agreed to be no more than a Conspiracy to
levy War, or rebel; that such Conspiracy was adjudged Treason, within the
Statute of Edward III. till within these few years. In the next place, let any
Man show me any Opinion or Resolution in any printed Book of Authority, till of
late years, (except the above Opinion in Dyer, which is answered,) that such
Conspiracy was High Treason within the Stat. of Edward III. And now I appeal to
all Mankind, whether it be not a full Answer to all the Cases the Author has
cited, except Plunket's, and the Cases of later Times. That there needed no
such Opinion of the Judges, as the Author puts upon them; because the
Endictments and Proof (if true) on which they gave their Opinions, were
Treason, within the Stat. of Edward the Third: And therefore why they should
strain the Sense of the Statute, which is penned as strictly as a Law could be,
to prohibit the Judges to make any other than a litteral Construction of it;
and therefore prohibits them to give their Judgment on any Case, like the
Treasons expressed in the Act, until such Case should be declared in Parliament
to be High Treasons; and therefore since no such Opinion of the Judges, in the
Resolution of the Cases entered, is to be found, or needed to be, there is not
reason to believe they gave any such Opinion. In the last place, I will admit
that Letters make Words, and Words Sense, and that the Author is as well able
to read them as any Man; and yet I think he cannot show me, That a Conspiracy
to levy War, or rebel, which is the Sense of his Words, if he means any thing,
(for there is no doubt but the Indictment contained Treason, it being to Kill
and Depose the King) is Treawith the Stat. of Edward III. let him show me if he
can, if that Statute will bear that Construction. That that Statute which has
been always so highly commended in all Ages, and even by subsequent Acts of
Parliaments, and which my L. Coke calls a blessed Act, is not guilty of the
absurdest Tautology imaginable. And now I own, that if the present Judges
intend to follow the tract of some of their Predecessors in their extravagant
Judgments, they ought in prudence to correct the licentiousness of the Author's
New Observator, in his Remarks; but if they resolve to judge aright, as I do
not doubt but that they do, and much good, I do not doubt, it will do them so
to do; then I think they are not at all concerned in what he has written, or
shall write any remarks upon.

FINIS.

