REMARKS UPON THE TRIALS OF Edward Fitzharris, Stephen College, Count
Coningsmark, The Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, Henry Cornish, and Charles
Bateman.

As also on the Earl of SHAFTSBURY's Grand Jury, WILMORE's Homine Replegiando,
And the AWARD of EXECUTION against Sir Thomas Armstrong.

By John Hawles, Barrister of Lincoln's Inn.

Nec partis studiis agimur, sed sumpsimus arma
Consiliis inimica tuis, ignavia fallax!
Seldom of Tithes. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXIX.

THE CONTENTS.
REmarks on Fitzharris's Trial. page 3 Remarks on Colledge's Trial. p. 20
Remarks on the Earl of Shaftesbury's Grand Jury. p. 45 Remarks on Wilmore's
Homine Replegiando. p. 52 Remarks on the Lord Russel's Trial. p. 56 Remarks on
Colonel Sidney's Trial. p. 76 Remarks upon the Award of Execution against Sir
Thomas Armstrong p. 83 Remarks on the Trial of Count Coningsmark. p. 85 Remarks
on Mr. Cornish's Tral. p. 89 Remarks on the Trial of Charles Bateman. p. 99
REMARKS UPON SEVERAL TRIALS.
THE strange Revolution, which has of late happened in our Nation, naturally
leads one into the considerations of the Cause of it. The danger of subverting
the Established Religion, and invading Property, alone could not be the Causes.
For if it be true, that the same Causes have generally the same Effect: It is
plain, that, in the Reign of a precedent Monarch, the Subversion of the
Established Religion was as much designed, or at least it was believed to be
so, as of late; and it is not material, whether what was suspected was true, or
not; and Property was as much Invaded, as of late, by imposing Ship Money, and
other Taxes on the Nation; but more especially Ship Money: which at first was
light and easy; but in progress of time, was increased, according as it was
found the Nation would bear it. And at length it was feared, as there was just
reason so to do, that it would become as burthensom, as what is now imposed on
the French Nation by the French King; and yet, when the War broke out, if the
History of those Times, or the Persons who lived a bout those Times, are to be
believed, the majority of the Nation took part with the King. There was
therefore some other Reasons for the Disaffection of the Nation to the late
Government, and they may be ranked under these six Heads.

Exorbitant Fines. Cruel and Illegal Prosecutions. Outrageous Damages. Seizing
the Charters. Dispensing with the Test and Penal Laws. And Undue Prosecutions
in Criminal, but more especially in Capital Matters.

For the first I shall only observe, That when the House of Commons in the
Parliament 1680. took that matter into consideration, and intended to impeach
several Persons for the same, the highest Fine at that time complained of, was
but 1000 l. and yet in few Years they were heightened to 10000 l. 20000 l. 30000
l. and 40000 l.

For the second, The punishment of Oats, Dangerfield, and Mr. Johnson; and the
close Imprisonment of Mr. Hampden, Sir Samuel Bernardiston, and of several
other Persons, as it was against Law, so it was without Precedent.

For the Third, Though the Damages given to Bolsworth was the first Outrageous
Damages given, which were taken notice of, and in truth were such, yet in
little time Damages for matters of like kind were quickly improved to 10000 l.
20000 l. 40000 l. nay 100000 l. The truth of which a great many living
Witnesses to their Sorrow can testify.

For the Fourth, The seizing the City and other Charters, upon the pretenses
they were questioned, was without Example.

For the Fifth, The Dispensing with the Test and Penal Laws, was as mischievous
as it was Illegal; it making persons capable, which were incapacited by Law, of
being in Places, and of exercising Offices, for whom the persons who had Power
to Confer of Bestow the same, had more affection, than for the persons who at
that present enjoyed them; the Consequence of which was quickly seen, in
turning out the present possessors, to make room for others; which was the
thing which, as a Scotch Bishop said of another matter, set the Kiln a fire.

Of these five particulars something hereafter may be said, at present this
Treatise is only to consider, how far the Proceedings in Capital Matters, of
late years, have been Regular or Irregular: And as to that, I shall not at all
consider, how far the persons hereafter mentioned were Guilty of the Crimes of
which they were accused, but how far the Evidence against them was Convincing,
to prove them Guilty; and what Crimes the Facts proved against them in Law were.

REMARKS ON Fitzharris's Trial.
THE first Person I shall begin withal, shall be Fitzharris; and that it may
not be wondered, that the Trial and Comdemnation of a Person who was confessedly
an Irish Papist, should be complained of; and one, whose Crimes were such, that
if the Law declared had not made Capital, it had been just in respect of the
Malefactor, for the Legislative Power to have Enacted, that he should suffer
the severest Punishment usually inflicted for the Highest Crime; yet in respect
of the common good, it had been just and fit to have pardoned him, if he would
have confessed who was his Conspirators and setters on; for I am apt to think,
that if that matter had been thoroughly looked into, some Persons afterward
Witnesses in the Lord Russel's, Colonel Sydney's, and Mr. Hampden's Trials,
had either never been produced, or have not been credited if produced; nor
would my Lord of Essex's Throat have been cut; and my Lord Russel and Colonel
Sydney might have worn their Heads on their Soulders to this day.

All will agree, that there was a great struggle between the Whigs and Tories,
as they were then called, for hanging or saving that man: both agreed he
deserved to be hanged; the first thought it their advantage to save him, if he
would confess; the last thought it was fit to hang him, for fear he would
cofess; and to explain the matter, it is fit to go a little higher: It cannot
be but remembered, that before the breaking out of the Popish Plot, Mr. Claypole
was imprisoned in the Tower for designing to kill the King, in such place and
manner as Oats afterward discovered the Papists intended to do it. In Trinity
Term 1678. he had an Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench, and was brought thither
in order to be Bailed, and produced persons of worth to bail him; but the
penalty of the Bail set by the Court was so high, and the Court so aggravated
the Crime for which he was committed, and the likelihood of the Truth of it,
that the Bail refused to stand, and Claypole was remanded to the Tower. But the
Term after, when the matter of which he was accused, appeared bare faced, to be
the Design of other people, he was let go, for fear the Examination of it
should go farther in proving the Popish Plot, than any thing at that time
discovered. And if it were now discovered, upon whose and what Evidence he was
committed, it would go a great way in discovering the Truth of many Matters as
yet in the dark; (but that Design miscarried, because the Intreague was
discovered before it took effect, and yet a like design was still carried on;
and many of the Clergy of the Church of England had been prevailed with, to cry
the Popish up as a Fanatic Plot.) The Papists and the Clergy of the Church of
England being in the Late Times equally Sufferers, and oppressed by the
Fanatics, they naturally grew to have a Kindness for each other, and both
joined in hating the Fanatics, and therefore pretended at least that they did
not believe any thing of the Popish Plot, but that that Report was given out by
the Fanatics, whilst they themselves were designing something against the
Church of England. The Papists having so great a party of the Clergy of the
Church of England, ready to believe any thing of a Fanatic Plot, which they
should forge, and observing that that which gave Credit to the Popish Plot, was
Writings concurring with Oral Testimony, which it did; for very little of the
Truth of the Popish Plot depended on the Credit of Oats, Bedloe, or any other
person, most of the Facts of that Design, when discovered, proving themselves.
To instance in one, Oats discovered Coleman had Intelligence with Le Chase of
a Design on England, and that Coleman had papers testifying as much; when those
papers were seized, and owned by Coleman, and the purport of them was what
Oats said they were, it was not material, whether Oats was a man of Truth or
not, the Papers, without Oats his further Evidence, sufficiently proved the
Design. I say the Papists, having observed what the Evidence was which gave
Credit to that Plot, resolved to pursue the same steps, and therefore
Dangerfield was made use of to leave papers in Colonel Mansel his Lodging, who
was an Acquaintance of my Lord Shaftesbury's, importing a Plot; but that was so
foolishly carried on, and the then Attorney General, who had the Examination of
that Matter, not being qualified with the Assurance his Successor had, to carry
on a thing that had neither Sense nor Honesty in it, made such a scurvy Report
of the matter to the King and Council, that they were enforced to vote Mansel
innocent, Dangerfield guilty, and that it was a Design of the Papists to lay a
Plot to the Dissenters charge, and a further proof of the Popish Plot. But that
Attorney General being removed to a place of more Honor, though of less Profit,
and another put in his place, the Papists resolved to carry on the same Design,
and no Person a fitter Instrument than Fitzharris, in respect of his Religion
and his Acquaintance; but before his Design came to perfection, it was
discovered.

He was first Imprisoned in Newgate, where some persons (amongst whom Mr.
Cornish, as I remember, then Sheriff, was believed to be one, and it was not
the least of his Crimes, that he endeavored to look into that arcanum) went to
examine him as to the particulars of that Design; which was quickly taken
notice of, and the Prisoner in breach of the Habeas Corpus Act, removed from
thence to the Tower, where he was kept close Prisoner.

The Parliament at Oxford meeting soon after Fitzharris his Apprehension, and
the House of Commons being informed of as much of his Design as was them
discovered, they thought themselves highly concerned to examine him; but how to
do it they knew not; only they resolved (upon a Report which one of their
Members made them of one Hubert, who confessed himself guilty of Firing the
City of London, upon which it was resolved to examine him in the House of
Commons the next Morning, but before the House sat Hubert was hanged) that
Fitzharris should not be hanged without their knowledge, and consent; and to
effect it, they remembered a design to try the five Popish Lords in the Tower
upon Indictments, whereupon if they should be acquitted, it was throught that
those acquaittals might be pleadable to Impeachments; to prevent which, the
House had exhibited general Impeachments of High Treason against them in the
House of Lords; which had such success, that the Lords were never, and the
Judges gave their Opinion, that they could not be tried on the Indictments, as
long as the Impeachments were in beign; for which Reason, the House of Commons
exhibited a general Impeachment of High Treason in the House of Lords against
Fitzharris, which was received; after which the House of Lords made an Order,
that Fitzharris might or should be tried in the King's Bench for the same
Treason; suddenly after which, that Parliament was dissolved. Whether
Fitzharris his Business was the break-neck of that Parliament, I know not, but
it was shrewdly suspected it was.

There was at that time a Chief Justice in the King's Bench, who was himself
under an Impeachment of High Treason, and had not for that reason sat in Court
for some Terms preceding, and the Trial of Fitzharris being generally looked
upon to be as illegal as it was odious, it was thought convenient to carry it
on by a person of better Credit; whereupon one who had been a puisny Judge of
that Court, and had behaved himself very plausibly, and had gained Credit by
being turned out, was thought to be the fittest person to undertake it; and
accordingly the then present Chief Justice was removed, and the other was
preferred to this place.

It being resolved that Fitzharris should be tried, the business was how to get
Witnesses to give Evidence to a Jury, and how to get Juries to find the Bill,
and to Convict the Prisoner, which were difficult preliminaries.

A person who had been one of the House of Commons which had exhibited the
Impeachment, was a principal Witness, but if he should give Evidence on the
Indictment, he knew not how far he might be hereafter questionable and
punishable for it, when a Parliament should sit again; but at last that person
was prevailed upon to give Evidence, but by what means is best known to
himself. And as for the Juries, Grand and Petty, they were satisfied with the
direction of the Court, that they not only might, but ought to find the Bill,
and Verdict according to their Evidence. And I think the Court was so far in
the right.

That matter being adjusted, a Bill of High Treason was found against the
Prisoner, whereupon he was presently arraigned, and after much contest and
Declaration of the Court, that they could hear nothing till he had pleaded in
chief, (which if he had done, the Plea he afterward pleaded, which was to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, had come too late) he had leave given him to plead
the special matter of the Impeachment, and accordingly Counsel were assigned
him to draw up and argue his Plea put in to the jurisdiction of the Court;
which was, That he was impeached in a Superior Court for the same Treason.

Great endeavors were used to have the Plea overruled, without so much as
hearing the Prisoner's Counsel for the maintaining it; the pretenses were, That
the Prisoner on his Plea ought to have produced the Record of his Impeachment,
and that the Plea of the Impeachment for High Treason in general was naught,
without specifying what the High Treason was for which he was impeached: For an
Impeachment, or an Indictment of High Treason in general, was naught; that the
King had power to proceed on an Impeachment or Indictment for the same thing at
his election. That the allegation, that Fitz Harris was impeached, which
Impeachment stood in full force, not having mentioned an Impeachment before,
was naught. But afterward the Attorney General demurred, and the Prisoner
joined in the Demurrer. And then day was given to argue the Plea till Saturday
the 7th of May, at which time the Attorney added to the Exceptions he took to
the Plea, Whether a Suit in a Superior Court can take away the Jurisdiction of
another inferior Court, who had an Original Jurisdiction of the Cause, of the
Person, and of the Fact, at the time of the Fact committed?

To maintain the Plea, the Counsel for the Prisoner alleged, That an
Impeachment differed from an Indictment; the first was at the suit of the
Commons of England, and was like an Appeal, or rather an Appeal assembled an
Impeachment; that the proceedings were different in the Trials; in the first,
the Trial is by the House of Lords; in the last, of a Commoner, by a Jury of
Commons: In the last, but little time was allowed for giving or considering of
the Evidence; in the first a much longer time; that this matter was never
practiced before; that the King may pardon a Criminal prosecuted by an
Indictment, but not by an Impeachment, no more than if prosecuted by an Appeal:
If he should be acquitted on the Indictment, it might be a question whether
that may be pleaded in Bar to the Impeachment; and if not, the Prisoner should
be brought twice in jeopardy of his life for the same Crime, contrary to the
Rule of Law.

To the Objection, That the Plea was not certain, it being pleaded as an
Impeachment of High Treason, not setting forth the High Treason in particular,
it was answered, That an Impeachment differed from an Indictment; for by the
Custom of Parliament, which is the Law of the Land, such a general Impeachment
is good; but by the Law, a general Indictment of High Treason, without
specifying what, when, where, or how, is not good; and therefore the Plea of an
Indictment and an Impeachment variant.

As to the Objection, That there was no Impeachment mentioned before the
averrment of quae quidem impetitio, was frivolous, for it was before mentioned
that he was impeached, and then by a necessary consequence, there was an
Impeachment.

As to the Objection, That the King might, in which Court he would, prosecute
for High Treason, was little to the purpose; for the Case did not come up to
it, the Impeachment being the Suit of the Commons, and not of the King; and
that the Courts of Westminster Hall had refused to meddle with Matters relating
to the Parliament. That though the Impeachment was general, yet it was made
certain by the averment, that it was for the same Crime for which the
Indictment was: That the Attorney General might have taken Issue, that there
was no such Impeachment as was pleaded; or else he might have said, that the
Impeachment was not for the same Treason, for which he was indicted; but having
demurred, he had confessed both to be true; that at Common Law, if an Appeal of
Murder had been brought, the King could not proceed on the Indictment, till the
Appeal was determined; That the Judges, whereof some were then in Court, had
given their Opinions to the King and Council, concerning the five Popish Lords,
that they could not be tried upon Indictments, so long as general Impeachments
were depending for the same Treason, and yet their Cases and this differed;
there the Indictments were found before the Impeachments preferred, and here,
after the Impeachment.

In the reply to vitiate the Plea, it was insisted, That it did not conclude si
curia procedere debeat as well as vult, as was usual for Pleas of that Nature
to do; that perhaps this matter, if the Prisoner had been acquitted upon the
Impeachment, might have been pleaded in Bar to the Indictment, but it was not
pleadable to the jurisdicton of the Court; that in the Case of the five Lords,
the Indictments were removed into the House of Lords; that Appeals in Treason
are taken away by the first of Henry the 4th; that in the Plea it ought to be
averred, what Lex and consuetudo Parl. are; that till Articles carried up, no
man impeached is obliged to answer; that in all cases of Appeals a man is put
twice in jeopardy of his Life, if he be tried upon an Indictment within a Year.

To take a short review of what has been recited, it was thought the King's
Counsel run the Court upon a Rock, and it was hard for them to get off. The
Court had advised them to take time to consider what course they would take;
but the Kings Counsel were hasty, as they always were when they were resolved
to carry a matter right or wrong; and having three bad ways they chose the
worst.

If they had taken issue on the Record, or the Averment, that the Impeachment
and Indictment were not for the same Treason, they might have pretended that
the Journal of the House of Lords was not a Record, or that the Debates in the
House of Commons, were not good Evidence; or if they had replied the Order of
the House of Lords, for Trying the Prisoner in the King's Bench, to the Plea,
they might have insisted on the power of the House so to do; but having
demurred, they confessed the Truth of all the matter of the Plea, and waved the
Benefit of that Order, and stood upon Points of Law, either conceded by the
Court, or resolved by the Judges before; or such necessary inferences from them
as was impossible to be denied.

It could not be denied, but that a general Impeachment of High Treason by the
Custom of Parliament was good; it could not be denied, but, by the Resolution
of the Judges in case of the Lords in the Tower, a general Impeachment of High
Treason stopped proceedings upon an Indictment for the same matter. It did not
differ the case, that the Indictments in the King's Bench against the Lords,
were removed into the House of Lords; for every one knows new Indictments might
have been preferred against them for the same Crimes. And if that had been the
Reason of the Judges Resolution, why did not the Judges then in Court, all or
most part of which were Judges at the giving that Opinion, deny the Opinion, or
the Reason alleged? which they did not. It was not a Reason to disallow the
Plea, because particular Articles use to follow general Impeachments, and the
impeacht are not bound to answer, till the particular Articles were exhibited,
which is true; for by the same Reason, a Defendant cannot plead a Action
depending, against him for the same matter in a superior Court, unless the
Plaintiff has declared against him in the Superior Court, which is not true.
It was not a Reason that all Records in inferior Courts must be pleaded
particularly, as Indictments, and the like; because such Records must be
certain and particular, or else they are erroneous, and cannot be pleaded; but
an Impeachment may be general.

Where the matter of a Plea is naught, no form can make it good; though where the
matter of a Plea is good, an ill form may spoil it; if therefore a general
Indictment or Record is naught, as in all the cases cited against the Plea, it
was no special averment to reduce it to a certainty; or any form can make it a
good Plea: but a general Impeachment is good, and therefore it may and must be
pleaded generally, and pleading it specially, would make it false, if there
were no subsequent Articles, as in this case there was not, to ascertain it.

It is to no purpose, to run through all the ramble of the Counsel or Court
against the Plea, when they all said the matter of the Plea was not in
question, but the Form; and yet when so often asked in what of the Form it was
defective? they were not able to answer. If it be agreed that the matter of a
Plea is good, but it is defective in Form, they always show how it ought or
might have been mended, which in this case was never done: And as this case was
new in several particulars, so it is in this, that in reading all the Arguments
of this Plea, no man knows, by what was discoursed, what was the point in
question.

After the Arguments, the Chief Justice, in show at least, very favorably
offers the Prisoners Counsel liberty to amend the Plea, if they could; which
they apprehended, as they had Reason, (for I think none can show how it might
have been mended, rather a Catch than a Favor) refused to do; whereupon the
Court took time to consider of it, and on the 11th of May, there being a great
Auditory, rather to hear how the Judges would bring themselves off, than to
know what the Law of the Plea was, the Chief Justice, without any Reasons,
delivered the Opinion of the Court, upon Conference had with other Judges, That
his Brothers Jones, Raymond, and himself were of Opinion that the Plea was
insufficient, his Brother Dolbin not resolved, but doubting concerning it, and
therefore awarded the Prisoner should plead to the Indictment, which he did;
Not Guilty; and his Trial ordered to be the next Term.

I think it would puzzle any person to show, that if ever a Court of
Westminster Hall thought a matter of such difficulty, as fit to be argued, that
they gave their Judgments afterward without the Reasons; It Is true, that the
Courts of Civil Law allow Debates amongst the Judges to be private among
themselves, but the Proceedings at Common Law always were, and ought to be, in
aperta curia. Had this practice taken place heretofore, as it has of late (but
all since this President) no man could have known what the Law of England was,
for the year Books and Reports are nothing but a Relation of what is said by
the Counsel and Judges in giving Judgment, and contain the Reasons of the
Judgment, which are rarely expressed in the Record of the Judgment; and it is as
much the duty of a Judge to give the Reasons why he doubts, as it is of him who
is satisfied in the Judgment. Men sometimes will be ashamed to offer those
Reasons in public, which they may pretend satisfies them, if concealed;
besides, we have a Maxim in Law undeniable, and of great use, That any person
whatever may rectify or inform a Court or Judge publicly and privately, as
amicus curiae, a Friend to the Court, or a Friend to Justice: But can that be
done, if the standers by know not the Reason upon which the Court pronounce
their Judgment? Had the three Judges, who were clear in their Opinion, given
their Reasons of that Opinion, perhaps some of the standers by might have
showed Reasons unthought of by them, to have made them stagger in, if not alter
that Opinion; or if Justice Dolbin had given the Reason of his doubt, perhaps a
stander by might have shown him a Reason unthought of by him, which would have
made him positive, that the Plea was, or was not, a good Plea.

If a man Swears what is true, not knowing it to be true, though it be logically
a Truth as it is distinguished, yet it is morally a lie; and if a Judge give
Judgment according to Law, not knowing it to be so, as if he did not know the
Reason of it at that time, but bethought himself of a reason for it afterward,
though the Judgment be legal, yet the pronouncing of it is unjust.

Judges ought to be bound up by the Reasons given in public, and not satisfy
or make good their Judgment, by after thought of Reasons. How very ill did it
become the Chief Justice Popham, a person of learning and parts, in the
attainting Sir Walter Rawleigh, of which Trial all since that time have
complained, when ha gave his Opinion that the Affidavit of the Lord Cobham,
taken in the absence of Sir Walter, might be given in Evidence against him,
without producing the Lord Cobham face to face to Sir Walter, (which was
desired by him, although the Lord Cobham was then forthcoming?) When he summed
up the Evidence, he said, Just then it came into his mind, why the Accuser
should not come face to face to the Prisoner, because he might detract his
Evidence, and when he should see himself must dye, he would think it best that
his Fellow should live to commit the like Treason, and so in some sort seek
revenge. Which besides that it is against the Common Law and Reason, it is
against the express Statute of E. 6. which takes care that in Treason the
Witness shall be brought face to face of the person accused.

Did it become a just man to give his Opinion, and bethink himself of a Reason
afterward? And I am mistaken if it will not herein appear, that many persons
complained of, have been guilty of the same weakness, or injustice, call it
which you will; so foolish are the best Lawyers and plausible Speakers, when
they resolve to carry a point, whether just or not: However, they may deceive
the Ignorant, yet they talk and argue very absurdly, to the apprehension of the
majority of mankind. And they had been sooner discovered, but that the
discoverers were quickly suppressed, and crushed, as Scandalisers of the Justice
of the Nation. And I think this may be justly called the first mute Judgment
given in Westminster Hall.

But to return to Fitzharris his Trial, which came on the 9th of June; and then
the King's Counsel made use of their Arts in managing the Jury. And first,
there was a great many persons for Jurors, to which Mr. Attorney had no
Stomach, some challenged for Cause, for that they were no Fee holders, as John
Kent, Giles Shute, Nathaniel Grantham, and several others, and the Challenge
allowed to be a good Challenge by all the Court; for though the Chief Justice
spoke only, yet all the Court assent to what one Judge says, if they do not
show their dissent. I do not take notice of this, as complaining of it, for I
think it is good Cause of Challenge in Treason; but then I cannot but wonder at
the Assurance of the same King's Counsel, who denied it to be a good Cause of
Challenge in the Lord Russel's Trial. It is true, that was a Trial in the City;
but that matter had no consideration in the Judgment; for after the Lord
Russel's Counsel had been heard, all the Judges delivered their Opinions, That
at Common Law, No Freehold was no Challenge in Treason; and that the 1st. and
2d. Philip and Mary had restored the Trial in Treason to be what it was at
Common Law; of which number of Judges, Sir Francis Pemberton and Sir Thomas
Jones were two, nay Sir Francis Pemberton asked Mr. Pollexfen, Whether he found
any Resolution at Common Law, that no freehold was a Challenge in Treason? And
that Judgment is afterward cited in Colonel Sidneys Trial fol. 63. as the
Opinion of all the Judges of England, That no Freehold was no Challenge to a
Juror in Treason at Common Law; and Col. Sydney's Trial was in a County at
large.

But if it was not a Challenge at Common Law, I would know how it came to be a
Challenge in Fitzharris his Case? There was no intervening Act of Parliment to
alter the Law between the two Trials, that I know of.

Another art used, was to Challenge for the King, wihout Cause, where no Cause
could be shown, such Jurors as they did not like.

The Prisoner was troubled at this, and appeals to the Court, whether the
Attorney General was not obliged to show his Cause of Challenge; but is
answered by the Court, that he need not, till all the Panel was gone through,
or the rest of the Jurors challenged, which is true; but had the Prisoner been
advised to challenge the rest of the Jury, as he would have been, if he had had
Counsel, the Attorney must have waved his Challenge, or put off the Trial. And
since he was not allowed Counsel, why should not the Court, according to their
Duty, as they have said it is, have advised him so to do? I am sure in Count
Coningsmark's Trial, when Sir Francis Winington challenged a Juror without
Cause for the King, the Court presently asked the Cause; and such Answers was
made by the Prosecutor's Counsel as was made to Fitzharris; whereupon the Court
told the Count that the way to make them show their Cause of Challenge, was to
challenge all the rest of the Jury; and thereupon the Challenge was waved. They
were different Practices, tending to different Ends, and accordingly it
succeeded, Fitzharris was Convicted, and the Count Acquitted.

Upon the Trial the Evidence was this, Fitzharris was the 21st. day of
February, 1681. with Everard, gave him Heads by word of mouth, to write the
Pamphlet in the Indictment mentioned, to scandalize the King, raise Rebellion,
alienate the Hearts of the People, and set them together by the Ears; the Libel
was to be presented to the French Ambassador's Confessor, and he was to present
it to the French Ambassador, and it was to set these people together by the
Ears, and keep them clashing and mistrusting one another, whilst the French
should gain Flanders, and then they would make no bones of England: For which
Libel, Everard was to have 40 Guineys, and a monthly Pension, which should be
some 1000 of pounds; Everard was to be brought into the Cabal where several
Protestants and Parliament men came to give an account to the Ambassador, how
things were transacted. Everard asked what would be the use of the Libels?
Fitzharris said, we shall disperse them we know how; they were to be drawn in
the Name of the Nonconformists, and to be put and fathered upon them: This was
the sum of Everard's Evidence.

Mr. Smith proved Fitzharris his giving instructions to Everard; and Sir
William Waller, and others, proved the Libel, and the Discourse about gaining
Flanders, and England: other Witnesses were examined to prove Fitzharris's
hand, for the Prisoner. Dr. Oats said, Everard told him the Libel was to be
printed, and to be sent about by the Penny-Post, to the Protesting Lords, and
Leading Men of the House of Commons, who were to be taken up as soon as they
had it, and searched, and to have it found about them. He said the Court had an
hand in it, and the King had given Fitzharris Money for it already, and would
give him more if it had success.

Mr. Cornish said, when he came from Newgate to the King, to give him an
account in what disposition he found the Prisoner to make a discovery, the King
said he had had him often before him and his Secretaries, and could make
nothing of what he did discover; that he had for near three Months acquainted
the King he was in pursuit of a Plot, of a matter that related much to his
Person and Government, and that in as much as he made protestations of Zeal for
his Service, he did countenance and give him some Money; that the King said the
came to him three Months before he appeared at the Council Table.

Colonel Mansel said that Sir William Waller gave him an account of the
business in the presence of Mr. Hunt, and several others, and said, that when
he had acquainted the King with it, the King said he had done him the greatest
piece of service that ever he had done him in his life, and gave him a great
many thanks: But he was no sooner gone, but two Gentlemen told him, the King
said he had broken all his Measures, and the King would have him taken off one
way or another, and said that the Design was against the Protestant Lords, and
Protestant Party. Mr. Hunt confirmed the same thing, and added, that he said
the design was to contrive those Papers into the hands of the people, and make
them Evidences of Rebellion, and appealed to Sir William Waller who was
present, whether what he said was not true. Mr. Bethel said Everard before he
had seen Bethell, or heard him speak a word, put in an Information of Treason
against him, at the instigation of Bethel's mortal Enemy; which Information was
so groundless, that though it was three years before, yet he never heard a word
of it till the Friday before.

Mrs. Wall said, Fitzharris had 250 l. 200 l. or 150 l. for bringing the Lord
Howard of Escrick; she added, that Fitzharris was looked upon to be a Roman
Catholic, and upon that account it was said to be dangerous to let him go near
the King, that he never was admitted to the King.

The Lord Cornway said, that the King had declared in Council, that Fitzharris
had been employed by him in some trifling businesses, and that he had got money
of him; but added, as of his own Knowledge, that the King never spoke with him
till after he was taken, which was the 28th of February last.

All the Evidence being over, it was summed up by the Counsel, That upon all
the Circumstances of it, Fitzharris was the Contriver and Directer of the
Libel; that it was a Treasonable Libel, and a Jesuitical Design; that the
Excuse he made as if Everard drew him into it, or trepanned him into it, was
vain; nothing of that being proved. That Everard could do nothing alone, and
therefore Sir William Waller must be in the contrivance; but that was unlikely;
that the Prisoner would insinuate that the King hired him to do it, because the
King gave him Money, but that was out of Charity; and therefore concluded, with
a great many words, that an English Protestant Jury of twelve substantial men,
could not but find the Prisoner guilty.

The Court added, that though Doctor Oats said, Everard said it was a design of
the Court, and was to be put on some Lords, and into some Parliments Men's
Pockets, yet Everard was there upon Oath, and testified no such thing in the
world; and for the Impeachment in the Lords House they were not to take notice
of it.

After which, the Jury informed the Court, that they heard there was a Vote in
the House of Commons, that the Prisoner should not be tried in any inferior
Court: To which the Chief Justice said, That that Vote could not alter the Law,
and that the Judges of that Court had Conference with all the other Judges
concerning that matter, and it was the Opinion of all the Judges of England,
that that Court had a Jurisdiction to try that man. After which, Justice Jones
was of Opinion, that if he were acquitted on that Indictment, in might be
pleaded in Bar to the Impeachment. And Justice Raymond delivered his Opinion to
the same purpose. It is strange, that all the Judges should be of that Opinion,
yet before it was said, Justice Dolbin doubted. It is more strange, that if
Justice Dolbin was not of that Opinion, he would hear it said he was, and not
contradict it. It is most strange, that if the Judges of that Court were of
that Opinion, they had not declared so, in the arguing or giving Judgment on
the Plea; for that was the Matter of it, being pleaded to the Jurisdiction of
the Court, that they had not power to try the Prisoner for that Crime, so
circumstanced.

If the Plea had been overruled as to the Matter, none would have been so
impertinent, as to go about to maintain the Form of it.

Now to say truth in behalf of the public, and not on behalf of Fitzharris,
the Evidence was unfairly summed up; for Fitzharris never pretended Everard
drew him in, or was to trepan him: It is true, he asked Everard what the design
of the Pamphlet was, and whether he was not put upon it to trepan others? who
answered, he was not. But afterward being too nearly pressed by the Attorney
General, he said, Fitzharris told him the use of the Libels was to disperse
them he knew how; that they were to be drawn in the name of the
Non-conformists, and put upon them. And Oats said, Everard said the Libels
were to be printed, and sent abroad by the Penny-Post to the Protesting Lords,
and Leading Men of the House of Commons, and the persons seized with them in
their pockets; which is all strong Evidence that the Libel was designed to
trepan others, and that was all along the import of Fitzharris his Questions,
though cunningly not answered by some of the Witnesses, and as cunningly
omitted in summing up the Evidence.

It is true, the Chief Justice said, Everard said no such thing as Oats had
said; but why was not Everard, who was then present, asked whether he said what
Oats had given in Evidence?

There cannot be shown any President where a Witness contradicts, or says more
or less than a Witness that went before him, by the hearsay of that Witness;
but the first Witness is asked, what he says to it? Why was not Sir William
Waller, who was also present, asked what he said to the Evidence of Mr. Mansell
and Mr. Hunt? and who it was that informed Sir William what the King said? It
was no way in proof, nor pretended by Fitzharris, that any person was concerned
in that matter, but Everard and Fitzharris, though it was shrewdly suspected by
the House of Commons; and no man that reads the Trial, but believes there were
many more concerned, not yet discovered; but the Counsel might have brought in
any Judge of the Court by the head and shoulders to be a Confederate, as well
as Sir William Waller, that was a Jack-a-lent of their own setting up, in order
to knock him down again.

It was not pretended by Fitzharris that the King gave him any money to frame
that, or any other Libel; there was Evidence, that he had got money of the King
for some little matters he was employed in; perhaps for bringing Libels
dispersed abroad, or discovering Plots.

Upon the whole Evidence, it was plain that Fitzharris was an Irish Papist; it
was plain he was the only visible Contriver of the Libel; who were behind the
Curtain, is not plain, and to know them, was the Design of the Impeachment.

It was plain it was a Devilish Jesuitical Design, as the Court and Counsel, in
summing up the Evidence, agreed it to be; it was plain, that the Libel was
such, that if dispersed with intention to stir up the King's Subjects against
him, it had been High Treason within the Statute of the 13th of the King; but
what the intention of the contriving the Libel was, was not very certain; and
therefore, consequently what the Crime of it was, was uncertain.

To take the Evidence all the ways, as to the Design of the contriving of the
Libel, it is capable of being interpreted, the easiest construction, is to say,
he framed a Libel with intention to pretend to the King, that he had
intercepted a Libel privately dispersed; and to make it more likely, it should
be framed in the Nonconformists Names, to make his Report the more credible,
(for of Papists or Churchmen it could not be believed) to get more money of the
King; and that matter, by all his Questions to the Witnesses, he most drove at;
and that would at most be but a Cheat.

A more Criminal, but less credible construction, is to believe he designed to
disperse them, to excite and prevail upon the Discontented to take up Arms.

For what Effect had that Pamphlet, when it was, for it was afterward
dispersed, upon the Minds of the People? or what Effect could any Man of Sense
think it could have? for though it was a Virulent, yet it was as Foolish a
contrived Libel as ever was writ; yet I own if it had been writ and dispersed
with that Design, it had been High Treason within the Statute of E. 2.

But the most natural Construction of the worst Design of it, was to trepan the
Parliament Men, and make the Libels Evidences of a Rebellious Conspiracy, this
Everard confesses Fitzharris told him was the use to be made of them; and
Everard could not know the Design of them, but by what Fitzharris told him. And
Oats well explains what Everard meant by the words, in his Evidence, put the
Libel on the Nonconformists, by what Everard told him.

But yet even that, though in it self the highest Crime a Man can be guilty of,
next to putting it in Execution, is but a Conspiracy, which was mildly punished
in Lane and Knox their Case, though this exceeded that; that being a design
only against one Person, this against many.

Yet though this was of no higher Crime by the Law as now established than a
Misdemeanor, it was fit for the Legislative Power to have punished it in manner
it was punished, which yet the Legislative Power ought to resent as an Injury,
for an inferior Court's snatching the Exercise of that Power out of their
hands, which only belongs to the Supreme Authority.

That this Crime, upon construction of the Evidence taken in the best Sense, is
no Treason, though the Libel should in all probability incite the Subject to
leavy War, which it was not likely to do, or in Fact it had been the cause of a
Rebellion, yet if it was not designed by the Contriver to that purpose, it was
not Treason by the Statute of Edward the Third, or Charles the Second; for in
the last Statute it is Designing to levy War, and in the Statute of Edward the
3d. it is a strained Construction, to make designing to leavy War Treason, yet
none ever pretended to strain the Sense of that Statute farther than designing
to do it.

If the Ill Effects the Libel did, or might produce, made it Treason, then Sir
Samuel Astrey, who read it in Court at the Trial, and the Printer that
afterward printed and published it, and Sir William Waller, who read it to Mr.
Hunt and others, were guilty of Treason; for the Libel carried no Venom or
Charm with it the more, for being framed by Fitzharris, or Everard, or for
being published by either of them, than if published by another person.

The difference is, Astrey read it aloud, as his Duty; the Printer printed and
published it for gain; Sir William Waller published it as a Novelty; and if
Fitzharris contrived it to put it upon the Nonconformists or Parliament Men,
and not stir up a Rebellion, though it tended to all the ill consequences
mentioned in his Indictment, yet it was not Treason.

But it will be urged, how shall Fitzharris his intention be proved? it was a
question which made a mighty sputter in arguing the Plea, how shall it be
proved, that the Impeachment was for the same Treason for which the Indictment
was? but in the Trial of Fitzharris, that question was fully cleared; for it
was proved there, that the very Libel then produced in Court, was the same
Libel read in the House of Commons, upon which the Impeachment was Voted.

And to say Truth, nothing can be put in Issue, but is capable of Trial. Quo
animo a thing is done in all overt Acts of a design, is one of the main
questions; or to speak in Law Phrase, whether done proditorie or not, an Adverb
of great use and sense, though heretofore slighted; and under which, I believe a
great many persons will be enforced to shelter themselves from being punished
by the Law Established.

No Man will pretend, that Libel did any man Mischief, but the Contriver, nor
in probability could have done, if not used to the purpose Everard said to
Oats. Yet other persons have been guilty of as illegal Acts, of worse
consequences in prospect, and much worse in effect, and it did not amount to
Treason. I dare say, the Allegation, that they disturbed the Kingdom by their
Acts and War caused to be moved against the King, is true of them, and they are
guilty of all the aggravations used in Indictments of Treason.

To instance in some of many, Did it not make a mighty heart-burning in the
City against the Government, and raised great Jealousies between the King and
People, when the Sheriffs North and Rich were imposed on the City? Did not the
taking away the Cities right of Electing Sheriffs, and the suspicions for what
end it was done, besides the Illegalities that followed? If Sir Edward Herbert
in his late Vindication, fol. 16. be Law, as it has an Aspect as if it were,
that Grand Juries returned by such as are Sheriffs in fact, but not in right,
are illegal, and Convictions on their presentiments are illegal and void, give
great disturbance, and that Opinion seems to be countenanced by my Lord Coke's
3d. Instit. fol. 32. in his Comment on the 11th of Henry the 4th, and
consequently the Lord Russel's and other Attainders void? Did it not add to the
heart-burning, the punishing those Citizens as Rioters, who were at Guildhall
innocently contesting their right of Electing? Was it not an increase of the
mischief, the bringing the Quo Warranto against the City, whereby the Credit of
the City was lost, and many Orphans starved, and more impoverished, beyond the
possibility of recovery? And it was yet heightened by the Judgment given in the
highest Case that ever came into Westminster Hall, by two Judges only, and that
without one word of Reason given at the pronouncing, according to the pattern
of Fitzharris his case, and was the second mute Judgment? Did it not fright all
honest men from being on criminal Juries, when Willmore was so illegally
prosecuted for not giving a Verdict against his Conscience, by an homine
replegiando and Information? And did not that make all Merchants, who had
Transactions beyond Sea, afraid to send their Servants thither, for fear they
might be laid by the heels till they fetched them back again? Did it not
startle the Lords and the Leading Men of the House of Commons mentioned so
often in Fitzharris his Trial, when the Earl of Essex, Lord Russel, Colonel
Sidney, Mr. Hampden, and several others were clapped up close Prisoners in the
Tower? Did it not deter any honest man from appearing to witness the truth,
when Sir Patience Ward was convicted of Perjury? Did it not provoke two great
and noble Families, when the Lord Russel and Colonel Sidney were so illegally
and unhandsomely dealt withal, as shall be hereaster declared? Did it not
provoke all the Nation, except the Clergy and Soldiery, when all the Charters
of England were seized, and not regranted, but at excessive, rates, to the
starving the poor, who should have been fed with the Money which went to
purchase the new Charters, and reserving the disposition of all the places of
profit and power, within the new Corporations, to the King, but which indeed
the Confederates shared amongst themselves? Nay the very Election of Burgesses,
the freeness of which is the great fundamental of the Government, was
monopoliz'd, and put into a few hands. Did not the unreasonable Fines, and
cruel Punishments inflicted, oppress many, terrify all, and consequently make
the Government odious to the Subject? Did not the Cruelties acted in the West,
enrage above a third part of the Nation? Did not the turning out many of the
Soldiery and Clergy, without any reason; and for that purpose Erecting
Arbitrary Courts, and granting Dispensations to persons by Law disabled, to
enable them to have and enjoy the Places and Offices of such as were illegally
turned out, and of all who should be in like manner turned out? And was it not
seen what the Consequences of those things would be, by all who did not wink
their Eyes, or who wore not blinded by the Profit they made of such illegal and
cruel Acts? Was not the King at last sensible, that the Consequence of what
before recited would be what afterward happened? And did he not in less than a
Months time, when too late, throw down all that Babel of Confusion which had
been so long a building, and did all in his power, and would have done more if
he could, to have set things as right as they were before the Parliament of
Oxon; for from thence the Extravagancies may be dated: But Alas! more mischief
can be and was done by weak Brains, than the best Wits can retrieve; those that
were dead could not be brought to life; the Restitution of the Cities Charters
was but in show a relief; how shall those defend themselves, who have acted
under all the illegal Sheriffs, constituted and not Elected? How shall those
defend themselves, who have acted under Officers appointed by the new Charters,
which by the Restitution are gone as if they never had been? How shall
Sheriffs, Goalers, and other Officers, who have had, or now have Custody of
Prisoners, and having not taken the Test, trusting to the validity of a
Dispense, behave themselves? Shall they continue to keep their Prisoners in
Custody, or let them go? If the last, they are Subject to Actions of Escape; if
the first, they are liable to false Imprisonment. These and a many more
Mischiefs, not yet seen, are the natural results of these Illegal Actions.

I never reflect on these things, but I remember Tully in his Offices lays down
as a Rule, That nothing is Profitable, but what is Honest, and gives many
Reasons for it; but nothing so convincing, as the Examples he brings in Public
and Private matters; and though the Empire was vast, and he bore a great Figure
in it, and was very knowing, and was well read in the Greek and Roman
Histories, yet he was not able to bring a 100th part of Examples, to prove his
Position, as have been in this little Island in the space of eight years. And
the Persons, by whose advice these things were transacted, are the more
inexcusable, if it be true what a certain Nobleman, (who bore a considerable
Character in the two late Kings Council,) once said to me was true. He was
complaining that the King was misled by the Advice of his Lawyers. I asked him
whether the King put his Judges and Counsel upon doing what was done, without
considering whether it was Legal; as the common Vogue was, he did; or that his
Lawyers first advised what to be done, was Law? He answered me, on his Honor,
the King's Counsel at Law, first advised the King might do by Law what he would
have done, before he commanded them to do it.

Yet I agree, none of those matters, though so inconvenient and grievous, are
Treason by the Statutes of E. 3. or C. 2.

For Profit in some cases, Revenge in others, the endeavoring means to escape
Punishment, and a natural propensity to Cruelty in many, were the true ends
were driven at, and not the bringing their Prince into the Hatred of his
Subjects, though that was a necessary consequent of all recited, and of many more
matters omitted: And let Fitzharris his Crime, and those recited, be but
Examined, and his was but a Piccadilio to the least of those; though this was
acted by an Irish Papist, and those by English Protestants, Sons of the Church
of England as by Law Established, as they call themselves; though I doubt, not
sincere Protestants, as my Lord Russel said; words which were matter of
Laughter to those who brought him to the Block.

But, though neither Fitzharris his Crime, taken in the last Sense, nor the above
Crimes were High Treason by any Statute: and the Judges have not Power to
punish any other Treasons; yet in all times the Parliaments have practiced, and
it is necessarily incident to all Supreme Powers, in all Governments, to Enact
or Declare extravagant Crimes to be greater than by the Established Law they
are declared to be, not by virtue of the Clause in the Statute of Edward the
3d. whereby some have, by mistake, thought that a Power was reserved to the
Parliament to declare other matters Treason, than what is therein expressed; for
admit that Clause had been omitted, there is none can doubt, but in point of
Power, the Parliament could (how far in justice they might, is another
Question) have declared any other matter to be Treason, and the words of that
Clause are very improper expressions, either to vest or reserve a Power in the
Parliament, for the words are only prohibitory to the Judges, to adjudge any
other Matters Treason, than those expressed in the Act, though they were somewhat
like those expressed, and therefore might be supposed Treasons; and it is a
sort of monition to Offenders, that they should not presume to be guilty of
Enormous Crimes, upon presumption that they were not Treasons within that Act.
For in the preamble, it is said, because many other like Cases of Treason (which
in Sence-are Cases like Treason declared in that Act) may happen in time to
come which could not be thought of or declared at that present; therefore if
any such should happen before any Justice, the Justice should tarry, and not
proceed to give Judgment of Treason on it, till it should be judged in
Parliament, Treason or Felony. How well the Judges in late days have observed
this prohibitory Law, let the world Judge; and most certainly the Parliament
might have declared in Fitzharris his Case, as they may in those other, that
the Crimes were Treason, Felony, Misprision of Treason, Trespass, or what other
Crime known in the Law, and inflict what Punishment they thought fit; and it is
no injustice for the Supreme Power to punish a Fact in a higher manner than by
Law Established, if the Fact in its nature is a Crime, and the Circumstances
make it much more heinous than ordinarily such Crimes are. It was not injustice
in the Parliament of the second and third of Philip and Mary to Enact, that
Smith and others, who were supposed to be guilty, as Accessaries to a barbarous
Murder, and were equally if not more guilty than the Principal, to Enact, as
they did, that if they should be found guilty as Accessaries, they should not
have their Clergies, which at the time of committing the Fact Accessaries to
Murder were allowed to have. It is true, to Declare or Enact a Fact, after it
is committed, to be a Crime, which when committed was in it self none, such as
transporting Wool beyond Sea, and the like, would be high Injustice.

REMARKS UPON Colledge's Trial.
BUT to return whence I have digrest, Fitzharris being Executed according to
his Sentence, though there was great grumbling amongst the Protestants, that
those who set him on work were concealed, and never like to be discovered now
he was dead; yet all was quiet, but the Conspirators, who resolved, though
Fitzharris miscarried in his Design, yet the Plot should go on, but what it
should be, or where, the Scene of it should be laid, or who the Plotters should
be, they were not well resolved.

Great noise of Warrants being issued out there was, but at last, all centered
in an inconsiderable Fellow, one Stephen College, a Joiner by Trade, who for
his Honor, as a Prisoner of State, was committed to the Tower for High
Treason. At first it was designed to lay the Scene in London, and accordingly a
Bill of Indictment of High Treason was exhibited to the Grand Jury (whereof
Wilmore was one) at the Sessions House; but the Business of Fitzharris was so
new, and smelt so rank, that the Bill could not be disgested, but was spewed
out with an Ignoramus; for which Wilmore was afterward forced to fly his
Country.

Then it was resolved the Scene should be at Oxford, and accordingly the King's
Counsel, with Irish Witnesses, at the Assizes, post thither, and prevail with
the Grand Jury, to find the Bill; but by what Arts is not known, for he was
privately shut up with them; and I should wonder, if he, who frequently in the
hearing of those who understood better than himself, had assurance enough to
impose upon the Courts, should scruple in private to impose any thing on an
ignorant Jury.

I know not how long the Practice of that matter of admitting Counsel to a
Grand Jury has been; I am sure it is a very unjustifiable and unsufferable
one. If the Grand Jury have a doubt in point of Law, they ought to have
recourse to the Court, and that publicly and not privately, and not rely upon
the private opinion of Council, especially of the Kings Council, who are, or at
least behave themselves as if they were Parties.

It is true, it is said that they are upon their Oaths, and though it be not
expressed in their Oaths, that they should do Right between the King and
Subjects, yet that is implied in the Oath I agree; but have they behaved
themselves as if they were under an Oath? besides all Men are not capable of
giving advice to be relied on in so great a matter as Life; but the manner of
doing it being in private, can never be justified. I know in Fitz-Harris his
Case, the Kings Council were cajoling the Grand Jury in private for some hours,
but I did not think fit to take notice of it in that Trial, because I think
both the Grand and Petty Jury did very well, they acted according to the best
of their understanding, which is all that God or Man required of them; they
asked pertinent Questions, they were overruled in some, not fully answered in
others; not that I think either of them gave a Verdict according to Law upon
the Fact, as it appeared upon the Evidence; but that was not the fault of the
Jury, but of the King's Council, and of the Court who mislead the Jury. I
thought it more proper to take notice of it in this Trial, wherein the first
Bill was rejected by an understanding Jury; and all Men wondered how the second
came to be found Billa Vera; and for that reason one of the King's Council
boasted at Court of his service and cunning management in the matter.

The Bill being found, the next matter was to bring the Prisoner to his Trial,
and as he had more honor than what usually is bestowed on so mean a Man, to be
Committed to the Tower, though in truth it was to keep him from all means of
defense; so to carry the matter on, he was allowed to have by Order of the King
and Council, a Council and Solicitor to come to him, and advise him for his
Defense at all events, a favor denied to Fitz-Harris, for his Council was to
advise to the matter of the Plea only; but that favor in show was only to
betray him, as shall be shown: And a third favor he had, which no Man of his
quality ever had; there were then three of the King's Council sent from London,
and all the Council could be picked up upon the spot, which were three more,
and no less than four Judges to Prosecute and Try him; but that was to make
sure work of him.

The 17th. of August, 1681. he came to his Trial, his Endictment, as to part,
was in common form for Treason, but particularly for designing to seize the
King's Person at Oxford, mixed with words, he should say, as, That there was no
good to be expected from the King, he minded nothing but beastliness, and that
he endeavored to establish Arbitrary Power and Popery; to which being required
to plead, he desired a Copy of the Indictment, a Copy of the Jury, to know upon
what Statute he was Indicted, and Council to advise him whether he had any
thing pleadable in Bar, all which were denied him; then he desired he might
have his Papers which were taken from him after he was brought from the Prison,
and before he came into Court, at an House over against the Court; for so it
seems the King's Council had ordered the matter, that the Goaser Murrel, and
the Messenger Sawel, after they had him out of the Prison, should run him into
an House, and take away all his Papers, which they believed were the
instructions, as in truth they were, of the Council assigned him when in the
Tower, and bring the Papers to them, whereby they would not only disable him of
his Defense, but they could be better instructed how to proceed in a way for
which he had not provided himself of any Defense.

Murrel and Sawel did as the King's Council directed them; much wrangle there
was whether he should have his Papers or not, all the Court agreed he should
not have them till he had pleaded Guilty or not Guilty, and afterward he
should have the use of some, and not of others, because they did not appear to
be written by himself, but by some Council or Solicitor, and as they said,
none is allowed in Treason, unless assigned by the Court; the Chief Justice
North said they were not taken away by him; but says College, They were taken
away by the Keeper under pretense of bringing them to his Lordship; the Court
said they knew not what Papers he meant, and knew nothing of it; he said the
Indictment mentioned something of Misdemeanor as well as Treason, but he know
not how to make his Exceptions without his Papers. I have thought fit to
mention all these things, because this Trial was the inlet to all that
followed, and gave encouragement to spill nobler Blood; the injustice of the
violence used to the Prisoner, must be measured from the Reasons given for it,
That the Papers were instructions from Council and Sollicitors, and none in Law
was allowed in Treason. It Is true, no Counsel are allowed for the Prisoner in a
Trial upon an Indictment of any capital matter, but in an appeal for capital
matters, Council are allowed even on the Trial. The reason given that the
Indictment is the Suit of the King, and no Council or Witness is allowable in a
capital matter against the King, is foolish, as shall be hereafter shown; and
as vain is the reason that the Judges are Council for the Prisoner, which they
ought to be, but I doubt it will be suspected, that in this case, and many
others, they did not make the best of their Clients Case; nay, generally have
betrayed their poor Client, to please, as they apprehended, their better
Client, the King; for so they say, They are to be Counsel likewise for the King
in Indictments, that is to say, They are to be indifferent and upright between
both, so certainly they are to be in Appeals; therefore that is not the reason
why no Council is allowed the Prisoner in the Indictment, but the true reason
in probability is, that the Prisoners in Indictments are generally so very poor
that they could not be at the charge of having Council, and so non-usage gave
color of a Law.

The other reason my Lord Coke gives for it, is, That much of truth may be
discerned by the Prisoners Behavior, or Answers, which would be concealed if
he spoke by another, is not satisfactory; for the same is to be said in an
Appeal. As to the public it is not material whether a man is prosecuted and
punished by an Indictment, or an Appeal; and that Appeals are less frequent than
Indictments, is only that the first is more chargeable than the last, for tho
we hear not of late of any Appeals but in Murder, yet they lie in Robbery,
Burglary, Felony, and in all Crimes at Common Law punishable by loss of Life or
Member; but tho the rule in Indictments, is, That no Council is allowed, yet it
is confined to the Trial, no Law, Common, or Statute, nor any Usage says, A
Prisoner shall not have Council to advise him before or after the Trial; and in
Murder and all other Crimes, it is always admitted, and why not in Treason?

In Treason, says some, it is Criminal for one to advise or solicit for the
Prisoner; and the Kings Council said, He had known one Indicted for being a
Solicitor for one in High Treason; and says the Court, It is Criminal for one
to be Solicitor or Council in Cases of High Treason, unless assigned by the
Court, and whether it be so or not is worth enquiry.

First, No Law Book as to this matter makes any difference between Treason, and
other Crimes, and advising and soliciting is spoken of in general terms, which
being reduced to Particulars, will show the absurdity of it.

Suppose I observing the Indictment on which the Prisoner was arraigned, was
erroneous, and should therefore advise him to move and quash it for that error;
for, say I, If you should be tried on this Indictment, and found guilty, unless
you move in Arrest of Judgment, you will be attainted, and then you can take no
advantage of that error, and if you be acquitted you may be Indicted again, and
Tried again, because the first Indictment was Erroneous.

If this be Law as none can deny it, is it not lawful to advise him? and is it
not fit for the Court to quash the Indictment if faulty, notwithstanding all
the Cant of Dilatories, Subterfuges; and defending himself by plain matter of
fact? Or suppose I advise in fact that I hear that such a witness is to come
against him, I know he is hired to do the Jobb, and I will prove it on him if
called. Or suppose I tell him, I know such a witness is convict of Perjury, and
if he will call me, I will produce the Records of his Conviction; can any
Lawyer say these things are Criminal? but if I should advise a Prisoner to
escape out of Prison, showing him the way of doing it, it is Criminal.

In all Cases comforting a Traitor is Treason, but it is meant where you do it
to keep him from Justice, for else feeding a Traitor in Prison is Treason,
which none will affirm. So that reducing general words to particular facts,
clears the Sophistry of them; nor is it Criminal to be a Solicitor in Treason,
for where there is no positive Law, as in this case there is not, natural
reason must take place; and better reason cannot be given than what the
Prisoner in this Case gave; If a man be coup'd up and not suffered to go about
his business himself, and no friend must be employed to do it for him, how is
it possible for him to make his defense? I know it is said his Innocence must
defend him, but the folly of that saying shall be shown in another place; but
say they, The Court shall assign him a Council and Solicitor; but when, and
for what? only for a Point of Law. May not a Prisoner want a Solicitor for a
matter of Fact? Suppose he had Occasion for a Witness which he could not
readily find, or occasion for a Copy of Record, for want of which Mr. Cornish
suffered; was it not reasonable for him to have a Solicitor? And when shall
the Court assign him a Solicitor; only when the Prisoner comes upon his Trial,
and then it is too late to have any use of him; as College was, Arraigned at
Twelve, and Tried at Two a Clock the same day, and as was Mr. Cornish's Case.
But, say the King's Council, They had known one Indicted for High Treason for
being a Solicitor in such a Case; though I do not believe it, yet that
Authority goes no farther to prove the matter, than an Indictment I knew
against a Person once, for stealing an Acre of Land; and against another for
wickedly and devillishly breaking an Award, whereby two injust Arbitrators
directed the Prisoner to convey his Land to a certain Lord, without any
Satisfaction or Recompense, proved those Matters to be Felonies.

But though a Prisoner may be advised, yet that Advice must not be reduced to
Writing. Then suppose one Man's Memory be good, and can bear all the Advice
given him; and another Man's Memory bad, and cannot do it: Is not the last
Hanged for having a bad Memory, rather than for his Crime? But though it may be
reduced to Writing, yet it must be his own Handwriting, and not another; how
ridiculous is the distinction? Suppose the Prisoner cannot write, then is he
Hanged for his Parents Fault or Misfortune, for not Educating him, or for not
being able to Educate him better.

Which is somewhat of kin to the late Practice in the West, where many Men were
Hanged for having of old Jewish Names, as Obediah, or the like, with a Jest,
that their Godfathers Hanged them. But suppose it is not lawful in general to
be a Council or Solicitor, with, or to a Prisoner committed for High Treason,
yet the Prosecutions being the King's, he may give a Privilege, which the Law
of Courts does not allow, and in this Case it was so done; for, to the
Confusion of those who did this Injury, and of those Judges who would not do
the Prisoner Right, they have printed the Orders of the King and Council, which
appointed Mr. West and Aaron Smith to be his Council and Solicitor.

If it was lawful for the Prisoner to have Counsel and to have Advice in
Writing; it was very unlawful and as high a misdemeanour in the King's Council
to order his Papers to be taken away, as they were capable of being Guilty of,
both the Prisoner and the Matters of his Defense being under the Protection of
the Court.

It is not an ancient practice the seizing of Papers, though of late used; it
began, I believe, upon my Lord Coke, whose Papers were seized and carried to
the Secretaries Office, upon the like Pretenses as of late, and when returned
were gelt to many Bonds and other Securities, to a great many Thousand Pounds
value, which never came to light. It was afterward practiced upon some Members
of Parliament, and, as I remember, voted Illegal, as undoubtedly it is; for
though, sometimes, you may meet with Papers which may be Evidence against the
Prisoner; so it is possible, that other Papers, than the Prisoners may be mixed
with his to make good an Accusation; nay, which is worse, some of the Prisoners
may be withdrawn, which may be the only matter of his Defense; and that has
been often practiced: And I cannot but remember a Story about this Matter. When
Sir William Jones died it was said, That one from Whitehall offered Sir William
Jones his Servant a great Sum of Money but to let him search his Master's
Study, to find a Paper which would discover great Matters. A certain person
discoursing with a Privy-Councellor about it, the Privy-Councellor said, It was
not true; for, says he, if we had a mind to have done it, could we not send a
Messenger on pretense of searching for treasonable Papers, and bring all the
Study to Whitehall, and keep what we would of them?

But though that has been often practiced, yet this was the first time that
ever a Prisoner had the Instructions for his Defense taken away from him; and
the manner was worse than the thing, it being done just as he was coming to his
Trial, relying upon his Writing, not his Memory for his defense; besides the
Agony so great an Injury put him in, when he had so great a concern upon him,
as the Trial for his Life, and he could not but know by all that Preparation,
that it was more than ten to one against him; all which is well seen in his
Trial, where he so pathetically and sensibly pressed the Court for Justice in
this matter, which they excused with such mean Answers, that all mankind must
see they were satisfied of the Injustice, and were resolved not to do him
Right; They knew not which way he came by the Papers; they knew not but he may
be Criminal who brought them him; they knew nothing of his Papers; they knew
not what Papers he meant; that his Lordship did not take them away, and such
like stuff, as if it was not the Duty of the Court to relieve the Prisoner
against the Oppression of any Persons but themselves; else why did they not ask
Murrel and Sawel, who stood by, and were charged with taking them for the
Papers, and have satisfied themselves of them; but in truth they knew before
what they were. And College was a true Prophet, when finding his Life so
beset, he said, This is an horrid Conspiracy to take his Life: But it would not
stop there, for it was against all the Protestants in England, and the Rule the
Court made at last was as unjust, That he should have the use of some of his
Papers after he had pleaded not Guilty, but not before; for suppose there was
matter in them which could not be made use of after such Plea, as a Plea to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, a Pardon, otherwise acquitted and the like, could
not be pleaded, or advantage taken of them after not Guilty pleaded; although
there was not such yet there might have been such Pleas, for ought the Court
knew. How unjust then was it for him to plead not Guilty before he should have
the use of his Papers? but there was matter in them for quashing the
Indictment; and he hinted so much to the Court as that the Indictment contained
Crimes of different Nature, as Treason and Misdemeanour, and I think it was
good Cause to quash the Indictment.

In all Civil Matters, two matters of different Natures cannot be put into one
Action, as Debt and Trespass; two Capital Crimes of different Natures cannot be
joined in one Indictment, as Murder and Robbery; and for the same, and another
Reason, Treason and Misdemeanour cannot be joined in one Indictment; for the
Jury may observe that one part of the Indictment, which in it self is but
misdemeanour, as that he said, The King minded nothing but beastliness, etc.
though charged in the Indictment as Treason, was proved, and not the material
parts of the Indictment, as designing to seize the Kings Person, etc. and
finding some part of the Indictment proved, might find him guilty generally,
which extends to every Article of the Indictment, and so the Jury deceived, an
the Prisoner in danger; or suppose he was acquitted on such an Indictment, if
it ought to have been quashed, whether the Prisoner show the Error, or not, he
may be Tried again upon another good Indictment for the same Treason: If
therefore what he offered was an error, or but like an error in the Indictment,
by the Law which favors life, and the jeopardy of life, the Court ought not to
have Tried him on that Indictment, but have directed another Indictment to have
been found: It is a vain objection to have said, that that would have been
troublesome. Is the mischief of that comparable to that of putting a man twice
in jeopardy of his life for the same thing? but it would have been a delay. I
say none; for there was a Grand Jury in Court, and within the two hours time
the Court adjourned, for (to give the King's Council opportunity of viewing the
Prisoners Papers, which were taken from him, and to consider of the method of
his Prosecution by them, which they did, and altered it from what they at first
designed it;) the King's Council might have had a new Bill found, but
peradventure they could not prevail with that Grand Jury to have found a new
Bill; they remembered they had ill luck with the first Bill at London; that I
believe was the true reason; but because I Will do the Court no injury, in
imputing that to the cause of the adjournment, which was not; it is true, in the
Printed Trial, it is pretended they adjourned, in order to Dine; yet those that
knew that the adjournment was by the direction of the King's Council, and
overheard their whispering with the Chief Justice, (which is both an undecent
and an unjust thing, and is neither better nor worse than a Plaintiff or
Defendants whispering a Judge while his Case is before him Trying;) and I know
that he Judges had Breakfasted but a little before, and had no great stomach to
their Dinners, and therefore believe, that that before assigned, and not what
pretended, was the true cause. They might better have put off their Dinner to
their Supper, than their Supper to their Breakfast, as they did, the Trial
lasting till early next Morning.

But because all irregularities of Court and Council, in all these matters, are
shifted off and excused by two Sayings not understood generally; the first
whereof is, That the Court is to act for the King, and the Council are for the
King, and no person must come near the Prisoner to the prejudice of the King,
as in Fitz-Harris his Case was often said; a Witness was permitted to go on in
an impertinent story, on a Transaction between him and my Lord Shaftsbury, in
my Lord Russell's Trial, of which the Prisoner complained that it was designed
to incense the Jury; and though the Chief Justice declared it was not Evidence,
yet he a great while afterward went on in a like manner; nay, the Council, in
summing up the Evidence, repeated the same matter, which was permitted, because
it was for the King: and yet when the Earl of Anglesey began to say what the
lady Chaworth told him, he was snub'd, and cut short; and Mr. Edward Howard was
served the same sauce, because it was against the King: It is fit therefore to
know what is meant in Law by those words. No body doubts what the Courts or
King's Council of late days meant; but in Law the are not so meant, for though
many things are said to be the King's, as the Protector of his people, and more
concerned in their welfare than any private persons, yet they are so in
preservation, and not in property or interest. The Highways are the King's, in
preservation for the Passage of his Subjects, and whoever obstructs them wrongs
the King; as he is hurt when his Subjects are hurt, but in property the Soil
generally belongs to private Persons; the King is hurt when his Subjects are
oppressed by force, because he has engaged to defend them, and therefore the
Offender is punished by the King, to deterr the Offenders and others from
committing the same offenses, which is for the benefit of the public; but as a
Man may be oppressed by open force, so he may be oppressed by private insinuations,
and false accusations, and the King has engaged to defend his Subjects from
such; not that it is possible to prevent them, but by consequence, that is by
punishing such as shall be found guilty of such Crimes, which heretofore were
punished with the highest Arbitrary Punishments we read of: The consequence is,
That it is for the King to punish Offenders, to acquit the false accused, and
to punish the false accusers; that is to say, In all Cases to do right,
according to Law and Truth.

Surely Queen Elizabeth gave the best explanation of the words, when the Lord
Burleigh, seeing Sir Edward Coke, the then Attorney General, coming toward
her, he said, Madam, here is your Attorney General, Qui pro domina Regina
sequitur. Nay (says she) I Will have the words altered, for it should be, Qui pro
Domina veritate sequitur.

For the King and for Truth, then are sunonymous words, for the King against
the Truth is a contradiction, and the Judges and King's Council having taken an
Oath to advise the King according to the best of their cunning, which is
according to Law and Truth; if therefore the King's Council use means, and the
Court permit them so to do, to suppress Truth, or to disable the Prisoner from
making his innocence Appear, as in College his Case was done; if they urge
things as Evidence of the Crime whereof the Prisoner is accused, which by Law
are not Evidence, as in this Case, in the Lord Russell's Case, Colonel
Sydney's Case, Mr. Hambden's Case, Mr. Cornish's Case, and in many more they
did, and has in some of them shall be hereafter shown. If they insinuate any
fact as Evidence, which is not proved, as in my Lord Russell's Trial, that my
Lord of Essex killed himself; if they wrest as Evidence of the fact, which in
sense is not so; as in Colonel Sydney's Case, the writing his Book; for, for
any thing appeared, it was writ before King Charles the Second came to the
Crown; they are Council, against the King, being against Truth as well as
against the Prisoner.

I think no Man will deny the truth of this proposition, That it is as much the
King's interest, to have an innocent, accused of Treason, acquitted, as it is
to have a nocent, accused of Treason, convicted: If that be true, then let any
one show me a reason if he can; for there is no Law against it, why he may not
have the same liberty of clearing his innocence, as the prosecutor has of
convicting him; I mean by free and private access of all persons, to the
Prisoner, as is used in all other capital matters; if it be said he may get
some to corrupt the witnesses against him, or subborn others for him, the same
may be said in all other matters; but in Treason that is not a likely matter,
for generally the Prisoner never knows what he is accused of, and consequently
cannot know his Accuser, nor know how to provide a counter-Evidence, till he
comes to be Arraigned, and then it is too late; for generally he is presently
Tried after his Arraignment, as was the Case of College, and my Lord Russel,
and Mr. Cornish; and persons committed for Treason are so much the less able to
corrupt or suborn Witnesses than any other Criminals, that they generally,
according to the late practice, have no Accuser brought face to face to them on
their Commitment, as all other Criminals have, who always are committed upon an
Accusation made upon Oath in their Hearing, and their Defense heard before
their Mittimus made; and whatever the pretense may be, yet, in experience, it
is found more perjuries in prosecutions for Treason by the Accusers committed
than by the Witnesses for the Prisoner.

One reason is, a Witness in Treason is more difficultly convicted than in any
other Crime, for Treason is an Ignis fatuus, it is here and there, as College
was first in London then in Oxford; it is not confined to place or time, as all
others Crimes are; in all other Crimes, as Murder, Robbery or the like, it
must be proved to be within the County where laid; it must be of the person
named in the Indictment, which are Evidences of Fact, which in some sort prove
themselves. And there was but one that I remember (for Oats I do not count
one) was ever justly convicted of Perjury in Treason, and that too was for want
of cunning, for he foolishly Swore to time as well as place, which a Witness in
Mr. Hambden's Trial would never be brought to do: Besides, Malice and Revenge,
which in prosecutors and Accusers in Treason are generally the Motives, go
farther than Money or Kindness, which if used in any Case, are the Motives of
false Witnesses for the Prisoner.

Now as for the King, and for the Truth are the same, so for the King and for
the Law are the same. The Laws are the King's, as he is to see the Execution
and Preservation of them; so for the King against the Law, is a contradiction.

Therefore, to Try a Prisoner upon a vicious Indictment, as was done in
Colledge's and Colonel Sydney's Cases, is against the King, as it is against
Law, for by that means he is in danger to be Hanged if Convicted; or Tried
twice, if acquitted, which is against Law.

It is no Salve of the matter what the Judges said in Colledge's Case, that the
Evidence of Misdemeanour is no Evidence of Treason; for the same may be said in
an Indictment of Murder and Robbery; nor that the Judges would take care to
inform the Jury which was Evidence of Treason, which of Misdemeanour, which
they promised to do, but were not as good as their words, as shall be shown;
for the Court may forget so to do, and the Jury may forget what the Court said
to them of that matter.

But notwithstanding all this, if the Prisoner was innocent, there could be no
harm done to him, for his Innocence would defend him; this was a saying, and as
mortal it was to Fitz-harris, to College, to Colonel Sydney, to Mr. Cornish,
and several others, as was the Letter TH amongst the Greeks. It is true, my
Lord Coke used the Expression, but in another sense than what of late
practiced; I would fain know what they mean by the Expression; is it, That, no
man will or ever did swear falsely against a Prisoner in Treason; if that be
true, how came the same Persons to be so violent agianst Oats for what he
swore against Ireland? or do they mean, that, let an accuser swear never so
violently and circumstantially against a Prisoner, yet if he be innocent, it
will do him no harm: if that be true, I would fain know how the Prisoner shall
escape; is it that his Innocence shall appear in his Forehead, or shall an
Angel come from Heaven and disprove the Accuser? neither of which we have
observed, though all have said, and I believe, that some Persons have been very
innocently Executed. Or shall the Accuser be detected by the bare Questions of
the Prisoner? that I think will not be neither; and therefore to instance in the
only person who has of late escaped in a Trial of Treason, where there was a
design against his Life, which was my Lord Delumere, if he had not had
Witnesses, to have proved the persons mentioned to have been with him at the
place and time sworn against him to be in oath places it was not his denial had
served his turn, but he would have run the same fate with my Lord Brandon. Nay,
I am apt to think had he been Tried by a Jury of Commoners packed, as at that
time they usually were, he had not escaped.

The truth is, when I consider the practice of late times, and the manner of
usage of the Prisoners, it is so very much like or rather worse than the
practice of the Inquisition, as I have read it, that I sometimes think that it
was in order to introduce Popery, and make the Inquisition, which is the most
terrible thing in that Religion, and which all Nations dread, seem easy in
respect of it. I will therefore recount some undeniable Circumstances of the
late practice. A man is by a Messenger, without any Indictment precedent, which
by the Common Law ought to precede, or any Accuser or Accusation that he knows
of, clapped up in close Prison, and neither Friend or Relation must come to him;
he must have neither Pen, Ink, or Paper, or know of what, or by whom he is
accused; he must divine all, and provide himself of a Counter-evidence without
knowing what the Evidence is against him. If any Person advise or solicit for
him, unless assigned by the Court, by which he is Tried, they are punishable;
he is Tried as soon as he comes into the Court; and therefore of a Solicitor
there is no occasion or use; if the Prisoner desires Council upon a Point of
Law, as was done in my Lord Russell's Trial, the Council named must be ready to
argue presently, and the Court deliver their Judgment presently, without any
consideration. The Prisoner indeed has liberty to except to Thirty-five of the
Jury peremptorily, and as many more as he has cause to except to, but he must
not know before hand who the Jury are; but te King's Council must have a Copy
of them; he must hear all the Witnesses produced to prove him Guilty together,
without answering each as he comes, for that is breaking in upon the King's
Evidence, as it is called; Though it hold many hours, as it happened in most of
the Trials; he must not have any person to mind him what has been sworn
against him, and forgotten by him to answer; for if that were allowed, the
Prisoner perhaps may escape Hanging, and that is against the King; there is a
Proclamation to call in all Persons to swear against him, none is permitted to
swear for him; all the impertinent Evidence that can be given is permitted
against him, none for him; as many Council as can be hired is allowed to be
against him, none for him. Let any person consider truly these Circumstances,
and it is a wonder how any person escapes; it is downright tying a man's hands
behind him, and baiting him to death, as in truth was practiced in all these
Cases. The Trial of Ordeal, of walking between hot Iron Bars blindford, which
was abolished for the unreasonableness of it; thought it had its saying for it
too, That God would lead the blind so as not to be burnt, if he were innocent,
was a much more advantageous Trial for the suspected, than what of late was
practiced, where it was ten to one that the accused did not escape; if any of
these things have been legally practiced, I have nothing to say against it, but
I have never read any thing of Common or Statute Law for it. And I can with
better assurance say than any person who has practiced these things, that no
Law in England warrants them; and if not, then consider the unreasonableness of
these Methods.

There is yet one Objection to be answered, which being a very great hardship
upon the Prisoner, gives somes color or imposing other hardships upon him, to
wit, That a Witness cannot be examined for the Prisoner on his Oath in a Trial
upon an Indictment of a Capital Matter. It is not because the Matter is
Capital, for then no Witness ought to be examined upon Oath for the Appellee in
a capital matter: Neither is it because it is against the King, for then no
Witness ought to be examined on Oath for the Defendant in a Trial upon an
Indictment of any Criminal Matter, yet in Indictments of all Criminal Matters,
not Capital, it is permitted to the Prisoner.

To say Truth, never any reason was yet given for it, or I think can be, if you
believe my Lord Coke 3d Instit. fol 79 of which Opinion my Lord Hales is, in
his Pleas of the Crown, that that Practice is not warranted by any Act of
Parliament, Book Case, or ancient Record, and that there is not so much as
scintilla Juris for is: for he says, when the fault is denied truth cannot
appear without Witnesses. As for what is pretended, that it is swearing against
the King, and therefore it is not allowed of, it is a Cant Reason, which put
into sensible English, a man will be ashamed to own. And as slight is the
Reason. That it being a matter of so high moment as a man's Life, the Prisoner
will be the more violent and eager, and the Witnesses may be more, prevailed
upon to swear falsely, more than they would be in a matter of less moment: The
weakness of that reason has been in part shown, and shall be further shown. I
think none will deny, but the end of all Trials in any matters Capital,
Criminal, or Civil, is the discovery of Truth; Next, it is as necessary for the
Prisoner to have Witnesses to prove his Innocence, as it is for the King to
have Witnesses to convict him of the Crime; which Proposition is agreed by the
Practice, it being always permitted, that the Prisoner shall produce what
Witnesses he can, but they are not to be upon Oath, In the last place, since
truth cannot appear but by the confession of the party, or testimony of
Witnesses of both sides, it is necessary to put all the engagement as well on
the Witnesses of part of the Prisoner, as of part of the King, to say the Truth
the whole Truth and nothing but the Truth, as the Nature of the matter will
bear; and as yet no better means has been found out than an Oath. Which if
denied to the Prisoner's Witnesses, either he is allowed too great an advantage
to acquit himself, or he is not allowed enough.

If all that his Witnesses say without Oath, shall have equal credit as if they
swore it, then he has too much advantage; for men may be found which will say
falsely what they will not swear, as is plain enough, How often does a Defendant
say in a Plea at Law, that a Deed is not his, which yet in an Answer in
Chancery he will confess to be his? If his Witnesses shall not have Credit
because not sworn, to what purpose then is it permitted him to produce them? If
they shall have some Credit, but not so much as if sworn, I ask how much credit
shall be given? Is it two, three, or ten Witnesses without Oath shall be
equivalent to One upon Oath? And besides that that Question never was or can be
answered, what credit shall be given them? There is an unreasanable
disadvantage put on the Prisoner, that a Witness produced of his part, of equal
credit with the Witness against him, shall not have equal credit given him,
because he is not on his Oath, whereas he is ready to deliver the same things
on his Oath, if the Court would administer it to him; and yet that difference
was taken in Fitzharris his Case, as to the Credibility of Everard and Oats;
the first being upon his Oath, the last not.

But I do not offer this as any Reflection upon the late Proceedings, but as a
reason why matters in Capital Proceedings ought not to have been carried
further than heretofore they were, against the Prisoner, by example of so
unreasonable a practice.

But to return to the Trial of College, which came on in the Afternoon, when
the Attorney insisted that the King's Witnesses ought not to be examined out of
the hearing of each other; in which he was overruled, but the Rule not
observed, nor was it material; for the King's Counsel having the Prisoners
Writings, and by them observed how he intended to make the Witnesses against
him contradict themselves, they did not produce such Witnesses, as were not
instructed to concur in the Evidence of the same matter, but produced only such
as were instructed to give Evidence of distinct matters; and therefore Dugdale
was first produced, who gave Evidence of villifying words spoke of the King at
several times at Oxford, and London, by the Prisoner to himself alone; that he
showed the Witness several scandalous Libels and Pictures, and said he was the
Author of them; that he had a silk Armor, a brace of Horse Pistols, and a
pocket Pistol, and Sword; that he said, He had several stout men to stand by
him, and that he would make use of them for the defense of the Protestant
Religion; he said the King's Party was but an handful to his Party. Stevens
swore the finding of the Original of the Raree Show in the Prisoners Chambers.
John Smith swore his speaking scandalous words of the King, and of his having
Armor, and that when he showed it the Witness, he said, These are things that
will destroy the pitiful Guards of Rowley; that he said, he expected the King
would seize some of the Members of Parliament at Oxford; which if done, he
would be one should seize the King; that he said, Fitzgerald at Oxon kad made
his Nose bleed, but before long he hoped to see a great deal more blood shed
for the Cause; that if any, nay, if Rowley himself, came to disarm the City, he
would be the Death of him. Haynes swore he said, Unless the King would let the
Parliament sit at Oxon, they would seize him, and bring him to the Block; and
that he said, The City had One thousand five hundred Barrels of Powder, and One
hundred thousand men ready at an hours Warning. Turbervile swore he said at
Oxford, That he wished the King would begin; if he did not, they would begin
with him, and seize him; and said he came to Oxford for that prupose.

Mr. Masters swore, That in discourse between him and the Prisoner, he justified
the Proceedings of the Parliament in 1640. at which the Witness wondered, and
said, how could he justify that Parliament that raised the Rebellion, and cut
off the King's head? To which the Prisoner replied, That that Parliament had
done nothing but what they had just cause for; and that the Parliament which
sat last at Westminster was of the same Opinion: That he called the Prisoner
Colonel in mockery, who replied, Mock not; I may be one in a little time.

Sir William Jennings swore as to the Fighting with Fitzgerald, and the words
about his bleeding.

For the Prisoner.

Hickman said he heard Haynes swear God damn him, he cared not what he swore,
nor whom he swore against, for it was his Trade to get Money by swearing. Mrs.
Oliver said Haynes writ a Letter in her Father's name, unknown to her Father.
Mrs. Hall said she heard Haynes own that he was employed to put a Plot upon the
Dissenting Protestants. Mrs. Richards said she heard him say the same thing.
Whaley said Haynes stole a Silver Tankerd from him. Lun said, Haynes said the
Parliament were a company of Rogues for not giving the King money, but he would
help the King to money enough out of the Phanaticks Estates. Oats said
Turbervile said, a little before the Witnesses were sworn at the Old Bailey,
that he was not a Witness against the Prisoner, nor could give any Evidence
against him. And after he came from Oxford, he sad he had been sworn before the
Grand Jury against the Prisoner, and said the Protestant Citizens had deserted
him, and God damn him he would not starve. That John Smith said God damn him he
would have Colledge's Blood. That he heard Dugdale say, that he knew nothing
against any Protestant in England; and being taxt that he had gone against his
Conscience in his Evidence; he said it was long of Colonel Warcup, for he
could get no money else; that he had given out, that he had been poisoned,
whereas in truth it was a Clap. Blake said, that Smith told him Haynes his
Discovery was a Sham Plot, a Meal-tub-Plot.

Bolron said, Smith would have had him give Evidence against Sir John Brooks,
that Sir John should say there would be cutting of Throats at Oxford, and that
the Parliament Men went provided with four, five, six, or ten men a-piece; and
that there was a Consult at Grantham, wherein it was resolved, that it was
better to seize the King than to let him go, whereas he knew of no such thing;
that he would have Balron to be a Witness against College, and told him what
he should say, lest they should disagree in their Evidence that he heard Haynes
say he knew nothing of a Popish or Presbyterian Plot, but if he were to be an
Evidence, he cared not what he swore, but would swear any thing to get Money.
Mowbray said, Smith tempted him to be a Witness against College, and was
inquisitive to know what discourse passed between him, the Lord Fairfax, Sir
John Hewly, and Mr. Stern on the Road; and said, that if the Parliament would
not give the King Money, and stood on the Bill of Exclusion, that was pretense
enough to swear a design to seize the King at Oxford. Everard said Smith told
him he knew of no Presbyterian or Protestant Plot, and said Justice Warcup
would have persuaded him to swear against some Lords a Presbyterian Plot, but
he knew of none; he said, Haynes told him it was necessity and hard pay drove
him to speak any thing against the Protestants; and being questioned how his
Testimony agreed with what he formerly said? answered, he would not say much to
excuse himself, his Wife was reduced to that Necessity, that she begged at
Rouse's door, and mere necessity drove him to it, and self preservation; for
the was brought in Guilty when he was taken up, and was obliged to do something
to save his Life; and that it was a Judgment upon the King or People; the
Irish-mens swearing against them was justly fallen on them, for outing the
Irish of their Estates. Parkhurst and Symons said they had seen at College his
House, his Arms about the latter end of November. Tates said Dugdale bespoke a
Pistol of him for College, which he promised to give College. And upon
Discourse sometimes after the Oxford Parliament, Tates said College was a very
honest man, and stood up for the good of the King and Government; Tes, said
Dugdale, I believe he does, and I know nothing to the coutrary. Deacon and
Whitaker said they knew College was bred a Protostant, and went to Church, and
never to a Conventicle that they knew of, and thought him an honest man. Neal,
Rimington, Janner and Norris to the same purpose; and Norris, that Smith (in
company where was Speech that the Parliament-mens being agreed to go to Oxford)
said, he hoped they would be well provided to go, if they did go. El. Hunt
said, a Porter in her Master's absence brought the Prints taken in Colledge's
house eight weeks before, and said Dugdale told her, after her Master was in
Prison, he did not believe College had any more hand in any Conspiracy against
his Majesty, than the Child unborn, and he had as lieve have given an hundred
pounds he had never spoke what he had, and that he had nothing to say against
her Master, which would touch his Life.

Having summed up all the material part of the Evidence in the order it was
given, for, or against the Prisoner, let us see whether upon the whole, an
honest understanding Jury could, with a good Conscience, have given the Verdict
the then Jury did; or whether an upright Court could, with a good Conscience,
have declared they were well satisfied in the Verdict given, as all the four
Judges in that case did, though the Chief Justice North only spoke the works.
And, though it is too late to Advantage the deceased, yet it will do right to
the Memory of the man, to whose dexterous management on his Trial many now
alive owe the continuance of their lives to this Day; it was not their
Innocence protected the Lord Fairfax, Sir John Brooks, and many others before
mentioined, and many not named in the Trial, but Colledge's baffling that Crew
of Witnesses, and so plainly detecting their falsehood, that the Kings Counsel
never durst play them at any other person, but the Earl of Shaftsbury, as shall
be shown, and failing there, they were paid off, and vanished, and never did
more harm visibly, what underhand Practices they might be hereafter guilty of,
I know not.

Who could believe any one of those four Witnesses, Dugdale, Haynes,
Turbervile, and Smith, if it were for no other reason than the improbability of
the thing, that (as College said) was it probable he should trust things of
that nature with Papists, who had broke their Faith with their own Party, who
could lay greater Obligations of secrecy upon them than he was able to do?
That he, a Protestant, should trust people who had been employed to cut
Protestants Throats? And neither of them ever discovered any of the things they
swore, till after the Oxford Parliament, though most of them were pretended to
be transacted and spoken before?

Who could believe Dugdale in any part of his Evidence against the Prisoner,
when Oats testified against him, that he said he knew nothing against any
Protestant in England? And being taxt by Oats, that he had gone against his
Conscience, in his Evidence against College to the Grand Jury at London, he
said, it was long of Colonel Warcup, for he could get no Money else; which was
a plain Consession he had sworn wrong, and Confession of the Cause for which he
did it, and of the person by whom he was induced to do it? That he had given
out that he was poisoned, whereas his disease was a Clap, which was an ill
thing in him, as it employed a charge of poisoning him on other persons? And
when Elizabeth Hunt testified against him, that he said, after College was in
Prison, that he did not believe College had any more hand in any Conspiracy
against the King, than the Child unborn; and that he had as lieve have given an
100 l. he had never spoken what he had, and that he had nothing to say against
College which could touch his Life? And when Yates testified him, that when
Yates said College was an honest man, and stood up for the good of the King
and Government; yes, said Dugdale, I believe he does, and I know nothing to the
contrary?

Who could believe Haynes in any part of his Evidence against the Prisoner,
when Mrs. Hall and Mrs. Richards said he owned he was employed to put a Plot
upon the Dissenting Protestants? when Whaley testified against him that he was
a Thief, and had stole Whaley Tankerd? when Lun testified that Haynes said the
Parliament were a Company of Rogues, for not giving the King money, but he
would help the King to Money enough out of the Phanaticks Estates? when Hickman
testified against him he heard him say, God damn him he cared not what he
swore, nor against whom he swore, for 'twas his Trade to get Money by swearing?
when Mrs. Oliver said that he had writ a Letter in her Fathers name, without
her Fathers knowledge? When Balron testified against him, that he said he knew
nothing of a Popish or a Presbyterian Plot, but if he were to be an Evidence,
he cared not what he swore, but would swear any thing to get Money? when
Everard testified against him, that he said Necessity and hard Pay drove him to
say any thing against the Protestants; and being taxt that his Evidence against
College agreed not with what he had formerly said, he said, he could not
excuse it, but his poverty and solf preservation drove him to it? which was a
plain Consession of the falsehood of his Evidence, and of the reason of it; and
added, it was a Judgment upon the King or People, the Irish-mens swearing
against them, for outing the Irish of their Estates? which can have no other
sense, than he Irish-mens forswearing themselves against the English was a
Judgment, etc.

How could Turbervile be believed in any part of his Evidence against College,
when Oats testified against him, that he said a little before the Witnesses
were sworn against College at the Old-bayly, that he was not a Witness against
him, nor could give any Evidence against him: and yet asterwards at Oxon,
Turbervile told him he had sworn against College to the Grand Jury, and said
the Protestant Citizens had deserted him, and God damn him he would not starve?
which words I think need no explanation.

And lastly, how could Smith be believed in any part of his Evidence against
the Prisoner, when it was testified against him by Blake, that he said Haynes
his discovery was a Sham-Plot, a Meal-Tub-Plot? The meaning of the words I
think are well known. That he would have had Bolron swear against Sir John
Brooks, the Lord Shaftesbury, and College, things of which he knew nothing,
and told him what he should swear, lest they should disagree in their Evidence?
When it was testified against him by Oats, that he said God damn him he would
have Colledge's Blood? when it was testified against him by sMowbray, that he
tempted Mowbray to be a Witness against College and Sir John Brooks, and was
very inquisitive to know what discourse he had with the Lord Fairfax, Sir John
Hewly, and Mr. Stern on the Road to Oxon, and said, if the Parliament did not
give the King Money, and stood on the Bill of Exclusion, that was pretense
enough to swear a design to secure the King at Oxon? when Everard, and many
others testified he said he knew of no Presbyterian or Protestant Plot? Now if
College his Witnesses were credited, it was impossible the King's Witnesses
could be credited, that was agreed by the Court to be true upon the Trial; the
answer on the Trial was, that the King's Witnesses were on their Oaths, the
Prisoners were not; which was a Reason but in words and not in sense.

And surely what College said on that matter, without any knowledge in the
Law, cannot be answered. It is not fair dealing, said he with a man for his
life, because the Witnesses against him upon their Oaths deny the things the
Witnesses for him prove, therefore the Witnesses against him must be believed,
and the Witnesses for him disbelieved, when yet the Witnesses for him were
ready on their Oaths to maintain what they said for him.

Nor is the Law so; for taking the Law to be that a Witness for the Prisoner
shall not be sworn, which is only made good by practice; the same Law, that is
to say practice, is, that a Witness without Oath for the Prisoner, is of equal
Credit with the Witness against him upon Oath, and none can show the contrary
till of late days.

To give one Example of many, where it was necessary for the Prisoner to
produce a Witness to prove his Innocence, and where the Witness for him was as
much believed as the Witness against him. There was a person, whose name I do
not remember, was arraigned (at the same time an Indictment of High Treason was
endeavored to be found against the Lord Shaftesbury) for robbing another of
Money and of an hired Horse, of which likewise the person was robbed; the
robbing of the Money and an Horse was proved by himself and several others, but
that the Prisoner was the person that committed the Robbery, none positively
swore, but the person robbed, who likewise swore, that the Horse on which the
Prisoner was taken, was the Horse taken from him; against which the Prisoner
proved by the person of whom the Horse was agreed to be hired, that the Horse
the Prisoner was taken upon was not the Horse he let to hire to the person
robbed; whereupon the Prisoner was acquitted; and yet the Prisoner's Witness
was not on his Oath, and the person robbed was on his Oath; which, besides that
it proves the Matter for which it is brought, shows the Folly as well as
injustice of the practice of imprisoning men without letting them know for
what, and without confronting them with the Witnesses against them, upon the
Commitment. For how could this man have known what Witnesses to produce, unless
he had known what in particular he was Indicted for? and how could he have sent
to such Witnesses, unless he had had the liberty of sending to the persons who
were to be Witnesses for him; and it shows the folly of those sayings, that a
man's Innocence must defend him, and that the Evidence against the Prisoner must
be as clear as the Sun at noon day: All will agree that the Prisoner in this
case was innocent, and yet that alone without producing a Witness to prove his
innocence, would have stood him but in little stead; and how could he have
known what sort of Evidence to have ready, unless he knew what he was accused
of?

I do not mean what Crime he was accused of, as Treason, Murder, Robbery,
Thest, or any other Crime, but unless he knew the Person robbed, when, where,
and other Circumstances; which, say some, is not to be permitted in
Prosecutions of High Treason; for if so, then no man shall be hanged for High
Treason, unless there was as strong proof against him, as is required in an
Indictment of any other Capital Matter; and that, they say, is not to be
expected in Treason, for no man will call two Witnesses to be Evidences of his
Words or Actions, being Overt Acts of his Design of High Treason. The Objection
is too foolish to be answered: For it is neither better nor worse, than that if
a man shall not be hanged for Treason without Evidence, he shall never be
hanged for Treason; for no Evidence, and Evidence which the Law rejects, is the
same in Sense, though different in words; and as the intent of the mind is
difficult to prove on part of the King, so is the Prisoner's part of producing
counter Evidence much more difficult; and therefore the Law has taken care by
the Statute of Edward the 3 d. that the Intent shall be proved by an Overt Act;
and by the Statute of Edward the 6th. that that Overt Act shall be proved by
two Witnesses. And therefore, since the Law has taken care that there shall be
a stricter proof in High Treason, than in any other Crime, for the Judges to
say a less proof may be admitted to convict one of High Treason, than of any
other Crime, is very ridiculous, unless they will at the same time say, that
the Parliament who made those Statutes, were men of little understanding, and
not to be regarded. And certainly it was a good Counter-Evidence, which was
given in behalf of the Prisoner by some Witnesses, though slighted by the
Court, and not permitted by the Court to be given by others, that there were
great endeavors to set up Sham-Plots, and charge the Protestants with them:
For let any one show me a Reason, why the Evidence of Sham-plots, though they
do not immediately concern the Prisoner, is not as good Evidence for him, as
the Evidence of a Real Plot, in which he was not concerned, is against him. The
last was permitted to be given in Evidence against my Lord Russel, Colonel
Sidney, and others; tho the first was not permitted to many Witnesses in this
Trial, and it was a material Objection which College made, That there was no
proof of any Persons being concerned with him in the Design of seizing the King.

It was an unadvised answer the Court gave, that he alone might be so vain as
to design it alone; for if from thence an inference is made, as was insinuated
by the Court to the Jury, that therefore he did alone design it, it was an
Evidence of his being a Madman, not a Traitor; had the Evidence been of the
mischiefing the King by means which a single person is capable of using, as
Stabbing, Shooting, and the like, the matter is not impossible; but it being by
means which it was impossible for a single person to execute, it carries such
disbelief with it, that it is impossible to find a man in his Senses at the
same time guilty of it: And a man that is non compos mentis, if my Lords Coke
and Hales are to be believed, cannot be guilty of High Treason within that
Branch of the Statute, Compassing, and imagining, etc.

It is true, a mad man may be guilty of Treason, in atempting the King's
Person; but for that he is no more said to be punished, than Beasts of prey are
when killed; which are more properly said to be destroyed than punished for the
public good. But if so good a Counter-proof in Colledge's Case was not made,
as ought to have been, some allowances ought to be made for the Prisoner's
ignorance of what he was accused of, his usage and strict Imprisonment before
his Trial, the ruffling him just before his Trial in the manner before
declared, the depriving him of his Notes, the giving an Evidence of many hours
long against him, before he was permitted to answer any part of it. And the use
of Pen, Ink, and paper, was but of little advantage to him; for a man that has
not been used to do it, cannot take notes of any use. And in truth, he
complained he had not taken notes of half said, but relied on the Court to do
him Justice in summing up the Evidences, which they promised to do, but broke
their words.

It must likewise be considered, that the concern a man has upon him, when he
is upon Trial for his Life, it is so far from fortifying that it weakens his
Memory: Besides, the foul practice, without any remorse, put upon him and his
Witnesses; some of them imprisoned, that he could not have them at the Trial;
others so threatened, that they durst not appear for him, and the cry of the
auditory against him and his Witnesses, were mighty discouragements. All these
things being considered, how could any understanding Jury take it on their
Oaths, That the Evidence against the Prisoner, of a Design to feize the King,
etc. was as clear as the Sun at noon days.

As for the Evidence which Mr. Masters gave, if it were true, it was no
Evidence of Treason; an Erroneous Opinion may make an Heretic, but not a
Traitor; it is a very distant Consequence, that because he affirmed that the
Parliament in 40 had done nothing but what was just in respect of King, Charles
the First, therefore the Prisoner was guilty of a Design against King Charles
the Second; besides that in all pronbability, though Mr. Masters might inveigh
against the Parliament, College might only justify them, by throwing the ill
things done in that time upon the Papists, as College in his Defense says; and
Mr. Masters, after much pumping, recollected himself, and said he thought the
Prisoner said, the Papists had a hand in those things; which proved the truth
of Colledge's Assertion.

As for the Evidence of Colledge's saying he might be a Colonel in time; if he
hoped for what he said, it was no Crime, or proof of a Crime, it is no more than
what every private Soldier hopes for, and he himself had been one.

As for the Evidence of Atterbury, Sawel, and Stevens, of their seizing the
Pictures; admit they swore true, it did not amount to the proof of the Treason
in the Indictment, or of any sort of Treason: And yet if Colledge's Maid said
true, it looks as if the finders or some other person sent them to Colledge's
House, in order to find them there.

Of all sorts of Evidences, the finding Papers in a persons possession is the
weakest, because no person can secure himself against designs upon him in that
kind. And after Dangerfield's Design upon Colonel Mansell, and the Evidence in
Fitzharris his Trial, that the Design of that Pamphlet was to convey Copies of
it to some Members of Parliament's pockets, and then seize them, that piece of
Evidence ought to have been spared, till those and other practices of like kind
had been forgotten.

The last Witness was Sir William Jennings, of Colledge's saying he had lost
the first blood in the Cause, but it would not belong before more would be
lost; what was that more, than that he thought more would be lost in the Cause,
which he interpreted the Protestant Cause? Suppose he thought so without
reason, and was mistaken, where was the Crime? But if he thought so upon good
reason, and good reason he had to think so, there was no pretense of a Crime in
it. I believe most men thought as College did, from the time of the business
of Fitzharris, and what imputation was it to him? Why were not all the
expressions he used in his Trial as good Evidence against him as that saying?
For he then said, it was an horrid Conspiracy to take away his Life, and would
not stop at him, for it was against all the Protestants of England, and the
like; which was his Opinion, and after times showed him a true Prophet.

One thing was very dishonestly insinuated, that the Prisoner was a Papist,
which was only to incense the Jury against him, and it had its effect; whereas
it was very plain that he was a Protestant, though perhaps a Dissenter, and
therefore had not lately come to the public Church; and under that notion the
Papists and some Protestants, were contented that Dissenters should be punished
as Papists; yet if they could have proved him a Papist, no doubt of it they
would have done it; for the destruction of the man was the design of the
Prosecution, and it mattered not for what Treason he was convicted, so he was
convicted; and he himself gave a pretty sort of Evidence against himself, if
they could have proved him a Papist. He proved, and confessed, he was Educated
a Protestant; and if they could have proved him reconciled to the Popish
Religion, which was Treason, he helped them a great deal in their proofs: It was
therefore very disingenious in the Chief Justice to reproach him at his
Condemnation, that he had not made that proof of his Religion as it was
expected, when his Religion was not the matter of which he was Indicted; that
was slily insinuated to exasperate, and no proof pretended to be made of his
being a Papist: But he had more reason to complain of the injustice of the
Court in summing up the Evidence, who did it in such a manner, that if they had
been Counsel for the Prisoner, as they pretended, they would have been justly
suspected to have taken a Fee of the other side to betray their Clyent.

For, as College readily said, if the Chief Justice had looked on his Notes,
he would have found more Evidence against Turbervile and Dugdale than he had
repeated. And it was a lame excuse for the Chief Justice to say, he referred it
to the memory of the Jury, for he could not remember more; whenas I dare say,
after about thirteen hours Evidence, the Jury remembered no more than that they
were to find him Guilty.

The truth is, upon hte whole, what College said was true; they took away all
helps from him for defending himself, and therefore they had as good have
condemned him without a Trial. Notwithstanding all which, the courage of the
Man never fainted, but after he was condemned, boldly asked when he was to be
Executed? To which the Lord Chief Justice replied, it depended on the King's
Pleasure; but smoothly said, in those Cases of High Treason they did not use to
precipitate the Execution, it should not be so sudden but that he should have
notice to prepare himself. And in truth he had from the eighteenth, on which he
was condemned, to prepare himself, to the one and thirtieth of August 1681. on
which he was Executed; a much longer time than was allowed may Lord Russel, or
Mr. Cornish, and many others. And the true reason of so long a Reprieve, was to
see how the Nation would digest the matter, and to see whether the man by the
terror of Death could be prevailed upon to become a Tool for to destroy other
Innocents; but when it was found that the people were quiet, and that the
Prisoner could not be prevailed upon to do an ill thing to save his life, his
Execution was ordered; yet, as a show of mercy, his Quarters were permitted to
be buried; a favor he slighted, with saying that he cared not whether he was
eaten up with Flies or Worms. The same favor was likewise showed Fitzharris,
but the true reason of both was, that they had a mind that the Trials and
pretended Crimes, for which Fitzharris and College were condemned should be
forgotten; which would not be so soon done, if their Quarters were always
exposed to view. But though all people were quiet, yet there was great grumbling,
and most honest men were afraid; and the constancy of College at his Execution
was such, that it made the most violent against him relent.

REMARKS ON THE Earl of Shaftsbury's GRAND JURY.
THE next Person questioned was the Earl of Shaftsbury against whom a Bill of
High Treason was preferred to the Grant Jury, at the Sessions House on the 24th
Day of November 1681: The Evidence was publicly given in Court and was this.
Mr. Blathwaite swore he found the Papers then produced in a Velvet Bag in the
great Trunk, which was taken by Mr. Gwnnye in the Lord Shaftsbury's House. Mr.
Gwynne swore, All the Papers in the Velvet Bag when he delivered them to Mr.
Blathwaite were taken by him in the Lord Shaftsbury's House; Sir Leoline
Jenkins swore the Paper produced was the Paper delivered him by Mr. Blathwaite
and it was unaltered; then the Paper was read, the Effect of which was a
project of an Association signed by no Person, and whose Hand Writing it was
none knew; John Booth swore, that he was engaged to Captain Wilkinson, who
pretended to have a Commission from the Lord Shaftsbury and several others to
go for Carolina, he was about that time introduced into the Earls acquaintance
by the Captain, where was a discourse about Carolina business, he was four or
five times between Christman and March, with the Earl and the Captain, that the
Captain told him he was to Command Fifty Men to be the Earls Guard at Oxon, and
would have had him to be One, That if the King did not Consent to several Acts
of Parliament and other things they were to Purge the Guards and Court of
several Persons, and though the Captain told him, that first, yet afterward he
heard the Earl say the same things, particularly about a week or ten days
before the Parliament sat at Oxon, he gave some Intimation of this to Walter
Banes, and then Writ it down, and sent it to the Counsel Sealed in a Cover.
Turbervile swore, that the Lord Shaftsbury said about February, there was but
little good to be done with the King as long as his Guards were about him.
Smith testified a great deal of discourse between him and the Lord Shaftsbury
of something said Reflecting on the King, and that he should say that if the
King should offer any violence to the Parliament at Oxford, he would meet with
a strong Opposition for that the Gentlemen, who came out of the Country, came
well provided with Horse and Arms to Oppose, and that they might Lawfully do
it, if he offered and Violence to them, whilst they sat. Haynes swore, that
the Earl said if the King did not give Haynes his Pardon, he and others would
raise the Kingdom against him, that Haynes gave the Earl an exact Account of
Transactions since King Charles the First's coming to the Crown, and that the
Earl said the Duke of Buckingham had as much Right to the Crown as any Stewart
in England. John Macnamarra said, the Earl said, the King was Popishly Affected
and took the same Methods his Father did, which brought his Fathers Head to the
Block, and they would bring his thither, and this was said in the presence of
Ivey, and he thought of his Brother, and said the King deserved to be deposed
as much as King Richard the Second. Dennis Macnamarra likewise testified the
last words, and that it was the latter end of March or beginning of April,
Ivey, said, the Earl said, if the King denied Haynes a Pardon they would rise
upon him and force him to give one, and that they designed to depose him and
set up another in his stead. Bernard Dennis said, he had a great deal of
discourse with the Earl who bid him speak to his Friends in Ireland; for they
intended to have England under a Commonwealth and Extirpate the King and his
Family.

Then the Court told the Jury the Indictment was grounded on the Statute of
King Charles the Second, but they ought to consider of that Statute as also the
25th of Edward the Third.

The question is, whether the Grand Jury ought to have found the Bill on this
Evidence, first it ought to be considered, what the Duty of a Grand Jury is,
and I think it is not what the Chief Justice said, to consider only whether
there be probable ground for the King to call the Person Accused to an Account,
much less do I think that the reason of the finding of a Bill by the Grand Jury
was for the Honor of the King, or Decency of the Matter, least Persons Accused
should be called to an Account by the King, where there is no kind of Suspicion
of the Crime Committed by them, as the Court said (which last Matter was never
assigned as a Reason of finding a Bill by the Grand Jury before) but I take the
Reason of a Grand Jury to be this, that no Man for a Capital Matter shall ever
be questioned by the King, unless a Grand Jury take it on their Oaths that they
believe the Matter of the accusation is true, I do put an Emphasis on the words
questioned by the King.

It is true, it is generally said, That the business of a Grand Jury, in
capital Matters, is in favorem vitae, but that taken simply is not true, for
then what reason can be assigned, why a Man shall be Arraigned on an Appeal of
Murder, Robbery or the like, which touches his Life, as much as an Indictment
of those Crimes, without having the Matter of the Appeal first found to be true
by a Grand Jury; but the true reason of a Grand Jury is the vast inequality of
the Plaintiff and Defendant, which in an Indictment is always between the King
and his Subjects, and that does not hold in an Appeal, which is always between
Subject and Subject, and therefore the Law in an Indictment, has given a
Privilege to the Defendant, which it has done in no other Prosecution, of
purpose, if it were possible, to make them equal in the Prosecutions and
Defense; that equal Justice may be done between both. It considers the Judges,
Witnesses and Jury are more likely to be influenced by the King than the
Defendant; the Judges as having been made by him, and as it is in his Power to
turn them out, punish, to prefer or reward them higher, and though there are
not just Causes for them to strain the Law; yet they are such Causes, which in
all Ages have taken place, and probably always will, this was the reason of
running Prerogative so high in their Judgment of High Treason before the Stat.
of Ed. III. That no Man, as that Statute says, knew what was not High Treason;
This was the reason of expounding that Statute oftentimes between the making of
it, and the making the Statute of Queen Mary, that People was at as great a
Loss, till the last Statute as they were before the making of the first, and
even since the Statute of Queen Mary, the Exposition on the Statute of Ed. III.
has been so extravagant and various, that People are at this day as much at a
Loss to know what is not High Treason, as they were before the Statue of Ed. 3.
norwas it, or is it, possible, that the great Power of enriching, honoring,
rewarding and punishing lodged in the King, but that it always had, and yet
must have, an influence on the Witnesses and Jury; and therefore it is that the
Law has ordered, that at the King's Proscution no Man shall be criminally
questioned, unless a Grand Jury, upon their own Knowledge, or upon the Evidence
given them, shall give a Verdict, that they really believe the Accusation is
true.

Iown of late days, They have said the Duty of the Grand Jury is to find,
whether the Accusation is probable, but that saying is warranted by no positive
Law, or ancient Authority; and therefore the Duty of the Grand Jury must be
founded in the Oath administered to them, which is as strict as the Oath
administered to the Petit Jury; and to say Truth, the Verdict of the Petit Jury
takes credit from the Verdict of the Grand Jury, which is not only the reason
of the difference in the Names of the two Juries; but is likewise the reason,
why an Attaint for a false Verdict does not lie against a Petit Jury.

The Oath of the Grand Jury is, To present the Truth, the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth: The Oath of the Petit Jury is, Well and truly to try,
and true Deliverance make, between the King, and the Prisoner at the Bar, etc.
which signifies the same thing as to present the Truth, etc. it is true, some
reasons have been offered, which if considered, are Word, without Sense; As
thatthe Presentment of the Grand Jury is but in order to bring the Prisoner to
his Trial, and he is not before the Grand Jury to make his Defense himself; but
that can be no reason why Probabilities should satisfy the Jury, because it
does not answer the design of the Law, which will have a Man convicted by the
positive Oaths of Two Juries, consisting of more than twenty four, in all
Endictments.

Next why is a Grand Jury composed of more substantial and understanding Men
than a Petit Jury, if their business be mere Formality, or a Matter of less
weight than the business of a Petit Jury: In the last Place, why is less
Evidence required to convict a Man in his absence than is required to convict
him if present; it seems to me so far from an Argument, that less Evidence is
required to convict one, if absent, than if present, that it seems to me, that
more Evidence should be required to do it. Men may, and often do, make very
fair Stories in the absence of a Person accused, that when present, he easily
answers; and there being no positive Law for the Direction of a Grand Jury in
that Matter, a Grand Juryman is excusable, nay it is his Duty, to give a
Verdict according to the plain Understanding of the Words of his Oath, which is
to present the Truth, as far as he is convict of it, and that Truth must be
found according to his knowledge, or as it is represented to him by Witnesses.

And as for the Witnesses, they must be Persons of credit, and all Persons are
supposed to be so, unless the Grant Jury know the contrary, or have been so
credibly informed; it is true a Grand Jury ought not to believe Coffee house
Stories, or light Stories, but common Fame by credible Persons, which is vox
Populi ought to prejudice them against a Witness, so as to disbelieve him, and
it is no Answer to say, as the Chief Justice in this Case said, That the
credibility of the Witness is not to be considered by the Grand Jury, because
the King is not present to defend the credit of his Witness (tho the Fact in
that Case was not true, for the Kings Attorney, Solicitor and Counsel were
present, and I think the King is no otherwise present at any Criminal
Prosecution, and the Jury knew by Colledge's Trial and by Wilkinson's
Deposition, before the King that the Evidence of all the Witnesses produced
except what were to the Paper was questioned, but even that was afterward
quitted by the Court when it would not be swallowed by the Grand Jury; for
afterward the Court told them that if they, of their own Knowledge, knew any
thing against the Witnesses, they might consider of it, but not of what they
were credibly informed of by others, and besides the credibility of the
Witnesses, the Possibility or Probability of the thing sworn is to be
considered by the Grand Jury, an impossible thing they ought not to believe,
though sworn by never so many credible Witnesses, and a very improbable thing
they cannot positively on their Oaths swear they believe.

And not only the Fact, but what the Crime of the Fact alleged in the Bill of
Endictment, the Grand Jury as far as they are capable of judging Matter of Law
ought to consider; so they were told in the charge given them; it is true if
they were Ignorant in the Law and the Court in their directions misled them, as
if the Court should tell them stealing an Horse is High Treason, and the Grand
Jury find it accordingly, it is excusable in the Grand Jury, though punishable
in the Court; but wrong directions by the Court in the finding a Fact, where
there is no Evidence does not excuse the Jury. Now to examine the Matter in
hand by these Rules, could any Person who knew my Lord Shaftsbury, or that had
heard of, or believed his Character to be what it was, believe that it was
possible for him to discourse with the Witnesses, at the rate they swore; to
some of them; to discourse of Matters of policy, with Booth at one time, and
afterward with Haynes, and afterward with Macnamarra, Fellows of so little
Sense, that he would have been ashamed to have entertained them in the meanest
Office about him, and yet as they pretended makes them his Privadoes in the
secret, of not so much what he would have had them, but of what he intended
himself, to do.

Who could believe any thing, Turbervile, Smith or Haines should say where
there was so much of their falsehoods and of their designs to swear falsely
proved against them in Colledge's Trial, or of Ivey and the three Macnamarra's
after that Trial, who though they were not produced at it, because the Kings,
Conncil by Colledge's Notes, saw he was able to falsify them, yet some
Witnesses in that Trial proved their design of swearing falsely.

Who could believe Booth's story of Listing so many Men under Wilkinson, to be
at my Lord Shaftsbury's dispose at Oxon, after Colledge's Trial, and after what
Wilkinson had testified to the King and Council, though not then proved to the
Grand Jury.

A Judge indeed cannot take notice of any thing not proved (though he may and
ought to be a Witness, if he knew any thing material of the Matter tried before
him and others) but a Grand Jury may take notice of any thing they know or
believe. The Passages at Colledge's Trial were pretty notorious, being
authentically published by Fra: North; and the Examination of Wilkinson by as
authentic a Paper.

It was unaccountable, that the Witnesses concealed what they heard the Earl
speak so long, of which none of them pretended to give any reason, nor was it
any excuse to those who signed a Petition to the City, in which they suggested,
they were tempted to swear against their Consciences, to say they knew not what
was in the Petition, he that sets his hand to a thing, as if he aslented to it,
but does not, is a Man of Falsehood. Suppose one sets his hand to a Bond, said
to be sealed and delivered, not having seen it Sealed and delivered, is not he
guilty of little less than Forgery; but admitting those Witnesses had sworn
Truth, yet the Jury ought not to have found the Bill; for they ought to find
the Bill true according to all the material Circumstances of it, as well as the
Substance of it, which was High Treason; one material Circumstance of it was,
that it was said to be High Treason, within the Statute of Car. II. and that
made another Circumstance of the Indictment material, which was the time when
that Treason was committed; because by that Statute the Prosecutions of
Treasons on that Statute ought to be within fix Months after it is committed,
and the Indictment ought to be within three months after the Prosecution; and
he being imprisoned in July, and the Bill suggested, that the supposed Treason
was committed the 18th. of March before, and diverse other times both before and
after, which might be interpreted to have been after the Prisoners Commitment,
had the Jury found the Bill as laid, they had found the Treason to have been
committed not only within the time the Prosecution by that Statute ought to be,
but also within the time the Indictment ought to have been preferred; whereas
in truth, the Earl had been Imprisoned above three months before the Indictment
preferred, and there was no Evidence of any Treason committed by him after his
imprisonment; and therefore the finding the Bill as laid had been injurious to
bring a Man in question for his Life on that Statute, whereas by Law he ought
not to have been.

For it was resolved in Colledge's Case that the Prosecution for Treason on
that Statute ought to be within Six Months, and the Indictment to be within
three Months, tho the Court was of another Opinion in the Lord Russel's Trial.

And that this Indictment was on that Statute was expressly said to the Grand
Jury, and upon good reason; for the Court in their Charge said, that the
Intention of levying War, or designing to Imprison the King, was not Treason,
till the Statute of Charles the Second; though in the Lord Russel's Trial, it was
held to be Treason by the Statute of E. 3. and therefore the Time of the
Treason committed was material to be found by the Jury.

As for the Writing found in the Earls Study it was no manner of Evidence of
Treason, admitting what the Witnesses swore, as to the finding it to be true;
because it was not proved that it was Prosecuted or Composed by the Earl of
Shaftsbury, or by his Order, and that Piece of Evidence was in that Particular,
a mere Original.

In Fitz-Harris his Case, it was proved the Libel was Composed by his
direction, Coll. Sydney's Book was proved to be like his Hand, it was pretended
that College said he was the Author of the Raree-show, and no example of this
Evidence was ever made use of before.

Neither was it evidence of Treason as to the Matter, for there was not one
word against the present King, but his Successor, if it should be such a Person.

It is true, one of the Kings Counsel said that one passage in it, was that
they would join to destroy the Mercenary Forces about London, and thence
inferred it was down right levying War, against the King and his Guards,
whereas there is not any such word or thing in the Paper, as he pretended to
cite, and if they had been in the Paper, they would have been but Evidence of a
Treason within the Statute of the late King, and then the time of Writing them,
ought to have appeared, and if that had been cleared, yet for the above Reasons
it was no Evidence, and the Grand Jury, though some of them afterward smarted
for it upon other pretenses, did like honest understanding Gentlemen, and had
they done otherwise to avoid the Ignominy of being called, though in truth it was
an honor to be an Ignoramus Jury, they had justly deserved the reproach, which
since have lighted on other Juries; such as Mr. Cornish's. and the like, and
having spoken of this Ignoramus Jury, for which two of them, if not more, were
afterward upon other pretenses severely handled; I think fit to say something
of the Sufferings of one, for being in a preceding Ignoramus Jury, because it
was a mere Novelty, and that was Mr. Wilmore.

REMARKS ON Mr. Wilmore's HOMINE REPLEGIANDO.
HIS Prosecution tho it was but Criminal and not Capital did as much mischief,
as it struck a terror into all Grand Juries, as any the before mentioned
Matters; and it was by the homine replegiando issued out against him. As for
the Information against him I shall say nothing, because the injustice of both
will appear in the discourse of the first, Mr. Wilmore had sent a Boy beyond
Sea by agreement, as Mr. Wilmore said, whether true or not, as to this Matter
is not material, a homine replegiando is granted against Mr. Wilmore for this,
at whose Prosecution is not material; for any Person upon suggestion backed by
an Affidavit may have it granted, the Sheriff would have returned on the Writ,
that the Boy was sent by his own agreement and consent with Mr. Wilmore, which
return was not allowed, and the Sheriffs were told that they must either return
they had replevied the Boy, and they must have him in Court, or else they would
be laid by the heels, or else they must return that Mr. Wilmore had Esloigned
him, which is carrying him away, where the Sheriff could not find him, and then
a Withernam would issue against Mr. Wilmore, upon which he would be taken and
kept in Prison, till he produced the Boy, and no other return should be allowed
then one of those two, and if they did not make one of those two Returns they
should be Committed, and if the Law be so, the Court were innocent, but the Law
ought then to be reformed in that Particular; but if the Law was not so, as I
think it is not, I think Mr. Wilmore and the Nation had great injustice done
them; for it was quickly seen what the mischief of that Judgment was, and
therefore it was endeavored to be reformed by an Act of King and Counsel
afterward; first I say, it is lawful for a Master to Covenant with a Servant
to serve him beyond Sea, in the next place it is lawful for a Master to send
his Servant beyond Sea according to such agreement, and if both those
Propositions be true, as I think no Man will say they are not, it is a natural
consequence to say, that the Law has provided a Return upon a Writ of homine
replegiando, if it should be such out against such Master for a Servant so sent
beyond Sea, which may indempnify the Master in so doing, and that Return can be
no other then the special Matter, which in this Case was refused to be
accepted; it is no argument that no such Return is ever read of in any Book; For
the Law has determined, that some Returns are good and others are bad, yet it
has not said, what are all the good Returns, which may be made on an homine
replegiando, and the Sheriff is no more confined to Returns than a Man is in
the Pleading of his Case, which my Lord Coke says may very, according to the
Nature of his Case, and yet the Law has said what is a good Plea, and what a
bad one, but has not expressed all the good or bad Pleas; and therefore it is no
argument against such a Return, that no president of it can be found, it is
enough that no judgment can be produced against it, and the reason of both may
be, that the Case never happened before, that is to say, that never any Person
was so malicious before, as to sue out an homine replegiaendo against a Master
for a Servant sent by agreement beyond Sea, and Returns must be varyed
according to the Case, perhaps no President can be found of a Return on that
Writ, that the Person sought for is dead, yet all Persons will agree it is a
good Return, it is so in a Replevin of Cattle, and even that Example falsifies
the Doctrine of the Court, that there is but two Returns on that Writ allowable
by Law, it is not an argument for disallowing the Return, that the Person sent
beyond Sea, was a Child not capable of making such a contract, (though I
believe if the Matter were looked into he was of Age so to do,) for nothing of
that does, or can appear in the Writ or Return; It stands therefore simply upon
this, whether the Sheriff may on an homine replegiando return, that the Person
supposed to be in custody, being of full Age, was by mutual agreement sent
beyond Sea by the Person in whose oustody by the Writ, he is supposed to be,
which I think is far from a doubt; but notwithstanding all these hardships on
Juries, it was seen to be plainly impossible to procure any Bills of Indictment
for High Treason, much less any Persons to be convicted on the like Evidence,
except in London, where are some of the best, as well as the worst, Men in the
Nation, and even there it was not to be done as long as the Juries were
sensible and honest Men, which would be as long as the Election of Sheriffs was
in the Citizens, and to the Honor of the City, it was seen that they chose
honest Men to be their Sheriffs, and those chosen when they saw the Public
Safety depend on honest Officers, though at other times they had rather pay a
Fine than undergo the trouble and charges of that Office, yet at that time no
Man legally chosen refused to stand, though at that time they were reproached and
punished for it; and if Mr. Box. refused, it was because he would not join with
North, who was imposed on the City; for which reason it was resolved to take
from the City, the right of choosing Sheriffs, but by what means it was not
presently resolved on.

That the City might forfeit their right of Electing, there was no great doubt,
as if the Sheriffs were dead and new ones were not chosen in a convenient time;
so that there was a defect of Justice or the like, they would have forfeited
their right, but nothing of that kind could be laid to their charge, therefore
a new unheard of Matter was thought on, and set a Foot, which was to make the
City forfeit their being a Corporation, and being annihilated, the Grants made
to them by the Crown, as the right of Electing Sheriffs was, would revert to
the Crown again.

A quo Warranto was therefore brought against the City in Hillary Term 1681. to
show by what Warrant they pretended to be a Corporation, and to have the
Privileges mentioned in the Writ, to which the City pleaded and set forth
their right, and the King replied, and set forth several Matters done by them,
contrary to the duty of a Corporation; upon which there was a Demurrer, of
which Judgment was not given till Trinity Term, 1683. I will say nothing of the
right of the Proceeding, it having been largely and learnedly argued for the
City, but if the Matter were so clear a Case, as the Kings Council and Court
would have it to be, how came it to pass that in Henry the Eight his time, when
the King was so earnestly bent to dissolve the religious Corporations, in which
the inclination of the Nation joined with him, the doing it by quo Warrantoes
was not thought of, it was very plain, that those pretended Religious did not
observe the Rules, nor perform the Ends for which they were incorporated, and
certainly their Misdemeanors against the intent of their being incorporated
were better Causes of forfeiture than was the Cities Petitioning for a
Parliament, etc. yet that King took other methods, he had formal Conveyances of
their Lands, from most of those Corporations, and formal Surrenders of their
Corporations signed by every individual of the Corporations, and those
afterward confirmed by Act of Parliament, and sure the Late King had as much
right to bring a Quo Warranto against Maudling College for refusing, contrary
to their duty, to admit the President the King nominated; if the King had a
right to nominate the President (as some Judges asserted he had) as King
Charles the Second had against the City, and it was once in debate, whether the
Proceeding against that College should be by quo Warranto or before the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners; the last was resolved on, not as the more legal
or effectual, but as more expeditious. In the one the Proceedings being de die
in dieam, in the other from Term to Term; this only I will observe that when
the Judgment against the City was given, which was of the greatest concern to
the Nation ever contested in any Court of Westminster Hall, it was done by two
Judges only, and no reason of that Judgment rendered, whereof Wythens who was
one, I think, heard but one Argument in the Case; it is true they asaid
Raymond, when alive, was of the same Opinion, and said Saunders who was then
past his Senses was of the same Opinion, though I was told by one who was persent
when the two Justices came to ask his Opinion in the matter, he had then only
Sense enough to reproach them for troubling him about the Matter when they were
sensible he had lost his memory, and to say truth, the delivering the Sense of
an absent Judge, though it has been sometimes practiced, is not allowable; for
sometimes they deliver another Opinion than what the absent Judge is of, Judge
Withens did so in several Cases, when he delivered the Opinion of Sir Edward
Herbert, which Sir Edward Herbert afterward in open Court disowned; Judge
Holloway served Judge Powell the same trick, if the last said true. The long
depending of the quo Warranto had Alarmed all the Nation, who yet were quiet,
hoping that Judgment would be given for the City, as some of the Judges and of
the Kings Council had given out it would, but the contrary as resolved on; and
therefore the Nation at the time of the giving the Judgment must be amused with
somewhat else, and with nothing so proper as a Plot; but there was difficulty
in that also: for if the pretended Plotters should be acquitted it would make
the matter worse, and nothing would secure that, but imposing what Sheriffs
they pleased on the City, and accordingly North and Rich was pitched on, the
one by a shameless Trick, and the other by open Force, were imposed on the City.

Having gained that point the Proceedings in the quo Warranto were much quicker
then before, and two Arguments only were permitted in it of each side, the one
in Hillary Term, the other in Easter Term, and so the Case was ripe for
Judgment in Trinity Term, following, but must be, and was, ushered in with the
Discovery of a pretended Plot, which so amazed the Nation, that though Judgment
in the quo Warranto was given two days after the pretended Discovery, no Body
took any notice of it for several Months after it was given; the Truth was, no
body durst mutter against it, or question the Legality of it; it was enough to
have brought any Person into the Plot to have done it, it would have been
called flying in the Face of the Government, questioning the Justice of the
Nation, and such like Cant.

REMARKS ON THE Lord Russel's Trial.
THE Plot being noised abroad, the Persons beforehand resolved on, were seized
on, and the Lord Russel and others were clapped up close Prisoners.

The Lord Russel having been for some sew Weeks a close Prisoner in the Tower,
was the 13th. of July, 1683. brought to the Old Bailey, and arraigned for
High Treason, in designing to raise a Rebellion, etc. and the same Morning was
tried; he desired he might not be tried that day, for he had some Witnesses
which would not be in Town till Night, which being denied, then he desired that
the Trial might be put off till the Afternoon, which was likewise denied, he
asked whether he might not make used of any Papers he had, which was allowed;
he desired he might have a Copy of hte Panel of the Jury that was to pass on
him, he was told he had a Copy delivered to his Servant some days before. The
Jury being called, he challenged the Foreman, for being no Freeholder in
London, to argue which, Council were assigned him, who presently came into
Court, and having excused their not speaking more to the Matter, for want of
time to consider of it, argued that it was a good Challenge, because at Common
Law, every Jury-man ought to be a Freeholder; that the Stature of 2. Hen. 5.
provides none shall be a Jury-man in capital Matters, but a Freeholder of
forty Shillings yearly; that there is no difference between a City and County,
and a County at large at Common Law, nor by that Statute, 7. Hen. 7. which
takes away the Challenge of no Freehold in the Ward in London, shows it was a
good Challenge in London before that time; the 4th. of Henry the 8th. which
likewise takes away the Challenge of no Freehold in London, shows it was a
good Challenge before that time, and the same was inferred from the 23d. of
Henry the 8th. but though of those Statutes extended to Treason, yet if it was
a good Challenge in Treason in London before those Statutes, it was so still.
The Kings Council said, at Common Law it was not necessary that a Jury-man in
Treason should be a Freeholder, and though Treason is within the 2d. Henry the
5th. yet be the Statute of Queen Mary, the Statute of the 2d. of Henry the 5th.
as to Treason, was repealed, that it was a Point they would not have lost to
the City of London, that if the Prisoner should peremptorily challenge thirty
five, as by Law he might, there would scarce be found thirty five more
Freeholders in the City, the Inheritance of the City being mostly in the
Nobility and Corporations, and consequently Treasons may be committed in the
City, and there would not be enough to try it, and in the Case of the City of
Worcester, in a Quo Warranto brought against them, that Challenge was taken and
overruled by the King's Bench, by Advice of the Judges of the Common Pleas;
that the Venire mentions no Freehold, But only Probos and Legales Homines de
Vicineto.

Then the Chief Justice asked Mr. Polexfen, whether he did find in any Judgment
in Treason at Common Law, that no Freehold was a Challenge, who answered he
did not, whereupon the Chief Justice replied, that then he did not speak ad
idem; for he took it in case of Treason and Felony, at Common Law it was no
Challenge, and the Statute of Henry the 5th. in that point was introductive of
a new Law, and that Statute as to Treason, was repealed by that of Queen Mary,
and that a Case cannot be found of such a Challenge in Treason, since the
Statute of Queen Mary, but it was a business of great Importance.

The Chief Baron was of the same Opinion; for the same reason Justice Windham
and Justice Jones were of the same Opinion, the last added the rather, because
the Prisoner is allowed to challenge thirty five peremptorily; and Justice
Charlton was of the same Opinion, and the rather, because no President had been
offered of such a Challenge before. Justice Levins was of the same Opinion, for
the same Reasons: Justice Street was of the same Opinion, for the same Reasons,
and thought they had been very nice, when the Life of the King lay at stake,
and all the Customs and Privileges of the City of London seemed to be levelled
at in that Point: Justice Withins was of the same Opinion.

Then the Chief Justice told the Prisoner the Court overruled his Challenge,
but that he had no Hardship put upon him, for the Reason of Law for
Freeholders, was that no slight Persons should be put upon the Jury, but in
his Case there were Persous of Quality and Substance put upon the Jury, which
was the same in substance with a Jury of Freeholders.

These being the Reasons of overruling that Challenge, they may be ranked
under these Heads, there was no such Challenge at Common Law, if there were,
yet not in Treason. And if it were a Challenge in Treason, where the Trial is
in a County at large, yet not where it is in a City and County, and if in a
City and County, yet not in London.

The assigning many Reasons for one and the same thing, makes the Judgment
justly suspected, for if when two Witnesses to one Fact varying in the
Circumstances of it, are justly suspected in point of Truth, several Reasons
for the same Judgment makes the Knowledge or Integrity of the Judges justly
suspected; every Case in Law, as my Lords Coke and Hales say, standing upon its
own particular Reason, and therefore when many Reasons are given, it looks as
if the Judges were hunting about for Reasons to make good what beforehand they
are resolved to vent for Law, rather than that their Judgment is the Result of
those Reasons.

But to consider them singly, I do indeed think there is no express Resolution,
that at Common Law, in any Case of any Capital Matter, it was a good Challenge
(except the Case of Fitz-Harris, already taken notice of) but in Civil Matters,
my Lord Coke is express, that at Common Law it was a good Challenge; and with
him Sir John Fortescue seems to concur, in his Exposition on the Statute of
Henry the 5th. he says, if the Debts or Damages were under forty Marks, the
Juryman shall have Land to a competent Value, according to the Discretion of
the Justices. My Lord Coke says, in such case any Freehold suffices, now how
can that be true, if it were not necessary at Common Law, to have some
Freehold, for the Statute makes no Provision for Debt or Damages under forty
Marks. It must therefore be by Common Law, that some Freehold was necessary,
and that any Freehold shall suffice. And surely, if in Civil Matters it was
necessary for a Juror to have a Freehold, much more in captial Matters, and
mostly in Treason. It is very plain, that at Common Law no man was thought to
be a sufficient man, but a Freeholder, and though now, and for some time past,
the Value of Trade is equal to that of Land, yet heretofore it was not so, and
by what was heretofore, the Common Law is to be known.

The matter of Trade was heretofore so inconsiderable, and the Traders
themselves, for that reason so vile, that it was a Disparagement for a
Freeholder to marry with a Tradesman, as is to be seen by the Statute of
Wharton, and therefore mere Tradesmen, and not Freeholders, were not to be
trusted with the Concern of a Trial in a civil Matter, and much less in a
Capital, and least of all in a Trial of High Treason.

The Chief Justice Pemberton says, that the reason of Freeholders, was that no
slight Persons should be put upon a Jury where the Life of a man, or his Estate
is in question; it is plain therefore, the Concern of the thing to be tried, is
the measure of the substance of the Jury-man; if that be true, the Trial in
Treason is of the highest concern: How then is it true, as some of the Judges
concluded, that though Freehold migh be requisite in some Cases at Common Law,
yet in Treason, certainly not? it is indeed a Paradox to me.

And the peremptory Challenge of thirty five allowed the Prisoner, is no Reason
against the Challenge of no Freehold; for that is only a Privilege allowed
the Prisoner in Favorem Vitae; and it might as well be argued, that no
Challenge at all to the petty Jury shall be allowed the Prisoner, because he
had a Grand Jury past upon him before, which is also in Favorem Vitae, that no
man at the Kings Suit, shall be so much as questioned for his Life, till above
the number of twelve substantial men, have, on their Oaths, said they think the
Accusation true; and after that, he is allowed to challenge peremptorily thirty
five, and with cause, without number; to affirm therefore that no Freehold is
not a cause of Challenge, because he may challenge peremptorily thirty five, is
a non sequitur, and though Non-usage, that is to say, that this Challenge was
never taken in Treason, was then used as an Argument, yet it is the weakest of
Arguments, which is to be found in Littleton, though even that Fact was not
true, for the Challenge was taken and allowed before, unless you will
distinguish and say, that in that case it was taken by the King, and therefore
good, and in this by the Prisoner, and therefore bad; I Am sure that Difference
cannot be warranted, either by Authority or Reason; and what though Cook and
the other Regicides and other Persons did not take that Challenge, is it and
Argument that they could not, or that they thought they could not? perhaps they
had forgotten to do it, as much as the Judges in this case had forgotten their
Resolution in Fitz-Harris's Case; or perhaps they could not take it, their Jury
being Freeholders, or perhaps it was to no purpose, they being tried in
Middlesex, where a Jury of Freeholders would quickly be found. Nor is it an
Argument that no Case of this Challenge at Common Law is to be found in the
Books; for since the Statute of Henry the 5th. to the time of Queen Marry, it
could never be a Case, and from that time to this, it could never be a Case in
Felony, and the Law being so very plain, that if the Fact were with the
Prisoner, it was always allowed, if against the Prisoner, it was disallowed,
not as not good in point of Law, but as not true in point of Fact; therefore
the Challenge perphaps was not taken notice of in the Books, which only reports
Difficulties.

It is true of late, and it is but of late, Practice, the whole Transactions of
a Trial is published for the benefit of the Publisher, rather than for the
common Good, and that indeed was the Motive of publishing Fitz-Harris's Trial,
signed by Fra. Pemberton, and of Colledges's Trial, signed by Fra. North, and
of my Lord Russel's, signed by William Prichard Mayor, and Col. Sidnie's Trial,
signed by George Jefferies, and Mr. Cornish's Trial, signed by Thomas Jones.
And that is the reason, why since that Statute we find no Case of such a
Challenge in capital Matters, and before that Statute, the Year-Books go but a
little way.

It is enough that there was no Resolution that it was not a good Challenge,
for it will be of the Kings side, to show why that should not be a good
Challenge in Treason, which was in most if not in all other Cases.

It is pretty to observe what steps were made in overruling this Challenge,
some were of Opinion that it was no Chanllenge in any Case at Common Law; so
said the Attorney and Solicitor General, the Chief Baron, Justice Windham, and
Baron Street, The Chief Justice though it no Challenge at Common Law in Treason
or Felony only, but that the Statute of Henry the 5th. made it a Challenge in
Treason and Felonly; but whether the Statute of Henry the 5th. made it a
Challenge in Treason; the Chief Baron and Justice Windham doubted. Justice
Jones thought it no Challenge at Common Law in Treason; Justice Levins would
not determine whether it was a good Challenge in any Case at Common Law, but he
and Baron Street were clearly of Opinion it was not a good Challenge in London.
The Chief Justice thought it a Business of great consequence, not only for the
Prisoner, but for all other Persons, Baron Street thought the Judges had been
very nice in the Matter, which in the Phrase of the Law, is giving themselves a
great deal of trouble in a matter very clear, or of no moment.

But though they differed in their Reasons, yet all agreed in this, and in this
only, that tried he should be, and that presently.

Then, as for the Custom of the City of London, to try without Freeholders,
how did it appear to the Judges that there was any such Custom? Did they ever
read of any such Custom in the City of London? Nay, were not the Statutes which
were cited, where no Freehold was made no Challenge in London in particular
Cases, as so many express Resolutions, that there was no such Custom in the
City, for if there had been such Custom, what needed those Statutes, to which
the Judges never vouchsafed any Answer? because in truth, they could make no
Answer.

But it was objected, there was the Resolution in the City of Worcesters Case,
which I agree was of as good Authority, and of no better than the Judgment in
the principal Matter of the Quo Warranto; and it was likewise objected, there
would be a Failure of Justice in Cities, if the Challenge were good for want of
Freeholders.

I ask, would it have been a Failure of Justice at Common Law, or by reason of
somewhat which has happened of late Times, there is none who pretends to know
any thing of the History of England, that will say, that heretofore the Cities
were not inhabited mostly by the Gentry, and especially the City of London;
partly for Luxury, partly for their Security, and then there was no want of
Freeholders in the Cities; but when matters became more quiet, and Trade
increased, and made Houses in the Cities more valuable, then were Houses of
equal Convenience, and less Price, situate in the Suburbs, or in the Country,
the Gentry by degrees parted with their Houses in the Cities to Tradesmen for
Profit, and removed themselves to other Places. And I believe it may be
remembered, that even the Strand, in the momory Man, could have furnished the
County of Middlesex with a sufficient Number of Freeholders, and yet now, for
the above Reasons, you can hardly find a Jury of Freeholders there.

Besides, It must be remembered, that London heretofore had many of the Kings
Palaces in it, and the Countries did not then as now, take up with Lodging, but
were Inhabitants of Houses, and if the Failure of Justice happen by the above
means, I am sure it is against the Oath of the Judges to supply that Defect
with their Resolution; but it ought to have been supplied by an Act of the
Legislative Power.

If the Necessity of the thing warrants the Judgment, how unlearned were the
Judges in Henry the 7th. and Henry the 8ths. Times, that they did not supply
the Defect in Law in the City of London, and other Cities by their Resolutions:
How vain were the Parliaments in those Times, who supplied those Defects in
Law, mentioned in the Acts cited by those Statutes, which were Works of time
and trouble; if theyhad thought the Judges, by their Resolutions had Power to
do it, for if they had Power to do it, they could have done it Extempore, as in
this Case.

For the last Objection that the Writ mentions, only Probos, and Legales
Homines, and speaks nothing of Freeholders; Legales may very well be
interpreted, to imply men qualified by Law; but I take it, that Homines
implies, it for Homines de Comitatu is meant Freeholders of that County and
all others, in point of Trust, are not considered in Law. My Lord Coke in his
Comment upon the 28th. of Eliz. 1. cap. 8. which gives the Election of Sheriffs
to the People of the County, where the Sheriffwick is, not in Fee, says, People
there means Freeholders of the County, and the same is understood by Writs to
the Countries to choose Coroners, Verderors and the like, though the Writ says
per communitatem Comitatus, and de assenfu Comitatus.

And though the Writs of Venire in civil Matters, of late Days, mentions what
Freehold each Juror shall have, yet that is by the Statute of the 35 of Hen. 8.
cap. 6. which expressly commands the Writ shall so express it, in all Issues
joined in Westminster, to be tried between Party and Party, before which time
it is plain, the Venire, even in civil Matters, did not express any Freehold,
and that Statute does not extend to Issues joined on Indictments.

Now if upon all which has been said, it is not plain, that the challenge
ought to have been allowed, yet sure it was doubtful, and if so, and a matter
of great consequence, as the Chief Justice said it was, why might not the
Council for the Prisoner have had a little more time to have considered of the
challenge, before they had argued it, or the Judges have taken a little time to
consider the matter before they had given their Judgment. I dare say, none of
them could remember any positive Resolutions one way or other, nor upon a
sudden was it expected they should; and therefore for their own sakes, if not
for the Prisoners, they might have taken the Morning, if not the Day; the
Prisoner desired his Trial to be put off, for to have considered of it, in that
time perhaps some of them might have remembered, or others might have put them
in mind of their Resolutions in Fitz-Harris's Case, they might have considered
how to distinguish between that Case and this, and not run away with it, that
that challenge was never made in Treason, as all of the Judges affirmed; but my
Lord Russel was told by the Court, that they always tried the Prisoner in
Treason the day he was Arraigned, and could not put off the Trial for a morning
without the Attorney Generals Consent; but surely that is not true, Plunket and
Fitz-Harris were tried the Term after they were arraigned, though the Attorney
General opposed it. It is true, he submitted to the Rule, as it was as much his
Duty to do as the Prisoners; but if there be a Difference between an
Arraignment at Westminster and the Old Bailey, as to the speeding the Trial, the
Place will not vary the reason of the thing, if there be not any Law for it, as
there is not; but even at the Old Baily, the Trial in Treason has been put of
to another Sessions, it was done in Whitebreads Case, and in many other Cases,
if it be said that that was by the Attorney Generals Consent, I say that makes
no difference, for the Judge is to be indifferent between the Attorney General
and the Prisoner, if the Court must order nothing but what the Attorney assent
too, why is not the Prisoner Tried and Judged by the Attorney alone, or what
needs all the Formality of a Trial, if it be said that that Trial, was put of,
because the Kings Witnesses were no ready, I say there is the same Reason to
put of a Trial, because the Prisoners Witnesses are not ready, and that was the
pretended, tho not the true Reason of putting of Fitz-Harris his Trial to
another Term, and there is no Law to the contrary.

It is totally in the discretion of the Judges, to put of a Trial, which
discretion ought to be governed by Reason.

But indeed this was extraordinary and without any president, it can never be
shown in the Case of the greatest or meanest Persons, being accused of the
greatest or least Crime, that ever the delay of a day much less of a morning
for his Trial was denied, where he showed but any Color for what he said, when
the Sessions were to continue after the time he desired as in this Case it did.
Fitz-Harris said his Witnesses were in Holland, and tho he named no Persons,
yet his Trial was put off to the next Term; my Lord Russel said his Witnesses
could not be in Town till that Night, yet the respite till next day was denied,
all Persons agreed, that there was some extraordinary Reason for it, and before
the Trial was over, the Riddle was out.

My Lord of Essex was killed, or to be killed, that Morning, as to this Matter
it is not material, whether by his own or another Hand, they were sensible,
the Evidence against my Lord Russel was very defective, and that accident was
to help it out, but that would not avail unless it were a surprising Matter
upon the Jury, should the Jury have had a days or but a Mornings time to
consider of it, People might have been talking with the Jury, it was very
material to ask, what influence that accident would have on my Lord Russels
Trial, whether it was any Evidence against him, they might have been told what
was true, that no Person killed, was in Law supposed to have killed himself,
till a Coroners Enquest had sat upon the view of his Body and found it so, and
if it had been so found, yet even that had been no Evidence against another,
because the Coroners Enquest never found the reason why a Man killed himself,
and if they should find the reason, yet even that was no Evidence against
another, because that other was never called before the Coroners Enquest to
make his defense, they might have been told a great many Circumstances of the
Improbability of the killing himself, they might have observed that the Kings
Council was so far sensible, that it was no Evidence against my Lord Russel,
that they never attempted to prove the Earl of Essex was dead or killed
himself, it was only slyly insinuated together with the reason of it which had
its Effect, if the report be true of some of the Jurymen's saying it went
farther with them than all the Evidence of the Witnesses produced, and if that
be true, there was a reason, tho not a just one, for speeding that Trial beyond
the ordinary Methods of Trials at the Old Baily.

But tho my Lord Russel had seemingly less favor in that Matter than any other
Person, even than College, who had the respite of two or three hours between
his Arraignment and Trial, (tho that was not in Favor to College, but only to
examine his Papers which they took from him, and instruct their Witnesses
accordingly) yet in other things he had more favor or justice done him; his
Papers were not taken from him; it was agreed to be his Right to use them
without questioning from whom he had them, what they were, or the like, as in
Colledge's Case was done, he had a Copy of the Panel of the Jury, even before
his Arraignment given him, and the Chief Justice said it was never denied in
case of Life, that he knew of, which was denied Col ledge before he pleaded;
because as then was pretended there was no Issue joined, till Plea pleaded,
after which the Venire is awarded, though all Men know, That the Sheriff summons
the Jury before the Arraignment, and even after Issue joined; College was
denied a Copy of the Panel, only he was told, he should look every Jury-man in
the Face before he was sworn; and as far as the Looks of a Man betrays him, he
should be satisfied, whether he was honest or not, which is an ill way of
judging; for I think the Person, that gave that Rule, would have deceived any
Man by his Countenance, who had known his Practices.

But say the Attorney General, in my Lord Russel's Case, it was matter of
Favor, and not of Right, therefore no Injustice to College; I confess of all
Men, which ever came to the Bar, he has laid down the most Rules, which depend
totally upon the Authority of his own Saying; In Colledge's Case, he affirmed,
that the King's Witnesses ought not to be kept out of the hearing of each
other, when they gave their Evidence (a method used in Civil Matters, the
reason of which is well known, and none can show any Law or Reason, why it
should not be used in capital Matters) with as much Reason and Authority as
what now said.

First I do affirm there is no Authority in Law, which says a Prisoner shall
not Have a Copy of the Panel; In the next place I do affirm, that after a Jury
struck in a civil Matter, each Party ought to have a Copy of the Panel, in
order to provide himself of a challenge, if there be any cause: In the last
Place, I do affirm, that by Law more Favor is allowed a Defendant in a Capital
Matter to defend himself, then in a civil, and if these propositions be true,
let any Person if he can make out the Law, or Reason of the above assertions.

Of a like stamp were the sayings, when my Lord desired a Copy of the Matter of
Fact laid against him, the Attorney said he had notice of it, for questions
were put to him about it, and he was with his Lordship himself, and examined
him upon those questions, which was a Favor to him, that he might know what
the Matter was he was accused of.

I do not affirm that ever it was practiced, to give the Prisoner a Note of the
Fact, to be given in Evidence against him, proving Treason, or that it was ever
densed till then, nor do I know of any Law pro or con in the Case, but if one
would judge by reason or practice in parallel Cases, I think it ought not to be
denied.

I know not at present of more than two Sorts of general Indictments. and those
are of Treason and Barretry, the last is a general Indictment for stirring up
Suits without reason, and without mentioning any Suit in particular; and
therefore if by the Rule of Court, the Defendant was no helped, which obliges
the Prosecutor to give the Defendant some reasonable time before the Trial, a
Note of what Suits he intends to give in Evidence against him; it was
impossible for the Defendant to escape, if it had been his misfortune to have
had five or six Suits.

For I never yet saw a Witness produced against the Indicted, but he would
swear the indicted brought an Action against him without reason, and yet I have
often seen, that the Indicted having had notice, that that was one of the Suits
he was intended to be charged with, has been able to prove, that he had good,
or at least, probable Cause of Suit, which he could' not have done, if he had
not notice; and in Treasons for designing to kill the King, there having been
so many Interpretations of Facts tending that way, that it is almost impossible
for an Innocent to defend himself, unless he had notice of the Fact intended to
be insisted on at the Trial.

There are yet some expressions which mightily puzle me, the Kings Council said
in the argument of the challenge that they would not have the point of being a
Jury-man, tho not a Freeholder lost to the City of London, and one of the
Judge said, 'twas the Privileges of the City were struck at in that point, if
by those expressions it is meant, that it is for the benefit of the public
that there should be no failure of Justice, I argree to it but if it be meant
that it is for the benefit of the Citizens to be Jurymen, I deny it; and I
think nothing shows it plainer than that it is a Privilege, that a Citizen
shall not be drawn out of the City to be a Juryman, that a Nobleman shall not
be on a Jury, that it is a Matter of Prerogative in the King and favor to a
particular Person, to grant him a Charter of exemption from being on a Jury; so
that if I consider the Law, I know what is meant by those expressions, if I
consider allowed Practice, it is true a Jury-man may earn his Eight Pence for a
Trial, but that is too inconsiderable pay, for Persons of substance as the
Jurymen in this case were said to be fond of the employ, or to account it a
Privilege, but even that was but in civil Mattres, in criminal Matters, not
Capital, the Jury were heretofore paid, if they acquitted the Defendant, but
not if they found him Guilty, though of late it has been Practiced to give
them more, and treat them higher if they Convicted the Defendant than if they
acquitted him; but in Capital Matters, as the Case in question was, it was
never allowed, or at least owned to pay the Jury, be the Verdict which way it
would, having spoken to the Preliminaries, I proceed to the Trial, wherein
Coll. Rumsey was first produced, he said he was sent by my Lord Shaftsbury
about the end of October, or beginning of November who told him, he should meet
at one Sheppards, the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Russel, Lord Gray, Sir Tho.
Armstrong and Mr. Ferguson, to know of them, what resolution they were come to
about the Rising of Taunton; Sheppard carried him where they were, and Answer
was made, Mr. Trenchard had failed them, and there would be no more done in the
Matter, at that time; thereupon the Lord Shaftsbury took a Resolution to be
gone; Mr. Ferguson spoken most of the Message, and he thought the Lord Gray
spoke something to the same purpose, he did not know how often he had been at
that House, he was there more than once, or else he heard Mr. Ferguson make a
Report of another Meeting to the Lord Shaftsbury, my Lord Russel was in the
room, and that was all they said at that time, that he remembered, he was not
there above a quarter of an hour; there was some Discourse about seeing in what
posture the Guards at the Mews and Savoy were in, by all the company; to know
how to surprise them, if the Rising had gone on; Sir Tho. Armstrong and Mr.
Ferguson began, all debated it, he thought the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray
and Sir Tho. Armstrong were sent to view them; the Rising was appointed to be
the 19th. of November, he was spoke to by the Lord Shafsbury to go to Bristol,
if the Rising had gone on, but in what quality was not determined; the Lord
Russel agreed to the Debate, being asked, if my Lord Russel said any thing
there, and what? He answered, my Lord Russel spoke about the Rising at Taunton,
being asked what my Lord Russel said, he answered my Lord Russel discoursed of
the Rising; being asked if my Lord gave his Consent to the Rising, he said he
did. The next witness was Mr. Sheppard, who said in October last, Mr. Ferguson
came to him in the Duke Monmouth's Name, and desired the Convenience of his
House for himself and some Persons of Quality, which he granted. In the Evening
the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Gray, Lord Russel, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Coll.
Rumsey, and Mr. Ferguson came, not altogether, but the one after the other, Sir
Thomas Armstrong desired, that none of his Servants might come up and that they
might be private; so what they wanted he went down for, a Bottle of Wine or so,
the substance of the discourse was to surprise the Kigns Guards, and in order
to to it, th Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray and Sir Thomas Armstrong went one
Night, as ke remembered, to the Mewes, or thereabouts, to see the Guards, and
the next time they came to his House, he heard Sir Thomas Armstrong say, the
Guards were very remiss in their places, and not like Soldiers, and the thing
was feasible, if they had but strength to do it, he remembered but two Meetings
there, they came in the Evening, he heard, nor saw, any Coaches at his Door;
when they came in, as he remembered, the Lord Russel, was both times there, he
had no business with the Lord Russel, nor the Lord Russel with him, at that
time, but since he had; he did not remember. Coll. Rumsey discourst the Lord
Russel about any private business, nor remembered any farther Discourse, he
remembered no Writings nor Papers read at that time, upon Recollection he
remembered one Paper read by Mr. Ferguson in the nature of a Declaration,
setting forth the Greivances of the Nation, the Particulars he could not tell:
It was a pretty large Paper, it was showed for Approbation as he supposed, when
to be set out was no discoursed, 'twas showed to Sir Thomas Armstrong, and as
he remembered, the Duke of Monmouth was present, and he thought Coll. Rumsey was
present. Coll. Rumsey said he was not present, it was done before he came, Mr.
Sheppard went on and said the design of the Paper was in order to a rising as
he supposed, by the Purpose of it, he would not say the Lord Russel was there
when that Paper was read, but he was there when the talk was about seizing the
Guards, he could not be positive as to the times of those Meetings, but it was
when the Lord Shaftsbury was absent from his House, he absented about
Michaelmas Day, he could not be positive that my Lord Russel was at both
Meetings, he thought he was at both, he was sure he was at one, the last
Witness was the Lord Howard, he said, he brought Captain Walcot acquainted with
the Lord Shaftsbury, and upon his account, Captain Walcot soon gained a
confidence with the Lord Shaftsbury, Walcot told him, the People were sensible
all their Interest was going to be lost by the violence offered to the City, in
the Election of Sheriffs, and that they were resolved to take some Course to
put a stop to it, that there was several meetings, about it, and some Persons
begun to prepare to Act, that some had good Horses and kept them in private
Stables, and he resolved to be one in it, he having an Estate in Ireland, he
dispatched his Son thither, and ordered his Son to turn his Stock into Money,
the Son went about August, that the 30th of Sept. Walcot Dined with him; told
him that the Lord Shaftsbury was secreted and desired to speak with him, Walcot
brought him to the Lord Shaftsbury, who complained of the Duke of Monmouth and
the Lord Russel for deserting him, but there was such preparation made in
London, that now he was able to do it of himself, and intended to do it
suddenly, he had above 10000 brisk Boys ready to follow him, when he held up
his Finger, they would possess themselves of the Gates, and in twenty four
hours they would multiply to five times the number, and would be able to
possess Whitehall by beating the Guards; the Lord Howard went to the Duke of
Monmouth, told him the Lord Shaftsbury's complaint, who said, the Lord Russel
and he told the Lord Shaftsbury from the beginning, that there was nothing to
be done by them in the Country, at that time; the Matter of the discourse
between him and the Duke of Mounmouth, him and the Lord Shaftsbury, and him and
Walcot, is too tedious to relate, and as little to the purpose, if the Jury had
understood Matter of Law which they did not; in it he takes care to show what
Confidence my Lord Shaftsbury had in him, more than in the Duke of Monmouth or
the Lord Russel, how very Cautious he was, and how Precipitate the Lord
Shaftsbury was, and that what he told the Duke of Monmouth, the Duke told the
Lord Russel, and he heard the Lord Russel had been with the Lord Shaftsbury,
and put off the intended rising, at which the Lord Russel interrupted him, and
said he thought he had very hard measure, there was great deal of Evidence
given by hearsay only, whereupon the Chief Justice said it was nothing against
the Prisoner, he declared it to the Jury, but the Attorney General bid the Lord
Howard go on in the method of time, and that it was nothing against the
Prisoner, but the Witness was coming to it, if his Lordship would have
Patience, he assured him so, the Lord Howard went on where he left off, with a
story between him and Walcot, of an intended Rising, and of some dark Sayings
let fall by Walcot, and the Lord Gray, importing a Design upon the Kings
Person, but the Lord Howard was very careful to put al off, but at last it was
resolved to rese on the 17th of November, but the Lord Howard fearing it had
been discovered, because he saw a Proclamation a little before, for bidding
Bonefires without the Lord Mayors leave, that of the 17th of November, was also
disappointed, and the Lord Shaftsbury went away and died, but considering they
had gone so far, that it was not sase, to retreat, and considering that so
great an Affair as that was, consisting of such infinite Particulars, to be
managed with so much fineness, they erected a Cabal of six Persons, the Duke of
Monmouth, Lord of Essex, Lord Russel, Mr. Hampden, Algernon Sidney, and
himself, about the middle of Jannary last, and about that time, they met at Mr.
Hampdens House, where it was considered whether the Insurrection should be in
London, or in Place distant, what Countries and Towns were fittest and most
disposed to Action, what Arms necessary to be provided, how to raise twenty
five, or thirty thousand Pounds, and how they might so order it, as to draw
Scotland into a Consent with them; about ten days after, they met at the Lord
Russe's House, and then resolved to send some Persons into Scotland to the Lord
Argile, to invite some Persons hither to give an account of that Kingdom; the
Persons to be invited, were Sir Jo. Cockram, Lord Melvil, Sir Campbill, that
matter was referred to Col. Sidney, who told him he had sent Aaron Smith; they
agreed not to meet again till the return of the Messenger; the Messenger was
gone about a month, it was six weeks or more before he returned, and then his
Lordship was forced to go into Essex, where he had a small Concern, where he
staid three weeks, and when he returned, he was informed Sir John Cockram was
come to Town, and afterward he was forced to go to the Bath, where he spent
five weeks, and from that time to this, was five weeks, all which time was a
Parenthesis to him. And that he and the five mentioned erected themselves by
mutual Agreement into that Society. Atterbury swore Campbell was in his
Custody: then Col. Rumsey was asked whether my Lord Russel heard him when he
delivered his Message to the Company, and in what place of the Room the Company
were; who answered, that when he came in, they were standing by the Fireside,
but all came from thence to hear him; and when my Lord Russel said Col. Rumsey
was there when he came in, Rumsey said no, the Duke of Monmouth and Lord Russel
went away together.

Then in behalf of my Lord Russel, the Earl of Anglesey was examined, who said,
that visiting the Earl of Bedford, the Lord Howard came in, and told the Earl
of Bedford that his Son could not be in such a Plot, or suspected of it, and
that he knew nothing against the Lord Russel, or any body else, of such a
Barbarous Design, and he was going on again with what the Lady Chaworth had
told him, but was interrupted by the Kings Council, telling him, as the Court
would not permit them to give Hearsay in Evidence against the Prisoner, so
they must not permit his Lordship to give Hearsay in Evidence for the
Prisoner. Mr. Howard said, that the Lord Howard took it upon his Honor, and
his Faith, he knew nothing of any Person concerned in that Business, and not
only thought my Lord Russel unjustly suffered, but he took God and Man to
witness, he thought my Lord Russel the worthiest man in the World. Dr. Burnet
said, the Lord Howard was with him, and he did then, as he had done before,
with Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven, declare he knew nothing of any Plot, nor
believed any, and treated it with great Scorn and Contempt. The Lord Cavendish
testified, as to the Life and Conversation of the Lord Russel, and thence
concluded, it was not likely he should be guilty of any such matter, and heard
the Lord Russel speak of Rumsey, as if he had an ill Opinion of him, and
therefore it was not likely he should trust him. Dr. Tillotson spoke of his
Conversation. Dr. Burnet and Dr. Cox spoke of his Cenversation, and of his
Aversness to all Risings. Dr. Cox testified, that my Lord Russel said the Lord
Howard was a man of luxuriant Parts, but he had the luck not to be trusted by
any Party. The Duke of Somerset spoke of the Lord Russels Conversation. The
Lord Clifford, Mr. Leveson Gore, Mr. Spencer, and Dr. Fitz-Williams spoke as to
my Lord Russel's Conversation. The Lord Howard being asked by the Jury what he
said to the Earl of Anglesey's Evidence, owned what the Earl said, but he did
it to outface the matter, and if he said untrue, he ought not to be believed
on his Oath, and insinuated, that he meant what he said, to be meant of a
Design of Murdering the King, which he did not believe the Duke of Monmouth or
the Lord Russel guilty of.

This being the sum of the Evidence given against, or for, my Lord Russel, let
us consider how far it will justify the Verdict given against him; first
consider the improbability of Rumsey's Evidence, if my Lord Cavendish said
true, that he should trust Rumsey to hear the debate about seizing the Guards,
when the Lord Russel had an ill Opinion of Rumsey, as for Rumsey's delivering
the Message, there was no great Matter in that, it is impossible to hinder
Peoples speaking, and it is not Treason to conceal what is said; besides it was
well known, it was. Rumsey's way to talk extravagantly, in order to accuse
those that heard him, if they did not discover it, but besides the
improbability of the Evidence in respect of the Person, the manner of
delivering the Evidence, and the Evidence if self was such as carried no Color
of Truth with it, he said he delivered his Message and had an answer to it, and
being asked what the Company said further, answered, that was all that was said
at that time that he remembered, and gives a very good reason for it, for he
stayed not above a quarter of an hour, and added that he was not certain,
whether he then heard something of a Declaration there, or whether Mr. Ferguson
reported it to my Lord Shastsbury, that they had debated it, and yet when
Sheppard said Rumsey was there when the Declaration was read, he denied it, and
said it was read before he came in, being asked to what the Declaration tended,
he answered to another Matter, viz. that there was some discourse about seeing
in what Posture the Guards were in, and said that all the company debated it,
and being drawn on by questions, said it was in order to seize the Guards, if
the Rising had gone on; now how does that Part of the Evidence agree with what
he said before, that there was nothing more said then the delivering his
Message, and the answer to it; and how does it agree with the time he said he
staid, which was not above a quarter of an hour, whereas that debate, if all
the Persons present being six debated it, as he said they did, it would
certainly have taken up a larger time, how does the first and last part of his
Evidence agree, when he said my Lord Russel agreed to the answer of his
Message, and being askedd whether and what he spoke to it? said, he spoke about
the Rising at Taunton, but does not say, what, and yet in thefirst part of his
Evidence, he said when asked, who sent the Message back, Mr. Ferguson delivered
the answer, the Duke of Monmouth and the Lord Russel were present, and he
thought the Lord Gray said something to the same purpose, but what credit could
be given to any part of a Man's Evidence, whose memory was so shallow, that he
could not remember whether he was at two Meetings, or whether Mr. Ferguson
related one of them to the Lord Shaftsbury, yet both were supposed to be within
the compass of a Year, whereas a Man of Sense is supposed to remember all his
own Acts for seven Years past, which it the reason why the Chancery obliges a
Man to answer as to his own Acts possitively for seven Years without saying as
he believes, or as he remembers, or the like, what credit is to be given to a
witness who testifies what was said in company, and by whom, when his memory
does not serve to answer possitively, whether he was in the company, or whether
another told him what was there said, he might as well have said he was there,
or dreamt he was there, or that he heard the discourse or dreamt of it, had
carried equal credit with it.

It was plain, the Man was not of sane memory enough to make a Will, much less
to be a witness in the Trial of a Man's Life, and nothing can be said for him,
but that he was a witness for the King, that is to say, a mad Man may be a
witness to take away a Man's Life, which is as good law as a great deal of
other Cant vented as a part of the Prerogative.

It is true one of the Kings Council recommends Rumsey to the Jury, as a very
credible witness under the notion of an unwilling witness, but had the same
Person been a Council for the Prisoner, he would have called Rumsey a dancing
witness, for he said backwards and forwards, and an amazed winess for being
asked one thing, he answered another, being asked as to the Declaration, he
answered to the seizing of the Guards, being asked whether my Lord Russel
assented to the answer of the Message, he replied yes, because he talked of the
Rising, etc. which might be as well against as for it.

Sheppard's Evidence was to the Design, of seizing the Guards, and as to the
Declaration, he remembered but two Meetings, at both which he said, a he
remembered, my Lord Russel was present but he could not be positive in that, and
the times of the Meetings he did not remember, he said, the substance of the
Discourse was, how to surprise the Kings Guards, and that the Duke of Monmouth,
the Lord Gray and Sir Tho Armstrong went to see the Guards, as he remembered,
and the next time they came to the House, Sir Tho. Armstrong said, the Guards
were very remiss, etc. Taking this Evidence by it self, without tacking
Rumsey's Evidence to it, it was so far from being Evidence of Treason, that it
was no Crime; for he does not say, it was intended to be put in practice,
notwithstanding all said by him, both the Discourses and the Persons viewing
the Guards (which last was not Evidence, not ought to have been given in
Evidence) might be a Matter to try each others Judgments, as well as an
Evidence of a thing designed, and if it be capable of two Interpretations, the
Law has said, it shall be taken in mitiore sensu, in favor of Life, that
distinction was taken by the Chief Justice in Blagues Case, the day after this
Trial where the Evidence against him, was a discourse about taking the Tower,
as High a Crime as seizing the Guards, and upon that Blague was acquitied, it
is true Rumsey said it was in order to be put in Practice, when the Rising
should be in the Country, but that he did not say at first; but was afterward
lead to it by question, nor does he speak it as a thing at that or at any other
time determined, but as his own surmise or guess, because he knew of an
intended Rising, yet how foolishly did he contradict himself, for says Rumsey
it was to have been put in Practice, if the intended Rising had gone on, and
yet at the same Meeting he had said before, the Rising was put off, how
contradictory therefore is it to say they made preparations for a thing they
had laid aside before, and it is plain Sheppard speaks of the same time, for
both agree, Rumsey was at that Meeting, tho they do not agree how soon he came,
besides, how could Sheppard speak positively of the discourses, or of the
Design of it, when he owns he did not hear all their discourse, and gives a
very good reason for it; for he said he went several times down to fetch Wine,
Sugar and Nutmeg, and did not know what was said in his absence, he said he
heard nothing about a Rising, nor heard any further discourse; but on
recollection, he heard something about a Declaration of Grievances in order to
a Rising, as he supposed, the Particulars he could not tell, now what sort of
Evidence was that, in all Civil Matters, a Witness shall not be permitted to
give Evidence of the content of a Deed or Writing without producing the Deed or
Writing if self, or a true Copy of it, and upon very good reason; for he may
make an untrue Construction of it, I remember a Witness who swore to the
content of a Deed of Intail, and being asked whether he knew a Deed of Intail,
and by what he knew the Deed he spoke of to be a Deed of Intail, answered he
knew a tailed Deed very well, and he knew the Deed he spoke of to be a tailed
Deed, because it had a Tail half as long as his Arm, meaning the Label of the
Deed, and if this be the Practice and the Reason of the Practice in Civil
Matters, show me any Authority or Reason any thing should be permitted to be
given in Evidence in Treason, which is not permitted to be given in Evidence in
the Trial of any Civil Matter.

If you say as Justice Levins said, in a like Case, in Colledge's Trial, that
it would be the difficultest thing in the World to prove Treason against a Man,
if the Law were not so, and the King would in no sort be safe, of the other
Hand I say as College there said, if the Law should be so, no private Person
is safe, and if there be mischiefs of either Hand, the Law is and must be
Judge, which has taken care (tho to no purpose, because it has not been
observed) that there shall be a stricter Proof in Treason than in any Civil
Matter, or in any other Crime, and how the Judges come to permit that loose
Evidence in Treason to be given, which of late Years they have done, no just or
honest Account can be given.

The last material Witness against my Lord Russel was my Lord Howard (as for
Atterbury's Evidence, it ought not to have been permitted to be given, as shall
be shown, nor was it material) to no part of whose Evidence any Credit ought to
be given, even by his own Confession, he was surely in the right, when he said
that the Religion of an Oath is not tied to a place, and I Will add, nor to a
Form, but receives its Obligation from the Appeal is therein made to God, and
therefore if he said, (tho I own he was not bound to say it) to the Earl of
Bedford, Mr. Howard and Dr. Burnet, what was testified against him, he ought
not to be believed in any part of his Evidence, did he say to my Lord Bedford,
when unsent for and unasked, for ought appears after my Lord Russel was clapped
into the Tower, he said his Son could never be in any such Plot, as that, or
suspect for it, and that he knew nothing against him, or any body ehe, of such
a barbarous Design, and yet he knew if he swore true that my Lord Russel was
Guilty of such a barbarous Design, that nothing but the Lord Howard's Duty to
God, the King and the Country, could prevail with him, to give it in Evidence
against a Person for whom be had so great an Affection as he had for my Lord
Russel, how was it consistent with the truth of his Evidence what he said to
Mr. Howard, that he knew nothing of any Man's being concerned in that business,
and particularly of my Lord Russel whom he highly Commended, and said be
thought the Lord Russel unjustly Suffered, or with what he said to Dr. Burner
with Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven, which is as much an Appeal to God, as
may be, that he knew nothing of any Plot, nor believed any, it was an idle
Evasion to say, when he spoke of my Lord Russel, he meant my Lord Russel was
not Guilty of the Design of Murdering the King, (for which that Man as he said
was Committed) meaning Walcot, the Lord Russel, or any other Person, for he is
still at liberty to explain himself, and I am apt to think they were all
Committed by Warrants of the same Form. I know not how dextrous he is at paring
an Apple, but he must be an Excellent Logician that can reconcile the truth of
his Evidence and Sayings, the Truth is, that a Man that has those Niceties in
his Head ought to have no Credit; for no Man knows whether he understands what
he says aright, and I am apt to think that his Lordship can show, that he did
not intend what he said at my Lord Russels Trial in the Sense it was understood
by the Court or Jury, to say, that he was to outface the thing for himself and
his Party was as vain (for besides that I think he was of no Party, because as
my Lord Russel said he had the luck to be trusted by none) where was the Sense
of making those Protestations to Persons, who could do him no good, and would
do him no harm, both which my Lord Pemherton could; and therefore 'twas not
alike: It is true the Attorney General Commends the Lord Howard as a Person of
great Credit amongst the Party, and insinuates the Lord Gray was left out of
the Cabal for his Immorality, and the Lord Howarch was taken in his place; but
to pass from the General of his Evidence to the Particulars of it, for about
two Leaves in the Print of it 5 it is a discourse between my Lord Shaftsbury
and him; wherein he makes my Lord Shaftsbury have a wondrous Confidence in him,
and discovers all the Design to him, and what number of Men he had at Command;
but who they were, or what they were, was never yet discovered, and yet the
Lord Howard had not at that time been concerned in the Matter, nor did then
assent, he very prudently was resolved to see, whether it was likely to take
Effect or not before he would enter on it, it was indeed a Matter of great
wonder to those who knew my Lord Shaftsbury, and knew what Opinion he had of
the Lord Howard from the time the Lord Shaftsbury discovered that the Lord
Howard frequented the Duchess of Portsmouth, which was before Fitz-Harri his
Trial, tho after that Trial the Matter was publicly owned, which was before
suspected by most known to the Lord Shastsbury, that he should so readily trust
the Lord Howard with the Secret, who was unconcerned in the management before,
as he says himself, and yet secreted himself from the Duke of Monmouth and my
Lord Russel, who were equally Guilty, if what was sworn, was true; I cannot but
observe that in all the time of the Lord Shaftsbury, the Lord Howard was no
otherwise concerned in the pretended Design, but in raising difficulties, and
being in great fear least there should be a Rising or an Attempt upon the Kings
Person, and if he said true, he was he Man that put of the intended Risings and
likewise the intended Designs on the Kings Person, in so much that I think he
was so far from standing in need of a Pardon for Treason, that he deserved a
considerable Reward, if it were for nothing else than for his fearing the
design was discovered: By the Proclamation against Bonefires, which, as he
said, put off the Rising intended to be the 17th. of November, and yet he and
others being afraid the middle of January, they erected themselves into a Cabal
of Six Persons, of which there is but one Person in all his Narrative, he
pretends to have spoken to about that Matter before, which is the Duke of
Monmouth, and but one more he pretends even by hearsay to be concerned in it
before, which is my Lord Russel, and how improbable therefore was it, that
those Six Persons should, as it were on sight, put themselves upon such a
dangerous design, especially considering the reason he gives for it, which was
their Fears, that what had been transacted was, or might be, discovered; this
likewise is observable, that from the 30th. of September, the time the Sheriffs
entered upon their Office to the 17th. of November following, he is very exact
as to the time of each Matter, when there was no Person could contradict him;
for my Lord Shaftsbury was dead, Walcot was convicted, and the Duke of Monmouth
was gone, who are all the Persons mentioned to be concerned in that time, yet
when he comes to speak of the matter, in which my Lord Russel was concerned,
then be says, it was about the middle of January, about ten days after, about
six weeksafter, about three weeks and five weeks; for had he been precise in
the times, he might have been disproved in the Meetings, he gave Evidence of;
and it is much his Memory was so very good as to the former times to be so very
precise in them as he was, and so very defective in the latter times, and yet
those times do not make up the space between the middle of January, and the
time of the Trial by many weeks, unless you will give large allowances to the
word (about) an Exception which was taken to Mowbray's Evidence, though he
rectifyed it by his account in his Almanac; but it would not be admitted, though
College very sensibly desired of the Court for Justice sake to look on the
Almanac, to see whether it was newly writ, as if done for that purpose.

Besides the Improbability, if such a thing was in hand, as the Lord Howard,
pretended, for him to run into the Country, and then to the Bath, when the
matter was just come to a Crisis as it were, shows him, if swore true, rather a
Madman than a Traitor.

But the Usage of the King's Council and the Court toward the Prisoner was very
unjust and unfair, they permitted the Lord Howard to go on with a long story of
him and my Lord Shaftsbury, at which when my Lord Russel took Exceptions, the
Chief Justice it is true said it was no Evidence, yet the Attorney General
bidding him go on in the Method of time, he went on where he left of;
intermixing Stories of Designs and of Attempts by other Persons upon the Kings
Person to exasperate the Jury, as my Lord Russel said rightly against him; a
thing which no Council durst have done, and no Court would have suffered in any
other Case, nor even in that would the Court or Council suffer it for the
Prisoner; how was my Lord Anglesey checked when he began to tell what my Lady
Chaworth said, and Mr. Edward Howard, when he did not speak of his own
knowledge, how unjust was it for the King's Council to repeat all the Evidence
the Lord Howard gave, when they summed it up, even that which the Court told
them before was not Evidence! how unjust was the insinuating of the Death of my
Lord of Essex, as Evidence against my Lord Russel! and why did not the Court in
Summing up the Evidence take notice of the Liberties the Witnesses and Council
had taken, and have told them what was not Exidence. No other reason can be
given than what College said at his Trial upon his Observation of Fitz.
Harris's business and his own, That the Matter was not to stop at him.

REMARKS ON Col. Sidney's TRIAL.
THE Lord Russel being Executed, and the same day, what was called his Speech,
being published then, which nothing of Print was more eagerly accepted or
sought after, which showed the Inclination of People; there was some respite
for quieting the minds of the People, but it was not to stop there, as College
said, and therefore Col Sidney (who was talked to Death, under the Notion of a
Commonwealths man) was the 17th. of November, 1683. brought to Westminster to
be arraigned on an Indictment of High Treason; the Indictment at the time he
came to the Hall, was so far from being found by the Grand Jury, that it was
not so much as presented to them; but the Kings Council, who had packt the
Jury, knew well enough that it would be accepted, that is, found upon sight by
the Jury, without any consideration, which was accordingly done, and Col.
Sidney thereupon arraigned. The Indictment was for designing to depose the
King, and to persuade the Kings Subjects to rebel; and that he did write a
certain Libel, wherein it was contained, that he (meaning King Charles, the
Second) is subject to the Law of God, as he is a Man, to the People who made
him such, as a King, and To which Indictment, he would have put in some
exceptions, expressed in a Parchment in his Hand, but was told by the Court, he
must either plead or demurr, and upon no other Terms Exceptions could, or ought
to be, admitted, after which, he pleaded not Guilty.

The 21th. of November he was tried, at which time he insisted to have a Copy
of his Indictment, as he had done when he was arraigned; but was both times
denied. The first Witness against the Prisoner was Mr. West, against whom Col.
Sidney objected, because he was not pardoned; but it was answered by the Court,
that he was a good Witness in my Lord Russels Trial, and therefore should be in
that; then Col. Sidney desired Mr. West might speak nothing but what be knew of
Col. Sidney, but was answered by the Court, he might give Evidence of a Plot in
general, though Col. Sidney not concerned in it, and it was called Sir William
Jones's Law; then Mr. West went on, and gave Evidence of what Col. Rumsey, Mr.
Nelthorp, and Mr. Ferguson told him of Col. Sidney, but of his own Knowledge,
he could not say any thing of the Prisoner. Rumsey gave a like Evidence he had
done in my Lord Russel's Trial, with an Addition of what Mr. West and Mr.
Goodenough told him. Keeling gave evidence of what Goodenough told him, all
which the Court agreed was no Evidence against the Prisoner. Then the Lord
Howard gave the like Evidence from the niddle of January to that time, as he
had done in the Lord Russel's Trial, saving that the said the Earl of Salisbury
was brought into the Cabal, who was not mentioned before, and save that be said
the meeting at my Lord Russel's was about a Fortnight or three Weeks after the
meeting at Mr. Hampdens whereas in my Lord Russel's Trial, he says it was about
ten days after the meeting at Mr. Hampden's House, and here he makes two
notable Speeches for Mr. Hampden at the opening of the Consult, both which he
had forgotten at my Lord Russel's Trial, nor could remember at Mr. Hampden's
Trial, though in the last he was lead by a great many Questions, to put him in
mind of them. After his Evidence given, Col. Sidney was asked whether he would
ask the Witness any Questions, who answered, he had no Questions to ask him;
whereupon the Attorney General said silence -- You know the Proverb.

The Record of the Lord Russel's Conviction and Attainder was given in
Evidence. Sir Andrem Foster swore Sir John Cockrant and the two Campbells came
to London; Sir Phillip Floyd proved the seizing of some Papers in the Prisoners
House, and he did believe the Papers shown in Court to be some of them.
Sheppard, Carry, and Cook swore the Writing produced was like the Prisoners Hand
writing; the Attorney General desired some part of the Writing should be read;
the Prisoner desired all of it might be read, but was answered by the Court,
that the Attorney must have what Part of it he would to be read, and afterward
the Prisoner should have what Part of it he would, should be read; but he
persisted to desire all of it should be read; then the Writing was read, which
wad plainly an Answer to a Book, but what Book was not mentioned, in which the
Right of the People was asserted. The Earl of Anglesey gave the same Evidence
for the Prisoner, of the Lord Howard's speaking of my Lord Russel and the Plot,
as he had done in my Lord Russel's Trial. The Earl of Clare said that the Lord
Howard, after Col. Sidney's Imprisonment, said, if he was questioned again, he
would never plead, the quickest Dispatch was the best, he was sure they would
have his Life, and speaking of the Primate of Armah's Perphesie, said, the
Prosecution was begun, and he believed it would be very sharp, but hoped it
would be short, and said, he thought Col. Sidney as innocent as any man
breathing, gave him great Encomiums, and bemoaned his Misfortune; and as for
Col. Sidney's Papers, he said he was sure they could make nothing of them. Mr.
Phillip Howard said, the Lord Howard said it was a Sham-Plot; Dr. Burnet gave
the same Evidence as he did in my Lord Russel's Trial; Mr. Ducon gave Evidence,
that the Lord Howard said he knew nothing of Col. Sidney's being in any Plot.
The Lord Paget gave Evidence to the same purpose. Mr. Edward Howard gave
Evidence to the same purpose. Tracy and Penwick gave Evidence to the same
purpose. Mr. Blake testified, that the Lord Howard said he had not his Pardon,
and could not ascribe it to any other reason, than that he must not have his
Pardon, till the Drudgery of Swearing was over. Now to review that has been
said, it is strange to see what a Progress was made in the Resolutions of
Points of Law, to take away a man's Life; to say in Col. Sidney's Words, as if
the Court and Council thought it their Duty to take away a man's Life any how.
Mr. West and several others are admitted to give Evidence by Hearsay against
the Prisoner, and their Evidence summed up and urged as Evidence to the Jury,
and the Reason given for it, was, that he was admitted a good Witness of a like
matter, in the Lord Russels Trial; which besides that, it was not true, for he
was rejected in that Trial, as it appears in the Print; yet if he had been
admitted, it was of no Authority, as Col. Sidney said, because perhaps he was
not excepted to; of a like Stamp is the Evidence of the Conviction of the Lord
Russel, though I agree the Lord Russel's Conviction was as good Evidence
against Col. Sidney, as the Earl of Essex's Murder was against my Lord Russel,
and no better; the same may be said of Rumsey, Keeling, Foster and Atterbury's
Evidence. Against the Lord Howard's Evidence, there was the same Objections, as
in the Lord Russel's Trial, with the Addition of several other Persons,
testifying, that he said he knew not, or believed any thing of the matter, and
that he could not have his Pardon, till he swore others out of their Lives,
which in truth was the Sense of his Expressions.

The Kings Council indeed had thought of something since the Trial of my Lord
Russul to palliate the matter of the Lord Howard's Sayings (for they leaned
hard upon his Reputation, and looked as if he would perjure himself at the
expense of some Persons Lives, as his Words are in the Lord Russels Trial)
would you, say they, have had him confessed the matter to those Persons to whom
he had denied it?

I think there is a difference between confessing and denying, who asked him
the Question? What did it avail him to deny it to the Persons testifying
against him? and therefore when he voluntarily said a thing untrue, unasked,
not provoked or compelled to do it, and which could do him no good, it was good
Evidence of his untruth, and that no Credit ought to be given to what he swore.

As for the last part of the Evidence, which was about the Writing, both the
Indictment and the Evidence was defective.

As for the Evidence, if the Subject Matter of the Writing had been Evidence of
Treason, the Indictment ought to have expressed that he published it, which the
Indictment in this Case did not; and upon good reason, which was, that the Jury
might be put in mind, that the Publishing of it was necessary to make it known;
whereas they very well knew that the Evidence would not, nor did come up to it.
This was the first Indictment of High Treason, upon which any man lost his
Life, for writing any thing without publishing it; for in Fitz-Harris's
Indictment, he was charged with publishing his Libel; and so in all other
Indictments for Writing, and upon good reason, for this being made an overt Act
of Treason, it must be an Evidence of a Design to kill or depose the King, or
the like; and as the Consequence of what in the Writing contained, which was
that the Power was in the people, etc. being in its Nature no other, nor urged
by the Kings Council, to any other intent than to corrupt the Subjects minds,
could not be Evidence of such matter, unless proved he had Writ and Peblished
it, whereof the last was not pretended to be proved.

That it was necessary to be expressed in the Indictment, and and proved at the
Trial, appears by the Resolution of all the Judges of England in Hugh Pines
Case, reported in Cro. Car. 89. at a time when Prerogative run pretty high;
wherein, besides the resolution that no Words charging the King with any
personal Vice, is Treason. There is the Case of one Peacham, in the 33d. of
Henry the 8th, cited, who was indicted for Treason, for Treasonable Passages in
a Sermon, never preached, nor intended to be preached, but found in Writing in
his Study; he was found guilty, but never executed, for many Judges at that
time were of Opinion it was not Treason, as the Book says, which I think,
according to the Evidence here given, was the express Case of Col. Sidney,
admitting he writ the Book produced, and that the Passages in it were
Treasonable.

And as this Indictment was an Original in the particular before mentioned, so
it was a second of an Inuendo Indictment of Treason, Fitz-Harris was the first,
the Prosecution against Car,, as I remember, was an Information, and Judgment
Arrested after a Verdict because it was by inuendo, of which no Precedent could
be produced, and although in Actions for words it was permitted, yet in
Criminal Matters being Penal, it was resolved it ought not to be permitted, and
certainly much less in Treason, and as this Indictment was an Original in one
part, and a Second in another, the Evidence on it was an Original in another
part, which was proving the Book produced to be Coll. Sydney's Writing; because
the hand was like what some of the Witnesses had seen him writ, an Evidence
never permitted in a Criminal Matter before; The Case of the Lady Carre was
truly cited by Coll. Sydney against whom there was an Indictment or Information
of Perjury, in which it was resolved that comparision of hands was no Evidence
in any Criminal Prosecution, and it must be owned that at that time besides
Keeling and Twisden, there then sat in that Court Sir Wadham Windam,, whom all
will own to have been the second best Judge which sat in Westminster Hall,
since the Kings Resturation, and if it be not Evidence in a Prosecution of
Misdemeanour, much less in Treason as Coll. Sydney said, which inference,
besides the reason of the thing, is backed by the Authority of my Lord Coke.

But admitting Coll. Sydney writ that Book, and Published it; yet if it were
not done with a design to stir the Subjects up into a Rebellion, but was writ
and Published only disputandi gratia, as the immport of the Book shows plainly
it was, it was no more Treason then the discourse between Blagrave and Mate Lee
about taking the Tower was, and suppose it was writ with that design, yet it
not appearing when it was writ, how could a Jury upon their Oaths say it was
done with a design to raise Rebellion against King Charles the Second, when for
ought appeared, it was writ before he was King or thought of, it might for
ought appeared be writ in Kings Charles the First his time, or Cromwells time,
and designed against either of them, or any Foreign Prince, and therefore could
not be Treason against King Charles the Second.

The Evidence was an Original in this Particular, also it was the first time
that ever a Particular Expression in a Writing was ever given in Evidence
against a Man in Treason without reading the whole Writing, and for a very good
reason given by the Jury in Fitz Harris his Case, which was that there might be
something in the Writing not expressed in the Indictment, which may explain the
Clauses in the Indictment, so that they may bear another construction, and in
that Trial it was agreed, the whole Writing ought to be read, and was read
accordingly, and it was the duty of the Court to have ordered it, whether the
Prisoner or Jury had desired it or not, as they are upon their Oaths to do
right; but in Coll. Sydney's Case, when pressed by him, it was denied; only
some Particular Passages he might have read, if he would, which he did not
accept of, upon a very good reason with he gave, which was, that he knew not
the Passages of the Book, or at least he did not remember them, and therefore
could not call for them, it is true that Practice in Civil Matters is allowed to
save time, where the mischief is not very great, because of a Passage in a Deed
or Writing Material for either Party is omitted in reading, the Matter may be
brought about again, but in Criminal much less in Capital, Prosecutions they
cannot be, unless a way can be found to bring a Man to Life again.

Almost all the Circumstances of this Trial are Originals, the summing up of
the Evidence against him was Barbarous, being Invectives, and no Consequences,
it was shid he was not only Guilty of the Practices he was accused of, but he
could not have been otherwise, because his Principles lead him to it, and it
might with as good reason have been urged, that he not only was became, but was
Born, a Traitor; the last Matter remarkable in the Trial was that of an Overt
Act of which the Court said it was resolved by all the Judges of England, that
if I buy a Knife of J. S. to kill the King and one Witness prove I bought a
Knife, and another prove I bought it for that purpose, it is two witnesses of
an Overt Act within the Statute of Ed. 6th.

It were very fit to know who the Judges were which gave that resolution, if it
were but for the Authority of the Case; for I doubt the reason of it will
convined no Man; they might as well have resolved that eating or drinking, or
the most ordinary Acts of a Man's Life, is an Overt, Act of High Treason.

The Law has taken that care for the Evidence of High Treason, which it has
not done in any other Case, that it must be proved by an Overt Act, proved by
two witnesses, one would think at first sight of the Statute that there should
be two witnesses to the same Fact; but that has been adjudged otherwise, but
still it was resolved, there must be two Winesses, but if this Resolution be
Law it is plain there needs but one, it is true if a Man does an Act for which
he can give no reason, as Placing a Mine of Powder in a Place the King usually
passes over, or planting a piece of Cannon to shoot at a place the King
usually passes by, he cannot give a credible reason why he did it, and another
swears the purpose of the thing, it is two good Witnesses within the Act.

It has been said if a Man be bound to his good behavior, and wears a Sword,
it is a breach of the good behavior, and perhaps heretofore when Swords were
not usually vvorn, but by Soldiers, it might be so; because it struck a Terror
in other People as much as a Blunder-buss, or the like unusual Weapon, or the
going Armed in a Coat of Mail for any Person, but a Soldier, does at this day;
but no Man will say that now Swords are usually vvorn by all sorts of People,
that it is a breach of the good behavior, and so that which heretofore was a
Crime, by custom now is become none.

It is therefore the unusualeness and the unaccountablness of the Circumstance
makes it an Evidence which cannot be assigned as a reason in the Overt Act
mentioned. The last thing I take Notice of it, that Coll Sydney refused to ask
the Lord Howard any questions, from whence was inferred, that he assented to
the truth of the Matter sworm, but it is well known, it is no Prudence to ask a
through paced Witness a question, in Mr. Hampdens Trial, his Council refused so
to do for that reason.

The next who fell a Sacrifice according to Colledge's Prophecy was James
Holloway, he was Outlawed and taken beyond Sea, and being induced with
promised of Life, to accuse himself of things (whether he was Guilty or not,)
enough to make good an Indictment of High Treason against him; It was indeed
Generously offered him, that his Out-lawry should be set aside, and he should
have the liberty to be Tried, and defend himself as well as he could, but he
knowing what since he was taken he had said, which would be brought in Evidence
against him, refused his Trial; and because he would not Purchase his Pardon,
at the expense of Innocent Men's Blood by accusing others of what he did not
know they were Guilty of, (if his dying Speech is to believed,) he was executed.

I should not mentioned this, but for the sake of the next Persons Case which
was Sir Thomas Armstrong, who was Outlawed for High Treason, when he was
beyond Sea, he was taken and brough to the Kings-Bench-Bar.

REMARKS Upon the AWARD OF EXECUTION AGAINST Sir Tho. Armstrong.
AT Common Law if a Person was beyond Sea, when an Out-lawry was pronounced
against him, it was an Error in Fact, for which the Out-lawry was to be
reversed, and it is an Error in all Out-lawrys, but for High Treason to this
day by the 6th. of Edward the 6th. that Error is taken away in High Treason,
but there is a Proviso in that Statute, that if the Person Outlawed shall
within a Year after the Out-lawry pronounced, yield himself to the
Cheif-Justice of the King Bench, and offer to traverse his Indictment, and on
his Trial shall be acquitted, he shall be discharged of the Out-lawry; upon the
construction of this Statute, no Judgment was ever given that I know of, and
the reason is no Man Outlawed was ever denied a Trial till this time, if he
was taken within a competent Time, the reason of making that Stature was this;
Men would commit Treason, and presently fly beyond Sea, and stay there till the
Witnesses, who should prove the Treason, were dead, then return and reverse the
Outlawry for the Error of their being beyond Sea, and the Witnesses being dead,
they were safe; and therefore this Statute takes away that Error in part, tho
not in the whole, and does in effect say, that the Person Outlawed shall not
have advantage of that Error, unless he comes and takes his Trial within a
competent time, which that Statute limits to be a Year after the Outlawry
pronounced.

This being plainly the Sense of the Statute, it was injustice to deny the
Favor or ^ight of a Trial to Sir Thomas Amstrong, which was never denied any
Person before, nor since; where it was agreed, that all the Witnesses against
the Person accused was alive, as in Sir Tho. Armstrong's Case, they were
barely upon the quibble of the Word render, which in no Case that ever I read,
was ever differenced from takes, but in one Case, which is Smith and Ashes
Case in Cro. C^r. 42. In an Outlawry for Debt against Husband and Wife, which
will not extend to, or vvarrant the Judgment in this Case, and if there were
but a doubt in the Case, as it cannot be denied but there was, the Outlawry
ought to have been vvaved, or at least Council for the Prisoner heard as to the
Point.

It was a vain and unjust reason (and only tending to incenst the thing)
assigned by the Attorney, That the Prisoner was on who actually engaged to go
upon the King's hasty coming to Town, to destroy him by the way, whenas the
Prisoner offered to prove his innocence in that and other Matters, of which he
was accused, and even that object against him was an Invention of the
Attorneys for any thing appears, but then it was resolved to stop as nothing,
and ^cess had made shem fearless; Fitz-Harris and College 'twas owned had hard
measure, and that their Case might be forgotten, their Quarters were buried,
but Sir Thomas Armstrong's were exposed, tho the Proceedings against him were
equally as unjustifiable, as in the other two Case.

REMARKS ON THE TRIAL OF C. Conningsmark.
I Think fit to remember in the same Reign, tho before this time, one Case to
show how the Courts of Justice were remiss, or voilent, according to the
subject Matter.

All will agree, that the Murder of Mr. Thynne was one of the most Barbarous
and Impudent Murders that ever was Committed, and of that Murder Count
Conningsmark, tho he escaped Punishment, was the most Guilty.

I do not complain that in that Trial, the Chief Justice directed the Prisoner,
the way to make the Kings Council show the cause of Challenge against the
Persons, called on the Jury, and challenged for the King, without Reason it was
his Duty so to do, and he ought to have directed Fitz-Harris the same Method,
which he did not; but he was blameable that he did not ask the Lieutenant and
Polander, what they had to say for themselves, which was always done before,
and since, that time, and ought to be asked of every Prisoner, which was an
injustice; and therefore two of the Prisoners at the time of their Sentences,
said, they were never Tried, tho I believe no great Injury to them, because
they had little or nothing to have said for themselves.

But if they had been asked, they would have said as they did before their
Trials to the Justice of Peace, who Committed them, and as they did after their
Condemnations, that Count Conningsmark put them upon doing what they did, which
might have influenced the Jury to have found the Count Guilty, which was
contrary to the Design of the Court, and it was for the same Reason, the Chief
Justice would permit the Justice of Peace to read the Examination of Stern and
Barosk

I do agree that what they said before the Justice of Peace was not Evidence
against the Count, I do agree that the Count being Indicted and Tried as
Accessory at the same time the Principals were Indicted and Tried, the
Principals could not be good Witnesses against the Count, because properly a
Principal ought to be Convicted before the Accessory be Tried, and therefore
tho for Expedition both are Tried together, yet the Verdict always is, and
ought to be, given against the Principal, before that of the Accessory.

But I deny what was in that Trial laid down for Law, that the Accessory being
in the same Indictment, with the Principal, must be Tried at the same time, it
is true the Count desired his Trial might be put of for two or three days,
which the Court knowing what was best for the Count denied, and not for the
above pretended Reason; for an Indictment against many may be Joint, and yet
the Trials may be several, the Truth is in such Cases, the Indictment is joint
and several.

Suppose the Accessory, at the Trials of the Principals, had not been in
Custody, will any Person say that if afterward he was taken, the cannot be
Tried upon that Indictment, in which he was joined with the Principals.

But besides an hundred Presidents not Printed, there is George Salisbury et all the Case in Plowden Fol. 100. where it was resolved, that tho an Indictment
against many is Joint, yet the Venire may be several against each, Person, and
consequently the Trials may be several, and if so then the times of the Trials
may be several, but that which is to be complained of is, that the Count in the
Opinion of all Mankind at that time and since was the most guilty Man yet the
care taken to punish the less Guilty, as Stern and Borosky, was in order tolet
the most guilty escape for I think both Stern and Borosky might have been and
would have been, good Witnesses against the Count, if the Court would have
permitted it, the Count migh have been Indicted as Accessory to Wratts, only,
for the Accossory to all the Principals is Accessory to every of them
severally, and when the Court, in their private Consciences were satisfyied,
the Cound was most Guilty, they ought to hagve been cunning astati, as my Lord
Hobart calls it to have brought him to Punishment, but it was said Stern, and
Borosky being Indicted of the same Crime with the Count, they could not be good
Witnesses against him, which I think is no more Law than it is Truth, Truth it
was not, for the Count was Indicted as Accessory, the rest as Principals, but
taking it that all was Indicted and Tried as Principals for the same Fact, at
the same time, why is not the Evidence of the one good against the other.
First, I think there is no express Resolution for that point of Law, but a late
Rule given at Kingston Assizes, upon the Trial of a Maid and one Saterwaite,
for Burning or an House, and therefore there is a liberty to examine, by
Reason, how the Law is. I agree, if a Man Is indicted and tried for killing
another, he shall not be admitted to say, B. did it by himself, but I think he
may be a good Witness to prove that he and B. did it, that is to say, he shall
not give any Evidence against another, which tends to acquit himself, as well
as accuse another; but I think he may give Evidence which accuses another of
the same Crime whereof he is indicted, it it does not tend to vacquit himself.

For is agreed of all hands, that being guilty of the same Crime does not
disable a Witness, for then Widdrington and several Persons in the Lord
Russel's Plot, as it was called, had not been good Witnesses; in the next
place, the Circumstances of an Indictment against the Witnesses, for the same
thing he testifies against another, does not disable him; Widdrington was
indicted for the same things, of which he gave Evidence against several others,
a^ his Accomplices in Robberies; nay, the Law has given somewhat more Credit to
the Evidence of a Person indicted, as a Witness of the same thing against
others, than it does to a Person not indicted, as in the Case of an Approver,
which as Stamford says, was a Person in Prison (not at large) for the Fact for
which he was indicted, arraigned upon an Indictment, or an Appeal of Felony,
which before a Coroner assigned by the Court, confesses himself guilty of the
Felony, of which he is indicted, and not of any other, and confesses other
Persons, naming them as Co-adjutors with him, in committing the Crime of which
he is indicted, and not of any other Crime, so much Credit shall be given to
that Confession, that Process shall be made out against the Person peached,
who, it taken, shall be arraigned on that Approvement, as if an Indictment by a
Grand Jury had been found against him, and if the Law gives so much Credit to
an Approver, I think no Person can show me a Reason, why a Person indicted is
not a good Witness against another for the same Crime.

It is true, Stamford says, if the King gives an Approver a Pardon, he is a
good Witness; which implies, that otherwise he is not; but it must be
considered, that the reason of that, is, that an Approver being indicted, as he
always is, and confessing the Indictment, is convicted, and a Person convicted
of Felony, cannot be a Witness till pardoned; but it will be no Argument why
Stern or Borosky had not been good Witnesses against the Count, before they
were convicted; and it was a like piece of Justice, that whereas the Count was
the most guilty, he was acquitted. Wrats being the next greatest Offender, was
honorably interred, and Stern and the Polander, which were the least Offenders
in that Matter, were hanged in Chains.

It was somewhat like the New England Law, remembered by Hudibras, of hanging an
useless innocent Weaver, for an useful guilty Cobbler.

REMARKS ON Mr. Cornish's TRIAL.
THere yet remains two Persons Prosecutions to speak of, the one was Mr.
Cornish, who was taken the -- of October 1685. and was arraigne on an
Indictment of High Treason the Monday after, for conspiring to kill the late
King Charles the Second, and knowing James Duke of Monmouth, William Russel
Esquire; and Sir Thomas Armstrong to be Rebels and Traitors, promised to be
assisting to them in their Treasons; to which he pleaded not Guilty; he desired
to put off his Trial, because he had no notice till the Saturday before at
twelve a Clock, and he could get no Friend to come to him till eight a Clock at
Night, and then he was permitted to speak with no body, but in the presence of
the Jailer; he had been allowed no Pen, Ink, or Paper; he was told by the Court
he ought not to have it, without Leave given on a Petition preferred by him,
and that he was taken Teusday before, which to that time was almost a Week; he
said his Children had petitioned the King the Night before to put off his
Trial, and it was referred to the Judges, he did not know whether he was
committed for High Treason against the then present, or the former King, and he
had a material Witness an hundred an forty Miles off, but was told by the
Court, they had no Power to put off his Trial; it is true, they said the Lord
Russel's Trial was put off to the Afternoon, (which was not true) but that was
a Favor, which could not be challenged by another person as a Right; he
complained he had not a Copy of the Panel, but was answered it was not his
Right to have it; then the Attorney said he had not deserved so well of the
Government, as to have his Trial delayed, and therefore he was presently tried.

Rumsey swore, that about the latter end of October, or beginning of November,
the Earl of Shaftsbury desired him to go to Mr. Sheppard's House, where was a
Meeting of the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Russel, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong,
Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Sheppard; he came late, and they were just on going away;
he delivered his Message, and they told him that Mr. Trenchard had disappointed
them; he had not been there above a quarter of an hour, but Mr. Sheppard was
called down, and brought up Mr. Cornish, and told them Mr. Cornish was come,
who came into the Room, and excused his not coming sooner, and that he could
not stay, for he was to meet about the Charter, whereupon Mr. Ferguson opened
his Bosom, and under his Stomacher pulled out a Paper, they told Mr. Cornish
they had had it read, and desired to read it to him; Mr. Ferguson read it, Mr.
Sheppard held the Candle while it was reading, and afterward they asked Mr.
Cornish how he liked it, who said, he liked it very well, he remembered two
Points in it very well; the one was for Liberty of Conscience, the other was,
that all who would assist in that Insurrection, which had Church or Kings-Lands
in the late War, should have them restored to them; he did not hear all the
Paper, and observed only these two Points, it was a Declaration on a Rising,
and when the Rising was to have been, it was to have been dispersed abroad;
there was a Rising intended at that time, and Mr. Cornish said, he liked the
Declaration, and what poor Interest he had he would join with it; he had great
Dealings with Mr. Cornish, and Mr. Cornish was a very honest Man, it was out of
compassion he had not accused Mr. Cornish before.

Mr. Goodenough said there was a Design to rise in London, and for that purpose
to divide the City into twenty parts, and to raise five hundred Men out of each
part, to take the Tower, and to drive the Guards out of Town; before that
agreed on, he being by chance at Mr. Cornsh's House, said, the Law will not
defend us; some other way was to be thought on; Mr. Cornish said, he wondered
the City was so unready, and the Country so ready; Mr. Goodenough replied,
there is something thought of to be done here, but in the first place, the
Tower must be seized, where the Magazine is; Mr. Cornish paused a little, and
said, I will do what good I can or what I can, or to that purpose, he said.

He afterward met Mr. Cornish on the Exchange, who asked him how Affairs went,
and this was in Easter Term 1683. He had some Matters with Mr. Cornish about
managing the Riot, which was brought against him, Mr. Cornish, and others, he
came to Mr. Cornish's House about the Business of the Riot, and no Person was
by at the Discourse; Mr. Gospright testified for Mr. Cornish, that he opposed
Mr. Goodenough's being Undersheriff, and said he would not trust an Hair of
his Head with him, he was an ill Man, obnoxious to the Government, and had done
ill things, and he would not trust his Estate and Reputation in the Hands of
such an Undersheriff, and he believed Mr. Goodenough and Mr. Cornish were
never reconciled, Mr. Love, Mr. Jekil and Sir William Turner testified to the
same purpose; Mr. Lane spoke out of the Printed Trial, of my Lord Russel, and
said Rumsey in that Trial said he did not hear the Declaration read; for it was
read before he came, Dr. Calamy said Mr. Cornish did often come to Church and
receive the Sacrament, Mr. Sheppard said he was Subpaend d by the King, and by
Mr. Cornish the Night before, and that Mr. Cornish his Son was with him the
Afternoon of the day before, who pressed him to be at the Trial the next day,
that there were Accounts depending between him and Mr. Cornish, whereon there
was about one or two hundred Pounds due to Mr. Cornish, and Mr. Cornish's
Subpena was served first upon him: At one of those Meetings at his House, Mr.
Cornish came to speak a few words with the Duke of Monmouth or some other, he
could not be positive in that, it was so many Years ago, he did not stay above
half a quarter of an hour in the House, Sheppard came up Stairs and went out
with Mr. Cornish, and there was not one word read, nor no Paper seen while Mr.
Cornish was there, he remembered there was a Declaration read, Ferguson pulled
it out of his Sho, he could not tell whether Mr. Cornish was at his House the
Night the Declaration was read, but he was positive no Paper was read while Mr.
Cornish was there, for Mr. Cornish was not looked on to be one of the Company,
he did not know who Mr. Cornish came to speak with, when he came to Sheppard's
House, Mr. Cornish was but once at his House when the Duke of Monmouth was
there, he did not remember that Mr. Cornish was in the Company when Rumsey was
there, he said he had attended the Court from Eleven a Clock till half an hour
past three.

This being the Sum of the Evidence, given in the Trial for, and against, the
Prisoner. Let us see whether those Inferences could be made from it, as was
made by the Court and Council, and whether on the whole, and honest Jury, tho
but of little understanding, could have found him Guilty of the Treason in the
Indictment.

It is agreed of all Hands, that a petty Jury may, and must, consider the
credibility of a Witness, (tho in the Lord Shiftsbury's Case, it was said a
Grand Fury ought not so to do) and if so surely Rumsey was not a credible, tho
he was not a disabled, Witness, no more than a Man, who owns himself to be a
Man of Falsehood, a profligate Wretch, and perjured by his own Confession, tho
not Convicted of it; he had notoriously confessed himself Guilty of
High Treason, and of being in the Design of an intended barbarous Murder, he
had sworn in the Lord Russel's Trial, he had named all the Persons at the
Meeting, he spoke of, of which Mr. Cornish was none, and being taxt in this
Trial with it, he excuses his Perjury with Compassion to the Prisoner, which
was mean, foolish and contradictory; he Perjured himself to save the Prisoner,
and then swore Truth to Hang him, he had not presence of mind enough to excuse
himself in the manner, a Witness in the Lord Russel's Trial, did, that his God,
his King and his Country, put him unwillingly to Act that Part, besides that
in the Lord Russel's Trial, Rumsey swore he was not at the reading the
Declaration, and contradicted Sheppard, who swore he thought he was there.

But that passage was proved only by a Witness, who had read it in the Trial,
which I confess in strictness of Law is not Evidence (...) if the Witness had
said he heard Rumsey swear so at the (...) Russels, Trial, even that had not
been Evidence, unless a Record of that Trial had been produced in Court, which
was not done; but all those things being but mere circumstances, show the
injustice of Speeding his Trial, and denying him Council: Would not any Council
have told him that in strictness of Law, a Passage in a Printed Trial was not
Evidence, and was it not easy for him to have got a Witness to have said that
he had heard Rumsey swear so at that Trial, were not all the Judges which sat
upon him, and all the Kings Council which were against him, present at the Lord
Russels Trial, and perfectly remembered what Rumsey then swore, as to the
Pretended Declaration, and might he not have Subpaena'd them to have testified
that Matter? Nay, was it not their Duty, to have done it even without a
Subpaena?

To say it was against the King, and therefore they could not do it, or they
were in the Commission to try him, and therefore they could not do it, is
neither Law nor Reason, every Man knows that a Judge in a Civil Matter Tried
before him, and a Council even against his Client has been enfore't to give
Evidence (provided it be not of a Secret communicated to him, by his Client)
for in that particular, a Judge ceases to be a Judge, and is a Witness; of
whose Evidence the Jury are the Judges, tho he after reassume his Authority,
and is afterward a Judge of the Juries Verdict.

A Judge may Sue, and must be Sued, in his Court, but in that Case he ceases to
be a Judge and is a Suitor, though he re-assumes his Authority in all other
matters, and if it be so in Civil matters, let any Man show me a reason why the
Law is not so in Criminal matters, there is no express Law against it, and it
will be absurd in reason to say the Law is not so; for at that rate the King
may put any witness, he knows the Prisoner intends to produce for himself, into
the Commission for Trying him, and so deprive the Prisoner of the benefit of
his Evidence as in this Case; Sheppard whose Evidence ought to have been of
great, (as it shall be shown,) tho it was not of any, Avail to the Prisoner,
might have been put into the Commission, to have Tried Mr. Cornish, for he was
as much qualified for it, as Sir James Smith then Lord Mayor, or any Judge upon
the Bench, and if they might have been witnesses for the Prisoner, if
Subpaena'd, they might have been witnesses for him, even without asking; and it
was a duty incumbent on them, though not as Judges yet as Christian Men so to
be.

Humanity commands the Discovery of Truths, which prevent the shedding Innocent
Blood, and Christianity commands a Man to do as he would be done by. I think
the question need not be asked what they would have had done, if it had been
their Case.

The reason that all matters of Law are, or ought to be Transacted publicly,
is, that any Person unconcerned as well as concerned, may as amicus curiae,
inform the Court better, if he thinks they are in an error, that Justice may be
done, and the reason that all Trials are public, is, that any Person may
inform in point of Fact, though not Subpaena'd, that Truth may be discovered in
Civil as well as Criminal matters.

There is an invitation to all Persons, who can inform the Court, concerning
the matter to be tried to come into Court, and they shall be heard. It is true
if the Judges or any Person had testified what Rumsey had said at my Lord
Russel's Trial, it had not been Evidence without the record of the Trial, and
it is as true that neither the Record, nor a true Copy of it could have been
procured between Mr. Cornish's Commitment, if it were on Friday, (as I have
heard it was) though the Court said, it was on Tuesday, much less between the
notice of his Trial, which was Saturday-noon, and the time of his Trial, which
was Monday-morning.

But then what Justice was there in speeding his Trial, so as to deprive him of
the Circumstances of his defense, for that was but a Circumstance, and not an
essential matter, and what account can be given why the Court when they were
well satisfied, that it was in the Prisoners Power to procure such a witness,
and such a record, did not stay till he did it; or if it would be too long in
doing why should they not have put off the Trial for that time, and give the
Prisoner a convenient time to do it.

The first, in Civil matters has been, frequently done, when a Deed or Witness
has been wanting, if it could be done in a convenient time, and the putting
off a Trial before it came on, though after it came on they have not done it,
because there is no great mischief in that, for either Party has Power to
bring it about again, but not so in Capital matters, and therefore Jurys in
Capital matters have been frequently discharged, after sworn, where the
Evidence has been defective.

It is true my Lord Coke says that a Jury once charged with a Prisoner, cannot
be discharged but must give their Verdict, but it is as true that he says so in
Favor of the Prisoner, that when the Evidence against him appears defective,
he shall not be continued a Prisoner till more Evidence can be found, or
procured against him, though the Practice of late days has been quite
contrary, viz. to discharge the Jury where the Evidence against the Prisoner
has been defective, but enforce them to give a Verdict, where the Prisoner's
defense has been defective, though to their knowledge if he had longer time to
do it, he had been able to produce the witnesses who could clear him, but by
what Law or reason I am to seek, yet I confess, if Rumsey's owning his Perjury
in the Lord Russels Trial, in the very point sworn against the Prisoner, and so
frivelously excusing it would not discredit him; I know not that any Record,
Witness, or Evidence would have availed Mr. Cornish.

And add to Rumsey's contradicting himself, that Sheppard, who never
contradicted himself, and had been a witness in both Trials agrees, that what
Rumsey had sworn in my Lord Russels Trial, as to Mr. Cornish's not being there,
was true.

But admitting Rumsey had never perjured himself but was of equal credit with
Sheppard, yet when they contradicted each other in a point, which carried no
probability or improbability with it in a Capital matter, the Jury ought to
believe in favorem vita; for it makes the matter at least doubtful, and
therefore the Jury ought to have acquitted the Prisoner, for a reason the Law,
and which was given in Coll. Sydneys Trial (tho shewishly) by the Court, viz.
that it is better that 20 Nocents should escape than one Innocent sufferer.

But to pass from the credibility of the witness to the matter of his Evidence,
this was the second time that this sort of Evidence in any Case Criminal or
Civil, was permitted to be given in Evidence, and there is the same exceptions
to it, as are above assigned to the Evidence of Sheppard, as to the Declaration
in my Lord Russel's Trial, if a true Copy of part of a Deed or Writing was
never yet permitted to be given in Evidence, much less has or ought the
purport of part of a writing be given in Evidence, especially when such a
reason is given, why the vvitness remembered but part of it, as is given by
Sheppard in my Lord Russel's Trial, and Rumsey in this Trial, they did not hear
all the Paper read.

And surely Goodenough could no way fortify Rumsey's Evidence, being clearly
of another matter, and that so very uncertain that no heed ought to have been
given to it, when Goodenough told Mr. Cornish something ought to be done in the
City, but in the first place the Tower ought to be seized, to which he
ansvvered he would do what he could, or what good he could, may as well
relate to Goodenoughs precedent discourse, where he complains, that the Law
would not defend them, though Innocent as well as to the seizing the Tovver,
and if they should refer to the last, yet they may well enough be interpreted,
that he would do what he could, or what good he could, to prevent the seizing
the Tower, and if they are capable of two Senses they ought to be interpreted
in the best for the Prisoner.

Besides the words are spoken not as a thing designed, but as a matter without
which all other matters were in vain, and might be mere matter of discourse,
as was that between Blague and Mate Lee about taking the Tower, and if there
was such a Design a Foot, it does not appear, that Mr. Cornish was ever
acquainted with it; the same may be said as to what he asked Goodenough, when
he asked how Matters went, may not those words well enough be applied to the
business of the Riot, Goodenough managed for Mr. Cornish and others, and if
what Goodenough said was Evidence of a Design of Seizing the Tower, that as
well as the Treason against the Guards were Treasons by the Act of the late
King, and not by the 25th of Edward the Third, if it be true Doctrine, which
was laid down in the Charge to the Earl of Shaftsbury's Grand Jury, and if so,
it ought to have been Prosecuted for it, within six Months, and Indicted within
three Months if the Doctrine in Colledge's Trial be true, and yet this Design,
if true, was in Easter Term 1683. and the Prosecution not till October 1685.

There was yet one piece of Evidence urged against him, that by his own
Witness, Sheppard, who positively testified for him as to the main, yet in a
Circumstance seemed to testify against him, which was Mr. Cornish's being as
his House, when the Duke of Monmouth, and the rest were there, when the
Declaration was read, and upon that piece of Evidence, as if it had
contradicted what Mr. Cornish said before, there was mighty Triumph, whereas
the most that could have been made of it was that M. Cornish in part of his
defense was Guilty of an Untruth, and even that was not so in Fact; for being
charged to have been at Sheppard's the Night the Declaration was read, he
answered he was never at a Consult in his Life, he never was at Sheppard's in
any Consult, he never was there with my Lord Russel, as he remembered; he had
been at Sheppard's several times, but never liked Ferguson for his Morals, and
therefore never liked to be in his company, and he did not know, but that he
might enquire for the Duke of Monmouth in other Places, and this is all Mr.
Cornish says of that matter.

Sheppard says, Mr. Cornish came into his House at one of the Meetings to speak
with the Duke of Monmouth or some other, he could not be positive in that, it
was so many Years ago, and did not stay half a quarter of an hour, he could not
say it was the night the Declaration was read; he did not know, whether Mr.
Cornish came to speak with the Duke of Monmouth or not; he could not remember,
whether Mr. Cornish was there in company, when Rumsey was there; there were not
above three Persons there when Mr. Cornish came, which was the Duke of
Monmouth, Mr. Eerguson, and he could not tell, whether the other was the Lord
Russel, or the Lord Gray.

Now it would be hard to find out the contradiction between Mr. Cornish's
Sayings and Sheppard's Evidence; both agree that Mr. Cornish has been often at
Sheppards House, and neither denies or affirms that he was, or was not there
the Night the Declaration was read, for a good Reason, which was that Mr.
Cornish knew nothing of it, and Sheppard knew not which of the Nights he was
there, Mr. Cornish said he was not there with my Lord Russel, as he remembered,
and Sheppard does not affirm he was there with the Lord Russel; Sheppard says
he was, there, when the Duke of Monmouth was there, and Mr. Cornish does not
say, that he was not there with the Duke of Monmouth, Sheppard said, he spoke
to the Duke of Monmouth, or some other Person, but he thought it was the Duke
of Monmouth, which is no direct Affirmation that he spoke to the Duke; and Mr.
Cornish does not say, he did not speak to the Duke of Monmouth; so that if the
Account of the Trial, set out by the Authority of, and signed by, Tho: Johnes
be true, I cannot see any manner of contradiction between Mr. Cornish and
Sheppard: And therefore, as the Court and the King's Council did infer, that
Sheppard's Evidence, who positively denies the Truth of Rumsey's Evidence, was
so far from invalidating, that it corroborated Rumsey's Evidence, and cleared
the thing, which was before somewhat dark, beyond all manner of contradiction,
is a piece of effrontery: but admitting Sheppard had said Mr. Cornish was at
his house the night the Declaration was read, and had contradicted Mr.
Cornish, is it a necessary consequence, that he heard the Declaration read, and
promised his assistance to it? which must be the inference, if it must support
Rumsey's Evidence.

If it be not a necessary Consequent, but a probable one, that ought not to
weigh with a Jury, to convict a Person of a capital Crime, especially not of
Treason, the Statute of Edw. the 3d. says probably Convict, that is says my
Lord Coke, convicted upon direct and manifest Proof, not upon probable
Conjectural Presumptions, or Inferences, or Strains of Wit^: And to say truth,
when Verdicts have been given on such Evidence, they have been often faulty.

To give some Instances of many, it is remembered in our time, where Persons
were convicted of the Murder of a Person absent, but not dead, barely by
Inferences upon the Evidence of foolish Words and Actions; but the Judge before
whom it was tried, was so unsatisfied in the Matter, because the Body of the
Person supposed to be murdered was not to be found, that he reprieved the
Persons condemned, yet in a Circuit afterward, a certain unwary Judge, without
inquiring into the Reasons of the Reprieve, ordered Execution, and the Persons
to be hanged in Chains, which was done accordingly, and afterward, to his
Reprach, the Persons supposed to be murdered appeared alive.

My Lord Coke relates a like Story in his Time, of an Uncle, who beat his Neice
which had an Estate, which on her Death would descend to him, the Girl was
heard to cry, good Uncle do not kill me, after which she ran a way, and
concealed her self some few miles from London; the Girl being missing, and the
Neighbors remembering the Cry of the Girl, and tacking it to the Probability
that the Uncle might be induced, for his Advantage, to murder his Neice,
apprehends him, and he was indicted for it at the Sessions, and the Judges
being unsatisfied in the Evidence, by reason the Body of the supposed murdered
Girl did not appear; the Uncle saying that she was run away, they gave him time
to the next Sessions to find her out, which he being not able to do, thought to
defend himself by producing another Girl very like his own Neice, which he did
accordingly; and being detected, it increased the Suspicion, and by Inferences
from all those Circumstances, he was convicted, and afterward executed.

Some years after which, the Girl appeared, and claimed her Estate, and
therefore it is a most dangerous and unwarrantable thing, for a Jury, in
capital Matters, especially in Treason, to convict a Person upon the Evidence
of Probabilities.

As the Evidence in this Case against the Prisoner was weaker than in any of
the precedent Cases, so the Usage of the Prisoner was more rigorous than in any
of them; in all the other Case, the Prisoners had more Weeks allowed them to
prepare for their Trials, than this Person had Days; all the other Persons,
after Notice of Trial, were permitted to have Friends, nay, Council, freely to
come to them, and confer with them in private, without the Presence of a
Jailer, which was denied this Person; all the others, except Col. Sidney, had
soft Words given them on their Trials; but this Person was rudely handled.

How often was he snubb'd and bid hold his Tongue? How often did he beg the
Patience of the Court, to hear him and his Witnesses? and when he was heard,
how was all he said ridiculed? and if he said he was innocent, he was bid
remember my Lord Russel said so to his Death, when he said he was as innocent
as any Person in the Court, he was told, for all his Confidence few believed
him. If he said the Matter sworn against him was improbable (which has been
taken for a pretty good Topic for the Dis-belief of a Matter testified) how is
it ridiculed by Improbability, Improbability, Improbability? If he go to prove
he is an honest Man, he is told that is all Appearance. If he says he employed
Goodenough about the Riot, he is told that is a Branch of the Plot. If he call
Mr. Gospright as a Witness for him, the Witness is reproached with having helped
the Prisoner in packing Juries; if he call one to prove he received the
Sacrament, he is told, that was in order to qualify himself to be a Sheriff,
and as such his Usage before, and at the Trial, such was it afterward, to
order him to be tied when he was senten'sd, was an Indignity not used to
Persons of his Quality, a thing indeed permitted, not commanded to be used, on
boistrous Criminals, who may be suspected to do a sudden Mischief, if their
Arms were at liberty.

Of like kind was the Reproaching him with the Cheerfulness of his Countenance
at his Condemnation, and that it might be all of a Strain, his Quarters were
exposed, a Severity used to none abovementioned, but Sir Thomas Armstrong, and
in all these Trials, College made the best Defense, and perhaps Circumstances
considered, the best Defense ever made upon an Indictment of a Capital Matter,
and Mr. Cornish's was the weakest, though it signified nothing; for I believe
that none who reads his Trial, but will plainly see he was so beset, that the
Defense he, or any for him could make, would have availed him nothing, and no
Account can be given for the Proceedings against Mr. Cornish, in the above
manner, but that some of the judges, whereof three of them were then on the
Bench, had been newly come out of the West, where they had been so flusht and
hardened, that nothing seemed to them Rigorous or Cruel, and the rest seemed to
vie with them in the Practice.

REMARKS ON Mr. Bateman's TRIAL.
THE last Person, which concluded the Tragedy, was one Charles Bat man a
Chyrurgeon, his demerits were, that he had been, or at least was reputed to
have been Chyrurgeon to the Earl of Shafesbury, and one whom his Lordship had a
kindness for, and therefore according to the Cant of the Time, he was called a
Factious Fellow; and he had revived the Memory of his demerits, by attending
when Oats came from his Whipping, and Letting him Blood; whether either of
those Circumstances were true or not, I know not, but they were believed: And
therefore the 9th of December 1685. he was Indicted and Tried for High Treason.
On his Trial he seemed to be Distracted, and therefore out of abundance of
Charity, the Court appointed his Son to make his Defense for him.

The Witnesses against him were Keeling, who only spoke of a Design in general,
without mentioning Bateman to be concerned in it, Thomas Lee and Richard
Goodenough swore, at several times and places his discourse to them severally,
of seizing the Tower, City and Savoy. Baker for the Prisoner said, Lee in the
Year 1683. would have had him insinuated himself into the Prisoners company,
and discourse about State affairs, and by that he would find a way to make
Baker a great Man: upon the Evidence the Prisoner was found guilty. Against
Goodenough's Evidence, there is only this to be said, that he was pardoned but
so far only, as to qualify him to be a Witness, though not a very credible
one, not only the Guilt sticking to him, but even the Punishment of what he had
then lately done, hanging over his head, and what was said for some time, of
all the Witnesses for the King, at that time, and for some time before, was
true, they hunted like Cormorants with Halters about their Necks, though even
that matter by one of the Kings Council was boasted to the Jury, as a
circumstance of more credibility; for he assured them there was not a Witness
which he produced had a Pardon, as the Witnesses in the Popish Plot had. It Is
true, in the Popish Plot, upon very good reason the Witnesses having confessed
what they pretented to know, of matters in which they had an hand, it was not
thought proper to use them as Witnesses, though they had used them as
Informers, till they were pardoned, least it might happen to be, or at least it
would have been suspected, that the terror of the Punishment of the Crimes
confessed might influence them to swear falsely to the jeopardy of other Men's
Lives, to save their own, which as the Lord Howard truly said, was the drudgery
of Swearing. But to Lee's Evidence, besides the Evidence of Baker against him,
that he would have procured Baker to have been a Witness against the Prisoner,
and enticed him with the promise of making him a great Man, and besides that it
appears in Rouse his Trial, that Rouse and he were upon the Trepan with each
other, to bring each other into the pretense of a Plot, in order to make some
advantageous discovery of it. of which Lee got the start of Rouse; the
objection which was made to his Evidence, why Lee had not accused the Prisoner
sooner, there being near three Years between the pretended disign, and the
discovery of it, was never satisfactorily answered, it was a foolish story to
say Goodenough could not be had before, and a single Testimony in High Treason
was not sufficient; every one knows, that though a single Witness is not enough
to convict a Man of High Treason, yet a single Persons Testimony is enough to
commit a Person accused, and upon Conviction on the Testimony of a single
witness, to make him a Prisoner for his life, witness Mr. Hampden and others,
besides the subjecting him to other Corporal punishments, inflicted at
discretion, witness Mr. Johnson and Oats; and in 1683. when the words were
pretended to be spoken Bateman had not been spared if accused; and though it be
a good reason for the Court to have given, why they did not proceed against the
Prisoner till that time, because there were not two Witnesses against him, yet
it was no reason for Lee, why he did not accuse the Prisoner before that time,
especially he having been several times before that time examined, not only of
what he knew, but of what Persons he knew concerned: but to say truth, Lee in
the Trial did not pretend to answer the Objection, but the Court in the manner
before endeavored to answer it for him.

The last Matter observable in this Trial, was the permitting Bateman's Son to
make his Fathers Defense, which was an extraordinary unparalleled favor, it
was the first and last time that, or any thing like it, had been done, the Lord
Russel's Lady indeed was permitted to take Notes at the Trial for her Lord; but
he only was permitted to make use of them; Fitz-Harris his Wife when she but
whispered her Husband, or but told him what Jurors he should challenge, and
what not, was severely corrected and threatened to be thrust out of Court, for
doing it in prejudice of the King. In Colledge's Trial, he was told that
Persons that advised a Prisoner in Treason, even before a Trial, were guilty of
High Misdemeanor; nay a Solicitor had been Indicted of High Treason for it, and
therefore nothing can excuse the allowing the Prisoner Council in matter of
Fact, as was done in this Case (it is not material, whether the Son was a
Barister at Law or not) but the weakness of the Prisoner, who to all appearance
was moped Mad.

But the Court by excusing their Favor upon that account incurred a worse
censure; for nothing is more certain in Law, than that a Person who falls Mad
after a Crime supposed to be committed, shall not be tried for it; and if he
fall Mad after Judgment, he shall not be executed, though I do not think the
reason given for the Law in that point will maintain it, which is that the end
of Punishment is the striking a Terror into others, but the Execution of a
Madman had not that effect; which is not true, for the Terror to the living is
equal, whether the Person be Mad or in his Senses, and that is the reason of
breaking the Person executed for Treason, and exposing his Quarters, which is
done rather to deterr the living, than for punishing the dead; but the true
reason of the Law, I think to be this, a Person of non sana memoria, and a
Lunatic during his Lunacy, is by an Act of God (for so it is called, though
the means may be humane, be it violent, as hard imprisonment, Terror of death,
or natural, as sickness) disabled to make his just defense, there may be
circumstances lying in his private knowledge, which would prove his innocence,
of which he can have no advantage, because not known to the Persons, who shall
take upon them his Defense, and that is the reason many Civil actions die with
the Persons against whom they lay in their Life times, and that is the reason
why in Criminal matters, Persons by ordinary course of Law, cannot be convicted
after their deaths.

For in all civil Actions, there is as much reason for the Person injured, to
have satisfaction out of the Estate of the Person who injured him, in the hands
of his Heir or Executor after his death, as there was to have it out of the
Estate of the Injurer in his own hands in his Life time, and there is as much
reason that the Heir or Executor of a Person who has committed a Crime, which
by Law would have forfeited his Estate, if in his Life time he had been
attainted of the same, should forfeit the Estates they claim from him, as if
the had been attainted in his Life time, which had prevented the said Estates
vesting in them, and it has been sometimes practiced, where the Crimes of the
Persons deceased have been notorious, and without any doubt, as was the Case of
several Persons mentioned in the Act of Pains and Penalties, which Act had
example from many other Acts of Parliament in other Reigns, where the Persons
were dead before Punishment overtook them.

And though of late years it has been pretended, that the Kings safety depends
upon the speedy Trial and Execution of a Person guilty of High Treason, yet
that was never thought so heretofore, nor in Truth in it self is so; for it is
plain in reason as well as experience, that what is said of Witches is true, of
all Malefactors when once they are in Custody, their power of doing mischief
ceases.

The King is therefore no otherwise benefited by the destruction of his
Subjects than that his Example deters others from committing the like Crimes,
and there being so many to be made Examples of, besides those on whom the
misfortunes of Madness falls, it is inconsistent with humanity to make Examples
of them; it is inconsistent with Religion, as being against Christian charity,
to send a great Offender quick, as it is styled, into another World, when he is
not of a capacity to fit himself for it; but what ever the Reason of the Law
is, it is plain, the Law is so, and for remedying it in High Treason, was the
33 of Henry the Eighth made; whereby is is Enacted, that if a Man fall Mad
after he has committed High Treason, he shall notwithstanding be tried in his
abscence, and if a Man fall Mad after he is attainted of High Treason, he shall
notwithstanding be Executed, which Statute extending only to High Treason, the
Law continued, and yet is as it was at Common Law in all other Capital Matters,
and even that Statute was called a Crued and Inhuman Law, and therefore lived
not long, for is was aftenwards Repealed, so that the Law as to this matter,
when this man was tried and executed, was as it was at Common Law, and
therefore if he was of non sana Memoria, he ought not to have been tried, much
less executed. I know it will be objected, that if this matter of non sana
Memoria should be permitted, to put off a Trial or stay Execution, all
Malefactors will pretend to be so, but I say there is a great deal of
difference between pretenses and realities, and sana and non sana Memoria, has
been often tried in Capital Matters, and the Pris^ners have reaped so little
benefit by their pretenses, it being always discovered, that we rarely hear of
it, in this Case the Prisoner might have been tried as well absent as present,
according to that repealed Statute, for any advantage he did, or could, reap by
being present, and it seems very probable the Court thought him distempered,
for if he was of sane memory, his Son ought not to have been permitted to make
his Fathers defense; if he was distempered, he ought not to have been tried,
much less executed, and this Person being the last man, as far as I can
remember, or can find by the Printed Trials, which suffered for the Plot of
High Treason first set on foot by Fitz-Harris, and carried on against College,
and the other Persons herein mentioned, and the Design stopping here, I think
fit to end the Remarks in the Proceedings of all Capital Matters with him, but
I think it is fit for me to make some Apology for the thing, and for my self,
for taking on me to censure the Opinions and Actions of Persons whose
Characters carried Authority with them, I confess I never thought that either
the great Seal or a Garment ever added to a Man's Sense, Learning or Honesty;
but he remained just such as to those qualities, after his preferment, as he
was before, and as to many of the Persons reflected on in these Remarks, the
censure of Coll. Sydney was true, and for the best of them, it is plain they
not only varyed from one another in their Opinions, but even from themselves in
the Judgment of the same Case, but always tending to the destruction of the
Person tried for his Life, witness the Opinion of the Court in the Challenge of
Jurors not having a Freehold, and the designing to levy War not Treason,
within the Stat. of Ed. 3. and forty other Matters, and that not only gives a
Liberty to enquire, but naturally puts one upon the Enquiry, which of the two
Opinions is right, tho it is impossible for one, not to think meanly on the
Person, who in so great a Concern, as a Man's Life, should be so rash as to
give his Opinion without consideration, or so unsteady as to give different
Opinions in the same Case; for if the Truth of a Man, who tells history
backward and forward, is justly suspected in point of Truth, so the knowledge
and sincerity of a Man, who gives different Opinions in the same Case, is
justly suspected in point of law, which together with the fulsom, but
injurious, Stuff vented for Crown-Law, which was the first Matter, which put me
on considering and writing what I have done.

And for my self, if Tully thought it a reproach to his Son, if he did not
abound with Philosophy, having heard Cratippus for the space of a whole Year,
and that at Athens, surely one who has had his Education at one of the Three
great Schools for some Years, and afterward at the University: And lastly,
Twenty five Years constant residence in an Inns of Court, and Twenty Years
Attendance at Westminster Hall, and not diverted by the usual Employs of a
Solicitor or Attorney, may be allowed without the Imputation of Confidence, to
give his Censure, upon consideration, on the extempore Judgments or Opinions of
Persons, though of greater Standing and Character than Himself.

FINIS

