THE Quaker Converted to Christianity, RE-ESTABLISHED, Upon the same, sure,
safe, and only Foundation, Jesus Christ crucified, and his Righteousness
imputed for Justification: Having yet no mind to change the sweet and easy
Yoke of CHRIST's GOSPEL, for the Old Covenant-Yoke of QUAKERISM, which he found
so burdensome and intolerable: OR, A full REPLY to a Book entitled, Rebellion
rebuked, written by John Crook and William Baily, both in the Ministry among
the QUAKERS.

Written by WILLIAM HAWORTH, a Contender for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints.

With an Account from WILLIAM DIMSDALE, the Person so frequently mentioned in
this Treatise.

Acts 13.8. But Elymas the Sorcerer withstood them, seeking to turn away the
Deputy from the Faith.

Mat. 23.13. But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for you shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in Paul's Churchyard,
Anno Dom. 1674.

AN EPISTLE TO JOHN CROOK, Wherein his EPISTLE is Answered.
JOHN CROOK,
MY first coming to Hartford was soon after some sharp and long Buffetings that
I had been exercised withal, (as my Christian Friends know.) The Lord was but
then rebuking Satan, taking the Lion off me, and delivering me, and restoring
Comfort to me, there did remain many impressions of those Buffetings upon my
Spirit, which the Lord in rich Mercy has since healed, and taken away the
smart and pain, by giving me Faith in the Blood of sprinkling; much Guilt and
Filth was left upon my Conscience contracted by that long Combat, Satan
finding so much in me to work upon; but there has been a washing, and
pardoning, and reconciling and Sanctifying since that time.

Coming to Hartford, I found many of the People called Quakers, Inhabiting
there, was glad in this respect that I might thereby have occasion to try their
Spirit, Way, and Doctrine farther, which at London and elsewhere, I had been
frequently searching into. Hereupon I refused no Converse or Society with them,
and my behavior toward them, was with Love and sweetness; insomuch that I
have in my public Preaching given offense to some of ^r bearers, in that what
was commendable in the Quakers practice, I have reckoned up and praised, at
such times as I have Preached Truths against their Opinions. My carriage was
such toward you that it was frequently reported that I was not far from you,
that I was coming to you. I was very willing to entertain discourse with any of
you, and with thee, when it was desired by some, which was effected, and it
appears thou have not forgotten it, in that thou mentionest it in this Epistle,
that it was in some freedom from Heat and Passion: That Meeting was beneficial
to us by reason of a Concession from thee at that time, viz. That the New
Creature was an higher thing than the Light within, and that you did but point
out people to the Light, in order to the New Creature. Remember this, John, of
which there are many Witnesses.

Within two days I had another discourse with thee in the Town, and I dare
appeal to all the Light thou have in thy Conscience, if there were not much
extravagant Heat that day in thy self and Friends. Thou may John to this day
hear it that some of thy own party said; that John Crook was not in a right
Spirit that day: Pray forget not John, what a good and wholesome Truth thou
opposedst that day: viz. the everlastingness of the Covenant of Grace, saying,
that David was out of Covenant when under his Temptation; This thou know
Arminius is for, and all the Jesuits, viz. a Total falling from Grace. In that
dispute I dare not say I had no itch after applause or vain Glory stirring in
me, nor any anger, but I can say through Grace my main design was for the
defense of the Truth, for the prevention of errors. Not long after this, God's
providence ordered a Prison for me, where there were many of thy Brethren,
forty or fifty, some of them were Teachers, and had been for some considerable
time. Here I had a fair opportunity of making inquiry and informing my self,
whether the things I had heard reported of this people were true as to their
Opinions, and whether I had such cause to be so jealous of them as I was,
having discoursed them before, the Lord keeping up this Principle still in me,
that I would follow Truth in whomsoever I found it. Here many days did I engage
in debates with them touching many great things in Religion: viz. Touching
Original Sin: against this, that any such thing was upon Children when they
come into the World, they did contend, viz. Christopher Tailor, Lewis Lacondy
with others of them: The last named, asserted, that a Child when born is as
innocent as Adam in Paradise was before he sinned: Christopher Tailor disputed
very much against the Resurrection of the Body with me. This same Christopher
called the Doctrine of Election a Devilish damnable and Blasphemous Doctrine.
How often did I be^ this Man repeat this in his Preachings, do this and Live,
which is the voit of the Law in opposition to the Gospel, Romans 10. Thomas Bur
of Ware, did at that time acknowledge in my Chamber, that be apprehended
nothing in the point of Justification that we talked of. These are Teachers in
your Israel. And how many times have I heard this Man run in his speaking among
the people, into most strange, uncouth, dark, unintelligible nonsensical
Allegories upon the Scriptures! The Lord lay not this to some of your Charge,
that are greatly guilty of a dreadful abuse of the Holy Scripture this way: and
you do still up and down the Countries confound the poor people, that must
stand and wonder at that which neither they nor the Teachers themselves
understand. Thomas Moss of Balwick did argue this with me so long that I durst
talk no longer, lest I should have been an occasion of his Blaspheming, viz.
That Christ could not be born of the Virgin Mary, in case she was a Sinner,
without sin.

Thus was I trained up with them eleven Months, heard their Prayers made many a
time, and was glad to hear them in the seeming fervency and Zeal; but these
Prayers were not to me, like the Prayers of the Holy Men of God, Ezra, Daniel,
etc. Not with Confessions, neither did I ever ^ear such an expression as this
which Daniel bad, viz. For the Lord's sake. I could not discern that any use of
Faith was made of Jesus as a Mediator now without, while the Spirit did seem to
stir up sighs within. I understand withal this to be one of the firstborn of
your errors (which Thomas Bur would not deny,) viz. that every one of your
Teachers is equal to the Prophets and Apostles, and so their writings equal
with the Scripture: I told Christopher Tailor what William Penn said to a
friend of mine, viz. that George Fox was as good a Prophet as Isaiah; and he
did affirm it likewise. I can truly say, so much ignorance and confidence did I
find amongst this people there, and so much error and darkness, and withal so
much of a worldly Spirit in their Converse together, that had I had stronger
inclinations to them than thou think I had, I should have been alienated,
and at a greater distance from them: my soul was grieved many a time, by
hearing what I did; and I call the Lord to witness, that I wrong them not, but
speak the Truth. Since this J. Bolton made a disturbance in our Meeting, and
discoursing with him in the hearing of many, he questioned my attributing an
humane Nature to Christ, be there would grant Christ to appear in a Body, and
that was all, he would not answer to me, asking him whether that Body of his
(taking hold of his hand) rose again. Lately from Green, a Teacher among you, I
could have no answer, where be believed the Man Christ was, More lately in
discourse with some, That it was the Light within that was Crucified without
the Gates of Jerusalem, That the Mediator was in Heaven, but that Heaven was
any where out of him: where the Mediator was, I could not get him to Answer:
this was Thomas Prior of Stanstead, and his Wife would not tell me whether she
worshipped Christ within, or Christ without. I call to mind the Original of
this people in the North, I have been told by some that have seen them, that
they were extraordinarily acted by a Spirit, being some of them thrown down
upon the ground in foamings and tremblings; and then would speak something in a
strange way. I have been told by one that was in the Room at Cambridge at the
first Rise of them, how in a Chamber where he was, every thing in the Room,
Table, Bedstead, Stools, etc. and every person there (being many) trembled and
shook, himself excepted. I my self did see Ann Blackling acted more than
ordinarlily, who now is no Quaker (as I suppose thou know). Now be not angry
if for my own souls sake, I enquire whether this Spirit be the same Spirit
wherewith all the Holy Men of God were acted, the Spirit of Jesus Christ the
son, that is in all Christ's people, and how should I know but by examining the
fruits of it. I can never forget James Naylor, whom I saw suffer, and what was
the fruit of that Spirit by which he was acted; was he not strangely lifted up
in Pride, to make himself the Messiah, and take divine worship to himself? John
Bolton told me that he stood by and saw three Women one after another fall down
and worship him, and one of them in her Bowings, had these words, viz. thy Name
is no more James, but, I am. And James Naylor told John Bolton, that if he
worshipped his Body, he should refuse it, but if that within, he would accept
it: now by what Spirit was this Man acted? Likewise I have called to mind all
those extravagant things that some of you have been put upon, contrary to all
the Light of Reason and Nature, beyond all the bounds of Civility and Modesty,
viz. the besmearing your naked Bodies with Dung, and in that manner going naked
into the Christian Assemblies; how some of you have been put upon Voiages
beyond Sea to Preach (as I have heard) and yet have been cut off by Death,
before you have come there. But it is more than all this to me, that this
Spirit has carried you forth most especially in Reviling and opposing the best
people in the World, the Godly in this Nation, and the faithful Ministers of
the Gospel, and what Truth is there that you in your Writings and Preachings
have not opposed at times, of which our Brethren have given a late faithful
account out of your own Brethrens Writings. Now John, blame me not if I have
been wary and watchful, least I should be possessed by a Spirit that leads to
such things as these; there is nothing more plain to me than this, that
immediately upon the entrance into your way there is in your Proselytes not
such an attending to vocal Prayer as before, nor such a diligent search of the
Holy Scriptures, nor such high thoughts of the person of Jesus, and mighty
slighting thought of his Gospel-Institutions, viz. the Supper of the Lord, etc.
By what thou say unto me in this Epistle that thou wonderest at the Fruit
brought forth after such exercises of Spirit, and such travels as thou have
seen me in, I can collect nothing but this, viz. that there is not one truly
converted and born again, but every one miscarrieth in this work, and it proves
abortive in case it does not end in Quakerism, a harsh censure John. The Law in
the hand of the Spirit has been at work in my Soul, and I have known the
killing power of it, it has slain me; but is there no life unless I turn
Quaker? nor any deliverance but a conclusion that I have licked my self whole
by some proud and ungrounded presumption? is not this enough, John, that by the
Spirit of Bondage sin has been made bitter to me, and thereupon Christ
precious? And whereas thou speak of flying, I have fled for refuge to the
Hope set before me, and that Spirit of burning that was in me, has consumed in
some measure those proud Pharisaical, self conceited thoughts that I had of my
own Righteousness. This being a great work that the Lord has to do in the
Souls of his people, which I presume if thou had known, thou would not have
been a Patron for it, and endeavor to make it stand, which thy Brother Bailey
fairly owns, page 37.

In the Epistle thou apprehendest, it was with me as with Demas, that embraced
this present World, and fell in with those large preferments that are to be
reaped amongst my Nonconforming Brethren in the Ministry: This it was that
allured me to stay, otherwise I had turned Quaker thou think. I thank thee
for thy Charity still; Love thinks no evil. Do thou think it might not have
fared better with me as to outward maintain^^ce if I had conformed? why did I
not choose that? Why, John, should tho^ be angry that my Family has a little
daily Bread? I have had it from your Brethren, viz. That we may have the milk
of the Flock, why John did not some of you roundly tempt me, as some Quakers
did a sick-Maid not long since, promising her she should be taken care of, if
she would become one of them, and be against all others? I know your care for
your Proselytes this way has been very much: And whereas thou say, that I
once spoke so respectfully of the Light and Spirit within. I do so still both
publicly and privately, and God forbid I should be an opposer of it, or an
Enemy to it: Let my Tongue first cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, let me first
be dumb, and never speak any more: but the Lord has learned me to distinguish
of things, not to confound them as thou do, which shall be more plainly shown
thee in the Answer which follows. I Believe and speak, that Light which every
Child of wrath has as he comes into this world, is not the Spirit as he is
spoke of in the New Testament, the Spirit of Regeneration, Adoption, the Spirit
of the Son; nay, whatever thou will call it, it is but Flesh, whatsoever is
born of the Flesh (i.e.) what ever Man is in his first-Birth, he is but Flesh,
John 3. and in the 1 Pet. 1. All Flesh is Grass, all called Flesh till the
New Birth of the incorruptible Seed which every Man has not; yet I have given
and will give this Light its due, and say it is from Christ, he is the Author
of it, that gave Man his Rational Soul, and created all Lights, and had not the
Lord preserved this Light, Mankind had not been, the Species would have been
extinct, and we like bruits, and hereby is Man made fit for humane Society and
Commonwealths; and through the restraining-Grace of God joined with this (for
I attribute it to that indeed chiefly, as in the case of Abimelech, Genesis 20. I
kept thee, etc. else the Light within would not have done it) Man is preserved
from many gross outward evils. One can distinguish between many things that are
good and evil, by this Light, but to say as thou and others do, that it is the
Spirit, Christ, Regenerating Grace, God, as thou do in thy words in this
Epistle (as I understand it), let others judge of it) calls it the Son of God,
King of Zion, applying that of the second Psalm to this Light, therefore it is
the Rule, the Life, the Blood, the Principle, such horrid Blasphemies as these,
dethroning Christ's person, turning the God-Man into the Reason, Conscience or
Soul of Man, making them all one, and God, the Spirit the same with this which
is in every Murderer, Robber, was in them, Job. 21. goes with the damned to
Hell, remains with them there, Hear ye Heavens, and give ear O Earth, and be
horribly ashamed of such Tenants as these! my Soul through the Grace of God
utterly abhors and detests them, and I am and will be a professed Enemy to them
as long as I have being in this world, and doubts not in the least but Christ
will stand by me in this his cause. Oh how does this puff up poor proud fallen
Man that there is something left in him yet that will restore him, when all the
Light he had before, could not preserve him from falling: This thou have heard
at least was the old rotten gangrene of the Pelagians pleading for Nature. O
cease John, cease perverting the right ways of God, pleading for Nature in
opposition to the Grace of God. As for the Bands which thou mentionest of
Christ the Son, spoken of in the second Psalm. and for his cords, they are
welcome to me, I embrace them, and it is my Liberty to be his Captive and
Prisoner. It Is freedom from my lusts, I have found it so, and do. But no false
Prophets (as thou and others, while you maintain these Doctrines) shall ever
bring me into bondage again, to the cursing Law and the works of it, looking
for Life that way. Yet do I wholly stoop to this King of Zion, Jesus Christ, as
my Lord, as he that has subdued all my Enemies virtually already, and will
actually in time, which I wait for, and has given out Rules how he will be
served and worshipped, which according to my Light I desire to be found in,
desiring this glorious King by the power of his Spirit to subdue all evil in my
Soul. But let me entreat thee, John, to use plain words when thou speak of
the works of God in the heart of Man by the Spirit, at least say no more than
what is said of it in the Holy Scriptures, and do not use to strain Scripture
and wrest it from its proper literal meaning when there is no need so to do but
the doing of it takes off from the Glory of it and the Authority of the Truth
contained in it. Here thou turnest that great Scripture in Zachary into an
Allegory, which is a Prophecy of the Messiah, coming for the comfort of his
people, and was fulfilled in the Letter which was very glorious, and bespake
him to be the true Messiah, the ground of all Comfort to his people; and he
came in this low and mean way to show his contempt of the World, who could have
commanded all the Glory of the Creation, to attend him in this Triumph and
State, and yet this he did to show forth something of his Authority and
Majesty, being really a King. Now, John, why will thou go this way to work to
use these uncouth Allegories, is it not for want of plain and substantial
knowledge in the Scriptures? Do thou not know what mischief this way of
speaking has done? The evil one has made use of this way in the World in
false Teachers, to take off from the Authority of the Scriptures. I pray God
this be not your intent in going this way: if many senses of the Scripture,
then no one sense is certain, for I have heard thee my self say this, viz. He
brought his Son out of Egypt, i.e. out of the Egyptian darkness of our hearts.
Why does not this take off from the History, as if that were nothing, as if
such a thing had never been, the Man Christ brought from that Country so called
really and truly: but as if this was the great intendment of the Holy Ghost in
it, as to the work of God upon Man's heart: now this was gross, thick darkness,
such as might be felt; why then surely there is no Light before Christ be
brought forth; and yet you call the Light Christ: John, it savours not right,
to say God brought his Son out of Egyptian darkness. That work of the Spirit in
our hearts is not God's Son, and to say God's Son is brought out of darkness,
Egyptian darkness, who was with God from Eternity, and was God, and was Light,
the Light of the world as Mediator, and so the Author of all saving Light, it
is absurd. But this is not so bad, as that which thou spakest in Sarah Whites
Chamber in London, in my hearing and the hearing of others of my friends, viz.
the only begotten Son, begotten in us. Now John, whereas thou chargest me with
Blasphemy which shall be examined, who now is guilty? thou blushest surely to
think on it, you often speak of my tenderness how hard are your hearts, that
you can hear and speak such things as these and no shame upon you, whereas at
that time I was so tender that I could not but interrupt you by my Friend. Oh!
John, how has thy Pride and Itch to be a Teacher of Allegorical Mysteries,
Transported thee to be accounted a profound Doctor. Some things thou spakest
there that were true, but Oh, what a deadly poison did tho^ throw presently
into the Pot! What the Son, only Son, begotten Son, begotten within us? them
(...) he have a beginning, and original, and so many as there are works of
Sanctification, and the Spirit must be the Father which proceeded from the
Father and the Son according to the Scriptures. Now John, who is the
Blasp^emer? Repent for this I Beseech thee that it may be forgiven thee.
Another was; Bebeaded for the Testimony of Jesus, i. e. said thou, to part
with all Carnal Wisdom and Reasonings, that is beheading. Now who would not
think John, but that thou art beheaded? And yet thou have lost all thy
u^derstanding and judgment, thus to abuse the Scriptures. Like unto thi^, is
thy applying this in Zachary, to the work of the Lord in my Conscience. I would
not submit thou say, t^ the King of Zion, but would be saved without having
him Rule in and over me, that came meek and low, Riding on that Wild Asses
Colt, on which Man never Rode; now I suppose, that thou meanest by Christ's
Riding on the Asses Col^, subduing that Wildness tha^ was in me, that no huma^e
power could do: now it would be very difficult for thee to hold on the
Allegory, and tell us, if the wild Nature (...) was the Asses Colt, what was
the Ass that this was the Fool of, for (...) are mentioned in Matthew: What was
the Village from whence this (...) came, and what is to be denoted by the
owner; what were those Cloths that were spread upon the Asses, and in the way,
and what those Branches, and what by those that cried Hosanna, what those
Sto^es tha^ would cry bu^ in ease the Disciples had held their tong^e, and what
that Jerusalem (...) which Christ Rode. All these must be distinct things in
Man.

I will give thee a taste of this way of Allegorizing the Scripture from (...)
Author that writ against thy Brethren, Crellius and S^cinus, who (...) wont
thus to interpret Scripture, see hereby how easy it is, to the meak (...)
taking, how dangerous. -- When Moses delivers to us the History of Creation,
why may we not understand, In the beginning, for the beginning of the Mosaical
Dispensation: God Created the Heavens and the Earth i. e. erected the Jewish
Polity: by new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness etc. spoke
of in the Epistle of Peter is meant a new State of things under the Gospel: And
the Earth was without Form, and void, and Darkness was upon the face of the
Deep i. e. The World was in a State of Darkness and Ignorance before the Law of
Moses, v. 3. God said ^et there be Light and v. 5. And God called the Light
Day, this was the first tendencies to the Doctrine of Moses, v. 16. God made
two great Lights, the greater Light to Rule the Day, the lesser (...) the
Night, i.e. This Law which at first was divided and scattered, was united
afterward in one great Body of Laws, which was called the Sun, because it was
the great director of the Jewish Nation, and therefore said to rule the Day,
that people that had Light; the less considerable Laws of other Nations are the
Moon, to govern those that were yet under the Night of ignorance, v. 6. God
said, let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, i. e. The Jewish
State was to be erected in the midst of a great deal of trouble: Waters are
often taken for troubles and afflictions. v. 9. Let dry Land appear, (the
Waters being gathered together,) i.e. The Jewish State was to be settled after
all these troubles: but more particularly, this was to done after the passage
through the Sea, v. 12. And the Earth brought forth Grass and herbs, etc. i. e.
There was a great increase of the people, some of the meaner sort, those are
called Herbs and Fruits: But v. 24. The Earth brought forth the Living-Creature
(i. e.) These were an higher sort and Rank of people, that were to live upon
the other and trample upon them: that there were several days in the Creation
of making things one after another, which denotes that the increase of the
Church was not all at once, but by Steps and degrees. By Gods making the Man
and the Woman, and then placing them in Paradise, is meant the flourishing of
the Jewish State and Church after all this, and an enjoying rest and pleasure.
The Church in the Re^^lation is set forth by a Woman, and a perfect Man
signifies an high degree of perfection; so it is the Church of the Jews being
brought up to an high degree of perfection. There was a forbidden Tree that was
not to be ^aten of, i. e. The customs of other Nations, their eating was the
Jewish Church falling into those Customs. Their being turned out of Paradise,
was the loss of their own Country, the Curse was the loss of their settlement
and State, and being in slavery and captivity to other Nations.

This may help thee as a pattern to turn this and other Scriptures into an
(...) or Metaphor applying them to the Light within and your Quakers, as this
to the Law of Moses and the Jews, which is already your way if you could but
hit thus happily upon it.

Thou speak of thy tenderness to me in the conference, Apostle-like now
(...) comes with a Rod, well, I must be thankful to thee that thou did not
(...) Chastise me then, Thou had I perceive an high Spirit of discerning in
thee, and I know (thou say) the good and honesty in thee answered to my
Love, etc. Thy Love must either be very little, and so the good and honesty
very little that answered, or else it was not good and honesty of the right
kind; or else thy discerning eyes very dim, if thou had not quite lost the
faculty; for in two days time all this good and honesty was gone, See what thou
say, viz. Until the next discourse which was within two days, then nothing
but heat and passion, and eying reputation: this is like thy Brother J. Bolton
in London, that told me that I had a double portion of the Light, a fortnight
after comes to Hartford, and tells me when I opposed his Error^ that I had not
one dram of the Spirit. Such is thy discerning Faculty and I thank thee in the
close now that thou have reckoned me up among the wicked ones, in the latter
days in Daniel spoke of, viz. to grow worse and worse, and how proves thou it?
Because of my opposition to the Quakers, and likewise, my deportment shows it,
having turned my wonted Gravity into a Light, Vain, etc. Lofty, Confident and
Presumptuous Carriage. Had I been told so much by my Christian Friends whom I
converse with, it had concerned me much, whom I have asked since this Epistle
came forth, whether such a carriage is used by me, and I do still appeal to
them, and a^ willing to fall under any just reproof for this thing: A Vain,
Light, Lofty, Presumptuous Carriage, being unbecoming the Ministry. But surely
thou judge the Deportment and Carriage of all the Godly in the Nation to be
Light, Vain, Confident and Lofty, because they are not found in those mimied
punctilio's of denying the Hat in Salutation, and giving the Hand which the
Quakers use: if this Turkish mode which you have taken up of late, in not
stirring the Turbant be the thing, and that affected demureness, I am then
Guilty, my Light being not for it. Be not angry John, if Christ having made me
free, and restoring Comfort to my Spirit more of late the^ formerly, the Spirit
of Adoption enlarging my Soul; I express it in my Carriage in a more cheerful
Gravity, walking as one that does Believe in Christ, whom be has delivered
from Mount Sinai, to Mount Zion. We are not Children of Hagar the Bondwoman,
but of Sarah, not Ishmaels, but Isaac's, whose name is laughter! I am to
manifest my rejoicing in Christ, and that I have received not the Spirit of
Fear and Bondage, but of power Love and a sound mind. And this is for the
honor of my Lord, and his Doctrine. Thou do but bewray in this the same
Spirit of the Pharisees, who were angry with Christ, that be kept Company with
Publicans and Sinners, and because he came eating and drinking, they called him
a ^lutton, and Wine-Bibber. I place not my Christian Religion John, in denying
the Civil salute of the Hat, or any Courteous behavior toward my Neighbor,
whereby I expr^ss my Love and Friendship as you do, making if essential to your
way, and a signal Character of your Proselytes as appears by thy Brother
Baylies Answer.

But I have well nigh done rejoicing, that the little Book we writ, has
ext^rted from thee some good words of Confession, which how thou understandest
them shall be scanned afterward, and how thou agrees with thy Brethren thou
shall see when things are compared. It Is well if the Body at Devonshire-House,
and your Metropolitan George Fox, approve of this Confession: Though thou art
infallible John, yet thy infallibility must vail and strike Sail to the
infallibilty of the Body; If thou Believe as thou speak in some things,
why did thou rent from Christians, if thou would return John, it would be
better with thee than it is now: If thou understandest some Truths as thou
writest them, and all of you assent, never were people Guilty of such
uncharitableness as you in your Railings against all other sorts, of separation
and division in keeping your Meetings distinct, not in the least owning our
Worship; as appears by your irreverent Behaviors, when you come into our
Meetings: But I am greatly jealous of thee, and not without ground, having
conversed with you so long, and knowing how frequently you are found in
Jesuitical equivocations, and mental reservations, that thou have but covered
Poison in gilded words, and wrapped thy self in a Cloud: False Prophets must
come in Sheeps Clothing, else no deceiving.

It was a Golden Cup that Antichrists Poison was in. I pray God I may find it
otherwise. Thy Brother Penn is plain and honest downright in his assertions,
against Christ and the Scriptures, and satisfaction by the Death of Christ,
etc. In the close, let me say that I am thoroughly satisfied, that I am
defending the noblest Cause under Heaven, and call God, Men and Angels to
Witness: That if I were convinced you were in the Truth, I would not for a
Million of Worlds in the least oppose you. Lately at Hartford Bigg, and Martin,
confessed that our Principles were directly contrary: Let it then be tried who
is in the Truth, by the Holy Scriptures: and the Lord be Judge betwixt you and
us in this Matter I can heartily say appealing to him that searches the hearts
and tries the Reins, that as you are my Countrymen you are dear to me, and I
could wish my self deprived for some time of the Love of the Saints, (which is
highly valued by me) and no pains or travel of Body or Soul, Night or Day,
should seem great to me, to reduce any of you from that dreadful ^postacy,
which you are fallen into, through the cunning Craftiness of some Deceivers.
There is a Woe upon you, I am satisfied, because that Offenses have been given
by some Carnal Gospellers, and Libertines in our day, that have turned God's
blessed Grace into wantonness, and have not walked worthy of this Glorious
Doctrine. I have heard some of your way that lately have acknowledged this,
viz, no reason in Doctrine but in Practice, for your departure. Now blessed are
those that are not offended in Christ: A (...) to them that stumble (...) this
stumbling stone. I my self through weakness have been ^ear to this, but his
Grace has kept me and the Truth is dear to me still, and Jesus Christ though
many that professes the Faith adorn it not in their Conversation. And now you
are multiplied, me see you are a people of the like infirmities and passions,
therefore may you that are tender, (...) in again to the Truth, by the same
Reasonings. But oh! how strong is interest and faction when once engaged. Well
my Prayer to the Lord has been and yet is, that those among you that have not
sinned unto death, by a wilful opposing in hatred and emnity the Glorious
person of the Mediator. may be brought back, that whoever of you belongs to the
Election of Grace may be undeceived, as this young Man was. My labor in this
kind, in other places has not been in vain, and I will not cease but hold on,
Believing firmly that I do service to Jesus Christ therein: And I am the hold^r
(...) this work in that I can say (the Lord knows) I have been an hundred times
hurried into your way and Opinions like a Child tossed to and fro with every
Wind of Doctrine; but I am brought now into a consistency and fixedness through
electing Love, influencing of me, and have my senses exercised (...) discern
of things and Persons, and in Christ's strength, fear not the Gates of Hell. Oh
that this contention and Trial of Truth might by the effectual working of the
Holy Ghost upon thy mind, beget some thoughts of returning to thy first Husband
the God-Man Christ. Thou art the Dearer to us John, in that thou have been a
Stone once in Christ's Buildings, and Oh that the calls of God's people to
thee, from thy Apostasy might be blessed to thee, that thou may Blaspheme no
more. All knowledge that Men are apt to be puffed up withal, and soaring into,
is but Air, Wind and Fancy, but the knowledge of Christ. Take heed of that
Spirit in the false Apostles, that disdained Paul's Doctrine as low and Carnal;
so has Henry Nicholas, Swenkfeldius, and Beheman: and surely you do, and your
People speak it, Believing that you come forth with a new Prophecy, as some of
old pretended, they were sent to Preach the everlasting Gospel in opposition to
the old Gospel. In the Revelation some are spoke of, that talked of the depths,
which John adds Satan to. This has been my temptation, and I am confident is
thins now. Oh! be sober-minded, and be not ashamed of the Cross of Christ, him
I mean Crucified in sinners room and stead. The Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation
be upon thee, while thou are reading these following Lines, that thou may
see the mystery and cleave to the singleness of Christ.

Thy Friend to reduce Thee from thy Apostasy, WILL. HAWORTH.

THE The Quaker Converted to Christianity, RE-ESTABLISHED.
A full ANSWER, to John Crook's Reply to the EPISTLE.
J. C. P. 5.

What thou meanest by the Church of Christ at Hartford, whom thou ca^lest
well-Beloved in the Lord, I know not, except those the young Man page 6, of his
Book, calls most of them a loose wanton and proud people, that adorn the Bodies
more than their Souls. Answ. I mean a sew Believers, that have in obedience to
Christ their Lord, given their names up to Christ, and to one another, to walk
according to the Order of the Gospel, continuing in the Doctrine of the
Apostles, in Fellowship, Breaking of Bread and Prayer, These (...) more dear to
me than others, in that I stand in a nearer Relation to them than I do to
others. Thou might have guessed by reading over the Epistle, if thou had
not heard, that it was a select company I writ to, and not the whole Body of
the people that comes into our Meeting House: when as I spoke of his making
Confession of his Faith t^ong us, which is not a Custom kept up in p^blick
Meetings, I spoke of the eating of the Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood
by Faith, in the Supper of the Lord, speaking of his Institution before, which
you that are a dark people despise. I spoke in the Epistle, of God's adding to
us such as should be saved, which is spoken of that Church at Jer^salem. Surely
John, if thou had read the Epif^le before thou writst this, thou could not
be ignorant (...) but it is your way, to (...) on all people thus, besides your
selves, and the same thoughts I doubt; have thou and all of you, of all the
Churches of the Saints, viz. That they are but a loose, wanton and proud
people. Thou are full of love John, thou might have seen by the series and
Order of the story, that the young Man spoke this, first of the generality of
the people that met, what his thoughts were of them, when he first came amongst
them. Are all of you perfect John, that comes into your Meetings? Are there no
loose wanton proud ones there? These were his thoughts before his Conversion to
the Gospel, when he stood halting betwixt two, long before we had a Church in
that place.

I challenge thee and all of you at Hartford to accuse any Member of this
Church there, with wantonness, looseness, or that which may justly be called
Pride in Apparel, though not dressed it may be altorge there in your mode. And I
question not but the Grace of Christ will enable them to walk inoffensively and
(...), though you may watch for their haltings. J.C. page ibid. In the very
entrance, thou discoverest thy self and Spirit, to be filled with the sour
Leaven of the Pharisees, saying in this Relation which follows, you may see
some of the Quakers Rotten Opinions, etc. W. H. The Leaven of the Pharisees was
chiesty the Doctrine, Mat. 6.11. Beware of the Leaven of the Phorises and of
the Sadducees, v. 12, the Doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees Now whether I
or thou have most of that, let discerning ones judge. The Pharisees made void
the Scriptures by their Traditions; Thou, and thy Brethren by your Light
within, not vouchsafing to call it the Rule, but denying it so to be, as Pen in
his late Writing. The Pharisees placed much of their Religion in outward
things, washing of hands, etc. You very much in Hearts, Ribbonds and Laces, etc.
The Pharisees had an affected carriage singular in their Garbs, so be you They
did justify themselves that they were Righteous, and thought to be accepted of
God, by that which was within them; so it it is with you, Luke 18. I thank God
I am not, etc. see John he gives the Glory of it to God, and attributes it not
to his own power, free will, Reason, yet was Proud, and unjustisyed: the
Pharisees were Enemies to the person of Christ and despised him in the Builders
refused him which is understood of them: and surely thou and thy people are of
the same Spirit, white you pretend to speak of Jesus, it is but the light in
every Man you would advance, and refuses him: the Pharifees were such as
pretended to give a more sublime, mystical interpretation of Scriptures, than
others; so thou John by thy Allegory, the Pharisees looked upon Christ as vain,
Light, confident in his Cartiage, in that he would keep Company with Publicans
and Sinners: so thou judge of me and others, because we walk not with a
Naballike sour deportment. The Sadducees denied the Resurrection: So thou John
and thy Brethren. Take care John, left the Leaven of false Doctrine do not
Leaven the whole Lump, lest thou and thy people be nothing else but a sour
Lump of error. Thou art mistaken in applying this to me, through the Grace of
God I have a little of that Unleavened Sincerity, and wait for more from
Christ, which the Apostle speaks of himself and others: We can do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. Thou go on page 5. Rotten
Opinions in Common understanding; then their Opinions must once have been
sound, but now are decayed.

Answ. Be not offended John, many that read these lines and words will think
that thou have not Common Understanding, and that thy Intellcctuals are not
sound, but decayed. As for your Opinions, viz. The Light in every Man to be
Christ, that we are justified by inherent Righteousness, that Christ has not
now a Manhood, etc. I account them gross damnable errors. Now errors were
always rotten, never sound, to give this Epithet to error, would be a
Contradiction. Moreover, who sees not but this is spoke in a moral sense? I
spoke of Moral-Rottenness, not Natural Rottenness, not of the Rottenness of
Wood and Apples, but of Doctrine, Rotten Doctrine was always so. That Opinion
that was Morally evil was ever so. I ask when the Apostle speaks of Men of
corrupt minds which were the false Apostles, must it necessarily follow that
their minds were once sound? When the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. v. 20. Let no
corrupt Communication, etc. Was that Communication once sound? It will as well
follow that when Paul speaks to Timothy of sound words; that therefore they
were once Rotten. Nay, there is the Fruit of some Trees, that were never good,
but bitter, poisonous, Rotten, Deuteronomy. 32. 32. There is mention made of the Wine
of Sodom: Their vine is of the Vine of Sodom, their Grapes of Gall, their
Clusters are bitter, their Poison is the Poison of Dragons. By these, Moses
understood (says Ainsworth) the corrupt Doctrines of the Jews. Now Josephus
will tell thee, that the Fruit which grew in the place where Sodom and Gomorrah
stood, was always Bitter, and of a Poisonous Nature; nay, the Grapes and Apples
there were so Rotten, that if touched, they would fall into Dust and Ashes,
that were fair to the Eye. But you delight in such Childish quibbles.

J. C. page 16. Thy following words taste of the same Leaven, like those
Pharisees that said Christ was a Sinner, when he had opened the blind Man's
Eyes, Let God have the Glory; so say thou, let Christ have the Glory for
bringing this young Man amongst you.

Answ. How wide art thou in applying this of the Pharisees; the Pharisees did
think Christ was a sinner, we Believe he is the Holy and just One, a Lamb
without spot, harmless and undefiled, such an High Priest became us to have:
They did not Believe that Christ was God, therefore would not give the Glory to
him; We Believe according to the Scriptures that he is and was over all, God
blessed for ever, Romans 9. and therefore we give the Glory of all his works, and
of this work of his upon the young Man's heart; in opening the Eyes of his mind
to see the glorious Gospel, and discern your delusion, who was in his first
Birth Spiritually-blind. Thou and thy Brethren are worse than the Pharisees,
they acknowledged matter of fact, but you deny this young Man's Eyes to have
been opened; when as the most enlightened Servants of Christ whose same is in
all the Churches of the Saints have owned it, as an eminent work of the Spirit,
giving thanks to Christ for it. J. C. page 5. Again thy words: None of those
that went out from you, were properly of you, had Received the Gospel which you
Believe. No, it is not possible for any to receive it truly, and forsake it.
What that Gospel is, which you Believe, it concerns you to search, that it be
not another Gospel, Gal. 16. than the Apostles Preached.

Answ. It does highly concern us, I grant, for we are saved by the Gospel.
Therefore we have searched the Scripture which you despise, and say, is not the
Rule. Where do you search for the Gospel? You enquire of the Light within, as
of the Oracle. Therefore that Gospel which we Believe, is not another, but the
same with that which the Apostles Preached. We are Built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself (not the Light within) being the
chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. The Gospel which we Believe, is that Good,
Ancient, Everlasting-Gospel, which was revealed to Adam fallen; and in vain was
that Revelation, if the Light within would have shown it, viz. The seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents bead. The Light within cannot be said to be the
Seed of the Woman. When the Woman that is not to Prophecy in the Church,
according to your interpretation, is the Carnal part, but it is Christ that in
the fullness of time was made of a Woman, Gal. 4. Again it is that Gospel that
was Preached to Abraham, viz. In thy Seed shall all the Nations (viz.) Jews as
well as Gentiles) of the Earth be blessed. Which Seed the same Apostle in the
same Epistle says, is Christ's Person. This Gospel is witnessed by the Law and
the Prophets and the sum of it is in, Romans 1.1. separate unto the Gospel of
Christ; v. 3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the
Seed of David according to the Flesh, (This is more than to appear in a Body
according to J Bolton's Faith) and declared to be the Son of God with power,
according to the Spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection from the Dead, in Cor.
1.15. I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, etc. v. 3. how
that Christ died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures, v. 4. And that he
was Buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures.
This is the Gospel: and we confessing with the mouth this Jesus Christ, and
Believing with our hearts that God has raised him from the dead, shall be
saved, Romans 10.7. For he was delivered (i. e.) to death) for our offenses, and
was raised up again for our justification, Romans 4.25.

J. C. For there were those that perverted the true Gospel, and turned it
upside down, and wrested their sayings to their own destruction; and others
departed from the Faith which Paul Exhorts Timothy to hold fast, 1 Timothy 1.19.

Answ. It Is very true, there were such in the Apostles times, and they were
those that made themselves equal to the Apostles, they transformed themselves
into the Apostles of Christ, and said Paul was but Carnal, walked after the
Flesh: and do not you pretend to an infallible Spirit, equal to the Apostolical
Spirit? And have not you cried down all sorts of Ministers besides your selves?
Now what was that perverting the true Gospel in the Galatians but joining
something to Christ in Justification, viz. Circumcision, whereby they would
make every one a debtor to the whole Law, that they must keep it to perfection:
which whether it be not the same thing that thou art pleading for, shall be
tried as we go on. Only herein these false Apostles were not so much to be
blamed as you; we read not that they deserted the person of Christ, but you
have run up and down the Nation with this, viz. That the Light in every Man was
Christ, from that Text, John 1. This was the Light, etc.

J. C. That others departed from that Faith which Paul Exhorts Timothy to hold
fast.

Answ. Now, John, what is Paul's Exhortation to Thee? Whenas thy Brother Bailey
page 35. in a derision says, the Scripture which you call your Rule, is not
your Rule, what matters it what Faith you are Exhorted to thereby, why do you
thus make use of it? But let us see what Faith it was that these departed from,
in I Tim. 1.19. See that v. 20. mention is made of Hymeneus and Alexander. Now
in the 2 Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 2.17, 18. Hymeneus is named again, and his
Error particularly mentioned, saying, the Resurrection is past already, v. 18.
Hymeneus was for an Allegorical Resurrection within, and now how often have I
heard this, that when I have spoke with your Friends concerning the
Resurrection of the Body, viz. That they witnessed the Resurrection. They are
for an Allegorical Resurrection. This old musty Error of Hymeneus we all know
you be guilty of. Thou had better not named that Scripture. Thou go on.

J. C. page 5. And is not the Gospel the power of God, Romans 1.16. and the being
led away by sin and lust, a departure from, or a denial of the power, as 2 Pet.
3.17. where the Apostle exhorts the Beloved that knew the Truth of the Gospel,
to beware, lest they also should be led away with the Error of the wicked?

Answ. The Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation: Christ who is the sum and
substance of the Gospel, as coming of the Seed of David according to the Flesh,
was declared to be the Son of God with Power, by the Resurrection from the
dead. So it is the Power of God, his power exerted in Christ's Resurrection
whereby we have Justification, He rose again for our justification. Again, the
power of God was greatly exerted in working Miracles, while they preached the
Gospel. Heb. 2.4. God bearing them witness with Signs and Wonders, with diverse
Miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. While you pretend to a New Gospel, you
should have brought the Power of God to Seal it in Miracles. When he calls it
the Power of God, it may be you understand it as Winkfield did, that God's
Essential Power is Communicated, which cannot be; for then would the Creature
to whom it is Communicated be omnipotent. And if thou would plainly speak
out, do thou not think that the Light that every Man has, is part of the
essential Power of God which is able to save every one that does obey it? Now
Paul speaks not a word of the Light that is in every one here: he speaks of his
readiness to Preach the Gospel to them at Rome, v. 15. which Gospel what it was
he had declared before, v. 3, 4. viz. a Doctrine concerning Christ's being
Incarnate, and his Resurrection: now he says he is not ashamed of this
Doctrine; but thou and thy Brethren are, for you Preach it now: now the reason
why he was not ashamed of it, is, because it is the Power of God etc. (i. e.)
The Spirit who is God made use of this Doctrine (that many despised) to the
Salvation of many. The Spirit conveyed it self into the hearts of the hearers
by this Doctrine, and wrought Faith in them to receive it. Therefore that
Scripture 1 Cor. 1.18. does explain the Preaching of the Cross, i. e. Christ
Crucified at Jerusalem, without any Allegory, (not a word here of G. F's.
Doctrine of a Light that every Man has, to be turned to, which thou have been
deluded by) is to them that perish foolishness. I pray God it be not so to
you,) but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. Now Paul Romans 1.17.
proceeds to tell us how this Doctrine, not the Law nor the Light, nor any other
Doctrine, is that which the Spirit makes use of to convert, change, and save
because thereby the righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith. In
the Doctrine of the Gospel is revealed a Righteousness that every way answers
the holy Law of God which is the Righteousness that God approves of. If I will
be beloved of God, reconciled, have life, I must have a Righteousness complete
to bring to God; now no Doctrine declares this but the Gospel that declares the
Remission of sins by the sacrifice of Christ, and that by the Obedience of this
one we are made righteous; his Obedience without us. Now he faith, it is
revealed from Faith to Faith, therefore Faith is not that Righteousness, but
receives it, being revealed. I have writ the more upon this Scripture because
it is greatly made use of by you. And some will see hereby, that it is not for
you at all, but against you. Let me add this to what thou say, that being
led away by sin is a departure from, or denial of the power. To whomsoever God
gives Faith in this Righteousness, he sanctifies inwardly, and whoever has
this Faith he has it in a pure Conscience; and who-ever makes shipwreck of a
good Conscience as to morals, it is a Token to us that he has made shipwreck of
Faith likewise, if he continue so without Repentance. This departing and
denying of the Power begins in unbelief, an evil heart of unbelief in departing
from the living God, Heb 3.11. The last Scripture thou bring in is 2 Pet.
3.17. where the Apostle exhorts the beloved, that knew the truth, to beware
left they also should be led away by the error of the wicked. Now John what
error is there scarce mentioned in the Scripture which thou and thy people are
not guilty of? In the late Scripture thou namest thou did plainly read thy
self in Hymeneus. Now again what error of the wicked in this verse. 3. There
shall come in the last days scoffers, verse. 4. saying, Where is the promise of
his coming? for since the Fathers, etc. This was the error, viz. They did not
believe the second coming of Christ. Now in the face of how many thousands have
the Quakers denied this? speak of his coming again, they answer he is come,
they witness his coming: Tell them of that Scripture in remembrance of him till
he come; why Christ is come, therefore the Lords Supper is antedated as to
them. Thus they are for an Allegorical coming the second time (i. e.) to the
Spirit, in giving heed to the Light; and so it is without sin unto Salvation
according to you. Take heed lest your Salvation prove only Allegorical not
real. I have several times heard it, and can name one not long since of the
Quakers of Hartford, that has spoke it, That we that look for the second
coming of Christ are but gazers, and our eyes shall sink or rot in their holes
before we see that day, intimating it shall never be. John, the Scripture is
against thee, thou had better quote a piece of Jacob Be^eman.

J. C. page 6. The young man was fully of the Quakers way, Spirit, Faith and
Principle. Thy mistake also in this is very gross, as may appear by the Answer
to the young man's Book in this particular.

Answer. I confess I said that the young man was fully of the Quakers way, etc.
But it seems I am mistaken and that grossly, as will appear by thy Brother
Baylies Answers which I have looked over, and find that the reason that he
gives why this young man was no Quaker, was because he did put off his Hat, and
was not satisfied in silent meetings: So that I must it seems retract, because
I did not understand that these two things did essentially constitute a Quaker,
viz. Silence and Vnmannerliness, so that even a Dumb Turk is a Quaker. When
will thou be ashamed of these things John!

J. C. page 6. Thou Say the young man was an honest Quaker, (...) to his
persuasion as Luther said of himself before his Conversion, etc. (...) which
it is thus replied, then what are they converted from or to, that are (...) true
to their persuasion? Examine thy self, and thy people, whether you is all
things are true to your persuasion? if nay; then you are come so far a the
honest Quaker by thy own confession.

Answer, I said the young man was an honest Quaker, etc. because there be some
Knavish Quakers, John, thou know; as in Luthers time many pretended
mortification under a Monks Cowle, and at the same time were unclean
sensualists. So some of you it is known pretend to exact honesty in trade, and
under pretense cheat and defraud and so enrich your selves. But I am confident
this young man was honest, and so true to his persuasion, for honesty without
the Faith of the Gospel is their persuasion and Religion. Now thou reflectest
upon us by way of Query, then what they are converted from or to, etc? I
answer, we are converted from darkness, that imbred natural darkness that we
are in, and all men, unto Light, which Light is Christ's person and the Gospel
which declares of him, and so to all things that Christ in the Gospel requires
of us, which is not only Morality, but attending upon his Institutions as the
Lord's Supper. As often as ye do it, etc, and through Grace we are true to this
persuasion that the Holy Ghost has wrought in us. You will give us leave to
walk by our own Light, not yours, and to profess still that we are not perfect
nor think we shall ever attain it in this Life. Yet do we think that as the
Carnal Jew. went beyond the Unbelieving Gentile; so if we were as you think us
to be but carnal gospellers; yet in that we are come further than the Quakers,
that go about to make the people only moral Heathens.

J. C. Thou say the little time he has had for proficiency in the Knowledge
of the Gospel might discourage thee from making his Book Public. To which thou
replyest, I wonder at it, seeing thou say before, that it is not possible,
for any to receive it truly and forsake it, which if he has not done thou
speak unadvisedly with thy lips, in saying that it is an experience which
the Lord in rich mercy gave him whom thou also call dear and elect Child,
and say, flesh and blood has not revealed this to him but our Father which
is in Heaven: but how can he that thus contradicts himself agree with the
truth in others?

Answer. So according to thy Reasoning and Logic. It is not possible for any
to have been but a little time in the Gospel and yet truly to receive it, as to
be out of danger to forsake it. Is this is a Contradiction? every one that
receives the Gospel truly, must have received it many years, but if any turn
Quaker, as Mede, Pen, and Ruddier, you will say they are in the truth the first
day. As to the others, Cannot the Lord in rich mercy give an experience, and
yet there may have been but little proficiency in the Knowledge of the Gospel;
that one may have the true teachings of the Spirit, and yet not fit to Write
and Print? Is it not plain to all but Cavillers that I speak it thus, viz. That
he having penned these in his own Words and Phrases who was but newly come into
the Faith, and so might have but a dim sight into some truths, and not know how
to express himself so fitly as others that had spent more years in the Faith:
why did thou not add that which goes before, viz. the meanness of the persons
Education? thou should have taken them together. But it seems any of your
Proselytes though never so childish are fit presently to adventure out in the
press, and in the ministry: who so hold as blind etc.

J. C. page 6. Oh that every one of you, my dear Brethren, and every one i^
Hatford had the Knowledge of Christ thus distinctly formed in you, till which
thing be, the soul of him to whom Christ has committed you as his charge shall
travel in birth and be in pain, blessing God that his poor labors (...) not
altogether been in vain, as to this matter: what is that travel and labor
worth that brings not to a distinct Knowledge of Christ? and what a Church is
that, and what a pastor is he? and how can they be dear brethren in truth, in
whom the distinct Knowledge of Christ is not yet formed?

Answer. Either thou have forgotten that this Phrase which I make use of was
ever used by Paul, Gal. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I travel in birth
again till Christ be formed in you; or else thou do plainly gibe at Paul the
Apostle and the Church of the Galatians: at least through our sides thou
woundest them. Paul writes to the Galatians, owns them as the Churches of
Christ, Chap. 1.2. says, that they had received the Spirit, Chap. 3.2. Yet in
tha^ they were hearkening to false teachers, and were wavering, and halting,
and tossed, he speaks this: And I understand it as to the distinct Knowledge of
Christ, and so I speak of it; they had some knowledge of Christ, but it was too
confused and dim, otherwise they would not have been enticed: they were but
little Children; in this verse. 19. he called them so, yet Children. Now John is
this language, becoming thee? viz. Paul, what is thy labor and travel worth,
when as thou have not brought the Galatians to have Christ formed in them? and
Paul, what a Church is this Church that thou writes to in Galatia, and what a
Pastor, Preacher and Apostle art thou? and what dear Brethren are they to thee?
and what a Spirit is that they have received in whom Christ is not yet formed?
well said John, thou art now got a degree above the Apostles, in that thou
can thus call them to an account; and yet this may well be the tendency of
thy lines spoken to us, when as your Doctrine and Paul's are so opposite; much
a kin to the Doctrine of the false Apostles, that questioned Paul's authority,
and looked upon his ministry but carnal; and thou have in this declared the
same Spirit. Paul says in another place These. 1.3. there is much lacking in
your Faith; and to the Corinthians, are ye not Carnal? Now what an Apostle,
what a Pastor art thou Paul, and what a Church is the Church of the Corinthians
that are carnal? what Saints are they, and what faithful ones in Christ are
they? And John, how have thou forgot thy self in this cavil? had the Disciples
the distinct Knowledge of Christ, when as they knew not the import of his death,
nor that he should rise again? We thought (said they,) that it had been he that
would have restored Israel, Luke 24. whereupon he calls them fools, verse. 25.
They did not distinctly know why Christ died, nor the Scriptures that
prophesied of it: they did not distinctly know of his Resurrection, for they
would not believe it when reported; they thought of a carnal Kingdom which the
Messiah was come to set up: Yet these Christ calls Friends, Disciples,
Brethren, Go tell my Brethren: Mat. 28.10. and in another place, I go to my God
and your God, my Father, and your Father. Now John, see how it will become thee
to say, what Brethren are those, what Friends are those, that had no more
Knowledge, not a distinct knowledge of Christ's death and resurrection that were
so ignorant? and what a Pastor was Jesus that had such followers that had not
the distinct knowledge of Christ formed in them, but this is enough to make thee
ashamed I hope.

J. C. page 6. Thou say that thy daily Prayers to Christ are, that we all,
(meaning thy Brethren in the Ministry) may be made able Ministers of the New
Testament, and to this it is Answered: Then it seems, you are not yet so by
your own Confession; therefore be silent, till you are made so.

Answ. Yea, and I continue my Prayers for my self and Brethren in this manner,
yet this does not follow that there is no ability already to Preach the Gospel,
John 17.17. Christ prays, sanctify them through thy Word: by this way of
reasoning, it would follow that then these he prays for were not sanctified at
all; yet in v. 6. he says, he had manifested his Name unto them.

And v. 8. That they had received his words, and in v. 20. That they did
Believe, not for these alone, but for them that shall Believe: It is evident
that it was for more degrees of Sanctification, and a continuance of it, so
then here when I pray that we may be made able, etc. it is for a continuance of
that Ability that we have already, and further degrees thereof. Paul entreats
the Colossians, Chapt. 4. v. 3. that they would pray for the Apostles that God
would open unto them a Door of utterance to speak the Mystery: therefore
according to thy Logic, they had no faculty for that Work. Ephesians. 1. the
Apostle prays, that God would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation; Therefore though Saints, and faithful ones in Christ, they had none
of the Spirit. How would thou have me pray, if not thus? would thou have
me pray that we should be made weak Ministers of the Old Covenant of Works?

J. C. Page 7. Thou say thou have but Law and Gospel to Preach: Where in all
the New Testament do thou find the Apostles preaching the (...), and saying
they were sent to Preach the Law, but a Dispensation of the Gospel was
committed unto them, and they were made able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the Letter or Law, but of the Spirit.

Answ. It follows in the Epistle which thou might have writ, the Law for the
knowledge of Sin, and might have understood by that and what follows, that we
Preach the Law in order to the Gospel, to prepare the Spirit of Man by
convincing of Sin, and so humbling the Soul to a welcome reception of the Grace
of the Gospel: the Soul being weary and heavy laden, seeing its weakness to
keep the Law, flies to Christ for Rest, and laying hold of the free Remission
of sins by the Blood of Christ, so that when thou inquire, Where in all the
New Testament, do I find the Apostles Preaching the Law? thou had forgot a
passage, when but three pages lower. These are thy words, (...) And as for the
Moral Law, Christ is so far from repealing it that in Matth^ he binds it faster
and closer to his Disciples. How now, John, is Christ and the Apostles Ministry
in a different way, Method and tendency, and do thou not here say the
Apostles Preached not the Law in all the New Testament? and yet the Apostle of
our profession Christ himself, Heb. 3.1. preaches the Law, and the Moral Law,
and to his Disciples, and binds it faster than Moses, to be kept for Life (thou
meanest surely) of which afterward.

But again, do not the Apostles in several places speak of the Law, explaining
the nature and use of it? Romans 3. That by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin; in
the Corinthians, the Letter kills; in Galatians, how it was added because of
Transgression, how it is a Schoolmaster to Christ; in Timothy, how it is not
for the Righteous; in the Hebrews, how frequently is the Law spoke of: now is
not this Preaching the Law? (...) grant that the main work was to preach the
Gospel, they but Preach the Law in subserviency to the Gospel. Thus they were
Ministers (...) of the Letter only, for this does but kill; but of the Spirit,
the Gospel by the dispensation of which the Spirit of Adoption is communicated.
But Christ wounds as well as heals; he kills as well as makes alive. The one he
does by the Preaching of the Law, the other by the Gospel. The Spirit of
Bondage accompanies one, the Spirit of Adoption the other.

J. C. ibid. But why do thou divide betwixt Law and Gospel, (...) they were
not one in the End and Nature; saying, the one is for the conviction of sin,
and yet thou call it Spiritual?

Answ. How this agrees with the former that in all the New Testament the
Apostles Preached not the Law but the Gospel; and here they are not thou say
to be divided, but are one in the End and Nature, is not this a Contradiction?
Why, then the Apostles when they Preached the Gospel, Preached the Law. And why
should thou quarrel with (...) for saying we have the Law to Preach for the
Law and the Gospel are one in the End and Nature. Why then, when the Apostle
Paul said, we are able Ministers not of the Letter or Law, which thou addest
above, i. e. not of the Gospel or Spirit: for the Law and Gospel are all one in
their Nature, it will cost thee some Sweat to untie this Knot. What strange
Divinity is this? But when the Lord has infatuated, and left (...) through
Pride to delusion, what will they not speak? Law and Gospel are one in the End
and Nature, then are Moses and Christ one: yet (...) came by Moses, but Grace
and Truth by Jesus Christ: then Ha^ Sarah are one Ishmael and Isaac one,
Jerusalem beneath, and that above one. Thou have brought Heaven and Earth
together, Gal. (...) there the Apostle makes them distinct: then the Covenants
are one and the same, Heb. 8. one made with the People when he brought them out
of Egypt, and that afterward spoke of in Jeremiah, then no difference betwixt
Mount Zion and Mount Sinai, they are come to^^^^^. Thou, John, can remove
Mountains: they are now both one. In the Galatians, The Covenant and Promise,
the Apostle says, was 430 years before the Law; but John Crook says, the
Apostle was out in his Chronology, for they were both delivered at once; for
the Law and Gospel are one, the Spirit and Letter are all one; that which was
Engraven in Stones, and that work of God on the heart by the Gospel. This is
like the Divinity that you may hear from Quakers, when you have discoursed them
a little, which I have seen in Jacob Behmen, All things are but one; so here
Light, Spirit, Word, and Gospel, Heaven and Earth and Sea, all but one. The
Creation is God, and God is nothing but Creation, what we do, he does. O
Confusion! what (...) this to but Rantism indeed and Atheism? yet hitherto
tends this admitting of no distinction of Law and Gospel. But let us proceed;
(...) were not one in their End and Nature, thou say John, the Nature of the
Law, is by the Apostle described in 2 Cor. 3.6. the (...) kills: why, then
according to thy Divinity, the Gospel kills. (...), for they are both one in
their Nature; then the Gospel con^^^^^ to Death: What then is the
Administration of Life and Spirit, and Righteousness, and has more Glory in it
that excels? I suppose it is the Doctrine G. Fox has brought out of the
North-Country, Gal. 5. the Law genders to Bondage, so the Gospel, for both are
of one (...) What makes free then? What Truth is it? As many as are of the
works of the Law, are under a Curse, Gal. 3.10. how comes the^ the Blessing?
For as many as are of Faith, are but in the same (...) for Law and Gospel are
one. The Law is called a Yoke, in Acts (...). That neither we nor our Fathers
were able to bear; why, so is the Gospel, for both are of one Nature: The End
of Preaching the Law and giving it upon Mount Sinai, was to terrify, afright,
trouble, as all the people were exceedingly afraid. The Law in Romans 4.15.
works W^ath: why! so does the Gospel, and this is the End of Preaching it;
for they are both one in their Ends, according to J. C. what Divinity (...) is
the Doctrine of Comfort?

J. C. The Law for the Conviction of sin, and yet thou call it Spiritual.

Answ. Paul in Romans 7. says, The Law is Spiritual (i. e.) requires that all
the thoughts of Man and desires and Motions of the heart, should be Holy and
Spiritual continually; therefore it is a fit instrument, for the Spirit to make
use of by enlightening the Soul in the Knowledge of it, to convince not of
outward gross evils only, but of heart-pollutions; and so he sees his spots in
this Christal-Glass, and cries out I am C^nal.

J. C. The Spirit is said to convince and reprove the unbelieving World, John
16.8.

Answ. Ergo, the Law Jude 15. He shall convince all that are ungodly of all
their ^godly Deeds.

Answ. This is the second Scripture thou producest to prove Law and Gospel all
one; now here is not one word of the Law. Behold, the Lord comes with ten
Thousands of his Holy ones, which may be Angels as well as Elect Glorified
Saints. Is this Lord the Law? Is it the Light within which thou would have
it interpreted of? Is it not Christ Jesus, that is so frequently called Lord in
the New Testament? Is not this Coming, his second Coming to Judgment, not an
appearing of the Light, only to Judge and Condemn Men in their Consciences? It
is the Lord Christ in person, coming as Judge. Observe that all these that he
will Judge (spoke of here) shall be condemned; it is not a reproof in order to
deliver and save. It Is said to execute Judgment upon all, (i. e.) upon all
those false Teachers described in the foregoing verses, that were such as
denied Christ, v. 4.18. They were Mockers, 19. They were such as did separate
from the Saints in order of the Gospel, 19. They were such against whom the
Saints were to contend for the Faith; in a word, They were of your Spirit and
Principle, and Doctrines; herein is the difference, yours is Rantism covered
with Morality, theirs was with open Face; none of these were saved, v. 4. Who
were of all Ordained to this Condemnation, therefore impertinently alleged by
thee, and profanely wrested by thee to overturn the second Coming of the Lord,
whom he will judge when he comes, if you Repent not, for all your hard
Speeches against him which I have heard and read. This Scripture is interpreted
by another, Mat. 16.27. For the Son of Man shall come, (is that the Light
within?) in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels; what is (...) there, is
(...) here, one expounds the other; what is Holy ones there, is Angels here.
Again, he rewards them every one according to his works.

J. C. page ibid. Ps. 19.7. The Law is said to be perfect converting the Soul.

Answ. This is the third place alleged to prove Law and Gospel one. The Law is
here taken for all the writings of the Scriptures, will it follow, that
therefore it is so to be taken in all other places, and that there is no
distinction to be made: Nay, but therefore one part of the Doctrine contained
in the Scriptures, the Spirit makes use of for conviction, and another for
Conversion, according to the Nature of the Doctrines. The whole Nation is
called properly the Land, is therefore every piece of Ground in it good to bear
Wheat, because Ground or Land in general is?

J. C. So that Law and Spirit are frequently used as terms that signify the
same thing.

Answ. It does not appear by those Scriptures thou have yet mentioned: And I
challenge thee to produce one Scripture where Law and Spirit are one: the
Gospel is called Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. but the Law is called the Letter.

J. C. If thou knew that Spirituality of the Law, thou would not (...)
about to divide them, or quarrel with us about them.

Answ. I have known the Spirituality of the Law, convincing me of that to be
evil, which you say is not Sin, viz. Evil thoughts arising in my heart though
not consented to. Yet I know how to distinguish between Law and Gospel; it was
the Doctrine of Righteousness by the Gospel that relieved me, as it did Paul,
though he had a Body of sin working in him, yet gives thanks to God through
Christ, in that there (...) condemnation to them that were in Christ. It is the
Doctrine of the Gospel, not Law, taken strictly, that declares non-imputation
of Trespasses.

J. C. page ibid. But hence has risen the mistake of many, because they (...)
found several Names in Scripture, therefore concluded they must needs intend
several things; while it is frequent in the Scripture to intend one and the
same thing under several Names given them, yet one in Nature and Being: several
Ministrations, diverse operations, yet all by one and the same Spirit.

Answ. I have before shown that Law and Gospel have diff^ Ends and Natures, not
only several names, therefore this of Father, Son, and Spirit is nothing to the
purpose. Father, Son, and (...) are one in nature: Thou speak of several
ministrations etc. and yet all by one and the same Spirit.

Answ. What then is therefore the Gift of Tongues and the gift of Fielding one
and the same Gift? is the Gift of Faith and Miracles all one? (...) might not
the one be where the other was not, as Christ to them who had cast out Devils
said I know you not? There is but one Soul in the body, and all the actions are
from that Soul, therefore is my speaking and walking both one. The Heaven and
Earth from one Creator, Sun and Moon are they therefore one?

J. C. page ibid. We know the Spirituality of the Law in the Apostles sense is
the inward Conviction of the Spirit.

Answ. This cannot be, for the Law in its own nature is spiritual though none
should be convinced by it, and though the Spirit should ^ver make use of it;
yet it would be Holy and Spiritual, it being (...) which discovers the Holy
Nature of God, who was the Author of it.

J. C. page 8. Thou either ignorantly or enviously, if not both, affirmed that
whoever has tasted that the Lord is gracious, never takes up with the Quakers
Christ.

Answ. What I say, I say upon my Knowledge and experience, having conversed with
the Quakers so frequently and read many of their Books, and know that this was
the reason viz. my tasting of the Grace of Jesus Christ, why I did not in the
midst of the Scepticalness of my mind take up with the Quakers Christ, finding
so much sweetness and comfort in the Knowledge of him Crucified, and so
abhorring to believe in the Light within as the Christ of God.

J. C. page 16. The Quakers Christ is the Lords Christ.

Answ. Now let this John be fairly tried whether the Quakers Christ be that
Christ of Jehovah which is spoke of here, L^k. ^. 26. which Simeon was to see
before he died according to the revelation he had: This was the Child Jesus
which was born of Mary the Virgin, of the (...) of David according to the
flesh, whom Simeon took up in his bodily arms, verse. 28. that Messiah whom the
Prophets spoke of, verse. 31, 32. Now how will thou be tried in this matter? I
know no better way than by thy Peers and Equals in the Ministry, while you be
all guided by the self-same infallible Spirit; and do own them for Quakers wh^
shall mention. Mr. Faldo has impannelled a sufficient number in this Case, and
I desire the Reader of these lines to look into that part of his Book which
treats of this thing, viz. the Quakers deny the Christ of God; he has there to
good purpose saved me a labor in transcribing out of the Quakers own books
many of their sentiments touching these things. And though thou have been so
shy John, as not to open thy self in thy wiltings in this matter, yet thou
dare not deny these men to be Quakers: I will but transcribe a few of the
lines of the greatest Rabbis, and leave the rest to be read in the Book with
those Judicious detectings of them by our said worthy Brother.

Let us hear George Fox speak first (as it is most meet) in his Book called the
Mystery, page 71. And Christ's nature is not humane which is ^thly, for it is
the first Adam's. Now John what is in this plainly but that Christ that Simeon
had in his arms is not the Lord's Christ? for he had a nature humane which was
earthly of the first Adam, for he was made of a woman in Gal. 4. and the Son of
Adam in his genealogy; which nature is now in Heaven glorified according to the
Scriptures. We believe that Christ had a Soul too and has still as well as a
Body, and a Divine Nature as well as Humane; which word, though you quarrel
with it, is no more but what belongs to man or man's nature: and the Scripture
in Hebrews says, He was like us in all things sin excepted. Let (...) come
next in his book page 20. What says he? for that which be took upon him was
our garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our nature so far is good: But hear
again, which is of an earthly perishing nature: yet it saw no Corruption
according to the Scripture in the Acts. But let us have the rest: but he is of
an Heavenly nature. Jesus then that Simeon took i^ not the Christ, but only a
garment, the perishing flesh and blood of our nature ^cording to this Doctor.

Hear again a Mystery. And his Flesh and Blood and Bones of his nature (i. e.)
Heavenly. This is the Quakers Christ, Heavenly Flesh and Blood, and Bones which
came down from Heaven (as they suppose) and did tabernacle in the carnal body
and flesh and bones for a while, which is in every Quaker now. This is the
Quakers Christ, not that which Simeon had in his arms and is now in glory. The
next is (...), his Princip. page 9. They are false ministers that preach Christ
without: Then Simeon had him only within.

Sword of the Lord, a Treatise of Smiths page 24. Your imagined God beyond the
stars.

For again in his Book called the Great Mystery, page 286. the man (...) speak
Christ in the Male and in the Female. He is giving an account why a woman may
teach. Now John the Quakers Christ is the man in every Man that is a Quaker,
and every Woman. I will likewise set down here what I had from Christopher
Tailor a Teacher among you, he confessed to me when I asked, if the whole
Christ was within him, and so if the Man Christ? That the Man Christ was within
him, where is the Mediators Intercession then? art thou not ashamed of such a
People as this? Come out from among them, and own the Christ of God; If ye
believe not that I am be (says Christ) ye shall dye in your Sins, John 8.24.
By these Testimonies Jesus of Nazareth is not the Quakers Christ. What is then
the Christ? it is that Light that is in every one, that reproves for some
Immoralities, which every Drunkard and Unclean Person has in his Conscience.
Here now one for all speaking plainly, FOX the younger, a great Author, page 49,
50. (...) scorn me the Light in you, they have disobeyed it, and called it a
nature Light, and ye have said that I the Light am not able to save those that
believe in me. Mark, this is the Quakers Christ: but further, page 54. that if
you would believe and wait in me the Light -- I will purge out all your
Iniquities and forgive all your Trespasses (none forgiveth sins but God) and I
will change your natures, and will make you new Creatures, (therefore it is
very God) if you harken to me, and obey me the Light within [it should be a
Person by this, for actions are ascribed to it]: Now how often have I heard
this spoke by your Teachers, God manifested in the Flesh, clapping their Hands
upon their Breast, this Flesh? Here Major Corbet (once a Quaker) in his Book
against you on this Subject.

Well now, let these stand together; and John do thou speak for thy self:
Either these are no Quakers and thou disowneth them and their Writings; or the
Light, not Jesus of Nazareth, is the Quakers Christ, so not the Lord's Christ.
Therefore John, thou do but Juggle in thy words, like the Men on the Thames,
Roweth one way, and looks another, pretends to the Lords Christ, and it is
nothing but the Light within every Man. By this you may know what he means by
his Testimony to Jesus in the latter end of his Book.

J. C. The same that delivered Paul from his wretched state.

Answer, That Christ that delivered Paul from the guilt of Sin and Punishment,
while Sin dwelt in him, was Jesus of Nazareth, not the Quakers Christ, the
Light within every Man, which according to Far the younger forgives Sin.

J. C. page ibid. And if thou had understood what thou said immediately
before concerning the Blood of Christ, which thou call Oil poured into the
gashes of Conscience, thou would not have spoken thus slightingly not
Blasphemously of the Quakers Christ.

Answer, Through Grace I understand what I say, in that expression, and have
experienced it in mine own Soul. I understand by the Blood of Christ all the
Sufferings of Jesus of Nazareth the Messiah, and the Merit, Virtue, and Value
of them. (I do not with Quaker Penington understand the Heavenly Blood, in
opposition to that Blood of his Earthly Body that was shed) Penington in his
Questions page the 25th, says, can outward Blood cleanse the Conscience? in
thy confession upon this Article, I Question not but thou art of the same mind,
that the outward Blood and Sufferings of Christ are all of no value for the
taking away of Guilt, notwithstanding all thy glorying words there. This Blood
and Sufferings, the value of them toward God for the expiation of the Guilt of
Sin, I apply to my own Soul that is guilty of the breach of the Law, and have
peace hereby, Romans 5. Being justified by Faith we have peace with God; (are
Reconciled, and so must needs have Peace of Conscience) through Jesus Christ.
As for my speaking slightingly if not ^sphemously of the Quakers Christ, I am
thoroughly persuaded by my reading and converse, without the least desire in my
heart to wrong them; (Nay this last Testimony of Fox the younger, is enough to
convince thee if thou have been deluded by them) That the Light in every one is
the Quakers Christ, and that they believe, there is no Manhood of Christ now,
but it vanished when Christ ascended, and diffused it self into every one. Now
if thou art of the same mind, but will not pull of the Monks hood: Why should
you charge me with Blasphemy for saying that the tasters of Christ's Grace
cannot take up with this Christ: is this the Sealed One? Him that was ordained
as Peter speaks, set forth, Romans 3. to be a Propitiation, the Head of the
Church, the High Priest at God's right hand, the firstborn of every Creature,
the brightness of his Fathers Glory, the Eternal Word that was made Flesh, the
Seed of Abraham in which all the Nations of the Earth shall be Blessed, that
Lamb of God that took away the Sins of the World, Judge of quick and dead, the
only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Alpha and Omega, all in
all. Therefore hear me John (that it thou beleivest as these have expressed
themselves) I charge thee with the highest Blasphemies imaginable, and if thou
do it knowingly and wittingly such as never shall be forgiven; if thou
attribute any of these Titles to any thing that is in Man, besides the very
Person of Jesus Christ.

J. C. Page 8. Oh that the Gospel was studied by us, and Preached by us more!
(J. C. is very angry at these words, and says) O vain Man! do thou think by
the fleshly study, and Preaching from the same, to advance the true Christ?
Nay, but Man and self instead of Christ and his Righteousness; for the Gospel
is a Mystery, and the Preaching of it Foolishness to all that Perish, and the
things of it are the heavenly things themselves, searched (...) only by the
Spirit of God. Therefore cease from thy own study and wait in the silence of
all Flesh, for the pouring out of the Spirit which can only open the Mysteries
of Christ and his Righteousness and show them unto thee.

Answ. Had I said that with fleshly study and Preaching from the same, we
should advance the true Christ, I had spoke like a vain Man; but thou have
foysted that in, apprehending that all the study and pains that we take in
searching the Holy Scripture, is fleshly and carnal, and Mr. Faldo's Key will
open this to us, that all the enquiries after Knowledge is accounted by you but
the Toil, Labor, and Birth of the Flesh. I perceive thou art not at all for
searching into the Scriptures, and comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual,
only for waiting upon the Light within you, as your Teacher, and Rule, and
Guide. Could thou persuade all the Ministers to silence, Thou and Fox might
carry your Kingdom of Delusion the better. The Gospel is a Mystery thou
say, but John, it is a Mystery revealed, it was hid in God, and none knew
it but himself. If a Mystery, we had more need to Study and search out for it
in the Scriptures. The Angels stoop down to pry into this Mystery and to learn
it now revealed, and yet thou would not have us to study it. O vain Man! But
what do thou mean by the Gospel being a Mystery? Is it such a Mystery as
cannot be understood by Man's searching the Scriptures, through the enlightnings
of the Holy Spirit? But the Key helps me again: It is a Mystery because it is
only an Allegory, and J. C. thinks that Allegorism is only the true Preaching
of it; as once I heard thee make use of that passage spoke by the Angels to
Mary: viz, He is not here, he is risen, intimating so much, we are not to Look
by Faith to his Death, but to the Light Rising in our hearts: Thus it is a
Mystery, as in your sense. That Preaching that thou mentionest from the
Corinthians, was the Preaching of Christ Crucified, and that was counted
Foolishness, looking for Life to come by the death of another. Per mortem
alterius stultum est sperare salutem. Thus do the Jews, Heathens, Socinians,
Quakers. What, that death 1600 years since, as far off thee, as Jerusalem? This
is thy Language, the Heavenly things themselves which thou mentionest are the
things of the Gospel, in Heb. 9.23. It Is true; but I am jealous that thou
meanest the Light within by these Heavenly things themselves, whereas it is
plainly in opposition to the Vessels, Tabernacle, etc. under the Law, that were
sprinkled with Blood: thou must understand either Christ himself, who in Chap.
2. v. 10. was consecrated through sufferings, or the Church and People of God,
who are the Heavenly Jerusalem, or Heaven it self, whereinto he is entered with
his Blood: The things of the Gospel are things searched out by the Spirit, (i.
e.) they are already searched out by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. God has revealed
them to us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God, Christ Crucified, which he speaks of before, the things of this
Doctrine, v. 16. but we have the mind of Christ; they are revealed by the
Apostles, and by the Wisdom and Judgment of Man enlightened by the same Spirit
that gave them forth, we may attain the Knowledge of them, and not without; but
this Spirit thou speaks of is nothing but the Light that every Man has
according to the Quakers; but withal, we cannot be persuaded by thee, to that
deep silence thou intimates in case we did look for such an effusion of the
Spirit, as was at first, knowing that the Apostles themselves at Jerusalem,
waiting for the Promise of the Father, Acts 1.14. continued with one accord in
Prayer and Supplication. I suppose it was not mental Prayer in a silent
meeting; but we believe by an ordinary Revelation of the Spirit upon our minds,
in the diligent reading of the Scripture, we may be able to understand the
Mysteries necessary for Salvation, 1 Cor. 2.18. The Spiritual Man discerns
all things.

J. C. Thou say we are to conceive of God, according as the Scripture sets
him forth to us.

Ans. Thou might well have joined that to this which immediately goes
before it, viz. we are prone to measure God by the Rules of our own
imagination, and to think that what appears to be Righteousness with us, is so
with him: but this would have prevented thy following Cavil. I insert it lest
the Reader should not have the Epistle by him, I ask now, Whether the
Scriptures or our imaginations and thoughts be the Rule whereby we are to
measure God and true Righteousness?

J. C. page 16. But the Scriptures contrariwise Condemn all Man's conceivings,
saying, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, it has not entered into the
heart of Man to conceive.

Answ. When I say; We, it is plain I understand Saints and Ministers that have
the Spirit, not those that are totally destitute thereof. For I write to a
Church of Christ, direct my Speech to them, and by way of digression to my
Brethren in the Ministry. And though thou apprehendest none but Quakers and
their Ministers have the Spirit, give me leave to think that others have, and
these to whom my Epistle is sent, so that thou do but here trifle as in other
places, and very Childishly; the Scripture does no where condemn Man's
conceivings of Godly the Scriptures and according to them.

The Scripture thou mentionest here speaks of the natural Man, 1 Cor. 2.14.
opposed to the Spiritual (i. e.) the Man that has no more Light than that
which every Man has. Why art thou angry with this, John? if any do conceive of
God according to the Scripture he conceives aright of God, and it argues he
has the Spirit: But I know where it pincheth thee, thou would not that any
should conceive of God according to the Scripture, but according to the
immediate teachings of the Light within. I know John, thou art an Enemy to the
Scripture, as shall appear as we go on.

J. C. ibid. The Scriptures are true, as God means them; not as Man by his
conceivings interprets them.

Answ. If thou would speak out, thou would say that this God that only
gives the meaning of the Scriptures is the Light within, so that according to
thee, none can give any true meanings of the Scripture but John C. and those
Brethren of his in the Minstery: Thou art herein as bad as Muggleton the
Prophet, he says none can interpret Scripture aright but he. Thus John, thou
have set up a few Popes at Devonshire-House, from whom, as from so many
Oracles, we are to receive the true Interpretation of Scriptures; it is true,
what thou say here: But does not the Spirit who is God, give the meanings of
the Scriptures in the Scriptures? Do not they Interpret themselves best? When
thou say as viz. Man by his conceivings: Why, are not the Saints Men? And
the Ministers of Christ Men? Ours are still, though yours be Women and Virgins.

But J. C. how did thou forget thy self in contradicting the Oracle G. F. who
said, that the Man in the Male, and the Man in the Female may speak, and so
Interpret Scriptures in your Meetings, and here thou say, Not as Man by his
conceivings Interprets them.

J. C. And the understanding of every true Disciple must be opened by Christ,
before he can rightly know them, as it is written, he opened their
Understandings that they might Understand the Scriptures: for till then they
are a sealed Book to the Learned and Unlearned.

Answ. This likewise we acknowledge to be true, but then do still query, Whether
this Light that opens the Understanding of every true Disciple be not the
Light within that every one has? if not, then the Light within cannot do it,
thou grantest, and that Scripture thou namest confirms me, that thou have
forsaken thy Principle, about the Omnipotency of the Light within; for in the
last of Luke, that opening of the Disciples Understandings surely was another
thing, than any teachings of the Light that every one has. It was some
Beamings of the Spirit at that time, enlightening their Understandings, which
are of a different nature from that Light that every one has, as in time we
will make evident. I grant in the close, that the Scriptures are a sealed Book
both to the Learned, and Unlearned, that have not the Spirit of Christ,
according to Jer. 55.21.11, 12. Only, I query whether still it be not a sealed
Book to all but the Quakers? Thou go on to the next Paragraph of the Epistle
and meddles not with a word of this more, so that I take it for granted; and
let the Reader take notice of it, that J. C. consents either to this first
Principle, in the Series of the Principles, as in order they are laid down,
viz. that such is the Purity of God that nothing is accepted by him, but what
is every way complete and perfect; and if so, then he believes that
Righteousness within, which consists in the virtues and gifts of the Spirit, in
every Quaker is every way perfect and complete, and for this compleatness is
accepted, and that it will hold the test before God's Tribunal, and so will
justify us, and that it is beyond the Righteousness of the Elect Angels: or he
does not consent to it; if so, then he is afraid to touch it, but silently
passes it, as a Principle that is altogether too strong for him to encounter,
though it is the basis of all the rest touching Imputed Righteousness.

J. C. page ibid. Thou utterest many words about the Confession of Sin, as if
the Quakers were against the Confession of sin to God.

Answ. As to this Head or Principle that is also asserted, thou do not speak
any thing, viz. None of the Sons of Men since Adams fall, (that was no more
than Man) has ever brought, neither can any of them bring this perfect and
complete Righteousness to God: either thou consentest to this or no; if thou
do, as by thy silence it should appear, then what becomes of the Quakers
Perfection that thou and all have pleaded for? It is then a Perfection that is
not a complete Righteousness: if thou do not think this true, thou playest
the Hypocrite in not contradicting it, but if thou would not juggle and play
Leger-de main thou do think that Man can bring a complete perfect
Righteousness since the fall, and this Righteousness is in every Quaker wrought
by the Light and it does justify; of which afterward.

J. C. As if the Quakers were against that Confession of sin, etc.

Ans. Shall we not judge of your Opinions by your practices, you Pray I know,
having heard you frequently, without the least Confession of any sin. Thus it
may be the Quakers are not against the Confession of sin, viz. they apprehend
that others that are not Quakers being sinners ought to confess their sins; But
as for them they are not sinners. I have lately tried them in a discourse, not
a word can I draw out of them that they are sinners, Woe unto them Pharisees,
Hypocrites. Humphery Smith being asked at Hartford why he did not confess sin
to God in Prayer, answered he had none to confess as being no drunkard etc. I
can prove this by witness.

J. C. page ibid. We own the Holy Scriptures.

Answ. Are not the Scriptures and Christ mightily obliged to you infallible
Doctors, that will condign to own such fragments, and a Book patched up of so
many scraps to help a little when the Church had lost the life of the Spirit.
One now living in Hartford, about ten years since heard John Crook at Hartford
in George Westwares house, in a discourse amongst the people, invalidating the
Holy Scriptures as not being the Rule, and that people should turn to the
Light, and therefore had words to this purpose as near as can be remembered:
viz. That at first the Saints lived by the life of the Spirit and were guided
thereby, and had none of those Books which they call (meaning Professors) the
Scriptures, which Scripture so called, in the primitive times after they were
written, some part of them was at Corinth, some at Colosse, others at Rome,
etc. now when the Churches had lost the life of the Spirit, they called a
Council and sent to those places, and gathered those fragments and packed or
patched them together and called them the Scriptures; and he said f^rther That
we had no more than the Rhemists (who were Papists) would let us have, and that
there was a Gospel written by some one of the Apostles, and a Revelation by
another which we had not: when J. C. was charged with this at Hartford, he
replied to the same person that had heard him, that if these were his words, it
was not his Judgment.

J. C. page ibid. We say, that if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.
But confession of sin ought to be performed from the sense of evil of sin upon
the Conscience, and not out of formality and custom only as most do.

Ans. We say the same; here we agree, but this phrase (as most do) I suppose
are all of what sort soever that are not Quakers; for Quakers do not at all
confess sin, therefore all are but in a senseless formal state besides them,
and what they do it is but out of custom.

Page ibid. Yet we say (now this is spoke from an infallible oracle) in the
name of all the Quakers, where the heart is sprinkled with the blood of Christ
from an evil Conscience at that time, and while remaining so thanksgiving is
proper to be given to God: for praise is comely for the upright, and such Know,
etc.

Answ. So may there not be a sense of the desert of the evil of sin, (though
not anguish and trouble upon the Conscience for it) at the same time that the
Conscience is sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and so there may be, and
should be Confession of sin and Praise together; Supplication and Thanksgiving
the Scripture speaks of; and so in many of the Psalms there are Confessions and
Thanksgiving together; so there is a Rejoicing with Trembling. I query whether
the Quakers ever had a true sense of sin, because they never do confess sin;
whether they are not much more perfect than Isaiah, Job, and John, yet these
Saints Consciences at that very time were sprinkled with the blood of Christ,
and so Isaiah when he said I am a man of unclean lips: Paul had the sense of
sin, Romans 7. yet at the same time gives thanks. I query again whether any that
have it sprinkled ever have it unsprinkled, though they may lose the sense of
it: so indeed Praise, not to exclude Confession, is comely for the upright.

J. C. And such know the Blood of sprinkling to be a speaking blood; it
speaks with the Apostle, causing that soul that is washed with it always to
be mindful of it, and truly to prize it.

Answ. This true if rightly understood, but by the Blood (look in o Mr. Faldo's
Key) is to be meant the power of the light within, not the sufferings of Christ
according to the Quakers sense; Remember what Pennington says that external
blood cannot cleanse the conscience, the blood of Bulls and Goats could not do
it, no more can this; there is no more worth in this than in other common blood
in your account, although thou do afterward seem to confess otherwise.
Pennington says heavenly blood which Christ brought with him from Heaven and
dwelt in the garment of the body a while, and now is in every Quaker. This is
the blood thou meanest; still thou art at Legerdemain. Where does this blood
speak? why we believe (according to the Scriptures) That as the high Priest
entered into the Holy-place with the blood of the sacrifice; so Christ by his
own blood entered in once into the holy place, Heb. 9.12, 24. into heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Now according to your
Allegorists, this Heaven it self is within man, so was Christ in the Saints
before he came in the flesh, and his blood the Light within before any of his
sufferings in the flesh. But we now will declare our sound Scripture-sense as
follows: Christ is our Advocate with the Father, and his Blood; the infinite
worth of it, the value of all his sufferings speaks to the Father John 1.2. he
is an Advocate by virtue of his being a Propitiation, as there its spoken; now
he was not a propitiation within us, therefore he is not an Advocate within;
that is the Spirits work, enabling us to go to God in prayer through his Name,
yet we say that faith that looks to this, and trusts to this, is wrought within
us by the Spirit, and so know that the blood speaks the sufferings without; and
thus we have peace of Conscience.

J. C. page 9. Thou say Jesus Christ of Nazareth, etc. brought this
Righteousness; if thou believe that none were really saved or made righteous
by that Righteousness of Christ till or after that time, thy faith is contrary
to the Scripture, which calls Christ's Righteousness an everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Isa. 45.17. Micah. 5.

Answ. Yea and again I say Jesus of Nazareth brought this Righteousness, and he
only, and it was not actually brought in before, according to that in Dan.
9.24. And to bring in everlasting Righteousness; prophesying of the Messiahs
coming in the flesh, he says, Seventy weeks were to be accomplished to make
reconciliation for iniquity, atoning justice by being cut off, verse. 25. not
for himself; then it was to be, and not till then, not before, he offered not
himself before, Heb. 9.26. But now once in the end of the World has he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Abraham, David, Paul,
none of them brought in this Righteousness; was Paul crucified for you? 1 Cor.
11.3. yet is this Righteousness an everlasting Righteousness, the working of it
was now, and fulfilling of it in his person, taking flesh upon him; but yet
everlasting in that it was first the Righteousness that the Father had from
eternity designed; Secondly, the Righteousness of the eternal word; Thirdly, a
Righteousness of an eternal virtue and efficacy; Fourthly, a Righteousness that
remained forever wherever it is imputed, Fifthly, a Gift never by God repented
of: Therefore it is very frivolous, and argu^s nothing but that thou want
matter to fill thy paper with, to cavil in this wise, as if it could enter into
my thoughts, that any either before or after were saved but by virtue of this
Righteousness; when as against Papists, Socinians, Quakers I am pleading, that
all those I named viz. Abraham, David, Ezra, Daniel, Job, Isaiah, had no
Righteousness that would save them but this, because the other Righteousness
they had in them was imperfect, as appears by their Confession of sin; and God
will accept of nothing but what is entirely and absolutely perfect. As to that
Micah. 5. I cannot find the word everlasting, but only in the verse. 2. where it
is thus written, whose goings forth have been of old from everlasting, which is
certainly spoke as to Christ's Deity, for his coming forth from Bethlehem, was
in time there mentioned, and then did he bring in and fulfill, and not till
then, this Righteousness that I am speaking of, In the fullness of time God sent
his Son, Gal. 3. Behold, I come to do thy will. A Body have thou prepared me,
Heb. 10.

J. C. page ibid. We Believe Salvation only by that Jesus which witnessed a
good Confession before Pontius Pilate.

Answ. This is a good Confession: if only by him, then not by the light within,
for that is not Jesus that witnessed before Pontius Pilate; if only by him,
exclusive of all things else, then not by the Virtues, Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit; for they are not Jesus that witnessed, amp;c.

J. C. page 10. For Answer to the Heathens Knowledge of God's Vengeance and
sight in the Deity; I refer the Reader to the Reply to the young Men's Book.

Answ. I shall also defer my Answer in full, till I come to that, only say,
that I find you Brethren in iniquity, in abusing so grossly my words. If you do
it not with purpose and design, then you be more ignorant than Schoolboys; If
designedly, it is Jesuite-like: my words are these, viz. They saw (speaking of
that Barbarous people) in the Deity, a Vengeance ready to punish. Now, would
not a Boy of seven years of Age take it thus, viz. They saw a Vengeance ready
to punish sin, in the Deity (i. e.) to be in the Deity, and thou with thy
Brother makes this phrase, viz. in the Deity, to be the modus of their seeing
the Vengeance, when as before I said, that God had Justice in him, there is the
Subject of it; the very Light of Nature shows, there is the way and manner of
their seeing it: not as you say and make use of it, as a Concession for your
turns; sight in the Deity (i. e.) Light that was in their Consciences,
believing the Light to be God himself. O horrid Blasphemy! you would make me
speak-like your selves, I believe no other Light in those Heathens but that of
Nature, and this was not the Deity: But (...) the Reader take notice that J. C.
wholly passes over this Paragraph concerning that of Christ's Righteousness
(as indeed he does the other two before) which consists in his sufferings, and
making satisfaction, and not a word unto that Vengeance that is naturally in
God, lest he should discover himself to be a Socinian. Oh, for a little
plainness from this people! for if this be true, that God has a Vengeance in
him, and that naturally, his Nature engages to punish sin, and all have
sinned; I would know how all the Righteousness of mere Man, will or can atone
this; but I had like to have omitted something material.

J. C. page ibid. But for thy own knowledge of it, I find thee like the
Pharisees of old, casting all God's Vengeance upon Christ, an easy way of thou
could so escape it: by imagining his doing and suffering God's pleasure, to
be reckoned thine, by a bare belief of it wholly without thee.

Answ. I do not understand thee, help me herein I pray thee, how the Pharisees
did cast all God's Vengeance upon Christ, as a way to escape the wrath to come,
Mat. 3.7. I never read this, or heard of it. It is written, who has warned you
to fly from the wrath to come? and that follows, bring forth Fruit meet for
Repentance; so then they having some convictions upon their Consciences, and
apprehensions of wrath through John's Ministry, betake themselves to the
Baptism of John, believing that an External submission to this, would be
sufficient to (...) their Consciences, in the mean while being destitute of any
inward change of heart, or any real Holiness in their lives, and all this while
had no whit of Faith in Jesus Christ, which is always accompanied with true
Repentance, as the beginning of it. These Pharisees were very ignorant of
Christ, if not altogether; they were Vipers, John calls them so, they placed
their Religion in their carnal kindred to Abraham, v. 9. and were Chaff to be
burnt up, v. 12. yet thou do make their Faith as good as the Faith of any of
the Godly in the Nation: my Knowledge of the Vengeance of God is this, which I
express in the Epistle, if it should rest upon thee or me, or any of the Sons
of M^^, or all Mankind, it would burn to the neithermost Hell: Therefore having
felt something of it in my Conscience, in the sense of Sin, and knowing more of
it was due to me for my sins, I fly by Faith, which the Spirit works in me, by
the hearing the Gospel, to Jesus Christ (...) be delivered from this wrath to
come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. believing through Grace, that all that Vengeance and Wrath
that was due to me for transgression was upon that person Jesus, my Surety, in
my stead and room: and though thou do scurrilously call the Faith we have
Imagining, yet this is the Faith of God's Elect, Isai. 53. The Chastisement of
our Peace was upon him, which we should have born in the same kind, v. 7. the
right reading of it, is, it was exacted, and he answered, and whoever believes
not thus, shall find wrath in his Conscience, if his judgment be not
intoxicated with error as thine is. I perceive this by what tho^ say here,
that thou have but tasted very scantly of the wrath of God in thy Conscience,
otherwise thou would not have such slighting thoughts of it, as to apprehend
it to be atoned any other way, than by Christ's bearing it, who sweat drops of
Blood under it, and thy unacquaintedness with the Nature of Faith, in that thou
call it an easy way; Ah, John, what meanest thou to turn the scoffer like
Julian? do the Saints find it an easy way, who are crying out daily, Lord help
or unbelief; but it is such an easy way, that you poor Creatures have not hit
of it, nay you will fully despise and scorn it I doubt. Ah, J. C. here thou
stumblest at the Cross of Christ, and art leavened in thy mind with Hellish
Socinianism, the dirt will out at length John, here thou art plainly ashamed of
the Cross of Christ, dares not own that the wrath of God was upon Christ; Oh
Repent John, of the thoughts of thy heart! and let that Scripture convince
thee, Gal. 3. He was made a Curse for us, etc. whatever thou do pretend
afterward in thy Lines, concerning Christ's sufferings, the enlightened Reader
will know by this, that it is but to blind the People. In the last place thou
say in the same Paragraph, by a bare Belief of it wholly without; that which
thou calledst before an Imagining, here thou call Belief, and (...) Belief;
what would thou John, have more than Faith? here thou discoverest thy self
to be a Papist; Oh, what a bundle of Rotten^^^^ is Quakerism! thou would
have Works to justify us, Faith only if not sufficient, against which error
the Protestants (thou know) have ^^^^^nded, Romans 4. He that works not, but
Believes, there is Faith only, (...) Belief John, what say thou to that?
though that Faith that is justifying, will work by Love, yet it receives no
efficacy from its being accompanied with Works as to our Justification, but
from the Object without, how sad is it, that every Truth must be struck at, by
a (...) sort of Papists.

J. C. Here we differ in our account. I say according to Dan. 9.24. ^king of
Christ page 16 to finish Transgression, and to make an end (...) sin, and to
make Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness,
etc. I know and believe Salvation, by the imputed, (...), and real everlasting
Righteousness of Jesus Christ brought (...)

Answ. Enough, if thou wast but real in thy expressions; let us turn (...) on
every side, it is likely the cheat may be found out: if thou art (...), what
then means thy arguing against my asserting Imputation, and taking up most of
my Arguments for it, pretending to Answer them? what a Knave is he, that will
pretend kindness to my dear Friend, whom I love, and profess friendship to him,
and in the meanwhile go about to wound him and stab him to the heart; if thou
art real in this for Imputed Righteousness, when I charged Penn for calling it
a Doctrine of Devils, why did thou instead of bearing thy Testimony against
him, call upon me to Answer his Arguments for (...) if thou be for it, why do
thou not Preach it and thy Brethren, (...) are contradicting it in all your
Meetings? there is no end of thy dissembling; it is a professed Trade thou
drives, as the Mountebancks, up and down the Country. But proceed we; what may
we understand by this word Imputed, which he acknowledges? Why, one of your
Gang can tell us, James Naylor, Love to the Lost, page 7. and with him, his
Righteousness is freely imputed, or put into the Creature; so now we have his
sense Imputed Righteousness, is Righteousness put into the Creature. 1. That
spotless Manhood of Christ. 2. His active Obedience, all the holy Actions of
his Life. 3. All the Sufferings of Christ, for herein we say by the
Righteousness of Christ: All these are put into every Quaker, and so in this
sense not imputing Trespasses, is God's not putting them into us. I cannot omit
another Testimony from another Doctor of them, Smith Cat. page 64. and 12. We
believe that Christ in us does offer (...) himself a Living Sacrifice to God
for us, by which, the Wrath and Justice of God is appeased toward us;
Salvation then by Imputed Righteousness, you must understand, Christ offering
up of himself in us, in the Quakers sense, and so appeasing Gods Wrath. The
other word Reckoned is not thus: that what Christ as a Surety, has paid down
for me in his Obedience is accounted as if I had paid it, as we say, and that
truly: but according to the other, it must be as money in a Man's own purse there
told and reckoned, which he has to pay to God at any time when he demands, not
needing any to pay it for him. Real thou (...) as if there was no reality in
the Act of God, reckoning and imputing Righteousness, but by this and by the
other, thou understandest in opposition to the Faith of God's Elect, which thou
call Imagination; (...) it is something more and better than what is
received by Faith, that is not to thee a Real Righteousness. The other word is
brought nigh; well then, it is too far off thee, if thou have it no other way
than by Faith I had thought that Faith had been the substance of things hoped
for, that by Faith Christ dwelt in our hearts, and that there had been a
reality in God's Acts of imputing, that what God Reckoned to Abraham, had been
very Real; for he was really saved. Thou mistrusted God, John: But the sum of
all is this: viz. The Light within, Obedience to that is this imputed,
reckoned, real Righteousness of Christ; For the Light is Christ: Remember Fox
the younger's Testimony, before he speaks of the Light, what it would do, if
obeyed: I will forgive all their Iniquities, etc. and hear the Old Fox Bark:
Christ being within, there is justification, Mystery, page 49.

J. C. page ibid. Which in the fullness of Time, was manifest in and (...) him,
and in due time was really made mine by the Work and Application (...) Spirit
in my inward parts.

Answ. This is true, plainly understood as spoken: But if a Man be caught
stealing, and cheating, once, or twice, he is greatly suspected, when ever he
is dealt with. We have thee tardy, John, frequently; and now no trusting of
thee. Thou only steals the good and wholesome words that have been used by us,
that thou may make thy putrid errors go off the better. Thou have learned to
dress that Strumpet Quakerism up in a more modest, sober attire, than thy
Brethren, that so she may be taken for a chaste Matron. Now let me explain what
we understand by this: viz. That Righteousness that was manifest in Christ and
by Christ, in the fullness of Time, it was that which I have already distanced
in, viz. 1. That Christ was born of a Virgin, so his Manhood (...) without sin
spotless, and endued with the Spirit without Measure. (...). He did in his Holy
Actions fulfill the Law. 3. All his sufferings (...) taken in, being at last
made an offering for sin, he being God as well (...) Man, these Actions and
sufferings are of infinite value: now observe Reader, not a word of this here
in this place by J. C. but only in the general Righteousness manifested in him
and by him.

Now what do the Quakers mean? Let Pennington speak; page 25. What Nature must
these sacrifices be of, which cleanse the Heavenly things, whether of
necessity, they must be Heavenly: If so, then whether it was the Flesh and
Blood of the Vail, or the Flesh and Blood within the Vail. Whether it was the
Flesh and Blood of the outward Earthly Nature, or the Flesh and Blood of the
inward Spiritual Nature. Whether it was not the Flesh and Blood which Christ
took of the first Adams Nature, or that of the second Adam's Nature.

Now John, That Righteousness, that in the fullness of time was manifested in
Christ, and by Christ, was only the Obedience and Sufferings, and Sacrifice of
that Spiritual Heavenly Flesh and Blood of the first Adam's Nature, that was in
the Vail: that of the Vail the Body and humane Nature, that he had from the
first Adam, the Righteousness of this, and the Sufferings of this is nothing.

Now let the Reader view the Harlot, She is known now, She is in her own
Whorish Attire.

J.C. page ibid. And in due time made mine by the work and application of the
Spirit in my inner parts.

Answ. True, we say that this Righteousness spoke of, is really made mine thus:
The Spirit works Faith in my inward parts, whereby I view it, apprehend it,
receive it for my self having need of it: therefore called so often the
Righteousnss of Faith. Through faith in his (...) in Romans 3. and it is really
mine: Faith is the substance of things hoped (...)

But now hear Penington Mysteries of the Kingdom page 17. Convered to the
Creature in and through the seed and brought forth in the Creature by the seed
and the Creature united to Christ in the seed, here is Justification of Life.
This is the application of the Spirit in their sense, This Righteousness is the
Light Christ, the heavenly flesh that was in the vail. The seed through which
it is conveyed is Christ, and the Seed that brings it forth is Christ, and the
Seed in which the Creature is united to Christ is Christ, the Light within
every man. The sum is then acc^ording to Penington Christ the Light in every
man is conveyed to the Creature by Christ, and brought forth by Christ, and the
Creature is united to this Christ in Christ the Light. This is John Crooks
application of the Spirit. Deny Peningtons Divinity if thou dare.

J. C. parag. ibid. And God is well pleased or satisfied in and with him in
whom I am accepted, and not for works of righteousness that I have done, nor
yet for the works sake only, or quatenus works though wrought in me by his
Spirit, but in and for the sake of him that works in us and for us. Isa. 26.12.

Answ. Would any think that it is the same man that writes a little further so
much against my asserting that our own Righteousness consists in those Virtues
and Gifts that the Holy Spirit works in our minds, and that this is not the
Righteousness in which we are accepted. Oh would not any think that John had
fully yielded herein to me and that he was very sound in this point, and no
Papist; But now pray let us conster it by their own Dictionary, and see what it
will speak; And God is well pleased and satisfied in and with him. If this him
was to be understood of the true Christ we need not one word further: But
Remember what the Quakers Christ is: viz. the Heavenly Flesh Blood and Bones
that came down from Heaven, not Jesus of Nazareth; and it is the man in every
Male and Female that preaches among the Quakers; it is nothing but the Light
in every man which is called the Spirit in the inward parts immediately before:
God is well pleased with this and satisfied with the Light, and I am accepted
in the Light he means, and not for the works of Righteousness which I have
done; here is Paul's words but the Quakers sense still, no, but for the works of
Righteousness that the Light does and are wrought in the Light that every man
has. Naylor Love to the lost page 64. yet it is (speaking of
self-Sanctification and Mortification) the Work of God wrought by Christ in the
Believer, whereby such become his workmanship in Christ Jesus wrought into
(...) Obedience, and his Obedience into them, in the measure till they (...) of
one heart, one mind, one Soul, one Flesh, one bone, one blood (...) one
Obedience, and one Life, and that it is no more we that live (...) Christ that
lives in us. Now by this line you may fathom to the (...) the Mystery of works
of Righteousness, which he has done i. e. J. C. did them not, but Christ the
Light in him; it was the Obedience of that Light wrought into him and he made
one Soul, flesh, blood with this Christ the Light in every one: ye know what
Naylor made himself. Thou now Reader sees the snare and trap uncovered; this
Divinity will bring you to this, that the Personality of J. C. is lost, and his
personal actions are all lost, when he prays or preaches it is Christ Prays
and Preaches, not John Crooks; and that Christ and he are both one Person.
Such monsters have been among the Quakers.

J. C. not for the works sake only or quatenus works, though wrought in me by
the Spirit.

Answ. For the works sake only; why then J.C. thou would have the works that
are wrought by the Spirit have some share in acceptance, thou would not have
it only for their sakes, which we may thank thee for; but partial causes they
must be, Christ of himself and his Merit is not sufficient unless something
wrought by the Light in us does join its Merit with him: but this Phrase
quatenus works, why if not as works, how (...)? as they are Christ the Light
and his Obedience, as before according in Naylors sense.

J. C. Wrought in me by the Spirit, but in and for the sake of him that works
all our good works in us and for us.

Answ. That is plainly, it is for the Lights sake in which the Quakers works,
all their works that the Quakers do are accepted, and which does work all their
works in them and for them.

J. C. page 10. Thou believe to be saved by a Righteousness wholly without
thee, reckoned but not real, which Righteousness Christ wrought 1600. years
since.

Answ. And I do J. C. solemnly profess in the presence of God, Angels, and Men,
that I believe that Righteousness whereby I am accepted of God, Justified and
saved is the righteousness of Jesus of Nazareth, which he wrought out in his
own personal Obedience and Sufferings 1600. years since, that God giving Faith
in this Righteousness which is by him reckoned to me, and in this reckoning
there is a reality; what the Lord does, is really done; and though this
Righteousness was wrought in Palestine at such a distance from me, nay Christ's
person be now at a greater distance than so, yet it hinders not but the Merit
of his death and bloodshed may and does reach me; my Surety paying such a Sum
of money for me at never such a distance discharges me, I have benefit by it,
as soon as I hear of it and accept it, the Sun is at a distance in the heavens
but we have the heat of it, and feel it. But indeed the Righteousness is not at
a distance from us, but put upon us by the Fathers Gift as the Scriptures
speak, ye have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. It is the best robe put upon us; and
as Isaac smelled the garment of Esan the Elder Brother when Jacob had it put on
by his Mother, and blessed Jacob, so the Father does in this case, he is well
pleased with us and blesses us, having Christ's the first-borns Righteousness
upon us by Imputation, receiving it by Faith, and all that Righteousness that
is within (...) of Sanctification is but the fruit of this; it was merited and
purchased for us by this.

J. C. page ibid. adds: Not that we undervalue that Righteousness (...) cursed
is he that so does.

Answ. According to J. C's. desire let the curse be upon all those that
undervalue the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that according to him is but a
thing at a distance both as to time and place 1600 years since, as far as
Jerusalem, never like to come nearer to us by our Imagining as he says. I do
really think, John that thou have cursed many of thy Brethren, and many of the
people called Quakers and thy self: w^ to them if it should be according to thy
curse, this is like the Jews that said his blood be upon us and our Children;
and they are under a sad Curse to this day: and surely there is a dreadful
curse of hardness, sottishness and pride upon the poor people the Quakers, and
from whence does it arise but from the undervaluing that Righteousness that was
wrought out 1600 years since and as far as Jerusalem. But observe a little how
thou writes this, Not that we undervalue that Righteousness, no. Answ. But then
it seems there is an other Righteousness in which we may be saved and which is
by the Quakers valued at an higher rate, and that Righteousness may be and is
brought nearer to you Quakers than this to us Christians; that it is a real
Righteousness, the other but reckoned; the Righteousness thou meanest which is
attained by attending on the Light, now this was wrought nearer in the North of
England, in Lancashire and those parts, when George Fox that Father of many
Nations (as a Quaker calls him) arose and this was nigher than Jerusalem, and
this was not above 22 years since or thereabouts; 1600 years is too long a time
for Christ's Righteousness to hold its virtue, and Jerusalem where he died and
now heaven were he lives, is too far off for Christ's Righteousness to have an
influence by any act of Gods imputing according to these unbeleiving Quakers.

J. C. page 10. For proof of thy belief thou say we are made Righteous in the
same way that he was made sin; but he was not made sin by inhe^^^^, or really
as thou speak elsewhere, for he knew no sin; therefore by ^^putation. The
same way when Christ knew no sin nor was any sin inherent in him, must we then
be made Righteous without either knowing or enjoying any real righteousness in
us as the Comparison holds forth.

Answ. John, I would know why thou passes over the first argument and writes
not one word in answer to it; but thou would have laid thy self open too much
it is likely: but now at this thou cavillest, the Comparison, as thou call
it, is not mine but Paul's, 2 Cor. 5. v. ult. for he has made him to be sin for
us who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Now
my argument is, viz. that we are trade Righteousness the same way that Christ
was made sin, he was not made sin by inhesion but by imputation: Therefore the
right conclusion is, we are made Righteous in Justification (for of this every
one ^eeth that I am treating and the Apostle likewise) not by Righteousness
that inheres in us, but that without us, John, when will thou learn to be
ingenious and distinguish right? when will thou desist winding and turning thus
like a Crooked Serpent, studying to deceive? Who of us ever denied that we were
to have a real Righteousness in Sanctification, but this is not to justify us:
we make a difference between Christ's personal Righteousness and our
Sanctification; the one imputed to us, the other wrought in us: we had by the
first Adam not only guilt of Sin, but the loss of the image, and the power of
indwelling sin: so we have two Righteousnesses by the second Adam Jesus Christ;
the one to take away the guilt of sin, that is the Righteousness I am pleading
for, and the other to take away the reigning power of sin, Sanctifiying of us,
and renewing of us into the image of Christ in some degree; but this latter
Righteousness is but an effect of the other. Christ is not only the Author of
the former (that we are speaking of, as he is of all Righteousness) but the
subject of it.

J. C. page ibid. But besides, if we are made Righteous in the same way in all
things.

Answ. Rather than want something to write thou will add some words of thy own
to write against: did I say any where in all things? There is no more, than
that we are made Righteous that way or same way as he was made sin. Now he was
made sin by imputation is plain, so we by imputation; for this Righteousness of
God that we are made (spoke of) is not the Righteousness of Sanctification; for
that is not by Imputation, but by Inhesion. Therefore, that which thou says J.
C. Parag. ibid. That he was made to be sin (for sin is mentioned in the
Abstract) then we must be without, or free from all manner of good, as he was
without, or free from all manner of evil, is true: add but this to it, in the
point of Justification, according to the Scripture, Righteousness imputed
without Works. Yet the Doctrine of Sanctification, is kept entire in its place
as a fruit of this still.

J. C. In the next Page save one, Thou affirmest, That the Gifts and Ve^tues,
that the Spirit of God works in our minds, is our own Righteousness. First,
because our Souls are the Subjects of it. And Secondly, because it is really in
our minds, and therefore ours.

Answ. If thou look into the Epistle again, thou may see thy mistake.

I give the Reasons, why the Gifts and Virtues that Gods Spirit works in us,
are our Righteousness in contradistinction to the Righteousness of Christ,
whereby we are justified, and the first Reason is because the Scripture calls
Faith our Faith, etc. 2. Our Souls are the Subjects of this Righteousness, it
is really in our Minds: now, why do thou make of thy own head, this last
Clause, another distinct Reason, when as it is but the same in other words, to
explain the former. Thou should not wrong me in transcribing what I have
writ. But I attend thy motion; Go on.

J. C. Parag. ibid. Yet thou say in this place, Christ is really (...)
Righteousness, Jehovah, (Tsidkenu) What, one while he is really Righteousness,
and another while not real, but reckoned; I would not wrong (...), but thy
words are plain.

Answ. I suppose the Quakers will admire thee here, as in all other of thy
Cavils, but what thou aimest at I know not well: I suppose thy Invention here
ran a Tilt, and was low; but I will adventure to reconcile the seeming
Contradiction: the Virtues and Gifts of the Spirit are really in our minds;
this is the Righteousness that Sanctifies: Christ as the Branch and Jehovah,
with all he did and suffered personally, is really our Righteousness for
Justification; and yet this Righteousness is a Reckoned Righteousness, and
imputed, not inhering in us, but very real still; for there is a reality in
God's Reckoning it to us, and it is really ours (as I said) as if we had so
done and suffered. Some may busy themselves to find a Knot in a Bulrush.

J.C. page ibid. Thy calling William Penn a Novice, manifests only Pride in thy
self, but it is no proof against him, and the truly considerate will account
thy charge upon him to belong to thy self, till thou have confuted his
Arguments.

Answ. The truly considerate weighing what there I charge him with, will think
it too little. I charge him with this, viz. That he (...) the Doctrine of
imputed Righteousness, the Doctrine of Devils. Now ^ Novice is but one, that
has been newly in the Faith, and is pussed up: But here he has denied at
once, the Faith of all God's people in all Ages, and maligned it, making the
glorious Doctrine of Christ to be Patronized by the Devil. If Luther had lived
and seen this, he would have anathematized this Proud Man, and thee John for
thy thus questioning of it, and nibbling at it: But Remember Paul has done it,
and it will stand upon Record against you, viz. If any Man Evangelize otherwise
than we have, let him be accursed: John, who will think thee in earnest in thy
seeming good words in owning this Doctrine as before and after, when instead of
bearing thy Witness against this Shuttle-Cock, thou call me to Answer his
Musty Popish Arguments which which he has penned against imputed
Righteousness: John, they are all Answered already, by those that the Lord
raised up against Bellarmine the Jesuit, and other Papists, by Downham, Ames,
etc. Let the Reader call to mind before I leave this J. C's Profession, viz. I
Believe Salvation by the imputed Reckoned Righteousness, etc. But you will
cease to Breath, before you will cease Deceiving; and yet here takes part with
Penn's calling it a Doctrine of Devils.

J. C. Thou say, If Jesus Christ had the guilt of sin really charged upon
him: what, Do thou suppose the Innocent Lamb of God, to be really guilty of
Sin? What Blasphemy is this? What, really guilty of that which thy self says,
he neither did nor had? Yet thou bring Scripture to prove it, 2 Cor. 5. ult.

Answ. This is an old Rotten cavil of the Quakers which I have heard often, and
of their Brethren the Socinians in their Books. Christ was the Lamb of God I
acknowledge, not the Light within, as Fox and others say that John pointed to
the Light within, when he said the Lamb of God, etc. and this Lamb of God was
in his own Nature innocent, without Spot, Holy, harmless, and undefiled, and
(thou say I write that he had no sin, i. e. inherent as you see in the
Epistle) nor did any sin, which is true: Yet in my own words, I dare say again,
that Christ had the guilt of sin really charged on him, yet am I no Blasphemer;
no, thou chargest Paul, that says in 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin, to which
thou answerest not a word: if he had not sin on him, God in Righteousness could
not have punished this innocent Lamb: But thou art ashamed (I tell th^e) of
Christ's Cross: this is foolishness to thee, viz. Christ to be made sin.

J. C. page ibid. Thou uses many words to prove the imputation of Christ
Righteousness to Man while in Sin and Rebellion against God.

Answ. If thou could have found any words importing so much, no question thou
would have repeated them over and over, but there are none. I am pleading
that this Righteousness is imputed to Believers, it is offered in the Preaching
of it to poor sinners, and if God gives Faith, it will change their hearts; we
will grant that when God comes to justify he finds all in sin, ungodly, Romans
5. Rebels, Enemies; but he leaves them not so, but gives strength to them, not
to trade in sin, it has not Dominion over them; but we are not ignorant, that
by this Phrase, viz. Our being in sin, The Quaker understands sin being in us,
and so we still say that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to them that are in
sin and Rebellion (i. e.) sin dwells in them, otherwise no need of the
imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. And therefore these things are not
contraries, to have sin working in us and yet by Faith in Christ to be
righteous and justified, and at unity with God, reconciled to him, while that
which is contrary to God dwells in (...) being justified by Faith, we have
Peace with God, Christ has slain the Enmity, and made us one with God in
friendship with himself; so that notwithstanding that Maxim of thine, of
contraries, this is true, That a sinner (i. e.) one that has sin in him at the
same time (though sin in it self be contrary to the Nature of God and so
impossible it should be in Unity with God) may through Jesus Christ be
justified and have Union with Christ.

J. C. Parag. ibid. Vain Man! Does not the Apostle James, Chap. 2.20. say, that
Faith without works is dead?

Answ. He does so, and we believe the Scriptures cannot be broken, but are
these two inconsistent, viz. To have sin dwelling in us (by which you
understand Rebellion and being in sin (see Mr. Faldoes Key) and having Faith
with good Works. We say Faith is dead, and so no Faith at all without Works,
but only so called. But again, May there not be a Living Faith, and so Clothed
with good Works, and yet sin remain in a Person, and that Person
notwithstanding be at Peace with God. Paul in Romans 7. complains of sin, yet
says, there is no condemnation, Romans 8.1. But the plain English of this is,
none have any Faith nor good Works but are in sin and Rebellion against God,
but the Quakers that obey the Light as their Christ, these only must be said to
have Righteousness imputed, i. e. Put into them.

J. C. Page 11. In the next place, Thou bring forth thy own strange
^^nceivings about Man's own Righteousness; thou say our own Righteousness
consists in those Gifts and Virtues which the Spirit of God works in ou^ minds,
and we express these outwardly in the Observation of the Moral-Law, in our
walkings among Men. This is such an heap of Confusion that I remember not the
like.

Answ. Let it be Fairly tried.

J. C. page ibid. The Scripture calls what is wrought by the Holy Spirit in us,
the Virtues of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.3, 5.

Answ. It should follow, Ergo, It is an heap of Confusion, to say that the
Virtues that the Spirit works in Man, is his own Righteousness, as if Christ
might not work Virtues in our hearts, which we express in our Lives, and yet
these be but our own Righteousness, but must needs be Christ's personal
Righteousness; as if because the Spirit of Jesus works Love in me, Therefore it
is not my Love; and Wisdom, therefore not my Wisdom; If I be by Christ's Spirit
enabled to walk in his Commandments, therefore it is not my own Righteousness,
but Dent. 6.25. Moses says it is, See the weakness of thy reasoning. Let me
^ell thee with all this, none ever did or can show forth Christ's Virtues in
their Lives, that were not first justified by imputed Righteousness, neither
can add any Virtue to their Knowledge, etc. according to that Scripture, in
Peter; those he writes to, there it is plain, he supposes them Saints,
Believers in Christ, that were forgiven and pardoned: see the beginning of the
Epistle of Peter.

J. C. Page ibid. To be Spiritually minded is Life, and Peace, Romans 8.6. Then
according to thy Interpretation, we must have Life and Peace in our own
Righteousness. Answ. Understand but the Scripture aright, and there is no
danger to draw such a Conclusion as this, from thence, viz. that therefore we
must have Life and Peace in that Spiritual-mindedness. (...), the Wisdom of the
Spirit in opposition to the Wisdom of the Flesh. But let us enquire what this
Wisdom of the Spirit is, v. 9. So then they that are in the Flesh, cannot
please God; now Hebrews 11. Without Faith it is impossible to please God; why,
Then to be in the Flesh is to be without Faith, to receive Christ's
Righteousness. By Faith, Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice, Heb. 11. So
then the Wisdom of the Spirit is to Believe and Receive the Doctrine of
forgiveness of Sins, and that no Condemnation is to them that are in Christ, to
receive this in opposition to the Building (as the Jews did) upon Fleshly
Privileges, being Abraham's Seed, etc. And leaning to the way of the Covenant
of Works: Now the Wisdom of the Spirit is thus rightly understood, i. e. The
Spirit gives Wisdom in this Doctrine of imputed Righteousness, and hereupon
comes Life and Peace, Romans 5. Being justified by his Blood we have Peaces So
that Life and Peace arises not by Looking to this Wisdom and Spirituality, for
that is imperfect, but in that this Wisdom looks to Jesus Christ himself and
the advantage we have by him.

J. C. Parag. ibid. Thus like the foolish Woman do thou Build an House and
pull it down with thy own hands.

Answ. Thou see the Building raised upon Christ the Foundation stands still,
and I am so far from pulling it down, that my work is to defend it against the
assaults of such false Teachers as thy self, that would either remove people to
another Foundation, or ruin all the good Truths that have been built as
precious stones upon it, and bring in thy Hay and Stubble.

J. C. Parag. ibid. For take away the Gifts and Virtues which the Spirit of God
works in our minds, and what remains but a Body of Sin and Death, and Thoughts
only Evil continually, and yet Man as Bold and Confident as if he needed
nothing.

Answ. Who ever of us, went about by our Doctrine to take away the Gifts and
Virtues of the Spirit. Thy Conscience gave thee the lie when thou writ this:
Thou know we are for Sanctification and H^liness, inward and outward, and
say, there is nothing but Sin, Death Flesh, Evil, where the Spirit of
Regeneration is absent, which is more than you will say; for you say the Spirit
is in every one, making the Light of Nature and Spirit both one. Again, Why
should you suppose such a thing as this, viz. taking away the Gifts of the
Spirit, when as we are treating of Righteousness imputed unto them that have
Faith? Now can any have Faith, and have the Gifts of the Spirit taken away? But
yet shall there be no distinction? May not the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit
remain in us, and we thereby be Sanctified, and yet not Justified by that
Righteousness within, but by that without us, which is the cause of
Sanctification.

J. C. Parag. ibid. As is spoken of the Kings Daughter, Ps. 45.13. To be all
Glorious within, is to abound in our own Righteousness according to thy
Interpretation.

Answ. There is Glory I grant in Sanctification, but a greater in
Justification: Christ's personal Righteousness is far more Glorious than our
Righteousness, yea, than the Righteousness of Angels. Whoever has it by Faith
as the Church here, are glorious both within and without, both Souls and
Bodies; our Beauty lies in his own Comeliness that he puts upon us, Ezekiel. 16. I
do but query whether this Glory of the Church set forth by Gold and
Embroideries, be not rather the Righteousness imputed to her than any thing
else, or whether we may not take it so, viz. That the Church while in the
World, is ragged and squalid through Afflictions and Persecutions, but yet
there is an inward Glory by reason of Christ's Love toward her, which is
discerned by her Spiritual Children, when others see it not; and how can this
be understood of Sanctification, when as she is said to be [all] Glorious
within, yet this Work is not perfect in any as to degree, but there remains
sin in them: But let it be understood as thou will of the Virtues of the
Spirit; We are not against having of these, and abounding in them, but would
not have any to trust in them, they being imperfect, to justify them; but give
the Glory of this to Christ's Righteousness wrought out 1600 years since.

J. C. Par. ibid. 2. Pet. 1.5, 8. Speaking of the Virtue of Christ, He that
lacks these things is blind.

Answ. So he is; but now John, see what Virtues those were, try whether Faith
may not be found there, v. 5. I see it: Add to your Faith Virtue: Now Faith
always respects an Object without, Christ's Person is the Object of Faith: So
now John, it is right, he is very blind, that has no Faith in Christ, what is
this to thy Business; so the other that thou say, those in whom Faith
abounds upon this Righteousness will neither be barren nor unfruitful.

J. C. Par. ibid. What is this less than calling Christ Beelzebub, and what
follows but that be has a Devil.

Answ. Big words and a sore Charge which I would not be Guilty of for more than
this World.

But what is the matter? Why, in that I say our Righteousness consists in those
Virtues and Gifts, that the Holy Spirit works in us: First, I call them Virtues
and Gifts: is there any hurt in that? Secondly, I say the Spirit is the Author
of them, God himself, and he works them in the mind of Man, through the
Preaching of the Word; Is this to call Christ Beelzebub, to give him the Glory
of his Works? What then is the matter: Because I cannot say that the
Righteousness the Spirit works in us, is the same but different from the
Righteousness that was personally wrought out by Christ when here on Earth, in
that I think one far excels the other: the sum is, because I say that all the
Righteousness the Quakers can attain to by attendance to the Light within, will
not justify them, without the personal Righteousness of Christ imputed, which
they despise.

J. C. Page ibid. And we express these outwardly, in our Observation of the
Moral Law, in our walking among Men. So the worse people are, and the Looser
they walk, the greater Right they have to the Righteousness of Christ and in a
better Condition to receive it, than those that in the sense of the evil of Sin
turn from it, because thou say this is properly (...) own Righteousness,
which consists in those Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit of God works in our
mind, is not this Ranterism in the highest degree?

Answ. If it be Ranterism, it is thy own: For thou addest many words there that
are none of mine. It is Knavery in thee to make such bad Inferences from the
Doctrine of the Gospel; it is like that in the Primitive time from Paul's
Doctrine: Shall we sin that Grace may abound? Thou may find these words not
far off, viz. in my Epistle, viz. the poor heavy laden Soul, will thankfully
receive this Righteousness, the sick this Cordial, the starved Prodigal this
Bread. How can thou in Conscience go about to make the People Believe that we
Preach in this wise: That the worst people have a greater Right to Christ's
Righteousness, than those that have a sense of the Evil of Sin. Do thou not
see thy nakedness? Art not thou ashamed for this Guile? Can any be heavy Laden,
Burdened, sick, Starved, ^in a Spiritual Sense as I spoke it) and not have a
sense of sin? is this ^^nterism now? But let me add, that the Right to this
personal Righteousness, arises not from any Righteous walking of ours, but it
is God's (...) Gift, he bestows it where he pleases. There is no Righteous
walking (which thou supposes here) before we are in Christ, and so have actual
Right to this Righteousness. But this I will heartily speak, that there is more
hope of so me of those vain wicked people to embrace this Righteousness of
Christ, and so to be saved, than some reformed Quaker, according to that in the
Scripture, Mat. 21.31. Publicans and (...) go into the Kingdom of God sooner
than you, the Publican was justified when the Pharisee was rejected.

J. C. page ibid. For the moral Law, Christ is so far from repealing (...),
that Matt. 5. he binds it faster and closer to his disciples; for of old, it
(...) said, etc.

Answ. What knowledge thou have of the Law thou have shown before in saying,
Law and Gospel are both one: Christ was so far from repealing it that he
fulfilled it, it is granted, and he did fulfill it by keeping it (...) I showed
in the Epistle, and bearing the curse of it, otherwise none (...) have been
saved: but that he did bind the moral Law closer or faster (...) his disciples
is strange to say; why Moses bound it for life, did he not What did Christ bind
it faster than Moses? then it should be for more than life if they kept it;
then they incurred more than eternal death and condemnation if they broke it:
but when thou come to this point Thou art wretchedly out John; I challenge
thee and all the Quakers in England to prove that Christ bound the Moral Law to
any of his Disciples closer and faster than Moses to be kept for Life and
Blessedness. Nay John thou may see the end of Christ in expounding the Law so
spiritually, it was to take down that proud Pharisaical Spirit that is in thee
and all Quakers, and something of it in all Disciples, and to convince them that
they could not keep the Law, and thereupon they might see a need of Forgiveness
and Righteousness by another, though thou hear me say we are to express the
Virtues outwardly in the observation of the Moral Law in our walkings among
men: what then, By these deeds of this Law shall no flesh (i. e.) no man living
Psalm. 143.2. none of the Sons of man, be Justified.

J. C. page 13. But remarkable is that Mat. 7.13, 14. where he Commands doing
as he would be done by, and calls, it the strait gate; Foreseeing that false
Prophets would preach another broader way.

Answ. Thy Exposition of Scripture is remarkable as will appear before we have
done with this. I charge thee with belying Christ in saying that he calls this
Principle. To do to others as we would be done by, the straight Gate; thy only
argument that can be brought is this viz. That this sentence, straight is the
Gate, does immediately come after the other, viz. to do as we would have
others, etc. But now look into Luke 13.23. we must take all that the four
Evangelists say to make up the complete history. There is the occasion of his
speaking these words, upon ones coming to him with this curious question, viz.
Lord are there few to be saved? ver. 24. strive to enter in at the straight
gate. This Passage of doing as we would be done by is omitted by Matthew. So
then there is not that coherence between the 12. and 13. verses as J. C. would
make to be. Christ had been speaking of several things of several Natures
before, and when he had done with one he begins with another distinct thing. As
in the Proverbs, he that would make one verse there have connection with the
precedent verse in many places, would make strange interpretation; So here in
this place now, why should not we interpret one place by another. Christ says
of himself, I am the Door, Joh. 10. By me if any Man enter, he shall be saved,
and in Joh. 14. he says, I am the way, no man comes but by me, Heb. 10.13. It
is said We enter into the Holy of Holiest by the blood etc. And that new and
Living Way, which is ^secrated for us through the Vail, that is to say, his
Flesh, now whether is more likely that this Principle of Morality or Christ's
person, should be the Gate of entrance into Glory? It is called straight, not
that it is so in it self, but our natural darkness, unbelief, makes it so, and
it is usually accompanied with hot Persecutions: now John, who is the false
Prophet that makes the way Broader, thou or I, in that thou make Morality
without Christ to be the Gate. Now are there not more Moral Men than
Christians, nay, is it not possible for Men in their Conversations to do as
they would have Men to do to them, and yet be Enemies to Jesus Christ? was it
not thus with the Pharisees? Was not Paul blameless, touching the Moral Law,
yet at that time a Persecutor? The young Man that said to Christ, all these
things have I done; and what does Morality signify without Faith in Christ the
Way? but whoever of us said, that Faith in Christ was at any time without
honesty? Thus thou art unhappy in all thy attempts.

J. C. Page ibid. Thy Reasonings are as ridiculous as thy Positions: (...) is,
because it is called your Faith, and your Righteousness, and your Love, etc. By
the same Reason, Christ himself must be our own Righteousness, for he shall be
called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

Answ. Then must Christ be our own Faith, and our own Love, and whatever thou
find, this Pronoun yours, joined to, or ours; that must be our own
Righteousness. All things are yours, Ergo, all things are our own
Righteousness. Christ I grant, is our Righteousness, but not by Inhesion, it is
by way of Imputation to which we are speaking; and his personal Righteousness
cannot properly be said to be our own Righteousness by Inhesion. That word
properly, I did put in before thou may see. By no means can it be said to
inhere in us, of which I am speaking; that Scripture Isa. 54.17. Par. ibid.
Your Righteousness is of me, speaks directly for me in this cause: though the
Righteousness was wrought of God, yet he calls it theirs by Imputation, it is
not here meant of the Righteousness of Sanctification: thou bring that
passage Par. ibid. He that dwells in Love, dwells in God; The right conclusion
should be according to this Reasoning, Ergo, God is that Love that inheres in
us toward him, so then there is no difference between the Affection and the
Object, and if it were so, then it would be so as thou speak, that they that
did dwell in God, did dwell in their own Righteousness, Par. ibid. That
shedding abroad Love in the heart, is God's giving an assurance and sense by
the Spirit of an Interest in this Righteousness of Christ without: Thou cryest
out of thick darkness in the close, but thou see I have not lost my way in
the darkness as thou imaginest in that I leave not the Lord Jesus Christ to
follow John with the wisp to lead me into pits to the endangering of my Soul.

J. C. Parag. ibid. Another Reason thou give, is because our Souls at the
Subjects of this Righteousness, it is really in our minds, therefore (...).

Answ. Now thou have done me right, joined these together, which before thou
made two distinct things and heads.

J. C. What would thou have to be the Subjects of true Righteousness.

Answ. Christ Jesus himself, I would have to be the Subject of that
Righteousness that justifies; for he, not we, was without spot, he not we, kept
the Law perfectly in his Actions, he, not we, suffered on the Cross. And I
would have our Persons, Souls and Bodies be the Subjects of the Righteousness
whereby we are Sanctified, but the latter is the fruit of the former. Therefore
go on.

J. C. Par. ibid. Is it not our souls that are saved.

Answ. I pray God they may be saved by Jesus Christ from the wrath to come.

J. C. But it follows, do not they and we by them reap the benefit of
Salvation?

Answ. Surely, it had been better expressed, we with them, or our Bodies with
our Souls.

Again, we reap not the Benefit of Salvation by our Souls, but by Christ. Now I
am jealous of these expressions, because Fox has made the Soul to be God, and
John, it is likely thou art in the same mind.

Par. ibid. And is not that the Subject of Righteousness which is saved by it.

Answ. Thou should have said the Subject of Salvation which is saved.

But to come closer, the Righteousness whereby our Souls are saved, is not the
Righteousness that is within, of Sanctification, but the Righteousness whereby
we are justified (i. e.) The meritorious cause of Salvation is not any thing in
Man, but it is the obedience of Christ Ephesians. 2. We are saved by Grace not of
Works, not of such works, as God works in us, see v. 10.

J. C. Parag. ibid. And by the same Reason, the Grace of God must be our own
Righteousness, because our Souls are saved by it, and the Subjects of it.

Answ. In Romans 5. There is Grace, and the Gift by Grace, which is (as there
spoken) by one Man Jesus Christ: Now the Grace of God in the first place, is
taken for the free Love and favor of God, and it is false to say we are the
Subjects of this, the Subject is God himself, and this is the Grace spoken of,
whereby we are saved, most frequently and properly, and this Grace can in no
way be called our own Righteousness. 2. The Gifts by Grace are many, Christ
himself, and his Sufferings and Obedience, are Gifts by Grace; now our Souls
are not the Subjects of these, though these are the means whereby the Grace of
God saves: other Gifts there be, as Faith and Love, our Souls are Subjects of,
but these are the Righteousness of Sanctification, and these as well as our
Salvation are but the Fruits of the Grace of God.

J. C. Parag. ibid. 'Its said God loves Truth in the inward parts, etc.

Answ. And yet this Truth in the inward parts is but our own Righteousness:
Faith and Love are God's gifts, he works them in us. Now he loves his own
Gifts, yet they are ours by inhering in us, our Faith, our Love; God would have
them true and unfeigned, yet they are ours still. But now the Father much more
loves the Righteousness of his Son, Matthew. 3. This is my Beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, for it is for his sake, that he pardons our defects in the
exercise of this our own Righteousness, and accepts us in this beloved Christ,
Ephesians. 1.

J. C. Parag. ibid. But the Ground of thy dislike of the Gifts and Virtues that
the Spirit of God works in our minds, which thou call our own Righteousness,
is because it is real in our own minds, therefore ours; what, a Christian, and
an Enemy to reality?

Answ. These pretty Rattles will please Children, I dislike not John, our own
Righteousness, for it is reality in our minds, but say, it is no Righteousness
at all if it be not real, but Hypocrisy; but thou know how I speak it in
way of distinguishing it from the other Righteousness; Our Righteousness which
consists in the Gifts, etc. wrought in us, is really in our minds; Now the
Righteousness of Christ is not in our minds at all, but in his own person: I
speak it (thou see) to explain to any that should not understand what it is
for our souls to be the subjects of this Righteousness (i. e.) It is for one to
have any thing really in him; and this I speak likewise, to distinguish it from
the Righteousness that is imputed to us, though there is a reality in that
Imputation but it is not the reality of Inhesion. I do not speak this (I dare
appeal to thee that thou see it) as being an Enemy to reality. There is a
reality in God's imputing Righteousness and forgiving sin, and a reality in his
work upon our hearts, but he has appointed the one to Justify us, and the
other to Sanctify us, and that Righteousness which is to justify us, is
perfect and complete, and is the Righteousness of his Son: the other is not
complete in this Life, though it is really in us, and so will not justify us.
Then I am not an Enemy to the Reality of Holiness, as thou would make me,
but to Real Quakerism, and Socinianism, that would have M^n justified by the
Law of Works.

J. C. Parag. ibid. What, a Spiritual Man, and an opposer of those Gifts and
Virtues the Spirit works in our minds, calling them our own Righteousness.

Answ. I am no Enemy to the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit, while. I would
have them be kept in their place, and would have Christ still have the
Pre-eminence, otherwise I should be an Enemy to Christ; they are for
Sanctification; is a Man an Enemy to the Chancelour, if he says he is not the
King? if my E^nity appear in calling them our own Righteousness, then Paul is
an Enemy to them for the calls them so, Phil. 3.9. Not having my own
Righteousness which is of the Law. Now is there any Righteousness wrought in
us, that is not required by the Law, yet he calls it his own Righteousness.

J. C. Parag. ibid. What must the poor in Spirit, the meek, the Mourner, the
Hungerer and Thirster, the Merciful, the Pure in Heart, the Peacemaker deny
their Blessedness, which they must do if these be their own Righteousness? etc.

Answ. I affirm, that there is no Blessedness to any, but as they a^ in Christ,
and so are pardoned and accepted, and forgiven in his Righteousness, Romans 4.
Blessed is the Man, to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity: in Mat. 5. Christ
spoke this to his Disciples (as thou may see) who were in him, and were
pardoned, and forgiven, had received by Faith, this Righteousness of Christ;
do thou think that there is any Blessedness in these qualifications
considered in themselves, or any merit in Poverty, mourning, etc. to obtain
Salvation, only they prepare the Soul for Blessedness. None will receive Christ
and his Righteousness, but the Poor, the Hungry, the Thirsty, etc. But their
Blessedness consists not in being Poor, or Hungry, or Thirsty, but in that it
is a Token to them, that Christ their Blessedness, is and shall be theirs: And
again, as to those positive qualifications, Blessedness is annexed only as they
are Tokens and Evidences to them that God has had mercy on them, and is at
peace with them; therefore I dare say that not one such as these, but deny that
their Blessedness lies in these qualifications, for they see defects in all
their Mournings, Meekness, etc. But it lies as there it is spoke in obtaining
Mercy, v. 7. In being filled with. Righteousness, v. 6. (i. e.) Christ's
Righteousness: Besides let me say, that there is no right Mourning, Meekness,
Purity, but first we are in Christ, and so this Righteousness imputed; no
eternal Reward is promised but to those in Christ, Romans 5. ult. Grace reigns
through Righteousness unto Eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

J. C. Page 14. What, must they turn from reality, and lay hold on imagination?

Answ. Here John, thou do with a Brazen-Face, call all the Faith of all that
are not Quakers an Imagination, is there not a Reality in God's Act; but of
that before.

J. C. From Real Enjoyments and possessions, to conceived or imagined
Apprehensions.

Answ. This is the same over again, still concluding that Chrst's Righteousness
is but a Fancy, that there is no possessing of it, that none have any
enjoyments that are Real, but the Quakers, all the rest to the end of that
Paragraph, is but the same over again, and has been Answered: only adding this
for the Readers memory as an Antidote still, that the Reality of our Inherent
Righteousness will not make it perfect and so it cannot justify us, though from
the sincerity and reality of it we may be comforted, as it is an evidence that
we are pardoned and justified.

J. C. Page ibid. The sum of the matter is this: that our heads and not our
hearts, etc.

Answ. This is false in that I speak of Faith, now Man Believes with his heart.

J. C. Our Bodies and not our Souls.

Answ. This likewise is false, for I have said that our persons We, and
expressly that this Righteousness of Sanctification is in our Souls and minds.

He goes on, Parag. ibid. Our own conceivings and not Reality.

Answ. I said that the Gifts of the Spirit were Really in our minds which thou
did quarrel with me for, and I say there is a Reality in Imputation and in
Faith, for it is the substance of things, etc. yet here thou suggestest the
contrary. But I go on to trace thee.

J. C. Parag. ibid. Our Imaginations without and not the Gifts and Virtues of
the Spirit within our minds are the Subjects of true Righteousness according to
thy account.

Answ. Here in Conclusion that he might cause the Reader to lose the ^atter in
hand, he runs all into a confusion and speaks nonsense, endeavoring to make
the Reader believe that it is his Adversary that speaks it. Whoever said
imaginations were the Subjects of true Righteousness? Our Souls I said were the
Subjects of Faith and Love, wherein this Righteousness consisted. I do not say
Faith, which thou call Imagination, was the Subject of it, but it was part
of inherent Righteousness. He proceeds, And not the Gifts, etc. Here John,
thou would have the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit, be the Subjects of true
Righteousness, viz. Inherent, for that thou art treating of which does consist
in Graces and Virtues, etc. i. e. Righteousness is the Subject of it self, but
this is like you. The sum in truth then is this: That our persons are the
Subjects of that Righteousness which sanctifies. Christ's Person is the Subject
of that Righteousness which Justifies.

J. C. Page 14. Another Reason thou give to prove the Gifts and Virtues
aforementioned, to be our own Righteousness, because we put forth the Actions
both internal and External. Is it not we that Believe, and we that Repent, and
we that are said to pray? By this Argument it is best neither to believe, nor
repent, nor pray; because these are but our own Righteousness, and the more we
do them, the heavier are we laden with the filthy Bags of our own
Righteousness.

Answ. The Reason is good, and stands, and thy inference is ungodly and wicked.
This I say distinguishing our own Righteousness from Christ's Righteousness, it
is not Christ that Believes, or Repents, or Prays, neither was it any of us
that suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, nor that was born of the Virgin,
nor perfectly fulfilled the Law; and the inference from hence that is Genuine
is this, viz. therefore ought we not to trust to our Repentings, Believings,
Prayings, Sufferings, for these are imperfect, but to Christ; and we are not
laden the more with these Rags (as thou speak) but the defects are pardoned
for Christ's sake, and we are, and so our Duties accepted in Christ: Spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God, no other way but through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.5. that phrase in Isai. 64 4. which thou in scorn so often repeats are the
Prophets words, and thou mocks at the Holy Scriptures: he does speak it of his
own Righteousness, our Righteousness, not only the peoples, but his, and the
duties which he and the people were found in, were those that God had commanded
in the Ceremonial Law; yet of these all, he says this, and it is true
Comparatively to that pure spotless Righteousness of the Son of God, and if God
through Christ, should not cleanse us, and wash us, and put his own Robes upon
us, we should all be cast out: But let me ask thee, dare thou say, that this
moral Principle of doing to others as we would have them to do to us, is the
Righteousness that Justifies before the Glorious Tribunal of an infinite pure
God, whose eyes are as a flame of Fire, that thou dare stand and fall to the
strict judgment of God, as thou have all thy days (for cursed is he that
continues not in all things to do them) been true or false to this Principle? I
trow not; woe to thee then, for thou have in several things in this thy writing
dealt with me, as thou would not have me to deal with thee; why but then, if
it be not that which Justifies, it is better never be found at all, in doing
to any as we would have others should do to us, for this is but our Moral
Righteousness, in the second Table commanded between Man and Man: how do thou
like this retortion? Withal, by this is implied the mercenary Spirit of the
Quakers, who would neither Pray, nor be Holy, if they did not think to merit
something by their Works.

J. C. Parag. ibid. These things manifest thy estrangedness to the Works of
Regeneration and helpings of the Spirit of God.

Answ. I have through Grace experienced that work upon my Soul, and have
pleaded it with thee as thou know, in opposition to their tenent of the
Light in every one which overthrowes it, as if every one had the Seed of it in
his heart; but yet I have learned to distinguish between this and forgiveness
of sins, wherein my Justification lies, as in Romans 4. Regeneration, this is but
a Fruit of Forgiveness, had not God forgiven my sins, he would never have
healed my Nature; no Regeneration without Faith, Acts 26.18. Sanctified by
Faith. So that your Doctrine destroys Sanctification, if no Justification by
imputed Righteousness, no Regeneration. I own the helpings of the Spirit of
God, and more I can say, for that word helpings, is too narrow, as if there
were some power in Man, the Spirits causing, creating Faith in me on this
Righteousness of Christ, which my heart has been so far in helping in, that it
has opposed. But yet I will distinguish and say, it was Christ, and not the
Spirit died for me. Those helpings of the Spirit in me do not Justify me, yet
I praise God for them, as an evidence and fruit of Justification.

J. C. Parag. ibid. A heavy charge upon all the Prophets and Apostles of
Christ, who were obedient to these inward Gifts, Virtues and Motions of God's
Holy Spirit.

Answ. If thou can produce one instance of either Prophet or Apostle, that
ever sought to be Justified in the sight of God, for any obedience to any
inward Gifts, and did not apply themselves to God through Christ for Pardon of
sin, I will leave this Doctrine, Remember Romans 3.24 But now the Righteousness
of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets: But John, thou have forgot what thou said page 10. viz. Not for
the works sake, though wrought in me by the Spirit, and here pleads for
Obedience to the inward Gifts which must be Works, and says, all Prophets, and
Apostles were Obedient to them, and this in opposition to imputed
Righteousness: But I knew thou wast not in earnest, in what thou seemed'st to
speak them; but to conclude, I believe that the good Men of old, were obedient
to the inward Gifts of the Spirit, and we all ought to he, and are through
Grace, in some measure, but then by all that the Spirit does in us, it does
lead us to Christ and his Righteousness, according to that in John 15. The
Comforter shall testify of me. Chap. 16. He shall take of mine and show it unto
you, and hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter from the Spirit of
error; The Comforter will Glorify Christ's person.

J. C. Parag. ibid. By thy Account, they did but obey their own Righousness in
what they did, they knew and understood that their hearts are as the Pen of a
ready Writer as David speaks.

Answ. This thou bring is very impertinent to the thing in hand. That of
David, Ps. 45.1. My Tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer: Thou changest Tongue
here for Hearts. Now does not David a Prophet, about to write great things of
Christ in this Psalm, make use of this Phrase to denote the Power of the Holy
Ghost with him in giving forth this Holy Scripture, that as Man's hand acts the
Pen as its Organ, so the Spirit the Tongue of David, and thus the Holy Men of
God that writ the Scripture are said in 2 Pet. 1. ult. to be moved, acted,
forcibly carried away by the Holy Spirit, (...), in the speaking forth the
Truths of the Scriptures; and how sad is it that some of you should pretend to
this same impulse, to as high a degree in their Writings, as I have seen some
Title-pages of your Books, filled with such Blasphemies, viz. Given forth by
the Spirit through the Trunk of the Body of FOX or such a one. Horrible Pride!
And therefore do your Disciples at this day account their Writings of equal
Authority with the Writings of the Apostles, nay, beyond them, because a newer
Revelation of a later Date, you be advanced to a good Degree: but to the thing,
now what is this instance of an extraordinary Power of the Spirit to the
ordinary working of Gifts in Sanctification which thou art treating of. There
are 7 Lines follows that are but Queries to the same purpose as before which I
have Answered fully to, viz. I have said in My Answer, that we are for acting
and doing, and by the Holy Ghost, yet dares not trust to it but to Christ. In
the End of this Paragraph, you have this, Neither is it we that speak as we are
kept truly ^lent out of all our own thoughts, but the Holy Ghost in us, Mark
13.11.

Answ. Here is speaking and yet silence. Reconcile contraries as you can, that
place in Mark speaks of the Holy Ghost being promised to the Disciples in times
of Persecution to assist them in their Confessions of this Faith I am pleading
for, viz. Salvation by a Crucified Jesus as their Righteousness when they
should be called to an account before Tribunals; as if we could not have the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost to enable before Magistrates or Quakers, to
confess the Faith, but we must of necessity make this assistance, our very
Righteousness that Justifies us, what weakness is this?

J. C. Page 15. Thou say our Righteousness is but the Righteousness of mere
Man etc. And yet before says, it consists in the Gifts and Virtues the the
Holy Ghost works in our minds. See thy Confusion from thy (...) words.

Answ. I can see none, and let the Reader Judge; Thy Soul (...) is the Soul of a
mere Man, yet the parts of it consist in Understanding and Will, which God has
created and given, the Light within is the Light of a mere Man, yet it consists
in a Faculty which God has given, of discerning Moral good and evil, and a
reflex Act of Conscience in accusing or excusing, according to a Man's Actings
thereunto. So here, when I say the Spirit works these, there is the efficient
cause; when I say of mere Man, there is the Subject in which it is wrought,
still to distinguish it from that Righteousness that Justifies, that is the
Righteousness of one who is God and Man, Col^ss. 2.9. This Scripture proves
Christ to be God and Man, for in him dwells All the fullness of the Godhead
Bodily. What is that Him? and what that Fullness of the Godhead? Where is now
Confusion, Reader?

J. C. page ibid. One Righteousness is perfect and complete, the other (...)
faulty, imperfect and incomplete, thou would make them two in nature, and
kind, the one from Heaven, the other on Earth, the one Christ's, the other
ours, and yet says it is incomplete as to Degree, then they must be one in
kind; for Degrees vary not kind or Nature.

Answ. That thy heart smote thee a little when thou was writing this John,
appears to me by thy way of expressing they self. Thou say I would make them
two, in Nature and Kind, etc. Why, then there was something spoken that made it
evident, as that the one was Christ's, the other ours; That an Adversary could
not but take notice of it. Degrees thou say vary not kind, which is true,
in things of the same Nature; But here I have plainly by thy own Confession
made them of various Natures, then this Sentence, viz. faulty, imperfect,
incomplete as to Degree, must necessarily be restrained, as to those things of
their own Nature, of which I am speaking, viz. our own Righteousness, and no
more is in it than this, viz. That the Spirit in working it in our Souls, does
not work it up to that height, as that (...) thing of sin remains in us; but as
to the other Righteousness, there was no spot in Christ; Remember the Proverb.
Rather than Satan will (...) he will play at a small Game; Rather than thou
willt not manifest thy enmity against Imputed Righteousness, and be a Patron of
our own to Justify us to take off from Christ, thou will play a small low Game.

J. C. Page ibid. So it is manifest that thou know not what thou say,
such is thy confusion: no marvel, while thou errest from the form of sound
words, calling it a Righteousness contrived, where find thou such a word i^
Scripture?

Answ. Let the Reader judge, if I know not what I say, thou art a ^^^ty, and not
sit to judge in the Case; now by saying the Form of (...) words, and then
mentioning the Scriptures, who would think (...) J. C. began to be ashamed of
the Quakers Principles, and to own the Scriptures for the Rule which his
Brother Bailey disowns, and that (...), was again returned to his old
Christianity, from which he had Apostatized, and grew weary of those many
uncouth, strange words; and Gibberish Language, that Fox brought out of the
North, resolving to fashion all his words in his Prayers hereafter, according
to the Dialect of the Scriptures. Oh, that it might prove true! Yet how can I
but say this, that an Ape that is most like a Man, and yet of another kind, is
one of the most ill-favouredst of the Bruits; so it rendereth thee most
ridiculous in our eye, when we see thee here, Ape it so like a Christian, and
yet knows that thou art of a different Species. Speak and write like a
Quaker, or else utterly forsake them; my eye has been deceived sometimes by
the Art of Limning, in thinking I have seen Living Creatures, Men and Women,
Lions, Bulls, etc. and yet turn but the other side, and nothing but a thin
painted Past-Board. So here, I fear many be deceived with thy expressions in
thy lines, wherein thou appears to a weak eye, a Living, real, sound,
substantial Christian, but I hope I have turned the other side, and now it
appears, thou art but still a thin, dead, liveless, rotten, Apostate and
Quaker, only painted over with better Colors, and a little more Art. Thou have
got the Art that Gaptains have at Sea, that they may have the greater
advantage, and thou think it Lawful as they do, thou come up to us
(thinking to board us presently) with an English (...) and Colors, when as
thou art absolutely a French Man. I have heard lately from one that has read
J. C's. Books, that in one of his Books he expresses himself to be for this,
viz. a Liberty for Quakers to admit themselves into all Churches of what
Judgment soever: This is the Man that is for overcoming, not by force of
Argument, but (...) Stratagems; This is Romes way at this day. And remember
that (...) writ before an Answer which J. C. gave to one that charged him with
what he had said, viz. If they were my Words, that was not my Judgment. He can
speak any thing with his mouth to the people, and believe the Contrary thing in
his Judgment at the same time. But to the matter, Thou ask me where I find
such a word in Scripture as Contrived, as if I err from the from of sound
words. Now John, I could be heartily glad if I had never heard a more unsound
word from the in thy preaching, thou might well have joined that to it which I
have writ in the 6th. Head, viz. in infinite Wisdom contrived. This makes it
sound a little better. I confess I might have said appointed, and that had been
the very Scripture-word. But this is such another mighty Stone as J. B. threw
at me at Hartford, when he told me humane Nature of Christ was a word I must
not use, because not in the Scripture But John, is the import of this word any
more than appointed, ordained, willed, purposed, and are not all these in
Scripture. Romans 3. he (...) set forth, 1 Pet. 1.20. who was foreordained. But
I begin to be (...) of playing thus at Pash-pin with thee.

J. C. Parag. ibid. Sometimes calling Faith our own Righteousness and again
without Faith it is impossible to please God, as if a Man could please God by
Man's Righteousness.

Answ. We have not yet done. Who but thee John, sees any Contradiction in this?
Faith as a Habit or Act in us, is our own Righteousness. I have all along
distinguished between Chri'sts Righteousness and Faith, in the Epistle this may
be seen that upon that Scripture, (...) 4. Abraham believed, and is was (...)
to him for Righteousness, I say not the action of Believing, but that which he
rested upon justified: yet this is true likewise, that without Faith it is
impossible to please God because Faith does trust to those Sufferings that did
pacify and please God yet Faith did not dye on the Cross: So that we please God
by Faith not as being an Habit or Act in us barely so considered, but as it
does relate to its Object, and takes hold of the Object; God is pleased, not
for Faiths sake but for Christ's sake that Faith Receives; I query John,
whether it be the hand that receives the money, or the money that enricheth, yet
the money without the hand is not received, whether was it the Eye or Serpent
that healed, yet not without seeing. Did Abel's Faith without Christ make his
Sacrifice acceptable, or please or pacify God, or was it the Sacrifice of
Christ that which his Faith respe^ed? But if you will in this matter hear Fox
speak more plainly, for John will not pull his Mask off yet. Fox's great
Mystery page 49. This Justification is by the Faith of Christ within, for all
the Holy Men of God were Justified by their Faith, and that Faith is in their
Heart. So this is that the Quakers with their Brethren the Romanists contend
for, viz. Justifying Righteousness to be within, because Faith is within: in
opposition to which, we say, Faith is taken Relatively with its Object Christ,
and so Justifyeth, even as David also describes the Blessedness of the Man
unto whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without Works, (...) Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, etc.

J. C. page ibid. Thou say the young Man may now engage without any Peril,
any Quaker in England. This is like Goliahs Boast, but let (...) him that
puts on the Harness, boast as he that puts it off; I suppose (...) if not
thy self, will be of another mind when you have impartially (...) the Reply to
the young Man's Book, to which I refer the Reader to Judge of his great ability,
or rather his confused indigested thoughts, concerning the Mysteries of God,
and Christ.

Answ. I know the Quakers so well John, that they are to me a very
inconsiderable Enemy, insomuch, that any one that has but by the Holy Ghost
been taught the Principles of the Christian Religion, may encounter with them,
and that with little difficulty or danger, and when I cast my Eye abroad who
they are that you have prevailed with to fall in with you, see, some you fell
upon as Simeon and Levi did upon the Shechemites, when they were sore under
troubles of Conscience from awakings by the Law, before any healings came by
the Gospel, and picked up them; others were straglers from the Camp, either
that have been cast out of Churches, or never settled in any way; some that have
taken up some prejudices against Christians, or through some (...) and Ambition
highly discontent; a sound humble, Christian is out of your reach. I have
talked with many and could not find any of this people that could even give any
telerable account of the Christian Religion* And how many turn Quakers whose
hearts are not turned to God a change in their Carriage and Garb but not in
their Soul; the same Passions and Pride (...). Now Glory if you can in such a
Regiment.

The young Man I confess is no Goliath, but more like a Stripling, and to take
off from the Credit of the story has been reported by you to be but a mere
Boy, but in God's strength, both he and I have put on our Harness, and will not
put them off as long as you fight against the Truth, and may and will boast in
Jesus Christ, and in his Truth and Love toward his Elect, as the Captain of
our Salvation.

J. C. Page ibid. Whereas thou say the Quakers keep people in perfect Popish
Slavery, the Quakers knew no Bondage and Slavery, like the ^^^dage and Slavery
of Sin, which you believe all Men must continue in (...) of Life, and so thou
refers us to thy Brother Baylies Book.

Answ. I never saw a people in more perfect Bondage. There is nothing more
plainly appears than Bondage upon them, it is written upon all their Words and
Carriages, the Principle of the Quakers tends to perfect Bondage, viz. That
they are to give heed to something within as to an Oracle, which has put many
on to hard and difficult tasks going beyond Seas, going naked, long fastings,
going three Miles upon their Knees, etc. and no resistings, is not this
Bondage? and is not this in your Religion, viz. That it is to be Obeyed as Fox
says, for Life and Salvation and that to perfection. That your people sit
Brooding upon this Principle, in expectation of a Chimaera perfection in this
Life: must not this be Bondage to the uttermost? Now what if they dye before?
With what fears must they needs depart? Only you have got the Popish knack to
tell your people that Concupiscence is no sin, i. e. evil motions arising, not
consented to, are not sin.

And here I will take leave in a Digression to propound some Arguments against
that error of the Quakers, viz. That first Risings to evil in the heart, if not
consented to, are not sin, desiring J. C. to give a fair Answer to them.

1. That which the Apostle of Christ, Paul, calls by the name of (...),
surely is sin, and we ought to call it so, and think it so; But the Apostle
Paul gives this name to those motions to evil that were in his heart not
consented to: Ergo. The Major cannot be gainsayed, the Minor is proved thus,
Romans 7.20. He calls this sin that dwells in him, and says, Now if I do that
which I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. And
in Prove. 24.9. a thought of foolishness is called sin, though not consented to.

2. That which is a Transgression of the Law of God, the ten Words (as they are
called) delivered by Moses, is a sin; But a motion, a desire to evil in the
heart, though not consented to is a Transgression of the Law of God: Ergo. The
Major is evident, the Minor I confirm thus.

If a motion to evil in the hearts of Men not consen^ed to, be a breach of the
tenth Commandment, viz. Thou shall not Cov^ or desire, as in De^t. 5.21. then
it is a Transgression of the Law; But this it is: (...). The Major is clear,
the Minor is thus proved. If this 10th. Commandment does specially and
particularly forbid such a motion in the Heart, then such a motion in the Heart
is a breach of this Command; But it does especially forbid such a motion, etc.
Ergo. All the other Commands going before, forbid consent to evil thoughts
arising in the (...), as Thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not kill,
thou shall not (...), etc. according to Christ's interpretation of them in Mat.
5. These Commands forbid not only the outward actions but the consent in the
mind, so that if this 10th. Command forbid no more, it is but the same over
again; needless, impertinent, and there are not ten (...) Words as they are
called, Exodus 34.28.

3. That which is to be Mortified and Crucified, and put to Death, must needs
(...) evil; But these motions arising while we are not consenting to them it is
our Duty to Mortify them and to Crucify them: Ergo. I ask whether these
motions to evil are not some deeds of the Body of sin, and we are (...) to
Mortify them by the Spirit, Romans 8. I ask from whence they arise, if not from
an evil habit in the Soul.

4. If they are such (though not consented to) as are a burden to one that is
made partaker of the New Nature, then they must be evil, and (...); But the
former is true from Romans 7. Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me? Yet
at that time it is evident he did not consent, but says, that which he would
not do, that he did. Which cannot be understood of outward Actions, but inward
Motions Ergo.

5. If these Motions (though not consented to) bring so much guilt upon a Man
that there is need of the Atonement of Christ: and if it were not for this
Grace of God in Christ, we should be condemned for them, and we are to give
thanks unto God for his Grace in Christ that we are not condemned for them,
then they are evil, but all this plain, from Rom 7. For Paul consented not to
them because regenerated, delighting in the Law of God after the inward Man:
yet says I thank God through Jesus Christ. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ. He had no need to give thanks for
non-Condemnation if they were no sin, God who is a Righteous God would not have
Condemned for their being there if not sin.

6. That which flows from an evil Fountain, must needs be evil; But these do
though not consented to, they flow from fallen corrupt Nature, James 1.14.
every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of (...) lust, Luke 6.45, Ou^ of the
evil Treasure of the heart is brought (...) that which is evil.

7. That which is a privation of that Righteousness and Image (...) was at
first in Man and should be now in Man, and the Law (...) it should be in every
one of us, that must needs be Evil: But this (...) the presence of these
motions argue though not consented to. The ^^nor appears thus; Adam had none of
these before he had sinned, while he had the Image of God complete in him,
Christ that had the Image of God complete, had none: The Saints and Angels in
Glory that (...) perfect Righteousness in them have none of these. Ergo.

8. Every thing is either good or evil, or indifferent (i. e.) neither good nor
evil in its own Nature, being neither forbid, not commanded; now one of these
three must these first motions be^ Good who will say? if so, we ought to
consent to them: Evil the Quakers (...) them to be, if they be resisted and
judged (as they say) the indwelling and being in the heart is to them no sin,
then they must be indifferent. If so, then they are neither commanded nor
forbidden, and if they are not forbidden, then the Perfection that the Quakers
speak of (...) much, is not commanded, nay, if we go about to Mortify these,
and subdue them, it is a work of supererrogation more than needs, more than is
required.

Object. 1. All sin is voluntary, these are not voluntary, the Will consents
not; therefore.

Answ. We deny that all fin is voluntary, if so, then there are no (...) of
ignorance, but there were sins of ignorance that Sacrifice (...) offered up
for, Levit. 4.2. and in Psalm. 19. David prayed that God would cleanse him from
his secret sins (i. e.) those fins that escaped him, and he knew not of them:
as appears plainly by that which goes immediately before, viz. Who can
understand his errors? and that which follows, Keep back thy Servant from
presumptuous sins, these presumptuous sins are such as be committed knowingly
and wilfully, opposed to the other: besides, Paul frequently in Romans 7. calls
that sin, that (...) Will was against, that which I would not do, etc.

Lastly, the proper notion of fin does not consist so much in volu^^iness, as
in contrariety to the Will and Law of God, a Man (...) if he commits any
thing contrary to God's Will, though his own Will be not in it, not knowing it
is a breach of a Precept.

Object. 2. But are not all these stirrings and first motions to Evil we speak
of from Satan? Now will any say, in case we yield not to Satan's Temptations
that we sin: Was not Christ tempted, and yet had not any sin? (...) is
frequently in the Quakers Mouth.

Answ. Those first Motions to Evil that we are treating of, are not (...)
Satan: but from that corrupt Principle of fallen Nature that is in (...) in
James 1.14. Every Man is Tempted, when he is drawn aside of (...) Lusts, and
enticed. Mat. 15.19. Out of the Heart proceeds evil (...), etc. No mention of
Satan, Genesis 6.5. The imagination of the (...) of the Heart, there is a Minting
and Forming of thoughts to Evil, (...) are only from the Heart; And let it be
considered, Satan cannot (...) to think in us, but it is we that think in these
thoughts of Fool^^ess; Satan is frequently exciting and suggesting, its true,
but yet (...) experienced Christian may discern those Temptations that arise
from (...) in his Heart, from those Temptations of Satan: I grant, that in
(...) we yield not to Satan, we are not guilty; His Temptations not (...) to,
are our Afflictions, not our Sins; and likewise it is true of Christ,
notwithstanding the Devil's Assaults, yet was he without sin; But then, as I
have said, these Motions and Desires, arise not from Satan, (...) our own Lust;
and the very presence of them in the Soul is sinful, (...) been proved. Withal,
may not I say, it is easier to resist the Tempt^^ than these, in that they are
so near, close, and continued? and who is there that though he give not a
formal express, yet a virtual in^e^^^etative consequential consent, he does
many a time unawares, when he does but in the least admit of that which is an
occasion of sin. Again, there is sin habitually in the Will of every Man,
though at present his Will consents not actually to these Motions: These
Desires arise from a Will that is corrupted. As to that of Christ, we say he
had no Lust (...), his case was different, he says of the Tempter, John 14.30.
(...) comes and finds nothing in me: So that his Temptations were only
external, and there was no mixture of Evil in them; you see it is nothing to the
purpose then to instance in him.

Now, John Crook, Who are for Holiness more, you Quakers or we? who pleads for
sin most, you or we? You say we plead for sin when we deny Perfection in this
Life; we say you plead for sin, in saying (...) the Motions to Evil in the
Heart if not consented to, are not sin: we (...) this now, that your Perfection
boasted of, is no other than that which every Babe in Christ has, viz. Not to
consent to these evil Mo^^^^^, who now has most tenderness of Conscience, you
or we? you (...) that a motion to Adulteries, Murders, Incests, are not sin if
not (...) to, therefore need not concern your selves about them groan (...)
them, cry out of them, be troubled for them, but we say they are sins, and
their being in us is ^^^som: and burdensome; we (...) against them, the new
Creature in (...) is contrary to them, and (...) with them, hates them, and
cannot bear them therefore we (...) the the utter extirpation of them: and
again, no wonder you your (...) and your followers prize not Christ's Sufferings
and Atonem^nt, but (...) Proud and Pharisaical, resting in Moralities and legal
Righteousness, (...) as you believe this, and teach it the people, that if no
consent (...) Will to covetous and unclean thoughts, there is no sin in them,
(...) Blood is therefore despised by you, Paul did despise it in Rom^ 7. and
was alive, self-Righteousness led some to know this by understanding the
spirituality of the Law, Romans 7. I was alive without the La^ (...) etc. But to
return from whence we came.

Their slavery appears greatly in this thing, in that they adhere (...) their
Teachers as infallible, so that whatsoever they say, or write they dare not but
believe it as Gospel: now is not this Bondage, and (...) Popish Bondage? Yea,
they are brought into Bondage to every (...) Voice, any thing they fancy to be
but a Vision, Revelation, (...) Oh poor deceived people! Yea what Bondage ere
long will you (...), to the Presbytery at Devonshire-House, no marrying without
their (...) judging of matters of fact by their pretended Revelations, G. (...)
solving at his Knees whom he will, sending out to the Ministry (...) he will.
You may see this in the little Book called the Spirit of the (...) and the
other styled Tyranny and Hypocrisy of the Quakers detected. The^e is certainly
a great Bondage and slavery to be in Bondage to sin and Lusts, and not only the
Quakers, (as thou writest) think thus, (...) others. But there is another
Bondage, (i. e.) to the Law, which (...) sore Bondage, and that I see the
Quakers are in: viz. to the Law (...) Covenant of works. You have tempted God
and displeased him, (...) putting this Yoke upon the necks of the poor people,
and galled (...) necks with it, and neither they, nor any of you are able to
bear (...) to go about to keep the Law, so that in case they keep it not to the
height, they are damned. Cursed is every one, etc. Gal. 3.

J. C. Which you believe all Men must continue in term of Life.

Answ. We say and believe, that sin will continue in us for (...) Life, but
that Phrase thou make use of speaks more, viz. our ^^luntary activity in sin,
which thou know we are against: we say (...) know that the power of sin is
broke by the Spirit in us, Romans 6. (...) shall not have Dominion, etc. But yet
it does dwell in us, the Leprosy of Original sin will eleave to us, till the
House of our Bodies be (...) down. But John, if thou be for absolute
Perfection in this (...) (...) say thou not so in this place? but thou art
for lying hid (...)

J. C. Parag. ibid. As high as Heaven is above the Earth, so far is that (...)
^f the Faith of Jesus in you, above the Spirit of Antichrist that (...) them,
viz. the Quakers. How now, is your own Righteousness grown (...)? haft thou
forgotten that thou call the Gifts and Virtues that (...) of God works in
your minds but your own Righteousness?

Answ. I am still of the same mind, what ever is wrought by the (...) is but
the Righteousness of the Law, i. e. what that Law does (...) in us, and of us,
and that Paul calls his own, Phil. 3.9. and (...) Righteousness does grow in us
stronger and stronger, as we hold (...) Communion with Christ; but my
Confidence which I express in (...) words, does not arise from my own
Righteousness (as thou (...) left have it) but still from Jesus whom I mention
in these words; (...) height and strength of Faith does not arise from it self
as an Habit (...) or Act of ours, but from its Object Jesus Christ, as before.
Be^^^^^, I say the Spirit of Faith, viz. That Spirit that is the efficient
(...) of Faith in Jesus, opposing this to a contrary Spirit of Antichrist; Now
I have said the Spirit it self was not our own Righteousness, but (...) it in
us: and is not the Spirit of God above the Spirit of the (...) and smaller
Antichrists. I believe it, therefore speak it, and I (...) it still, and affirm
it.

J. C. Page ibid. But take heed of the Blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, (...)
Francis Spira's condition be thine, or madness and distraction befall (...)

Answ. To the making up of that sin, there must certainly be this (...) viz. an
Acting against high Conviction, certain knowledge and persuasion: now I ask my
self, am I convinced and persuaded that the Spirit of Jesus is in the Quakers:
I Answer my self: (...) certainly then speak the same things with the Spirit in
the Scriptures, which it does not, and agree with it self in others of God's
people in the Nation, and it is directly contrary, 1 Cor. 12.3. Wherefore I
give you to understand that no Man speaking by the Spirit of (...) calls
Jesus Anathema. Now I have heard Jesus slighted by you, (...) one will aver it,
that Naylor said Mary was a Whore, and her Christ (...) a Bastard; Now John, I
am not persuaded that it is the Spirit of Christ, a Spirit there is, if not of
the same Christ, it is against Christ, and in the Room, it is exalted by you
above all that is called God and worshipped. Fox the younger page 53. says, I
will make them know, that I the Light am the true eternal God that Created all
things, it sits in the Temple of God showing it self that it is God (i. e.) you
(...) called it God you and your people believe it is God, your people (...)
worshipped it as God, attributed that to it, that is not to be given to any but
God, is not this the spirit of Antichrist? Let the Reader (...) Faldoes Book
and turn to that part called the Quakers Idolatry.

How plain now is it, that it is the Spirit of Antichrist that deni^h Jesus to
be come in the Flesh, 1. John 4. Now the known Comment of the Quakers is in the
Flesh, (i. e.) the present Flesh, the Light being in them; the Offices of
Christ have been denied, his Prophetical in that they deny the Scriptures to be
the Rule, and all Ministry but their own. 2. The Priestly, in that they say he
was and is crucified, (...) offered in them: Kingly, in that they deny all the
Government and Discipline of Christ, and Ordinances that he has set up, and
have (...) up a Monarchy at Devonshire-House; is not this their Spirit of
Antichrist? The Parallel will run better betwixt Francia Spira and thy self, in
that thou have forsaken and denied that way thou once was of in London, and
those that once thou prayedst with, and had Communion with. It is the Grace of
God I acknowledge that has kept me from (...) hitherto, and from his
condition, whom yet many in Charity apprehend was saved. As for thy last words
of Madness and Distraction I know that the Lord might in Righteousness send it
upon me, when (...) pleases, and if he do he is just, he may do with me as he
will, but (...) recoils of Conscience for writing that Epistle will not
occasion it, for there are none: I can say John, that if God turn thee
presently into Bedlam, nay if with Nebuchadnezzar for seven years together
among the Beasts of the Field, to converse with them, and eat Grass among them,
till thou have Hairs like Feathers, and nayls like Claws, till thou should
be like a Vultur, or some Ravenous Bird, God would he Righteous, because thou
have been exalted and lifted up; and has not given, neither yet does give that
Glory to Jesus Christ of Nazareth, which is due to his Name, Dan. 4. Those that
walk in Pride he is able to (...).

J. C. Par. ibid. My Soul could even pity thee, because if thou (...) not of
these and the like Passages, viz. That the Quakers Spirit, is a Spirit of
delusion, and their Doctrine Antichristian, Gods displeasure will break out as
fire, etc.

Answ. What I write I write deliberately, I have known the Quakers these twenty
years, and have Conversed with them and tried them, and believe that if Paul
and Peter, Moses and David, Luther and Calvin, had been on Earth, they would
have said the same, and the Generation of the Godly throughout the Nation say
the same, and therefore in threatening me with God's displeasure, thou
threatnest all the people of (...) in the Nation, calling us all but so many
Briars and Thorns, ^it (...) nothing but to be burned. As for thy Pity; Oh
that thou would^^ (...) thy self and thy followers, who ere long will be
summoned (...) appear before the Tribunal seat of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, to
give (...) account of all your slighting thoughts, and hard Speeches of him,
(...) has been and is, the great stumbling stone and Rock of offense, among
you to this day; against which you shall all be broken if you (...) not from
your errors, and one day he will gri^d you to poude^. (...) know that this our
High Priest pittieth us, and has compassion, (...) wherein we go out of the
way through ignorance, he will give Repentance unto Life.

J. C. To burn thee up among the Briars and Thorns, that muster up (...) in
Battle against him, and his ever blessed appearance in Spirit (...) power in
the hearts of that poor despised people.

Answ. We do wait for, and love Christ's glorious Appearance, and ^^cond Coming
in Person, and detest that wicked error of yours in pre^^ding to the Appearance
of the Light in you, for the overturning of (...) his blessed personal
Appearance. Oh how will you be ashamed then (...) cover your Faces, because you
have changed the Christ of God into Robbers Light that goes down to Hell with
him: in a word, none (...) despise the Quakers for their Poverty (as thou
seem to intimate) (...) for their desperate Pride, Scornfulness, Stiffness,
and Hardness in (...) strange Opinions; It Is well if we could see them coming
out of (...) errors as fast as out of their Poverty. John, thou art worse than
^am the conjurer, for he did but endeavor, but thou have actually ^ed all the
Israel of God. Your Religion will turn at length into ^letons Religion, I fear
several of you do center there, that is a cur^^^ Religion, let your
enchantments fall upon Babylon, and Hell, from ^nce they came, there is one
cursing them whom God has blessed; (...) blessing of Abraham is upon us
through Jesus Christ, who will one ^judg betwixt you and us.

J. C. Page 16. God has and does always bless the Faithful among (...) and
they shall be blessed.

Answ. This is John Crooks Testimony, in the end of his Book. We (...) like
wise that God does bless the Quakers, and that very much; (...) alas it is with
Esan's Blessings, and Ishmael's Blessings, left hand Blef^ings, those that are
faithful as thou say (i.e.) industrious and honest in their callings with
the Riches of this World; the highest Blessings we (...) see, is only this,
that being faithful to the Light within they continue in Morality, but they
live not at all in the knowledge of (...) Christ, but the God of this World does
strangely blind them (...) Now if the Gospel be ^id, it is ^id to them that are
lost, 2 Cor. 4.3.^ what an efficacy of error do we see upon this people,
presently to believe so many ^ies! what a fore heavy hand of God is against
you, in that they are left to such scattered, naked, bewildred Judgments in the
things of the Gospel, that we can conclude no other, and have every day more
ground for it than other, that as there was of old Elymas the Sorcerer, and
Simon Magus that bewitched the people of Samaria, and (...) there are now some
such among the Papists, so among you some the be witch the poor Country people
with Sorceries. For one to be humble in his Carriage among his Neighbors to
day, surly, dogged, and proud to morrow; courteous in his Salutes to day,
Brutish and unmannerly to morrow; affable and discoursing now, presently
(...), silent, morose; to day speaking honorably of Christ, Scripture, Lo^
Supper, to morrow either contemning of them, o^ quarrelling with them; or else
downright speaking against them. When as this day he came among God's people,
to morrow he will not come near them, nor pray with them; to day he prays with
his Family, next day no^ now he is sedate and quiet in his Spirit, within a
while trembling, restless, raging; to day love to his Relations, next day runs
away from them, or little regards them, if not Quakers, in one day his whole
Garb, Carriage, Love, Words, Gestures will be changed, and which is remarkable,
they shall all agree to speak against the old substantial fundamental
comfortable Truths of the Gospel, yea, the nea^ the Truth is, concerning Christ
Jesus, his Person, Natures or Officer, the more against it; withal every one of
them endowed presently with a sly, cunning, juggling, Jesuitical temper, for
equivocations, mental (...) servations, waiting to catch at words that are
spoke to them; all plainheartedness, and ingenuity is gone: And again; how
worldly, stingy, reserved? all freeness, right, generosity, and nobility, is
all departed; now is this the blessing? Who can think but that another Spirit
that is not Christ does enter, O Lord arise and let thine Enemies be scattered;
It Is very manifest now, the Lord remedy it, and deliver this poor blind people
from these Regions of Darkness wherein they sit, to the sweet Light of the
Gospel, which begets the quite contrary eff^ in the Saints. What if a Spirit
should possess any, fill him, toss him, tumble him up and down, throw him into
Trances, act him to pray, yea, to speak like an Angel, and enable him to endure
sufferings, yea, and in some measure he is at peace and in comfort, yet loves
not Christ Jesus nor his Gospel, what would this avail? was it not a Spirit of
de^on, and would not that person be in a deplorable Condition?

J. C's POSTSCRIPT.
OH that these smitings may be as Balm, for they are the words of a Friend to
thy poor lost Soul, as at present thou art, oh feel them, feel them, and be not
wroth because of them, lest the gate of Mercy be shut against thee.

Answ. In Luke 18.23. If I have spoken evil, hear Witness of the (...) (says
the Lord Christ) but if well why smitest thou me? so if I live writ any thing
false confute it plainly, if not, why do thou rail at me? how then can I
receive those smitings for bearing witness to the Truth, as Balm, when as it is
not the Balm of Gospel-Love, but like the Vinegar and Gall they gave to Christ:
and the words of this Friend but like the kisses of such a Friend as Judas was,
that would betray (...) redeemed Soul into the hand of damnable errors that
would ^roy it, thou bid'st me feel them. I have felt them, and perceive from
what Spirit they proceed, by the sharpness of them, and cannot but be grieved
that there should still remain in thee such a keen, bitter, proud, Pharisaical,
Socinian Spirit, against such a good ancient, wholesome, sound, comfortable,
saving, holy Truth, as the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, to poor fallen,
lost undone sinners, without strength to keep the Law and save themselves, and
a Spirit of Hell and Satan, directly contrary to the blessed Angelical Spirit:
the Angels rejoice when a Sinner is converted, but thou and thy Brethren are
very angry at this young Man's Conversion. Now I am not wroth as thou think,
because of thy smitings, but they have stirred my Zeal against er^, for the
Truth the more, which shall by the Grace of God be improved to the utmost in
preachings and writings against your ways: ^ycing that the Keys are in David's
hand, Jesus Christ's not thine; for then the Gates of Mercy would be shut
against all such as we are, but they stand open, and for such Rebels as thou
art to the Grace of Christ Jesus, and such Apostates from the Truth, if
peradventure God will give thee Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth,
that thou may be recovered out of the snare of the Devil, that art taken
Captive by him at his Will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

An Answer to the Aditional POSTSCRIPT.
THe Christian Judicious Reader, having passed the foregoing lines, by this
time sees that what follows in this Postscript, Page 18. is but a mere
fallacious harangueof words purposely stitched together to deceive some weak
ones: this Testimony of thine is indeed like the Apples of Sodom, touch them,
and they immediately moulder into dust, let them be examined and they are found
to be hollow, rotten, shouking, but I have done it already, and therefore need
not do it over again.

And now, that all may know thou art a dissembler; I challen^e thee to Answer
to these following Queries in thy next Book, to which if thou Answerest me
plainly, briefly, cordially, properly to the truth of them, thou will discover
thy self, that one of these two things will follow. Either, that thou art a
perfect Cheat in these lines thou haft writ, and so gross a Heretic, that thou
art not worthy that a Chriss^an should eat or drink with thee. Or, Secondly
that thou have presently renounced Quakerism, and if so, why then we desire
thee to publish thy Repentance, withal, promising to Answer any Question thou will put to me, to try the Principles of my Religion by, and in thy Answer, let
me have I pray thee a solemn appeal unto God that thou speak according to
the bare literal ordinary meaning of the Words and Phrases, which has been
received among the serious Professors of the Christian Religion: this may do
much to put an end to the controversy and satisfy many.

1. Do not thou know that the Independent, Presbyterian and Anabaptist party
are both in their Preachings, and Writings, for an Experimental spiritual
knowledge of Christ, and that they do generally assert, that a bare Dogmatical,
and Historical knowledge of Jesus of Nazareth, is not sufficient for Salvation,
without the Truths be inwardly taught by the Spirit, because thou do
insinuate so much in the 8. P. as if they were only for an Historical, and
against an Experimental Knowledge.

2. Do not thou believe that some may know the Mystery, and so be (...),
without ever hearing of, or knowing the History of Jesus of Nazareth?

3. Whether is Jesus Christ now a Person out of Man, or only a Principle, or
Quality in Man?

4. Do thou believe that Man that was born of Mary the Virgin at Bethlehem in
Judea, to be the Messiah, the Christ of God.

5. Do thou Believe that the Man Christ is any where now in being besides
that being that the Quakers say he has in them? and if so, ^here is he? In
Heaven Earth, or in every Man, and every Grea^re?

6. Whether the Light that you say every Man has, be a Creature or no?

7. Whether the Light that every Man has, be of the very same Nature with the
Spirit of Faith and Regeneration, or of a different kind? or take it thus,
Whether it differ from the new Creature in ^^cie?

8. Whether that which Jesus Christ of Nazareth did and suffered above six
hundred years since in Judea, be not the matter of fallen Man's Instification
in the sight of God?

9. Whether any actions or sufferings of any besides these of his, have ^y
merit, worth, desert in them, to purchase anything at God's hand for any of
Mankind?

10. Whether Christ Jesus died in the room, place, stead of any, or only for
their benefit or advantage?

11. Whether God's imputing Righteousness to any Man, be any thing else, but
his putting Righteousness into the Creature, by Sancti^ing of it?

12. Whether Justification be not an Act of god, in absolving and ^^quitting a
sinner for Christ's sake, in opposition to condemning, as in Romans 8. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect, it is Gad that Justifies, who shall
Cond^mn? and accounting him Righteous, for the personal Righteousness sake of
Christ that was wholly without the sinner?

13. Whether God does not find every one ungodly and in their sin^, when he
first gives Faith to them that justifies them, according to that Romans 5. He
Justifies the ungodly?

14. Whether by the Blood of Christ thou mean est any thing that is not in thy
heart and soul, within thy self? whether thou meanest that material Blood that
was shed from that material Body of Jesus of Na^^teth, when he did hang upon
the Tree at Mount Calvary, without the Gates of Jerusalem, withal his material
real sufferings both of Soul and Body?

15. Whether that Blood the^e shed, was not the Blood of God according to Acts
20.28. he being God as well as Man?

16. Whether Remission of all sins was not actually purchased, by the Death of
Christ, above 1600 years since, for all that have been or shall be saved?

17. Is any Man any father Justified than Sanctified, any farther forgiven than
according to that Degree that sin is Mortified in him.

18. Whether is Justification any thing else but an Act of the Light within
every Man upon obedience to it giving Peace?

19. Whether is there any good work done by any Man, before he is Justified and
forgiven all his sins?

20. Whether Faith as a Habit in, or Act of our Mind, or any good work
proceeding from the Spirit in us, be any part of that Righteousness that
Justifies?

21. Whether there is any such thing in the Nature of God as Vindictive
Justice, so that sin must be punished upon all them that accept not of the
Atonement of Christ Jesus by the Sacrifice of himself?

22. Whether the Light within, or the person of Christ without, be the object
of Justifying Faith, or whether Faith be any thing but obedience to the Light
that every Man has?

23. Whether have not all the Sons of Men, (Christ excepted) the guilt of
Adam's first transgression upon them, before they are Justified and called, and
so are by Nature Children of Wrath, Romans 5. in him we all sinned.

24. Are any so perfect in this Life as to be above the confession of Sin to
God?

25. Of what Use is that Intercession of Christ as a High Priest in Heaven?

26. Whether there be a higher Prophecy than the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles? and it so, where is it, and what is it?

27. Are not the Holy Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, the Rule of
Faith and Life?

28. Whether do thou believe, that the sime natural Body of Man after the
departure of the Soul from it, does rise to Life again.

29. Whether are our distinct personal Beings preserved in the future state?
whether we lose them being swallowed up into God at death?

30. Whether the Light that every Man believed in, obeyed, trusted to, is not
the Jesus, the Righteousness, the Justification, the Blood, the Remission, the
Mystery, the Experience, the Faith, the Cleansing, the Sanctification; the
Shedding, Drinking, Sprinkling of the Blood, is it not the price of infinite
value, that freeth from the Wrath, is it not the Life, the Virtue of the Blood,
the choice Raiment, the putting it (...) the opening of the Understanding, to
know the Mystery, which words and phrases are all in this thy Testimony: Answer
plainly, is there any more in thy whole Treatise, and this Postscript than
this? viz. to the Light, obey the Light, and whoever does not, is but in the
History, is but a Prodigal, in a (...) Country, seeding among the Swine; a
poor, naked, starved Sinner, every one that takes not up this P^inciple (i. e.)
is not a Quaker.

Let the Reader in these two following Columns compared together, (...) how
near a kin the Quakers erroneous ways, opinions, and Practi^^^, are to those of
the Papists; and so judge, whether they had not their Original from Rome, and
John Crook, do thou see thy self in this (...), and behold thy spots, that they
are not the spots of God's Chil^^^, see how like the Daughter is to the Mother;
the young to the (...) Antichrist, and repent, and come out from among them
lest thou with thy followers taste of her Plagues.

The Quakers and the Papists Paralleled.
The Quaker. The Papist. 1. THe Quaker Believes that every one of then Teachers
is infallible, whilst he is a Preaching and Writing, in or by the Light. 1. THe
Papist Believes that the Pope is infal^ib^e in the Chair, 2. That the Body at
Devonshire House must determine all things, and every particular Quaker is to
stoop to the Light of that Body although his and her particular Light dictates
otherwise. See the Book styled the Hypocrisy and Tyranny of the Quakers. 2.
The Papist for an implicit Faith, and a believing as the Church believes. 3.
The Quaker sets up his Light within, equal with the Scriptures; nay, above
them. 3. The Papist sets up their Traditions equal with the Scripture. 4. The
Quakers are for Enthusiasm, immediate Revelations, and Voices, and Visions. 4.
Many of the Papist's Doctrines and Orders came this way, by pretended
Revelation, see Stillingfleet's Fanaticism of the Church of Rome. 5. The
Quakers say the first Motions to evil arising in the Heart if not consented to
by the Will, are not sin. 5. These say the same, viz. that Concupiscence is not
sin. 6. For Perfection in this Life. 6. So the Papist, for a State without sin
in this Life, the Beguardij in Germany. Stillingfleet Idolatry of the Church of
Rome, Page 294. 7. That to attend to the Light that every one has, is
sufficient for Salvation. 7. See Stillingfleet idolatry page 295. That a sort
of Papists said that every intellectual Being has enough within it self to
make it happy. 8. That Man is justified by something within him. 8. Bellarmine
and others, that Man is justified by Inherent Righteousness. 9. That the
Righteousness that is wrought by the Light which they call Spirit, in obedience
thereunto is the Righteousness of God and so Justifies. 9. The Papists say that
the Righteousness which the Spirit works, is the Righteousness of God, and
therefore Justifies. 10. The Quaker, that Works done in the Light, are of
value, worth, and accepted. 10. The Papist, That Christ Merited, that our good
works might Merit. 11. These say, that if we obey and follow the Light that
every Man has the New Creature and Salvation, and all Good will come. 11.
These, that there is the Merit of Congruity, (i. e.) a worth in some good
works, we do before Conversion, for the sake of which God gives saving Grace
and the Spirit 12. The Quakers, against the lawfulness of taking an Oath. 12.
Stilling. Idolat. page 290. The Spiritual Brethren of the Franciscan Order,
were against the taking an Oath. 13. The Quaker says, as John (...) in his
last Book, that Law and Gospel are one. 13. Bellarmine the Jesuit, in his
writings says the same. 14. The Quaker speaks of Forgre^ess of sins past i.
e.) till Conversion upon turning to the Light. 14. The Papists you may see in
their Writings, speak of this very much, which is called the first Institution.
15. The Quakers in scorn (as J.C. in his late Book) speaks of (...) Belief,
that we their Adversa^^^^ seek to be saved by, calling our (...) a fancy and
imagination. 15. The Papist calls Protestants Solifidians, in a jeere, as
thinking to be justified by Faith alone; and they frequently call the Faith of
Protestants after the same rate, viz. a Fancy, etc. 16. The Quakers write and
(...) as if they did think that (...) will be saved but themselves. 16. The
Papists say, none will be saved out of the Church of Rome. 17. The Quakers deny
the Salu^^^^^ of the Hat to his Neighbor, (...) to give any Titles to any Men.
17. See Stilling. Idolat. page 314. Ignatius Loyola, the first founder of the
Order of the Jesuits, was in this very mind, viz. denied to put off the Hat to
any, and to give any Titles to Men, giving this Reason, that it proceeded from
too great fear of Men. 18. The Quakers are for silent Meetings, making it
essential to (...) way. 18. Stilling. Idolat. page 332. There is an account of
some of the Papist's ways of Devotion, some of them were for abstractedness of
Life Mental Prayer, Passive Unions with God in the Deiform fund of the Soul, a
state of introversion, and for attendance upon God alone in the depths of the
Spirit, for pure actuations in the Spirit, these are their own words, out of
their own Books; see Stillingfleet, they are for the vacuity of the Soul, and
(...) solitude, etc. Stilling. Idol. 322. 19. They are against making use of
our Reason, and understandings in Divine matters, as in Crooks you may see, and
in Faldoes Key. 19. The Papist speaks of an entire Union with God, whereby the
Soul is Deified, that it is to be attained by self-annihilation, the (...) of
nothingness, the Union of nothing with nothing. Now (...) compare Penningtons
and (...) Canting Language, with this, see (...) they be not akin, Stilling.
Idol.(...) 20. The Quakers do speak of the everlasting Gospel, they are come
out withal, a new Prophecy despiseing the Scripture, talking much of the Spirit
in opposition to the Scriptures, that when this People began then the day came,
Christ's Light came, the pouring out of the Spirit came, looking upon
themselves as having a greater measure than any fort of people before them:
owning it in Writing, that there is no use of any Gospel Ordinances, as
breaking Bread, etc. calling them shadows that are done away by the substances,
see an account of Penn by Mr. Hicks Dial. 20. In the same Book page 47 some of
the Papists were for (...) Kingdom of the Spirit, and (...) everlasting Gospel,
as a higher (...) than Christ's Gospel, that the (...) of the Father they said
conti^^^^^ till Christ; the Law of the Son (...) their time, and then the time
of (...) Holy Ghost was to come, in which Sacraments were to cease, and (...)
Administrations, and every (...) was to be saved by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, without any external Actions.

WILL. HAYWORTH.

(...) Reply to William Baylies pretended Answer to the Pamphlet, as he calls
it, entitled the Quaker Converted, written (...) Southwark, the 17th. of the
11th Month called February, 1673.

JOB, 11.2, 3. Should not the Multitude of words be Answered, and should a Man
of lips be justified? Should thy lies make Men hold their peace, and when thou
mockest, shall no Man make thee ashamed?

(...) Bailey, Thou Quarrellest with me for asserting that the young (...)
Willam Dinsdel, was once fully of the Way, Faith, Spirit, Princi^^^ of the
Quakers; and that he went farther than most of them, to^^^^ that which they
call Perfection; there be four things thou pitch^^^on, to enervate, and weaken
my Testimony, viz.

1. (...) Page 23. Because he had no ground in himself to go to silent (...),
upon which thou queriest, whether it be the Quakers Way, (...), Faith, and
Principle, to dislike silent Meetings? etc.

Reply. I can (if thou will put me upon it) produce several, owned (...) you,
that are constantly among you, that are not for silent Meet^^^^

2. The young Man said he had not ground for it in himself, yet followed be
Light, it seems thou would have every one be like unto thy self, (...) other
Quakers, viz. For silent Meetings whether he has ground (...) it in himself or
no; otherwise no Quaker, thou art in this a Papist (...), for implicit Faith.

3. It appears, that an assent to this practice of yours, and the practi^^ng of
it, though no example for it, or command in Scriptures is es^ential to
Quakerism; I suppose this practice must be founded upon (...) private
Inspiration.

4. I challenge thee, and any of you to give me any Instance in the ^cripture,
where the people of God did professedly meet together at (...) times, as you do
sitting together in silence, without any pray^^ng or speaking by way of
Exhortation or Doctrine: thou may see (...) that it was the practice of some
of the Papists, that they were (...) Mental Prayer, and profound silence.

Page 72. 2. Because he had no Grounds in himself to deny the pu^ing of the Hat
when he met a Friend, not knowing that he offended God, (...) Now thou ask
whether this be the Quakers way?

Reply as before, I know two at this day, that are Quakers, and owned by many
of you, and yet use the Salute of the Hat, and if thou will call me to it I
will find thee several more.

2. Thou make this which is but a Mahumetan Instance, an essential thing to
Quakerism, if so, then Ignatius Loyola, the first founder of Jesuitism was a
Quaker, as you may see before, Page 72.

3. Thou implyest, that God is offended by putting off the Hat in Saluting a
Friend, then it must be a sin, and if a sin, a breach of some of the words of
the Moral Law, delivered by Moses; and if so, I ask of which? Whether of the
5th. viz. Honor thy Father and Mother.

4. It seems thou think a Man ought to keep his Hat on, though he is
persuaded otherwise, and so acts against his Light.

The third thing Bailey says, the young Man was no Quaker, because of that
passage that he has, viz. I was ready to assent to every thing the Quakers
did, whether I saw ground for it or not, upon which thou ask whether this be
the Quakers way?

Reply. He says only, That he was ready to assent, not that he did assent. 2.
I appeal to any impartial one, whether there be not as perfect superstition
among the Quakers, as among any people under He^ven, an affected doting
imitation of their Teachers in many things, whether any ground for them or no
in themselves. 3. See the Books styled the Spirit of the Hat, and the other
called the Tyranny and Hypocrisy of the Quakers, there may you find instances
by name of some Quakers, that have been called upon at Devonshire-House, to
submit (...) the sense of the Body, though it was not according to the Light
that he or she had at present.

The 4th. thing, is, about that manner of Speech which the Quaker (...) viz.
Thou and not You to single persons asking whether it be the Quaker way?

Reply. Yea, it is the way of some Quakers whom I know and could name, they do
speak in this common way which is as proper thoug^^ not in other Languages yet
in ours as the other, as instances you (...) in the Translation of the
Scriptures into our Language; but to conclud^ this, the young Man was of this
mind, Page 3. of his Book, viz. the finding something within, that did convince
him of sin, and hearing (...) Jesus that came to save sinners, because likewise
the Quakers (...) much of the Light that every Man has, and that there must be
Obedience to it, did believe that this was the Christ and so did obey the Light
(...) Christ: and found a reformation, insomuch, that Page 8. he thought that
he was perfect, and without Sin; and that he had not (if God should call him
out of this World) one sin to Answer for. Now, Bailey, is not he that is of this
mind a Quaker, yea, a perfect Quaker, to Believe the Light within to be Christ,
to obey this as such, to be faithful in it to a Pretended perfection is not
this the Faith, Way, Spirit, Principle, Life, Soul of a Quaker. And thou can
not Bailey, refuse any, but own him that is thus minded, although his Light at
present tells him, that he ought to put off his Hat and Salute his Neighbor,
and that by his Light he sees no warrant for silent Meetings: and that it will
give him leave to say (You) as well as (Thou) unless thou will take up and
defend this Prnciple which is already started at Devonshire House, viz. That
every single person must be guided not by his or her own single Light, But by
the Light of the Body of your Teachers, which Penn has pleaded for, in a late
Book; So then your first professed Principle is gone, and every one must no
longer Act as he is guided by his own Light. Answer plainly Bailey, and rail no
more; for my calling him Quaker, I do still believe by all that ever I could
learn, by my Converse with the Quakers, and reading their Books, that he was as
real a Quaker, as was in England, had as far improved their Principle as any of
you; as for the other things thou mentionest, they are but the Appurtenances of
a Quaker; He that has the Soul and Body of a Man, is certainly a seal Man,
although he wants some Hair, or Nails, or the like; So here; or I look upon
this Clownish Custom rather as an excrescency from the Body, as a Wen or Wart,
or some proud Flesh rather, that is arisen, and grown out of your false
Principles, that leads directly to Pride, and Affectation, and singularity in
Carriage and Behavior, placing Religion where Christ never did, in Hats, Lace,
Ribbon, saying You, and Thou, etc. So that Will. Bailey, I have not lied (as
thou say) but have told the Truth, and need not be ashamed of it. The young
Man has sufficiently in his (...) Book testified that he was a Quaker, which
the Reader may view.

In Page 24. Thou look upon this abstaining from saying (You) in our
ordinary discourse, to be that bridling of the Tongue, spoke of in James 1.26.
Now I query, is every one that uses this mode of speaking guilty of an
unbridled Tongue? And does every one that is such deceive himself, and his
Religion in vain? And so he is damned? Again I query whether James the Apostle
does not by this, viz. not bridling the Tongue, understand the same with that
in Chap. 3. giving Liberty thereunto to Curse Men, v. 9. while we pretend
likewise to bless God therewith: now if any people in England he so guilty as
you this way, let others judge, so that sooner might all the Wild-Horses in a
Country been ruled and broke with Bitts and Bridles, than this people caused to
desist from cursing all about them. What a bridled Tongue this Baily has you
may see in his Book, which is full of Railings.

In the same Page thou speak of thy sufferings for these things.

Reply, We Justify not them that persecuted you, but say, if you suffered not
in some things, as busybodies in other men's matters, disturbing many a Holy
Man in his Ministry, but as Christians, you need not be ashamed, glory not in
your sufferings, but learn to glory in Jesus Christ.

In Page 25. Thou assertest, that silent Meetings are a means, through which,
the Quakers came to know the Lord; and thou go about to pro^^, that the
Writers of the Scriptures, and Holy Men of God of old, (calling them your
Brethren) were for silent Meetings, in their Practice.

Reply, I have read in Romans 10. v. 17. That Faith comes by hearing, but thou
assert'st, it comes without hearing, v. 14. How can they be^^ without a
Preacher? but thou have found a way, by silent Preaching. 1 Cor. 1. it is said,
By the foolishness of Preaching to save, etc. but it is foolish to talk so; here
is a way found out, to save without Preaching: I query what that Lord is, and
what that Salvation is, that ye came to know by silent Meetings? Whether any
other than the Light within, and Obedience to that Light; and thereupon some
Peace, which indeed may be attained without the Gospel being heard? The Indians
have this in their Religious Meetings: but can Jesus Christ the Lord, and
Salvation by him, be known to any without hearing of it first by the outward
ear? Can they believe, that never heard the word of Faith? God can, it is true,
reveal himself without any outward means, but is it his ordinary way? Has he
not declared his Will, viz. That he makes known himself and his Salvation by
Preaching? But this same Baily says no; but by silent Meetings, and his
Brother the Prophet Isaiah is for silent Meetings, Chap. 26.8. Yea in the way
of thy Judgments O Lord have we waited for thee, thy Judgments (i. e.) silent
Meetings, would it not be better understood of Afflictions and Chastisements
upon the Godly, which God inflicts with moderation? when as in 1 Cor. 11.32. it
is there, When we are Judged we are Chastned, Judging is Chastning, Judgments
then are better expounded, Chastisements th^n silent Meetings: There was indeed
a silent Meeting by many of the Corinthians, but it was then in the Graves, v.
30. For this Cause God did so Judge them that many fell asleep in Death. What,
is there more then in this Scripture but this, viz. God's people will wait upon
him, cleave to him, love God, honor and serve him in their Afflictions,
when as Hypocrites will run away, and cast off his fear, and speak hardly of
him, saying, why should we wait any longer.

But another Scripture to prove silent Meetings a means of knowing the Lord is,
Isa. 41.1. keep silence before me O Islands, here is the word (...).

Reply. O Islands, what is meant by them, look into v. 5. The Isles (...) the
ends of the Earth, (i. e.) the remote places from Judea, 6, 7. Which worshipped
Idols: as you may see there, next, Let the people re^^^ their strength, what by
people here is to be understood; the people here is not Israel, for the word is
in the plural number, and so denotes the Nations in opposition to Israel, and
in v. 8. you may see Israel is spoke to in contradistinction to the Nations,
Renew their strength (i. e.) ^^ster up themselves, and get what power they can,
and let them speak (i. e.) then let them plead for themselves; now what this
keeping silence is? Why the Prophet calls to them, being about to speak to
(...) by writing of great things, viz. v. 2. Who raised up the Righteous (...),
gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings, v. 4. (...) has
wrought and done it? (i. e.) Was it any of the Idols that did this? Nay, I the
Lord, as it follows in that same 4th. v. He puts these Questions to them, and
knew they must be silent; For it was his own Power, not the power of their
Idols that did all these great things, this is the right understanding: now
according to you, I know another thing can be evinced out of this Scripture,
but such a sense as this, viz. That after the people of the Nations had ended
the noise (...) would be in making them Idols, the Carpenters, Goldsmiths, as
(...). When they have done their Sawings, Hammerings, and driving (...) N^il^,
they may gather as many as can, and sit down about these I^^^ and silently
Worship them; But Baily, this Scripture will not be for (...) purpose, for here
is such a silent Meeting, wherein there is speaking mentioned, Then let them
speak; and the Prophet speaks here to the people, whom he calls to silence, you
know it is common for the people to be silent, when any one speaks in a Meeting,
Acts 21.40. Paul bechened with his hand, and there was made a great silence,
and then Paul spoke. So God spoke to all the Nations by the Prophet that were
in Idolatry, appealing to them (as I said before) that it was not their gods,
but he himself that called Cyrus to this great work; if then you would prove
silent Meetings from this Scripture, as thou say thou can, then it must
run thus, and this is the most genuine, sense, viz. That the Prophet here calls
the Dumb Idols, that had Mouths and spoke not, and Ears and heard not, and Feet
and walked not, to gather themselves together, and keep a silent Meeting; and
there God would be known to them, they should turn to the Light, and become
Quakers.

The next Scripture for silent Meetings, is Jam. 25.2. Zachary 13. Be silent O
all Flesh before the Lord, such another is that which is joined to this, Hab.
2.20. The Lord is in his Holy Temple, let all the Earth know silence before
him. Now, let us try if from hence all Flesh, and all the Earth should keep a
silent Meeting: who sees not but these two Scriptures with that third that
this Man names, Psalm. 46. Be still, and know that I am God, etc. do speak
forth thus much? viz. That seeing the Heathens had been Enemies all along to
God's people, and had wronged and distressed them, now God was eminently coming
forth to Judge them, and deal with them, and therefore speaks thus to them of
silence, foreseeing how it would be with them all, as with them that are amazed
and astonished with the sense of their own guilt and weakness, and God's
Greatness and Righteousness; therefore, we read in Psalm. 46. of Desolations in
the Earth, of Wars, and how God is the Lord of Hosts, etc. Therefore it
follows, I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted in the Earth:
W. Baily, thou might as well have brought that passage in the Parable, when
the King came in, He saw there a Man, that had not on a Wedding Garment, and he
was speechless, Mat. 22.11, 12. this speaks as much as the other Scripture.
This Man was astonished at his own Guilt, and God's wrath that was due: I do
think in this sense, there will be the greatest silent Meeting that ever was,
at the day of Judgment, when every Unbelievers mouth shall be stopped; but yet
as no means of savingly knowing God. But Revel, 8.1. which is brought next,
will do it effectually, all these have failed. There was silence in Heaven, it
follows, about the space of half an hour; now Baily, why did thou omit this
last passage, whereby thou might as well have known how long your silent
Meetings should continue not above half an hour; But let us enquire the genuine
sense of this place, likewise, is there any more in it than this? viz. that for
some small space of time comparatively to the time of trouble, the Church
should have a time of freedom from persecution! this brings to mind that your
silent Meetings have been of great use to you in these late persecutions. Your
custom was, we know at Hartford, and we have heard in other places likewise (in
the heat of the Execution of the late Act for fi^eing the Speaker so much, and
so the House, and people) to have much silence in Heaven for many half hours in
many of your Meetings.

The next Scripture is Psalm. 4.4. be moved, the Hebrew is, either with anger,
fear and grief, but sin not, Examine your own hearts upon your Beds and be
still. This certainly is spoke to Gods people, what their Duty was, every one
apart upon their Beds that every one alone should keep a silent Meeting in the
Night in his Chamber, retired upon his Bed; not a word of assembling here; only
thus much is in it, when God comes with afflictions, if we be moved with grief,
yet are we to take heed of sinning against God, by murmuring and fretting, but
rather be retired, and examine our hearts; we shall find cause enough, why the
Lord deals so with us, and that he is Righteous: let every one in the night
season, when full of thoughts, upon remembrance what God has done to him, then
be patient, quiet, still, fret not against God.

The last is Isa. 8. and Isa. 40.3. concerning waiting on, and that which
Christ the Lord speaks to his Disciples, bidding them wait a Jerusalem till
they were endued with power. Now, what kind of silent Meetings these Scriptures
speak for, it will soon appear, let one place open the rest, what this waiting
is: see Acts 1.14. They all continued with one accord, in Prayer and
Supplications; And Peter stood up and Preached to them, v. 15. Let the Reader
now Judge what fit Scriptures these be, to prove the things in hand; and what a
mighty Man this is, that while he goes about to let others see their ignorance
(as he says) he betrayeth his own. And its not something strange, that this
people should wrest the Scripture thus, to prove their silent Meetings, and
when it speaks plainly for silence, there they are against it in their
practice? in 1 Cor. 14.34. it is said by the Apostle, Let your Women keep
silence in the Churches; For it is not permitted unto them to speak: yet the
Quakers are for Women Preaching, 1 Timothy 2.11. Let the Women learn in silence,
if any silent Meetings, they must be such wherein there is none but Women: What
thou say Baily, in this (...) touching the Quakers, I shall at present pass,
till I come to the place where thou go about to prove Ezekiel and others to
be Quakers, after the same rate, as thou have proved silent Meetings.

Page 26. B. And could not own that refuge of Lies, W. H. has made concerning
him.

Reply. I Challenge thee to mention one lie that I have either said or writ of
him, whatever I have writ in my Epistle of him, is owned by himself, in his
book under his own hand; and had I thee, Face to Face with him, in case thou
have any Sobriety, and Modesty, and Ingenuity left, I would make thee eat up
these words again, viz. these could not own that refuge of lies, etc.

B. Page ibid. And I do not understand, from his Master, or any in Hartford,
that ever he was ten times at the Quakers Meetings, but (...) sometimes as the
other boys did, as he said, and may be farther seen in the account from
Hartford.

Reply, If any please to enquire of the young Man himself, now dwelling at
Ware, he will affirm, that which here I write, viz, That for five years
together he went to no other Meetings, but the Quakers Meetings, and is it
likely, that he should not be above ten times, in all that space, at their
Meetings? you may likewise hear at Hartford, that none of us saw him in our
Meetings but of late years, thou do wrong him Baily, and thou do not
rightly transcribe his own words: He says several times, I went as other boys,
and thou have put in another word, viz. sometimes; and let it be considered,
that lest any should think that he went only when a boy, by that expression,
viz. as other boys, that he is there in the beginning of his Book, relating his
first step and entrance into their Way; This boy was twenty years of Age before
he left the Quakers: as for that account from Hartford, what little value it is
of, the Reader will soon Judge; when by enquiry at Hartford, he comes to hear,
that some of the Quakers hands (...) to it, that did not dwell in, nor near the
Town, till several years after (...) young Man was an Apprentice in the Town;
Besides, whatever they restifie in this account, they testify either; First,
from the young Man's Master and Dame Grigson. Or Secondly, from his own Relation
in his Book, (...) that he was against the Quakers practice in two things, viz.
the ^^^^ing on the Hat, and silent Meetings; Now as to his Master and (...)
Testimony concerning him, of what force will it be to the Judicious, when this
is weighed, that such was the young Man's reservedness in the Family, (which he
was naturally addicted to) that both Master and Dame acknowledged (as these Men
confess in the account) that they did not know this young Man's mind; see, their
own words are these, viz. They never understood, that he had any convincement
upon his mind when as be had far a long time, great troubles and convictions
upon his Spirit, while in the Family, as appears by the Book: As for the Second
thing, viz. his practice in putting his Hat off in Salutations, and being
against silent Meetings, you must give us leave to think, that notwithstanding
this, the young Man was of the Quakers Spirit, Faith, and Principle; for having
conversed much with the Quakers at Hartford, having read several of their
Books, and the Books of others that (...) us of their opinions, we apprehend,
that to believe the Light (...) every Man has, to be Christ, and to obey this
as Christ, and being Faithful in the obedience, to come up to an outward
Reformation, which this young Man did, and call it Perfection, thinking God
could (...) charge him with sin, is the very Heart and Life and Essence of the
Quakers Religion; and for the two things insisted on by them, we look (...)
them rather as outward Badges, Tokens, and Marks whereby to distinguish Quakers
from others, than any essential things to constitute a Quaker. But again, he
asserts in his Book, that he walked in this practice, according to his Light:
and enquire at Hartford Rea^er, and thou may have many Witnesses, that such
is his Integrity, that he may be credited in what he has said; And it is not
probable, (...) he that was Faithful in other matters of greater weight,
touching ^^^^ning from sin, and acting Righteously, should be unfaithful in
(...) less matters: Now observe, these Subscribers yet say, he was (...)
Quaker, when as he acted according to his then present Guide, the light within:
In the close, how can this thing be determined, whether (...) young Man was a
Quaker or no, when as he was so reserved, that (...) they, according to their
own Confession, nor any of us knew (...) or Principles? only he went to their
Meetings, and to no other (...) years space as we can prove; how can it be
determined, but by (...) Confession, which has been published already? and you
may now see more in his own following Book toward the end, where he (...) up
eight distinct grand errors of the Quakers, that he had swallowed. And this
Testimony of himself may be credited, if en^^ry be made of his Integrity at
Hartford, and if need be, I will prove (...) the hands of several there, that
shall witness, that neither he nor I myself are Liars, or Forgers in what we
have said in this matter, but what we have done herein, we have done in Truth;
and for this end, (...) the gross and damnable Errors of the Quakers.

In the 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. for nine Pages together, there (...)
strange a Wild-Goose-Chase, as I have seen; and the fame Cole^^^^ boiled over
again, for frequently things are repeated usque ad nan^^^^, that turns the
Readers Stomach.

The sum of that which the young Man offers by way of Answering (...) Questions
is this, viz. That the Light which he had before Conversion, (...) not the
Light of the Spirit of the Son of God Jesus Christ, that of ^^generation;
because of the Fruits of it, which were only convictions of ^^moralities, and
some outward Reformations, but it did not show the saving knowledge of Christ
Crucified in the room of Sinners as their Surety, so that it was but the same
Light the Heathens had 1600 years since, spoke of Romans 2.14. and all Heathens
have it now. This is true, and we dare maintain it against you all, and
question not but he is able to say enough for it himself.

First, I will prove, that it is but a natural Light which the Heathens have,
and that which as you say every one has, that Light within: Secondly, That
therefore it is not sufficient to reveal Christ savingly; toward the latter
end the Reader may see it proved, that this Light within, is not the Spirit of
Regeneration but that it differs in kind, Page,

1. That which is Common to all men is natural, but this Light is Common to all
Men, Ergo.

The Major is made good thus, viz. That without which a Man cannot be a Man
must needs be Common, and so Natural, but without this Light Man is not Man,
Ergo. That which distinguishes Grace from Nature is this, that Grace is a
special Gift of God, to whom he will, the other is Essential to Man, he cannot
be a Man without it.

2. Arg. If the Heathens did by Nature, things contained in the Law, then this
Light the Heathens had, was a Natural Light, and no more; but this is asserted
by the Apostle, in Romans 2.14. For the Gentiles which had not the Law, ( i. e.
of Moses) do by Nature things contained in the Law, Ergo.

2. That this Light is not sufficient to Reveal Christ savingly.

1. If by Nature all Men are Children of wrath, then Nature cannot savingly
inlighten; but the first is true, Ephesians. 2. Ergo.

2. If Whatever is Natural be but Flesh, then it cannot savingly reveal Jesus
Christ; but the first is true, from John 3. Whatever is (...) of the Flesh, is
Flesh.

3. If the Heathens by all the Light they had, did not savingly know Christ,
then this Natural Light cannot savingly reveal Christ; but the is true: that
they did not, the Scripture testifies, 1 These. 4.5. T^ Gentiles that knew not
God (i. e.) savingly in Christ, Gal. 4.8. (...) then when ye knew not God,
speaking to the Saints how it was (...) them before Conversion, 2 Ephesians. 12.
they were (it is said) with^^ Christ, and so without God, and had no hope.

If you say it was not sufficient, because they resisted it.

I Answer, it is said they obeyed it, in Romans 2. They did things ^^^tained in
the Law. If you say not to the full.

I Answer, that would have been according to you, unto Perfection, and then no
need of Christ being revealed.

4. If the Heathens could by all the Light they had, attain to Salvation, then
their Conversion was not such a Mystery, but it is spoke of as a very great
Mystery, wherein God's Rich Grace and Power was seen to a wonder, as the
Scripture bears Witness.

5. That Opinion that makes void that Prophecy spoke of, Luke 2.32. viz. That
Christ should be a Light to Lighten the Gentiles, cannot be true; but this of
the Quakers does: Ergo. For if they had sufficient Light before, there was no
need of the other.

6. If the Heathens notwithstanding all the Light within, which is spoke of in
Romans 1.20. yet were at that same time unrighteous, Romans 3.9, 10. and under Sin,
and fallen short of the Glory of God, v. 23. unjustified, then this is true,
that the Light they had, was not a saving Light; but so it is: Ergo. You cannot
say they were not obedient to it, for they did things contained in the Law.

7. That Opinion that makes Divine Revelation to be in some, is false; but this
does, to say, that the Light that every Man has is a saving Light: Ergo.

For if Salvation can be attained by attendance to this Light, then it is in
vain, for God to make known his will and mind and way to Salvation, by the
Revelation of the Scriptures. Frustra fit per plura, and fieri potest per
pauciora. In vain does any, that by more, which may be done by fewer things and
ways.

8. If the Light within can reveal Christ savingly, then was the Covenant made
with Abraham, no Covenant of Grace, it was not Grace to Abraham, for God to
make known his Will to him, when as he might have attained it by the Light he
had before, and which others might have known as well as he.

9. If all the Light that Adam had before his fall, was not sufficient to
preserve him to Salvation, and prevent his fall, much less is that Light in Man
being fallen sufficient to restore him, and so save him.

10. If Angels could have known the Gospel without Revelation, then this Light
is not sufficient to Reveal him savingly, but the Angels could not, as appears
by the Scripture, in that it was a Mystery, hid in God, and they learned it of
the Church, Ephesians. 3.9, 10.

11. That which makes the omnipotent Work of God, upon the heart of Man, by
savingly enlightening his Mind and Understanding, giving a new Heart, taking
away the Heart of stone, making him a new Creature etc. in vain, is not to be
admitted as true; but this does, to say every Man has a saving Light.

For if Man by attendance to the Light can be saved, then no need of the other
works of God, upon the Soul of Man; If thou writest again Baily, Answer plainly
to these Arguments.

The Objections that Baily raises, are here Answered.
THe first stone that out of the Rubbish of this Babel, is thrown at us is this.

Baily, And in that he says the Light by which the Heathens did the things
contained in the Law, Romans 2.14. Which showed the work of the Law, written in
their Hearts, is not the Light of the Spirit of Christ, he is found a denier of
the Scriptures, John 1.9. If every Man that comes into the World be lighted
with the Light of Christ, then the Heathens, and all other Men.

Reply, That Scripture, John 1.9. which thou bring, will not prove this,
viz. That every one that comes into the World, is lighted (i. e.) savingly by
the Light of Christ; for that Phrase, comes into the World, has reference to
that Word Christ, not the Word Man, as appears by another Scripture, John
12.46. I am come a Light into the World, so that it is said, this Was the true
Light, having Respect to the person of Christ, taking Flesh, thus coming into
the World, he was the greatest Light, and brought the greatest Light that ever
was by his Preaching, working Miracles, giving the Spirit, but says not here,
that he is the Light in every one: Now the other, viz. that Lights every Man,
this cannot be meant universally of every individual Man or Woman, in the
World, because many at that day were in darkness, v. 5. The Light shined in
darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not, Christ was among them, yet they
were darkness: and they cannot be said to have a saving Light in them, and yet
be called darkness; for then their state would be changed from darkness to
Light. Again, the Apostles are the Light of the World, will it therefore
follow, that all the Heathens, and every one was Lighted within by them, that
they were that Light within that every Man has? Its said of Paul, warning
e^every Man, and teaching every Man, Col. 1.28. did Paul warn every individual
Man and Woman in the World? That Christ as a Creator does give some kind of
Light to every one, may be granted to thee, but not as a saving Light, that
must be as a Mediator, thou must seek another Scripture. It Is at hand.

Baily, Titus 2. If the Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared to
all Men, then it appeared to the Heathens for they were Men.

Reply. It should have been said in the last Proposition, viz. to all the
Heathens; to the Heathens it did, for many of them were converted by the
Preaching of the Gospel, but what is this to thy purpose? the Light in every
Man cannot be called the Grace of God, in that I proved it to be a Natural
Light before: But withal how came thou to be so mistaken? if thou had
minded the Margin, it would have corrected the reading, but thou wast not
willing, it is not so in the Greek as thou reads it, viz. has appeared to all
Men, neither ought it to be rendered in the translation, but thus; the Greek
has it, The Grace of God that brings Salvation to all Men, has appeared,
this then will not effect thy business yet, unless thou will say, that this
bringing Salvation to all Men will do it, but if Salvation be brought to every
individual, then every one is saved, surely then, it was only to every one that
was saved by it.

The Third Argument of Bailey is, W. H. calls it the Deity,] Ergo.

This is a notorious falsehood, it is well if not maliciously perverting my plain
words, I have given a fair account of it in my Answer to Crook Page here thou
acts not according to the Light, to do as thou would be dealt withal.

The Fourth Argument is drawn from the Fruits of this Tree, which thou
Blasphemously calls the Tree of Life, which should be spoke of the Person of
Christ, He, and He only is the Tree of Life. The young Man says the Light that
every Man has, is not the Light of the Spirit of Christ, (i. e.) Of
Regeneration and Faith; because of it is Fruits; which were these three:

1. It taught that the first motions to evil, arising in the heart if not
consented to, were not sin.

2. That the Doctrine of Justification was a Doctrine of Libertinism.

3. That Salvation was by our own Righteousness.

Now thou speak not a word here to this corrupt Fruit, that sprang from that
which thou call the Tree of Life: but let us hear what the Fruits are as
thou say.

Baily. 1. Thou say, It assented to the word of Christ and his Apostles,
therefore it must be the Spirit of Christ.

Reply. The Devil did assent to the words of the Scripture, it will follow then
according to thy Arguing -- which I may not write.

2. It does not assent to all the Scripture which the Spirit of Christ does,
for it taught him contrary as you may see in these three things.

3. It assented only to the Abstaining from outward Evils, which foolish
talking and jesting were; which it may do, and yet not be the Spirit of the
Son, as I will make appear plainly in the Answer to thy next proof.

2. Fruit. It convinced him of Evil, and let us join the four following to
this, for they are all of the same nature. 3. Kept him from stealing. 4. From
Lying (that of few words was spoke to before.) 5. From doing any wrong
outwardly, sinning outwardly. 6. It gave him strength and power to do that
which was good in the sight of God and Men.

Reply. In this last passage thou greatly wrongs the young Man, and in that
other likewise, viz. and delivered him from it; his words are that he had power
over Evil, and was delivered, but not that this Light within gave him the
Power, but let it go as thou would have it, what from all these therefore is
thy conclusion?

It is the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter that leads into all Truth, page 30.

Reply. Then had Judas the Spirit of Truth, that leads into all Truth, the
Comforter, for the was convinced of sin, and so the most wicked Man under
Heaven has sometimes convictions for sin.

2. Then the young Rich Man had the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter; for he
could say, touching the commands of the Law, All these have I done; So had Paul
before his Conversion, while a Persecutor and Blasphemer, for at that time he
could say of himself touching the Law blameless, Phil. 3. likewise by this
Reasoning of thine the Pharisee had the Spirit, the Comforter, that thanked
God, he was not as others, nor as the Publican, Luke 18. it is said Matthew.
12.44. of the Jews, that they were swept and garnished, yet Satan entered,
outward Reformation of Life, does not evince the Spirit's indwellings.

7. Fruit. He had Joy, Peace, and Comfort, in obeying the Light; Therefore it
is the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth.

Reply. Then had Paul the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth before his Conversion,
Romans 7.9. I was alive without the Law once. What is that? But that he had Peace
before he came to have the Spiritual Knowledge of the Law, convincing him, that
desires after evil, though not consented to, were sin.

2. If all Peace was true, then this Fruit would argue it to be the Spirit of
Christ, but all Peace is not right, good, true; else why does Christ say my
Peace I leave with you, John 14. and the Apostle speaks of the Peace of God,
that passes all understanding, etc.

3. There can be no Good Conscience, nor true Peace without Faith in the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. The Answer of a good Conscience
through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; no Man can rightly Answer the
accusation of his Conscience for not coming up to that absolute Perfection that
the Law requires, but by Faith in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who rose
again for our Justification, Romans 4.25. Now one may have the Light within
(which you speak of) and yet want Faith, and this young Man it is manifest had
one at this time, but wanted the other; therefore his Peace was naught.

4. Withal, if this will hold, many ungodly ones most profane, have the Spirit
the Comforter, for they have Peace both living, and dying, Psalm. 73. There are
no bands in their Death, and they say Peace in their Lives, 1 These. 5. They
stretch themselves upon their Couches, and Ch^unt at the sound of the Viol,
Amos 6.4, 5. I read on page 31, and meet with nothing but the same over again,
which the Judicious Reader will take notice of, till we come to that passage,
viz. That there is (...) name under Heaven by which Men can be saved: observe,
this is the second time of Baylies Blasphemy, applying this to the Light within
every man that is no more than Nature, which can be attributed to none but
Jesus Christ the Mediator, calling it also the Deliverer and Counselor, from
Isa. 59. as well might thou call the Soul, Reason, Understanding of Man by
these Names.

And whereas thou ask in this same place, is there any other Spirit and
Light which can deliver from sin, and give power over it, but what is of Jesus
Christ.

Reply. The young Man never owned this Light to deliver from, and give power
over sin, as thou here intimates, nay, the scope of his Relation speaks the
contrary, and in the 17. Page he says in the greatest of his purity and
perfection, there were longing desires after evil, which he could be delivered
from no manner of ways; Observe Reader, how these people make lies their
refuge, to defend their tottering Opinions, if any deliverance, it was only in
externals; Lust had as much power within, as ever, and this as has been shown,
may be had without the Spirit of Regeneration, viz. external Reformation.
Before I conclude this, let the Reader observe that Baylies Question runs thus,
viz. Any Spirit but what is of Christ; why, the Light of the Sun is of Christ,
the Wind is of Christ as a Creator, is it therefore the Spirit of Regeneration
proceeding from Christ as Mediator? No surely. But again, in one place that we
mentioned, he calls the Light within the Tree of Life, and in another a little
before the Name whereby all must be saved, the Deliverer and the Counselor,
now here only of Christ, a Spirit of Christ; see what consistency is in these
Men's lines.

Bailey. Is it not the Light of Christ, that makes sin manifest, mentioing
Ephesians. 5?

Reply. What Passage it is that thou have thine eye upon I know not, except the
13. Whatsoever makes manifest is Light. Now this is true of all kinds and sorts
of Lights, they all make manifest, but they act according to their several
Natures, yet Christ is the Author of them all; the Light of the Sun will not
make sin manifest, yet another Light will; the Quakers Light that every Man
has, will manifest some sin, but not all; and it appears by the young Man's
Relation, for it will not show desires to evil to be sin, if they be not
consented to, according to what Paul does testify in Romans 7. I had not known
sin but by the Law: So then this Light thou pointest to in Ephesians. 5. was of
another sort, in that all things were reproved by it, and in that it was but
lately bellowed on the Ephesians, not having it before; for in ver. 8. Ye were
sometimes darkness, notwithstanding all the Light within, that they had from
the Womb.

Bailey. And does not the Apostle say in that same place, v. 8, 9. the Fruit of
the Spirit is in all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth?

Reply. By what I said before, the Spirit spoke of in Ephesians. 5. is not the
Light that every Man has, for they were darkness all that time they had that,
till Faith came. This spoke of in the Ephesians, was the Spirit of Grace,
Faith, Adoption, Regeneration, the Spirit of the Son; now the Root being
different, the Fruit must be different, this Goodness, Righteousness and Truth
must be and is of another better sort and kind than that which yet is called by
the same names, springing from another Root, viz. the Light that every Man has.

B. And does not W. H. Say it is the Spirit that makes known (...) which was
not seen before, then whenever any sees sin, it is the Spirit that makes it
known, and puts this word, viz. Mark, to it; as a thing that he is happy in the
hitting upon it, and that what he says is convincing and unanswerable.

Reply. Now Reader, see how acute this Man is in catching one in an Argument,
and holding one fast in it? what a formidable Enemy I have to deal with? This
was spoke by me (you may see) in the sixth page of the little Book) upon that
Scripture, viz. He shall Baptiz^ you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, Luke
3.16. Saying that the Spirit did operate after the manner of Fire (i. e.) by
Light and Heat: As to the Light, the Spirit makes known sin when it comes
(thou should have repeated that Phrase and then said Mark) but as often as
thou re^ea^edst this, thou ever omittedst that phrase) is this fair play? It
follows, as the shining of the Sun through a Crack into a dark Room, we may
behold every small dust within that compass, these are the words; (...) let me
reason with thee a little, every one has the Light within, you grant, but is
every one Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and Fire? is it not such a Spirit spoke
of here, wherewith every one is Baptized that is regenerated and none else?
which comes to us at that time, and works and dwells in us, and we had it
not before, a Spirit that will show the dust and. Atoms of sin and lust in our
Souls, which this Light that every one has will not? I will pass over and take
no notice of thy railing Words that thou art full of here and elsewhere; but
the Conclusion will hold still, which thou art angry with, viz. That the Spirit
of the Quakers is a Spirit of delusion, and let the Reader (...) by our Lives,
whether thou or I are more like the clamorous Woman thou speak of.

I must desire the Reader to turn back to the 27th Page, there is something
that Bailey says, which I cannot well omit to speak something to; it is that
which this Man does frequently touch upon, and his Brother (...), I could not
well Reply to it before, because I would take all the objections I could
gather, and Answer them in order.

Bailey. And yet he compares this blessed Light which has done all this (...)
for him to the Egyptians, ( which grievously and wickedly oppressed (...)
afflicted the people of Israel) on whom the Lord sent his Plagues, because of
their Cruelty which they exercised upon his people, as may be seen in page 18.
And yet confessed he had Joy, and Peace and Comfort; and (...) in Spirit under
these Taskmasters; which the poor Israelites had (...), but cried to the Lord,
as may be read in Exodus 3. and so no fit, but a wicked and unrighteous
comparison, which the Lord will one day judge him (...).

Reply. Thou and thy Brother Crisp, are very Angry with the young Man I
perceive, for making use of this Comparison in page 18. of the little Book;
Crisps piece is nothing but a mere paraphrase upon this Comparison, which will
be Answered here, besides what the young Man has written concerning it to
vindicate himself. How easily be ye stirred if any reflection be but seemingly
cast upon the Light, more Zealous you be here, than if any should reproach the
person of Christ, for many of us are persuaded (and upon good Grounds) that you
Believe there is no such person as Jesus Christ God and Man. But why so moved?
ye be jealous for your God, the Light, there being no just ground given: you
might as well be angry with the Apostle for comparing the Covenant of works to
Agar, saying it gendreth to Bondage, Gal. 4.24. and all that are under this
Covenant to Ishmaels Children of the Bond woman to be cast out; thou might
as well say that the Apostle here in this place, compares the Light within to
Agar, and it is Children to Ishmael, and call this a wicked unrighteous
comparison, that God will Judge Paul for one day, as to speak this of the young
Man, who only sets out by this Comparison, that estate and condition that he
was in before Christ did savingly reveal himself to him by his Spirit, when he
followed the Quakers Light within as his Guide, which led to the way of the
Covenant of works, to obtain Life by his own doings, wherein he had some Carnal
false Peace and satisfaction, as the Israelites had in Egypt upon performing
their tasks, not being beaten when they did that which was required, but had
Garlic and Onions and Meat to the full, in remembrance of which they had
frequent longing desires to return; there was something then desirable to
their Carnal Appetite, so it was with this young Man and with every one under
the Covenant of works, they have Peace in their Consciences, as long as they
are toiling for Life and Salvation in some external things, but no Peace
arising any other way, whereas afterward when in Can^an the Israelites had not
these Tasks imposed on them, neither were they beaten for the neglect of them,
but were free from this Bondage, and had an inheritance given them of God, and
were to serve Christ in the improvement of these good things he had given them.
Thus the young Man upon the Faith of the Gospel was set free by Christ, If the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, John 6 36. He saw now a
better and more complete Righteousness in Christ his Head without him than that
which was wrought in him; hereupon he had a better Peace drawn from a surer
ground, that would endure, Being justified by Faith we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. and so there must needs be sweet and
steady Peace of Conscience; for who can lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect, God Justifies, who can Condemn? Romans 8. he now continues in his Duty,
but from another principle to another end, than when a Quaker. viz. The Life of
Faith, doing what he does not for fear of a whip (like an Egyptian o^ Turkish
Slave) for fear of Hellfire, and the Wrath of God, but what he does, he does
it now with delight and sweetness; it is pleasant, this is Love that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. now he aims
not only at himself in his obedience, which one under the Covenant of works
does, and therefore his Righteousness is nothing worth, it is but Hypocrisy:
but he aims now (...) Glory of Christ, and would not leave Holiness, in case
his hapness was not concerned in it; So that this Canaan is not as thy Brother
(...) weakly insinuates a Canaan of Looseness but Godliness: where the (...) of
God is, there is Liberty; the Christian walks in the Royal (...) of Liberty,
not fearing the loss of Salvation, because it is sure (...) Election and
Purchase; and Christ has taken possession of it for (...) already, although he
comes not up to that height that the Law ^^^ires; and do not they Love God
more, and obey better, that apprehend the Love of God in Christ, unchangeable
toward them, than those that after all their toil, fear they may fall short.
The Pharisees fasted oftener than Christ's Disciples; but were not so really
Godly as they; what is all Obedience, without Love, and how can there be Love,
but by apprehension of God's Love to use.

I find nothing in Page 32 but vain Repetition, till I come to that Paragraph,
that begins thus, viz. Take heed of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, for it is
near, when that which casts out Devils is called Beelzebub, (...) how you sport
your selves with a consuming Fire.

Reply. Is it not Blasphemy to say that the Light that every Man has, all the
Heathens have, that worships Devils; every unclean Adulterer, every Murtheren,
Thief and Robber has, is Common and ^ssential to Man, as his Soul, Conscience,
Reason; in a word is Nature; That this is the Holy Ghost who is God, of the
same Nature and Essence with the Father.

2. To say that the Light within every one has power to cast out Devils.

3. That it is a consuming Fire; which here thou do.

Observe, this is the third time of Baylies Blasphemy, making the (...) to be
the very omnipotency and Justice of God, which are himself.

Bailey in the fourth Paragraph, Whether the Lord requires Obedience, and
Service, and Worship, to any other Light or Spirit (of Christians) but (...)
own?

Reply. The Lord requires Obedience of Christians to the Magistrate, yet the
Magistrate is not the Spirit of Christ; to the Moral Law; yet (...) not the
Spirit, to Officers in Churches, to the Light of Nature and Conscience, yet are
they not the Spirit of Regeneration: Worship to any other Light thou sayest^
Here thou do plainly, imply, that the Light within may be Worshipped (for
thou surely speak of Divine Worship) as it was in Naylor, this is the fourth
time of thy abs^^^ Blasphemies; yet in the next breath, says, It is but a
Plant of the (...) others Planting, yet such a Plant, as it is a Tree of Life,
and a con^^^ming Fire; and that which casts out Devils, and to be Worship^
Those Plants spoke of in Matthew. 15. which thou mentionest, (...) the Pharisees
themselves with their erroneous Principles, directly such ^ sort of People as
the Quakers, as thou may see, in the Answer to Crook, and the Lords hand
will assuredly pluck up all Heresies and H^reticks in due time.

In Page 33. He pretends to describe the Glorious State of the Kingdom of
Christ, as brought in by Obedience to the Light Within.

Read it over, for it is too long to Transcribe, and you will see this is the
sum of it, viz. That all the Earth would become outwardly reformed, living
Peaceably, Sobe^, Civil, Neighbors, one to another, not wronging one another,
that Lawsuits and Wars would be no more, but every (...) growing Rich,
Building and Planting, they would all have Vines and Figtrees, and so sit under
them in Peace, and Eat and Drink the good of the Land.] Live merry sensual
proud lives, yet all this while Carnal, Ignorant, have Lusts Reigning in their
hearts, not a Dram of the Knowledge of a Mediator, or any thing of the Spirit of
the Son upon them, not a word of that in all this; but only guided by the Light
within, (i. e.) In a word, the Subjects of this Kingdom, and all Inhabitants of
the World, will all be Quakers, honest civil Heathens; and Baily apprehends,
this Kingdom will never come, till we all take up this Principle of obeying the
Light of Nature, and so turn Quakers; Baily says peremptorily, that Christ's
Kingdom would come this way, viz. By attendance to the Light, and appeals to
the wise in heart to Judge. Now, let the Judgment be made from these two
Scriptures that he has quoted, Isa. 2.4. and Micah 4.2. For out of Zion shall
go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Whether is this, the
Light within that every Man has, or the Preaching of the Gospel by Apostles,
is the question? Now to resolve it, what we are to understand by the Law going
forth from Zion; and the word from Jerusalem, whether it was not the Apostles
Preaching first to the Jews according to their Commission, they were sent to
the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, and not to go into the way of the
Gentiles; and this they did, and when they had done it, then they turned to the
Gentiles. The Preaching of the Gospel did thus go out of Zion, and from
Jerusalem, from among the Jews to the Gentiles; the Law of works was from Mount
Sinai, but the Law of Faith as it is called Romans 3.27. did come from Mount
Zion, according to that in Luke 24.47, That Repentance and Re^^^^ of sins
should be Preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning Jerusalem.

Whether was it this Doctrine, or the Doctrine that George Fox ^^^ght out of
the Mountains in the North, about 20. years since, that (...) in the Kingdom of
Christ? Let the wise Judge:

(...). 34. Baily, Thou art running the same round again, like -- in the 2
Paragraph, thou have this, How would the very Root of wickedness decay, and
wither inwardly, if all were ceased from outwardly, would it (...) speak
Barrenness if no Fruit appeared?

Reply. By this it is clear, what the Quakers Kingdom of Christ is, that this
Man has spoke of, what a Reformation they would have wrought in the World,
only outward, if this be not right Pharisaism where is there any, to paint the
outside, when all is full of Rottenness within? not a word of any change of
heart, but thou supposest necessarily, that if no Fruit outwardly, the Root
must decay; when as some external means as Cold, Mildews, Blastings, Shakings
by Wind, may the away all the Fruit of a Tree, and yet it is Root be in it is
full Life and Vigor: may not fear of the Law, awe of Parents, the strength of
(...) Disease, Old Age, take many off their Practice of Sin, when as at the
same time the Love of it is in their Hearts? thus we have counted the number of
the Beast (as thou biddest us) and see that the Quakers Religion is merely
external. Before we leave this, let the Reader take notice, how this blind Man
perverts that Scripture, 1 John 3.8. For this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, and puts a mark upon
it, applying it to the Light within every Man, calling it the Son of God, who
was of the same Nature with the Father: the Jews knew that who-ever called
himself the Son of God, made himself God, and therefore they charged Christ
with Blasphemy, and would have stoned him, when he called God Father; now here
it is plain, he calls this Light of Nature the Son of God, coequal, coeternal
with the Father; An Eternal Father must have an eternal Son, this is the 5th
time of thy Blasphemy.

Now, would you know what the manifestation of the Son of God is, nothing but
Obedience to the Light, and Christ's destroying the works of the Devil, only
some outward Reformation attained by Obedience to the Light according to the
Quakers.

The other Scripture is, Matthew. 28.18. All Power is given to me [in Heaven and
in Earth.]

Bailey. Why do thou leave out these last words, viz. in Heaven and in Earth?
why do thou quote Scriptures as Satan did, omitting (...) thereof? now
Answer, is all power in Heaven and Earth, given to the Light within, which is
in every Drunkard, Swearer, and Robber^ If so, this Light then is to send forth
Apostles as Christ did, at that time he spoke this of himself, and they are to
Preach in the Name of this Light, and teach them to observe all things that
this Light commands, and this Light is with them to the end of the World, and
this would enable them to cast out Devils, to convert many, and would give
Eternal Life to as many as it pleased, John 17.2. there it is said, as tho^
have given him power over all flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as
many as thou have given him; Does not thy Ears tingle Reader, and thy Heart
tremble at these Rampant Blasphemies.

B. page 35. And W. H. says, that the Righteousness of Faith, by which we are
Justified, is wholly without us, and that the Father has poured out all his
Wrath upon his Son Jesus Christ, now if this Doctrine (...) true, and sound
Doctrine, there is no need to fear miscarriages for there is (...) Wrath left
to punish sinners, if all be poured out upon Jesus Christ.

Reply. I have already given Answer to this Cavil, consisting of two Branches.

As for the first, touching the Righteousness of Faith, I have abundantly spoke
to it, as the Reader may find in many places, both in my Answer to Crook, and
this Caviller, and to the other concerning Gods pouring out his Wrath; but will
add here a little to that.

This is true, Baily, rightly understood, as it is spoke of in the Epistle, viz.
That the Father poured out all his Wrath upon his Son Jesus Christ; by the
Wrath of God, we understand, as in the Epistle may be seen, his Justice; the
Holy Nature of God is such, that he cannot but be against sin, and punish it,
he cannot endure iniquity; to speak properly, there is no such thing in God as
Wrath, as it is a boiling up of anger to the height, but it is his Holiness and
Justice; this is attributed to God after the manner of Men, in that God when he
comes forth in Justice to punish, he Acts as if he was in Wrath: Now if all the
sins of the Elect were charged upon Christ, then all that Wrath (i. e.) Justice
of God that was obliged to punish these sins, must exert it self upon him that
had those sins; Yet is there Wrath enough (i. e.) Justice in God to punish
sinners that believe not, nor trust to the Grace of God in Christ, such proud
Pharisaical ones as thy self (if God give thee not Repentance) who mocks thus
at Christ's Cross; I say again, that Justice of God which the sins of all the
Elect, for whom Christ died, deserved, which was infinite, was exerted upon
Christ, and God does no^^^g toward the Elect to satisfy his Justice. All
Afflictions are Chastise^ts in Love toward them (as the Scripture speaks but
are all Elect? (...) all Faith? Are there not multitudes that believe not, and
so are (...) punished here, and damned for ever? There is Wrath (i. e.) Ju^^^ce
upon them that will not come to Christ, and receive the Atone^^t. As to that
passage, viz. fear of miscarriage; I say, this Doctrine (...) ours, begets in
them who have the Faith of it, and see themselves interessed in Christ,
Confidence, Comfort, Joy, Establishment, insomuch that those tormenting,
slavish, despairing fears of being damned, lost, reprobate, are dispelled;
therefore it is expressed by the young Man to this purpose, viz. fear of
Miscarriages to the loss of my Salvation; a true fear of God, lest they should
offend their Father by ^nning against him, is never separated from those that
believe this Doctrine; yet this is true, Luke 1.74. Being delivered from our
Enemies we should serve the Lord [without fear] in Holiness and Righteousness.
But W. B. Thou art for such a sound Doctrine it seems in the belief whereof
thou might still fear miscarriages to the loss of thy Salvation (i. e.) so
as to despair and be damned, and likewise such a Doctrine that teaches that
some of Gods wrath might light upon thee, unless by thy works from the Light
that every Man has without the Atonement of Christ, thou could satisfy and
appease it.

Baily. And that satisfaction was made 1600. years ago, for all sins past,
present and to come. The Devil might play what Cards he will ^^w, if this be
true, there is no need to fear the loss of Salvation through miscarriages.

Reply. The Papists are of this mind, viz. That there is no assurance of Faith
to be attained in this Life, but that it is the Duty of Christians to doubt all
our days, thus likewise the Quakers. But remember Baily, though thou say the
Devil might play what Cards he would, yet the Devil is never so beaten, as when
this blessed Doctrine of Free Grace is revived, (Witness Luther's time) the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone in Christ's Blood (which that Worthy
of Christ maintained in the Face of all Merit-Mongers and Shavelings, and
Hypocrites) did in very many places, and among multitude of Souls put the Devil
quite off his play, and laid open his shuffling tricks, praise to the most high
for that time; Luthers followers were Holy, and yet believed the forgiveness of
all their sins by Jesus Christ. Could we but know your ^hind concerning this
Truth, we would write more, but it is not your time as yet to open your selves;
but let me query, are any sins at all forgiven by Christ's sacrifice and
Atonement? If so, then I ask, if the^ sins are only sins past (i. e.) only
those committed before we attend (...) Light; if so, then how are those sins
pardoned that are fallen into afterward? We do believe according to the
Scripture, That the Blood, of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses from all sin, 1
John 1. That being in Christ God has forgiven us all Trespasses, 2 Col. 13.
Acts 13.39. By him all that believe, are Justified from all things, etc. all
sins past and present are Actually forgiven us, all sins to come not yet
committed, virtually; If any one sin be charged upon us, there is condemnation,
but there is now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8.1.

Baily. And that was needless Doctrine of Christ, to bid his Disciples Watch
and Pray, Matthew. 26.41. And of the Apostle Peter, who bid them give all
diligence, etc.

Reply, These Exhortations are means that the Lord makes use of to continue the
Elect for whom Christ died in perseverance, and God thinks them not needless.

Baily. Who among all the ungodly in Christendom (so called) would turn their
ears from this kind of Doctrine, O ye Daubers; and so Railes on.

Reply. This Doctrine of Grace and free Remission of sin, is sent on purpose
for the ungodly and sinners, remember Christ came to call such, not the
Righteous to Repentance, (i. e.) those that think themselves Godly, and are not
(as the Quakers) do despise this Doctrine. W. B. who would thou have saved,
only Godly ones (i. e.) those that think themselves so, and have no need of an
Atonement and forgiveness? O that all the ungodly in Christendom, would turn
their Ears to this sweet Doctrine, it would effectually change their Hearts!
Blessed be God we have so good a Doctrine to Preach, for we are all ungodly
ones by Nature, and are all transgressors of the pure Spiritual Law of God. I
see the Pharisees are still angry with the Gospel.

Baily. Was there ever such a Doctrine Preached by any of the Holy Men of God
as this, since the beginning of the World?

Reply. But what Doctrine do thou mean? It must be that, viz. that the
Righteousness of Faith by which we are Justified is wholly without us; now that
this Doctrine was asserted in all Ages by all the Holy Men of God, let the
Scripture be Judge betwixt us. I have said enough to this in my Answer to Crook,
which I pray thee peruse, and the Lord open thine eyes, for I know thou art
blind; there the Reader may see we own Faith to be within, but the
Righteousness that Faith Embraces is without; for Christ's Person is the
Subject of it, and (...), either as an Act or Work of our Mind, is not the
Righteousness that Justifies.

B. Search the Scriptures, and see which ye call your Rule.

Reply. Are they not worthy to be called the Quakers Rule, which (...) call
your Rule, would thou like that Language used to thee (if thou art married)
the Woman thou calledst thy Wife; if thou have an Estate, the Ground, the Land,
the Houses thou call thine, would i^ not imply a denial of thine Interest,
Property, Title, and that the Man that spoke so, had a mind to wrong thee as to
thy Wife and Estate, to take them from thee? What can be the tendency and
import of this Phrase so frequently used in thy Book? only that you think we
have no Right, or Claim to the Scriptures as our Rule, or that you would (if
possible) take them from us, as the Pope from the People. Your Rule we are sure
they are not, otherwise you walk not according to your Rule, for ye practice
not many things that Christ commanded in the Scriptures.

Baily. It follows that the Faith that Justified them, and their Salvation was
without, by a Righteousness or Person wholly without as ye do.

Reply. I am not here concerned to Answer, in that these are not my words, nor
the young Man's words, my words were cited a little before in that same Page of
thine, line 4. the Reader may see them, is this to do Justice?

Arguments of Baily, to prove Man to be Justified by inherent Righteousness
Answered.
B. Page 36. Did they not say their Faith wrought by Love.

Reply. The Faith that receives Christ's Righteousness does work by Love, but
as it works by Love in us it is not the Righteousness that Justifies, nor
receives it any virtue or efficacy from this working by Love to Justify us in
the sight of God; but still the Righteousness that Justifies us is in the
Person of Christ as its Subject.

Baily. And purified their Hearts, Acts 15.9.

Reply. There is a purifying the Heart in Sanctification and in Justification
also; and both are through Faith, it is upon Faith, we are Actually forgiven by
the merits of Christ, thus our hearts are cleansed from the guilt of sin, and
this is chiefly to be understood I apprehend in this Text. Again, by Faith our
Hearts are purified, in that the New Creature begins in Faith, upon our
believing we are turned to God, begin to Repent and be Holy; but yet our
Justification is not our Regeneration; nor this purifying of the Hea^^ in our
Sanctification, the Righteousness whereby we are Justified.

B. And that the Righteousness of the Law was fulfilled in them who walk not
after the Flesh.

Reply. That Scripture, Romans 8. That the Righteousness of the L^^ might be
fulfilled in us, cannot be meant that it should be fulfilled in our persons, in
that in v. 3. before he says, For what the Law could (...) do, in that it was
weak through the Flesh, Now if we could in our own persons fulfill the Law, then
might we be Justified by the deeds of it, but in this v. 3. he had said, the
Law could not Justify, because it was weak through the Flesh (i. e.) since the
fall none ever that was but mien Man could keep it, so it was invalid to
Justify; then it follows, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
Flesh, etc. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. By
Christ coming in the Flesh, and being a Sacrifice, the Law was Answered in us,
he having our Nature, and being our Head and Surety, in our Room, and the Law
is not fulfilled by any other, nor in any other way; thou say in one place
of thy Book, that thou have known the Scriptures from a Child, O! that thou
had but understood this one great place of Scripture, thou would never
have turned Quaker.

B. And that the Anointing was in them, and was their Teacher, and that it was
Truth and no Lie.

Reply. May not this be true, and yet the other Doctrine also? The Spirit here
spoke of is in all the Saints, and is their Teacher, what then? did the Spirit
therefore dye for the Church, shed its Blood on the Cross, was that made under
the Law? is there no distinction to be made betwixt Christ and the Spirit? Is
that which the Spirit works in the heart of a Saint; that very self-same work
and suffering, and Obedience which Christ acted and sustained in Judea, and at
Jerusalem? we are for inward Righteousness, but this is not complete enough to
Justify us.

B. And was he not their Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Reply. In this Scripture these two, viz. Righteousness and Sanctification are
plainly distinguished, which thou would confound, we have both from Christ
and by him, but they are not both one.

B. How their Salvation was wrought out with fear and trembling, and ^t it was
God which wrought in them to will and to do of his own good ^ure.

Reply. As to the first of these, we shall have an occasion to mention when we
come to that part of the Book wherein he goes about to prove all God's people
to have been Quakers. The other is true, and (...) own God's working in us,
both to will and to do every thing that (...) good; but yet neither our willing
nor doing by his enabling of us, is the Righteousness that Justifies us in the
light of God. These are all thy Arguments to prove we are Justified by a
Righteousness within, not without, how strong they be, let the Reader Judge.

After some Repetition of my words in the Epistle, viz. Of Christ's being
amongst us, and that I said, we eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, that we have
Christ both within and without, etc. Thou Paraphrasest thus.

B. Now if Jesus Christ dwells in you, does not the Savior dwell in you? and
if you eat and drink his Flesh and Blood, is it not then in you?

Reply. The Savior Christ is in us by his Spirit, but yet neither is the whole
person of Christ in us, for he is Man as well as God: this Union does not
confound our Person and his Person, nor our Actions and his, but they are
distinct; neither is this In-dwelling and Union the Righteousness that
Justifies us; we eat and drink his Flesh and Blood by Faith, so have the
benefit of his Obedience, Sufferings, and Death, the Spirit causing us to trust
to the Merit of them as Sinners: but yet the Flesh and Blood of Christ is not
in us, unless the Quakers will turn Carpocrations, that asserted that they did
really eat the substantial Bodily carnal Flesh and Blood of Christ; or Papists,
that assert the very Flesh, Blood, and Bones of Christ are turned into the
Bread, or rather the Bread into the Body of Christ. Yet the Quakers have
asserted this, that the Man Christ is within us, meaning nothing but the Light
within, but of this before. Thou intimates thus much here Baily, that the Flesh
and Blood of Christ is nothing else but the Light that is in every carnal
wicked Man.

In the close of Page 36. B. Would not this be madness and folly for Paul to
say, I count all loss and dung, that I may Win Christ, and that I may be found
in him, not having those Gifts and Virtues which the Spirit of God works in
me?

Reply. I query and Answer plainly, whether those Gifts and Virtues of the
Spirit which he had within him were not his own Righteousness, (i. e.) his own
Faith, Love, Humilty, and Prayers, Tears, Fastings, that proceed from hence?
were they not his own? was it Christ, or Paul that Believed, Loved, Prayed,
etc? all the Logic thou have, Baily, cannot gainsay, but that it was Paul; and
if so, then it was not madness and folly to say, but the Wisdom of the Spirit
of God taught him so, viz. That he would be found in Christ, not having those
Gifts and Virtues that the Spirit had wrought in his Mind to Justify him in
God's sight; for there are defects in all these Gifts, Faith, Love, etc. and in
all our Holiness; and remember, God charge his Angels with folly, and might
well have charged Paul with Madness and Folly, if he had trusted to his own
Righteousness to Justify him in his sight: I wish thou would see thy own
Pride, Hypocrisy, Ignorance, Pharisaism. Answer any of you: Could ever Paul
have the least temptation to trust to his Pharisaical Righteousness after he
was converted then surely it was this Sanctified Righteousness he here speaks
of, which he saw would come short to Justify him, but thou art otherwise
mindded (as it is said in Phil. 3. by Paul) God reveal it to thee in due time:
many of us were thus minded for some time, but now through inlightnings we
follow Paul's example in this Truth, and are like-minded with him herein.

B. And page 11. Thou say, viz. The Quaker goes about to make his own
Righteousness to stand: yes, and blame him not, if it consists in those Gifts
and Virtues that the Spirit of God works in his mind, how is any a true
Christian without these?

Reply. Thou have said more here through thy ignorance of the Righteousness of
God, than thou dare stand to; dare thou say that thou would stand or
fall before the infinitely Holy God, and have him deal with thee for ever in
his exact Justice, according as thou have been found in the most holy Exercise
of any of the Gifts and Virtues of the Spirit? speak. The Prophet says, Enter
not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be
Justified, Psalm. 143. 2. but here is a Prophet says, Thou may, Lord, to the
utmost Judge me, for I have Gifts and Virtues enough of the Spirit in me to
Justify me in thy sight. In Psalm. 130.3. The Psalmist says, If thou Lord
should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Yea, says this Pharisee,
but I shall, and my Righteousness too, for it consists in the Gifts and
Virtues of the Spirit; and let God mark iniquities never so narrowly, I shall
do well enough. Job a perfect and upright Man speaks on this wise, Chapt.
9.2. How shall Man be Just with God, v. 3. If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. But here is a perfect Man that says, Man
may be Just with God, and if God does contend with him, he has the Gifts of
the Spirit which Job belike had not, and this Righteousness shall stand; and
thus W. B. can Answer God every thing in every thousand that is laid to his
Charge. V. 15. Whom though I (...) Righteous, yet would I not Answer, but make
my supplication to my Judge, yea, v. 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not
know my Soul; (...) 30, 31. Though I wash my self in Snow water, and make my
hands ^^ver so clean, yet shall thou plung me in the Ditch, and mine own
Clothes ^^all abhor me. But W. B. says, he will Answer God in this his
perfection, and this shall be his Answer, viz. That his Righteousness shall
stand, and he will know his own Soul thus adorned, and let God plung him if he
can, he will adventure it: The Heavens are not clean in (...) sight, the
Scripture says in the Book of Job; but Baylies Righteousness is clean in God's
sight. He charge his Angels with folly: no mat^^^ for that, Bailey cannot be
charged, for his Righteousness consists in the Gifts of the Spirit. But have
not the Elect Angels the Gift of the Spirit? But it is likely not in such a
Degree as this Man, or they have more mixture of evil in the exercise of them
than this Prophet: I err not in calling thee a bold proud Man for this saying.
I will give thee a Testimony out of Foxes Monuments, of one of the Martyrs, see
how it agrees with thy Doctrine; in the third Volume, page 418. Anno 1555. in a
letter of Robert Samuels, written to the Christian Congregation, declaring the
Confession of his Faith, these are his words, viz. All the Works, Merits,
Deservings, Doings, and Obedience of Man toward God, although they are done by
the Spirit of God, in the Grace of God, yet being thus done, be of no Validity,
Worthiness, Merit before God, except God for his Mercy and Grace account them
worthy for the Worthiness and Merit of Christ Jesus, etc. And thou contradicts
thy Brother John Crook, who in his words acknowledges, that he looks to be
accepted not for works of Righteousness that he had done, not for the works
sake only, though wrought by the Spirit; yet here that which is wrought by the
Spirit must Justify us in Gods sight, otherwise thou say nothing; for we
say that none are true Christians without the Gifts of the Spirit, but yet
these do not Justify them in God's sight: Justification and Sanctification go
hand in hand, our state and Relation is changed, there is Justification; our
Nature, there is Sanctification, the Gifts of the Spirit and Regeneration flow
from Justification; in order of Nature, though not of times; we are Justified
before we are Renewed, forgiven before Sanctified.

Page 37. I cannot well pass over one passage in Bailies Railery, saying, that
I am like Jannes and Jambres, that withstood Moses, proclaiming (...) folly, a
Phrase used frequently by the Quakers.

Reply. After that lof^y Anti-evangelical Speech that he had used before,
touching his own Righteousness how it must stand, it will (...) be amiss to
cast our eye to the Scripture where this is mentioned, 2 Timothy 3. 8. and view
that sort of Men there described, and see if they were not Quakers, if of any
sort, v. 2. Boasters, proud, Blasphemers, v. 3^ fierce, dispisers of them that
are good, v. 4. Heady, high minded, v. 5. Having a form of Godliness, denying
the Power, v. 7. Ever learning, never coming to the knowledge of the Truth, v.
8. Men of corrupt minds, of no Judgment concerning the Faith: These were they
that were Seducers, which did resist Paul's Doctrine, as you may read in this
Chapter.

B. And it is known to thee and all the world, that the Quakers own (...) other
Righteousness to be Justified by, but the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith in him.

Reply. But now it is too late to deceive with these good words. We see your
cunning Craftiness, this Righteousness of Jesus Christ that you plead for, he
is only the Author of, not the Subject, it is no^^^ his Person according to
your Divinity, but in our Persons; it is nothing but Sanctification the Quakers
think, nay, nothing but an Obedien^^ to the Light that every Man has.

B. According to the Scriptures of Truth.

Reply. But yet not worthy to be the Quakers Rule, its well we call these
Scriptures our Rule, which are owned by the Quakers to be Scriptures of Truth.

B. And yet desire that the Gifts and Virtues, that the Spirit of God works in
our minds, may stand.

Reply. But why do not thou speak out? do you desire that they should stand
for Justification?

B. Had not Gamaliel more Wisdom, and Patience, etc. Who said, i^ the Work was
of God it would stand, and they could not overthr^^ it?

Reply. That work was the Preaching of this Doctrine that we assert, as thou
may read in Acts 3.30, 31. The Death of Christ and his Exaltation, and
Repentance, and Remission of sins through him, which Doctrine ye do plainly
oppose, and instead of Jesus of Nazareth ye set up Nature in his stead; and say,

B. Man's own Righteousness is Rotten, and must fail, as in the last page of
your Book.

Reply. The young Man speaks this of a Righteousness that some go about to set
up in opposition to the Righteousness of Christ, apprehending (which is true)
that there is no Christian that has any (...) of an inherent Righteousness,
but is so much enlightened, that ^eseeth the way of Justification by the blood
of Christ: whoever then has any such thoughts, to make inward Righteousness to
stand for Justification, have indeed no true inward Righteousness, but its
merely (...); they never had the Spirit aright, nor Faith, how can their
Righteousness be but Rotten; though indeed comparatively to Christ's personal
Righteousness, all Righteousness is but Rotten, in that there (...) mixture of
the Flesh, in the exercising all the parts of it, though the Spirit of God be
holy and pure that is the Author of it.

B. Who is Antichrist now, W. H. the Quaker, or thee? Read 1 John (...) 3, 4.
and consider.

Reply. It Is well W. B. If thou would stand to the Test of this Scripture:
have you confessed, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh? (...) which of the
Quakers (you will say) ever denied the History? (...) do not the Devils own the
History to be true? yea, they gave their Testimony, That he was the Son of God,
Mat. 8.29. Then this is not (...), there must be something more; Now surely,
Christ's coming (...) Flesh was for some end, some great end; we ask what it
was? To be a propitiation, or only as an Example? if you think that Christ
(...) not to offer up himself as a Sacrifice to atone Justice, and so to
expiate for sin, you do deny Christ to be come in the Flesh. Again, what is
become of that Flesh? we say it is in being still in Heaven, Christ is (...)
still, has the Nature of Man in Union with the Godhead; but (...) for you to
cry up a Light in every Man to be the Christ, the Mediator, and so to overturn
the Manhood of Jesus, you plainly deny Christ to be come in the Flesh: he is
come in the Flesh in Man's Nature you say, but that Nature is vanished, you
conceive, and Christ with^^^ (...) a great Idol, as Pennington writ in a letter
to Cobbet. And must this Manhood of Christ ever be seen again? no, we are
called Gazers by the Quakers, that speak any such thing. Why, but surely this
wa^ employed in this comprehensive Character, viz. Christ to be come in the
Flesh; Is not he in that Nature to Judge the World, Acts 17. by (...) Man whom
he has appointed? was not this one end why he took it ^^ him? but the Quakers
deny any second coming, but that coming to their Spirits and hearts, in
Obedience to the Light: now who is Antichri^^

Baily. To deny the Propitiation, Sacrifice, to say there is no Justification,
No Remission of sins, indeed no Resurrection of Christ, (For if Christ (...) no
Manhood now, how can we say his Body rose, what became (...) after the
Resurrection) no Ascension, no Intercession, no second (...) therefore by all
my discourse with them, and perusing of their Writings, I believe it thoroughly,
and believed it when I writ, and writ it then deliberately, calmly, and so do
now, and am willing to (...) of your Faces, in the most solemn public Meetings
you have, to make it good, that your Doctrine is Antichristian, and in
Diametrical opposition to the Apostles Doctrine.

B. For we can prove our Doctrine to be parallel with the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and Christ himself, by the Scriptures of Truth.

Reply. I suppose thou meanest that the Doctrine George Fox brought out of the
North, is of equal authority with that of the Apostles Paul, Peter, and John,
what ever it was, nay with that of Christ, in that George Fox was as infallibly
inspired as any of them thou Judge^, in this 38. Page, the Reader may take
notice of this passage.

B. I testify for God, you call his true and faithful Witness in you (...)
Devil.

Reply. Is this one of the Testimonies that the Quakers give for God to testify
to a Lie, a plain Lie? Where do we call his true (...) faithful Witness in us
the Devil? The Devil (the young man (...)) had two Cards to play, which were
Objections, etc. The sum is the viz. He was tempted once to be loose upon the
breaking in of Light and again to despair upon misapprehension, that only sins
to the (...) of Conversion were taken away by the blood of Christ. Now (...) is
it but the Devil, that would drive Souls either into Looseness or Despair? but
how any can say, that he calls the Light within the Devil from hence, I see
not. There is only thus much in it, that after God undeceived him, and had
shown him that the Light within was not the Christ, nor sufficient for
Salvation, but rather misguided him^^^ several things: and then the Spirit of
Jesus did truly lead him to (...) right Christ, and gave him some sound
knowledge; then steps in S^tan with his Temptations to blind and mislead him.
Thou might (...) well say, that when as it is writ, That Christ spoke to
Peter, Get (...) behind me Satan, that was the Light within, Christ calls it
Satan. When he told Peter that Satan had a desire to Winnow him: (i. e.) the
Light within, the true and faithful Witness he speaks this of.

B. It Is the Word of the Lord unto you all.

Reply. And yet quarrels with us, for calling the Scriptures the Word (...).

B. And thou W. H. says, the Quakers catch many simple hearts, and (...) them
in perfect Popish Slavery and Bondage; and call them Foxes, (...) Seducers.

Reply. This has been made good abundantly in the Answer to Crook, where he
takes notice of the same thing: and here is not a word spoke (...), to any
purpose, to invalidate my Charge. Let the Reader new my Lines, which would be
tedious to transcribe: Only page 39. (...). 3.

B. The Papists would Condemn and Judge thee to be an envious Hypo^^^, should
these Lines come to their hands, who are as opposite to us (in (...) Religious
ways of Worship) as Darkness to Light.

Reply. Let the Reader take notice, that here Bailey has shown as (...)
ingenuity as in any part of his Book, in that he does tacitly imply, (...) the
Papists and Quakers agree in Doctrine: It Is only in Worship that they are
Opposits. And what agreement there is, may be seen in (...) Parallel.

Baily. And are wholly without with thee in their dark imagination.

Reply. Thou may see that many of the Papists are for Mental Prayer; Passive
Unions; a State of introversion; attendance upon God in the depths of the
Spirit: internal Solitude: Thou art mista^, here thou may learn many brave
mystical words from Mr. (...) that speaks frequently of the Deiform fund of the
Soul.

B. And again say thou, If ever Satan was transformed into an An^ of Light,
It is in this People: and say they swarm like Locusts, and (...) have an
Impudent Enemy to deal withal.

Reply. There is not any thing said by thee to take off this Charge: (...)
only, thou ask what evil the Quakers have done me? how they (...) to be my
Enemies? promisest that if they have wronged me, that they will right me. I
know what I have said is true: and withal that (...) and wrong that the Quakers
have done me in their Railings, (...) Language to my Face, behind my Back, the
false Reports they (...) raised of me, may easily be passed over, in that I see
it is their (...) way to deal so with all their Adversaries: but their greatest
(...) is, in Adulterating the Gospel, perverting Scriptures: Their (...),
fulsome, loathsome Errors, whereby they offend the Ears and (...) the hearts of
all the Godly in the Nation. And if you should right me and others herein, it
would be well, if thou and John Crook, and George Whitehead and William Penn,
would write Books of Retractation in unfeigned Repentance.

B. For it is Christ in them, the Hope of Glory, which thou have bl^sphmed, who
is the true Light that lighted every Man that comes into the World: to whom
all the Angels must bow.

Reyly. Now I thank thee for this plain Testimony: If you would always thus
plainly speak out, then would the people loath you, and spew you out: but thou will deny thy words again.

Here Reader, thou see the Light within, which every Heathen has, and every
Man living, that comes into the World, is, according to Baily, a person, and
the very Christ. He that was Preached of among the Gentiles; that has Riches
of Glory treasured up in him; that is both the ground and cause of all the hope
of Salvation that any has: That all the good Angels must Worship; and do
Worship. And all the Devils are subject to him. No wonder a few Quakers
Worshipped the Light in Nailor: For all the Angels ought to Worship it. No
wonder thou chargest me with Blasphemy, for saying that the Light in every Man
was not the Christ of God; when as thou have made it thy God, and Worshipped it:
if this be true thou have said here, I am justly Charged by thee. But art not
thou Baily, guilty of gross Idolatry, and would make all the elect Angels
Idolaters with thee? I charge thee with Idolatry; and it will lie at thy Door:
and thou can not extricate thy self.

B. As for their Swarming which thou enviest, it is not like Locusts, the is thy
mistake. But as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand upon the Sea-Shoar, shall
the Seed of Abraham be, who rejoiced to see Christ day.

Reply. I envy you not for your Multitudes: neither writ I that ^^ Envy: For I
have said it to several Quakers, that no other is to be expected, but that this
Gangrene, Leprosy, Plague, will spread apa^^ Error runs like Wildfire.
Christ's Flock is but a little Flock, Truth prevails but slowly, If there be
ten, yea a hundred turn Quakers, for one Christian, it is no more than what I
look for.

But W. B. If I had used such a Phrase as thou usest here, thou thy self would
have laughed at me: and the Reader may well smile at it viz. That the Quakers
swarm like Stars: and swarm like the Sin^ udon the Sea-Shoar. Swarm surely is a
word properly used to Vermin^ not inanimate Creatures, and so better to Locusts
than Stars: Locu^ are living Creatures, gendred of Corruption, and who are they
the are made up of all the Corrupt Errors that have been these many years
Revel. 9.3. It Is said of the Locusts there, that they came out of the smoke
that arose out of the Bottomless Pit: Which Pit is surely Hell. ^ll Error
arises from hell; and is as smoke; stinking, offensive, darkning. Now what a
smoke of Error has been in this Nation for a long while; and who are they that
have come out of the Smoke, like Locusts for number? v. 7. It Is said, That they
were like Horses prepared for the Battle: What Boldness, what Courage, what
Rushings into Sufferings, and Dangers and Oppositions, has there been in this
people, wherein they vainly Glory? V. 10. They had Tails like Scorpions: What
a fawning, flattering, insinuating way have they in their proselyting people to
them? But there were Stings in their Tails: O what Venom, Poison, Wounding
and Death to the Soul, is there in their Errors! And has it not been so? As in
this place of the Revelations, it is said, that the Grass, the green thing, the
Tree, (i. e.) the Living, Fruitful, Established Christian, have not been hurt
by them: They have wounded none of them: Only those that had not the Seal of
God upon their Foreheads. If it were possible the Scripture says, they would
deceive the very Elect: but it is not possible.

B. And as the Sand upon the Seashore, so shall the Seed of Abraham be.

Reply. Whoever have not the Faith of Abraham, cannot be the Seed of Abraham.

B. Who rejoiced to see Christ's day the true Light, etc.

Reply. Abraham had that which thou call the true Light, when he was an
Idolater; and therefore this rejoicing to see Christ's day was h^s seeing by
Faith, that a certain time would come, of the Messia's being born of his Seed;
Abraham's Seed according to the Flesh, it being so promised by God, viz. In thy
Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed: Not, W. B. as thou
think, to see the Day of George Foxes ^roaching this Error of Quakerism in
the North?

B. Page 40. Now to return to some more of the young Man's Words: Page 17. Where
he speaks of another Light which every Man has not; by which he saw Salvation
by a person wholly without him; whose Righteousness being imputed to him: Is
this like Scripture Language, which ye call your Rule? See more of your
Confusion, and blindness. Did the Apostles of Christ Preach a Light that every
Man has not.

Reply. There be two or three things put together here, with which thou art
angry.

1. That there is a Light that e^ry Man has not.

2. That there is a Righteousness imputed.

3. That Salvation is from a Person wholly without: which are all Truths; and I
am ready to defend them.

The First thou begins with, and asks, Whether the Apostles of Christ did
Preach a Light, or of a Light, that every Man has not?

1. Now I assert, and will make it good, that the Scriptures do frequently
speak of a Light that every man has not: (Jude 19.) Natural or Souly, not
having the Spirit. Now the Spirit is Light; and he that is but a Natural Man
has it not. Then this Scripture speak^ of a Light that every Man has not.
John 14.17. The Spirit of Truth whom the World cannot receive: If the World,
(i. e.) Worldly Carnal Men cannot receive it; be sure they have it not. Luke
8.10. To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; but to
others in Parables; that seeing they might not see, etc. Now here is a Light
that the Disciples had, which the others had not. Matthew. 11. Thou have hid
those things from the Wise and the Prudent, and have revealed them to Babes:
Then the Wise and Prudent to whom the Father reveals not Heavenly things, want
this Light that other Babes have. Isa. 60.21. Darkness shall cover the Earth,
and gross Darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee; and his
Glory shall be seen upon thee. A Prophecy of the Church that should be in
Gospel Times: All excepting these, he says, will be in Darkness: as Goshen had
Light when all the rest of Egypt were in Darkness. Here is a Light that the
Church has that none other has: This Light that they were to have in a
distinguishing way, was the Spirit in their Hearts, and Gods word in their
Mouths: According to God's New Covenant, Isa. 59. and the last verse, As for
me, this is my Covanant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy Mouth, etc. When thou writest, be sure
thou omit not answering these Scriptures plainly, or else Recant for saying,
that it is a strange erroneous Doctrine, quite contrary to the General
Testimony of all the Holy Men of God in all ages.

B. says, What is that other Light, beside the true Light; That it may be
known distinctly, according to plain Scripture? And in the next Parag^ If you
are not able to give us an account of this Light which every Man has not a
measure of, we shall justly Judge it to be a mere, dark, and vain Imagination of
your own Brains: and asks in p. 41. Whether every one has two Lights in him?
And whether they differ in degree only or in kind and nature?

Reply. This is something worth while to Answer to. I am glad; (following thee
step by step in every line:) that I have brought thee hither. It had been fair
if thou had promised, that if in any plainness I lay down this thing thou
desire, and Answer thy Objections; that thou would have left the dark,
vain Imagination of thy Brain, and own this to be a Truth; and ceased thy
Quakerism.

1. I Grant that there is a Light in every Man; a spark remaining in ^llen Man
of that Light that Adam had in a full Flame before his Transgression in his
time of Innocence.

If ye ask me what it is? I Answer, some Principles of Common Truth, fixed in
the Mind of Man.

2. What can it effect? How far can it go?

1. By this, Man may know some Divine things: viz. That there is a God; and
that he is to be Worshipped: Therefore, every Nation have had some kind of
Worship.

2. Hereby Man may discern betwixt some Moral Good, and Evil. As the Heathens
saw hereby Murder and Adultery to be Evils; and therefore made Laws to punish
those that were guilty of them.

3. Man may hereby, and by the help of Conscience and the Common Restraining
Power of God, be kept from many Evils; and do many Duties that lie before him,
for the profit of his Neighbor, for the good of the Society or Commonwealth
wherein he dwells: for this one thing he sees by it, viz. the Judgment of God
(i. e.) Justice to punish sin; and this makes him fear.

4. From this Light, is that power in Man, which he feels, of condemning and
excusing. He may know many things to be good, and his duty to do them; now,
when he does according to this knowledge of his, reflecting upon it, he has
Peace; his Conscience will be quiet: if not, there will be trouble through the
many reasonings that will be in Man; and fear of Judgment.

5. This Light is greatly helped and increased by the consideration of the
Works of Creation, Romans 2.19, 20.

6. More by the reading of the Scriptures, hearing the Word preached, converse
with Christians. And let it be noted, that the Quakers had the Improvement of
the Light, this way, though they will not acknowledge it. In India, we hear but
of little Improvement of it.

7. Many that live not up to this Light, will be very inexcusably Condemned.

8. And those that walk according to it, doing some things contained in the
Law, do shame, Judge and Condemn those that pretend to Christianity, and yet
live not in Righteousness and Sobriety. And shall not Uncircumcision, which is
by Nature, if it fulfill the Law, Judge thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision,
do transgress the Law, Romans 2. 27.

Quest. 3. What can it not show to Man?

1. It cannot show to Man, how sin came into the world. None of the Heathens
ever spoke of this, it is known only by the Revelation of the History of it, in
the Scriptures.

2. It does not show to Man, neither can it, that the first motions to evil in
the heart, (though not consented to,) are sin. None of the Philosophers saw
this: Paul says, Romans 7.7. I had not known Lust (i. e.) Concupiscence, Desire;
(to be sin, he means;) except the Law (That is, Moses Moral Law) had said, thou
shall not Covet, or desire: He knew it not by all the Light of Nature within.

3. It does not show Unbelief to be a sin: a slighting and contemning, and
rejecting Jesus of Nazareth, as the sealed Mediator, John 14.8. He (i. e.) the
Comforter, shall convince the World of sin, because they believe not. Now this
is plain in the Quakers; who following the Light, do so much contemn the Person
of Jesus; and his Righteousness.

4. It shows not to Man, some Moral Evils. The Heathens saw not Fornication to
be a Sin, by all the Light they had: Poligamy was not accounted a sin by them:
Nor Revenge a Sin: Nor Vain Glory, etc.

5. It does not show the right way of Worship, that is by Scripture-Revelation
only: Therefore the Heathens always ran into Idolatries and false Worships.

6. It will not show to Man, the necessity of the New Birth. Every Man while in
his Natural State, knows not hingof this: It is a Riddle as it was to
Nicodemus that had more than the Light within, the Light of the Scriptures.

7. The Mystery of the Redemption of Man from the Fall, by the Sacrifice of
Christ; It Is utterly ignorant of it, cannot see any thing of it; nor show it to
Man. But this seems foolishness to Man, the Doctrine of being saved by the
Cross of Christ. It was so to the Greeks; and is so to the Quakers at this day.
None of the Heathens therefore spoke any thing of Redemption by Christ; if they
did, they had it from Moses Writings, and the Prophets. No, these things are
too high: 1. That very God, should become very Man. 2. That a Virgin should
bring forth. 3. That by giving up that Body that he took into Union with
himself, unto Death, he should make Atonement to God's Justice; and expiate for
all the sins of all those that were given to him. These, Man that has no more
than the Common Light, cannot, will not receive.

8. The Resurrection of the same Body, is a thing that this Light will not
discover. It is only the Scripture-Revelation. The Heathens knew nothing of
this; but it was a scorn to them; Jesus, and the Resurrection. And the Quakers,
attending to the Light within more than the Scriptures, do err as to this Truth
and gain say it.

9. It cannot show, That the Soul of a Saint is immediately with Christ upon
the departure from the Body: nor indeed, any thing of a future state. This must
be known by Scripture-Revelation: According to that 2. Tim. 1.10. Life and
Immortality was brought to Light through the Gospel.

2. There is a Light that every Man has not, but is peculiar to the Saints:
Those that are born again, and converted from their fallen Estate and
condition; and put into another state, through Christ Jesus. This we have
proved before, from the Scriptures; only will add thus much, viz. God suffered
all Nations, it is said, to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. but had at that
time a people, Israel, in the midst of the Nations; Of whom he said, Psalm. 147.
He showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel: he has
not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his Judgments they have not known
them. Here it is plain, he gave Light and Knowledge to Israel, and suffered
others to walk in their Natural blindness.

3. This Light is at the same time in a Saint, with the other, that is (...)
saving Light.

4. This Light is a true Light, as to it is kind and Nature; as far as it will
reach.

5. But that this Light that every Man has, and that we speak of which every
one has not, are two different Lights, as to kind and Nature; and not only as
to Degree; as the Quakers would have it; I prove as follows.

1. If the Roots from whence these two Lights do spring be different, then the
Lights differ in Kind and Nature: But the former is true, Ergo.

Christ as a Creator, is the Root and Fountain of this, that every one has;
but Christ as Mediator, is the Root of the Light that the Saints have. I prove
that the Light that every Man has, is from Christ only, as Creator.

If whatever Adam had in his State of Innocence, was only from Christ as
Creator; not as Mediator: Then this Light that every Man has, is only from
thence: But the former is true, Ergo.

If the Light that every Man has, be only a remnant of that same Light that
Adam had in Innocence; Then the consequence will hold; But it is only a
remnant, etc. Ergo.

If it be nothing but Nature, then the Minor of the last Syllogism is true:
viz. that it is nothing but a remnant of the Light that Adam had in Innocence:
But it is no more than Nature; which I have proved before.

Argument 2. If the Light that every one has, differ only in Degree, and not
in Kind from the Spirit of Regeneration; then the most wicked ungodly person
may be said to be truly Gracious, and Sanctified, and Regenerated; though not
in such a high Degree as a Godly one. For the smallest Wire of good Gold, is as
truly Gold as the whole Wedg, though not so much: Water hot in the second or
third Degree, is as truly hot, as that which is hot in the sixth or eighth
Degree. He that is strong in a less Degree, is as truly strong, as he that is
in a greater Degree: But what a ridiculous thing is it, to say, that the most
wicked Man is a true Believer; a true Saint? When As he is so far from this,
that he is not truly Moral and Civil?

3. If they differ only in Degree, then a Regenerate Man and an unregenerate,
differ no more from one another, than a Babe in Christ, and one strong in
Christ; -- But to say this is false, Ergo.

4. If having the Light within, be consistent with all manner of Wickedness,
and continuing in it to the end; but the having of the other Light is not: Then
they surely, differ in Nature and Kind: But the former is true: as all see and
know daily. Many that have the Light within, which the Quakers speak of, are
Wicked, Ungodly, and continue ^^to the end. None that have the Spirit of
Regeneration, are so, and continue so: They may fall into sin, but do not
continue in it; nor make a Trade of it. He that is born of God cannot sin;
because he is born of God, 1 John 3. 9.

5. If a Man may have the Light within which the Quakers speak of, and yet be
dead in Sins and Trespasses; but not the other, but must needs be spiritually
alive; in that it is the Principle of Spiritual Life; then they differ in kind.
But the former is true: For every one had the Light within: the Quakers grant;
But every one is not Spiritually alive; but most dead in sins and Trespasses:
Ergo.

6. If those that have the Light within (which the Quakers speak of,) may go to
Hell with it: and the damned in Hell have it still in them; then they differ
more than in Degree. But the former is true: Otherwise what is that which
accuses in Hell, and condemns in Hell? Answer. But now to say, that any part
of the Spirit of Regeneration, Adoption, goes to Hell; and is in the Damned,
would be ridiculous, if not Blasphemous; Ergo.

7. If Flesh and Spirit differ more than in Degree, then these two Lights do:
But surely, Flesh and Spirit differ more than in Degree; Ergo. All the Light
that every Man has, as he comes into the World, is but Flesh: John 3.
Whatsoever is born of the Flesh, is Flesh. Now Flesh and Spirit are so far from
being of the same kind, that they are contrary one to another; and lusts one
against another.

Baily. If thou writest again, Answer these Arguments fairly; then thou may
go far to reduce me to thy mind in this point; if it were possible to forget my
experience: Who knew a time, when the Lord gave a Light; which I perceived by
its workings and operations in me, was of a different Kind, from that which I
had from my Childhood. I dare in this point, appeal to any that have had
experience of the work of the New Birth upon their hearts.

Arguments that Baily offers; to prove, That every Man has the True Saving
Light: And that the Light that every Man has, and the Spirit of Regeneration,
differ not in Kind.
HE says, That John did testify, That it was the true Light that Lighted
every Man that comes into the World, John 1.9. and adds. That all Men through
him might Believe.

Reply. We have opened this Scripture, and given the sense of it: and it is
nothing to the Quakers purpose.

2. The next Scripture for Proof, is Tit. 2. The Grace of God appears unto
all Men. Here Baily says, Paul is as large in his Testimony as John.

Reply. I think so likewise: they do agree in their Testimony every way; and
one is as large as the other. But neither of them in these Scriptures that have
been brought, speaks a word of the Light within, that every Man has. As to
this last Scripture, this infallible Man is utterly mistaken in the reading of
it, as before p.

3. Scripture, This is the Condemnation, That Light is come into the World, etc.

Reply. This is spoke of the Person of Christ; the Fountain of all Light; and
of his coming into the World; when the Eternal Word took Flesh.

Argument 4. And the wicked Sloathful Servant was not condemned because he had
not a Talent; but for not improving of it, according to his Masters requiring.

Reply. The Conclusion from hence must be this; Therefore every wicked and
sloathful Servant, has a true and saving Light, and it is of the same kind
with that which the best Believer has. Then is the wicked and sloathful
Servant a true Believer in some Degree. But let us see what Talents these were,
that are spoke of, in those three places, Matthew. 25. Mark 13. Luke 19. Are we
not to understand by these Talents, those Offices that Christ did appoint in
his Church; and Gifts to discharge those Offices? This will appear if you
consider in Matthew. 25. For the Kingdom of Heaven is as a Man Traveling into a
far Country, who called his Servants, and delivered to them his Goods. Mark
13.34. it is said, Taking a far Journey, and left his House, and gave Authority
to his Servants, and to every Man his Work. What could this going a far Journey
be, but Christ's leaving this World, upon his Ascension, going to Heaven? And
compare Ephesians. 4.8. with this, It Is said, He Ascended and gave Gifts, and tells
us there, of what kind; viz. Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, etc.
Officers in the Church, as we said before, and Gifts to discharge those
Offices: So then these Servants to whom he distributes these Goods are not all
Men in the World, as thou Baily would have it: For he calls them his own
Servants; his House; but they were such certainly, that were in a profession of
the Gospel; and had Evangelical Gifts bestowed from Christ upon them, for the
use of their Brethren. That these Talents cannot be any Natural Gifts, which
all have, and of which sort the Light within is, will appear presently:

1. They were such Talents, upon the Improvement of which there was Eternal
life given: v. 21, 23. But now Eternal Life is not given upon the Improvement
of any Natural Gifts. For then, that which is Natural would be saving which we
have disproved before. p. 112.

2. In v. 30. It Is said, That the Servant that did not improve the Talent was
cast into utter Darkness: Was not that Hell, think you? to be damned? Yes
surely. But now God does not damn all, and send them to Hell, that do not
improve their Natural Gifts, the Light within, etc. No, for the Lord we read,
converted many that finned against the Light of Nature and Conscience; and does
so daily, by his Grace. To worship Idols, Stocks and Stones; to abuse
themselves ^^th Mankind; to be Drunkards, etc. are all against the Light of
Nature: But these things the Corinthians were Guilty of; 1 Cor. 6.9. yet upon
the Grace of God coming, they were Converted, Washed, Justified, Sanctified;
and were not thrown into utter darkness. This Word was done for them when they
were not improving the Light within; but sinning against it to the utmost.

3. It is such a Talent, that this is said of it, viz. From him that (...) not
shall be taken that which he has. Now if this was to be understood of the
Light within every Man, then it must be taken away upon the non-improvement of
it; and if so, then must every one it is taken from, cease to be a Man, or
become a Madman. For if the Light be Nature; and if Nature be taken away, Man
cease to be a Man, and is not fit for any Society of Men; will become as a
Bruit, not discerning betwixt Good and Evil; and be a Fool or Idiot. But this
we do not see: many ungodly Men that do not turn Quakers, yet are not Fools;
many that have been Quakers fallen from them to Looseness and Debauchery, yet
not Idiots. Why then Baily, this Scripture is nothing to thy purpose. The
Slothful Servant was Condemned, and that Justly, because he did not improve his
Talent; but it will not therefore follow -- That this Talent was the Light
within every Man; and the very same in kind with the Spirit of Adoption and
Regeneration, as thou say.

I have, Reader, more fully opened this Scripture, because it is a Scripture
that they often make use of, and pervert.

Baily. But if all Men are not Lighted with the true Light, then some Men have
no true Light.

Reply. All Men we grant, are lighted with the Light of Nature, which we speak
of; and that it is in its kind a true Light, we have granted: So that the
Inference should have been this, viz. Therefore some Men have no true saving
Light; and that we have proved to be true.

Baily, Then why should such be Condemned, that are so miserably deceived? Is
this equal?

Reply. Who art thou, poor crawling Earth-Worm, that should reason with God;
and call him to an account for his matters? I ask, in order to satisfy this
bold Question, whether any carnal Man does, to the utmost height, at all times,
obey the Light within? If not, God then is Righteous in Condemning him. If thou
Object, viz. That we say, It is not sufficient for Salvation, so that one will
be miserably deceived if he trusts to it, and has not a better Guide. I
(...) God is not bound to give his Good Spirit to any one: no Law o^^geth him:
He certainly may do with his own as he will.

Object. But Man has not power to come up to that which God requires.

Answ. If Man has lost his power of obeying, God has not lost his power of
Commanding: and he may justly demand that of a Man, which he has wilfully
lost, and deprived himself of. In a Word, God condemns none but those that
have freely run on in sin and impenitency to the last. And this, Baily, is
Equal and Just.

Baily. But if all Men are lighted with the true Light (as I Believe,) then by
your Doctrine, some have two Lights; another Light besides the True Light.

Reply. It Is no absurdity at all to say, that two Lights of two kinds and
natures, may be in one and the same Soul, at one and the same time: As the
Light of the Sun and Moon are seen at one time in the Air.

Baily. If it be of another kind; (speaking of the Light that the Saints have;)
then it must be a false Light, because the other is a tr^^ Light.

Reply. We have granted, that the Light every Man has is a true Light, in its
kind; and so is the other true, in it is kind: both true, yet differ in Kind
from one another. The Light of the Moon, some apprehend, differs in Kind from
the Suns Light: Yet the Light of the Sun is not false, because the Moons Light
is true. An Ass differs in Kind from a Man; yet he is as true an Animal as a
Man. Here is all the strength of Argument I can find. Let the Reader now judge,
who is guilty of confusion and blindness.

Baily. And after thy confused Prayer, p. 11. to Christ in thee, and to Christ
in the Heavens, and by and in the Spirit, (as thou thoughtest) the say;
several weeks was I in this trouble, making my Condition known to no one;
because I would not be persuaded to any thing, but did wholly rely upon the
inward instruction of the Lord: Thus did my hope perish. How did thou rely upon
the inward instruction of the Spirit; when thou prayed in that confused manner,
as aforesaid? Consider it.

Reply. He did rely upon them in the same way, as the ignorant Quaker does: for
he was one at that time; and so this Lord was no other than the Light within:
and the instructions of the Lord, (that he speaks of;) no other but the
Dictates of Nature. No wonder he wandered: Nature will not teach the right way
of Prayer: neither can (...) will it show, that the Father, through the
Mediator Jesus, is to Worshipped. All may see by this, what darkness ye be in,
in your ^^ship, and what Confusion, and that you follow the dictates of (...)
Light of Nature; and leave the Instructions of the Spirit in the Holy
Scriptures. It Is very lately, a Quaker acknowledged, she Worshipped Christ
within: and being ashamed of what she had spoke, afterward said, she
Worshipped Christ without also: May not we say; ^^ worship ye know not what?

Baily. Did any ever rely upon the inward Instructions of the Lord, and their
hope perish? Bring one Example for this.

Reply. The Hypocrites hope will perish: and every one that makes not Christ
Jesus, God and Man, his Hope, is a Hypocrite. ^ Tim. 1.1. Which is our Hope.
The inward Instructions of the Spirit lead to this Jesus Christ, God and Man;
and whoever depends upon them, in the (...) of hearing the Word preached, and
reading the Scripture, (For the Spirit teaches in the Use of these means;)
their hopes shall be strengthened: But this dependence was only, (as he
thought,) upon the spirits teachings. That expression, viz. [As I thought]
should be ta^^n in here. But he was mistaken in that they were but Natures
Dictates, he was guided by; when the Spirit came, that led him to Christ's
Righteousness from his own. And an Example, (as thou demandest,) I give thee,
in this same Case, in Paul before his Conversion, Acts 26.2^. I verily thought
with my self that I ought to do many things contrary to (...) Name of Jesus of
Nazareth. He had the Light within at this time; be thought this his Duty; to
Act against this Religion: he rested in his Law-Righteousness: he surely would
have answered any that would have blamed him, that he did all by the inward
Instructions of the Lord; for he followed his Light: he verily thought, etc.
it is said, yet in that State of Law-Righteousness, his Hope perished.

Baily. Thou say thou had peace of Conscience by the powerful work of God
without thee. Is this like Scripture Language.

Reply. Yea, the Spirit does everywhere testify, what the young Man instanceth
in there, viz. That the Fathers preparing a Body for Christ, was the Work of
the Omnipotent Power of God, sixteen hundred years since; his bearing sins in
that Body, and the Curse of the Law: his dying in that Body; and yet could not
be held of Death, but rose again: God's upholding him in, and through all those
things, was the wonderful work of God without us, before thou and I, and this
young Man had our beings. Let the Reader take notice that --

In Page 42. Baily acknowledges this, that here he snarles at; his Wo^^ are,
viz. We deny not the Work of God and Christ, without. And likewise, does not
the young Man own a work within? This Doctrine he says, was manifest to him in
the Spirit, that was within surely.

His next Words are, viz. Working Faith in me; by this I had Pe^s of
Conscience: All this was within. Yet all this Work was not the Righteousness
that justified him; but that was by the powerful work without us; in giving
Christ for us. Near the end of page 41. He threatens the young Man with
trouble; and concludes thus.

Baily. The Lord has spoke it.

Reply. Does he not pretend to as high an Inspiration as the Apostles? And yet
in the next Paragraph bewrays himself to be a weak fallible Man; in that he
says,

Baily. The Yoke which W. H. calls the burdensome Yoke.

Reply Whereas, it was the young Man himself alone, without the least
intermedling of mine, that gave this Title to the little Book, (as I have
Witness,) calling that bondage he was in to the Law of Works, when a Quaker,
the Burdensome-Yoke.

Baily. Page 42. But did not the Saints and People of God in all Ages, witness
their Salvation and Peace of Conscience by the powerful work of God within them?

Reply. Yea, We heartily own it: and the young Man owns it; as before. And thou
art in this page and the next about a needless work; none denying this: If
withal thou will but say that these Saints and People of God had some things
within them, of another Nature than the Light that every Man has, that did
thus work in them; which did still lead them forth to glory in the personal
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, for their Justification: Therefore the first
Scripture speaks for us; not against us.

Baily. 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined into our hearts.

Reply. It appears by this plainly, that they had not this Knowledge by any
Light before; but by some Light super-added, and shining into them. It follows,
to give the Light of the Knowledge: See, still they had it not in them before.
Again, of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: Now look into those
that are well acquainted with the Greek Language, they will tell thee, this
word, (...) signifies properly a Person; Answering to that Hebrew word used in
Levi^. 19.15. Thou shall not respect the Person of the Poor. And it is used in
(...) 1.11. by the means of many Persons. Now was no the Per^o^ Christ without
them? That which in 1 John 1. they had seen (...) their eyes, it was external
to them. And most of the Glory of (...) did shine forth in Christ's personal
coming: Therefore when he (...); (which is the next Scripture thou bring,)
We have this Trea^^e in Earthen Vessels: It was the Knowledge the Apostles had
in their (...) of the Person without. Page 42. Parag. 2. Thou ownest the Work
of God without; If thou wast plain-hearted and honest, we would thank thee: And
we do say, with thee, there are none knows the things of God aright, but by
the Spirit. And it is the same Spirit that raised Christ from the dead, that
dwells in his people; and will at last quicken their Mortal Bodies: But thou
have a reservation in all this. Is it any less than Blasphemy to say, that the
Light within raised Christ from the dead; and shall raise the Saints Mortal
Bodies, in the day of the Resurrection? As that Scripture, Romans 8.11. i^ to be
understood.

All discerning ones by this time see, that the Quakers deny the Resurrection
of the Body; and so consequently, Christ's Resurrection. Then this quickening of
the Mortal Bodies mentioned by Baily, is no more than what, (as the Quakers
apprehend,) is attained by attendance to the Light within. Are the Quakers
Christians?

Baily. Next quoteth Romans 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. to prove the Apostle
preached Christ within.

Reply. Not for Justification, those Scriptures speak of Sanctification.

He had spoke of Justification before, which is the Cause of this; and this an
evidence of the other.

Baily. And Christ Preached the Kingdom of Heaven within people, Luke 17.21.

Reply. This place is much made use of by the Quakers. Now it is plain, he
speaks to the Pharisees; whom he calls there Vipers, Hypocrites; said Satan was
their Father. Is it likely that Christ would give a Specimen of what his
Kingdom was, by it is being in the Pharisees? What, Children of the Devil and
Unbelievers, and yet the Kingdom of Heaven within them? What, the Holy Ghost's
Sanctification, Faith, Love, Holiness, Peace and Joy: (For the Kingdom of God
consists in these things:) what, all these in the Pharisees?

The Quakers Light, I grant, was in them; but is this any where called, the
Kingdom of Heaven? What, is Nature the Kingdom of Heaven? Then this (...) is
but intra vos, or apud vos (i. e.) with you or among you; used by the Greeks in
their Translation of the Old Testament, (...) for (...) among you; there is no
more in it, than (...) 1 John 26. There stands one among you. These Pharisees
dreamed (...) an Earthly Kingdom, in Earthly Glory: Therefore, he says (...)
Kingdom comes not with Observation. Their Eyes were blinded (...) this
Conception of theirs; and they stumbled at the lowness and (...) verty of
Christ, and would not believe that he was the Messiah, (...) were inquiring for
the Kingdom. Now he tells them, It comes (...) with Observation, but it was
come, he being come, and it was among them; he in Person being among them,
working Miracles in the midst of them. They sought for the Messiah, as absent,
when he was present, and very near them. We still grant Sanctification within;
but here, the Kingdom of Heaven is taken for the personal coming of Christ,
that is without.

Baily. And the True Worship of the Father is in Spirit and in Truth.

Reply. But had not the Father an existence of himself, without (...) before
any had their beings? Do ye Worship the Father within, by the Light or Spirit
(as ye call it,) within? And was not the Fathers powerful work in sending his
Son? And the Righteousness of Christ without, notwithstanding this Worshipping
of the Father in Spirit and Truth.

Baily. And said, what and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend (...) where he
was before? John 6. It is the Spirit that quickneth; the Flesh profits nothing,
When they cried, How can this Man give us his Flesh ^^ eat? Whose Minds were
wholly without; like many of yours.

Reply. These Jews did not believe that Christ was God; but did despise his low
estate. He is convincing them here, that he was God as well as Man, though he
did vail his Glory thus in the Flesh, for the present. Therefore he asserts his
Original, that it was from Heaven, and his Eternal existence before he took
Flesh; and says here, the Son of Man was in Heaven before he took Flesh. He
uses a Phrase that is common in Scripture; Attributing that to his humane
Nature, which was proper to the Divine. Otherwise, as the Son of Man he was not
in Heaven, before his Ascension from the Earth. It Is well if thou and thy
Brethren did Believe that he is now Ascended into Glory, as he is the Son of
Man: But is evident ye do not. That of his Flesh profiting nothing, must be
understood thus; viz. That his Manhood is nothing for Salvation, taken alone
and apart from his Deity; called the Spirit there. And they believed him not,
(as we said) to be God. The reason why they stumbled at that saying; viz. That
he would give them (...) to eat, was because they were ignorant of the way of
Faith, (...) gross Conceptions of eating his Material Flesh, with their Ma^^^
Teeth. We Glory in the Flesh of Christ, and know that it pro^^^ (i. e.) the Son
of God taking Man's Nature into Union with him^^ and therein fulfilling the Law,
and bearing the Curse of it, Of^^ng that Body on the Cross: Thus he is the
Bread of Life, and by (...) in this, (as done for us,) we have Life, and
entrance into Glory (...) New and Living way, which he consecrated for us
through the Veil, (...) to say, his Flesh, Heb. 10.20.

Baily. And said 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Pro^^ty, to
which ye do well to take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a (...) place,
until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts. (...) Jesus is the
Bright and the Morning Star.

Reply. Remember Reader, that these Scriptures are brought to prove (...), the
Apostles did Preach Christ only within. Now let us see, whether in this
Scripture, Peter does not point them to the Person of Jesus Christ; and this
day dawning, and Day Star arising in their hearts, was but a more clear
knowledge of Jesus Christ. Certainly he is pressing them to get into their
hearts a more distinct knowledge of Jesus Christ's Person, and of the end of his
Coming; and the import of his Death: and tells them the way and means, viz, By
attendance to the Prophecies of the Old Testament: which they being Jews did
reverence; and he says, they did well to take heed to them, for this end. The
Light within every Man, cannot be meant by any Word or Phrase in this
Scripture: But it is the Knowledge of the Person of Jesus. He is called a Star,
by Balaam; that was then in a Spirit of Prophecy, (...), 24.14. There shall
come a Star out of Jacob: Foretelling his (...) and Incarnation. But where is
the Light that every Man has, called so? Besides, this people had enjoyed and
possessed the Light with^^ from the Womb. What need he speak of its arising,
and the day dawning in them? If thou Baily say, Though it be in Man, yet it
shi^^th not, it arises not in any brightness, till attended to, and obeyed,
which is commonly replied by the Quakers:

Let this be considered, in Answer; That this people had before this ^ime of
Peter's writing, obeyed it: For they were converted. In the beginning of the
Epistle it is said; they had like precious Faith with the Apostles. Now Faith
and Conversion is nothing else, according to the Quakers, but a higher rising
of the Light within.

The other Phrase, To which ye do well to take heed, as to a Light that ^ines
in a dark place: Can this be the Quakers Light? If so, then is the Quakers
Light, and the dictates thereof, a more sure Word than a Voice from Heaven;
such an one as Peter heard in the Mount: For of that he speaks here. But which
of the Quakers themselves will say so? Again, If so, that by this Light in a
dark place be meant the Quakers Light within, then is there such a state to be
attained in this Life by attendance to the Light, in which there needs not be
any more heed given to it: For it is said, To which ye do well to take heed,
until the day down, and the Day Star arise. If we take the word (until) in that
sense, (as some would have it;) so that after a while, some must leave off
being Quakers, advancing into a higher Form. As it was with Merchant Rich; who
styled himself, one of the Church of the Firstborn.

By this the Reader may see, what little ground they have to make use of this
Scripture for their way of Preaching; pointing people to the Light within;
taking them off the Scriptures and from the Person of Christ, the bright
Morning Star; to follow Fox and Nayler, Wandering Stars from the North, Blazing
Comets full of Malignancy, portending much evil to the Inhabitants of this
Nation: As we have seen, what a Plague of Error has followed.

Baily. And Jesus Christ bids people believe in the Light, that they might
become the Children of the Light.

Reply. Which place is not as pointed in John 6.62. but in John 12.36. Now thou
say Christ bid people believe in the Light. I query, Whether this Light was
not himself? Whether he pointed the people to believe in any thing, or person,
but himself? Answer: We say, It was not to believe in the Light that every Man
has: For he says in the same ver. which thou omit'st, While ye have the
Light; and v. 35. yet a little while is the Light with you: Now the Light the
Quakers speak of is always with every one, never extinct as long as Nature
remains. It was then Christ's Person, that was about to depart out of the
World: As he in this Chapt. speaks, v. 33. of his being Lifie^ up. This he
said signifying what death he should die. When Christ Jesus departed out of the
World, the greatest Light that ever was departed: Never any Preached as he,
wrought Miracles as he. This fellow would make people think, that Christ
Preached in the same way that the Quakers Preach, viz. That he bid the people
believe in the Light of Nature within, not in himself. Whereas he had said of
himself, I am the Light of the World: he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness. Is this Baily a Christian?

Baily. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

Reply. I cannot find, that this Spirit speaks one Word of a Light, that
every Man has as a Guide to follow: But much in every place, does it speak of
the Person of Jesus Christ. The next Scripture we shall have an Occasion to
mention ere long.

Baily. And said the Apostle, if we walk in the Light --

Reply. To walk in the Light, is to walk in Gospel-Holiness; As he is in the
Light: Holiness is a likeness to God. But it cannot be understood of the Light
of Nature. This may be walked in, and yet no true Holiness; and so no
fellowship: In that one may have that and be destitute of the Spirit of
Adoption and Grace.

Baily. Then have we fellowship one with another.

Reply. Baily cites it thus: but it is not so in the Greek; nor in the
Translation, the Word then, is not there. This walking in the Light does not
procure or cause this friendship, reconciliation, or fellowship with God, (as
the Quakers Dream:) Neither this, nor any Purity or Holiness, can be the first
Cause. For indeed, there is no Holiness, without first there be friendship and
Communion with God. Only this Walking in the Light, is a token that we have
fellowship, because it is an effect of it.

Baily. So they were to drink his Blood; and that was it, by which they were
cleansed from sin; and had Eternal Life: and if they drank it, was it not
within them?

Reply. There was a purging of sin, when Christ shed his Blood, and suffered
Death; Heb. 1.3. Who when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down, etc.
All the sins of all the Elect were virtually purged, or cleansed then: A price
laid down to expiate them all, by the Sacrifice of Christ. This was sixteen
hundred years since. The drinking of the Blood, is but the Application of it in
time. Then is it manifest that it was done for such. But still thou confounds
Justification and Sanctification. We are not forgiven our sins by reason of any
works wrought in us; No, these works in us, are but effects of forgiveness: But
by the virtue and worth of the work and sufferings of Christ without us. And
whereas thou ask, Whether the Blood be not within, if it be drunk? So I ask
thee, If any eat the Flesh of Christ, is it not within him? If Christ dwells in
our hearts by Faith, is not the Person of Christ in our very hearts? and so the
Man Christ? Now by the Blood, who understands any thing, but all the Sufferings
and Death of Christ; his offering up himself as a Sacrifice? Can these be drunk
but by Faith? So then, as far as by Faith, the Sufferings of Christ and his
Death can be within us, they are, viz. We have all the benefit and virtue of
them, for procuring of all good for us; Pardon, Peace, Holiness, Eternal-Life.
This word Drink, is but a Metaphorical word; implying, that we can have no
Benefit nor Good by Christ, except there be an Application by Faith.

Baily. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, and Mark 7.21, 22, 23. From
within, out of the heart of Men proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries, and defile
the Man. Now must not these evil thoughts be purged out? But how, and by what
means must these evil thoughts be purged? Seeing they are within? Must not the
Antidot be taken inwardly when the Poison is within. What is it that must
cleanse, but the precious Blood of Christ?

Reply. This is the sum of what thou say in Page 43. We grant that sin comes
from within: therefore is there a Fountain within, from whence these evils
flow; which we call Original sin. Every Man is tempted, Jam. 1.14. When he is
drawn away of his own Lust, etc. Romans 7. Sin wrought in me all manner of
Concupiscence. This the Quakers deny: Now Man in his Natural state, can do
nothing else but sin; Genesis 6. The Imagination of the thought of his heart is
only evil continually; notwithstanding all the Light he has within. Hereupon
must there needs be great defilements upon his Mind and Conscience, 1 Ti^^ 15.
Their Mind and Conscience are defiled. This defilement consists in the guilt of
Sin: and in the power and presence of sin. These defilements must be taken
away; and there is nothing will do it, but the Sufferings and Blood of Christ.
Now the guilt of sin is taken away, by God's Act of not imputing sin to us,
upon Faith: Which Faith is wrought in us by his Spirit; in that Christ was made
sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. As for the power of sin, this is broke in us, by the
New Creature and Sanctification; which begins in Faith on Christ. Now as this
work is carried on in the Soul, so the presence of sin is more removed. But
it is the will of God, that the work of Sanctification should not be so
absolutely perfect in this Life: So that Sin has some presence in the best of
Saints; yet no condemnation to them, because they are in Christ. See then, we
are for an inward work upon the heart of Man; a work of Sanctification, which
the Light of Nature will never produce; but there is a necessity of the Spirit
of Grace to be given; This work is but the Fruit of the shedding of the Blood
of Christ. Thereupon it is, that we have Faith given, as well as pardon, Phil.
1.29. To you it is given (...) on the behalf of Christ, not only to believe,
etc. All this pains Baily, that thou have taken, is only, (the Reader now
sees;) to throw down Christ's glorious Person; and set up corrupt Nature, in
his place. And by Blood and purging, etc. is nothing meant, by you, but the
Light within, and Obedience to that. I would not omit any thing that has the
least show of Argument; and desire thee Baily, if thou write again, to do the
like by me.

The next Scripture is 1. Pet. 1.19.

Baily. Speaking of the Blood. Did it not Redeem people formerly from their
vain conversation?

Reply. Yea, it did, and it does now; and nothing else. It was not the Light
within. Many had this, the Jews had it, the Fathers of these he is writing to;
yet they walked in vain Conversation (i. e.) in error and superstitions, after
Traditions; as he there speaks. And so multitudes of Heathens at this day, and
many in this Nation. But whoever Christ has died for, shall effectually be
called from such a Conversation. The offering up of himself was the Meritorious
cause of all Holiness. Whoever then walk in the vain Conversation of error,
false Worships, Superstitions, Wickednesses, to the end; manifest, Christ never
dyed for them. They were not Redeemed, nor bought with his precious Blood.

In the last Parag. of the 43. page thou speak of the Indwelling of Christ
in his people by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 6. I will dwell in them, etc. And of his
presence in the Gospel-Churches; walking in the midst of his Golden
Candlesticks.

Reply. Both these surely, are consistent with Christ's being a person without;
and all his suffering without; These all are but Fruits of Christ's dying for
his Church. But before I leave this, one Scripture in Prove. 16. thou have, viz.
By Mercy and Truth Iniquity is purged. What meanest thou by this? I am afraid
thou art a downright Papist. The Papists say, that by Almsgiving, Iniquity is
taken away; Do thou think so? For that is Mercy. So, by doing to others as we
would be done by, is sin pardoned, for this is Truth, and Righteousness. Speak
out, Is there any thing that Man can do, (which thou do here imply:) that can
take away his iniquity? Is this the Blood that thou owned'st before? Then may
many unclean Drunkards have their iniquities purged; yet remain so. For several
of them, (it is known;) are merciful to the Poor, and true in their Words and
Promises; and Righteous in their Trades. Surely then, it is more safe to
understand this Scripture, of the Mercy and Truth of God; his Mercy promising
forgiveness through Christ, and his Truth, in making this promise good. Thus is
Iniquity Forgiven, Redeemed, Covered. In the Hebrew it is, in Mercy, and in
Truth, is iniquity redeemed, or covered.

Thou art a very unhappy Man in citing Scriptures.

In the 44, and 45. page I find nothing of any weight, or Argument. Let the
Reader view it. Much of page 44. is the very same that he said before of me,
and of the young Man: he sends some shot in Railing, in Parag. 2. and breaks
forth into the Praises of the Quakers, and Thraso-like boasts in his
confidence. And thus goes on, threatening all but themselves, as Babylon and
Antichrist. At length, concludes page 45. in the 4th. Parag. in Prayer: He
begins thus, viz. Arise O God, etc. he ends with a Doxology, viz. To whom be
everlasting Praises, Glory, and Thanksgiving, from all that know thy Name; God
over all Heaven and Earth, blessed for ever and ever; Hallelujah. Now I have
read over the Prayer once and again, I find not one word of Christ in it;
nothing desired in his Name, or for his sake; and am greatly jealous, and
desire therefore to be satisfied in this Question; (having said so much before,
as thou have:) Whether thou do pray this Prayer to any other Person or thing,
than the Light within; which thou call here, God over all Heaven and Earth,
blessed for ever; giving Halelujahs to it? If thou write again, I pray thee
resolve me, who thou prayest to; and why not in the Name of the Mediator Jesus?

In page 46. The Reader may see much of the same he had before, applying
himself to me; calling me to an account, for what I have written: appealing to
my Conscience: Where there is this passage Parag, 1.

And see if thou can stand by them, when examined to thy Face.

Reply. I have said enough upon this account, in my Epistle to Crook and say
here, in all Calmness, I have not wronged the Quakers; but have acted in all
things according to my Light and Conscience, and it does not in the least
upbraid me. If for any thing, it is, that I have not used more diligence and
boldness, in preventing their gross and damnable errors. And now I am ready to
speak with thee Face to Face, or any of you.

Baily. Page 47. Whom thou say is a Quaker converted to Christianity; as if
the Quakers were no Christians. Showing thy Envy against them; and thy
Ignorance, or wilful-blindness concerning the Scriptures of Truth; in which may
be seen plentifully, that God's People (whom he has regard unto, above all
people in all Ages:) were such as trembled at his Word. As in Isa. 66. And
Moses was a leading Quaker, Heb. 12. and Ezekiel was a Quaker: see Chap. 12.18.
And Daniel, a Man greatly ^^loved, was a Trembler, Chap. 10.11, 12. And Paul
preached in much trembling; 1 Cor. 2. 3. And Paul bid the Christians, Work out
their Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. And exhorted Servants to
obey their Masters, with fear and trembling, Ephesians. 6.5. And the true
Christians received Titus with fear and trembling, 2 Cor. 7.15.

Reply. I wish for thy own Credits sake, thou had forborne these ^nes. Every
Babe in Christ smiles when they read them: seeing the weakness and impertinency
of them. I find that the Quakers are very much distasted, that we allow them
not to be Christians. Now how on they be Christians, if they hold not the Head,
the Person of Christ, ^ut make the Light within, the Head of the Church? I
wish, not on^y they, but all the World, were not almost, but altogether
Christians! Were you but sound in the Faith, had ye but the Vital Essential
part of Christians, what a good addition would there be by you, to the Church
of Christ? Ah! have ye suffered so many things in vain in this Nation? But it
is not amiss to call a Spade, a Spade. Ye must (I dare say,) change your
Religion from top to bottom, before ye be owned Christians by God's people in
this Nation. But to the thing;

Thou will prove them Christians thus, viz. If the Christians of old ^ere
Quakers, then the Quakers now are Christians; But the former is true, thou
say, by many Scriptures, which thou have quoted.

Before we come to examine the instances, let me but Query, How this people
came to be thus called? Was it not upon their strange fits of bodily
Tremblings, which they had in their first Rise, wherein all their flesh and
bones would tremble? I take it for granted, having spoke with some that have
seen them thrown upon the ground in this posture. Now that such bodily
Tremblings as these are essential to Christians, and to the people of God as
such, I deny; they never had such, except it was upon some dreadful Visions or
Appearances, as you in the least can by no claim to. This is no part of
Christianity. Though we do not censure the Quakers as no Christians, because
they trembled thus: but because they deny Christ himself, from whom that Name
is derived; and the Christian Doctrine. So that your Religion, is a Religion of
another kind and sort and Species; much more like Mahumetanism, or Judaism, or
Heathen-Philosophy, than Christianity.

Now to the Scriptures, which prove the people of God of old, Quakers.

Isa. 66. v. 5. Such as tremble at my Word. This is the first Scripture.

Reply. Was this bodily Trembling here spoke of? Is there not in the same verse
a contrite Spirit mentioned? Was it not in Spirit, having a Holy awe and
Child-like fear of the threatenings of God?

2. Moses was a Leading Quaker, Heb. 12. This may be spoken of Moses, some
think, not as if it were verified in his own Person, as if he did quake; but he
is brought in as the Mouth of the people, speaking in the Name of the people;
Moses said, (i. e.) in the Name of all the people: he being a Mediator betwixt
God and them. See Exodus 19.19, 20. that for all this, it is said there, he spoke
to God -- and God called him, and he went up to the Mount. But be it so, Was it
not upon an Extraordinary occasion? Had you ever the like Visions as the
burning Mount? Did you ever hear the voice of God? Was your Doctrine among the
Mountains in the North, delivered with that Augustness as the Law at Mount-
Sinai?

But again, grant he did quake, was it any part of his Religion, o^
Christianity? Nay, it only argued this, that he was imperfect; a sinner, legal
in part. It Is said, in that Chapter, that it ought not to be thus with
Christians, viz. to fear thus and tremble; nor be discouraged. For they are
come to Mount-Sion; and to the Blood of sprinkling; being delivered from a
cursing fiery Law: and are come unto a State, where there should be nothing but
Peace, Joy and sweetness.

The next is Ezekiel, He was a Quaker; in Chap. 12.17, 18. The word of the Lord
came to me, saying, Son of Man, eat thy Bread, with Quaking, and drink thy
water with trembling.

Now, have you the same Reason for yours, as this Prophet for his? Any
immediate Vision, or Revelations by Angels, Spirits, Voices, etc. prove it to
us.

Then the next Quaker that is brought, is Daniel, Chap. 10, 11. in a ^. you
read of a marvelous Vision Daniel had; which you dare not say you have any such
amongst you, which was the cause of his Trembling.

As for Paul's trembling, prove it such Bodily trembling as yours. We deny it,
and say it was not such.

That in Phil. 2. 12. was not Bodily Trembling; but an holy fear and reverence
of God, in their Spirits rousing them from security upon consideration of the
Decrees of God.

So the other two mentioned; as to Servants and Titus.

But is it not a strange Argument, whereby to prove the Quakers Christians,
because the Prophets did upon some extraordinary Visions, tremble in their
Bodies? and because others in their Ministry of the Word, and servants in their
places were not proud and secure, but tender and modest; and had a Child-like
fear of God in their hearts: therefore all Christians ^are Quakers, and all
Quakers Christians. But excepting these extraordinary Cases, what do these
Tremblings signify, ^^t horror and despair? Who trembles more than Devils, who
believe (...) tremble? Does it not argue, that you rather come with the
Doctrine of the Law, the Covenant of Works; (which indeed you Preach) ^an the
Gospel? As if you had been only at Mount-Sinai? The Gospel Spirit is not a
Spirit of such fear; but of power, love, and of a sound (...). And the more we
get into a Spirit of Love, the more is this (...) cast out.

But to conclude, I wonder not that any that are found upon the ^aw of works,
not owning the Mediator, his Death, Suffering, Obedience; as having Eternal
Virtue in them, for the taking away of sin; appeasing Justice, making his whole
Church complete; I wonder not, ^at any such should Quake, and Tremble: In a
dying hour they will ^^mble more; In the day of Judgment, most of all. Any that
will ^ave no Savior but the Light within; and no Righteousness but what (...)
in Obedience to that, to Justify them in God's sight; such will call for the
Hills and the Mountains to cover them in that day.

In the end, he casts out, like the Dragon, a flood of Railing; but I must not,
will not, return Reviling: but have learned to bless them (...) that curse me,
and to pray for this Man, that the Lord would not ^y this sin to his charge,
viz. of speaking evil of the Truth, and of me; ^ut forgive him; for he knows
not what be does. Let not the Gospel, O Lord be hid unto him. Let not the god
of this World blind him; that the Light of the Glorious Gospel may shine into
him. Give him the eye^^^e, open his dark Understanding. Let the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation be upon him in the acknowledgment of the Mystery. In thy
Light ^et him see Light. Hide Pride from him, bring down every high thing in
him: every thing that exalts it self; every thought, into Captivity to the
Obedience of Christ; that he may come as a helpless Sinner, to be reconciled to
God through Christ: and not any longer despise the Cross of Christ; and count
the Doctrine of it foolishness; through a Confidence in the flesh: lest he
wonder and perish. Amen.

WILL. HAWORTH.

An Answer to Mary Stouts Letter.
AH, W. H. What is become of that tenderness, that once was upon thy heart?

Answ. That which was true tenderness in avoiding what was really evil, is
still through Grace, maintained in me. But Childish scrupulosity and that
Bondage-Spirit that sometimes I have been in; and which the Quakers remain in,
is removed from me, through more Gospel Knowledge given to me.

M. Stout, Then wast thou little in thine own eyes.

Answ. I am now nothing in mine own eyes: as I am in my self. By Grace I am
what I am. And this is the way to be little, to have (...) sense that by Nature
we are sinners and Enemies to God, and without strength, fallen short of Gods
Glory; Children of Wrath: And so humbly to receive the Doctrine of free
Justification by imputed Righteousness; which your Teachers oppose. Whether is
likely to be less in hi^ own eyes, he that sees he has nothing to justify
him but what i^ without; which God by a free Act of his, imputes to him; or
(...) that thinks there is enough within from the Birth, if it be obeyed (...)
which he has Will and Power to do?) the Lord open thine eye^ Mary, and humble
thee.

Mary, Thou did then confess to the Truth.

Answ. Christ's Person is the Truth, John 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth and the
Life. I am still confessing against the Errors of the Quakers; who are
certainly against the person of Christ, and set up another Christ; a Quality
that is in every Murderer and Robber, which here thou call Truth; and yet it
will not teach many things necessary to be known: But with this, (which thou
call Truth, and attendan^^ on it,) many have gone astray. Witness all the
Heathen World; an^ the Quakers at this day, wandering in desperate Errors. I
have a^ ways given this Light it is due in its place, which is that I suppose
tho^ meanest by Confessing to the Truth. I never any otherwise professed
Quakerism; For then indeed had I been guilty of the highest Rebellion
^maginable; to own the Light in every Man to be the Christ of God to lift
Nature into the Throne of God, to make a Deity of the Cre^ture, which the
Quakers do. The Lord convince thee, Mary, of the Truth.

Mary. And the Quakers were honest people in thy account.

Answ. There may be honesty, where no Godliness. I should be glad, if the
Quakers were as sound in their Judgments as Moral in their Lives. Though of
late they have much declined from Morality. Whatever thoughts I had of them
formerly, I know now them better; and have no Reason to call Darkness Light,
having had so much Experience of them; (how honest soever they be in their
Callings) I know assuredly, there are Errors, and Scarlet Errors of a deep die,
among them: and the Scripture calls Error Iniquity, 1 Timothy 2.19. They are then
such an honest people, among whom there is much gross Iniquity.

Mary. How well had it been with thee, if thou had grown in tenderness!

Answ. Through Grace, I am grown so in tenderness, that I cannot but bear my
Testimony against the Quakers Errors. Where indeed is thy tenderness Mary,
when as thou can bear with such Blasphemies that are in thy Brother Bailies
Book? Yea, Witness to them as Truth? That is but a narrow-Tenderness, that
extends only to witness against some Pride in Apparel, against saluting with
the Hat; and in the mean while can hug, embrace and kiss these Serpents,
Crocodiles, Plague-Sores of Blasphemies. I find my Spirit (and rejoice at it,)
growing in this Tenderness every day, more and more to loath Corruption,
stench, and rottenness; not only in Men's lives, but in their Judgments.

Mary. But it is just with the Lord, that all them that have rebelled against
the Light of his Son, should be hardened.

Answ. The Light that every Man has; (of which thou speak,) is no where in
Scripture called, The Light of the Son of God. Thou may learn from Reading
this Book, that it is but the Light of Nature. Your Teachers have beguiled you,
by putting a false Name upon it. Thou might as well, and may as properly
call the Sun in the Firmament, the Light of the Son of God: It Is a far better
and higher Light that should be so styled.

As for my Rebelling against the Light thou mentionest, I can say, in a great
measure I followed and obeyed it, when a Child, and a Youth, But knew a time
when I had a better guide bestowed upon me. I have now that Light in me walks
not contrary to it. But it is not my Guide nor Rule. But the Spirit of Christ
leads me to the Holy Scriptures, as the Rule. There have I seen higher and
greater things than the Light could discover to me.

Why should thou have me and others walk by Moonlight, as in the night;
when we have the Sun-light, to direct us; in the day of the Gospel? Take heed
Mary, lest thou have not rebelled against the knowledge thou once had from
the Scriptures. That God has thus left thee to Delusion, and hardened thee in
Error.

Mary. It would be well for thee to consider, where thou art, and what thou art
a doing.

Answ. I cousider my self to be in Christ; and that I am doing that which
Christ would have me to do for him in my Generation.

Mary. For doubtless thou art now found fighting against the Lord.

Answer. The Light within every Man, is not the Lord. I am contending, as Paul
in the Synagogue, with the Jews, that Jesus is the Christ; when as this Light
of yours would usurp his Throne. I am fighting for our Jesus of Nazareth,
against the Quakers Christ, and for Justification by imputed Righteousness;
against the old Popish Error of Justification by inherent Righteousness.

Mary. And his Glorious Work which he has begun in the Earth.

Answ. Thou meanest, the Work that G. Fox and J. Naylor began in the North, in
bewitching many people with ridiculous Errors. The Work of God, is the Fathers
sending Christ in Man's Nature, to redeem the Elect, and his causing us to
Believe on his Name; John 6.29. This is the Work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he has sent. Which cannot be Understood of that Light every Man has.

Mary. For it is all in vain and to no purpose; For it will not prosper. And if
thou can stop the Sun in its Course, and set bounds and limits to the Sea,
then may thou accomplish thy desire.

Answ. I am bound to do the duty Christ requires of me; whatever the success
be. I leave my work with Christ. And though I may apprehend that your Kingdom
will prosper, yet am not I discouraged. I know how Popery has prospered;
Mahumetanism, Arrianism. I know how most of Poland at this day, are denying
Christ to be God. Yet are those Errors and Delusions. What if Quakerism should
spread it self, (as here thou speak;) as far as the Sunbeams; or drown the
World as the Deluge; I should not be startled or wonder, but believe it still
to be an Error. And though none of us can, yet Christ can, and at length will,
(though it should be yet a 100 years:) cause this Error, which thou comparest
to the Sun, to go backward, or darken it; or cause it to fall from it is Orb.
Yea he can and will in due time, still the r^ing Sea, divide these Waters, yea,
utterly dry them up. And soar (...) up as high as the Clouds in vain boastings;
I can mount above you, in this Eagle winged Spirit of Faith and Confidence. I
believe (...) therefore speak. Infinitely stronger is he that is with us, than
he that is against us.

Mary. For the Lord has blessed us, and he will bless us, and there is (...)
Enchantment against us.

Answ. It Is well if there be no Enchantments among you, ye are blessed, I
confess; but (as I have said) it is but with Ishmaels blessings, to be rich in
this World. I desire you might have that blessing, Acts 3. (...). That Jesus
Christ in his saving Knowledge, may be sent to you, to turn every one of you
from his Iniquities and Errors.

Mary. And thy Printing Books and spreading them, and Preaching so (...)
against the Quakers, and vilifying them as thou do does but manifest that
Spirit of envy, etc.

Answ. I Appeal to Christ with what Spirit I have done it. Thou (...) too low
to judge me, and out of thy place. My Printing Books, is only writing that small
Epistle. As for my Preaching against the Quakers, I cannot Preach the Gospel,
but I Preach against them. Vilifyed their Persons, I have not, (as I know); I
speak still against their Errors.

Mary. For what is the Chaff to the Wheat?

Answ. The Chaff must be burnt up, I believe, with unquenchable f^re; and so
must all the Hay and Stubble of Error. The Chaff is nothing to the Wheat, but
is so light that every puff of the Wind of Error, blows it away, and
separateth it from the Wheat, and it is to^^ed up and down: Whenas the Wheat
has solidity in it, and will, remain upon the Barn-Floor. All will be found to
be Chaffy-Spirits, that deny the Justification of a sinner by a Righteousness
without, that, deny the Person of Christ and his Sacrifice without us. And what
are your Doctrines, but such as may be like Chaff, squeezed into nothing but
air and fancy, when you have let go all the solid Truths of the Gospel.

Mary. And although thy understanding be darkened, that thou can not see the
dawning of the Day of God.

Answ. I am not of thy mind, that the Sun did rise in the North about twenty
years since. And that then began the day of God, when Fox came from thence,
which thou intimatest. Through Grace I see the Light of the Gospel, which came
from Mount-Zion. The Law shall go forth from Zion. If thou meanest by the
dawning of the day, a further breaking out of the Light in me: I can Answer, I
have known Conversion by the Spirit. But thou may read in the Book, that
this Work is of a different kind from that which your Light effects.

Mary. Yet it is not in thy power to shut the eyes of others from seeing the
Glory of it.

Answ. They may see the Glory of that Light of Nature, and not be saved by it.

Mary. Nor stop their Ears from hearing the true Shepherds voice.

Answ. I cannot learn from Scripture, that the Light that every Man has, is
the true Shepherds voice; (i. e.) the voice of Christ Jesus. The Doctrine which
the Apostles Preached, being inwardly taught by the Holy Ghost, is the Voice of
Christ. But the Light in every Man, is not this.

Mary. For the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding to know
him that is true: and many are in him, and do know the Elect-Seed born, which
cannot be deceived.

Answ. Do not thou here proclaim to all, that thou art of the number of those
Silly Women, that have been ever Learning, but never yet came to the Knowledge
of the Truth? How can we but pity you, to see you embrace a shadow, and let
the substance go? That Naylor and Fox should so bewitch you as to cause you to
dance round about this shadow, and adore it. You know not what to call it; but
rather than miss, you will call it every thing that Christ is called.

Answer me in thy own Conscience, Is the Light within every Man the Son of God?
Then is it Eternal? for the Father is Eternal: and an Eternal Father must have
an Eternal Son.

It is then God of the same Nature with the Father, as every Son is of the same
Nature with the Father? Before it was but his voice; now it is himself. Did not
the Son of God come, before this Doctrine came out of the North, viz. A
harkening to the Light within? Or before there were any Quakers in England?
Thou say, He is come; Implying that there was a time when he was not come.
What do thou mean, this to be his first or second Coming? Here thou call
Nature a Creature, the Son of God. Obedience to this Nature, The coming of the
Son of God. This is the Tender Woman!

Elect Seed born: Then every Adulterer and Murderer, has an Elect Seed in
him: Only it is not born, till he gives heed to it. It Is dead before. Can this
be applied to any, but the Person of Christ, or those that are chose in him? Is
the Light within the Elect Seed? Then it must be saved: yet it goes to Hell
with many: how comes that to (...)? But ye lose your selves for want of found
knowledge, and sound (...) you speak you know not what, following your Teachers
(...) choosing to use them; rather than Scripture Language.

The four next lines I have Answered before in the Body of the Book. (...) in
the last line of the 55 Page, thou call it the Light of the Son of (...) and
a little before, The Son of God: and Elect-Seed. See thy ^onsistency.

Mary. Which he has given for a Leader to his people, to lead out of all (...)
into all Truth. And those that have followed the Lord fully, and ^^^thfully
therein, have found Life and Salvation: According to that (...), he shall save
his people from their sins, not in their sins.

Answ. What an Efficacy has Error upon the minds of poor people when the Lord
has given them up to blindness of heart? How (...) thou call the Light within
every Man, The Leader of the people, which is applied to Christ's Person, in
the Prophets, who leads (...) people by his Spirit, in the use of the Holy
Scriptures? Is Nature ^me the Leader? Fallen blind Nature, the Captain of your
Salvation? What tumbling into Ditches, must there then needs be? What a
^phetess art thou in Israel, to say likewise, that this Light is Jesus; (...)
therefore had that Name given it, as it was to be born of Mary? His (...) shall
be called Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins. So (...) why not
Emanuel? as well God with, as in us? God have mer^^ on thee. It Is Recorded in
History, that when some malevolent Spirits (...) a mind to make disturbance in
the Nation, in the absence of the (...) their treasonable way was to set up a
Counterfeit; to whom (...) would give the Name of him that had Right to the
Crown. Thus (...) Quakers do; give all the Names, Titles, Attributes, to the
Light (...) every Man, that is but Nature: that this way they might lift (...)
into the Throne of God. Which is desperate Treason against Christ the Lord.
Whose Glory he will not give to another.

Mary. And therefore, come down out of that high and lofty Spirit; and (...)
that which convinces thee of sin; For all that will not how there^^ will be
broken thereby.

Answ. The Law of Moses is greater than the Light that every Man ^^th; It will
show more sin in Man, than the Light can. Romans 7. (...) not known sin but by
the Law.

But to make the Law of Moses, Jesus Christ, would be an intolera^ble thing.
But it is a higher villainy to make Nature to be the Christ, (...) to be be
worshipped, as here thou do.

At the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow Phil. 2. 10.

To the Law in my Conscience I have been faithful, in (...) drive me to Christ
the Mediator. By the Law is the Knowledge of (...) is this, or the Light within
every Man That Jesus, that every (...) must bow to? Does either the Law or the
Light within convince of (...) in order to drive to it self; as the Savior? O
what darkness is (...) Christ and none but he is that Stone, that whoever
trusts not to, (...) be broken to pieces.

Mary. There is not an easier way unto Life for thee, than there (...) for us.

Answ. The Scripture says, Luke 13.24. Many shall seek to (...) and shall not
be able. Many of the Jews did strive, but missed (...) they sought it as it
were by the Works of the Law, Romans 9. (...) as the Gentiles that followed not
after Righteousness, did attain to (...) Righteousness of Faith.

You Quakers go the same way with the Pharisees. I know the Christ Jesus is the
only way, the Veil of his Flesh; Faith in this, (...) 10. He that confesses
with his Mouth the Lord Jesus; and believes (...) heart, that God has raised
him from the dead shall be saved. The Spirit make this way short and easy. The
work of the Law upon my Conscience, has compelled me to this way. And this is
the way for (...) you will be saved. He that believes not shall be damned.
Exce^ Believe, says Christ, that I am He, ye shall die in your sins, (...) 8.
24.

Mary. And yet we have no Cause to complain of a burdensome Yoke or that the
Lord is a hard Master. For the Yoke of Christ is easy, and (...) Burden is
Light.

Answ. Following the Dictates of Nature, is not the Yoke of Christ for it leads
into the Covenant of Works, which is a heavy-Yoke (...) work for Life. And ye
are under it. And as many as are of the (...) of the Law are under a Curse,
Galat. 3.10. Only you relieve your (...) with that which is false: As thou
may see, page 56. viz. that ^^ons to evil within us, are not sin: (if not
consented to,) And so (...) interpret the Law, as the Pharisees; that thought
they kept it, (...) they broke not out into external sins.

Christ is no hard Master; For he gives strength to do that which he commands:
But the Light of nature is not our Master, as it is yours. For we call no
thing, nor person Master, but Christ Jesus, to teach us by his Spirit.

Mary. And do not flatter thy self with vain hopes of our fall. For the (...)
look for that, shall perish in their holes.

(...) My hopes are, that your Errors shall be blasted, that every which the
Father has not planted, shall be plucked up by the Roots. This Hope shall not
be in vain. If I live not in the Body to see it, yet (...) be. If the Tares
which the Envious one has sown, grow till the (...), they shall then be weeded
out and thrown into the Fire. The ^ture speaks it. And now it is sufficiently
manifest to all the Coun^^ that there are great Errors amongst you. You have
been weighed (...) found too light, tried and found dross.

(...). For we are built upon the Rock of Ages; and though the storm ^ction
beat on one hand; and the raging Sea which casts up mire and in the other hand:
yet shall we stand, for our foundation is immovable, the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against us.

Answ. O, that ye were built upon Christ the Rock! His Person is Rock of
Eternity: not the Light that is in every Man, but the of Man, Christ Jesus.
This is the foundation the Apostles laid, and (...) can any, of Right, lay. But
ye have gone about to lay another. (...) your building is according to the
foundation.

You may hold out in an hour of Man's Persecution and Opposition; but (...) the
Tempestuous Sea of Gods Justice beats upon you, and his bil^ go over you; and
the Whirlwind of his fiery indignation ^^eth upon you, in an hour of Death; and
in the day of Eternal ^^^gment to come; the Sandy foundation of your own
Righteousness, ^all, and great will be the fall. O, the sad disappointments of
(...) confident ones, in that day! That will say, We have prophesied in Name --
and Christ will say, I know ye not. Therefore take heed, (...) your Faith be
the same with that which Peter professed, which (...) this of the Person of
Jesus; Thou art that Christ, the Son of the Li^^^ God; Against which, all the
power of Hell shall not prevail. But (...) profession is, that not Jesus of
Nazareth, but the Light within eve^^ is the Christ. And against this Faith, you
may be sure; (it being (...) the Gates of Hell will never prevail, for Satan
will never fight against it.

Mary. And this is my Testimony for the Lord, to thee; and all who (...) with
thee in this Work.

Answ. This Lord, thou testifiest for, is only the Light of Nature. (...) thy
Testimony therefore, is not the Testimony of the Saints in the Revelations,
viz. The Testimony of Jesus. For thou art not in the Faith (...) Jesus of
Nazareth.

Mary. Cease striving against the Lord in his people.

Answ. Our striving is for the Lord Jesus, and that the Light of Nature, is not
the Lord in his people, (as you say.) And so you Rob Christ of his Glory. Cease
you, from opposing the Lord Jesus, whose Person is without his people; Calling
him the great Idol.

Mary. And Repent of your Evil, else you and your work will fall together.

Answ. Do thou Repent, poor Woman, and do thy first works.

Go to God as a poor sinner, in Confession of thy sin: (as thou have sometime
been taught) neither say, nor think; (as I fear thou do through Pride:) that
thou art Rich, increased in Goods; stand^st in (...) of nothing: When As thou
art blind, and miserable, and wretched, (...) naked. We see this to be thy
state; and Counsel thee to buy Eye salve to see thy Poverty and thy nakedness;
Raiment, which is imputed Righteousness, here despised by you; that thou may
be clothed, and the thou be not found naked in the day of Christ.

I Counsel thee, with Mary, Love the Lord Jesus his Person, despise him not:
fit at his feet, and learn the sound Knowledge of him Crucified. This is the one
thing needful; Knowing this assuredly, that if you do not Repent and turn from
your Errors, that though you in confidence say, as that Lucifer King of
Babylon, Isa. 14. We will ascend into Heaven: We will Exalt our Throne above
the Stars of God: we will ascend above the heights of the Clouds; We will be
like the most high: yet shall ye be brought down to Hell, to the sides of the
Pit.

Luke 19.27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither and slay them before me.

1 Cor. 16.22, If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him (...)
Anathema Maranatha.

Isa. 50.11, Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about
with sparks: Walk in the Light of your fire; and in the Sparks the you have
kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall ly down in s^^row.

John 8.24. For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your (...)

Here follows the Titles, Phrases, Epithets, given to, and used of the Light
that every Man has, by W. Baily, in his Pamphlet.
Page 24. Stone of Stumbling, Rock of Offense:

Page 30. The Tree of Life, The Light of Christ Jesus, Spirit of Truth, Leads
into all Truth, The Comforter. ibid. The Grace of God which Paul declared of,
Titus 2. which taught them to deny all ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to
live Soberly, Righteously, Godly, etc. The Name given under Heaven, by which
and by no other, Men are to be saved. The Deliverer, Counselor, that brings
forth all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth.

Page 32. That which casts out Devils; a Consuming Fire, Obedience, Service,
and Worship required of the Lord to it. This is all employed in that page I
would not in the least wrong thee. Let the Reader Judge.

Page 33. Parag. 2. The Fruit of this Tree heals the Nations; and stills the
raging Sea of folly and wickedness, ibid. Christ's Glorious Kingdom brought to
pass this way; by attendance to this Light.

Page 34. Parag. 3. Christ Jesus the Son of God, manifested to destroy the
works of the Devil. All power in Heaven and Earth given to it. The Deliverer
that comes out of Zion to turn Iniquity from Jacob.

Parag. 3. Christ in them to whom all Angels must bow.

Page 40. The right way of the Lord.

Page 41. The true Light. All other Lights being false Lights. ibid. The
Instructions of the Lord; the Yoke of Christ.

Page 42. The Day Star arising in the heart, the bright and Morning Star, The
Light which is to be believed in.

Page 43. The Blood, that cleanses and purges all evil, that which redeemeth
the Cup of blessing; God that walks and dwells in us, the Spirit that speaks to
the Churches.

Page 44. The Armor of Light, He that sits upon the Throne, And, the Lamb, who
is getting the Victory over the Beast, and Image, etc.

Page 45. The strong Lord that Judges; The New Jerusalem that (...) down from
above, the Holy City.

Parag. 2. Whose Light is like a Jasper, clear as Crystal; The Glory of God
that shakes the Earth.

Parag. 3. Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; The Power of God; The Dominion of
it is witnessed over Death, Hell, and the Gates of it. Dreadful presence! He
prays to it, at length, and gives praises to it; in this page 45. Parag. 4.

WILL. HAWORTH.

A farther, faithful, and sober Account of the Experiences of William Dimsdel,
now dwelling at Ware in Hartford-Shire; The Person whose heart God eminently
turned from the Principles of the Quakers, to embrace the Christian-Religion.
Being a Defense of his present Faith and Principles, against the Railings and
false Accusations of his Adversaries, W. Baily, and S. Crisp, Quakers.
Wherein you may see the Distinct clear sound Knowledge that the Spirit of God
has taught him, in the Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness for Justification;
With many profitable Answers to Objections. And what the several gross Errors
of the Quakers are, wherein he was once Captivated: but Christ delivered him.
HAving viewed the Book entitled, Rebellion Rebuked; and that part chiefly
relating to me, written by Wills Baily and S. Cris^ I could not but think it
reasonable, that I should write something in my own defense; Seeing there are
so many things contrary to my Spirit, not only concerning my Faith, but Life
and Conversation also. Seeing I find these words as a Caution to the World,
page 50. viz. Had not Men need to take heed, how they believe him in his words,
how they must him in his Actions, or how they have to do with him?

It Is but reasonable (I say,) that I should write something for the ^^^ing of
my self, and I will do it in as plain and meek a manner as I can according to
the ability God has given me.

I cannot Sir, forget the words of your Friend, which tarried with me after
your Departure: (whose name I forbear to mention) which were to my best
remembrance these, viz.

Young Man, I would have thee prepare thy self, if it be upon the hearts of any
our friends to write, to vindicate the Truth; that thou should not think
they do it out of envy; but in all meekness, to reclaim thee.

For your Love and Care of me, I humbly thank you, being willing to learn
knowledge in the Gospel, by any. But your Titles which you put upon me, are not
such as should Reclaim me, viz. A Rebel, Blasphemer, Traitor wicked Person,
Dangerous to be believed in words, or trust^^ in Actions. Had these things
proceeded out of my Mouth; I have just ground to Judge, thou would have
counted them fruits of envy, by what thou toldest me of W. Haworth; but I leave
it to others to Judge, what they are in you.

After a Repetition of several of my sayings, in page 27. of my little Book, I
find thee W. Baily condemning me for setting forth my Condition while I was
obedient to the Light in my Conscience for Life and Salvation; by the
similitude of Israel's being in Egypt. Which thou l^st strained to make
Confusion, and render me odious to the World.

According to this Rule of thine, might I say of Paul in Gal. 4.24, 25. That
the Covenant of Grace was no more than giving Abraham a Son in his Old Age: And
Hagar the Bondwoman, which bare Abraham a Son, is the very Mount Sindi in
Arabia; on which God gave the Law.

Also I might say from Luke 18.3, etc. That God is unrighteous; and that he
will not hear his People unless they trouble and urge him with their Cry. Which
God forbid I should say or think. I know no more wickedness in setting forth
working for Life and Salvation, by Israel's being in Egypt, than for the
Scripture to set forth God, by an unjust Judge. Is this abusing my Similitude in
this manner, a Fruit of the pure Light within?

But why may not my Condition in obeying the Light within, be compared to a
state of Bondage? Seeing this Light teaches the things contained in the Law;
though not all things contained in the Law as they ought to be taught. As not
to kill, not to Steal; not to Commit Adultery, and many more: and says in this
Language, viz. Do this and Live: Which is plainly the Covenant of Works. This
Light teaches That the Man that keeps his Statutes, (i. e.) the
Commandments of the Light, he shall live in them. As in Levit. 18.5. Romans
10.5. Gal. 3. (...) The Quakers words are these, viz. Mind the Light, heed,
obey the Light and turn to the Light which reproves; and suchlike expressions.

Which words are good in their place; but when Justification, Life and Peace
with God, are placed herein, they are stark naught. For then the Gospel, and
the Honor and Glory of Christ are destroyed. That Christ which was dead, and
is alive, and lives for ever, Revel. 1.18. Which cannot be the Godhead without
the Manhood. So then, he that submits to the Light and obeys it, does not
Steal, as he that heeded the Covenant of Works. And this Light as that Covenant
shuts up people unto Good works, only to do them for fear of punishment. So
that, they that are thus obeying the Light, differ not from those that all
their Lifetime were subject to Bondage by reason of the fear of Death, Heb. 2.
15.

Now Paul calls it no other than Bondage, to be under the Law for Life and
Salvation, Gal. 4.25. Why therefore may not I compare it to such an Estate;
without such Wickedness as you speak of? How often do you say there must be a
cleansing from all sin in this Life; else no Salvation? Does not this speak,
that the Righteousness in which Man is to live, must justify him? Is this any
other than the Covenant of Works, which is perfectly to be kept, or no
Salvation to those that are under it? Where is Gospel-Repentance now? Where is
a freedom of Will, and delight to do good? It is all out of doors. This I
remember, upon my own Spirit, when the Lord enlightened me to see Justification
by the personal Righteousness of Christ; then came in a freedom of will to
good: and a Delight and sweetness in doing Good; which I had not before.
Neither can this be in any, where this Change is not. There may be in you
Quakers, a Legal Repentance; which is a turning from Wickedness to Civility;
because ye are bound so to do, for Life and Salvation, as you think. But
Gospel-Repentance, is an Obedience to the Faith which Justifies without Works.
And such an one receives thankfully, and accepts of the Righteousness of
(that Person,) Jesus Christ, for his Justifying Righteousness: And from
thenceforth in Love to Jesus, and for the honor of his Name, lives soberly;
as a Son obeys his Father; But does not look to be made a Son, and owned to
be a Son; and so accepted and received, by these works wrought in him, and by
him. Which kind of Repentance, the Light within every Man, shows not. So let
him which has the (...) Judge of the Tree by its Fruit; (as thou say:) If
the Spirit the (...) are in, be not the Spirit of Bondage, which Paul speaks
of in (...) 15. When as the fear and dread of the Majesty of God un^^^ the
Covenant of Works, is such to those that remember that there eternal punishment
for sinners, that they dare not go on in sin (...) this. But then it is with
them; If I may draw a Similitude once (...) as with a Merchant on the Sea,
laden with rich Treasure, which (...) truly loves, and is loath to part with;
But there arises a Storm (...) Tempest; So that he must either part with his
Goods, or lose his ^^^e; and then he says farewell my Treasure, which I so
dearly loved. (...) a kind of Will, such a Repentance is theirs, who are shut
up in (...) under the Law; and bound to be obedient to the reproof of the (...)
that they may be delivered from the wrath of God, and the punishment of sin.

(...) farther, because there is a Light in every Man's Conscience, which (...)
Check for evil; as was in Adam after the Fall, Genes. 3.10. un^o which I have
been pointed by some: And the more it is heeded, the (...) it will work: So
that when going to act some evil, this Light ^^oeth: and the fear and dread of
God, because of punishment and (...) of shame that will ensue, seizes upon
Man; so that he has not (...) to go on in sin. Hereupon dark, blind, blockish
Reason, con^^deth, this is the Christ, and the Power of God to Salvation. By
this (...) of deceit, I came to believe the Light and Power within to be (...)
Christ, the Savior of the World: (As some of the Quakers do ^nowledg the Light
in overy Man to be:) They say it is both the (...), and the way to the Savior.
Upon this, arises Love to the (...) (esteemed falsely to be the Lord;) because
by obedience to it, (...) may be delivered from some sin. And he is ready to
say, This is (...) that loved me, before I loved him. Thus, misapprehending
those (...) words in the Scriptures, which are to be understood of the Per^^ of
Christ as a Savior and a Redeemer; As that viz. Walk in the ^ight as he is in
the Light; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses (...) all Sin. And
ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make ye (...). And many more,
which might be reckoned up, are all falsely ap^yed to the Light within, and the
power that does accompany it. (...) so, according to the Quaker, the Savior,
the Redeemer, the Blood which ^l^anseth, are all within; changing, renewing,
quickening, bringing (...) perfection. Without which, they say, There is no
Salvation, so that (...) directly runs to the Tenet of those mentioned, Acts
15.1. and in the Epistle to the Galatians, who said, they must be Circumcised,
and keep the Law of Moses; without which they could not be saved (...) the
contest was about Circumcision, yet the Law of Moses (...) something more than
Circumcision: this likewise, viz. Thou shall (...) the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart, Soul and Strength, and thy (...) bour as thy self. Which no Man
since the Fall, was ever (...) (Christ excepted) as appears, Acts 15.10. the
Law is called (...) which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear. And who
were (...) Fathers, but Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? which were saved by (...) and
not by Works, Romans 4.1, 2, 3.

But thou say Baily, that Moses was a leading-Quaker, when trembled at Mount
Sinai, at the terrible appearance of the Lord, in (...) the Law; Declaring that
we are under the dispensation of the Cove^^^ Works. But was Moses saved by that
terrible Appearance? No (...) looked unto Christ to come in the flesh. For he
had Faith it is (...) received not the promise, Heb. 11.39. (i. e.) They lived
not in this (...) to see the accomplishment of the Promise of Christ to come in
the (...) Wherefore it appears, that ye believe that the Blood, Savior, Red^^^
are within; That Person that was put to death at Jerusalem, raised (...) Life
again; whom God has Exalted, Acts 5.30, 31. Which is (...) born of Mary; (for
the Godhead could not die and rise again; (...) he Exalted; but the Manhood) And
not only this Person, but (...) wise Reconciliation in that Body of his Flesh;
the Peace through (...) Blood of his Cross are little worth with you Quakers.
And so (...) well Gospel; But the Light, the Life, the Power within, as you
(...) it, is all your Justifying Righteousness. And so the Law, with (...)
become the Gospel, and the Gospel the Law, Moses Christ, and (...) Moses. Thus
the poor Soul is shut up in Prison, to work for Li^^ Salvation; (as I have
said) according to the Quakers Doctrine, (...) there is an end of Christ and
the Gospel. (Not that I deny good (...) in their place.)

So that your Condition and State; (which I was once in) may (...) be compared
to Bondage. The Lord be merciful to you.

Furthermore, Thou say Baily, that in my asserting the Light (...) which I
was convinced of sin, and by obedience there unto, though^ should be brought
into the Image of Christ: and in that Righteo^ness be accepted with God, and
delivered from Wrath to come) (...) to be the Light of the Spirit; But only the
same Light by which (...) Heathens did by Nature things contained in the Law;
That I am (...) a denyer of the Scripture; which Scriptures thou say are
John (...) and again in Tit. 2.11.9. p. 29. of thy Book. Both which places
(...) (...) you told me were spoken of Christ; he being called in one place
(...) in another Grace.

(...) that lights every Man, and appears unto all Men, is (...) the same
according to you.

(...) speak a little to the first Scripture.

(...) thou art out, for I deny not the Scripture; but your sense (...) ^^^uing
of the Scripture. And I have good ground to judge and (...), that thou may,
with thy friends, corrupt the right meaning the Scripture for your own ends; as
thou have our words and Wri^^ notwithstanding your pure Light. For in saying W.
Haworth (...) the Deity and Godhead which the Barbarous people saw by, when
apprehended Paul to be a Murderer; in page 29. and says, I have ^^^dicted my
Companion. Which is a Lie; with which you have (...) the heap of Confusion. For
W. H. does not say, By the (...) but In the Deity they saw it. As I by my eye
see a Glory in the (...). But the Glory of the Sun is not therefore my eye; by
which I (...) God has placed an understanding faculty in the Soul of Man;
(...) he comes to know something of God: It does not follow ^^^upon, that this
faculty is God.

(...), thou abusest our Words in affirming, the Faith that justifies (...)
wrought out by a person, wholly without Man, as in page 35. g^^^^ to make
people apprehend that we say, Faith is without as well (...) Person Jesus
Christ. When as I said in page 19. speaking of im^^ Righteousness: It was
manifested to me in the Spirit, working (...) in me. So here is a plain wrong
done us; yet we say, that Faith (...) the matter of Justification; think of us
as thou will, but the Instru^^^ which we lay hold of the Matter of
Justification, viz. the ^^^^nal Righteousness of Jesus Christ. This Faith God
works in his (...) by his Spirit, according as it is written, He shall
testify of me, (...) 15.16.

In page 51. S. Crisp says, I have cast of Christ's Yoke and Burden, (...) ^ot
to Sieal, tell lies, speak evil words, etc. and cautioneth the (...) therefore,
to take heed of me, page 50. Whereas I said in page (...) the little Book, that
I ought to lead a good Conversation, 1. For (...) of God. 2. To manifest my
Love to Jesus Christ. 3. To Con^^^ the World of Sin, etc.

Page 16. Faith is the Spring, from whence true Christian-works do (...)

Page 19. This Faith ingageth to Love the Lord.

Page 20. Holding Faith in a pure Conscience: hoping to be found (...) my self.

Thus you abuse us, turning our words to your sense and meaning because we will
not admit of those Works wrought in us by the Spirit to come in to
Justification: But dare say, so to do, is no other but (...) destroying of the
Gospel (...) a despising of Christ; and making Man service his Savior.
Therefore you would make the people believe tha^ we are against good-works and
Sanctification.

Surely, in this Censure you pass, you did not obey your Light (...) else your
Light cannot inform you aright, which shows it to be impure and unsound.

But to the Scripture thou mentionest, John 1.9. That was the true Light, which
Lights every Man that comes into the World.

1. As to that Phrase, True Light: I believe it was Jesus Christ (...) of the
Virgin Mary, God and Man united in One. As he was Man he was capable of
suffering Death; To be cut off, not for himself. (...) he was God, he was able
to go through the Work he had to do for poo^ sinners: This was he, the Light
that John bare Witness of, wh^^ chiefly deserves the Name of Light; seeing he
gives Light (...) and receives Light of none. Now as he was the Creator of
all thing John 1.2. So he Lights every one, (we will grant,) that ^^^^thing
the World, reading that Phrase as you do. Of which Light (...) partook before
his Fall, yea and after his Fall, though not in so great (...) measure, as when
he was in the Image of God. The Heathens had the Light also, yet were without
God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. T^^ Young Man, Matthew, 10.20. that came to
Christ, had it. And Paul before his Conversion; yet both were without the
Spirit of Regeneration, as appears plainly.

Also there are many things, and several Conditions to which man may, by this
Light of Nature attain, and yet be without the Spirit of Adoption, viz. to be
(touching the Law) blameless in the ey^ of Man: and seeming to himself to be
Righteous before God, (...) 9. It was so with me when time was; and I saw no
Bondage (...) State, though there was real Bondage. According as it was with
the in John 8.33. that said, We be Abraham's Seed, and are not in B^^^ to any
Man. Where Christ did imply that they were not free; they (...) being sensible
of their Spiritual Bondage.

If any say, that by this Light, a Man may apprehend the Notion (...) Christ, a
Savior, a Gospel, Why, If that should be granted (...) if I consult my own
former experience, and the Scripture, it (...) turns the Gospel into looseness
that Grace may abound; or it corrupts it by joining the Law and Works for
Justification with Christ. It teaches that the Law must be kept perfectly, or
else thou can not be saved. Yet I still deny, that every Man that comes into
the World, is Lighted with a Gospel-Spiritual-Light. This is a Light that every
Man has not. Therefore in Answer to your Request page 40. viz. to know of us,
Whether there be a Light that every Man has not? And if so, how it differs
from the other? I ask, Can there be the Light of the Sun, without the Sun? Or
the Light of the Fire, without the Fire? Or can there be the Light of a Candle,
without a Candle? Then can there be the Light of the Spirit in Man, without the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11.

Now it is Evident that all Men have not the Spirit, as in Romans 8.9. If any Man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Implying, that some were
without the Spirit. Jude 19. Sensual, not having the Spirit. Gal. 3.2. This
only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or
by the hearing of Faith? Then there was a Time before they received it, seeing
they might remember when and how they received it. John 14.17. The Spirit of
Truth which the World cannot receive: Then the World has it not. And many more
Instances may be gathered out of the Acts of the Apostles; That both Jews and
Gentiles had a Light, the Gentiles had the work of the Law written upon their
hearts; and the Jews with this Natural Light, the Knowledge of the Law of Moses;
Yet were without the Spirit, not being Converted to the Faith of Jesus, but
opposing it. Wherefore, as a Man in outward things cannot lay hold on that
which is beyond his reach; no more can any, by that common Light that every Man
has, lay hold on that which is above its reach. For that Light that showed
Adam that he had broke the Law of God, Genesis 3. did not show unto him the way of
deliverance; but God showed it to him by Revelation. So is it in our Day, none
sees any Beauty or Comeliness in the Gospel without the Lord reveal it unto
him by his Spirit.

Now here comes in the other Query, page 41. Whether this Light I speak of, the
Light of the Spirit of Christ, be another sort or kind of Light, differing from
that which every Man has?

I Answer, Of those that have the Common Light, it is said John 3. 6. That which
is born of the Flesh, is Flesh.

Titus 1.15, 16. Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing ^ure;
but even their mind and Conscience are defiled; they profess that they know
God, but in works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient and to every
good work reprobate, or of no judgment. The Natural Man discerns not the
things of God, neither indeed can, 1 Cor. 2.14.

But now, of those that have the other, in the least measure of it, this is
said, 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure
heart, and of a good Conscience; and Faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding
Faith and a good Conscience, which some having put away; But how did they put
it away? What, by falling into Theft, Murder, and Adultery, and suchlike
practices? Not so much by these things, if at all: for they became Teachers of
the Law; and as I humbly conceive, thought that the Law must be kept perfectly,
as necessary for Salvation; by which Doctrines they did corrupt the Gospel, and
cast off the Faith which once they pretended to; making an unlawful use of the
Law, as Paul Witnesses, v. 7, 8. whose Doctrine did eat as a Canker, as it
does in our day. Therefore the sum of all is, as to these two Scriptures; No
Faith in Jesus, no good Conscience, no pure Light. For they are always joined
together; never go asunder.

Furthermore, Paul speaking of himself, 2 Timothy 1.3. That he served God at that
present from his forefathers, (i. e.) as Abraham and Isaac, etc. that were in
the same Faith that he had now; only they looked unto Christ to come; and he,
as already come: With pure Conscience, How so? had he not a pure Conscience
always? No, when as he said of himself before, when a Pharisee he ought to do
many things contrary to the Name of Jesus: Yet lived strictly, as touching the
Law. But time was, that when a Pharisee, the Lord met him, and smote him to the
Ground, and gave him his Spirit: and then he builded up the things that before
he destroyed: viz. The Faith of Christ, and then, and not till then, had he a
pure Conscience, and served God with this pure Conscience.

Obj. But why should this Common Light be counted impure, or an evil
Conscience; seeing it reproves for sin? And the Heathens by this, did things
contained in the Law, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their Consciences bearing Witness? Why should it be so called or styled?

Answ. Because, it does not show unto Man Obedience to the Will of God, from
right ends, and from right principles; from right reason and understanding and
judgment: But is like an unskilful Pilot, that undertakes to Steer the Ship,
and yet runs it upon Rocks and Quick sands. So this, teaches the things
contained in the Law, and yet destroys the Gospel, missing of the way of
Obedience out of Love to God. There is no Doctrine under Heaven begets this
Love to God, like the Doctrine of the forgiveness of all sin in the Blood of
Jesus Christ.

But is there then a difference betwixt this Light in every Man, reproving for
sin; and the Light of the Spirit, in their Teachings and Operations?

Yea, very much, if I had Words to express my self: though I am (...) Condemned
person by a Jury of eleven, and though it be accounted (...) Divination of my
own Brain, it matters not. What is the difference?

1. The Light of the Spirit, esteems, reckons, or prizeth the
Personal-Obedience of Christ, 1600. years ago, viz. his keeping of the Law in
every point. He having fulfilled the Law in our Nature, that knew no sin of his
own; as the only Righteousness by which we are justified before God, Romans 5.19.
And makes the Soul gladly receive it, and embrace it in all humbleness of
Spirit, this Person, and his Personal-Obedience, as the greatest Treasure in
Heaven and Earth and causes the Soul in all thankfulness to walk in Obedience,
before and to the Lord.

But the Common Light, looks for a Righteousness within, to be justified by the
Righteousness in which Man lives, and consequently the Righteousness of the
Law.

2. The Spirit begets an esteem of the Sufferings of Christ, the Sacrifice
of his Body, as the only means by which we are freed from the wrath of God due
to our sins, he being made a Curse for us, Heb. 10.12, 13, 14. Isa. 53.5. Gal.
3.13. But the Common-Light counts it a Doctrine tending to Looseness, as may
be seen page 35. and 50. of the Book called Rebellion Rebuked. And I my self
did once so esteem it, but now no such thing.

3. The Spirit makes us esteem the Cross of Christ, and the carrying forth the
Person of Christ through it, and the penalty of the Law, and raising him to
Life again; and exalting him into Glory, to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts
5.31. to be the Power of God to Salvation to as many as thankfully receive it
and embrace it.

But the Common-Light esteems that power and dread in the Conscience, which
restrains Man from sin, binding Man to obey for Life and Salvation, to be the
power of God to Salvation. And in many more things there is a difference, in
their teachings and directions. Nay, I scarce know one Gospel Truth, but this
Common-Light contradicts: yet the Teachers of this Light, come with the words
of this Glorious Gospel. So that word is true, which has comforted me many a
time; and may comfort others, viz. If it were possible the very Elect should be
deceived: But notwithstanding all the subtilty of Satan, it is not possible.

But farther, the Spirit causes a higher Repentance, than the Common-Light.
Such a Repentance, such a Change in the Will, that the Saints even loath their
own Bodies; they are as it were weary of them, because of the Corruption that
dwells in them, though the power of it be broken that it does not Rule and
Reign over them. Not because they would be justified by a Righteousness wherein
they would live; as Paul Witnesses, 1 Cor. 4.4. But that they might glorify
God more in their Generation; that they might be for the praise of his Name,
that has redeemed them.

But the Common-Light works a Change in the Life and Conversation, to merit
Eternal Life by; and to get into the Love and Favor of God. So that there is
not so clear a Love, nor so free a Will to walk in the Commandments of the
Lord, as is in the Gospel-Repentance wrought by the Spirit; As may plainly
appear, by what William Baily says, in the 35. page of his Book, viz. If so
be the Father has poured out all his wrath upon his Son, there is no need to
fear miscarriages. And again he says, If so, the Devil may play what Cards he
will. Now, whoever tasted of the Gospel, that would make this use of it, but
did count it as their only happiness?

There is difference in the Motives and Arguments to move to a Holy Life,
between these two Lights. My experience in this has been as a second Pillar,
which the Lord has made use of, to uphold my Spirit for some time. And
comparing my experience with John 16.14, 15. I have been relieved; and perhaps
it may be a relief to others, if with me now they view the three Distinctions
in those words, v. 14. He shall Glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and
show it unto you.

1. I considered, who that was that should be glorified: Whom I conceive is
Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary; the Mediator or middle-Person betwixt God and
Man; having the Nature of both, that he might accomplish the work that he had
to do; and that he might hear and defend his people, when they cry unto him,
seeing he was touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4.15. But is
now Exalted in the Heavens in that very Body which he took of the Virgin, Acts
5.31. Heb. 4.14. This is he that was to be Glorified. For he does not point
them unto that within him or within every Man; but to his Person, v. 16.
speaking of his departing a little while after, signifying his Death, which
filled them with sorrow.

1. Who that was, that should receive of his, which is plain; the Spirit of
Truth, the Comforter, whom he said, he would send, v. 7. in his personal
absence. Whose office is, to take of Christ's things, and show them to his
people. For though the Spirit be the same in Essence, yet it hinders not but
they may be, and are, two in Office and Personality. The Spirit thus takes of
Christ's Righteousness, Sufferings, the Travel of his Soul, to redeem his
people, and shows them unto his people.

The 3d. thing, To whom these things were to be showed. They were the eleven
chiefly there mentioned: But surely as well to all his people, in all Ages and
Generations. For none sees them but by the Spirit; as it pleases God to
reveal them to us. And this Spirit he gives to all his people. Now Jesus
Christ being born of a Woman, was made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. who in all
things did fulfill the Law in all respects, and at all times, in all cases and
conditions: So that he knew ^s sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, 2
Cor. 5.21. By which Obedience, Righteousness, and Holiness of Christ, we are
made Righteous, Romans 5.19. Therefore he is called by the Prophet, The Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. A Savior and a Deliverer. Now the Comforter takes
of these things and shows them unto us; When we see our miserable and
wretched Condition, under the Wrath of God, and our inability to keep the Law
of God. And this is the Language of the Spirit to us, viz. Christ is the end of
the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.

Now it is not the Office of the Spirit the Comforter; much less of the Light
within every Man; (which deserves not the Name of the Comforter:) to work
Righteousness in us to justify us; though it does lead to Holiness: Neither to
bring us to fulfill the Law in our persons to be justified thereby before God; 1
Cor. 4.4. Though I once was entangled with an opinion of this Nature, viz. That
it was Christ by the Spirit which wrought in me: therefore it was not my
Righteousness but his, and this for Justification. Jesus was put to death,
Crucified, cut off, not for himself, he was an Offering for sin for ever, Heb.
10.12. A sacrifice well pleasing to God: And he rose again for our
Justification, Romans 4.25. Signifying so much, that he had satisfied the Justice
of God for the Sins of his people; and could not be held of Death. Now the
Spirit takes of these things, when Man is, (as we have said before:) under the
sense of the wrath of God, and applies them unto his heart; giving him Faith
herein, saying, Christ was made a Curse for thee; Gal. 3.13. (i. e.) in thy
place, room, and stead. He was in a bloody Agony; he was forsaken of God; and
all for the sake of his people. His Blood therefore cleanses from all sin. Now
the Blood is not within us, (as the Quakers say:) Any Sacrifice, any Crucifying
within Man, to purge, to purify, to make Reconciliation with God. But the
Spirit does apply the Merit of the Sacrifice, the Bloodshed of that Person
Jesus Christ, which was 1600. years since. He it was, not the Light within
every Man, that is often called the Redeemer, in the Prophets. And as Paul
calls him from thence A Deliverer to come (...) of Zion, Romans 11.26. when the
time of his Birth drew nigh, he was pointed at to be the Person, Mat. 1.21.
Luke 1.31, 32. to accomplish the Work. This is said, he gave his Life a Ransom
for many, Mat. 20.28. Now the Spirit, as we said, takes of these things, and
applies them to his people, and says, he has; (not he will redeem, but has)
Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. and has made them Sons
through Faith, Gal. 4.6. though they had infirmities, and had need of Reproofs
and Exhortations to good works; as may be seen in the Epistle; he having
obtained everlasting Redemption, through the means of his Death, entering into
the Holy Place once, with his own Blood, Heb. 9.12, 15.

These things I say, does the Spirit Preach to the Souls of poor Men; As an
Ambassador receives of the King his mind, and declares it is a far Country;
so the Spirit receives of Christ's Love, his Riches Care for his people; and
gives them to understand them, for themselves for their own Comfort.

But to the last, viz. He shall glorify me. So is it indeed; the Spirit does
mightily exalt the Person of Christ, it proclaims him to the Soul to be the
fairest among ten thousand, to be altogether Comely. No deformity at all in
him; How excellently is he set forth in the Book of the Canticles! And when the
Spirit does thus reveal Christ in his loveliness and Beauty, they cry out. O
what a wretch was I, that I should sin against so Gracious a God! That such as
Jesus Christ must d^ for my Salvation! We that stood in the stou^ness of our
Spirits, and slighted, and scorned to accept of his personal Obedience 1600.
years since. Now do melt in the remembrance of our hard hearts. And thus is
(...) got likewise in the heart of Man, a Love, to live to the praise of the
Name of Christ for ever; because of a Rebel, he has made him a Son, because he
has made Reconciliation by the Blood of his Cross; from henceforth he would
fear him, and serve him as a Father, that has done so much for him that he
cannot do so much for Christ, never require or make amends.

So then you see, it is not (as the Quakers say;) Obey the Light within, and
submit to the power thereof; that your peace may be made; that ye may get into
the Love and favor of God; that you may be made the Sons of God, by the
Righteousness which the Light has wrought in you; according to that I have
read, that George Fox the younger has writ. These are his words, viz. If ye
would believe and wait in me, or obey me the Light in you, I will purge out all
your iniquities, and forgive all your Trespasses; and I will change your
Natures, and make you New Creatures, if you will hearken to me, and obey me,
the Light in you.

Ye see the Motive of one and of the other Light to Obedience, is different.

Again, another difference is, that the Light of the Spirit of Christ, lays a
Man more humble and low in his own Soul, than the Light the Quakers plead for.
It shows him, that he has nothing to boast or glory in, but all is freely
given him: Nay, if God should deal in Justice with him, that he is a wicked
person, in that he has sin dwelling in his flesh, a corrupt nature; if God
should look upon him as in himself; this might justly befall him, to be
condemned.

So that he cannot vaunt it over his Neighbor, and say, I am Righteous, thou
art Wicked; I am good, thou art evil; I have done Righteousness, thou have done
Wickedness: and thou may be Righteous and hold on, and do good, if thou obey
the Light in thy Conscience, the voice of the Lord, calling unto thee in the
inward parts (which thing the Quakers say by their Light) and I have said it in
heart many a time, before the Lord humbled me to accept of the personal
Righteousness of Christ, for my Justification as I am a poor sinner.

Again, there are things which the Light of the Spirit discerns to be sin,
which the Light in every Man cannot discern to be sin. As First, to seek for
and look for Justification, Reconciliation, Acceptance with God, in, with, or
by the Righteousness in which we live, acted in our persons: It sees not this
to be a Despising the Righteousness of Christ; a corrupting the Gospel,
eclipsing the Glroy of Christ a contradicting God in his Way and appointment
for the Salvation of poor sinners. It sees no evil in this which yet makes
Christ of no Advantage, not submitting to the Righteousness of God. Yet I am
not ignorant my Adversaries will say, They are justified by the Righteousness
of Christ; and they do not despise the Gospel; with many more good words, as
they have writ; which would to God were true.

But I would here Answer a Question or two; and then proceed. If it should be
in the mind of any to ask,

Quest. What shall we do, that we may attain to this Gospel-saving Spiritual
Light?

Answ. I know thou will count that which I am about to Answer, a notorious Lie;
except the Lord lead thee to experience it, yet dare I speak it, viz. That you
must unlearn all that you have learned; and pull down that fair building of
Righteousness: and deny that great progress you have as you think, made toward
Heaven, by your doing that which is Good, and abstaining from evil. (Which yet
is of use in its place:) and to deny all that you think is of Christ in you,
the Light, Life, Peace within you; it must all become as nothing, in the point
of Justification, or to deserve or merit Salvation; (not that they should be
left off in their place.) And notwithstanding all your Righteousness, you must
be sensible that you are miserable sinners; and you must be as a Man that has
not a bit of Bread to eat, nor a rag to cover his nakedness. I have said
before, and say again, I mean not that you should turn to a vain Life and
Conversation,

Quest. But if there be such a Low estate to come before we attain the
Saving-Light, which way shall we come to it, that we may have the other?

Answ. Thou must not think, that if thou art Righteous in thy own sight, that
thou art so in Gods also. Neither if thy Conscience do not Condemn, is it
enough: but apply thy self to the Glass of the Law; for by the Law is the
Knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. Remember that God looks not at the outward
appearance, but upon the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. and see if thou do not break the
Holy Law of God every day by thought, word or deed. If there be not wandering
Thoughts arising in thee; or some evil desires in thee; some envy to thy
Neighbor, or some Covetous desire, at some time or other; Then remember, He
that offends in one point, is guilty of all, James 2.10. And if thou should
commit sin in ignorance, thy ignorance will not excuse thee; but thou stand
guilty before God, Luke 23.34. Neither yet say in thy heart, though I do not
keep it, I shall come up to it in time, and so rest here. When As thou know
not but death may seize on thee the next hour. Again, forget not this, that God
requires a continual keeping of his Law, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. And much more
might be said as to this. Try now thy self by this written Law; and see if thou
do not break it frequently; and by all the power thou have, can not keep it
as thou ought. This is the way for thee to see thy self poor and naked,
miserable and undone without the personal Righteousness of Christ to justify
thee.

Obj. But you say, If the Righteousness by which we are justified be wholly
without, and satisfaction made 1600 years ago, for all sin, the De^^ may play
what Cards he will, there is no need to fear the loss of Salvation through
Miscarriages, page 35. Thus indeed did I think once, as well as you; as you may
see page 16. of my Book.

Answ. And as I said in that my Book, in Answer, so say I here again from my
own experience: Whosoever counts it a Doctrine tending to ^y Unrighteousness,
they never truly knew the want of a Savior. But this Objection is no new
thing. For after Paul had spoke of being made Righteous by the Obedience of
one, Romans 5.19. in Chap. 6. v. 1. (...) brings in this very Objection
presently, What, shall we continue in sin (...) Grace may abound; he meeting
with what was in their Spirits, v. 2. (...) forbid, how shall we that are dead
unto sin, live any longer therein? As if he had said, is it possible? can this
be? Will it not be abhorred? If Christ dyed for the sins of his people, that so
many as believe on him are buried with him, and as he had victory over Death,
so have they by Faith; Will not this Influence their Spirits so, as to live to
the praise of his Glory? What, if they are delivered from the loss of
Salvation, which the Scriptures speak, Isa. 55.3. Acts 13.34. Jer. 31.3^ John
6.37. Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33. Does it therefore follow that they should go on
in wickedness, and not love and fear God? Though their Life and Salvation
consists not in it, or their Reconciliation or acceptance with God. They ought
to fear and love him, but it is as a Father, not as a Condemning Judge: But as
being taken into Everlasting Covenant with him, as having the Inheritance sure
to them; and not for fear of losing it, and being cast out. If they transgress
his will presumptuously, he deals with them as a Father with Children: in love
Ch^stiseth them, which way he pleases, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8. Prove. 3.12. Now a
Son loves his Father because he is his Father. So it is with the people of
God; yet the Relation of a Father and a Son stands ^^re: So does the relation
of God and his people through Faith.

So that when they sin, as we said, he corrects them; because he loves them,
and delights in them. And how great a difference is there, betwixt the
Correction of a Father, and the Sentence of a Judge?

But W. Baily, Thou Objectest, That was a needless Doctrine to bid his
Disciples watch and Pray lest they entered into Temptation: and of Peter, who
bid them, Give all diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, Mat.
26.41.2 Pet. 1.10. as in page 35. of thy Book.

Answ. O no! Though the matter of Justification be sure on God's part, viz. the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Merit of Christ his fulfilling the Law, and
being the end of it; and this he does manifest to his people by degrees working
Faith in them. Our State is sure and certain on Gods part. His foundation is
sure, yet as to us it is brittle, and very uncertain, considered in our selves,
by reason of our Corruption that dwells in our Flesh, and the many Enemies we
have, within and without: carnal reason gets up, and it contendeth in our
Breasts, saying, what Foolishness is this, to trust to the Righteousness of
another? What, must ye not be Righteous in your selves and can ye be Righteous
else? and unbelief gets up, and says, what, will ye believe that the promises
of God are true? That ye are made Righteous by the Obedience of Christ? That he
for you has overcome Sin, Death and the Devil? how can this be; when sin
dwells in your Flesh to this day, and the Law comes with its Threatening, to
bring trouble upon the Spirit? The Devil accusing, and stirring up the Enemies
of the Gospel to lay false Notions, and errors, and stumbling blocks in the
way: and the half of our selves Warring against the other, The Flesh against
the Spirit; and so hinders the view and sight of the Gospel for a time: and our
Faith is very weak and low. As I may say by experience, How many dark and
gloomy hours have I met with in my lifetime? What ups and downs? What
struglings in my Spirit very often? sometimes tossed in my Spirit to the works
of the Law for Justification; Sometimes to the other false and strange foolish
Opinions. Therefore surely it was no needless thing, to bid the Christians
beware of temptations; and to stir them up to make their Calling and Election
sure: seeing they had many Enemies to meet with, and had but little Faith; but
like Children when they first go alone are ready to stumble and fall at a small
thing.

But because it is my desire to help others, if it may please God; I would
proceed, before I leave this, a little further according to the Knowledge God
has given me.

Quest. What Comfort has a Christian in these Conflicts with his Enemies,
which are so many?

Answ. This is one Comfo^^ that God will never leave him nor forsake him: his
loving kindness he will not take away from him, but will preserve him and
defend him to his Heavenly Kingdom.

2. That Jesus Christ does Intercede for his people, as he prayed for Simon,
that his Faith should not fail, Luke 22. 32.

3. That he that has begun that good work, Faith in us, is able to carry (...)
on to the end; and to perfect it to the day of Glory, John 10.28,29.

4. That there is a Promise of Victory over sin and Death, and all (...)
Enemies. So that we may say, they shall not always overcome us, (...) there is
a stronger than they, Romans 6.14. Heb. 12.5, 6.

5. That we fight against vanquished Enemies, such as are overcome in our Head
already, John 16.33.

Surely Paul had a strong Faith in these things, when he Preached the Gospel,
meeting with many difficulties, and dangers from his Enemies; yet his
persuasion we see, did not fail him, but the Lord stood by him and strengthened
him, and he was delivered out of the paw of the ^^on; and he says in
confidence, that the Lord would deliver him from ^^^ry evil work, and preserve
him to his heavenly Kingdom, 2. Tim. 4.18.

Obj. But W. Baily says, Who among the ungodly would turn their ears from this
kind of Doctrine? page 35.

Answ. What if the ungodly make a wicked use thereof? Is it therefore false?
and is it unlawful to Preach it? If a Man walk with a staff ^^ his hand in the
Road, with which he Murdereth a Man; is it therefore unlawful for me to walk
with a Staff by which I am supported, and my Life preserved? If any make that
bad use of it, as to continue in sin, let them remember the Lord's dealing with
Israel in the Wilderness, treated of 1 Cor. 10. and the 12 verse.

But now on the other hand, the self-Righteous, the Just before Men, (...)
proud in their Spirits, and they scorn this Reconciliation by the Obedience of
the Person of Christ, and his Death and Sufferings; and ^^e no need of it, or
them; no Beauty, no Comeliness in Christ. Therefore according to that which
Christ says, he came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to Repentance.

So that I may bring in your Objection here.

Obj. But if all Men are not Lighted with the true Light, then some have no
true Light: Then why should they be Condemned? is this equal? page 41.

Answ. That all Men are Lighted by a Light that is true in its kind, by Jesus
Christ, as he was the Creator of all things, I deny not.

But that all Men have a saving-Light from him as Mediator, I do deny. And if
thou ask, Is this equal?

Answer. Is it not lawful and equal to withold relief from him that scorneth
to receive it, and yet is in want?

2. Is it not equal for a King to withold a Pardon from a Murderer, when he
scorneth to accept of it, yet is at the point of Death? Why then should it not
be equal with God, to withold a saving-Light from such as those I have been
speaking of? that say in their hearts, they have no need of it?

Many more things might be spoke, but I pass them by, and shall not meddle with
them, but leave them to others, whose business it is, more properly to contend
for them, viz. As to the powerful work of God without, and the Righteousness
that justifies being without, and other things which I am satisfied in; yet
deny not the inward workings of the Spirit, neither a Holy Life and
Conversation: but say as before often, that good Works must be maintained,
upheld, and taught, but, in their time and place; and not so as to destroy the
Gospel, and bring Men's Consciences into slavery and Bondage, under the Law.

The next thing is S. Crisp, his expressions concerning me; how he has set me
forth, which I could not but wonder at, when I viewed it, that any pretending
to an infallible, and an unerring Spirit, should write so many false things.

First, page 50. Oh horrible Canaan! Such a Canaan God never led hi^ people
into, nor ever will; Where these tasks are not laid upon them. The is a Canaan
for the Sons of Belial, who are Men without any Yoke. I testify in the Name of
the Lord, that made the Heavens and the Earth, and all that is in them, that
the true Name of this Canaan, is Sodom and Egypt.

What shall I Judge of this! I have not met with the like Expression! That
Canaan, the Kingdom of Christ, given unto his people, being Justified by Faith
without the Deeds of the Law; and from thenceforth acting in Love to him,
living to his Glory; That this should be called a Canaan for the Sons of
Belial! And to be so confident to say, He testifyeth in the Name of Jehovah,
that the true Name of this Canaan is Sodom and Egypt! It made me even tremble
when I considered it; That any Man should testify in the Name of Jehovah, and
speak such Untruths! Why might not this Man say of Paul as well, where he
says, Galat. 5.13. Brethren ye have been called unto Liberty; that he told the
Galatians, that they might Steal, and Lie, and Kill, and Commit Adultery, and
do all manner of Evil? Seeing he was Treating as we are, about the Law and the
Works thereof. And likewise, why did ye not say, that Paul allows it to be
lawful to Kill, Steal, and Commit Adultery, etc. when he says in 1 Cor. 6.12.
All things are Lawful unto me; And so Chap. 10.23?

It may be thou will say, not so, because Paul said to them in the Gal^t. Use
not your Liberty as an Occasion to the Flesh, but by Love serve one another.
And in the Corinthians said, All things are not expedient. And besides Paul
lived a just Life.

In like manner did I say, that I ought to go on in Holiness.

1. For the Glory of God.

2. To manifest my Love to Christ.

3. To convince the World of sin.

4. It is my Duty in God.

Page 19, 20. To be found in doing justly between Man and Man, according to the
Light. And yet he says, This is a Canaan for the Sons of Be^^^ and declares
it to be the Wickedness of my Principles.

Page 50. he says, The Latitude of my Judgment and Faith is, that if I do Lie,
Steal, speak evil words, etc. that I am not a whit the less approved of God for
so doing.

Take notice Reader, he does not say, that it is the Consequence of the
Doctrine I laid down, neither says he, that in all probability, I may grow to
such a Faith; but speaks in the present Tense, that it is thus with me; and
thus I did believe at this very time.

Now I remember, I have read 1 Cor. 2.11. What Man knows the things of a Man,
save the Spirit of a Man that is in him? I know no such thing by my self, that
my Faith and Judgment is such, (Yet this he said of me,) yea notwithstanding
all that I said to the contrary in page 14. and elsewhere, viz. That Faith
ingageth to serve the Lord. So that I know not what to make of it, but such a
slanderous Report as Paul met with, Romans 3.8. when some affirmed that he taught
that Men might do evil, that good might come of it. Therefore as it is a solemn
thing, so I do solemnly declare, that I know no such thing by my self is (...)
would make me Guilty of: But say as before, that I believe that in case a Son
do offend God his Father, by falling into sin, God will Correct, and that
sharply; but his loving kindness will be not take away from him.

But further this Man says of me, page 51. Thou have cast off Christ's Yoke
and Burden, and endeavourest to betray him into the hands of Priests and
Pharisees.

What he means here by this, viz, betraying Christ, casting off his Yoke and
Burden; which I conceive he accounts the denying of the pure Light, (as he
calls it,) in every Man to be the Savior of the World, is.

As to this Yoke and Burden, I confess I have cast it off; and that likewise,
viz. looking for Justification and acceptance with God by the Works commanded
by the Light, and by Obedience to that Light; yet do I walk in Obedience to my
Conscience as my Duty. As to my Conversation, I may say with Paul, Acts 24.19.
Those that have known it ought to have Objected against me, first, if they had
whereof ^^^ly to lay to my Charge, and not a Stranger.

So this is the Reward, or part thereof, for speaking the things I experienced
upon my heart; but I matter not such Reproaches, I look for them; only this I
beg of God, a support under them, and a right Carriage through them. If it be
my Lot and Portion, even so be it. It is a small matter, as Paul says, to be
Judged by others, whethe^^ have been faithful or no, in what I have writ. Yet I
know not (...) may lead as sober a Life as S. Crisp, though I do not expect to
be Justified, or to have my Peace made; or to get into the Love and Favor of
God, by these Good things wrought in me: But believe they are the Fruits of
that justifying Love and Favor of God to us, through Faith in Christ, without
the Deeds of the Law. So that if I be counted a Lier, a Thief, a Blasphemer, a
wicked Person; not fit to be believed in Words, or trusted in Actions; it is I
say, a small matter, it is no more than what was their Lot which went before.
And the Scripture hears Witness to it, viz. That all manner of evil shall be
spoken of the people of God falsely, for Christ's Names sake: The same that
comforted Paul, comfort me; 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. in this Case.

Again, I say it is a small matter to be Judged by W. Baily, or 8. Crisp, or by
a Jury of eleven. I call them a Jury, because a Jury Judges according to their
Evidence, not knowing the Person that Committed the Fact. And such were some of
these. Yet I do not know that I have acted any thing contrary to that which God
has given me in my inward parts.

And therefore, as these things have been falsely declared concerning my Faith
with what else soever; I have only this to say as my desire. The Lord lay it
not to their Charge but forgive them, and embrace then in the Arms of his Pity
and Compassion; Even so be it: Amen, and Amen.

I have one thing or Question more to Answer, if it be upon the hearts of any
one to ask me.

Whether I was of the Quakers Faith and Principle or no?

Which I shall Answer by way of Querie, and leave it to others to Judge. Though
it is possible, my Adversaries may have five words for my one. Yet in this I
have rejoiced, that in an hour when they came to try me, my Faith did not fail
me, which is more to me than thousands of Words. Though good Words are good in
the place.

^^^ther he be of the Quakers Way, Faith and Principle, who Believes the Light
in every Man, which reproves for sin, is Jesus Christ the Savior of (...)
World?

Then was I of their Way, and Principle, according to that I mention^^ page 3.
of my Book. But do now say, it is a rotten corrupt and ^^^ound thing or
Principle, as to the leading or guiding into the know^^ of the Gospel, or the
way of Salvation that God has appointed Jesus Christ.

(...) it will be asked, How can I prove it?

Answer, By my own Experience. I found it so, as to my self. Of which, I could
speak more; but omit it at present. And prove it to (...) unsound thing; (I
mean the Light within every Man) to reveal (...) Gospel: Because it has led
these Men to say, in page 29. which I (...) before, viz. That W. Haworth says,
It was the Godhead by which (...) Barbarous people saw the Vengeance, when they
apprehended Paul to be ^e a Murderer.

He says, I have contradicted my Companion.

3. Page 5. Crisp says, The Latitude of my Canaan, is to have none of these
Burdens laid upon me, which burdens, he before reckoned up; is not to Lie,
Steal, etc. Which Burdens he says, I have cast off; And cautions Men how they
believe me, and trust me, etc. Notwithstanding I had said, in page 19. It was
the Duty of every Man to walk in the Commandments of God.

4. The same Crisp says, It is my Judgment, to believe, that if I do Lie,
Steal, etc. or any such wicked thing; I am not a whit the less approved of God.
Though I had declared my Judgment in my Book to the Contrary. Now I would ask
any one to give a Just reason, why this pure, an infallible, an unerring Light,
may not as well lead aside into ways of Damnation, as to prompt them into the
misunderstanding of our words; and the Declaration of our Faith? I farther
Querie.

Querie, Whether this pure infallible unerring Light, (as they call it,) may
not suffer a Man to rest in a Righteousness short of the Righteousness which is
sufficient to complete and perfect Man every way, and to Justify before God,
and to bring to everlasting Peace; as it has suffered these to fall into the
breach of that Commandment, viz. Thou shall not Bear false Witness; As they
have done, in the four last Instances. Which things are utterly false.

Obj. But if any yet Object against all I have said here; and say in their
hearts; which I question not but many do say, That they can and do ^^ll
themselves upon the Lord (i. e.) The Light within: and their hearts do not
conde^^ them. They have boldness toward God; and that if they ^y in this
Condition they shall be blessed.

Answ. Let these but well consider, Galat. 3.10. Cursed is every (...) that
continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them. Now I
Reason thus with you; Either ye continue in all that the Law requires, or no:
If you say yea; then are you absolutely perfect, without the least sin, or
spot, or presence of sin; If ye do not continue, and be not thus, and yet have
peace, and your hearts condemn ye not; (as you say:) It must be from one of
these two things, which are both false, viz. Either because God accounts that
to be sin to one which he does not account to be sin to another; Or that God
will not Condemn a Man for sin committed in Ignorance. As if a Man Commit
Adultery in his heart unawares, if his Conscience smite him not for it, but he
dies without trouble in his Conscience for it; that such an one goes to
blessedness, whereas Christ desired forgiveness of his Father for them who knew
not what they did.

Obj. If any will say, that our words are darkly spoken, and so that they could
not be otherwise understood.

Answ. They were not so dark, but many have understood them aright, which
pretended not Immediate Revelation, nor Infallibility, as ye do: Is it not
strange then, that Men that pretend not to obey the Light as their Rule, should
understand them aright; and God, (as ye call the Light) should not instruct ye
aright in these things? Seeing all things are naked and bare before him, and
there is nothing too hard for him to know. The sum is this then, viz. That
which erreth in the less will surely err in the greater; Or that which
instructs amiss in those of smaller, will instruct amiss in those things that
are of a higher Concernment; and therefore it is unsound. But, as I have said,
this pure Light in every Man has instructed these men amiss, as to the
understanding of our words, and demonstration of my Faith and Judgment;
therefore it does certainly mislead, as to the right understanding of the
Gospel, and the Principles pertaining thereunto; and therefore it is corrupt.
And as we said before, that which will suffer a Man to rest in the breach of
any one Commandment, will suffer him to rest in the breach of any other of
them; and consequently, suffer him to rest in the Righteousness which will not
Justify before God: But the Common Light in every Man, has suffered these Men
to do the First, therefore the second likewise, to take up in a Righteousness
wherein they live; and which was wrought in them by the Light which they call
the Spirit. But to return to my business in hand.

Quer. 2. Whether he be of the Quakers Faith and Principle, who Believes that
the power which accompanies the Light and restrains Man from ^^^ng some
evil, is the power of God unto Salvation, if it be obeyed? If so, (...) was I
one.

Quer. 3. Whether he be of the Quakers Faith and Principle, that ex^^eth to be
Justified, accepted with God: and to have reconciliation made, in with, or
through that Righteousness in which he lives; acted in ^^ person: wrought by
Christ; (as they say; i. e.) The Light and Power within? Then was I of their
Faith.

Quer. 4. Whether he be of the Quakers Faith and Principle, that yield^th
submits, hearkneth to, or obeys that Light and power in him for that very
end, viz. to be Justified, to be brought into the Love and Fa^^ur of God, to
have his Peace made by those Works wrought in him? Then, (...) I a Quaker?

Quer. 5. Whether is he of the Quakers Faith and Principle, That believes,
that the Washing, Cleansing, the Purifying, by with or through the Blood of
Jesus Christ, is only that Life, and Light, and Power that is within Man, when
he gets any strength by attendance hereunto, over any (...) and iniquity, and
is led into any thing that is good. In which sense, I (...) prayed that I might
be washed in the Blood of Christ, and cleansed from all my sins. Yea many a
time when I was in my distressed Condition. If so, then was I a Quaker.

Quer. 6. Whether he be of the Quakers Way, Faith, Spirit and Principle, that
believes that no Man of himself is able and sufficient to keep the Law of God;
it being weak through the Flesh, to bring to Eternal Life therefore Christ the
Light, Life, and Power within, does work in him to change him from darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, to fulfill the Law in us; (i. e.) in
our Persons, to make an end of sin, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness,
viz. the Righteousness wrought in us. So reconciling man to God, breaking down
the middle Wall of Partition; destroying the Works of the Devil, Sin and
Wickedness, all within, no where else, and in no wise else. Of this kind was my
Faith for some time.

Quer. 7. Whether he be of the Quakers Spirit Way, Faith, and Principle, that
through Christ, (i.e.) the Light, Life and Power within Man, thinks he should
be carried up, freed from sin, and live in holiness before Christ, as the
person of Jesus Christ was 1600 years since, for an example to us, being
obedient to the Call of the Lord, as they say, in my inward parts. So I
believed formerly.

Quer. 8. Whether he be of the Quakers Faith and Principle, who Believes, yea
the Frame of his Spirit is, to say, when he sees Man go on in wickedness, Thou
may be Righteous if thou will; if thou will but obey the voice of the Lord
in you: (i. e.) The Light which calls to you in your inward parts, he will
deliver you from sin; for he delights not in the death of a Sinner.

These I once held, with several others, which I pass by for brevity sake; as
concerning the Taking an Oath, the Sabbath, the Law of Moses, etc.

Now, if he be of the Quakers Faith, which thus believes, then was I. For the
declaring whereof, I have suffered Reproach, and that none of the least,
because of a similitude used by me; insomuuh, that I am declared to be a Liar,
a Thief, a Wronger of my Neighbor, and several more, as may be seen; When they
say, I have cast off Christ's Yoke and Burden: and the Latitude of my Canaan,
is to have none of these things laid upon me. He must of necessity mean that I
am become a Thief, and a Liar, etc. Otherwise there would be no need to give
notice unto Men, how they believed me in my words, or trusted me in my actions,
etc. But my Reproaches are not at an end; but I do look for more day by day,
Knowing it is my Lot and Portion; and so would resign up my self to undergo
them. What they may be, the Lord knows.

William Dimsdel.
From Ware in Hartfordshire, June the 20th. 1674.
An Index of some Scriptures, opened in this Treatise.
Chapter Ver. Page Psalms. 45. 13. 40,41. 45. 1. 51. 46. 10. 78. 4. 4. 79. Isaiah.
64. 4. 49. 26. 8. 76. 41. 1. 77. 40. 3. 79. 2. 4. 92. 66. 5. 127. Daniel. 9.
24. 26. Micah. 5. 2. 27. 4. 2. 92. Zachariah. 2. 13. 78. Matthew. 7. 13, 14.
43. 5. 3, 4, 5. 47. 25. 14. 114, 115. Luke. 17. 21. 119. John. 16. 8. 14. 1. 9.
84. 6. 62, 63. 120. 12. 35. 122. 6. 53. 123. 16. 14, 15. 150, 151, 153. 1. 9.
146. Romans. 1. 16. 6, 7. 7. 14. 14. 8. 6. 39. 5. 15. 46. 8. 4. 98. 2
Corinthians. 4. 6. 118. Ephestans. 5. 13. 88. 5. 8, 9. 88. Philippians. 13. 9.
99. 2. 12. 128. Titus. 2. 11. 84. Hebrews. 9. 23. 20, 21. 12. 24. 25, 26. 12.
21. 128. 1 Peter. 1. 19. 125. 2 Peter. 1. 3, 5. 39. 1. 5, 8. 41. 1. 19. 121. 1
John. 4. 2, 3, 4. 103. 1. 2. 123. Jude. 15. 14. Revelation. 8. 1. 78. 9. 2, 3,
4, 7, 10. 107.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
These in the Epistle. Page 2. l. 23. r. Laundy. p. 7. l. 12. r. to be done. p.
6. l. 12. r. and that thou have lost.

In the Book, Page 2. l. 16. r. thy Spirit. p. 3. l. 30. r. their Wine is the
Poison. p. 5. l. 34. r. if not your Rule. p. 6. r. does explain this, viz. the
Preaching, etc. p. 8. l. 18. r. then you are not come. p. 13. r. Divinity, what
then is the Doctrine of Comfort. p. 15. l. penult. r. several Names given them,
as Father Son and Spirit have several names given them, yet one in nature, etc.
p. 19. l. 10. r. glosing words. p. 20. l. ult. r. it is plainly spoke in
opposition. p. 21. l. 1. r. thou must understand by these heavenly thing
themselves, either Christ. p. 25. l. 14. r. at that very time when they
confessed sin, were sprinkled. p. 26. l. 8. r. and so we know that the Blood
speaks. p. 27. l. 28. r. believing. p. 28. l. 23. r. that it should rest. ^1.
28. l. 33. r. that which we should have borne. p. 30. l. 28. r. something more.
p. 31. par. 4. l. 4. r. the second Adams nature. p. 39. r. (...) p. 43. par. 3.
l. 11. r. omitted by Luke. p. 50. par. 3. l. 14. r. so far from helping in. p.
53. r. restrained to that things onw Nature. p. 58. par. 1. l. 7. r. Angels in
Glory that have. p. 59. par. ult. l. 8. r you hold that motions. p. 60. par. 1
*r. selfrighteous, till be came to know this by understanding the Spirituality
of the Law. p. 61. par. 4. l. 2. r. clear Knowledge. p. 61. par. 4. l. 10. *
dele. her. p. 61. par. 4. * for and in the Room its exalted. r. in his room,
the Light within is exalted. p. 62. l. 8. r. their flesh. p. 63. par. 2. l. 15.
r. no cursing. p. 64. l. 6. r. shattered cracked. p. 64. l. 33. r. that is not
Christ's. p. 66. par. 2. l. 7. r. thou have renounced. p. 69. r. every Man has,
believed in. p. 70. * for and accepted, r. Merit. p. 71. * for Institustion,
r. Justification. p. 74. par. 3. r. Mahumetane custom. p. 78. par. 2. r.
bewrays. p. 83. par. 5 l. 1. r. Divine Revelation in vain. p. 83. par. 9. r.
Angels could not have known. p. 85. par. 1. r. so rendered in the Translation.
p. 87. par. 2. r. no other Name. p. 89. l. 15. r. judge by our lives. p. 101. l.
16. r. gifts. p. 102. penult. (and say) add to Bailies immediate following
words. p. 118. par. 7. r. something within. p. 115. r. this work was done. p.
154. par. 3. r. a low estate to come to before.


