THE English-mans RIGHT.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A BARRISTER at LAW, AND A JURY-MAN: Plainly setting forth,
I. The Antiquity of JURIES, II. The excellent designed use of JURIES, III. The
Office and just Privileges of JURIES,


By the Law of England.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head Alley in Paternoster-Row.
1680.

The English man's RIGHT, etc.
Barrister. MY old Client! a good morning to you, whither so fast? The
Introduction.
you seem intent upon some important affair?


Juryman. Worthy Sir! I am glad to see you thus opportunely, there being scarce
any person that I could at this time rather have wished to meet with.


Bar. I shall esteem my self happy, if in any thing I can serve you. -- The
business I pray?


Jurym. I am summoned to appear upon a Jury, and was just going to try if I
could get off. Now I doubt not but you can put me into the best way to obtain
that favor.


Bar. It Is probable I could. But first let me know the reason why you desire
to decline that service.


Jurym. You know, Sir, The Reasons why fit men endeavor sometimes to avoid
serving on Juries.
there is something of trouble and loss of time in it; and men's Lives,
Liberties, and Estates (which depend upon a Jury's Guilty, or Not guilty, for
the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant) are weighty things. I would not wrong my
Conscience for a world, nor be accessory to any man's ruin. There are others
better skilled in such matters. I have ever so loved peace, that I have forborne
going to Law, (as you well know many times) though it has been much to my loss.


Bar. I commend your tenderness and modesty; Not sufficient.
yet must tell you, these are but general and weak excuses. As for your time
and trouble, it is not much; and however, can it be better spent than in doing
justice, and serving your Country? To withdraw your self in such cases, is a
kind of Sacriledg, a robbing of the public of those duties which you justly
owe it; the more peaceable man you have been, the more fit you are. For the
office of a Jury-man is, conscientiously to judge his neighbor; and needs no
more Law than is easily learnt to direct him therein. I look upon you therefore
as a man well-qualified with estate, discretion, and integrity; and if all such
as you, should use private means to avoid it, how would the King and Country be
honestly served? At that rate we should have none but Fools or Knaves entrusted
in this grand concern, on which (as you well observe) the Lives, Liberties, and
Estates of all Englishmen depend.

Your Tenderness not to be accessory to any man's being wronged or ruined, is
(as I said) much to be commended. But may you not incur it unawares, by seeking
thus to avoid it? Pilate was not innocent because he washed his hands, and said,
He would have nothing to do with the blood of that just one. There are faults
of Omission as well as Commission. When you are legally called to try such a
cause, if you shall shuffle out your self, and thereby persons perhaps less
conscientious happen to be made use of, and so a Villain escapes justice, or an
innocent man is ruined by a prepossest or negligent Verdict; can you think your
self in such a case wholly blameless? Qui non prohibet cum potest, jubet: He
abets evil, that prevents it not when he may. Nec caret scrupulo societatis
occultae qui evidenter facinori desinit obviare: He deserves not to be free
from the suspicion of a close society or underhand con piracy in the mischief
of subverting the fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Nation, who ceases to
obviate and oppose it.


Jurym. Truly I think a man is bound to do all the good he can, especially when
he is lawfully called to it. But there sometimes happen nice cases, wherein it
may be difficult to discharge ones conscience without incurring the displeasure
of the Court, and thence trouble and damage may arise.


Bar. That is but a vain and needless fear. For as the Jurors privileges (and
every English-mans in and by them) are very considerable; So the Laws have no
less providently guarded them against Invasion or Usurpation. So that there
needs no more than first understanding to know your duty, and in the next place
courage and resolution to practice it with impartiality and intergrity, free
from accursed bribery and malice, or (what is full out as bad in the end) base
and servile fear.


Jurym. I am satisfied, that as it is for the advantage and honor of the
public, that men of understanding, substance, and honesty should be employed
to serve on Juries, that justice and right may fairly be administered; So it is
their own interest when called thereunto, readily to bestow their attendance
and service, to prevent ill presidents from men otherwise qualified; which may
by degrees fatally, though insensibly, undermine our just Birthrights, and
perhaps fall heavy one day upon us, or our posterity. But for my own part, I am
fearful lest I should suffer through my ignorance of the duty and office of a
Juryman, and therefore on that account principally it is, that I desire to be
excused in my appearance, which if I understood but so well as I hope may
others do, I would with all my heart attend the service.


Bar. You speak honestly, and like an Englishman. But if that be all your
cause of scruple, it may soon be removed, if you will but give your self a very
little trouble of inquiry into the necessary provisions of the Law of Engla^^
relating to this matter.


J. There is nothing (of a temporal concern) that I would more gladly be
informed in, because I am satisfied, The Antiquity of Trials Juries.
it is very expedient to be generally known. And first I would learn how long
trials by Juries have been used in this Nation?


B. Even time out of mind; so long, that our best Historians cannot date the
Original of the Institution, being indeed cotemporary with the Nation it self,
or in use as soon as the people were reduced to any form of Civil Government,
and administration of Justice. Not have the several Conquests or Revolutions,
the mixtures of Foreigners, or the mutual feuds of the Natives, at any time
been able to suppress or overthrow it. For, 1. That Juries (the thing in effect
and substance, Amongst the Britains.
though purhaps not just the number of Twelve men) were in use amongst the
Britains the first Inhabitants of this Island, appears by the Ancient Monuments
and Writings of that Nation, attesting that their Free holders had always a
share in all Trials and determinations of differences. 2. Most certain it is,
that they were practiced by the Saxons, and were then the only Courts, Amongst
the Saxons. Lamb. p. 218. Cook. 1. par. Institutes. fol. 155.
or at least an essential, and the greater part of all Court of Judicature: For
so (to omit a multitude of other Instances) we find in King Ethelreds Laws, In
singulis Centuriis, etc. In every Hundred let there be a Court, and let Twelve
ancient Freemen, together with the Lord, or rather according to the Saxon, the
Greve, i. e. the chief Officer amongst them, be sworn, That they will not
condemn any person that is Innocent, nor acquit any one that is guilty. 3. When
the Normans came in, William, though commonly called the Conqueror, Continued
by the Normans. See Spelmans Glossar. in the word Jurata.
was so far from abrogating this Privilege of Juries, That in the 4th year of
his Reign, he confirmed all King Edward the Confessors Laws, and the ancient
Customs of the Kingdom (whereof this was an essential and most material part).
Nay, he made use of a Jury chosen in every County, to report and certify on
their Oaths what those Laws and Customs were; as appears in the Proem of such
his Confirmation. 4. Confirmed by Magna Charta.
Afterward when the Great Charter, commonly called Magna Charta, (which is
nothing else than a recital, confirmation and corroboration of our Ancient
English Liberties) was made and put under the Great Seal of England in the 9th
year of King Henry the 3d (which was Anno Domini 1225.) Then was this Privilege
of Trials by Juries in an especial manner confirmed and established, as in the
14th Chapter, That no Amercements shall be assessed, but by the Oath of good
and honest men of the Vicinage. And more fully in that Gold* on Nine and
twentieth Chapter -- No Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, nor be disseized
of his Freehold or Liberties, or free customs, or be out-lawed, or exiled, or
any other way destroyed, nor shall we pass upon him, or condemn him, but by the
lawful judgment of his Peers, etc. Which Grand Charter having been confirmed by
above thirty Acts of Parliament, the said right of Juties thereby, and by
constant usage, and common custom of England, which is the common, Law, is
brought down to us as our-undoubted Birthright, and the best inheritance of
every English man. For as that famous Lawyer Chief Justice Cook in the words of
Cicero, excellently avers, 2. Institutes, fol. 56.
Major Hereditas venit unicuique nostrum a jure and legibus quam a parentibus:
It Is a greater inheritance, and more to be valued, which we derive from the
fundamental constitution and Laws of our Country, than that which comes to us
from our respective Parents. For without the former, we have no claim to the
latter.



J. But has this method of Trial never been attempted to be invaded or justled
out of practice?


B. It Is but rarely that any have arrived to so great a confidence: Essays made
to overthrow Trials by Juries, always unsuccessful, and severely punished.
For it is a most dangerous thing to shake or alter any of the rules or
fundamental points of the common Law, which in truth are the main pillars and
supporters of the fabric of the Commonwealth. These are Judge Cooks words 2.
Institutes, page 74.
Yet sometimes it has been endeavored. But so sacred and valuable was the
Institution in the eyes of our Ancestors, and so tenacious were they of their
Privileges, and zealous to maintain and preserve such a vital part of their
Birthright and Freedom, that no such attempts could ever prove effectual, but
always ended with the shame and severe punishment of the rash undertakers. For
example, 1. Andrew Horn an eminent Lawyer, in his Book Entitled, The Mirror
of Justices, (written in the Reign of K. Edw. 1. now near 400 years ago) in the
fifth Chapter, and first Section, records, That the renowned Saxon King Alfred
caused four and forty Justices to be hanged in one year as murderers, for
their false Judgments. And there recites their particular Crimes, most of them
being in one kind or other Infringements, Violations and Encroachments of and
upon the Rights and Privileges of Juries; amongst the rest, that worthy Author
tells us, he hanged one Justice Cadwine, because he judged one Hackwy to death
without the consent of all the Jurors; for whereas he stood upon his Jury of
twelve men, because three of them would have saved him, this Cadwine removed
those three, and put others in their room, on the Jury, against the said Hackwy
's consent. Where we may observe, that though at last twelve men did give a
Verdict against him, yet those so put upon him, were not accounted his Jurors;
by reason all, or any of them, who were first sworn to try him, could not (by
Law) be removed, and others put in their stead. And that such illegal
alteration was then adjudged a Capital Crime, and forthwith the said Cadwine
was Hanged. 2. A second instance I shall give you in the words of the Lord
Chief Justice Cook. Against this ancient and fundamental Law (and in the face
thereof) there was in the 11. year of King Henry 7. Cook 2. part of Institutes,
fol. 51.
cap. 3. an Act of Parliament obtained (on fair pretenses, and a specious
preamble, as to avoid divers-mischiefs, etc) whereby it was Ordained, That from
thenceforth, as well Justices Assize, as Justices of the Peace, upon a bare
Information for the King before them made, without any finding or presentment
by the Verdict of Twelve men, should have full power and authority by their
discretions, to hear and determine all offenses and contemts committed or done
by any person or persons against the Form, Ordinance, or effect of any statute
made and not repealed, etc. By color of which Act (says Cook) shaking this
Fundamental Law ( he means, touching all Trials to be by Juries) it is not
credible what HORRIBLE OPPRESSIONS and EXACTIONS, to the undoing of MULTITUDES
of people, were committed by Sir Richard Enipson Knight, and Edmund Dudley Esquire
(being Justices of the Peace) throughout England; and upon this unjust and
injurious Act (as commonly in like cases it falls out) a new Office was
erected, and they made Masters of the Kings Forfeitures.


But not only this Statute was justly soon after the decease of Hen. 7.
repealed by the Statute of the 1 Hen. 8. cap. 6. but also the said Empson and
Dudley (notwithstanding they had such an Act to back them, yet it being against
Magna Charta, and consequently void) were fairly executed for their pains; and
several of their under agents, See Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. p. 273.
as Promoters, Informers, and the like, severely punished, for a warning to all
others that shall dare (on any pretense whatsoever) infringe our English
Liberties. For so the Lord 4 part Instit. fol. 41.
Cook having (elsewhere) with detestation mentioned their story, pathetically
concludes, Qui eorum vestigiis insistant, exitus perhorrescant: Let all those
who shall presume to tread their steps, tremble at their dreadful end. Other
Instances of a latter date might be given, but I suppose these may suffice.


J. Yes surely; The benefits of being tried by Juries.
and by what you have discoursed of the long continued use of Juries, and the
zealous regards our Ancestors had, not to part with them; I perceive that they
were esteemed a special privilege. Be pleased therefore to acquaint me wherein
the excellency and advantages to the people by that method of trial above
others, may consist?


B. This question show, See all this excellently made out, and more at large by
the L. C. J. Fortescue, afterward Chancellor to K Hen. 6. in his Book, De
laudibus Legum Angliae. cap. 26, 27, 28, and 29.
you have not been much conversant abroad, to observe the miserable condition
of the poor people in most other Nations, where they are either wholly subject
to the despotick arbitrary lusts of their Rulers; or at best under such Laws as
render their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, liable to be disposed of at the
discretion of strangers appointed their Judges, most times mercinary, and
Creatures of Prerogative; sometimes malicious and oppressive, and often partial
and corrupt. Or suppose them never so just and upright, yet still has the
Subject no security against the attacks of unconscionable Witnesses; yea, when
there is no sufficient Evidence, upon bare suspicions they are obnoxious to the
Tortures of the Rack, which often make an innocent man confess himself guilty,
merely to get out of present pain Is it not then an inestimable happiness to be
born and live under such a mild and righteous Constitution wherein all these
mischiefs (as far as humane prudence can provide) are prevented; where none can
be condemned, either by the power of superior enemies, or the rashness or ill
will of any Judge, nor by the bold Affirmations of any profligate evidence; But
no less than Twelve, honest, substantial, impartial men, his neighbors (who
consequently cannot be presumed to be unacquainted either with the matters
charged, the Prisoner's course of life, or the credit of the Evidence) must
first be fully satisfied in their Consciences, that he is guilty, and so all
unanimously pronounce him upon their Oaths. Are not these, think you very
material privileges?


J. Yes certainly, though I never so well considered them before. But now I
plainly see our forefathers had, and we still have all the reason in the world
to be zealous for the maintenance and preservation thereof from subversion or
encroachments, and to transmit them entire to posterity. For if once this bank
be broken down or neglected, an ocean of oppression, and the ruins of infinite
numbers of people, (as in Empson and Dudley's days) may easily follow, when on
any pretense they may be made Criminals, and then fined in vast sums, with
pretext to enrich the Kings Coffers, but indeed to feed those insatiate
Vultures that promote such unreasonable Prosecutions. The Office and power of
Juries.
But since you have taught me so much of the antiquity and excellency of
Juries, I cannot but crave the continuance of your favor to acquaint me
somewhat more particularly of their office and power by Law.


B. See Cook, 4th. part of Instit. fol. 84.
I shall gladly comply with so reasonable and just a request. A Jury of twelve
men are by our Laws the only proper Judges of the matter in issue before them,
As for instance, 1. That Testimony which is delivered to induce a Jury to
believe, or not to believe the matter of Fact in issue, is called in Law
EVIDENCE, because thereby the Jury may out of many matters of Fact, Evidere
verilatem, that is, see clearly the truth, of which they are proper Judges. 2.
When any matter is sworn, Deed read, or offered whether it shall be believed or
not, or whether it be true or false in point of Fact, the Jurors are proper
Judges. 3. Whether such an act was done in such or such a manner, or to such or
such an intent, the Jurors are Judges. For the Court is not Judge of these
matters, which are evidence to prove or disprove the thing in issue. And
therefore the Witnesses are always ordered to direct their speech to the Jury,
they being the proper Judges of their Testimony. And in all Pleas of the Crown
(or matters Criminal) the Prisoner is said, to put himself for trial upon his
Country, which is explained and referred by the Clerk of the Court, to be meant
of the Jury, saying to them, Which Country you are.



J. Well then, what is the part of the Kings Justices, The office of the Court
in Trials.
or the Court? what are they to take cognizance of, or do, in the Trials of
men's Lives, Liberties, and Properties?


B. Their office in general is to do equal justice and right: particularly, 1.
To see that the Jury be regularly returned and duly sworn. 2. To see that the
Prisoner (in cases where it is permittable) be allowed his lawful challenges. 3.
To advise by Law, whether such matter may be given in evidence or not, such a
writing read or not, or such a man admitted to be a witness, etc. 4. Because by
their learning and experience they are presumed to be best qualified to ask
pertinent questions, and in the most perspicuous manner soonest to sift out
truth from amongst tedious impertinent Circumstances and Tautologies; they
therefore commonly examine the Witnesses in the Court, yet not excluding the
Jury, who of right may, and where they see cause, ought to ask them any
necessary questions, which undoubtedly they may lawfully do with modesty and
discretion, without begging any leave. For if asking leave be necessary, it
implies in the Court a right when they list to deny it; and how then shall the
Jury know the truth? And since we see that Council, who too often ( -- Pudet
haec opprobria nobis) for their fees strive only to baffle Witnesses, and
stifle Truth, take upon them daily to interrogate the evidence, it is absurd to
think that the Jurors should not have the same privilege, who are upon their
Oaths, and proper Judges of the matter. 5. As a discreet and lawful Assistant
to the Jury, Vanghan's Reports in Bushell's Case. fol. 144.
they do often recapitulate and sum up the heads of the Evidence; but the
Jurors are still to consider whether it be done truly, fully and impartially,
(for one man's memory may sooner fail than Twelve's.) He may likewise state the
Law to them, that is, deliver his opinion where the case is difficult, or they
desire it. But since Ex facto jus oritur, all matter of Law arises out of
matter of Fact, so that till the Fact is settled there is no room for Law,
therefore all such discourses of a Judge to a Jury are or ought to be
Hypothetical, not coercive; conditional, and not positive; viz. If you find the
fact thus or thus, (still leaving the Jury at liberty to find as they see
cause) then you are to find for the Plaintiff. But if you find the Fact thus or
thus, then you are to find for the Defendant, or the like, Guilty, or not
guilty, in cases Criminal. Lastly, They are to take the Verdict of the Jury,
and thereupon to give judgment according to Law, For the office of a Judge (as
Cook well observes) is jus dicene, not jus dare; not to make any Laws by
strains of wit, or forced Interpretations; but plainly and impartially to
declare the Law already established. Nor can they refuse to accept the Juries
Verdict when agreed: For if they should, and force the Jury to return, and any
of them should miscarry for want of accommodation, it would undoubtedly be
murder; and in such case the Jury may without crime force their liberty,
because they are illegally confined, having given in their Verdict, and thereby
honestly discharged their office, and are not to be starved for any man's
pleasure.



J. How Jurors are Judges of Law as well as Fact.
But I have been told, That a Jury is only Judge of naked matter of fact, and
are not all to take upon them to meddle with, or regard matter of Law, but
leave it wholly to the Court.


B. It Is most true, Jurors are Judges of matters of Fact, that is their proper
Province, their chief business; but yet not excluding the consideration of
matter of Law, as it arises out of, or is complicated with, and influences the
Fact. For to say, they are not at all to meddle with, or have respect to Law in
giving their Verdicts, is not only a false position, and contradicted by every
days experience; but also a very dangerous and pernicious one, tending to
defeat the principal end of the Institution of Juries, and so subtly to
undermine that which was too strong to be battered down.

1. It it false: for though the direction as to matter of Law separately may
belong to the Judge, and the finding the matter of Fact does peculiarly belong
to the Jury, yet must your Jury also apply matter of Fact and Law together; and
from their consideration of, and a right judgment upon both, bring forth their
Verdict: For do we not see in most General issues, as upon not guilty, pleaded
in trespass, breach of the peace, or Felony, though it be matter in Law whether
the party be a trespasser, a breaker of the Peace, or a Felon; yet the Jury do
not find the Fact of the case by it self, leaving the Law to the Court; but
find the party guitly, or not guilty, generally. So as though they answer not
to the question singly, what is Law; yet they determine the Law in all matters
where Issue is joined. So likewise is it not every days practice, that when
persons are Indicted for murder, the Jury does not only find them guilty or
not guilty, but many times upon hearing and weighing of circumstances, brings
them in, either guilty of Murder, Manslaughter, per Infortunitus, or
se-defendendo, as they see cause. Now do they not herein complicately resolve
both Law and Fact? And to what end is it that when any person is prosecuted
upon any Statute, the Statute it self is usually read to the Jurors, but only
that they may judge, Whether or no the matter be within that Statute? But to put
the business out of doubt, we have the suffrage of that Oracle of Law
Littleton, who in his Tenures, Sect. 368. declares, That if a Jury will take
upon them the knowledge of the law upon the matter, they may. Which is agreed
to, likewise by Cook in his Comment thereupon. And therefore it is false to say,
That the Jury has not power, or does not use frequently to apply the Fact to
the Law; and thence taking their measures, judge of, and determine the crime or
issue by their Verdict.

2. As Juries have ever been vested with such power by Law, so to exclude them
from, or disseize them of the same, were utterly to defeat the end of their
institution. For then if a person should be Indicted for doing any common
innocent act, if it be but clothed and disguised in the Indictment with the
name of Treason, or some other high crime, and proved by Witnesses to have been
done by him; the Jury though satisfied in Conscience, that the Fact is not any
such offense as it is called, yet because (according to this fond opinion) they
have no power to judge of law, and the fact charged is fully proved, they should
at this rate be bound to find him guilty. And being so found, the Judge may
pronounce sentence against him, for he finds him a convicted Traitor, etc. by
his Peers. And thus as a certain Physician boasted, That he had killed one of
his Patients with the best method in the world; So here should we have an
innocent man hanged, drawn, and quartered, and all according to law.


J. God forbid that any such thing should be practiced; and indeed I do not
very fully understand you.


B. I do not say it ever has been, and I hope it never will be practiced: But
this I will say, that according to this Doctrine, it may be; and consequently
Juries may thereby be rendered rather a snare or engine of oppression, than any
advantage or Guardian of our Legal Liberties against Arbitrary Injustice, and
made mere properties to do the drudgery, and bear the blame of unreasonable
Prosecutions. And since you seem so dull as not to perceive it, let us put as
Imaginary case, not in the least to abet any irreverence toward his Majesty,
but only to explain the thing, and show the absurdness of this opinion. --
Suppose then a man should be Indicted, For that he as a false Traitor not
having the fear of God before his eyes, etc. did traitorously, presumptuously
against his Allegiance, and with an intent to affront his Majesty's Person and
Government, pass by such or such a Royal Statue or Effigies with his hat on his
head, to the great contempt of His Majesty and his Authority, the evil example
of others, against the Peace, and his Majesty's Crown and Dignity. Being
hereupon arraigned, and having pleaded Not guilty, suppose that sufficient
evidence should swear the matter of Fact laid in the Indictment, viz. That he
did pass by the Statue or Picture with his hat on; now imagine your self one of
the Jury that were sworn to try him, What would you do in the matter?


J. Do? Why I should be satisfied in my Conscience. That the man had not herein
committed any crime, and so I would bring him in not Guilty.


B. You speak as any honest man would do: But I hope you have not forgot the
point we were upon; suppose therefore when you thought to do thus, the Court,
or one of your Brethren, should take you up and tell you, That it was out of
your power so to do; For look ye (says he) my Masters! An ordinary Jury-man's
wise Speech.
we Jurymen are only to find matter of Fact, which being fully proved as in
this case before us it is, we must find the party Guilty; whether the thing be
Treason or not, does not belong to us to inquire; it is said so here, you see in
the Indictment; and let the Court look to that, they know best, we are not
Judges of Law: Shall we meddle with niceties and punctilio's, and go contrary
to the directions of the Court (...) perhaps we shall bring our selves into a
praemunire (as they say) and perhaps never be suffered to be Jury men again.
No, no, The matter of Fact you see is proved, and that is our business, we must
go according to our Evidence, we cannot do less; truly it is something hard, and
I pity the poor man, but we cannot help it, etc. After these notable documents,
what would you do now?


J. I should not tell what to say to it; for I have heard several Anoi^nt
Jurymen speak to the very same effect, and thought they talk's very wisely.


B. Well then, would you consent to bring in the man Guilty?


J. Truly I should be somewhat unwilling to do it; but I do not see which way
it can be avoided, but that he must be found guilty of the Fact.


B. God keep every honest body from such Jurymen; have you no more regard to
your Oath? to your Conscience? to Justice? to the Life of a man?


J. Hold! hold! perhaps we would not bring him in Guilty generally, but only
Guilty of the Fact, Finding no more but Guilty of passing by the Statue with
his Hat on.


B. This but poorly mends the matter, and signifies little or nothing; For such
a finding has generally been refused by the Court, as being no Verdict, though
it is said it was lately allowed somewhere in a Case that required favor. But
suppose it were accepted, what do you intend shall become of the Prisoner? must
not he be kept in Prison till all the Judges are at leisure and willing to meet
and argue the business? Ought you not, and what Reason can you give why you
should not absolutely acquit and discharge him? Nay, I do aver, you are bound
by your Oaths to do it, by saying with your mouths to the Court, what your
Consciences cannot but dictate to your selves, Not Guilty: For pray consider,
Are you not sworn, That you will well and truly Try, and true deliverance make?
There Is none of this Story of matter of Fact, distinguished from Law in your
Oath. But you are, Well, that is, Fully and Truly, that is, Impartially, to try
the Prisoner, So that if upon the Consciences, and the best of the
Understanding by what is proved against him, you find he is guilty of that
Crime wherewith he stands charged, that is, deserving Death, or such other
Punishment as the Law inflicts upon an Offense so denominated; then you are to
say, he is Guilty. But if you are not satisfied, that either the Act he has
committed was Treason, or other Crime, (though it be never so often called so)
or that the Act it self, if it were so criminal, was not done, then what
remains but that you are to acquit him? For the end of Juries it to preserve
Men from oppression, which may happen as well by imposing or ruining them for
that as a Crime, which indeed is none, or at least not such or so great as is
pretended, as by charging them with the Commission of that which in truth was
not committed. And how do you well and truly Try, and true Deliverance make,
when indeed you do but deliver him up to others to be Condemned, for that which
your selves do not believe to be any Crime?


Jurym. Well; but the supposed Case is a Case unsupposable. It is not to be
imagined, that any such thing should happen, nor to be thought, that the Judges
will condemn any Man, though brought in Guilty by the Jury, if the Matter in it
self be not so Criminal by Law.


Bar. It Is most true, I do not believe that ever that Case will happen. I put
it in a thing of apparent Absurdity, that you might the more clearly observe
the unreasonableness of this Doctrine; but withal I must tell you, That it is
not impossible that some other Cases may really happen, of the same or the like
nature, though more fine and plausible. And though we apprehend not, that
during the Reign of His Majesty that now is, (whose Life God long preserve) any
Judges will be made that would so wrest the Law; Yet what Security is there,
but that some Successors may not be so cautious in their Choice? And though our
Benches of Judicature be at present furnished with Gentlemen of great
Integrity, yet there may one day happen some Tresilian, or Kinsman of Empsons,
to get in, (for what has been, may be) who Empson-like too, shall pretend it to
be for his Masters Service, to increase the number of Criminals, that his
Coffers may be filled with Fines and Forseitures. And then such mischiefs may
arise. And Juries having upon confidence parted with their just Privileges,
shall then, too late, strive to reassume them, when the number of Ill
presidents shall be vouched to enforce that as of Right, which in truth was at
first a Wrong grounded on Easiness and Ignorance. Had our wise and wary
Ancestors thought fit to depend so far upon the Contingent Honesty of Judges,
they needed not to have been so zealous to continue the usage of Juries.


Jurym. Yet still I have heard, that in every Indictment, or Information, there
is always something of Form or Law, and something else of Fact; and it seems
reasonable, that the Jury should not be bound up nicely to find every Formality
therein expressed, or else to acquit (perhaps) a notorious Criminal. But if
they find the Essential Matter of the Crime, then they ought to find him Guilty.


Bar. You say true, and therefore must note, that there is a wide difference
to be made between Words of Course, How far aggravating words, or those of
course in Indictments or Informations, are to be regarded.
raised by Implication of Law, and Essential Words, that either make, or really
aggravate the Crime charged. The Law does suppose and imply every Trespass,
Breach of the Peace, every Felony, Murder, or Treason to be done Ui and Armis,
with Force and Arms, etc. Now if a Person be Indicted for Murder by Poison, and
the Matter proved, God forbid the Jury should scruple the finding him Guilty
upon the Indictment, merely because they do not find that part of it, as to
Force and Arms, proved. For that is employed as a necessary or allowable Fiction
of Law.

But on the other side, when the Matter in Issue in it self, and taken as a
naked Proposition, is of such a Nature, as no Action, Indictment, or
Information will lie for it singly, but it is worked up by special Aggravations
into Matter of Damage or Crime; as that it was done to scandalize the
Government; to raise Sedition, to affront Authority, or the like, or with such
or such an evil intent. If these Aggravations, or some overs Act to manifest
such ill Design or Intention be not made out by Evidence, then ought the Jury
to find the Party Not Guilty; for example.

Bishop Latimer, (afterward a Martyr in bloody Queen Mary's days, for the
Protestant Religion) in a Sermon preached before the most excellent King Edward
the sixth delivered these words. I must desire your Grace to hear Poor Men's
Suits your self; the Saying is now, See Latimers Sermons fo. 41. the second
Sermon before King Edward the sixth.
That Money is heard every where; if he be Rich, he shall soon have an end of
his Matter, others are fain to go home with weeping Tears for any help they can
obtain at any Judges Hand. Hear Men's Suits your self, I require you in Gods
behalf, and put them not to the Hearing of these Velvet-Coats, these Up^skips.
Amongst all others, one especially moved at this time to speak; This it is,
Sir! A Gentlewoman came and told me, that a Great Man keeps certain Lands of
hers from her, and will be her Tenant in spite of her Teeth. And that in a
whole Twelvemonth she could not get but one day for the Hearing of her Matter,
and the same day, when it should be heard, the Great Man brought on his side a
great sight of Lawyers for his Counsel, the Gentlewoman had but one Man of Law,
and the Great Man shakes him so, that he cannot tell what to do; so that when
the Matter came to the Point, the Judge was a means to the Gentlewoman, that
she should let the Great Man have a quietness in her Land: I beseech your
Grace, that ye yould look to these Matters. And you proud Judges! Hearken what
God says in his Holy Book; Audite illos ita parvum ut, magnum, Hear them
(says he) the Small as well as the Great, the Poor as well as the Rich, regard
no Person, fear no man. And why? Quia Domini Judicium est, The Judgment is
Gods. Mark this Saying, thou Proud Judge, The Devil will bring this Sentence
against thee at the Day of Doom. Hell will be full of these Judges, if they
repent not, and amend, they are worse than the wicked Judge that Christ
speaks of Luke the 19th, that neither feared God nor the World. Our Judges
are worse than this Judge was; for they will neither hear Men for God's sake,
nor fear of the World, nor Importunateness, nor any thing else Prison
; yea some of them will command them to ward if they be importunate. I heard
say, That when a Suitor came to one of them, he said, What fellow is it that
gives these folks counsel to be so importunate? he deserves to be Punished and
Committed to ward. Marry sir! punish me then, It is even I that gave them
Counsel, I would gladly be punished in such a Cause, and if you amend not, I
will cause them to cry out upon you still, even as long as I live. -- These are
the very words of that good Bishop and Martyr Father Latimer.


Jurym. Truly they are somewhat Bold, but I think very Honest ones. But what
signify they to our discourse?


Bar. Only this, suppose the Judges of those times, thinking themselves
agrieved by such his Freedom, should have brought an Indictment against him,
setting forth, that falsely and maliciously intending to scandalize the
Government and the Administration of Justice in this Realm, and to bring the
same into Contempt, he did speak, publish and declare the false and scandalous
words before recited.


Jurym. I conceive the Judges had more Wit than to trouble themselves about
such a Business.


Bar. That Is nothing to the purpose, but suppose I say by them or any body
else, it had been done, and his speaking the words had been proved, and you had
then been Living and one of the Jury.


Jurym. I would have pronounced him not Guilty, and been starved to Death
before I would have consented to a contrary Verdict, Because the words in
themselves are not Criminal, nor reflecting upon any particulars, and as for
what is supposed to be laid in the Indictment or Information, that they were
published or spoken to scandalize the Government and the Administration of
Justice, or to bring the same into Contempt, nothing of that appears.


Bar. You resolve as every Honest, Understanding, Conscientious man would do
in the like Case, for when a man is Prosecuted for that which in it self is no
Crime, how dreadfully soever it may be set out, as the Inquisitors in Spain use
to Cloth Innocent Protestants, whom they Censure to the flames, with
Sambenito's (Garments all over bepainted with Devils) that the people beholding
them in so Hellish a dress, may be so far from pitying them, that they may
rather Condemn them in their thoughts as Miscreants not worthy to Live, though
in truth they know nothing of their Cause, yet I say notwithstanding any such
Bugg-bear Artifice, an Innocent man ought to be Acquitted, and not he and all
his Family ruined and perhaps utterly undone, for words or matters harmless in
themselves, and possibly very well intended, but only rendered Criminal by being
thus hideously dressed up, and wrested with some far-fetched, forced and odious
Construction.


Jurym. This is a matter well worthy the Consideration of all Juries, for
indeed I have often wondered to observe the Adverbs in Declarations, Indictments
and Informations in some Cases to be harmless Vinegar and Pepper, and in others
Henbane steeped in Aqua fortis.


Bar. That may easily happen, where the Jury does not distinguish Legal
Implications, from such as Constitute, or materially Aggravate the Crime, for
if the Jury shall honestly refuse to find the latter in Cases where there is
not direct proof of them, viz. That such an Act was done Falsely, Scandalously,
Maliciously, with an intent to raise Sedition, defame the Government, or the
like, their mouths are not to be stopped, nor their Consciences satisfied with
the Courts telling them -- you have nothing to do with that, its only matter of
Form or matter of Law, you are only to examine the Fact, whether he spoke such
words, writ or sold such a Book or the like; For, now if they should ignorantly
take this for an Answer and bring in the Prisoner Guilty, though they mean and
intend of the naked Fact or bare Act only, yet the Clerk Recording it, demands
a further Confirmation, saying to them, thus, well then you say A. B. is Guilty
of the Trespass or Misdemeanour in manner and form a he stands Indicted and so
you say all, to which the Foreman Answers for himself and his fellows Yes.
Whereupon the Verdict is drawn up -- Juratores super Sacramentum suum dicunt,
etc. The Jurors do say upon their Oaths, that A. B. maliciously, in Contempt of
the King and the Government, with an intent to scandalize the Administration of
Justice, and to bring the same into Contempt, or to raise Sedition etc. (As the
words before were laid) spoke such Words, published such a Book, or did such an
Act, against the Peace, of our Lord the King his Crown and Dignity.

Thus a Verdict, so called in Law, quasi veritatis, because it ought to be the
Voice or Saying of Truth it self, Dictum.
may become composed in its material part of Falsehood. Thus Twelve men
ignorantly drop into a Perjury. And will not every conscientious man tremble to
pawn his Soul under the sacred and dreadful solemnity of an Oath, to attest and
justisie a Lie upon Record to all Posterity; besides the wrong done to the
Prisoner, who thereby perhaps comes to be hanged (and so the Jury in soro
conscientioe are certainly guilty of his Murder) or at lesst by Fine or
Imprisonment) undone with all his Family, whose just Curses will fall heavy on
such unjust Jurymen and all their Posterity, that against their Oaths and Duty
occasioned their causeless misery, And is all this think you nothing but a
matter of Formality?


Jurym. Yes really, a matter of Vast Importance and sad Consideration; yet I
think you charge the mischiefs done by such Proceedings a little too heavy upon
the Jurors; Alas good men! They mean no harm, they do but follow the directions
of the Court, if any body ever happen to be to blame in such Cases it must be
the Judges.


Bar. Yes, forsooth! That Is the Jury-mens common-plea, but do you think it
will hold good in the Court of Heaven? It Is not enough that we mean no harm,
but we must do none neither, especially in things of that moment, nor will
Ignorance excuse, where it is affected, and where duty obliges us to Inform our
selves better, and where the matter is so plain and easy to be understood.

As for the Judges they have a fairer plea than you, and may quickly return the
Burther back upon the Jurors, for we, may they say, did nothing but our duty
according to usual Practice, the Jury his Peers had found the Fellow Guilty
upon their Oaths of such an Odious Crime, and attended with such vile,
presumptions, and dangerous Circumstances. They are Judges, we took him as they
presented him to us, and according to our duty pronounced the Sentence, that
the Law inflicts in such Cases, or set a Fine, or ordered Corporal punishment
upon him, which was very moderate, Considering the Crime laid in the Indictment
or Information, and of which they had so sworn him Guilty; if he were innocent
or not so bad as Represented, let his Destruction lie upon the Jury etc. At
this rate if ever we should have an unconscionable Judge, might he Argue; And
thus the Guilt of the Blood or ruin of an Innocent man when it is too late shall
be Bandyed to and fro, and shufled off from the Jury to the Judge, and from the
Judge to the Jury, but really sticks fast to both, but especially on the
Jurors; because the very end of their Institution was to prevent all dangers of
such oppression, and in every such Case, they do not only wrong their own
Souls, and irreparably Injure a particular Person, but also basely betray the
Liberties of their Country in General, for as without their ill-complyance and
Act no such mischief can happen; so by it, ill precedents are made, and the
Plague is increased, honester Juries are disheartened or seduced by Custom from
their Duties, just Privileges are lost by disuser, and perhaps within a while
some of themselves may have an hole picked in their Coats, and then they are
Tried by another Jury just as wise and honest, and so deservedly come to smart
under the Ruinating Effects, and Example of their own Folly and Injustice.


Jurym You talk of Folly, and blame Jurymen, when indeed they cannot help it,
they would sometimes find such a Person Guilty, and such an one Innocent, and
are persuaded they ought so to do, but the Court overrules, and forces them,
to do otherwise.


Bar. How I pray?


Jurym. How? Why, did you never hear a Jury threatened to be Fined and
Imprisoned, if they did not comply with the Sentiments of the Court?


Bar. I have Read of such doings, but I never heard, or saw it done, and
indeed I do not doubt but our Seats of Justice are furnished with both better
men, and better Lawyers, than to use any such Menaces of Duress, for
undoubtedly it is a base and very Illegal Practice. But however will any man
that fears God, nay that is but an honest Heathen debauch his Conscience, and
forswear himself, do his Neighbor Injustice, betray his Countries Liberties,
and consequently enslave himself, and his Posterity, and all this merely
because he is Hectored and threatened a little?


Jurym. I know it should not sway with any, but alas, a Prison is terrible to
most men, whatever the Cause be; And the Fine may besuch, if one shall refuse
to comply; as may utterly ruin ones Family.


Bar. Fright not your self, Jurors cannot be Fined or Imprisoned in any case
for giving their Verdict according to their Consciences, though contrary to the
direction or sense of the Court.
there is no cause for this Aguesit, to shake your Conscience out of Frame; if
you are Threatened it is but Brutum Fulmen, Lightning without a Thunderbolt,
nothing but big words, for it is well known That there is never a judge in
England that can Fine or Imprison any Jury-man in such a Case


Jurym. Good Sir! I am half ashamed to hear a Barrister talk thus; have not
some in our memory been Fined and Imprisoned? And sure that which has actually
been done is not altogether Impossible.


Bar. Your Servant Sir! Under favor of your mighty Wisdom and Experience,
when I said no Judge could do it, I spoke the more like a Barrister for it is a
Maxim in Law -- Id possumus quod Jure possumus. A man is said to be Able to do
only so much, as he may Lawfully do. But such Fining or Imprisoning cannot
Lawfully be done; the Judges have no Right or Power by Law to do it, and
therefore it may well be said, they cannot, or are not able to do it.

And whereas you say, that some Juries in our Memory have been Fined and
imprisoned, you may possibly say true, But it is as true that it has been only
in our Memory, for no such thing was practiced in Ancient times, for so I find
it asserted by a late Learned Judge (d) in these possitive words; Lord Chief
Justice Vaughan in his Reports fol. 146.
No case can be offered, either before Attaints granted in General or after,
that ever a Jury was punished by Fine and Imprisonment by any Judge, for not
finding according to their evidence and his direction, until Pophams time, nor
is there clear proof, that he ever Fined them for that Reason, separated from
other Misdemeanors. And Fol. 152 he Affirms -- That no man can show, that a
Jury was ever punished upon an Information either at Law or in the Star Chamber,
where the Charge was only for finding against their Evidence, or giving an
untrue Verdict, unless, Imbracery, Subornation, or the like were joined. So
that you see, the Attempt is an Innovation as well as unjust, a thing unknown
to our Forefathers and the Ancient Sages of the Law; and therefore so much the
more to be watched against, resisted and suppressed, whilst young, lest in time
this crafty Cockatrices Egg hatched and fosterd by Ignorance, and pusillanimous
Compliance, grow up up into a Serpent too big to be mastered, ^and so Blast and
destroy the Firstborn of our English Freedoms. And indeed (Blessed be God) it
has hitherto been rigorously opposed as often as it durst Crawl abroad, being
Condemned in Parliament and knocked o'th head by the Resolutions of the Judges
upon solemn Argument. As by and by I shall demonstrate.


Jurym. Well but are Jurors not liable then to Fine or Imprisonment in any
Case whatsoever.


Bar. Now you run from the Point; Juries Office partly Ministerial, partly
Judicial. Vaughan Repfo. 152.
we were talking of giving their Verdict, and you speak of any Case whatsoever,
Whereas you should herein observe a necessary distinction, which I shall give
you in the words of that Learned Judge last Cited (e) Much of the Office of
Jurors in order to their Verdict is Ministerial; as not withdrawing from their
Fellows after they are Sworn, not receiving from either side Evidence not given
in Court; Not eating and drinking before their Verdict; Refusing to give a
Verdict, etc. Wherein if they Transgress they may be finable. But the Verdict
in self, when given, is not an Act Ministerial, but Judicial and (supposed to
be) according to the best of their Judgment, for which they are not Finable,
nor to be punished but by Attaint; that is, by another Jury, in Cases where an
Attaint lies, and where it shall be found that Wilsully they gave a Verdict
false and Corrupt.

Now that Iuries otherwise, are in no Case punishable, nor can (for giving
their Verdict according to their Consciences and the best of their Judgment) be
Legally Fined or Imprisoned by any Judge on Color of not going according to
their Evidence, or finding contrary to the directions of the Court, is a truth
both founded on unanswerable Reasons and Confirmed by Irrefragable Authorities.


Jurym. Those I would gladly hear.


Bar. They are many, but some of the most evident are these that follow.

As for Reasons. 1. A Jury ought not to be Fined or Imprisoned, because they do
not follow the Judges directions, for if they do follow his directions, they
may yet be Attainted, and to say they gave their Verdict according to his
directions is no Bar, but the Judgment shall be reversed and they punished for
doing that, which if they had not done, they should (by this Opinion) have been
Fined and Imprisoned by the Judge, for not doing it. -- Which is Unreasonable.
2. If they do not follow his direction, and be therefore Fined, yet they may be
Attainted, and so they should be doubly, punished by distinct Iudicatures for
the same Offense, which the Common Law never admits. 3. To what end is the Jury
to be returned out of the Vicinage (that is, the neighborhood) whence the
issue arises? To what end must Hundredors be of the Jury, whom the Law
supposes to have near knowledge of the Fact than those of the Vicinage in
general? To what end are they challenged so scrupulously to the Array and Pole?
to what end must they have such a certain Freehold, and be Probi and legales
homines, and not of Affinity with the Parties concerned? etc. If after all this
they implicitly must give a Verdict by the Dictates and Authority of another
Man, under pain of Fines and Imprisonment, when sworn to do it according to the
best of their own knowledge; a Man cannot see by another Eye, nor hear by
another Ear, no more can a Man conclude or infer the thing to be resolved by
another understanding or reasoning, unless all Men's understandings were
equally alike; and if merely in compliance because the Judge says thus or thus,
a Jury shall give a Verdict, though such their Verdict should happen to be
right, true, and just, yet they being not assured it is so from their own
understanding, are for sworn, at least in Foro Conscientiae. 4. Were Jurors so
finable, then every Major and Bailiff of Corporations, all Stewards of Leets,
Justices of Peace, etc. whatever Matters are tried before them, shall have
Verdicts to their minds, or else Fine and Imprison the Jurors till they have;
so that such must be either pleased, humored, or gratified, else no Justice or
Right to be had in any Court. 5. Whereas a Person by Law may Challenge the
Sheriff or any Jury-man, if of Kin to his Adversary, yet he cannot challenge a
Major, Recorder, Justice, etc. who it is possible will have a Verdict for their
Kinsman, or against their Enemy, or else Fine and Imprison the Jury till they
have obtained it; so that by this means our Lives, Liberties, and Properties
shall be solely tried by, and remain at the Arbitrary dispose of every
mercenary or corrupted Justice, Major, Bailiff, or Recorder if any such should
at any time get into Office. 6. It Is unreasonable that a Jury should be Finable
on pretense of their going against their Evidence. because it can never be
Tried whether or no in truth they did find with or against their Evidence, by
reason no Writ of Error lies in the Case. 7. Were Jurymen liable to such
Arbitrary Fines, they should be in a worse condition than the Criminals that
are tried by them; for in all Civil Actions, Informations, and Indictments,
some Appeals, or Writs of false Judgment, or of Error, do lie into Superior
Counts to try the regular Proceedings of the Inferior. But here can be no
After-Tryal or Examination, but the Jury-man (if Fining at all were lawful)
must either pay the Fine, or lie by it, without remedy, to decide whether in
his particular Case he were legally Fined or not. 8. Without a Fact agreed, it
is as impossible for a Judge or any other to know the Law, relating to that
Fact, or direct concerning it, as to know an Accident that has no Subject; for
as where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, so where there is no
Transgression, there is no place for Law; for the Law (says Divine Authority)
is made for the Transgressor. And as Cook tells us, Ex facto Jus oritur, upon
slating the Fact or Transgression matter of Law does arise, or grow out of the
Root of the Fact. Now the Jury being the sole Judges of Fact, and Matter in
Issue before them, not finding the Fact on which the Law should arise, cannot
be said to find against Law, which is no other than a Superstructure on Fact,
so that to say they have found against the Law, when no Fact is found, is
absurd; an expression insignificant and unintelligible; for no Issue can be
joined of matter in Law, no Jury can be Charged with the Trial of matter in Law
barely, no Evidence even was, or can be given to a Jury of what is Law, or not.
Nor can any such Oath be given to, or taken by a Jury to try matter in Law, nor
does an Attaint for such Oath if false, etc. But if by finding against the
Direction of the Court in matter of Law, shall be understood, that if the Judge
having heard the Evidence given in Court, (for he can regularly know no other,
though the Jury may) shall tell the Jury upon this Evidence, the Law is for the
Plaintiff, or the Defendant, and the Jury are under pain of Fine and
Imprisonment to Find accordingly, then it is plain the Jury ought of Duty so to
do. Now if this were true who sees not that the Jury is but a trouble some
Doldy, of great Charge, much Formality, and no real use in determining right
and wrong, but mere Ecchos to sound back the pleasure of the Court; and
consequently that Trials by them might be better abolished than continued?
which is at once to spit Folly in the Faces of our Venerable Ancestors, and
enslave our Posterity. 9. As the Judge can never direct what the Law is in any
Matter Controverted, without first knowing the Fact, so he cannot possibly know
the Fact but from the Evidence which the Jury have; but he can never fully know
what Evidence they have, for besides what is sworn in Court, (which is all that
the Judge can know) the Jury being of the Neighborhood, may, and oft-times do
know something of their own knowledge, as to the Matter it self, the Credit of
the Evidence, etc. which may justly sway them in delivering their Verdict, and
which self knowledge of theirs is so far countenanced by Law, that it supposes
them capable thereby to try the Matter in Issue, (and so they must) though no
Evidence were given on either side in Court. As when any Man is Indicted, and
no Evidence comes against him, the Direction of the Court always is, You are to
acquit him, unless of your own knowledge you know him Guilty; so that even in
that Case they may find him Guilty without any Witnesses. Now, how absurd is it
to think, that any Judge has power to Fine a Jury for going against their
Evidence, when he that so Fineth knows perhaps nothing of their Evidence at
all, (as in the last Case) or at least but some part of it? For how is it
possible he should lawfully punish them for that which it is impossible for him
to know. Lastly, Is any thing more common, than for two Lawyers or Judges to
deduce contrary and opposite Conclusions out of the same Case in Law? And why
then may not two Men infer distinct Conclusions from the same Testimony? And
consequently may not the Judge and Jury honestly differ in their Opinion or
Result from the Evidence, as well as two Judges may, which often happens; and
shall the Jurymen merely for this difference of Apprehension merit Fine and
Imprisonment, because they do that which they cannot otherwise do, preserving
their Oath and Integrity? especially when by Law they are presumed to know
better and much more of the Business, than the Judge does as aforesaid.


Are not all these gross contradicting Absurdities? and unworthy (by any Man
that deserves a Gown) to be put upon the Law of England, which has ever owned
Right Reason for its Parent, and dutifully submitted to be guided thereby?


Jurym. If the Law, as you say, be Reason, then undoubtedly this Practice of
Fining of Juries is most Illegal, since there cannot be any thing more
unreasonable; But what Authorities have you against it?


Bar. You have heard it proved to be a Modern up-start encroachment, so you
cannot expect any direct or express Condemnation of it in Ancient Times,
because the thing was not then set on Foot. And by the way, though Negative
Arguments are not necessarily conclusive, yet that we meet with no Precedents
of old of Iuries Fined, for giving their Verdict contrary to Evidence, or the
Sense of the Court, is a violent presumption, that it ought not to be done; for
it cannot be supposed, that this latter Age did first of all discover, that
Verdicts were many times not according to the Judges Opinion and Liking.
Undoubtedly they saw that as well as we; but knowing the same not to be any
Crime, or punishable by Law, were so Modest and Honest as not to meddle with
it. However, what entertainment it has met with when attempted in our Times, I
shall show you in two remarkable Cases.

1. When the late Lord Chief Justice Keeling had attempted something of that
kind, it was complained of, and highly resented by the then Parliament; as
appears by this Copy of their Proceedings thereupon taken out of their Journal,
as follows.

Die Mercurii. 11. Decembris 1667.

The House resumed the Hearing of the rest of the Report touching the matter of
Restraint upon Juries, and that upon the Examination of diverse Witnesses in
several Cases of Restraints put upon Iuries by the Lord Chief Justice Keeling,
and thereupon Resolved as follows.

First, That the Proceedings of the said Lord Chief Justice in the Cases now
Reported are Innovations in the Trial of Men for their Lives and Liberties. And
that he has used an Arbitrary and Illegal Power, which is of dangerous
Consequence to the Lives and Liberties of the People of England, and tends to
the introducing of an Arbitrary Government.

Secondly, That in the Place of Judicature the Lord Chief Justice has
undervalued, vilified, and contemned Magna Charta, the great Preserver of our
Lives, Freedom, and Property.

Thirdly, That he be brought to Trial in order to condign Punishment, in such
manner as the House shall judge most fit and requisite.

Die Veneris 13. Decembris 1667.

Resolved, etc.

That the Precedents and Practice of Fining or Imprisoning of Jurors for giving
their Verdicts, is Illegal.

Here you see it Branded in Parliament: Next you shall see it formally
condemned on a solemn Argument by the Judges. The Case thus.

At the Sessions for London Sept. 1670. William Pen, The Sum of the Case of
Bishel, and the rest of Mr. Pen and Mr. Meads Jury.
and William Mead (two of the People commonly called Quakers) were Indicted,
for that they with others, to the number of 300, on the 14th. Aug. 22. Regis,
in Gray-Church-street, did with Force and Arms, etc. unlawfully and
tumultuously assemble and congregate themselves together to the disturbance of
the Peace; and that the said William Pen did there Preach and speak to the said
Mead and other Persons in the open Street; by reason whereof a great Concourse
and Tumult of People in the Street aforesaid then and there a long time did
remain and continue, in contempt of our said Lord the King, and of His Law, to
the great disturbance of his Peace, to the great Terror and disturbance of many
of His Liege People and Subjects, to the ill example of all others in the like
Case Offenders, and against the Peace of our said Lord the King, His Crown and
Dignity.

The Prisoners Pleading Not Guilty, it was proved, that there was a Metting at
the time in the Indictment mentioned, in Gray-Church-street, consisting of
three or four hundred People, in the open Street, that William Pen was Speaking
or Preaching to them, Note, the Quakers have a Meeting House in that Street,
out of which they were then kept by Soldiers, and therefore they met as near to
it as they could in the open Street.
but what he said the Witnesses, (who were Officers and Soldiers sent to
disperse them) could not hear. -- This was the effect of the Evidence; which
Sir John Howel, the then Recorder, (as I find in the Print of that Trial P. 14)
was pleased to sum up to the Jury, in these words.

You have heard what the Indictment is, it is for Preaching to the People in the
Street, and drawing a Tumultuous Company after them, and Mr. Pen was speaking;
if they should not be disturbed, you see they will go on, there are three or
four Witnesses that have proved this, that he did Preach there, that Mr. Mead
did allow of it. After this you have heard by substantial Witnesses what is
said against them; Now we are upon the Matter of Fact, which you are to keep
to, and observe, as what has been fully sworn, at your pern. This Trial begun
on the Saturday; the Jury retiring, after some considerable time spent in
debate, came in, and gave this Verdict, -- Guilty of Speaking in
Gray-Church-Street. At which the Court was offended, and told them, they had as
good say nothing; Adding, -- Was it not an unlawful Assembly? you mean he was
speaking to a Tumult of People there. But the Foreman saying, what he had
delivered was all he had in Commission, and others of them affirming, That they
allowed of no such word as an unlawful Assembly in their Verdict, They were
sent back again, and then brought in a Verdict in writing, subscribed with all
their Hands, in these words.

We the Jurors hereafter named do find William Pen to be Guilty of Speaking or
Preaching to an Assembly met together in Gray-Church-street the 14th of Aug.
1670. And William Mead not Guilty of the said Indictment. Note, though this
Jury for their excellent example of courage and constancy deserve the
commendation of every good Englishman, yet if they had been better advised,
they might have brought the Prisoners in Not Guilty ut first, saved themselves
the trouble and inconveniences of these two Nights Restraint.
This the Court resented still worse, and therefore sent them back again, and
Adjourned till Sunday morning, but then too they insisted on the same Verdict,
so the Court Adjourned till Monday morning, and then the Jury brought in the
Prisoners generally Not Guilty, which was Recorded, and allowed of. But
immediately the Court fined them Forty Mark a Man, and to lie in Prison till
paid.

Being thus in Custody, Edw. Bushel, one of the said Jurors, on the 9th of Nov.
following brought his Habeas Corpus in the Court of Common Pleas. On which the
Sheriffs of London made Retorn, That he was detained by virtue of an Order of
Sessions, whereby a Fine of forty Marks was set upon him and eleven others
particularly named, and every of them being Jurors sworn to try the Issues
joined between the King, and Pen, and Mead, for certain Trespasses, Contempts,
unlawful Assemblies and Tumults, and who then and there did acquit the said Pen
and Mead of the same, against the Law of this Kingdom, and against full and
manifest Evidence, and against the direction of the Court in matter of Law of
and upon the Premises openly in Court to them given and declared; and that it
was ordered they should be imprisoned till they severally paid the said Fine,
which the said Bushel not having done, See Bushels Case in Vaughans Reports at
large.
the same was the cause of his Caption and Detention.

The Court coming to debate the validity of this Retorn, adjudged them same
insufficient; for 1. The Words, -- Against full and manifest Evidence, was too
general a Cause; the Evidence should have been fully and particularly recited,
else how shall the Court know it was so full and evident; they have now only
the Judgment, of the Sessions for it, that it was so; but, said the Judges, Our
Judgments ought to be Grounded upon our own Inferences and Understandings, and
not upon theirs. 2. It is not said, that they acquitted the Persons Indicted
against full and manifest Evidence, corruptly, and knowing the said Evidence to
be full and manifest, for otherwise it can be no Crime; for that may seem full
and manifest to the Court, which does not appear so to the Jury. 3. The other
part of the Return, viz. That the Jury had acquitted those Indicted, against
the direction of the Court in matter of Law, was also adjudged to be naught,
and unreasonable, and the Fining of the Juries for giving their Verdict in any
Case concluded to be illegal, for the several Reasons before recited, and other
Authorities of Law urged to that purpose; and all the Precedents and
Allegations brought to justify the Fine and Commitment solidly answered;
whereupon the Chief Justice delivered the Opinion of the Court, That the Cause
of Commitment was insufficient; and accordingly the said Bushel, and other his
Fellow Prisoners, were discharged, and left to the Common Law for Remedy and
Reparation of the Damages by that tortious illegal Imprisonment sustained.


Which Case is (amongst others) Reported by that Learned Judge Sir John
Vaughan, at that time Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, setting forth all
the Arguments, Reasons, and Authorities on which the Court proceeded therein;
from which I have extracted most of the Reasons which before I recited for this
Point, and for the greatest part in the very words of that Reverend Author.


Jurym. This Resolution has, one would think (as you said) knocked this
Illegal Practice on the Head, beyond any possibility of Revival, but may it not
one day be denied to be Law, and the contrary justified?


Bar No such thing can be done without apparent violating and subverting all
Law, Justice, and Modesty; for though the Precedent it self be valuable, and
without further inquiry is wont to be allowed, when given thus deliberately
upon solemn debate by the whole Court; yet it is not only that, but the sound
substantial and everlasting Reasons, whereon they grounded such their Resolves,
that will at all time Justify Fining of Iuries in such Cases to be Illegal;
besides, as the Reporter was most considerable, both in his Quality as Lord
Chief Justice, and for his Parts, soundness of Judgment, and deep Learning in
the Law; so such his Book of Reports is approved and recommended to the World,
(as appears by the Page next after the Epistle) by the Right Honorable the
present Lord Chancellor of England, Sir William Scroggs, now Lord Chief Justice
of England, my Lord North, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; and in a word, by
all the Judges of England at the time of Publishing thereof; so that it cannot
be imagined how any Book can challenge greater Authority, unless we should
expect it to be particularly confirmed by Act of Parliament.


Jurym. You have answered all my Scruples, and since I see the Law has made so
good Provision for Jury-mens privileges and safety, God forbid any Jury-man
should be of so base a temper, as to betray that (otherwise) impregnable
Fortress wherein the Law has placed him, to preserve and defend the just
Rights and Liberties of his Country, by treacherously surrendering the same
into the hands of Violence or Oppression, though maskt under never so fair
Stratagems and Pretenses; for my own part, I shall not now decline to appear
according to my Summons, and therefore (though I fear I have detained you too
long already) shall desire a little more of your direction about the Office of
a Jury-man, in particular that I may uprightly and honestly discharge the same.


Barrist. Though I think from what we have discoursed being digested and
improved by your own Reason, you may susficiently Inform your felf, yet to
gratify your request, I shall add a few brief Remarques, as well of what you
ought cautiously to avoid, as what you must diligently pursue and regard if you
would justly and truly do your duty.

First, as to what you must avoid.

1. I am very Confident, that you would not willingly violate the Oath which
you take, but it is possible that there are such who as frequently break them,
as take them, through their careless custom on the one hand, or slavish fear
on the other, against which I would fully caution you; that you may defend your
self and others, against any Enemies of your Countries Liberties and happiness,
and keep a good Conscience toward God and toward man.

2, It Is frequent, that when Juries are withdrawn that they may consult of
their Verdict, they soon forget that Solemn Oath they took, and that mighty
Charge of the Life and Liberty of men, and their Estates, whereof then they are
made Judges, and on their Breath not only the Fortunes of the particular Party,
but perhaps the preservation or Ruin of several Numerous Families does Solely
depend, now I say without due Consideration of all this, nay sometimes wihout
one serious thought, or Consulted Reason offered Pro, or Con, presently the
Foreman or one or two that call themselves Ancient Jurymen (though in truth
they never knew what belongs to the place more than a common Schoolboy) rashly
deliver their Opinions, and all the rest in respect to their supposed Gravity
and Experience, or because they have the biggest Estates, or to avoid the
trouble of disputing the Point, or to prevent the spoiling of Dinner by delay,
or some such weighty Reason, forthwith agree blind fold, or else go to holding
up of hands or telling of Noses, and so the Major Vote carries away Captive
both the Reason and the Consciences of the rest. Thus trisling with Sacred
Oaths, and putting men's Lives, Liberties and Properties (as it were) to the hap
hazard of Cross or Pile; This Practice or something of the like kind, is said
to be too Customary amongst some Jurors, which occasions such their
extraordinary dispatch of the weightiest or most Intricate matters, but there
will come a time when they shall be called to a severe Account for their Have
and Negligence, therefore have a care of such Fellow-Jurors.

3. Such a Slavish Fear attends many Jurors, that let the Court but direct to
find Guilty, or not Guilty, though they themselves see no just Reason for it,
yea oft-times though their own Opinions are contrary, and their Consciences
tell them it ought to go otherwise; yet, right or wrong accordingly they will
bring in their Verdict; and therefore many of them never regard seriously the
course and force of the Evidence, what and how it was delivered more or less to
prove the Indictment, etc. But as the Court Sums it up, they find; as if Juries
were appointed for no other purpose but to Echo back, what the Bench would
have done; such a base temper is to be avoided, as you would escape being
Forsworn, even though your Verdict should be right; for since you do not know
it so to be by your own Judgment or Understanding, you have abused your Oath
and hazarded your own Soul as well as your Neighbors Life Liberty of Property,
because you blindly depend on the opinion or perhaps passion of others, when
you were Sworn well and truly to try them your selves. Such an implicit Faith
is near of Kin to that of Rome in Religion, and (at least in the next degree)
as dangerous.

4. There are some that make a Trade of being Jurymen that seek for the
Office, use means to be constantly continued in it, will not give a disobliging
Verdict lest they should be discharged and serve no more, these standing Jurors
have certainly some ill game to play, there are others that hope to Signalize
themselves to get a better Trade, or some Preferment by serving a Turn; there
are others that have particular Piques and a humor of Revenge against such or
such Parties, if a man be but miscalled by some Odious name, or said to be of
an exploded Faction -- straight they cry hang him, Find him Guilty, no
punishment can be too bad for such a Fellow, in such a case they think it merit
to Stretch an Evidence on the tenter-hooks, and strain a Point of Law because
they fancy it makes for the Interest of the Government. As if Injustice or
Oppression could in any case be for the true Interest of Government when in
truth nothing more weakens or destroys it, but this was an old stratagem, if
thou suffer this man to escape, thou shall not be Caesar's Friend. When Caesar
was so far from either needing or thanking them for any such base Services,
that had he but truly understood them, he would severely have punished their
Fartiality and Tyranny.

All these and the like pestilent Biases are to be avoided and abominated by
every honest Jury-man.

But now as to the positive Qualifications requisite.

1. You that are Jury men should first of all seriously regard the weight and
importance of the Office; your own Souls other men's Lives, Liberties, Estates,
all that in this World are dear to them, are at Stake, and in your hands;
therefore consider things well beforehand, and come substantially furnished
and provided with sound and well-grounded Consciences, with clear minds, free
from malice, fear, hope, or favor; lest instead of Judging others, thou
should work thy own Condemnation, and stand in the sight of God our Creator
and Judge of all men, no better than a Murderer, or Perjured Malefactor.

2. Observe well the Record, Indictment or Information that is read, and the
several parts thereof, both as to the matter, manner, and form,

3. Take due notice and regard to the Evidence offered for Proof of the
Indictment, and each part of it, as well to manner and form as matter; and if
you suspect any Subornation, foul Practice, or tampering has been with the
witnesses, or that they have any malice or sinister design, have a special
regard to the Circumstances or Incoherencies of their Tales, and endeavor by
apt Questions to sift out the truth, or discover the Villainy. And for your
better satisfaction endeavor to write down the evidence or the Heads thereof
that you may the better Recall it to memory.

4. Take notice of the nature of the Crime charged, and what Law the
Prosecution is grounded upon, and distinguish the supposed Criminal Fact which
is proved, from the aggravating Circumstances which are not proved.

5. Remember that in Juries there is no Plurality of Voices to be allowed; 7
cannot overruled or by virtue of Majority Conclude 5. no, nor 11, 1. But as the
Verdict is given in the name of all the 12, or else it is void: So every one of
them must be actually agreeing, and satisfied in his particular Understanding
and Conscience, of the truth and Righteousness of such Verdict, or else he is
forsworn; and therefore if one man differ in Opinion from his fellows, they
must be kept together, till either they by strength of Reason or Argument can
satisfy him, or he convince them. For he is not to be Hecktor'd, much less
punished by the Court into a Compliance; Rep. fol. 151.
for as the L. Chapter Justice Vanghan says well, if a man differ in Judgment from
his Fellows whereby they are kept a day and a night, though his dissent may not
in truth be as reasonable as the Opinion of the rest that agree, yet if his
Judgment be not satisfied, one disagreeing can be no more Criminal than four or
five disagreeing with the rest. Upon which occasion the said Author recites a
remarkable Case out of an ancient Law-Book a Juror would not agree with his
fellows for two days, 41 Iss. p. 11.
and being demanded by the Judges, if he would agree, said, he would first die
in Prison, whereupon he was Committed and the Verdict of the the eleven taken,
but upon better Advice, the Verdict of the eleven was Quasht, and the Juror
discharged without Fine, and the Justices said the way was to carry them in
Carts (this is to be understood at Assizes where the Judges cannot stay but
must remove in such a time into another County) until they agreed, and not by
Fining them. And as the Judges erred in taking the verdict of Eleven, so they
did in Imprisoning the Twelve. And therefore you see on second thoughts
Reales'd him.

6, Endeavor as much as your Circumstances will permit at your spare Hours to
Read and Understand the Fundamental Laws of the Country; such as Magna Charta,
the Petition of Right, the late excellent Act for Habeas Corpus's, Horns
Mirror of Justices, Sir Edw. Cook in his 2d 3d and 4th parts of the Institutes
of the Law of England, and Judge Vaughans Reports, these are Books frequent to
be had, and of excellent use to inform any Reader of Competent Apprehension, of
the true Liberties and Privileges which every English man is Justly Entitled
unto, and Estated in by his Birthright, as also the nature of Crimes and the
punishments severally and respectively Inflicted on them by Law, the Office and
duties of Judges, Juries, and all Officers and Ministers of Justice, etc. Which
are highly necessary for every Jury-man in some Competent measure to know, for
the Law of England has not placed Trials by Juries to stand between men and
Death or Destruction to so little purpose as to Pronounce men Guilty, without
regard to the nature of the Offense, or to what is to be Inflicted thereupon.

For want of duly understanding and considering these things, Juries many times
plunge themselves into lamentable perplexities; as it befell the Jury who were
the Tryers of Mr. Vdal a Minister, who in the 32d year of Q. Eliz. was Indicted
and Arraigned at Creydon in Surry, for High Treason, for defaming the Queen and
Her Government in a certain Book Entitled, A Demonstration of the Discipline,
etc. And though there was no Direct, but a scambling Shadow of Proof, and
though the Book duly considered contained no matter of Treason, but certain
words which by a forced construction were laid to tend to the defamation of the
Government, and so the thing prosecuted under that Name; yet the Jury not
thinking that in pronouncing him Guilty, they had upon their Oath pronounced
him Guilty of Treason, and to die as a Traitor; but supposing that they had
only declared him Guilty of making the Book, hereupon they brought him in
Guilty, but when after the Judges Sentence of Death against him (which they
never in the least intended) they found what they had done, they were
confounded in themselves, and would have done any thing in the world to have
Revoked that unwary pernicious Verdict, when, alas! it was too late. Dr. Fuller
has this witty note on this witty Gentleman's Conviction, that it was Conceived
rigorous in the greatest, which at best (says he) is Cruel in the least
Degree. And it seems so Queen Elizabeth thought it, for she suspended
Execution, and he dyed naturally. But his Story survives to warn all
Succeeding. Jurymen to endeavor better to understand what it is they do, and
what the Consequences thereof will be.

7. As there is nothing I have said intended to encourage you to partiality, or
tempt any Jury-man to a Connivance at Sin and Malefactors, whereby those Pests
of Society should avoid being brougt to condign punishment, and so the Law
cease to be a terror to evildoers; which were in him an horrible Perjury, and
indeed a foolish Pity, or Crudelis misericordia, a Cruel Mercy; for he is
highly injurious to the Good that absolves the Bad, when real Crimes are proved
against them; so that I must take leave to say, That in Cases where the matter
is dubious, both Lawyers and Divines prescribe rather favor than rigor; an
eminent and learned Judge Fortesene, Ca. 27.
of our own has in this Advice and Wish gone before me, Mallem revera viginti
Facinorosos mortem pictate evadere, quam justion unum injuste condemnari. I
verily (says he) had rather twenty evildoers should escape death through
Tenderness or Pity, than that one Innocent Man should be unjustly condemned.

I shall conclude with that excellent Advice of my Lord Cook, In the Epilogue
of his 4th Part of Institutes.
which he generally addresses to all Judges, but may no less properly be
applied to Jurors. --

Fear not to do Right to all, and to deliver your [Verdicts] justly according
to the Laws; for Fear is nothing but a betraying of the Succors that Reason
should afford; and if you shall sincerely execute Justice, be assured of three
Things. 1. Though some may malign you, yet God will give you his Blessing. 2.
That though thereby you may offend Great Men and Favorites yet you shall have
the favorable Kindness of the Almighty, and be his Favorites. And lastly,
That in so doing, against all scandalous Complaints and pragmatical Devices
against you, God will defend you as with a Shield. mdash;For than Lord wilt
give a Blessing unto the Righteous Psalm. 5.15.
, and with thy favorable Kindness will thou defend him as with a Shield.



FINIS.

