ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a late Quibling LIBEL From the Hartford Quakers, STYLED, A
Testimony for the Man Christ Jesus. Demonstrating, That it is not the same true
and real Man Christ Jesus that they give Testimony unto, but another false and
feigned Jesus: Or, A fresh and fuller draught of the same Antidote, against the
Poison presented in the Whores Golden cup.

By WILL. HAWORTH.

Rev. 2.2. Thou have tried them that say they are Apostles, and are not, and
have found them liars.

Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets that come unto you in sheeps clothing.

2 Cor. 11.13, 14. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ: For no marvel, for Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light.

Romans 16.18. And by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple.

Printed in the seventh Month. 1676.

Animadversions Upon a late Quibling Libel, from the Hartford Quakers.
THere is a Book come to my hand, with this Title, viz. A Testimony for the Man
Christ Jesus, a Title never before (as I know) prefixed to any of the Quakers
Books, by whom it appears this was written: By that time I had read it over, I
found that to be true which I suspected, viz. That the Wine did not answer the
Bush, the Matter the Title: They have only dealt herein, as the Enemy at Sea,
which sets up the English Flag thereby to deceive and take advantage. I looked
for some particular name, but found none, who the proper Father of the Child
should be, who can tell? We are left to guess who the Father is, by the double
tongue, Quibling Language, Critical Wit in catching his Adversary in seeming
contradictions and inconsistencies.

They say Page 3. In the beginning, my Pamphlet consists of matter of charge
aggravated with reviling, and Answers to Objections of my own framing, to
render the Quakers infamous.

Nazareth (having heard it out of the mouth of a Prophet of their own with
three witnesses to the same, and have read it in their own Books, and you shall
have further proof of it before we have finished this: and indeed there is
enough in this late Book that speaks the same thing, as will appear anon) then
I have said too little of them, and need not fear the threatenings they produce,
that Revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, as being no way guilty:
If they will see their error and Recant, I will take off my Charge, and my
Reviling as they call it, otherwise it is but what the Apostle Paul's example
against Seducers and false Teachers does warrant me in. As to the Objections
that they say are of my framing, I find all of them, save one in this their own
Book, brought in against this Truth as stated by me concerning the Manhood of
Christ in Heaven, which shall be notified to you in the progress, that one,
which is not there produced by them, viz. Flesh and blood cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; not any that ever reasoned with the Quakers about this
subject, or the resurrection of the same body, but has heard it from them, see
then the ingenuity of these People in the entrance, saying, that I have framed
Objections of my own to render the Quakers odious.

But the great and material thing which I hasten to, is, that I charge the
Quakers with denying the same numerical, true, and real Manhood of Jesus to be
now in Heaven, a place remote from the Earth: I do I confess, thus charge them:
now mark it diligently and bear it in your minds, as you read along, Page 3. l.
12. They utterly deny the matter charged: Let us examine what the matter is,
contained in these words and phrases, taken in their true Grammatical sense and
construction, viz. The same numerical true and real Manhood of Jesus Christ, in
Heaven a place remote from the Earth.

1. That Jesus Christ has now a true and real Manhood consisting of two
Essential distinct parts, a Humane Soul and Body.

2. That it is the same Numerical Manhood, not only the same in kind and
nature, but the very self same one in number that was born of the Virgin,
crucified on the Cross, laid in the Sepulcher, raised again.

3. That this self same true Manhood is now in Heaven, a place remote from the
Earth, so circumscribed there, that it is not here upon Earth.

We heartily without any equivocation consent to these three Heads, contained
in those words: The Hartford Quakers in their late Book seem to own the same,
and would not be accounted guilty of the charge, but how shall they be tried:
no otherwise then by their confession under their own hand in that Book.

1. That Jesus Christ has now a true and real Manhood; These Hartford Quakers
deny, while in words they own it. 1. That cannot be a true and real Manhood
that has not a true and real Humane soul, but according to the Hartford
Quakers Jesus Christ has not a Humane soul: that soul that is in a thousand
distinct several places at one and the same time, cannot be a Humane soul, for
so it is immense and infinite, but according to these Quakers the soul of
Christ is in innumerable places at once: for that say it is in every Saint on
Earth, Page 6. 2. That cannot be a true and real Manhood that is not the object
of Sense, that can no way be seen by the bodily eye: but these Hartford Quakers
affirm, Page 10. 11. That the body of Christ now in Heaven is not the object of
sense, now what a body must that be, that cannot by any means be either seen,
felt or heard. 3. That cannot be a true and real Manhood that can penetrate
Wooden doors, and Stone walls. This is to make it so rare, thin, subtle and
spirituous, that the very Essence and nature of a body is destroyed: Air and
Light that are the most subtle of bodies, cannot pierce doors and walls, but
must enter by some crannyes or pores; but the Quakers at Hartford do suppose
that the body of Christ was so changed that it came into the Disciples through
the doors or walls, else why bring they that Scripture against me? John 10.19.
4. That cannot be a true and real Manhood that has not a Humane shape, figure
and from: but the Hartford Quakers deny this and dispute against it, Page 11,
12.


2. The second thing that is matter of the charge, viz. That they deny the self
same Numerical Manhood. Thus I prove it, If Christ's Manhood (as they say in the
late Book) cannot be seen with the bodily eye, though God do never so
strengthen it; if so immense, that part of it can be in every Saint, so subtle
and spirituous that it can penetrate doors and Stone walls of an house, it
cannot be the same for kind and nature with that which he had before his
Resurrection, for it appears evidently that was not such a Manhood, why, then
if it be not the same in kind and Nature, it cannot be the same in Number.

3. The third thing as to the matter of Charge, viz. That this same Manhood is
now in Heaven, a place remote, so circumscribed there, that it is not here on
Earth, this they openly deny in so many words, Page 6. But his conclusion (i.
e.) is denied, (by the connection it appears,) that therefore Jesus Christ is
not here on Earth as he is Man, but as to his Manhood only in Heaven, a place
remote from us, and in many other places of the Book you shall find the like:
They do clearly affirm that Jesus Christ is present on Earth in and with his
Saints as to his soul.

The Papists say in their monstrous opinion of Transubstantiation, that the
natural Humane body of Christ, can be, and is in an hundred, nay, a thousand
several places at once: So these that the soul of Jesus is in innumerable
places at once.

Thus every whit of the matter of Charge stands good against them, and I have
brought them in as witnesses against themselves, whilst they did pretend to the
weak people to vindicate themselves:

Now do not they that deny these three things mentioned, plainly deny Jesus
Nazareth to be the Messiah? which they say, Page 4. is the other part of the
Charge: if Jesus Christ has not the self same, true and real Manhood, which he
took of the Virgin, and which dwelt here on Earth at that place called
Nazareth, then is not Jesus of Nazareth the Messiah according to the Quakers:
For his name was called Jesus, as he was born of the Virgin, Mat. 1.21. And she
shall bring forth as Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus, and that adjunct
of Nazareth is given because of his habitation in those parts, Mat. 2.23. And
he came and dwelt in a City called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene. But these people,
now it is plain (the mask being pulled off) deny that Manhood that was taken of
the Virgin, and dwelt at Nazareth, in that they do suppose it so changed, that
it is turned into an Immense infinite Being, a Deity which that Manhood was not:
Let them but remember that Scripture, John 8.24. Except you believe that I am
he, ye shall die in your sins: and if they write again, fairly take off these
things that I have briefly brought against them.

Let us now hear throughout the Book what they have to say for themselves: that
they are not guilty of denying the Manhood of Jesus Christ in Heaven.

The first thing produced is W. Pens confession at Barbakin, Page 4. W. P.
speaks in the name of the Quakers thus, we do believe the Man Christ Jesus to
be glorified in Heaven, we do believe the holy Manhood to be in Heavenly Glory,
they add, see how far the Quakers are from denying the true and real Manhood of
Christ in Heaven. Some that are not acquainted with their way of speaking, may
think this sufficient, but others that have been used to them cannot, till W.
Pen does describe what he means by the Man Christ Jesus, and what by the
Manhood, whether it is such a Manhood as has a Humane soul and body as its
essential parts: For G. Fox in his great Mystery, Page 286. has these words,
the Man may speak, Christ in the Male and in the Female. W. P. then in the name
of all the Quakers, may mean such a man is Jesus Christ, as is in every Male
and Female Preacher, that is nothing but the light within: Fox again, has
another passage, Page 71. Christ's nature is not bumane which is earthly; for
that is the first Adam's. This man Christ that W. P. confesses, in the name of
all the Quakers, may be such as has no Humane nature, such a man as never had
a nature that was of an Earthly substance, such a man as came not of Adam's
race and line: but we always thought and believed that the Manhood was such,
which is Christ's nature as properly as his Divine nature. Again, nothing more
obvious in our discourses with them, than that Heaven is within them, I have
heard it in discourse with them. What does all this brave sound of words in
this Confession at Barbican come to? why, this is the sum of it, (when he
says, we believe the Man Christ to be glorified in Heaven, and the holy
Manhood to be in heavenly glory:) viz. that the Light within being hearkened
to, and obeyed, is lifted up and exalted, and glorified in the heart of man, I
know it to be true, that Pen has written it in the Folio, put forth by him and
Whitehead, viz. that the Light in that body that was taken of the Virgin, is
the Christ: whereas we know and assert that it is neither the Divine nature
alone, nor Humane alone, but both in union, that is the Christ of God: I will
give one testimony out of Smith's Primer, Page 8. They that are false Teachers
preach Christ without, and bid the people believe in him, as he is in Heaven
above: Now lest some Reconciler as W. P. or any other should say that their
Brother Smith meant, that whoever preached Christ without only, were false
Teachers, not but that the preaching of Christ without, will consist with the
preaching of Christ within: hear his own words again, Page 9. Child, This is a
great difference in their Doctrine (speaking still of the true and false
Teachers) for one to preach Christ without, and another preaches him within.
Fat. Yes it does make a great difference, and bath no more fellowship together
then the East with the West: See how far they are from denying the true and
real Manhood of Jesus Christ in Heaven: he that will be decieved let him be
deceived, by this line you may measure all the rest that follows.

The next thing to take off the Charge, is their own confession in the Book,
Page 5. They write, We farther add and confess, that the same man, Christ that
suffered, and was put to death in the flesh, and was raised from the dead by
the mighty Power of God, ascended into Heaven, Gods dwelling place, ascended
both as to change of place, and state of glory: Is not here a very full and
plain confession? Would not you take the Hareford Quakers more Orthodox than
others of them? would not one hope that our writing against their Error, does
inlighten them, teach them, convince them, and that they are coming near to
some good settlement in the good old Truths, and that they will at length
become Christians: but it is so with some that have accustomed themselves to ly
and cheat, they are always suspected by them that know them, so truly is it
with this People, they have altogether lost their credit and reputation with
many, as in this matter, in that we have so frequently caught them juggling,
equivocating, quibling, cogging the Dice, that we can no more trust them: they
have said much here, more then ever I read in any of their books, we would be
glad if they were real, but behold, with the very same breath they unsay it
again, Page 15. This exaltation was not that he might remain in a place remote,
(mark that) and separate from his body, which he is the head of, giving this
reason for it, For this were to keep body and head asunder, adding, that the
Son of Man had power to descend at his pleasure, to come again, bringing Matthew.
28. I will be with you always to the end of the World: Note, here is one of the
Objections as they say of my own framing, the rest will follow.

They had (pray remember) in the beginning utterly denied the matter charged,
here they are willing to own a good part of it, viz. That Christ is not in
Heaven, a place remote, They confessed just now that the same man: Jesus Christ
that died, was raised and ascended: But let us enquire, whither did he ascend?
They answer, into Heaven: But may be mean a state of glory, no, a place of
glory, say they; but observe the next question in order, Where is this Heaven?
Is it above or beneath? Is it remote and and far off, or is it near? their
answer is, It must not be remote, it must then be near at hand, it must be
where the Mystical body is, and part of it I am sure is on Earth, for the head
and body must not be asunder, why then, when they say the same man ascended
into Heaven, they mean nothing but that Globe which we call the Earth: that
Heaven they call Gods dwelling place, but they mean the hearts of Men; he
changed not his state only, but place at his ascension; but that change of
place was such, you must know, that notwithstanding he was here on Earth as to
his Manhood, for his soul was in the Saints: we may despair at this rate, ever
by words to understand one another. Here is Babel (indeed) Language confounded:
But he had all power in Heaven and Earth given him, and therefore might descend
at his pleasure, and he promised to be with his Disciples always to the end: To
argue from Christ's power to his will, was never accounted strong or right
reasoning. The Papists argued thus against the Martyrs for their
Transubstantiation, viz. God had power, and was able to turn the Bread into his
Natural body, ergo, when as the Word, his revealed Will, declared it otherwise,
and called it Bread after it was blessed: would it be a good argument? Christ
has all power in Heaven and Earth given him, therefore he may be crucified
over again, when as the will of God is revealed in the Scripture, Heb. 9.26.
that he is but once to be offered in the end of the World; so in this case,
Christ though he has all power, can do nothing contrary to his own Will
revealed: Now it is plainly revealed, that Christ as to his Manhood, is not to
descend frequently upon Earth, but is to abide in Heaven an appointed time,
which is not yet finished, Acts 3.21. Whom the Heavens must receive, till the
times of restitution of all things: If they would mind this one Scripture, it
would put an end to all their cavils, and guide them in this controversy. What
was received into Heaven? His Manhood only; as for his Deity, it is Infinite,
and can in no wise be said that the Heaven received it. Now, how long is the
Heaven to receive this Manhood? Till the times of the restitution of all
things, which times let them dare to say are already come; he has not then as
yet descended here on Earth as to his Manhood: Notwithstanding, he has
fulfilled his promise, and has always been present with his Disciples in the
discharge of their Ministerial gifts, and will be to the end of the World, by
his Spirit.

The reason of this which they produce, why the Manhood must not be in a place
remote? Because, that Head and Body would then be asunder. Answ. It Is not
possible for Christ and the Church his Body, to have some union without a
corporal touch? The Sun is in the Firmament at a great distance, yet we have
some kind of union with it; a man may be many miles distant from his wife, yet
he has some kind of union with her; we took this union to be Mystical, and
Spiritual, not corporal and carnal; as there is one soul throughout the natural
body of Man, the same in the head, and in every member; so one Spirit in Jesus
Christ the Mystical Head, and in every one of his Members the Saints, whereby
they are united to him. 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one
spirit: Let it be judged now, whether the Quakers are not those that know
Christ after the flesh, when they speak of the Manhood being locally present
with, and in the Saints, otherwise there can be no union they think?

But Christ being present in Spirit, which I grant, must needs (say they, Page
6.) be an overturning of what I have assorted, and a contradicting my self, and
therefore they call upon me to reconcile it how I can: But why so, because that
the Spirit of Christ is an Essential part of the Manhood, the same with his
Soul: Now if Christ be present by his Spirit in his Saints, then must he be in
some part of his Manhood o^ Earth. I have read, there were some formerly that
held the Holy Ghost did inform the Humane bod of Jesus Christ instead of the
Soul; but this opinion of the Hartford Quakers is much worse, for they grant,
that the Soul or Spirit spoken of, is an Essential part of the Man Christ, in
the very same sense with me, and yet says it is in every Saint, investing it
with the Office of the Holy Ghost: Let us try this notion, if the Soul of
Christ's Manhood be present on Earth with and in his Saints, then it must be
one of these two ways: Either with, or without the Humane body, united to it,
or separated from it: if in, and with the body united, then the Humane body
which was taken of the Virgin, is likewise with, and in every Saint on Earth,
and so is become an Infinite and Immense Spirit, and is ceased from being a
Humane body; this is so monstrous we dare not believe it: Or, 2. It is
separated from the Humane body in its presence with the Saints, then is not
Jesus Christ a man in Heaven (as they have confessed,) it is but a dead body in
Heaven: This we cannot receive, He was dead once, but is alive now, and he is
to be alive for evermore, Rev. 1.18. If they say that needs not, (viz.) that
the Soul should be separated from the Humane Natural body, it may be, and is in
it still in Heaven, and extended from it to every Saint upon Earth: Then must
the Soul of Christ be Immense and Infinite, and this is too much for us to
swallow; for then there must be a new created God in time, because every
Infinite and Immense is God: Now the Soul of Christ's Manhood was created in
time: who can make that which is crooked straight? Error is crookedness,
absurdity, and rottenness when it comes to the trial. In the close of this I
would ask them, whether in these two Scriptures, viz. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of
the Lord God its upon me, the Lord has anointed me, and Joh. 3.34. For God
gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. By the Spirit is to be understood
the Soul of Christ, the Essential part, if not, (as I believe,) then have I an
easy way of reconciling my self in this matter, telling them that when I grant
that Christ is present with, and in his Saints on Earth by his Spirit, that I
mean the Holy Ghost, who is God and Infinite, and can be and is in all the
Saints, both that are in Heaven and on Earth at once: not the Spirit of the
Manhood, an Essential part, that is a finite Creature, therefore their notion
is ridiculous: They cannot pass over the report I made of Will. Bates a
Neighbor; what he should say, viz. that what was taken of the Virgin had now
no being: They question, whether I truly state the matter, and censure me
sharply to be of a creeping, peevish, insinuating spirit, to seek an occasion
against my Neighbor, and to notify him in Print, Page 7.

Bates, for speaking so rashly and plainly, as that there is not a starting
hole, no bit of any equivocation; no room left to leap back, which is not the
Quakers way of expressing themselves: Now that it may appear that I had a right
call, when I went to discourse with Will. Bates, and therefore am wrongfully
censured by these men, to be of a creeping spirit, seeking occasion against my
Neighbor, etc. and that I have stated the matter right, read the following
Certificate.

Be it known to all whom it may concern, that we whose names are subscribed, do
testify, that it was through our motion, and desire, that William Haworth was
present at the discourse we had with William Bates, and that we did more then
once hear him plainly say, that what Christ took of the Virgin had now no being.

Sept. 19. 1676.

Daniel Doughty, John Albury, Stephen Tothil.

We evidently see now, they are not all guided by one and the same Infallible
Light, else that Light is not one with it self, in that it directs them to
contrary Opinions. Will. Bates says, that which was taken of the Virgin had
now no being, These Hartfordians, Page 7. That the Man Christ did neither
perish, nor vanish in any thing Essential to him, as to his Spirit or Body: Who
can bring the two Poles of North and South together, let them as can reconcile
these two sayings: But withal, let me ask them whether Visibility, Materiality,
Finiteness, and having the same shape, be not Essential to the Man Christ?
there is none in their wits can deny it: but these men, as has in some measure
already appeared, and will farther appear in the progress, have taken away the
Visibility, Materiality, Finiteness, and having the same Humane Figure from the
body of the Man Christ, they have then herein manifested themselves no less
than gross Liars, and Cheaters, (for there has something Essential perished as
to his Soul and Body, according to their Doctrine,) withal let them remember,
that I had more proof for my Charge against them, then merely my opinion (as
they of the Barbican Dispute, Page 4. when as I have such a plain loud witness
as this, viz. that which was taken of the Virgin had now no being.

But here is still more against our Opinion, viz. Christ is now a man in
Heaven; if so, how then can we disintangle our selves from that thing charged
upon us, in the 8th Page, that in this we resemble the carnal Opinion of the
Anthropomorphites, who hold, that God is like unto Man, in shape and form, and
that he has a right and and left hand as Men have, which likewise Mugleton
holds.

What would these men be at, when shall we find them constant, my soul pitieth
their instability, how are they tossed to and fro, did they not all along say
in words, that Jesus Christ was a Man in Heaven, had the Essentials of a Man
soul and body: Now, if he has a Humane body, it must necessarily have a Humane
shape: why then, they Symbolize with that Brute Mugleton as much as We, and if
they be concerned, let them answer for themselves; only you see by their way of
reasoning, they believe not a word of what they say, viz. That Christ is a Man
in Heaven, but equivocates in all; otherwise, why would they produce this? We
can answer for our selves, we are not guilty of having any such gross carnal
conceptions of the Deity, as to think or say that the Humane shape is the shape
of the Deity; we abhor such idolatrous thoughts, we know what the Scripture
says, and believe it, Isai. 40.25. To whom then will you liken God, or what
likeness will you compare him to: Deuteronomy. 4.12. Ye saw no similitude but only
heard a voice; but we say, the Word was made Flesh, Joh. 1.14. and in that
Flesh ascended into Heaven, has that same Body and Soul there, and it is still
in union with the Deity, the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in him,
Col. 2.9. but the form and figure the Body has there, is not the form and
figure of the Deity, but of the Manhood: the Godhead is Infinite and Immense.
And when we speak of Gods right hand and Christ's sitting there, we mean a state
and place of Honor, Power and Glory, that Christ upon his Ascension was
exalted to.

Still they dispute against that they seem to own, viz That Christ is now a Man
in Heaven: If his being ascended into Heaven, hinders him from being on Earth,
why not his ascending far above all Heavens, from being in Heaven? Page 9. Here
is a second of the Objections, as they say, of my own framing.

viz. Far above all Heavens. Any of the three Senses I gave, is safe and good.
First, Far above all Heavens, is no more then that in Psalm. 68.18. from whence
this is taken, nay the very same with it, Thou have ascended on high. 2. By the
Heavens may be understood, the visible Heavens that may be seen with the bodily
eye, because of their nearness to us. 3. Or Heavenly Powers, Angelical Nature
and Perfection. Now let us draw up their Argument, Jesus Christ ascended on
high, above the lower Heavens that may be seen, and is more excellent and
higher then any Angel: Ergo, he is not in Heaven, that cannot be seen with the
bodily eye, because of its distance from us. Are you not convinced mightily
with such strong Argumentations? In Ephesians. 1.20, 21. He is said to be set far
above every name that is named, not only in this World, but that which is to
come; Ergo, Christ is above the Father, this is the same way of Reasoning.

That Christ as to his Manhood has been upon Earth, and is upon Earth at least
as to his Soul, since his Ascension they attempt to prove here, Page 9. from
the Scriptures that speaks of his coming to his Disciples since that time. John
14.2. If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you.
verse 18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you.

at the times of the restitution of all things, (as the Scripture speaks:) The
other Scripture speaks of his coming in the power of the Spirit to their
hearts, to comfort them in the evil days wherein they should be cast; then they
are nothing at all to their purpose, to prove Christ personal Descension upon
Earth, either as to his Soul or Body since his Ascension into Heaven.

Another Objection is drawn from John 3.13. No man has ascended up to Heaven,
Page ibid.
but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven.
Here is a third of the Objections which they say, is of my own framing, and
it is brought here against Christ being now in Heaven as to his Manhood: I have
in my last answered it fully to which you may have recourse, as to what they
beg here, I can grant them the whole, without any loss to my cause, or gain to
theirs: Christ was spiritually in Heaven with his Saints when on Earth, and is
spiritually on Earth with them now he is in Heaven* The Reader knows what we
mean by the spiritual presence of Christ with his Saints.

They say, Page ibid
that of his coming the Apostles had signs and evidences, who by him wrought
Miracles, Acts 4.10. (i. e.) the Miracles that the Apostles wrought, were signs
of his Personal coming, that he has been upon Earth since his Ascension, as to
his Manhood.

Moses, and Eliah, and Elisha, and what they did, they did by the power of
Christ, who is God blessed for ever: Therefore Christ Jesus did Personally
appear upon Earth, and came again from Heaven in his Manhood, before ever he
had a Manhood, or ever did ascend into Heaven, risum teneatis Amici? Miracles
wrought by the Apostles were only Signs of the coming of Christ, in Power and
Spirit.

Here now comes their exceptions against four of the Properties of the Manhood
of Christ, as they stated by me, what pity is it that they should take so much
pains to oppose themselves in their own confession.

The Manhood of Christ since the Ascension, is the Object of Sense, is has
been seen with the bodily eye, and may be seen, Stephen saw him, thus in my
last.

To this they Object, Page 10. but before I name their Arguments, I here cry
out of open and manifest wrong: in that they Quakers have twice or thrice
endeavored to make the Reader believe, that I asserted, there was no more in
Stephen 's seeing the glory of God, and the Son of Man in Heaven, than what was
natural, that he had no extraordinary assistance and strengh from God in it,
Page 11. but to place all this sight upon carnal and bodily eyes, these are
their words, whereas, they had writ my own words before, viz. Stephens sight
was strengthened after a wonderful miraculous way, so that he pierced to the
Heavenly glory with his eye, this was more than what was natural no doubt; mark
that, whether this be not wilful forging, judge ye.

But to their Arguments against Stephen's seeing Christ in Heaven with his
bodily eye it being strenghthened by the Lord.

1. According to my own confession, Christ was passed into the invisible
Heavens, Ergo, he could not be seen, Page 10.

invisible, if I had but in the stead of it, said unseen, there would not have
been any ground for this cavil; but I did indeed think I should be taken in
that sense, and I believe was by all but the Quakers: Should I say, many of the
Stars are invisible, will any understand me that they are not capable of being
seen by any Teliscope or Prospective glasses, or, that they are not ordinarily
seen, because of their great distance, and the weakness of our sight; Children
will play with Rattles.

Arg. 2. Page 11. The ground of Stephen 's seeing the Heavens opened, and Jesus
on the right band of God, was on his being full of the Holy Ghost.

Moses and all the Prophets-saw the Son of Man, standing at the right band of
God, before he was the Son of Man, or ever did ascend thither, for they were
all filled by the Holy Ghost: And then Barnabas and all the Disciples in the
second Chapter of the Acts, saw the Son of Man in Heaven; and then this that is
related of Stephen in this History, that we took to be a singular remarkable
thing, is but what is common to all Saints filled with the Spirit: besides, how
can this merely as such, be the ground of Stephens sight of Christ in Heaven,
when the wicked shall see Christ coming in power and great glory, Rev. 1.7.
Every eye shall see him, it cannot be meant of a spiritual sight, for every one
has not a spiritual eye. For (ought I can learn) these men understand nothing
more, nothing besides some spiritual sight that Stephen had of Jesus Christ on
Earth in his own heart, else, why do they mention the vision that John had as a
parallel instance.

Page ibid. John saw the golden Candlesticks, and in the midst thereof one
like-the-Son of Man: Now, those Churches that were represented by the seven
Candlesticks, were then upon Earth, stay, and hear the conclusion: Ergo, when
Stephen looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and the Son
of Man at the right hand of God, the Heavens being opened: All this was no more
then seeing Christ on Earth, the light in his own Heart and Conscience. O for a
little plain heartedness and honesty: The instance is not parallel, John's we
say and believe, were only Spiritual Revelations in ecstasies and trances,
Stephen's was an Ocular Vision: Let me add this to these poor unbelieving
Creatures, why should it seem a thing impossible to you, that God should so
strengthen with his Divine power the bodily eye of a Saint, to see into the
highest Heaven, removing all things out of the way, which is denoted by that
Phrase, [The Heavens opened.]

The last thing in this matter, Page 11. This renders the glory of God, and his
righthand also obvions and visible to carnal eyes, you may see (say they) what
mean and carnal thoughts this man has of God, and the glory of God.

satisfy my Reason in all particulars, yet it is my duty to submit to the (...)
thus says the Lord. I do believe the Deity it self cannot be seen, no Mortal
eye can approach that invisibility, yet I believe that Peter and John did see
Christ in his Transfiguration, they saw his face shine as the Sun, and his
raiment as white as Snow, Mat. 17.2. They saw it I believe with their bodily
eye, and I query whether that was not something of the glory of God, whether
there was not a Material created light and splendour, that God made use of, to
set forth the Majesty and Glory of his Son to these his Disciples external
Senses.

Exceptions and Objections against the other Property of Christ Manhood.

I say it has the same Form and Figure that it had when here upon Earth, yet
withal, say it is a very glorious Body: How gloriously is it represented and
painted out to us by Daniel and John? more bright then a thousand Suns.

1. They cavil at this, and say, how then has it the same Form and Figure that
it had when here upon Earth, was it thus bright and glorious more then a
thousand Suns, when here on Earth subject to sufferings, Page 12.



2. This is to intrude, they say, into unseen things, Page ibid. (i. e.) either
of an Angel, or of -- which I will not write, or there must be a transmutation
of it into the Deity, which way soever they take, they destroy the Manhood of
Jesus Christ, which is a destroying the whole Christian Religion at one blow.

3. Exception, Page 12. They say, that I talk like one ignorant of the
Scriptures, in asserting, that the Manhood has the same Form and Figure that
it had when on Earth, in that he was known to his Disciples after his
Resurrection: and says, that he appeared in diverse Forms after his
Resurrection, Mark 16.12. After that, he appeared to two of them in another
Form. Answ. All the Books of the Evangelists do but complete the History, one
of them is to give Light to the other, and in any difficulty one to open and
explain the other, some of them being more full than the other: This is Mark is
the shortest of all, now look into the same particular portion of History, as
it was written by Luke, Luke 24.15. And it came to pass, that while they
communed together, and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them;
but their eyes were held, that they should not know him: it was then he
himself, and like himself, with the same Form and Figure Humane, otherwise, he
ceased to be a man; but it pleased the Lord, who had absolute command over
their senses, so by his power to hold their sight, that they should not
presently discern who he was, but seemed to them as one in another habit, so
the word (...) does sometimes signify.

4. Except: But if in the same Form, how came it to pass that Mary did not know
him, but thought it had been the Gardener, John 20.14, 15. Answ. 1. This
Scripture makes directly against them, it appears that Jesus had a Humane shape
and form after his Resurrection, which is a glorified State; for such is the
form and shape of a Gardener: 2. But that Mary did not know him, but supposed
it had been the Gardener, no wonder, when as she knew not that he was risen,
she came not to look for a living man, but only for the dead body, Verse. 15. if
thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him. 3. I say here eyes
were held that she should not know him, as in the Scripture of Luke before.


5 Twice he appeared in the midst of his Disciples the doors being shut, John
20.19, 26. was there no change then, Page ibid. Answ. Yes, of State and
Condition, not of form and Humane figure. The Papists make use of this
Scripture for their Transubstantiation, they say, his body penetrated the
doors, the same apprehensions must these Quakers have, or else in vain do they
quote this Scripture; but its no where said, that he went through the doors:
The preposition (...) is not in the Text, only (...) the doors were shut when
he appeared in the midst of them, none of them, nor any other man opened the
doors for him; there was then no question, a Miracle wrought by him, but not by
penetrating the doors, how then came he in? why, how came Peter out of Prison?
did he come through the Iron gate? Acts 12.10. They came to the Iron gate that
leads unto the City, which opened to them of its own accord, could not Christ
effect the like, think you, for himself?

Page 12, 13. The Opposers give a lash at two other Properties in a very
scornful way: As for his uncouth and unscriptural talk, that the Saints ought
to worship the Humane Nature of Christ, and this Humane Nature is such as
gives life unto our Souls, we need take little notice of such Language. Answ.
My Language as to the first, is not unscriptural, for there I say, he received
worship from several, when he was here on the Earth in the Flesh: and this is
so notoriously known, that I need not to instance. But here I will give you
some Scripture, Mat. 2.11. The wise men, its said, fell down and worshipped
him, when a Babe. Matthew. 8.2. The Leper worshipped him: Matthew. 9.18. There the
Ruler worshipped him. Matthew. 14.33. They that were in the Ship upon his
stilling the Storm, worshipped him. Matthew. 15.25. The Women of Canaan,
worshipped him. John 9.38. The blind man that Christ healed, worshipped him.
After his Resurrection, Mat. 28.9. They held him by the feet and worshipped
him, and the 17. verse. And since his Ascension John worshipped him in the
Visions he had; and Rev. 5. The twenty four Elders, yea, and every Creature in
its kind and way, is said to worship the Lamb: See what ingenous men these be,
to say my talk is unscriptural, in pleading for the Humane Nature of Christ to
be worshipped in conjunction with the Deity, the foundation of the worship
being the Deity; neither is my talk uncouth, but only to them that understand
not the Christian Religion, it is used by all the Christian Churches, and by
all Christian Writers that have written any thing of the Humane Nature of
Christ, especially if they have any contention with Socinians. The same can I
say of the other Property, viz. That the Flesh of Christ gives life to our
Souls, I have explained my self in that discourse, in what way and manner it
gives life: let them if they dare, oppose it, how unscriptural is this, when
as I there annexed, John 6.53. Except ye eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, ye
have no life in you? whenever Christ mentions his Flesh and Blood as here,
our judgment and belief is, that he has always respect to his Manhood, and
the benefits the Church has by his Incarnation, let them dare to contradict
it, and we say, that this Flesh that gives life, is himself, the Manhood with
the Deity is but one Person, one Christ, one Mediator, and both are spoken in
that place which they in their corrupt judgments allege against us, John 6.5.
Page 13. robbing the Humanity of that which is due to it.

Now let us gather up all briefly without wronging them a title, and you shall
see what a strange Manhood it is that they have confessed to?

1. Its (according to them) a Manhood that is no way the object of Sense,
cannot any way be seen, felt, or heard, though it was both seen, felt, and
heard, after the Resurrection which was a glorified state. 2. It is an
Infinite, Immense God, not any where to be circumscribed, it may be in a
thousand times ten thousand of Saints at once. 3. It is so thin, subtle, that
it can penetrate doors, Stone walls. 4. It is inform, has no shape, Figure,
Lineaments, Countenance that is Humane. 5. No one is to give any worship to it,
though in union with the Godhead: 6. It is such a Manhood as did not die for
Sinners, nor does not now intercede for Sinners: For thus I argue, according to
what has past, if the Flesh of Christ has not procured life for our Souls,
(which they called unscriptural, uncouth, not to be taken notice of,) then did
Christ never die for Sinners: life for our Souls could no way be procured, but
by expiating and taking away the cause of death, which was sin: Now sin is no
way expiated but by the death of Jesus Christ, but Jesus Christ only died as
Man suffered as to his Flesh; had there been no Manhood there had been no
Offering, no Sacrifice, 2. According to them the Man Christ does not now
intercede, if he procured not Life by his Flesh and Manhood, he does not
intercede, there can be no life to our Souls, without the Spirit and Faith: now
there is neither Spirit nor Faith to any, but by the Intercession of Christ, he
obtains them thereby for us, but now there is no Intercession without the Flesh
and Manhood of Christ: the blood of the Sacrifice was carried into the holiest,
which figured this, viz. Christ carries the Merit of his sufferings into
Heaven: 1 John 2.2. He is an Advocate by virtue of his being a Propitiation: it
is the Man Christ Jesus that is the Mediator: 7. Such a man is Christ as is not
now a Priest. Heb. 8.4. If he were on earth, 1 Timothy 2.5.
he should not be a Priest: but he is on Earth (the Quakers say at least in one
Essential part of his Manhood, his Soul is in every S^int: you see Error is big
bellied and fruitful. This is the effect of forsaking the Scripture, setting up
another Rule, not content with sound Doctrine, given forth in sound words,
condemning the Christians in this day as having gross and carnal conceptions of
things, refining Religion, and the blessed holy glorious, true, real, operative
Manhood of Jesus Christ into Air, Wind, Fancy, Nothing; and all this under a
pretense, that they are fully for it: but we have tried them, and you now
plainly perceive, what their true Scriptural sense is, which they speak of,
Page 13.


We have done with that controversy concerning the Manhood of Christ, now they
undertake to vindicate Christopher Tailor, whom we answered in a Postscript,
whom (if he be living) I thought was at years off -- to answer for himself:

And now (say they) to manifest how like a confused and distempered crazed man
W. H. writes, take a short view of some of his inconsistencies, etc. Page 13.

Reply. Christ, my Lord, was accounted mad, by his own kindred, and by others,
the Scribes and Pharisees; the Apostle Paul by Agrippa, and the false Teachers
was thus stigmatized to be besides himself: it was a common thing among the
Papists thus to censure the Martyrs; because Philpot in the Convocation house
manifested but a little more then ordinary zeal against the Popish errors, they
gave it out that he was raging Bedlam mad: this is an old trick of the Devil, I
could name you one of my Brethren that is full of zeal for Christ, that they
have not long since thus dealt with all, must I think much then if in this I be
conformed to Christ, to his Apostles, to the Martyrs, and the worthiest of my
Brethren? no surely, it is my honor, and we have reason to pity this People,
that herein as in other things they make themselves so like the Antichristian
Papists: I could tell them of that common speech, that some there be that are
not in danger of madness, and say again that it might discompose the most
composed man still to converse with men in Bedlam. They are at it again, Page
16. Lest he fall into manifest distraction, as may tend to his and your
reproach, for he appears in some danger: Answ. Questionless they have recourse
in their thoughts to that Prophet of theirs Will. Baily, who pronounced a
dreadful sentence against me, viz. that in the name of the living God I should
be mad, this was at Hartford, in the hearing of many, to the utter shame of all
their Party that was there, if they had but a dram of true Humility: I am sure
to the amazement of many of us, and the abhorrency and detestation of such
Hellish Spirits, to hear Gods holy Name profaned in such a horrible
execration, in such a Brazen-faced way, as if Satan himself had appeared with
Fire and Brimstone, and a nasty stink among us: I would be glad to hear that
God gave him Repentance for his great sin, who did not live to see his sentence
fulfilled; but was soon after cut off by death at Sea, whether Shipwrackt or
otherwise I have not yet learned These look for the fulfilling of this Prophecy
I perceive, its well I am not in their hands, nor in Satan's hauds, but in the
hands of Jesus Christ; I commit my self to him, he is righteous in whatsoever
he does to me: peradventure he will turn Shimeies and Balaams cursings, and
Rabshekahs railings, for good unto me: In this case I appeal unto the
Christians and Ministers of Christ, with whom I have to do, if hitherto I speak
not the words of truth and soberness, the Lord lay not this great evil (which
they are now too much hardened in) to their charge.

Before they mention the two Inconsistencies, they have a small Peroration
about Original sin, Page 13. Christopher Tailor denying Infants to be guilty of
it, calling them Innocents, but they dare not meddle with this Contoversy pro
nor con; only say that I have manifested a great deal of ignorance and
hardness, but proves not a Syllable of their Charge, only craftily suggests to
the People, that we condem these Innocents upon the Predestinarian principle?
Answ. We have proved Infants no Innocents, but such as have the guilt of Adams
sin upon them, and I am at any time ready to make good this Truth, against
their calumnies, and withal say for the satisfaction of all against this false
insinuation, that God is righteous in charging the guilt of the first sin upon
all, and that he does not predestinate any to damnation but with respect to sin.

But where are these inconsistencies?

1. That I say we are by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and yet says,
that the light within every one is nothing but nature which is corrupt, yet
affirm withal, that this light within is the Law of Moses written in the
heart, this they say is to write like a mad man, Page 14. Answ. The Quakers I
observe are always much moved when we do not give that honor to their Light
which they think is due, when we allow it to be no more than Nature: Now the
Apostle I am sure calls it Nature: Romans 2.14. The Gentiles do by Nature things
contained in the Law, and yet the same Apostle says likewise, Ephesians. 2.3. And we
were by Nature children of Wrath, even as others. Now, it is not I but the
Apostle that is charged for a mad man, for they are his words: must the Apostle
be guilty of mad inconsistencies? God forbid: I did say the Light within was
the Law of Moses written in the heart of man, giving that Romans 2.15. to prove
it, Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts; this Scripture must
guide in the sense of my words: The Law of Moses in the heart that I spoke of,
is the work of the Law; he does not say that all the matter of the Moral Law
was written in their hearts, nor that they did all things contained in it, but
only says the (...), the work of the Law was written in their hearts, and that
they did things contained in the Law: there is then no more in it but this,
that these Gentiles by doing somethings that were contained in Moses's Moral
Law did manifest, that there was an impression of some part of the Moral Law
upon their hearts: Now, its no mad Heresy to maintain, that a man's doing part
of the Moral Law, as to the matter of it, by the mere strength of Nature, is
nothing but sin, and that a natural man so doing is a Child of Wrath, and in a
damnable condition not withstanding; how can it be otherwise, when there is no
right Principle from whence he acts, Heb. 11.6.
not a dram of true Faith in Jesus Christ, and without Faith it is impossible
to please God; he is dead in sin not being born again, and all his works are
dead works, and cannot please the living God: And therefore the Apostle says
of these Gentiles that had done by Nature things contained in the Law, and had
the works of the Law written in their hearts, notwithstanding this they were
unrighteous, sinners, guilty, fallen short of the glory of God, Romans 3. Oh that
this was but well marked by these Patrons of Nature, the Quakers: where is now
the inconsistency?

2. Inconsistency: Because I will not admit works done by us in the Spirit, in
the point of the justication of a sinner, and yet confesses that Regeneration
id the making meet for the inheritance, and that I say the actions of the Deity
perfects all good in us, and prays that the Lord by his Spirit would establish
my Friends, seeming here highly to esteem of the holy Spirit, and its workings,
how slight soever I made of them in other places, Page 15.

my madness (as this people say) against them: sooner let my tongue cleave to
the roof of my mouth; I have some experience of that good, sweet, Spirits
working in my own heart through Grace, in his Convictions, Renewings,
Quicknings, Comfortings, and I do really value them: Yet I must not advance
these works done upon us by the Spirit, or done by us in the Spirit, to that
dignity which God never appointed them unto, viz. To justify a sinner in his
sight, to make him accepted with God for their sakes: no, we are accepted only
by the grace of God, (i. e.) his free favor, in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. (i. e.)
the Person of Jesus Christ, and the works done in the Spirit are not the Person
of Jesus Christ, nor his Personal Righteousness, we would know from the Quakers
which would give us to understand their thoughts, let them speak plainly and
tell us, whether the Person of him that is justified, or the Person of Jesus
Christ be the subject of that Righteousness whereby a sinner is justified in
Gods sight? whether the soul and body of the Believer, or the soul and body of
the Man Christ be the seat wherein dwells that Righteousness that justifies in
God sight? whether they be the works done Personally by us, or the works done
Personally by him? we are not ashamed without mincing. without darkening
counsel by words, firmly and constantly to confess with our Brethren in many
Protestant Churches, that we cannot, dare not, must not, admit of any thing, no
not so much as our Faith, (though it is wrought in us by the Spirit) into that
Righteousness that justifies us in Gods sight, but holds still, that it is
solely and alone the Personal Righteousness of Jesus Christ the Son of God in
his Active and Passive obedience, whereby we are justified, and accepted in the
sight of an Infinitely pure and holy God, who charged his Angels with folly;
Gal. 1.8.
and if any man or Angel preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. Thus as
chaste Virgins espoused, we will not (through Gods grace) suffer our selves
through the subtilty of the Serpent, 2. Cor. 11.3.
to have our minds corrupted from this singlenest that is in Christ, in this
great business of Justification: this Article reigned in Luthers heart he said,
and I desire it should reign in my heart, and it is (as that great Patron of
it, against these Pharesaical Meritmongers was wont to say) the Article of the
Churches standing or falling; and how can he be a Christian that is not hearty
in the belief of it, though never more than at this day spoke against: Christ
in this day is a very great stumbling-stone to the Quakers, and Socinians, as
he was to the Jews and Greeks of old: it is no wonder the Quakers care not to
have Christ's Manhood maintained in its sameness, truth and reality, now
carrying on the work of his Mediation in Heaven, pleading the virtue of his
Atonement, when as they will not own the Righteousness which was wrought out,
in and by that blessed Manhood sixteen hundred Years since, for the
Justification of sinners: They talk much of the works of the Spirit, I would
put a few Queries to them. 1. Whether the works done by the Man Christ, when on
Earth here, and the works he now does in Heaven be not works done in the
Spirit? he had the Spirit and has in without measure: were not his works
absolutely and completely perfect in Holiness? he was a Lamb without spot,
there was no guil found in his mouth, he pleased the Father in all things. 2. I
would ask whether there be any works done by the Spirit upon any of the sons of
Men (except Jesus Christ) but there still remains a body of sin in them? and
whether there be any works done by us in the highest degree of the Spirit, that
any can attain to in this world, but God can find some fault with them? there
is some defect, and imperfection, let them that dare, deny that Scripture,
Eccless. 7.20. There is not a just man upon Earth, that does good and sins
not. 3. If this be true, which now of us are mad against the works of the
Spirit, we that honor these complete works of the personal Obedience of
Christ, and receive them with thankfulness for our Justification, according to
the command of God in Scripture to believe, and withal are glad that God works
upon us by his Spirit to renew our evil natures after his own Image, though it
be but in part, and that we are enabled by the same Spirit to show forth any
good works to his glory in our Conversation among men, though they fall short
of that which the holy Law requires; and therefore we dare not plead them with
God, but daily prays for forgiveness in his Blood, and that he would accept us
not in this our own Righteousness within us, or without us, but in his Sons
Personal Righteousness, having union with him: or they now on the other hand,
that are only and altogether for the works done in the spirit, both for
Justification as well as Sanctification, though none of them can ever evince
that these works are in every degree complete, and at the same time disown,
despise, contemn the complete works of the Imputed Righteousness of Christ,
calling it a Doctrine of Devils, which of us is mad against the works done in
the Spirit? Let the Reader judge. What an unsavory lorry do many of them make
in the ears of Christians in their books, and discourses, saying and writing,
you look to be saved by a Righteousness wrought out sixteen hundred Years
since, and as far off as Jerusalem? we cannot but pity their blindness, and
enmity to the Cross of Christ, the Lord reveal his Sons Righteousness to them,
and make them ashamed of such kind of Pharisaical sayings, as that of Bailies,
viz. if this be to make our own Righteousness stand, (speaking of the
Righteousness of the Law) then will we go about to make them stand: if they
would but remember that great instance given by Christ, and consider it, its
enough surely to silence them for ever, in this matter, Luke 18.9. He sp^ke
this Parable to certain that trusted in themselves, as being righteous and
despised others: verse. 10. Two went up into the Temple to pray, etc. The
Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, I am not as
other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. I
fast twice in the week, I give Tithes of all that I possess. Verse. 13. And the
Publican standing afar of, would not lift up so much as his eyes to Heaven: but
smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. Verse. 14. I tell
you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other. What is
this instance of a Pharisee to a Quaker, that speaks so much of the Spirit, and
the inward works of the Spirit? Answ. Did not the Pharisee think that he had
the inward work of the Spirit? Yet surely, for he gives thanks to God that did
enable him to be thus religious; he acknowledged that all he had, was the gift
of God, and did not in the least attribute it to his freewill, might or power,
that he had made himself to differ, that he did thus fast, pray, was thus just,
holy, and zealous: let is be weighed, he was as confident as any Quaker, or any
other could be, that his Righteousness was good, of the right sort, the
Righteousness of the Spirit, in that he durst plead it before the Lord for his
acceptance, yet what was the issue, he was not accepted: it was the humble
sinner that was justified, that applied himself to the mercy of God in Christ
Jesus: but where do you at any time find this people acknowledge Grace, Mercy,
Atonement, confessing their sins with shame and humility, are these in the way
of Justification?

They will say, why do thou talk so of the Pharisees thinking he had the
Spirit, and the inward work thereof: we know and are sure we have it, are
regenerated, and act from thence in our lives, and whilst it is so, if there be
any such thing as imputed Righteousness, (as we think there is not, its only an
imagination of your own brains,) we shall have it, for according to you, they
both go together, Righteousness within and without.

I say to them with as great confidence and boldness, and much better grounded,
that in case they go on thus, they do manifestly declare, that they have not,
neither ever had the right Spirit of Christ, the Comforter, for what does
Christ say the work of the Comforter should be, upon his sending of him, John
15.26. He shall testify of me, and John 16.14. He shall glorify me (i. e.) in
the hearts of men, for be shall receive of mine and show it unto you: Now if
that Spirit which at present you boast of, does not this work, viz. Enlighten
your understandings aright in the truth of the Gospel, though you may find a
power (as you often speak) acting of you, if this Spirit do not testify of the
Christ of God; begetting high thoughts of his Person, Righteousness,
instructing your souls in his things, his Death, Resurrection, Intercession:
his Priesthood in Heaven (which you never talk of) though it should have so
much power in you as thereby you should be caught up and carried to Azotus:
though thereby you could (as they say of Simon Magus) fly in the Air, yet it is
not the Spirit of Christ Jesus the Comforter: 1 Pet. 2.7. 2 Cor. 13.14. 2 Cor.
11.4.
If Christ be not precious to you, you are unbelievers: I wish it might be
considered, there is no communion of the Spirit, where the Grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ it not sweet to us, where ever there is another Gospel and Jesus,
there is another spirit, who ever has not the Son, has not the Father, how
then can they have the Spirit? No man speaking by the Spirit of God, called
Jesus accursed, 1 Cor. 12.3. Be not deceived; if this Gospel be hid (the heart
and life whereof consists in the knowledge of this point of Justification, (It
is the Gospel of Righteousness, it manifests the Righteousness without the Law,
Romans 3.21. therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith:)
if this be hid (though you may be very confident) is is hid to them that are
lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. the God of this World having blinded their eyes. O that you
would remember what the Apostle said to the Galatians, who thought they had as
much of the Spirits Righteousness as the Quakers, being corrupted in their
judgments in this very matter, yet had not cast off their mentioning of Christ,
but allowing him a place in their Religion: Gal. 3.1. Gal. 5.4.
who has bewitched you, and in another place, ye are fallen from Grace, and
its a great convincing word, Romans 9.31. Israel, which followed after the Law of
Righteousness did not attain to the Law of Righteousness, yet were as confident
as you; but I shall be despised for this my love, in debating this matter with
you, and I doubt you will call this (as Page 15. you do) monstrous and
distracted Doctrine: The instances that I gave against Christopher Tailor to
prove, that we are not justified by works done in the Spirit are reckoned, Page
14. viz. Abraham's works, David's works, Paul's and Isaiahs works, all done in
the Spirit: but not a word of answer to them, no, I calmly challenge them all
to answer to them.

Only they ask a Question, Is it good Doctrine to say that Paul when a
Christian, counted his spiritual obedience loss and dung for Christ? Answ, Yes,
very good, sound, blessed and comfortable Doctrine, received by Millions of
Saints in Heaven and Earth: add but that which you ought, for of that I speak,
viz. in the point of Justification: in the same way are you to understand that
of Isaiah, Isa. 64.6. all our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, (i. e.) as to
justify us in Gods sight: Page 15. they repeat the Question, but slily adds
this to it, viz. and that as a Christain he must suffer the loss of this, (i.
e.) his spiritual obedience, so as not to have it in his heart: O the creeping
Serpent, to insinuate as if I taught the people such Doctrine. Answ. Yes, he
was to have it still in his heart, but not to plead it with God for his
Justification, Phil. 3.9. not having my own Righteousness, which is of the Law,
etc. But how can I make that out, for which they quarrel me here? Page 15. That
all the Righteousness that all the Saints have within them or without them, is
but the Righteousness of the Law. Answ. It is not difficult, otherwise the Law
of God is not a perfect Rule of Righteousness, but that must be grante: Ergo,
it requires all we do and more then any can do, not only outward duty, but an
inward spiritual upright frame of heart, yea the Image of God to be complete
and perfect in us: then my Argument holds good, we are not justified by any
Righteousness of ours done in the Spirit, for the Scripture is peremptory in
it, by the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his fight, Romans
3.20.

They produce two Scriptures here to prove Justification by the works of the
Spirit in us. First, Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
has made me free from the Law of sin and death: Romans 8.4. That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: I have opened both these
places in my Book against Crook and Bailie, I am of that mind that they both
speak as to our Justification, of the Righteousness of Christ's Person, so they
are nothing to their purpose: if they will in their next, plainly and openly
say from the first Scripture, that the Spirits work in us is the matter of our
Justification; and that the Law is fulfilled in our own persons, for our
acceptance from the second Scripture, I promise them a fuller answer: in the
mean while, we are of this mind, that we are not justified by any works done by
us, in and by the Spirit: yet we freely acknowledge, that it is Regeneration
makes us meet for the Kingdom, but not in a way of Merit, that is only by the
bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, but only disposes us for Heaven, without it
none shall see the Lord: Regeneration is to be distinguished from
Justification, as the Cause from the Effect, Justification the cause of
Regeneration, if God did not forgive us our sins for the Merit of Christ, he
would not renew our nature: we confess again, that the Deity perfects all good
in us, and for us, but them the Humanity is in union with it, and acts with it,
and they must not be put asunder: it was the Humanity that was the Offering and
Sacrifice, he offered himself by the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. The Flesh
profits nothing, (i. e. alone) it is the Spirit that quickneth, John 6.63.
yet the Flesh of Christ is the Organ and Instrument in by and with which Christ
performs all his Mediatory works of Redemption, and these two Natures are but
one Person: and whatever was done by the Spirit in the hearts of any, before
Christ's manifestation in Flesh, it was done in reference to, and for the Merit
of his Incarnation: so then in the last place (and then we have not left a hoof
of an exception behind) when I pray that the Spirit would settle, strengthen,
preserve, I believe that the Spirit is given thus to work, because Christ died
for us: John 16.17. If I go not away the Comforter will not come; it is given
by virtue of Christ's entering with his Blood into Heaven: by this time the
things I have written, the Reader will see, consist well together.

There remains nothing now, but some bitter scornful Reflections; let us
patiently hear them, with my Answers:

Page 15. This man (say they) can cast the Law of the Spirit behind his back,
and yet plead, he is justified by the Imputation of Christ's Personal
Righteousness, O gross Hypocrisy.

Answ. Could the Quakers at Hartford prove against me the wilful breach of the
Law of God that I did indulge my self in, or that I had preched or written only
for the Imputation of Christ's Personal Righteousness for Justification, and not
for Holiness of Life and Sanctification, they might then indeed speak at this
rate, but if they cannot, it is no less than a notorious slander: I can say
(through Grace) as the Apostle, I know nothing by my self as to any known sin I
live in, with him will I say again, yet am not I hereby justified, but be that
judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.4. I live in the observance of the Moral Law,
but yet I dare not plead this for acceptance with God, knowing I come not up to
perfection, but my prayer to God shall be that of David's, Psalm. 143.2. Enter
not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified: I will take up that of Job, Job 9.15. Whom, though I were righteous,
yet would I not answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge. Verse. 21.
Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul, believing with that
perfect and upright man (of whom God gave this Testimony, There was none like
him on Earth, one that feared God, and escewed evil, Job 1.8) believing what he
said, would prove true, Job 9.30, 31. If I wash my self with snow water, and
make my hands never so clean: yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine
own clothes shall make me to be abhorred: and is this a crime, must this be
censured for gross Hypocrisy? was David, Job, Paul, or the Pharisee the
Hypocrite? The Pharisee justified himself, and despised the Cross of Christ,
and went about to make his own righteousness to stand: Job and David confessed
their sins, and so did Paul, Phil. 3.9. Counting all dung for Christ, not
having his own Righteousness, which was of the Law: but was very much for
Imputation, he names it ten times at least in the fourth of the Romans: have
the Quakers at Hartford attained to such a perfection in Holiness, by the Law
of the Spirit? and is it discernable in their Converse and Trading, that they
have no need of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, but deride it and make
a scoff at it? The Lord have mercy on them.

They jeer me for any Apology to Sir John Hartop, Page 16.
in case that I had not worded things in my Book so congruously as I might,
that he would bear with me, they say, this is a Salve for all my distracted and
incongruous works. Answ. Had I been one of these infallible Doctors, I need not
to have apologized, but I pretend not to Infallibility, especially in words: I
am not ashamed to speak in humility of my self, and of my own labors, and to
think what I say, not to pretend only (as they suggest) remembering what the
great Apostle said of himself, 1 Cor. 2.3. I was with you in weakness, and in
fear, and in much trembling, and that he with others of his fellow Apostles and
Laborers in the Ministry, did but know in part, and prophecy in part. Ephesians.
6.19, 20. He was not too proud, to desire the Christians prayers for a door of
utterance, that he might open his mouth, and speak the Mystery of the Gospel
boldly, as he ought to speak.

But the People of Hartford are to persuade me to be quiet among my neighbors,
and the Quakers would have them give me no more money for keeping Christ and
them at a distance.

The present Incendiaries need no more, they had done their work, could they by
any means take off the Watch from their duty: the King of France had done his
work, could any persuade the Dutch to be quiet, and to give their Soldiers no
more pay: could the Wolf prevail with the Sheep, that the Spepherd might stay
at home, it would make well for him. The false Apostles did all they could to
exclude the true Apostles, that they themselves might be affected, Gal. 4.17. I
would if possible, live peaceably with all men; but is it possible, while there
is another Jesus, and another Gospel set up at Hartford? Paul and Luther would
have turned the world upside down had they dwelt there: it was a great man that
said, let Heaven and Earth be in confusion, rather then one dram of Truth be
lost: what peace, as long as the whoredoms continue! but, you must give me no
Money. Simon Magus thought all things in Christ's kingdom was carried on by
Money, therefore he thought to tempt the Apostle with Money. Does not this
saying argue the same Spirit? its well if their Religion be not propagated that
same way, we know in a great part it is; let me now speak this plain word to
you Christians at Hartford, the Quakers having administered this occasion to me,
take heed lest they ensnare you by the gain and trade of the world, they know
they have a hank upon you this way already, some of the Town they have won to
them by this means: others have abated in their zeal for Christ, fearing to
lose their worldly interest among the Quakers.

But they say, I keep Christ and you at a distance; therefore you must give me
no Money.

Answ. They acknowledge in many places in their Book, that I own Christ to be
present by his Spirit in his Saints, and do not the People at Hartford witness
that I preach this Doctrine among them? how then do I keep Christ and you at a
distance? are not we united to him by the Spirit? it is I suppose because I
have not yet taught you the Hartford Quakers new notion, viz. That the soul of
Christ's Manhood is in every one of you, and in every Saint throughout the
world; thus they have brought Christ and their Hearers together, and deserves
Money for their new invention of an Immense, Infinite, Invisible, Inform,
Spirituous Manhood, that can pierce doors, and then be sure come into your
bodies, a Manhood turned all into Soul, or an Angel, or into Wind, Fancy,
Nothing.

Last of all, They tell me I boast in saying my Book is unanswered by them,
they say it is not strictly true, for an answer has been written a long time,
but not published.

true, is not the Mothers womb in the world? only it stays there, and is not
come through the place of the breaking forth of Children: John Crook had his
Answer first written in his mind, before it was in his Paper, it was not then
strictly true, but that there was an Answer, before the Answer was written, as
well as before it was published: so witty are these people, we know not how to
speak the plain Truth, as to matter of fact, to them.

But I had not best talk too loud, for if I should, it may occasion the
publication of it, and that (they say) will not be for my credit, and that if
it comes out, I shall have need of a better Antidote, this is their Conclusion.

Here is the same Insinuation in the clause of this Book, as was in the end of
Christopher Tayler's Postcript, he said had more against me then he would
write: these say that the answer to my Book will not be for my credit when it
is published, why are they still so like the Jesuits, going about if possible
to take away our good name and credit from us? But it may be, they mean only
because it will be such a full and clear Refutation of my Book: Truth is strong
and bold, that I fear not, try it as soon as you will, or dare.

But they give me fair warning to provide a better Antidote, here is a tacit
Concession then, that there will be a stronger poison than usual in the future
Answer: however, I have but one and the same, and there needs no other
Antidote, it is sufficient against all the deadly poison, enchantments,
divinations, errors of the Socinians, Quakers, Ranters, Mugletonians, Papists
in this day, viz. That sovereign anointing, spoken of in 1 John 26, 27. These
things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you; but the
anointing which you have received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you: but, as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and
is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him.

Now, see what mischief these men have done to the Christian Religion, how
sacrilegiously they have robbed the Curch of many sweet and comfortable Truths
that the Saints in all ages have lived by Faith upon, as their life and
treasure, in all their failings, weaknesses, and imperfections, trials,
temptations, afflictions, desertions, for if Christ be not the same real, true
Man in Heaven that he was here upon Earth, (which the Quakers have here denied,
while in some wo^ds they confess it,) then it follows, according to what I writ
in my last Book, which I desire may be perused again, 1. There is no
Intercessor, no high Priest to appear in the presence of God for us, for
according to his real Humane Nature, as well as Divine, he is Mediator. 2. Then
is there no entering for us into Heaven, for the way thither was consecrated for
us through the vail of his Flesh, that was his Manhood, by that he went to
prepare a place. 3. Then is there no Spirit to be expected, nor any gift
thereof, for the shedding of it forth was the fruit of his Ascension as Man. 4.
He is not now Lord and King, for according to his Manhood he was exalted above
all Principalities and Powers. 5. Then shall Christ never come again personally
to be Judge of quick and dead: for as Man he is to judge the World, Acts 17.31.
He will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man, etc. This Truth is
openly denied by the Quakers, and no wonder. 6. Then has Christ no
fellow-feeling with us in our straits, for it is only as to his Manhood that he
was made like to us, and tempted as we ase; he is now neither a merciful nor
faithful high Priest if his Manhood does not remain, Heb. 2.17. And lastly, we
cannot then come unto him with any boldness in prayer, but shall be amazed and
confounded in the thoughts of the glorious Majesty of God, if He has not
rendered himself familiar to us, by taking our Humane Nature upon him, and still
retaining it in union with his Deity: upon this it is that we are bid to come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. ult. Because we have an high Priest,
that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
things tempted as we are.

FINIS.

