HEALING QVERIES FOR SICK CHVRCHES.

That is, Some seasonable thing begun, whereby the Present Breaches in Churches
may be Repaired: Future Rents and Divisions prevented; and so all the Lords
People have Communion not in darkness but LIGHT.

PUBLISHED, By a FRIEND to the Virgin Daughter of Zion.

Jer. 8. 22. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Why then
is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?

London, Printed in the Year, 1658.

To all the GATHERED CHVRCHES in England, Scotland and Ireland, PEACE with
HOLINESS be wished.
Men, Fathers and Brethren,
I May say in Jacobs words: Why do ye look one upon another? Behold I have
heard that there is Corn in Egypt, Genesis 42. 12. Parents as they are deeply
affected with their Childrens afflictions: so they are careful to use what
means they can for their recovery. It is very pious and Christian, for the
divisions of Reuben there be great thoughts of heart. Indeed our eyes cannot
weep enough for the breaches among brethren: yet this is but part of our duty.
Get thee up (says God to Joshua) wherefore lie thou upon thy face? Josh. 7.
10. Not blaming him for his mourning, but telling him there was more work to be
done. There are three Reasons (which I shall name) why I have published these
Queries. First, that they may be of some use to Pastors and Teachers of
Churches: who are most concerned in seeking to heal the breaches among them.
Now I do not see away more probable for healing, than to look into the Cause of
their differences.

As for example, when some Brethren are not satisfied about the place of
TRIERS; cannot comfortably join in communion with Soldiers: Nor with such as
have civil Offices under the present Government: think it a PUBLIKC SCANDAL
to Religion, that Church Members should be Jaylors and Judges of the Saints;
and show no cause why they persecute them: Here it is the Ministers duty in a
special manner to appear, where such offenses are taken. And by sound Doctrine
prove (if he can) that these scruples and questions do arise through the
ignorance, and weakness of the Brethren, and that they are offenses taken, but
not given.

Secondly, Of some use to such Brethren as desire to keep themselves pure, and
not be partakers of other men's sins: I hope without any further enlargment,
those who know what it is not to defile their garments, God will enable them to
make a fruitful improvement of these Queries.

Thirdly, Because I do intend to prosecute this subject about Churches a little
further; These Queries concern Churches already constituted: But I have
something to publish for their sakes, who are not yet in Church fellowship.
Lift up your eyes and look on the fields; for they are white already to
Harvest, Joh. 4. 35. Here I shall show (so far as may be hinted by Queries:)
first, what things are necessary that Saints agree upon as uniting principles:
secondly, what things (as differences) may be born with: thirdly, what Opinions
and practices are destructive to the peace and growth of Churches, which
hereafter shall be constituted. Because of the house of Jehovah our God, I will
seek good for thee, Psalm. 122. 9.

But in the queries one thing I forgot; Whereas some Church Officers a while
since took great liberty and boldness to write against the misdemeanour of the
late King, and in their Sermons, had often that Text, Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye
Meroh, etc. What is the reason that Doctrine is now laid aside? I move this
question, to the end that such who are herein concerned may vindicate
themselves: For it is generally said, if that which they wrote and preached
against the King, had been done sincerely, and in the fear of God, they would
now by Preaching and Writing, as earnestly persuade people to lcome forth to
the help of the Lord against the mighty, as they did then.

The close is thus, so that I may be any way useful for the overthrowing of
Iniquity, in Church and State, and the advancement of righteousness in both, I
have my end: With me it is a very small thing to be judged of man's judgment: my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.

Healing Queries for sick Churches.
Question I. WHether in a Church rightly constituted, every member is not alike
under the power of Christ, given to the Church; that is, whosoever breaks the
known laws of Christ, ought to be admonished and dealt with according to Mat.
18. 15, 16, 17, (...). 16. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 14. Levit. 19. 17. Gal. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 20.

Quest. II. Whether such Church Members as know any of their Brethren (in the
same fellowship with them) walk disorderly to the dishonor of God, the scandal
of Religion, and hardening wicked men in their sins; do not wrap themselves in
the sin and guilt of their Brethren; yea, and are murderers before God, if they
seek not to reclaim them, according to the Rules of the Gospel, Lev. 19. 17.
with 1 John 3. 15. Ezec. 3. 18. Jam. 5. 19. 20. Gal. 6. 1.

Quest. III. If a Brother or Brethren sin openly, and the same is known to the
whole Church, but the Church uses not the means and way, which Christ has
appointed for the humbling and recovering of such scandalous members: The
question is, whether the whole Church be not leavened, and her holy things
polluted? yea, further, it may be queried by what Gospel promise such a People
can expect the presence of Christ in the midst of them, so long as they remain
thus rebellious against the Lord, and the whole lump leavened: 1 Timothy 5. 20.
Hag. 2. 12, 13, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 6. Isa. 1. 11. to 17. Josh. 7. 12. Hab. 1. 13.
Jer. 7. 8, 9. Gen 35. 2, 3, 4. Amos 3. 3.

Quest. IV. Whether Churches are to take Cognizance of the Sins mentioned by
Paul in 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, etc. and more particularly, whether it be their duty to
enquire and judge, who are the Traitors and Covenant breakers, there foretold
to be in the last days; briefly, whether Churches, (as Churches) ought to
judge the Actions of their members in civil things, that is, about the
lawfulness of men's Callings, Places, Offices, Administrations, Maintenance?
suppose it be State Affairs, (as they call it) what has the Church to do with
her members in such a case? 1 Cor. 6. 2. 1 These. 4 6. Phil. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 10.
32. 33. 2 Timothy 4. 5. Rev. 2. 2. Heb. 10. 24.

Quest. V. Whether such Church members walk not scandalously and bring a
public dishonor to the Name of God, who join and act with the open Enemies of
the Gospel against the Saints; that is, persecute their Brethren, apprehend
them, and cast them into prison, will be their Judges and Jaylors, and yet have
no matter of Crime to lay to their charge? If so, whether then it be not a
great sin and shame to that Church, who keeps in her bosom any open persecutors
of the Lords people, Psalm. 50. 18. Obe. v. 11, 12, 13, etc. Mat. 24. 48, 49,
50. Act. 9. 4, 5, Mat. 25. 39, 40 43, 45. Ps, 93. 5 1 Pet. 2. 12

Quest. VI. In case the greater number of a Church shall tolerate and allow
apparent sin, in some members, and not deal with them for the same? what is the
duty of the other part (howsoever the lesser) knowing the walking of such
members to be very scandalous and sinful (and yet born with by the greater
number) that they may keep themselves pure, and not be partakers of others men's
sin. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 2 Timothy 3. 2. 3. 5. Hos. 11. 12. 1. Tim. 5. 22. Hos. 2. 2.
Rev. 3. 4. Or thus, If known scandalous persons are in a Church, and the Church
is dealt with for suffering the same? whether that Church may lawfully be left
and separated from, by Brethren (many or few, yet so as the lesser number) who
have used all due means and ways (so far as their duty is) to have the Church
purged of such defilements? but the Major part will not hear, but rather abets
the sinners and justifies the wicked? Again, if the greater number in such a
case may be left, the question is whether as a true Church, or a company of
Rebels, and the visible Church. State remain with the better part, though fewer
in number, Rev. 2. 5. Jer. 7. 11, 12. Mat. 21. 13 Eccles. 9. 18. 2 Chro. 15. 2.
Prove. 17. 15. Jer. 28. 16.

Quest. VII. Whether a Church lying under the guilt of much sin should not
please God far more to execute justice and judgment, that is, purge out the
old leaven, and destroy the accursed from among them, than to pray, preach,
fast, break bread, etc. Yea more, so long as judgment is neglected, and nothing
done against scandalous walkers? where is there any promise that the Lord will
accept of their sacrifices, as Prayer, Preaching, Fasting, etc. Prove. 21. 3. 1 Samuel 15. 22. etc. Isa. 1. 11 Hos. 6. 6. Mic. 6. 6, 7, 8. Isa. 33. 5. Mic. 3.
10, 11, 12. Jer. 7. 21. 23. Mat. 23. 23, 24. Mat. 5. 23, 2^. Rev. 2. 12. Jam.
4. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

Quest. VIII. Seeing it is well known how the Churches have been charged with
Apostasy publicly to the world, and in them (as it is asserted) the second
Apostasy is fulfilled, set down in 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc. It is queried, why some
thing is not published for their vindication; Besides it is desired that they
will declare, 1. What Apostasy that is of which Paul there speaks, 2. To what
time it is to be applied, 3. How it does appear that such Churches as are
fallen in with the present Government, have not by it made that Apostasy. 4.
What is meant by these words in the Text from such turn a side, 2 Pet. 3. 15.
Josh. 22. 10, 11. Tit. 1. 9. Act. 11. 2, 3, 4. etc.

Quest. IX. Whether such Pastors and Teachers of Churches, as join with this
present Government, and have much worldly advantage by it; do not by their
silence show either great ingratitude to their Lord Protector, being as they
say a nursing Father to them (if they can justify the Power and Government
which he has taken up:) or otherwise, whether they give not just occasion unto
People to think they cannot justify him, by Law, Reason, Religion, etc. and so
it is rather of coveteousness than Conscience, that they are fallen in with him;
besides by their silence, whether they deal not the more unworthily with their
Nursing father, (if they can defend him) considering they well know, how the
most conscientious Christians in the Nation are altogether dissatisfied about
the present Government. Prove. 27. 10. and 22. 1.

Quest. X. Whereas that place Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. is by our Brethren often
brought against us (as they know it was once the special objection of
Royalists against them and us,) Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, etc. Here we shall propose a few things, 1. If the higher powers must
be submitted too, because they are ordained of God, and are Gods Ordnanceiv.
whether it be not meant, so far as they are lawfully constituted, and do govern
according to reason and just laws, preserve their peoples Liberties, Persons
and Estates; Again, when they prove Traitors to the Nation, and are the Devils
Agents, whether they may not be severely punished for it. 2. Because these who
resist lawful authority and just commands receive to themselves condemnation;
it be not a non sequitur; Ergo, Usurpers must be submitted too, and unjust
commands obeyed. 3. Rulers must be obeyed, because they are not a terror to
good works but to evil, v. 3. Whether this be a good consequence, when they
are professed enemies to good works, and do evil continually with both hands;
therefore they must be obeyed. 4. Seeing the Magistrate is to be obeyed,
because he bears not the sword in vain, he is the Minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath on him that does evil, v. 4. Here the query may be, if he
seek to ruin, spoil, and enslave the people, gives liberty to all manner of
unrighteousnes, bears the sword not only in vain, in reference to the public
good, but draws it forth upon those that are good, and because they are good,
whither it be the intendment of this text, therefore he must be obeyed. 5.
Whither that which is not the Ordinance of God, but rather of the Devil, and
the mere sin, and presumption of men, is within the compass of this Text. 6.
Whether that which is no point or part of the Magistrates lawful power
ordained of God, but Diametrically repugnant to it, as Tyranny, Oppression,
Violence, etc. is within the Verge of this Text, and to be obeyed for
conscience fake. 7. Whether all the powers intended in the text, said to be
ordained of God, are not circumscribed and bounded with certain rules of Law,
Justice, and Honesty, within which they must contain themselves, and if they
pass beyond those limits, they are none of Gods Ordinances; Consider of it,
take advise and speak your minds. Judge. 19. 30. Prove. 22. 21.

Quest. XI. Whereas one special cause of the present differences divisions, and
rents in Churches, is this; namely, That soldiers and others, who have places
under the present Government (being Church members) are not called to an
account as evil doers: The question is, whether it be not the duty of
Churches, (especially the Officers) for the satisfaction of their offended
Brethren, to give some reasons, that howsoever there is offense taken at
Soldiers and other State Officers, yet they have the word of God to warrant
their practice in holding communion with them, Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17
Tit. 1. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Acts 20 2^. 2 Cor. 1. ^4. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8, etc.

Quest. XII. In like manner, where as it is well known that the place of
Tryers. (as it is commonly called) has given offense to many precious
Christians, and occasioned much trouble in some Churches, no less than
division; the query is, whether it be not the Duty of such TRIERS as are
Church Members to prove (if they can) what they act in that particular business
to be lawful by the Word of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 8.
12, 13. and 9. 22, 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 1 John 2. 10. Isa. 57. 14. 2 Cor. 8. 21
and 13. 7.

Quest. XIII. Whereas in the days of the late King, many honest men for
refusing to submit to an Arbitrary Power, and Illegal Taxes, and standing for
the Rights and Liberties of the People, suffered very much in their Liberties
and Estates, and were counted for it, Good Patriots to their Country: The
question is, if in Churches there are some Persons, who shall promote an
Arbitrary Power, and seek to destroy the civil Rights and Liberties of the
People? whether this be not a Scandal to Religion, and a matter which the
Church is to take notice off, and to deal with such members as offenders, 1
Cor. 6. 8, 9. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Job 24. 2. Psalm. 50. 18. Deuteronomy. 19. 14. and 27 17.
Prove. 22. 28. Phil. 4 8. 1 Thessalonians, 4. 12.

Quest. XIV. Whether in all Ages the Lord has not had some glorious work
proper to every Generation; * Whereas Mr. William Bridge, preaching lately at
the Charterhouse, May 23. 1658. Told his Hearers, That there is now a
Generation work, a generation Truth, and generation Sins. Whether it be not the
duty of all Pastors and Teachers, clearly to declare unto their people, when
the proper Work, Truth and Sins are of this generation. Psalm. 40. 10. Jer. 23.
28. Romans 1. 18.
if so, what is the Work now, as most proper to the Saints of this Generation;
Acts 13. 36. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 5. Or thus, whether to bear witness to and for the
glorious and visible Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to hold forth a public
Testimony against the present Powers of the World, that they shall be all
broken to pieces, and the Lord alone exalted as King of Saints and Nations; be
not now a Work more proper to the Churches and People of God than it was to
Saints in former Ages; Dan. 2. 44 and 7. 13, 14. and 12. 8, 9, 10. Rev. 22. 10.
Act. 1. 6, 7. Isa. 35. 5.

Quest. XV. Whereas Rev. 11. 16. There is mention made of the twenty four
Elders, but the four living Creatures, are left out of the Text; The question
is, whether it may not probably be concluded from the place, (comparing our
present experience with it) that near or about the expiration of the Fourth
Monarchy, when the Kingdoms of this world, are to become the kingdoms of our
Lord and his Christ; there will be a general declining of Church Officers from
the work of that Generation, and the Brethren, (not in Office) more faithful
than their Pastors and Teachers, in holding forth a public Testimony to the
glorious Kingdom and and Reign of Christ, Psalm. 8. 2. Isa. 26. 2. Jer. 50. 45.
1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. Isa. 29. 9. 10, 11, 12. 18. and 43. 27. Rev. 12. 4. Joel 3.
15, 16.

Quest. XVI. Whereas the late divisions and rents in many Churches have risen
from Soldiers and others, who have places under the present Government; It be
not necessary that all Churches (as yet free from the occasion of such trouble)
do well consider what they do, before they admit Soldiers and others (so much
excepted against) into Church Fellowship? Again, for others who either intend
to join to some Church already gathered, or to constitute themselves a Church?
Whether it do not likewise very much concern them to avoid that thing which
others have been so much prejudiced by: As a wise man will not run his Ship
upon that rock, on which he sees another Vessel is split before his eyes. Prove.
22. 3. Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 5. 6.

Quest. XVII. Whether Churches in such a day as this is, should not make
diligent enquiry, what it is that hinders their glory and growth? What it is
that keeps the bad in, and the good out? whence it is that they do not
experience so much life, sweetness, and divine Presence in Church Ordinances
as formerly they did? Again, would they be conscientious, and sincere in
searching for the cause? then, whether it would not be found: First, Negligence
in some Officers, who look more after the world than after the walking of their
Flock, and seek to keep up state and pomp in their own Family, more than
purity and holiness in the house of God. Secondly, Arrogance and Pride in some
Members who being Statesmen, are like the Sons of Zerviah, too hard for the
rest: For through fear some dare not speak to them of their scandalous walking;
others by gifts and preferment have their mouths stopped, though not their
consciences, others care not for it, as if ( Caa^like) they were not their
brothers keeper, Thus though the wickedness of some Church members be like
Gehazis leprosy upon the fore head of the Church; and the world cries shame on
it; yet the Church has neither an ear to hear, nor an ey to see, Lam. 3. 40.
Josh. 7. 5, 6. 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11. Ezec. 3. 4, 5, etc. Mat. 18 7.

Quest. XVIII. Whether unfaithfulness among Churches in neglecting their
Christian Duty each to other, that is, not admonishing one another of the great
corruption, which they see crept into Churches (especially the deceitful
walking of some Church Officers, who were winked at, when they openly sought by
LETTERS and other ways to corrupt the Churches) has not (by the just hand of
God) brought many troubles and divisions upon them: Again, if a Church be
corrupted by suffering scandalous persons in it, what is the Duty of a Sister
Church knowing the same to, be true? And how far, and how long may a Church
hold communion with any Church, which keeps scandalous persons in communion
howsoever admonished of it.

Quest. XIX. Whether the stop, that has been put to the Lords work, and the
good old Cause once famous in the three Nations, with what present oppression
and persecution is amongst us: has not been raised and continued in a special
manner, by some Church Members; And whether such Church members have not been
more false to the Interest of Christ and his People, then any other people, and
betrayed the most glorious Cause that ever was in the world. Jer. 11. 15.

Quest. XX. Whether Pride and Covetousness (so much condemned in holy
Scripture) are sins to be born with in Churches? If not, what is the reason
that few (if any) Church members, though never so apparently proud and
Coveteous are called to an account for such sins. Besides, whether for Pride
and Coveteousnesse, some WITHIN do not far exceed most WITHOUT; Prove. 8. 13
Hos. 5. 5. 1 John 2. 16. Isa. 2. 12. Mal. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 2. Jam. 4. 6. Psalm.
10. 3. 1 Cor. 6 10. Ephesians 5. 5. Luke 12. 15. Col 3. 5. Isa. 5^. 11. Ezec. 16.
48. 51. 1 Cor. 5. 4 Thou can not bear them that do evil, Rev. 2. 2.

Quest. XXI. Whereas the Name of God and Religion, lies under so much reproach
everywhere, by reason of the Apostasy, Hypo- ^^^^hood of Professors; for many
hereby are hindered from joining to Churches: Others hardened in error and sin;
yea, many by this occasion are become Libertines, Blasphemers, Atheists, and
what not? Query is, How far it is the duty of Churches, publicly to appear in
vindicating the great name of God, and wiping off that scandal and reproach
which lies upon the truth and them too. Exo. 32. 32. Josh. 7. 9. and Psa. 122.
9. and 137. 5, 6. Numb. 25. 13. Joh. 2. 17. Neh. 2. 3. Prove. 22. 1.

Quest. XXII. That some Brethren at this time not holding forth a faithful
Testimony, against the corruptions crept into the Churches, and showing the
Churches their evil and sin: so far as their light and duty is: whether this
be not one great cause, that the abuses and corruptions now in Churches are not
reformed? Further the Query is, In what souldanger that member is, who has
made a solemn Covenant before the Lord with his Brethren to practice all known
Gospel order, Christian (...) and duties, both to the Church and every
individual member, shall notwithstanding (contrary to the light of his own
conscience) break that Covenant so solemnly made in the principal part of it.
Prove. 14. 25. Ezekiel. 2. 7. Isa. 58. 1. Jer. 23. 22. Ephe. 17. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Romans 1. 31. Psalm. 15. 4. Romans 21. 27. and 22. 15. 1 John 3. 20. Ruth. 3. 18.
Isa. 30. 9. and 63. 8.

Quest. XXIII. Our last Query shall be; first, Whether there be not good ground
to think, when the Lord shall bring forth his judgments against the Nations of
the world, he will begin at his own house; Jer. 25. 18. 29. Eze. 9. 6. Amo. 3.
2. 1 Pet. 4. 17.

Secondly, Whether the Lords controversy at this time against Churches, be not
their neglect of judgment? Isa. 59. 4. 9. 14, 15.

Thirdly, Whether there be any way (following the Word of God) for Churches to
escape public judgments, than to purge out unclean persons and things? Josh.
7. 13. 26. 2 Samuel 21. 14. Rev. 2. 5. 16. J^^. 1. 15.

FINIS.

