Vera Effigies Samuelis Haworth, M. D.
R. White sc


A DESCRIPTION OF THE DUKE's BAGNIO, AND OF THE MINERAL BATH AND NEW SPAW
Thereunto belonging.

WITH An Account of the Use of Sweating, Rubbing, Bathing, and the Medicinal
Virtues of the Spaw.

BY SAM. HAWORTH, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

TO His Royal Highness JAMES DUKE OF YORK and ALBANY, etc.
Great Sir,
SInce it has pleased Your Highness to express so much Candor and
Condescension, as to encourage this New Undertaking, by suffering it to be
called by Your Royal Name; this small Tract, which is a Description of it,
presumes to throw it self at Your Highness's Feet, humbly imploring Your Favor
and Patronage: For tho it has too hastily broke Shel, and is still Callow, yet
it ventures to take Wing, and fly to Your Princely Bosom for Shelter and
Protection, rejoicing at the Opportunity it has given its Author of rendering a
Grateful Acknowledgment for those Undeserved Favors Your Highness has already
vouchsafed him. Particularly, I return Your Royal Highness most submissive
Thanks for introducing me into His Majesty's Favor, and recommending me upon
the account of the Success I had in Curing Consumptive Persons by a Particular
Method.

That Your Highness would still go on to Favor, and continue to retain candid
Thoughts of this Great Undertaking, now almost Completed; And that this Bold
and Ambitious Attempt, of prefixing Your Name to this small Treatise, may be well
resented by Your Highness, is the humble Request and earnest Desire of,

Great Sir, Your Highness's most Submissive Servant, Sam. Haworth.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE DUKE's BAGNIO, AND OF THE Mineral Bath, and New Spaw, etc.
THE Design of this Treatise being only to acquaint the World with the
particular Conveniences of the New Bagnio, etc. We suppose it needless to make
any Preliminary Apology or Introduction to usher it in. We shall therefore with all possible Plainness and Brevity present the Reader with our Thoughts about
it, and desire his Candid Perusal.

This Bagnio is erected near the West end of Long-acre, in that Spot of Ground
which has been called by the Name of Salisbury-Stables. At the Front of it,
next the Street, is a large commodious House, wherein dwells that Honorable
Person Sir William Jennings (of whose great Worth, and Services to His Majesty
at Sea, not only the King himself, but almost the whole Nation besides, is
sufficiently sensible); who having obtained His Majesty's Patent for the making
of al Public Bagnios and Baths, either for Sweating, Bathing, Washing, etc. is
the Only Undertaker of this New Building. In this House there are several
Rooms set apart for the Accommodation of such as shall come to the Bagnio; and
to the further side of it, the Structure of the Bagnio is adjoined. So that the
first Room we enter to go into the Bagnio, is a large Hal, where the Porter
stands to receive the Money. Hence we pass through an Entry into another Room,
where hangs a Pair of Scales, to weigh such as our of Curiosity would know how
much they lose in Weigh while they are in the Bagnio. Through this Room we pass
into a large Room, called the Dressing Room: This Room has on each side
several private Boxes, for Persons to undress and dress themselves in: The
middle Walk, between the Rows of Boxes, is paved with Black and White Marble.
This Room is always moderately warm, to prevent taking cold when the Body is
stripped; it is 32 Foot in length, and about 30 Foot broad; it is flat on the top,
and covered with Lead. At the farther end of this Room is an Entry, which is
somewhat warmer; in this Entry the Rubbers stand and wait, when they are not
employed. On the farther side of this Entry is a Door or Passage into the
Bagnio it self, which is a stately Edifice, of an Oval Figure, in length 45
Foot, and in breadth 35. It Is covered at the top with a high and large Cupola,
in which there are several round Glasses fixed, to let in Light, which are much
larger, and so fewer in number, than those at the Royal Bagnio. This Cupola is
supported by eight Cylindrical Columns of white Stone Pillars, each of which
are 20 Inches Diameter, and 16 Foot high. Between these Pillars and the Sides
of the Bagnio is a sumptuous Walk, about 7 Foot and a half broad, quite round
the Bagnio; so that the Middle of the Bagnio, within the Pillars, and just
under the Cupola, is 36 Foot long, and 26 broad: yet the Heat within these
Columns, and likewise round about them, is exactly in the same Degree. The
mentioned Walk in the Bagnio is Arched over with Brick; which Arch, with the
Cupola, and all the top of the Bagnio, is covered with Lead. The Bagnio is paved
with Marble, and in the middle of it is placed a Marble Table, which is 20
Inches high, and 6 Foot square. The Sides of the Bagnio are covered with White
Gally-tyles, and in the Walls are made ten convenient Seats, such as are in the
Baths at Bathe: there are likewise 14 Neeches in the Walls, in which are placed
so many Marble Fonts or Basins, with Cocks over them of hot and cold Water, for
the convenience of Washing. On one side of the Bagnio hangs a very handsome
Pendulum-Clock, which is kept to give an exact Account how Time passes away.
Adjoining to the Bagnio there are four little round Rooms, about 8 Foot over,
which are made for Degrees of Heat, some being hotter, others colder, as
Persons can best bear, and are pleased to use. In each of these little Rooms is
fixed a Leaden Cistern, about 2 Foot high, 6 Foot long, and 2 Foot and a half
broad: Over every of these Cisterns are placed two Cocks, the one to supply
with hot, the other with cold Water. These Rooms are likewise al covered with
Cupola's, and their Walls with Gally-tyles.

The Inside of this Bagnio being thus described, it is now requisite we say
something of the manner of Entertainment in it, which is as follows.

The Person that comes to receive the Benefit of this Bagnio, when he first
enters, pays his Money to the Porter, or Person appointed for that purpose,
then if he pleases, he may be weighed in the Scales: whence passing into the
Dressing Room, he is received by the Barbers, and presented with a Box to
himself, his particular Barber attending him, who immediately undresseth him,
causing him to sit down on the Squab or little Couch placed in the Box. Being
thus undrest, and his Head wrapped about with a Napkin, he has a Linen Cloth put
round his Middle, which reaches down to his Feet, and another thrown about his
Shoulders, which hangs like a Mantle down to his Middle, he has a pair of
Slippers given him, and so passes to the Entry of the Bagnio, attended by his
Barber, where he is met by a particular Rubber destined to wait on him, who
bringing him a pair of Wooden Clogs, which he changes for his Slippers,
introduces him into the Bagnio, and then leaves him to walk about, or sit down
on one of the Seats, or else lie along upon the Marble Table, which best
pleases him. Thus, observing the Clock, the Person may continue as long as he
will: If he purposes to sweat much, and desires a greater degree of Heat, he
may walk into one of the little Rooms designed for that purpose; and if he
finds himself almost overcome, or ready to faint, he may pass thence into
another of these little Rooms on the other side of the Bagnio, which is much
cooler, and there find present Relief; or, if he please, he may call for a
Bottle of a Diaphoretic Liquor, which our Apothecary has always in readiness,
which is a very pleasant Cordial, and will both prevent Fainting, and quickly
restore him from it if he already faint, and likewise much promote his
Sweating. After he has been in about an Hour, more or less, he calls for his
Rubber who first causes him to sit down in a Chair, over against one of the
Stone Basins in that Bagnio; there with his Hands he artificially rubs him
over, beginning with the Arms, then the Legs, afterward the Back, and then the
Breast and Belly: Hereby he fetches off much Scurf; which before stopped the
Pores, and so hindered those Sluices of Perspiration from sending forth those
Heterogeneous Particles which Nature deems not fit to remain mixed with that
wholesome Liquor the Blood, and therefore endeavors to throw them off that way.
After this, to make the Parts more pliable, the Rubber stretches every Limb of
the Body, and distends every Joint in each Limb; then he throws warm Water upon
him, and washes his Body all over, and hereby renders him white and clean.
Having thus done, he takes him into a little Room, which is a Degree colder;
there he rubs his Body al over with a Hair-Chamlet Glove, which gently
scratcheth the Body, and is exceeding pleasant to the Sense; the particular Use
and Benefit of which, we shall relate in the Sequel of this Discourse. After he
has continued this pleasant sort of Friction for some time, more or less, as
the Person desires it, he fetches a Basin of a Perfumed Lader, with which he
washes the Body al over; this, the Rubber tells you, he finds at his own
Charge: The Body being washed hereby, retains a very grateful and pleasing
Scent. This being finished, he rinseth the Body with Water, and the fills the
Leaden Cistern, setting the Cocks of hot and cold Water both running, whereby
the Cistern is soon filled with Water moderately warm. The Cocks being then
both stopped, the Person is desired to lie or sit in the Cistern of Water; and
the Cocks being at his Hand, he sets the cold Cock a running, which renders the
Water in the Cistern gradually colder and colder: Thus he cools himself at
pleasure; and when he thinks himself cool enough, fresh Linen is brought him:
He then walks to the Door of the Bagnio, where his Barber meets him with a pair
of Slippers, and a long white Linen Frock; which having put on, he is again
conveyed to his Box, where lying along upon the Couch, he is with fresh Linen
wiped dry, and covered with Clothes for some time, where he lies till he is
desirous to dress: The Barber then brings him his Shirt warmed at the Stove,
which is at one corner of the Dressing Room; having put on his Shirt, he helps
him on with his Clothes, and then brings him his Shoes ready cleaned: Having
put on his Clothes, Shoes, and Stockings, he shaves him, if he desires it. The
Person then repairs to the Scales, and sees what he has lost; and then leaving
the Bagnio, he betakes himself to his Pleasure or Business, finding himself as
brisk, active, and vigorous, as if he had just skipt into the World, and never
wearied his active Members by any Exercise or Occupation.

The same Reception and Entertainment do also Women find, only with this
difference, viz. On Women's Days there are all imaginable Conveniences of
Privacy, and not a Man to be seen; but all the Servants are of the Female Sex,
and such as are not only neat and cleanly, but likewise skilful and dexterous
in the Business they have to do. They likewise use a Water which affects the
Skin with an admirable Whiteness and Clearness, with which they wash the whole
Body, but especially the Hands, and Face, and Neck; whereby much Luster and
Beauty is added to those Parts. The Days appointed for Men are Mundays,
Wednesdays, Thursdays; and Saturdays; those for Women are Tuesdays and Frydays
only.

Having thus described the Inside of this Bagnio, and given a concise Specimen
of the Manners and Customs appointed for the Accommodation of such as shall
frequent it; it is altogether requisite we should give as short an Account as
may be of the Particulars belonging to it, especially the Bath and Waters,
before we relate the singular Use and Virtues of them all; which take as
follows.

On the East side of the Bagnio there is a Coffee-house fronting the Street,
with this Inscription upon the Sign, THE DVKES BAGNIO COFFEE-HOVSE. Near the
end of this Coffe-house is the great Gate, which opens into a large Courtyard,
convenient for the receiving of Coaches: In this Courtyard is visible the
Front of the Bagnio, having this Inscription upon it, in Golden Letters, upon a
Carved Stone, THE DVKES BAGNIO. On the left hand of the Yard, over against the
Coffee-house, is a very convenient Building, erected for the Accommodations
belonging to the Bath; on the outside of which is inscribed in like manner, THE
DVKES BATH. This Building is about 42 Foot broad, 21 Foot deep, and three Story
high. There are in the lower Story, of first Floor, several Partitions: On the
West side of it is a narrow Room for a Laboratory, in which are Chymic
Furnaces, Glasses, and other Instruments necessary for making the Bath-Waters.
At the East end a Door opens, through which Persons that come to the Bath first
enter into an Entry, and then turn on the Right Hand into a convenient Room
appointed for their Reception; and on the further side of this Room a Door
opens to the Bath, round about which, within the Partition, is a Place for the
Friends or Servants attending such as go into the Bath, to stand, who may lean
over, and see those that wade in the Waters. At one Corner of the Bath are five
or six Steps down into the Water. This Bath is about 10 Foot long, 7 Foot
broad, and 5 Foot deep; tho it seldom or never is full quite up to the top: It
holds about 10 Tun of Water, according to the Rules of Gaging: On the further
side of it are Seats in the Wall, such as are in the Baths at Bathe: At one
corner of it is a large Pipe, to let in Water upon occasion; and also a Cock
somewhat smaller, which is constantly running to supply the Bath with Water.
There is likewise another small Cock, and several Vessels adapted for our
purpose, through which those prepared Liquors pass which impregnate the Water,
and cause that Heat and Ebullition which appears immediately after their
mixture with the Water. The Bath is hereby kept continually hot to an exact
Degree, and is impregnated by the very same Mineral Principles wherewith the
Natural Baths are; only in this Bath they are more pure, being separate from al
noxious Fumes, Arsenical Particles, and other poisonous and unwholesom
Mixtures: So that this Artificial Bath is much safer and better than any
Natural ones; for (not to lessen the Esteem of Natural Baths, they being
extraordinary Blessings which God hat conferred upon some Countries) in Natural
Baths there is much of Contingency and Casualty; and it is almost as probable
that the Currents of Water in the Bowels of the Earth should fall upon a
poisonous, as upon a wholesome or innocent Mine; and so may almost as soon be
impregnated with Antimonial, Arsenical, or Mercurial, as with Sulphurous,
Nitrous, or Vitrioline Particles. Hence several Baths in Europe do retain such
deadly and pernicious Qualities, that none dare to enter them: Others, tho
frequented, are in some measure hurtful and destructive: And there is no
Natural Bath in the World but has some unwholesom Particles swimming about
with the numerous Sulphurous ones.

On the Right Hand coming out of this Bath is a little square Room,
accommodated for the wiping and wrapping such Persons as use the Bath; which
Room is kept moderately warm by the Heat of the Bath. At the end of this Room
there is a Door into the Entry, and at the end of the Entry a pair of Stairs up
to the Chambers above, where there are Beds, Fires, and al manner of
Necessaries for such as bathe. There are likewise Garrets for Servants
Lodgings, and other Conveniences.

The Manner and Circumstances of Bathing are these. The Persons desiring to use
the Bath, whether one, two, three, or more, first come directly to the
Bath-house, through the Courtyard adjoining to the Bagnio and Bath, and, by a
Servant appointed for that Business, are conducted into the common Room of
Reception, who having received their Money, either takes them into the private
Room at the end of the Bath, or else up Stairs, if they desire it, and there
undresseth them: After they are stripped, he puts on them a Canvas Shirt or
Shift, gives them a pair of Clogs, and so leads them to the Bath. If they are
feeble, and unable to help themselves, they have a Guide enters with them;
otherwise they go in without. When they are in, they either walk about, or sit
down on one of the Seats in the Bath, which Seats are some higher and bigger,
some lower and lesser, for the Convenience of tal and short, great and small
Bodies. They continue in the Bath as long as they please, or so long as their
Physician, if they consulted any, advised them. They have also, while they are
in the Bath, offered them by the Apothecary a Bottle of the mentioned
Diaphoretic Cordial Liquor. During the time they stay in the Bath, they either
divert themselves by talking with their Friends or Servants about them, or else
by taking notice of the somewhat strangeness of the great Ebullition and Heat
which now and then by Intervals they will perceive to be caused by the
abovementioned Mixtures: Also, if they please to order the Windows to be shut,
and so the Bath darkened, the Surface of those Vessels wherein the Mixtures are
made will appear Light and Flaming, and several shining Vapors or Exhalations
will be seen to ascend, in the manner of Fiery Meteors; which Phenomena are
caused by the avolition of the Sulphurous Aporrhea or Fumes from the Mineral
Principles of this Bath, and are somewhat pleasant to behold: So that although the
great Virutes and admirable Qualities, besides the Cleanliness of it, is the
main Inducement to persuade Persons to make use of it; yet these Curiosities
being for Diversion-sake worth observing, I thought fit to mention them in the
Description of the Bath, intending by and by to insist upon the peculiar
Virtues and Qualities of it.

Therefore to return from this Digression, and proceed in what is yet behind,
in reference to relating the Manner and Circumstances of Bathing. The Persons
in the Bath having continued there as long as is thought convenient and
necessary for this time, they come out, being handed up by a Servant, and
entering the adjacent little Room, they are wiped dry, a Shirt or Shift and Gown
is put on them, and hence they are either conveyed into warm Beds prepared for
them in the Chambers, or else they are carried in a close Chair to their own
Lodgings near the Bath, such as they shall choose for themselves.

Women likewise two Days every Week are here received with all Decency and due
Respect, by Persons of their own Sex, ordered to attend them. There is also one
Day appointed in every Week for a particular Bath prepared for Children in the
Rickets, very effectual in that Distemper, as will appear in the following Part
of this Treatise, and likewise by the Experience of such as will have occasion
to send their Children to it.

But to avoid being prolix, I shall now (having given this summary Account of
the Particulars belonging to the Bath) in as few Words as may be, give a
Description of the New Spaw.

This Spaw is a Well of Medicinal Waters, artificially made, by Mineral
Principles, conveyed into the Earth by appropriated Vessels, there springing up
in a sufficient Quantity to supply al Persons that shall have occasion to drink
them. Their Color is clear and transparent, their Taste sweet, and somewhat
stiptic; they turn Purple if mixed with Gals, and are reduced to Transparency
by a few Drops of Spirit of Vitriol: Oil of Tartar per Deliquium will curdle
and turn them White, and Spirit of Vitriol will restore them to their former
pellucid Color. The Well is covered over with Stone, with a Figure upon it, and
other Carved-work about it: It has a small Iron Door, which is kept locked, and
opened only by the Person that draws the Water. This Well is made close to the
Wall of the Bath-house, in the Yard, about the middle of that Building; and it is
encompassed on the Yard-side with tal Pallizadoes, in which there is a Door
made for the Person that draws the Waters to pass to the Well, and likewise a
Window, out of which the Waters are to be delivered to those that want them.
Near to these Pallizadoes is a little Room, for Persons to sit in that drink
the Waters. There are also al other convenient Accommodations for the Drinking
these Waters, as Bottles, Cups, Glasses, etc.

This is all I thought necessary to relate in reference to the Description of
the Bagnio, the Bath, and Spaw. The subsequent Part of this Tract is to be
spent in mentioning the great Virtues, Effects, and Qualities of them al: And
we shall begin with the Use of the Bagnio.

Amongst the many excellent Helps and useful Inventions wherewith the Industry
of Ancient and Modern Physicians has supported the tottering Fabric of Men's
Bodies, the Practice of Bagnios deservedly claims an honorable Mention, and
justly challenges a venerable Esteem. And indeed if we consider how long they
have been known to the World, it cannot be supposed (whithout a manifest
Reproach to the Judgment of the Learned in so many Ages, who having often
experienced the great Advantages they have received by them, took care to hand
them down to our Times, and recommended them to the Use of succeeding
Generations) that their Usefulness is not found to equal the Character which
they have always given them, and which we now contend for.

Besides, when we remember how nearly Art resembles Nature in this sort of
Administration, we have no reason to question such considerable Effects from
Means so highly probable; for, as it is generally acknowledged, that by
observing the singular Benefit some have received by involuntary Bleeding at
Nose, some at the Hemorhoids, others in other Parts, we were first directed to
take up the Lancet, open a Vein, and call in the Assistance of Phlebotomy; so
it is not unlikely, that the Ancients taking notice of the great Relief some
have found after, Critical Sweats, by a free Transpiration of the Fuliginous
Parts of the Body through the Pores, received the first hint of attempting the
like Evacuations by Artificial Baths or Bagnios, thereby powerfully assisting
the weakness of sluggish Nature, in throwing off the offending Matter. We need
not look back so far as to the Times in which Rome, when Mistress of the World,
boasted of near 200 beautiful Structures erected for this purpose, since the
present Practice of the Turks obviously presents it self to our Consideration;
the Wisdom of whose Governors has thought fit to provide such Accommodations
in all the principal Places of that vast Empire, and endow them with large
Revenues: Nor do they think their Charge and Trouble in erecting these Bagnios
lost; for they apparently find themselves much recruited and invigorated by the
frequent use of them; as likewise several Distempers are hereby prevented. It Is
rare to see any there afflicted either with Gout, Dropsy, or Rheumatisms; the
Reason of which can be ascribed to nothing so much as this wholesome Custom of
using Bagnios.

Not only in Turkey, but also in several Parts of Europe, the use of Bagnios is
much esteemed of; particularly in several Parts of Hungary, Germany, Sweedland,
Denmark, etc. where they are in great request.

Now if Bagnios are thus useful, the frequent Sweating in them so beneficial;
if they are so much in request abroad, and found to be of such extraordinary
Advantage to Kingdoms, why should we exclude them? It Is matter of great wonder
to me, that in this pregnant Age, when almost every Art and Science (but more
particularly the Noble Faculty of Physic) has been more improved than in
several preceding Generations, and almost al ingenuous useful Inventions,
whether found out in Europe, or any other Parts of the World, have been brought
into immediate Use and Practice, that so admirable and Invention, and so
publicly known in other Parts, was not thought on in England till about four
Years ago. Certain I am, that if the real Virtues and Benefit of frequenting
Bagnios were well known and believed by the generality of the Inhabitants of
London and Westminster, it is not the Royal and the Duke's Bagnio would be able
to receive the twentieth part of those that would crowd in upon them. But such
is the remiss, careless, and negligent Humor of the Inhabitants of these
Islands, that they think not of preventing Distempers til they come upon them,
and then they smart for it. There is no Part of Physic so much rejected and
forgotten, as the Prophylactic or Hygieinal, which is the Preservative Part,
tho no one Part of Medicine ought to be more respected. To this very end Mr.
Boil, the Mirror of our Age, has prompted us to this Study, in his
Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, Part 2. Essay 4. Now that Bathing and
Sweating is useful in the Prophylactic or Preservative, as well as in the
Therapeutic or Healing Part of Physic, is evidently enough demonstrable. For
nothing tends more to the preventing of Distempers, and so, ex consequenti, for
the preserving of Health, than the assisting of Nature in throwing off what is
offensive to her, and incongruous with her Balsamic Crimson Liquor, and other
deputrated Juices. The Pores of the Body, which are the Out-lets of those
unwelcome Guests, are soon obstructed, by the constant and successive thronging
forth of Effluviums by insensible Perspiration, some of which are glutinous, or
rather crooked, and so hang in their very exit, by which others are afterward
stopped in their passage, and so in time several Pores of the Body are almost
quite clogged, and Nature many times put to a force to burst them open: In the
mean time several of these pernicious Corpuscles, which the Blood would
otherwise transmit through those Pores, finding no passage into the open Air, at
the yet too weak repulse of Nature, are hurried about again by Circulation, and
hereby oftentimes such irregular Motions in the Blood created, by Natures
strenuous endeavor to throw them off, by a kind of abhorring violence and
impetuosity, that the genuine Ferment, and slow and moderate Motion of the
Blood, is exalted to a rapid Motion and furious Ebullition, and so many times
fatal and destructive Maladies are created; all which, by the moderate use of
Bagnios, might be prevented. And this is the reason why the Turks, and the
Natives of other Countries that have the frequent use of Bagnios, are seldom
sick, and live to a prodigious Age, because constant Perspiration being hereby
promoted, the very Seeds of Distempers are thrust out, and the Enemies of
Nature quite exterminated; so that Nature having nothing heterogeneous, or
contrary to the Principles of Life, she performs her proper Functions with the
greatest regularity to a competent Old age. The Body then resigns not by being
overcome by any Distempers, but because its Organs are quite worn out and
impaired by their long Exercise, and so unfit and unable for longer Service. We
may mention the Use of Bagnios not only in preventing Diseases, as we have just
now evinced, but also in curing and removing some particular Maladies and
Infirmities. What can be prescribed better for a new-taken Cold, than to sweat
moderately in a well-tempered Bagnio? For, as the Sulphurous and sticking
Particles of the Blood do sometimes hang together in their Passage from the
Body, and so obstruct the Pores; so it is also undeniable, that frigorific and
cold Particles, which swarm and glide about in the fluid Air, especially in
Winter, darting upon the Body exposed to the Air, do often stick in the Pores,
and so hinder Perspiration, and hereby occasion very bad Effects, and
perplexing Symptoms in the Body. Now it is not only highly probable, and easy
to imagine, but certainly the Effect and Product of daily Experience, that
these pernicious cold Particles are soon driven away and put to flight by the
calorific or hot Particles, of which there are enough floating or rather jumping
about in Bagnios. Cold Particles have likewise other hurtful Effects upon the
Body, besides secluding the Pores; which is by entering the Body, and mixing
themselves with the Blood, and hereby causing Coughs, Catarrhs Defluxions,
Hoarsness, Quinzies, Pleurisies, Fevers, Rheumatisms, Pains, Headaches,
Toothaches, Deafnesses, etc. All which direful Maladies are prevented, if the
Party soon after taking Cold enter a Bagnio, the Heat expelling those Particles
which are the Causes of the mentioned Evils.

Another Use of Bagnios may be to recruit the Body after a tedious and wearisom
Journey; for if a Person coming off such a Journey do immediately make use of
the Bagnio, it presently refreshes him, prevents, Stiffness of the Limbs, and
renders him as fit for Business the next day, as if he had never traveled.

To what has been said, I may add, That Sweating is useful in Surfeits gotten
by Fruits, Meats, Wines, and other Strong Liquors; by causing the Blood to
throw off and separate that which being mixed with it, gave it the Surfeit: For
which reason it is very proper and benficial for such as drink hard, to make
frequent use of Bagnios.

Bagnios are likewise many times helpful to such as have Old Pains and Aches,
and also newly contracted Rheumatisms.

Farther we have to add concerning the Benefit of Bagnios, That the Friction or
Rubbing used in them is of extraordinary use to Humane Bodies, as well as the
Sweating: For hereby the Circulation of the Blood in the small Capillary Vessels
is exceedingly promoted, and the narrow Ducts and Passages in the extreme and
superficial and cutaneous Parts of the Body, wherein the Blood and other
Liquors are often coagulated, or those Vessels stopped by other Accidents, are
hereby opened; the tender Nervous Fibers are also hereby rubbed up and
stimulated to perform their Exercise. So that many and considerable are the
Advantages of so little and unthought-of a thing as Friction. And this is not
only my bare Opinion, but the Opinion of several Learned Authors. Galen in
several places of his Works highly commends Friction; particularly, in Lib. de
Artic. cap. 81. he says, Frictiones reddunt Fibrarum substantiam pleniorem,
Carnium vero validiorem; Frictions render the substance of the Fibers fuller,
the Flesh more firm. Also Lib. de Offic. cap. 25. he says, Frictio moderata
nutrit; Moderate Friction nourishes. We have not only the Authority of Galen
for the abetment of our Assertion; but likewise several Modern Authors do
testify the same.

The Lord Verulam, in his History of Life and Death, looks upon Touch and
Friction as a great Medic Branch, and effectual Cure of many Diseases and
Infirmities; That Motion and Warmth (which make up Friction) draw forth new
Juice and Vigor into the Parts; and that they also contribute much to the
Prolongation of Life, etc. See his History of Life and Death, Hist. 6. Sect. 3.
and in Canon xiii.

Mr. Boil, in his Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, Part 2. c. 15.
compares the Bodies of Animals to Engines, whose distant Parts may be altered
much for the better or worse, by Impressions upon some other Part, by Motions
confessedly Mechanical: He also tells us how much the wel-dressing and Currying
of a Horse contributes to his Thriving; that he shall look better by such
wel-ordering, than twice the quantity of Corn without such care taken of him;
That the Brasilian Emperics, tho otherwise very unskilful, do strange things in
the preserving of Health, and removing Diseases, by such means; curing Cronic
Diseases by Friction, Acute ones by Unction.

You may see more among Dr. Beal's Communications concerning the Cure of
Excrescences and Wens by the Touch of a Dead Man's Hand, and Friction; and of
some that would cause Vomiting or Purging by different Stroking, and give ease
in the Gout; as also the Benefit an old Gentleman received, having his Feet
lickt by a Spaniel. Of which see at large in Philosophic Transactions, N. 12.
p. 206, 208. for the Year 1666.

It Is likewise credibly reported, and I am apt to believe it, That Mr. Hobbs,
who lived to a great Age, was a great Admirer of Frictions, and oftentimes
employed his Man to rub him down with a course Cloth, if not constantly.

It Is also more than probable, That many great Cures which have been done by
some Private Persons, who have been Famous for Stroaking or Rubbing the Parts,
and have been thought to have had an Extraordinary or Divine Gift or Happiness,
that way, have oftentimes been no other than the natural Effects and
Consequents of Friction.

The Famous Van Helmont tells us, That he himself could by the Milk of an Ass
tell whether she had been that day diligently Curried or no. Now so considerable
an Alteration in Milk, should methinks strongly argue, that a great one is in
the Blood, or other Juice of which the Blood is elaborated, and consequently in
diverse of the principal Parts of the Body, which must have preceded it. Now
there being so sensible an Alteration made in the Body of a Brute by mere
Currying, how much more Benefit and Advantage must needs accrue and redound to
the Body of Man by accurate Friction?

Thus we have endeavored to demonstrate the great Use and Benefit of Bagnios.
Now that this ample and spacious Structure of the Duke's Bagnio does not fall
short of, but rather exceed most of the Bagnios in Europe, is the Assertion of
al Travelers that have yet seen it.

That which next occurs to our Consideration, is the Use and Benefit of Baths,
and particularly of this New Artificial Bath.

Not undeservedly have Natural Baths been applauded by the most Eminent and
Learned Physicians of many successive Generations; neither has the general
Esteem of the Vulgar for them, for so many past Ages, been merely the Fruits of
Fancy, without Ground or Reason, since the multitude of Cures that have yearly
been effected by the Use of them, has been a sufficient Manifesto of their
great Virtue and Usefulness.

Never was the Use of Baths so much in vogue in Europe as now. The most
Renowned, and those that indeed excel al other Natural Baths in Europe, are
those of Hungary, Dr. Brown's Travels.
at Glas-Hitten, an Hungarian Mile from Schemnitz: There are five very
convenient Baths, with handsome Descents into them, and covered over with large
high Roofs. These Baths are exceedingly frequented, by reason of the
extraordinary Cures that are done by them. Also at Eisenbach, which is four
English Miles from Glas-Hitten, are two very commodious Hot Baths, which are
very much frequented. Not only in Hungary, but likewise in Germany, Natural
Baths are highly esteemed, and much used: Particularly those of the famous City
of Aken are much celebrated in many Parts of Europe. They were found out in the
Year of our Lord 53. by one Granus, a Noble Roman, who adorned them after the
manner of the Roman Baths, and built a Noble Habitation near them, part of
which is still to be seen, retaining the Name of Turris Grani. Hence likewise
these Thermae are still called Aquae Graniae. Within the Walls of this City are
three Baths, viz. the Emperor's Bath, the Little Bath, and the Bath of St.
Quirinus. The Emperor's Bath was very large, but is now divided by Partitions
into several Bathing-rooms. This is that Bath in which Charles the Great
formerly took so much delight, that he spent the latter end of his Days here,
and would frequently swim in it, and invited abundance of his Friends to this
Bath, so that a hundred at once did frequently enter it. There are likewise
other Baths about this City, as the Bath of St. Cornelius, the Rose-Bath, so
called from Mr. Rose, a Citizen, that built it; also the Compus Badt, or Poor
Man's Bath. These are esteemed to be Sulphureo-Nitrous; their Smell is
offensive, and Water not transparent. About a Furlong from the South Bath of
Aken is a Village called Borset, where there are Twenty eight Baths, eath of
them holding Fifty Tun of Water, and all of them frequented.

In Austria, at Baden, are Fourteen very sumptuous and delightful Baths, al of
them well beautified, and much resorted to.

The Turks also make great use of Baths, as well as Bagnios; and do most of any
Nation beautify their Baths, and always build large Cupolas over them.

We may likewise mention the Hot Waters at Bourbon in France, the use of which
in Bathing, as well as Drinking, have given such satisfaction to the World of
their singular and admirable Qualities, that Persons from al Parts of Europe do
throng and flock thither for the sake of Bathing in them. Thus we see how
Foreign Parts prove exemplary to us in the frequent use of Bathing.

'Twil not be amiss now to mention something concerning the Natural Baths in
our own Native Country. Those that are most known and frequented, are those of
Bathe in Somersetshire, which were ('it is said) found out by one Bladud, King of
the Britans, about 900 Years before Christ. This Bladud was surnamed a
Magician, and was counted by the Common People to be a Conjurer, tho all that he
did to deserve that Character, was nothing but the Effects of his Learning and
Ingenuity.

Guidot of Bath.
The Baths of Bathe are in number chiefly three; the King's, the Cross, and the
Hot Bath; the Queens being but an Appendent to the King's, as the Lepers to the
Hot Bath.

The King's Bath is about 58 Foot long, and 40 Foot broad: The Queens, 25 Foot
long, and 24 Foot broad: The Cross Bath, 24 Foot long, 19 Foot over Northwards,
and 12 Foot over on the South: The Hot Bath, 30 Foot long, 13 Foot broad. If we
reckon by Gage, we find that the Kings Bath contains about 314 Tun of Water;
the Queens 81 Tun 3 Hogsheads, the Cross 53 Tun, the Hot 54 Tun. These Baths
are much frequented in the Summer; yet not so much as they would certainly be,
if due Observation was made, and notice taken of the many Cures are done by
them, and the admirable Virtues of them. But for what farther might be
mentioned of these Baths, I refer the Reader to Dr. Jorden of Natural Baths,
and Guidot's Discourse of Bathe, and the Hot Waters there.

Another admirable Bath in England is the Sulphur-Bath at Knaisbrough in
Yorkshire, the extraordinary Virtues of which, as the Causes of its Heat, are
accurately discussed by that Ingenious Physician Dr. William Simpson (lately
deceased) in his Discourse of this Bath, adjoining to his Zymologia Physica, or
a Philosophic Discourse of Fermentation.

It might now be expected we should say something of the Causes of Heat in the
Hot Baths, and of the particular Minerals wherewith they are commonly
impregnated; but the Largeness of that Theme will not agree with the Brevity
which we have resolved to limit our selves unto, and therefore I shall not
enter upon it.

Nor shall we launch out to relate the Virtues of particular Natural Baths, but
only betake our selves to declare the Use of this New Artificial Bath, by
giving an Account of the several Diseases that it may safely and successfully
be prescribed for.

Only let us premise thus much, to take off whatsoever prejudice the Reader may
possibly have entertained against an Artificial Bath, That there can be no
Reason in the World alleged, why Baths may not by Art be prepared with the
same Mineral Ingredients that the Natural ones are impregnated with, which shall
equal, if not exceed any of them al. The Reason may be this, That there are no
Metals in the World but by Art may be so prepared, as that the prepared
Particles of those very Metals may be mixed with Water, and so the particular
Virtues of those Particles communicated to the Water. Secondly, There are no
Saline, Aluminous, or Esurine Particles in the Body of the Earth, which,
impregnating Water, render it able to prey upon and dissolve the Metals or
Mineral Sulphurs there, but what may be obtained or prepared by Art, or
something analogous to them. Thirdly, There are no Natural Baths in the World
but have some Arsenical, Antimonial, or else some other unwholesom offensive
Particles, mixed with the more wholesome and powerful Principles of it, which
render those Waters less helpful and effectual in routing those Maladies for
which they are prescribed. But this Artificial Bath consists of Principles most
refined and depurate, and so consequently most innocent and effectual: For
whatever is poisonous and pernicious to the Nerves, is abstracted and separated
from them; but whatever is purely Sulphurous, Balsamic, and agreeable to the
Nerves, is added to them. Besides, our Bath is much more convenient than the
Baths at Bathe, it being within-doors, and covered, so that Persons need not
fear the bad Effects of being exposed to the open Air. This likewise renders
our Bath useful in Winter, as well as in Summer. Another Convenience of it is,
that it is at London, whither the numerous Diseased Persons, that either have
not Money, or Strength to travel down into Somersetshire, may here be
accommodated with small Charge or trouble, and that altogether to as much
purpose.

We shall now mention the particular Distempers in which this Bath gives
immediate Relief: And that which first occurs, and hardly admits of any Relief
from any other Means than Bathing, is the Palsy. This it does by opening the
Pores of the Body, absolving the Nerves from their Obstruents, dinting the
Acrimony and Sharpness of the Serum, dissolving coagulated Blood, and giving
Current to that fluid Balsam of Life, and at length reducing the Nervous and
Membranous Parts to their due Order and Tone. For the same Reason this Bath is
likewise very effectual in Convulsions, Cramps, Epilepsies, Pains, Numbness,
and Lameness in the Joints, and al other Affects of the Nervosum genus, which
are caused by the various Seisures of pungent, acid Particles upon the Nerves,
hereby first vitiating the Nervous Juice, and then causing Contorsions in those
tender Vessels, whereby their Tone is altered, contracted, or relaxed. Now as
these Nervous Maladies are created by the prevailing of supervening Acids,
resulting from some spurious inordinate Fermentation upon those Animal Chords,
and so causing Obstructions, Contractions, Relaxations, Coagulations, etc. so,
in order to their Cure such Remedies are to be sought after as may dint, alter,
and dulcifie such kind of Acid Particles, and thence may loosen the contracted,
smooth and make even the contorted, and strengthen the relaxed Nerves; yea, and
may every way answer the Indications of the depraved Tones of those Animal
Pendulas or Vital Strings, whereby the imprisoned Spirits may again be set
free, and all the Animal Functions be restored to their pristine State. Now of
this sort is our New Artificially-prepared Bath, which by correcting the Acids,
supples and softens the contracted, strengthens and binds up the weak, and very
much repairs the depraved Tone of the Genus Nervosum. We may also add under
this Head, the Stiffness of the Limbs and Joints, Contractions of the Tendinous
and Musculous Parts: For these outward Maladies being caused through some rejected
Acids, which wanting a due Fermentative motion to give them wing by
Perspiration, are coagulated or hardened in the external Parts: By this Bath the
Pores being opened, and they dissolved and put into Motion, are either
sweetened, or carried off.

We may likewise here mention, That this Bath may be used in Atrophyes or
Aridulas, Witheredness of one or more Parts; for by helping a fresh
Fermentation of the Blood, it may force its passage into the otherwise deserted
Parts, and thereby become capable of distributing an equal Nourishment to every
Part.

The next general Distemper that this Bath is proper for, is the Gout. O, what
direful Pains, what wracking Dolours do some undergo, by means of this
cruciating Malady! How are some (otherwise stout and undaunted Persons) forced
to cringe, stoop, and cry out, when this Tyrant begins to teize them? Now
nothing more safe and speedy to give ease in these horrid Torments, than to
enter into this New Bath: It immediately dints that Fermental Acor impressed upon
the Synovia of the Joints, so easily communicable to the adjacent Nerves: For
this Distemper, as well as the forementioned Maladies, is chiefly determined and
specificated by Acid Particles fixed and coagulated upon different Humors and
Parts. Now it is the essential Efficacy of a subtilized Sulphur (and such is
the chief Principle of our Bath) to dint Acids, and to resolve such as are
coagulated; so that by the Use of this Bath I doubt not but Persons will find
so much Alleviation of these previous Symptoms, and such a Mitigation of the
Severity of a future Fit, as that it will soon need no Pen to commend it, or
Tongue to assert its Usefulness. Under this Head may be added, Rheumatisms,
Sciaticas, Old Pains and Aches, Strains, and other Griefs, here too tedious to
relate; all which Affects may be removed, or at least in a great measure
lessened, by the use of this Bath.

The next grand Malady for which the frequent use of Baths is proper, is a
Scorbutic Lassitude, Debility, Sloth of Limbs, Drowsiness, Obtuseness of the
Internal Senses, and other liminary Symptoms of the Scurvy. Most of the Affects
which are the Buds of that reigning Malady the Scurvy, do depend on the
Intemperature of the Animal Spirits, not being potent enough to perform their
Offices with alacrity, to which their accustomed just Temperament is absolutely
requisite. Now by moderate Bathing the Animal Spirits are quickened, the Nerves
cherished, and all Obstructions and Remoras to their spritely Motion taken
away, and so these unwelcom Symptoms quite removed. The Blood and Humors are
likewise hereby purified: and so the Bath becomes also useful in other Symptoms
of the Scurvy, as Spots, Blotches, Elephantiasis, and other Scorbutic
Impurities of the Blood: For by Bathing in this Bath there are procured most
excellent moderate Sweats, whereby the impure Acid Particles (which are
precipitated or cut off from the Blood in its Circulation, and topically fixed
upon this or the other external Part) are loosened, dissolved, or mortified.

The next General Use of this Bath which we design to mention, is for Women's
Distempers; particularly, Barrenness, Proneness to Miscarry and not retain;
Distempers of the Womb, Obstructions of the Natural Courses; al which
Distempers this Bath is very useful for: But for Modesty sake, being unwilling
to disgust the Ladies, we shall omit insisting on them; tho we resolved to
mention them, that they might not plead Ignorance in the great Virtue and
Efficacy of our Bath in this Particular.

Another admirable Effect of this Bath is to Cure the Rickets in Children; for
which purpose we have ordered, that One whole Day every Week the Bath be wholly
employed for Children, admitting no other Persons into it on those Days.
Besides, on those Days we appropriate our Bath for that Distemper, by somewhat
altering the Mineral Principles of it from those which impregnate it on other
Days. Because Bathing may at first seem something uncouth for this Distemper,
it being unusual, and seldom prescribed, let us a little inquire into the
Nature and Cause of this Distemper, and consider whether Bathing may not then
seem the most Rational and Probable Remedy that can be prescribed for it.

The Rickets is a Distemper which has been known but a few Years in the World;
and the Sea Glisson de Rachitide.
first Place that it was taken notice of was in England, about Fifty odd Years
ago. It first appeared in Dorset and Somersetshire, and afterward by little
and little it came to be minded at London; and still in the Northern Counties of
England it is not so common, and in some places hardly known.

It Is uncertain who was the first Person that took notice of this Malady, who
gave it that Name, and for what Reason: The most probable Etymology or
Derivation of the Word is from (...), or (...), Spinalis, quasi (...) Morbus
Spinae dorsi, because the Spine or Backbone is the Part primarily affected in
this Distemper. The Spinal Marrow being first affected, its Tone vitiated, an
Imbecility and Relaxation caused, the adjoining Nerves do al by consent
likewise suffer, and also all the Membranous and Fibrous Parts, to which those
Nerves are fastened; hence Impotence, want of Motion, Torpitude, Dullness, and
Imbecility, etc. which are the first Symptoms of it, discover this Distemper
to be creeping on, which in a little time renders the whole Habit of Body
feeble, the Tone of the Parts relaxed, flaccid, soft, and lubricous; whence
succeeds such an internal Slipperiness in all the Parts, that they are quite
despoiled of their Faculty of Retaining and so Assimulating that Nourishment
which Nature conveys to them: Hence an unequal Distribution and Retention of
Nutriment does proceed, whereby one Part becomes less, another bigger, than in
proportion it ought to be: for some Parts are much emaciated and extenuated, as
the Legs, Thighs, Arms, etc. other Parts are swelled, as the Head and Liver.
There are likewise in this Distemper, for the same Reason, several
Protuberancse of the Bones, particularly at the Wrists, Ancles, and Extremities
of the Ribs. There is likewise, which is another Symptom attending this
Disease, a Sharpness and Straitness upon the Breast. We may likewise add, that
several Bones are sometimes inflected or bent, as the Bones of the Legs and
Thighs, Arms and Shoulders, etc. All which Symptoms, with several others which
might be mentioned, if not removed by Art, do tend very much to the future
Prejudice of Children. How many crooked-boned, Bandy-legg'd, Strait-breasted,
Jolt-headed, Wry-back'd, Weak, Decrepit Persons do we daily see? The Original
of all which Infirmities may be attributed in a great measure to the Relicts of
the Rickets, with which they labored when they were young. Now of All the
Remedies that ever were yet invented for this Malady, there is none like that of
Bathing: Therefore to prevent the Injury that Children would otherwise
necessarily receive by this Disease, we have ordered a particular appropriated
Bath to be made every Saturday, for such as are afflicted with it; by the use
of which the vitiated Tone of the Parts is rectified, the Parts themselves
comforted and strengthened, equal Distribution of Nourishment promoted, and the
Causes of the former inequality of Nutrition and Extenuation removed; and, in
fine, the whole Habit of Body in those tender Punies reduced to its due Eutaxy
and regular Disposition: So that among all the Remedies that have hitherto been
in vogue for Curing the Rickets, as Scarrification of the Ears, Issues,
Leeches, Cupping-glasses, Blisters, Ligatures, Rollings, Strait Stockins,
Clisters, Purges, Vomits, Specific Powders, Syrups or Electuaries, Ointments,
etc. none can be safer and more effectual than Bathing in this appropriated
Bath; for by the use of it this Distemper is prevented where there is fear or
danger of it; its Progress is stopped where it is begun, and al its Symptoms in a
short time removed where it has arrived to an Increment and considerable
State. The Certainty of al which, and much more than I have asserted, will
appear to such as shall hereafter use it.

Another very afflicting and somewhat spreading Malady, to the Cure of which
Bathing may much contribute, is the Dropsy; and that because it is found by
experience, that Bathing provokes both Urine and Sweat: For a Man shall scarce
well get out of the Bath, but he shall be inclinable to make Water; and then
Sweat does in some considerable measure succeed, which if promoted by some
inward Diaphoretic, will help notably to transpire the superfluous Serum or
Water in the Blood, especially in that sort of Dropsy which is called
Anasarca, where the Blood is too much diluted, and the Limphaducts obstructed
in the Habit of the Body: So that two grand Symptoms or Effects of a Dropsy,
and perhaps a third, are hereby removed, viz. Stopping or Difficulty of Urine,
Obstructions of the Pores, and lastly, Debility of Ferments in their separating
Functions. For hereby the Reins, Ureters, and Sphinctor of the Bladder are
reminded of their Duty, the Pores of the Body are opened, the inward and
outward Parts rendered Perspirable, and the Digestive Ferments fortified: So
that tho the use of this Bath it self, without concurring Means, is not
sufficient to Cure a Dropsy, yet if Bathing be joined with other Remedies, it
will certainly prove very useful and beneficial.

We may here likewise mention another great Convenience of it, which is, That
it is very useful for. Corpulent Persons, for gross and fat Bodies: For by
opening the Pores, and exciting a new and brisk Ferment in the Blood, it
assists Nature to emit the superfluous Unctuous Parts of the Blood; it likewise
wastes and causes to exhale that Matter that has already been settled into
Fat: Thus Fat and Corpulent Persons may in a little time be eased (at least in
a great measure) of that heavy Burden which they generally complain of. Nor
does this Bath make Lean Persons become Leaner, for the same Reason that it
makes Fat Persons Lean; because in Lean Bodies there is none of that
superfluous and Unctuous Matter which it meets with in grosser Bodies; but in
Lean Bodies it plumps and corroborates the Fibers of the Muscles.

We shall in the next place add, That this Bath may with very good Success by
used to give present Ease in the Fits of the Stone and Gravel; for by a kind of
an Anodyne Virtue it obtundeth the acute Sensation of those Nervous and
Membranous Parts which suffer in this Distemper: It likewise causes a
propension to make Water, and so either expels the Gravel or Stone if it be
small, or else if it be too big to force its exit through the Meatus Vrinarius, or
Urinary Passage, it often causes a Removal of it from the top of that Passage,
and so present Ease ensues. But we shall not insist farther on this Head, our
Mineral Waters, the Virtues of which we shall hereafter relate, being of
exceeding Efficacy in this wracking Distemper.

The last thing I purpose to mention in Commendation of this Bath, is, That it
Beautifies the Skin, tho some Natural Baths make it more Tawny and Unhandsom:
To which end I can commend it to Ladies, to smooth and whiten their Skin,
increase its Plumpness and Luster, and preserve the Body in a good Habit and
Disposition: It takes away Wrinkles and Shrivellings in the Skin, and is very
useful to take away Chaps in Women's Breasts and Bellies after Lying-in: It
fetches off Spots, and other Cutaneous Deformities: It also washes from the
Body that Scurf and Dirt which adheres to it, so that the use of it is very
neat and cleanly: It takes off that yellow and unhandsom Color of the Skin
which remains in the Yellow Jaundies after the Cause is removed.

These things, besides the great Pleasure of Bathing and Washing the Body, are
al I design at present to mention concerning the great Usefulness and Virtue of
this New Mineral Bath: of which much more might be said, but, for brevity sake,
let what has been here concisely related suffice til a future Opportunity, and
more apparent Testimonies of its real Benefit, do present themselves. We shall
therefore now proceed to give an Account of the Nature and Virtues of the New
Spaw, or Mineral Waters designed for Drinking.

Having made it part of my Study to dive into the Nature of Waters, I must
declare my Opinion to be, That Mineral Waters are not only of great use in
Physic, and retain in them very admirable Virtues; but also, that no other sort
of Medicines, let them be made up in what Form soever, have that Energy in
reducing the Blood to its pristine Eucrasie, the whole Body to a sound
Diathesis, and routing the Mineras and Seminalities of Diseases, as wholesome
Medicinal Waters. Of the Truth of which Opinion, not only I my self am fully
satisfied and persuaded, but also the whole European World becomes every day
more and more convinced. How many thousand Cures have been performed in this
small Island, within few Years? What flockings are there every Summer to
Tunbridge, where the best Mineral Waters in England are? How is Epsom, Northaw,
Scarborough, Knaisborough, etc. yearly frequented? Not only in our own Country,
but in other Parts of Europe, Mineral Waters are much in vogue, especially in
France and Germany. How are the Wels at Burbon crowded in May and September, by
Persons of several Nations? And what a Confusion of Tongues is there every
Summer at the Spaws in Germany? This being my first Thesis, That Medicinal
Waters are of admirable use and efficacy both in Preserving and Restoring the
Health of Man: My next Position is, That there is no Mineral Water that is
naturally made in the Bowels of the Earth, but may be likewise prepared exactly
by a skilful Hydrotomist: For all such Waters are made by a Mixture of such
Mineral Particles with their Bodies as they have washed off from the Mines or
Metals by which they pass. Thus if a Current of pure Elementary Water fall upon
an Allum-Mine, it is immediately impregnated with an Esurine Quality; whence
passing on, it may probably meet with an Iron Bed: here by the Esurine Quality
which it before acquired, it gnaws and erodes that Mineral, receiving several
of its finer Particles into such Pores or small Cavities in its Body as those
Particles are adapted for by their Figures; and thus it becomes a very wholesome
Alumino-Chalybeat Water: And of this Nature are the Spaws in Germany. So
likewise a Current of Water within the Caverns of the Earth gliding through the
Marcasites of Vitriol, which abound in some Countries, and the Nitrous Glebes
wherewith some Lands are saturated licking up the Saline Particles of those
Bodies, and then meeting with a Sulphur-Bed, there is instantly an
Effervescence and Ebullition caused by the strenuous Conflict between the Acid
and Sulphurous Particles; a notable Fervor presently arises, and a Heat
hardly to be endured by the Hand; which Waters afterward break forth in Hot
Springs: Thus the Waters of Burbon in France are made. I might instance in
several other Springs, but I aim at Brevity. Now all that is thus effected by
Nature, may be performed by Art, by a Person well studied in the Nature and
Principles of Mineral Waters; such curious Preparations may by Labor be made,
as may by their solution in pure Fountain Water enrich it with the excellent
Qualities of Natural Spaws. For my own particular, having pried and been more
than ordinarily curious and inquisitive in the Anatomy of Spaws and Mineral
Waters, I dare say so much in my own behalf, that I never went about to imitate
any particular Water, but in the end I exactly effected it. Further, to
pleasure any Person of Quality, or particular Friends, that are desirous to
drink the Burbon, or Spaw Waters of Germany, I do here offer to make either of
them, so exactly, that those Persons that frequently have drunk them, or the
greatest Hydrotomist or Proficient in the Study of Waters, shall not be able to
distinguish them from the Natural Waters, either by Taste, Smell, Color,
Operation, and Virtues, or whatsoever Experiments he shall make to try them.

But to proceed: Another Position that I would lay down, before I come to
relate the Virtues of our Spaw, is, That a Mineral Water may be prepared by
Art, much purer, wholesomer, and more effectual in answering the Indications
they are prescribed for, than any Natural Waters can be. My Reason for this
Assertion is, That Natural Medicinal Springs being the Products of Chance and
Contingency (not to detract from the Providence of the Infinitely-wise Creator)
must needs receive many unwholesom male-figur'd Particles with their other
Principles: Those Springs being casually made, have no intrinsic Ferments in
them, that will throw off the Arsenical Particles which they have accidentally
devoured, to which no Poison can be compared for Mischief; they have no
Streiners to secern them from the impure Mixtures; no Preparations made by the
Alembics in the Earth, that will precipitate the Mercurial Corpuscles; nor any
Expedients to dissipate the deadly Fumes or noxious Aporrhea they have
received. I will not maintain, That al Mineral Springs have in them Arsenical
and Mercurial Particles; but this I dare be bold to affirm, That many Waters in
Europe, that are frequently drank of, do retain in them some of either of these
Particles, tho in a small quantity; and likewise, That there are no Natural
Waters, that are impregnated with Mineral Principles, but have likewise in them
some very impure Particles: But now such Waters may Artificially be made, as
shall be altogether pure, being impregnated with nothing but the most refined
and wholesome Particles of those Minerals from which they receive their Virtues;
which pure Principles and curious Preparation are divorced and separated by Art
and Labor from the gross Recrements and impure Sordes that accompany al those
Metals out of which the Natural Springs extract their Medicinal Qualities. And
certainly Waters thus diligently prepared, must needs excel the Effects and
Products of mere Chance and Casualty, and prove more innocent, wholesome, and
effectual.

Being fully convinced of the Verity of this my last Assertion, by considering
the Reasons I have here mentioned, I endeavored to make a Mineral Water that
should recede in Virtue to no other, either Natural or Artificial; and
therefore I set about the Work with as much Care and Diligence, as Pleasure and
Curiosity; and at last, by dissecting some of the most wholesome Minerals by the
Instrument of Fire, have accomplished my expected and desired End, and obtained
so admirable a Water, that I really think that all the Countries in Europe
cannot produce a Natural Water equal to it. I do not say but Physicians, by
taking the same Pains that I have done, may in time effect the same; but that
this Water, or any thing like it in Virtue, was ever yet made, I dare
confidently deny.

Now it is by the Persuasions of two or three Persons of great Quality, as well
as my own Ambition, and Inclination to pleasure my Country, and add any thing
to the promotion of Health, or Improvement of Physic, that I am induced to make
public these Excellent Waters; not doubting but the general Benefit that will be
received by them, by all that drink them, will Quickly give an universal
Satisfaction of their Goodness.

These Waters, with all Accommodations, being now almost ready for Public
Drinking, we have given them the Name of the New Spaw; the particular Virtues
of which we shall just mention, desiring no other Judge of the Reality of what
we have or shall affirm concerning them, than Common Experience.

The Chief Virtue of these Waters consists in their Diuretic Quality; for they
work potently by Urine. To some Bodies they give a Stool or two, especially if
they drink them quick: They make the Excrements very black, and the Urine pale:
They dilute the Blood, and dissolve those Salts that are fixed upon the Nerves,
or other Parts, causing acute Pains, and other Maladies, and force them out of
the Blood through the Reins and Bladder: So that the particular Distempers they
are proper to be prescribed in, are these.

1. They are very safely and successfully drank by Scorbutic Persons; tho
indeed the Word Scurvy is grown so general a Term in Physic, that some
Practitioners, whatever Symptoms their Patients labor under, when they are any
way doubtful of the Distemper, immediately term it the Scurvy: whereupon
several Physicians of late have declared their Opinions to be, That there is no
such Distemper in Nature as the Scurvy, and that the Notion of the Scurvy is a
mere Imposition upon the Fancies of Men: Yet I am fully persuaded, and that for
several weighty and convincing Arguments, that there is such a Distemper as the
Scurvy, which some call the Scurvy, others the Scorby, and the Scorbute.

'Twould not only be too tedious to enter upon explaining the Causes of the
Scurvy, but likewise needless, it being so accurately done by Dr. Willis, in
his Book de Scorbuto, and likewise by Dr. Gideon Harvey, in his New Discovery
of the Scurvy, to which I refer the Reader. We shall therefore only reckon up
some of the chief Symptoms and Effects of the Scurvy, for which these Waters
may successfully be taken. The Scurvy, for the most part, appears in the Gums
and Teeth; the Gums are swelled, spongy, discolored, and sore; the Teeth
become loose, and in process of time they do inevitably rot and caviate; and a
Stinking Breath does frequently render the Disease very incommodious. The Gums
will bleed at the least touch, insomuch that some Scorbutic Persons can hardly
bite a piece of Bread, but the Remainder in their Hands will appear Bloody.
Hereupon the Gums sometimes fissure or cleave, and afterward become Ulcerous;
which little Ulcers are many times succeeded by malignant Cancerous Ulcers,
threatening Deformity to the circumjacent Parts. Another grand Symptom of the
Scurvy is Weakness and Lassitude in the Limbs, especially about the Knees and
Ancles, which is attended with Shortness of Breath, great Faintness and
Weariness upon the least Exercise: Sometimes there is an universal Soreness of
the Limbs, especially the Arms, Shoulders, Neck-bones, and Back, and no
disposition to stir or move, but a Heaviness and Drowsiness possesses the
Body, especially upon the least alteration of Weather.

Another Concomitant of the Scurvy is Pains in the Joints, extreme Tortures in
the Wrists, Knuckles, Elbows, Shoulders, Hips, Knees, Ancles, Toes, and
Fingers; and that which is worst of al, miserable Pains about the Neck and
Backbone, shooting and darting Pains in the Head.

The Scurvy is also frequently discerned by Spots and Blotches, of several
Colors and Figures, on the Legs; Pustules, Tumors, and Tubercles on the
Shins; thick, hard, callous Skin about the Ancles: The Spots are commonly first
red, then yellow, afterward livid, and at last of an Ash Color. After this
appear Blotches on the sides of the Legs, which are first red, then yellowish,
and in time grow rough, and peel off: these generally are succeeded by
Pustules, Tumors, and sometimes nasty Scabs. Not only the Legs, but many times
the whole Skin is deformed by Scorbutic Spots and Eruptions. To these we may
add frequent Itchings al over the Body, a livid and deadish Complexion of the
Face, and pale Tallow Habit of Body; a (...), or bad Digestion of the Stomach,
sour Belchings, Dullness and Drowsiness after Meat, want of Appetite, and
sometimes too sharp an Appetite, puffing of the Stomach, and tension of the
Belly, especially after Food; Costiveness, and sometimes Fluxes of the Belly,
as Diarrheas and Lienteries; suppression of Natural Courses in Women, with a
sort of painful Whites.

These being the Chief Symptoms of this Epidemic Disease in England, nothing
can be more proper or more effectual in removing them, than our New Spaw
Waters: In confirmation of which, I do assure the Reader, that I have
frequently prescribed not only these Waters Artificially prepared, but likewise
the very Principles of which they are made, to several Persons in this City,
with great Success, for this very Distemper. By these Waters the Scorbutic
Impurity of the Blood is washed away, and the whole Mass of Blood purified, the
exalted salt, acid, and saponary Quality of the Blood removed, the Habit of the
Body rectified, the Concoctions altered, the vitiated Tone of the Parts
reduced: so that by drinking of this Water every Morning, for some considerable
time, all the mentioned troublesome Symptoms are made to vanish and disappear.

2. The next Disease these Waters are useful in, is the Stone and Strangury. I
will not pretend that these Waters will dissolve or break the Stone in the Reins
or Bladder, for no Waters in the World can effect that: But yet these Waters
are certainly as helpful in this Distemper, as any Waters in Europe; for by
swiftly gliding through the Reins and Bladder, the Places where Gravel and the
Stone have their Nativity, by the abstersive quality of their esurine Salt they
hinder the Increase or Growth of the Stone, by carrying away the recremental
Sordes that would otherwise adhere to the Stone, and so increase its Bulk; and
likewise by their weight they keep the Currents open, dilate the Passages, and
take the opportunity of slipping a Stone now and then, with a stream of water,
through the Sphincter of the Bladder.

Not undeservedly are the Spaws in Germany much resorted to upon this account,
and exceeding Benefit and Relief found by such as drink them. Now there is
nothing in these Waters, that ericheth them with these excellent Qualities, but
it likewise impregnates our Waters: Why therefore should not our Waters, which
are more refined and exactly prepared, be endowed with as great Lithontriptic
Qualities as the Spaw-waters in Germany?

It Is certain, that some Mineral-waters, by being drank, occasion and cause the
Stone, as Dr. Tonstal in his Anatomy of Scarborough-Spaw proves, by several
undeniable Arguments; and relates several Stories and Observations concerning
Persons who never were troubled with this Distemper in their Lives, yet upon
drinking those Waters for other Distempers, have afterward been tormented with
direful Pains of the Stone. And Dr. Simpson, in his Hydrological Essays,
prescribes a Method to correct the Petrifying Qualities of those Waters. And
it is my Opinion, That there are very few Natural Medicinal Waters, but among
their Mineral Particles and Recrements that are dissolved in them, there are
several Lapidific and Petrifying Particles. But these Waters are free from al
such kind of Sabulous Mixtures.

3. A Third Malady that may be helped by these Waters, is the Dropsy: For by
these Waters the main Cause of a Dropsy, which is an Obstruction of the Reins,
is removed: The Esurine Salt, which is a Solvent in these Waters, dissolves the
coagulated Matter in the Reins, and makes free passage both for it self, and
for the exit of the restagnating Water which before floated in the Abdomen and
Legs, and so caused that Swelling in them. In the Dropsy likewise there is a
vitiated Ferment in the Stomach, and an adust Sordes impacted in the Tunicles
thereof; whence a Feverish and pressing Thirst constantly attends Dropsical
Persons: Now this Water does cleanse the Stomach, it looseneth and dissolveth
the Sordes of Digestion, and so carries it off.

Perhaps it may seem something contradictory and unreasonable, that Dropsies
are to be helped by Waters, because the Blood in this Disease is too much
diluted already: But if we consider how these Waters remove the Cause of this
Malady, the strangeness will be taken away. Besides, when Dropsical Persons
desire these Waters, we can, by adding to them some Preparations of the Mineral
Principles of them, make them much stronger; and so consequently a smaller
quantity of them may be more potent than a much greater, and so this Objection
quite removed.

4. The Yellow Jaundice is curable by these Waters: For hereby Obstructions in
the Bilary Ducts are opened, the regular and genuine Motion of the Choler
promoted, and the Blood cleansed from that Yellow Liquor which before was mixed
with it, and hurried about through the Veins and Arteries by the Circulation,
whence the ultmate Fibers and cutaneous Parts are at last discolored by it.

5. These Waters may be drank with admirable Success in Hypochondriac
Melancholy, and Affects of the Spleen. The Causes and Nature of this Distemper
I have related in a little Tract which I published several Years ago, called
(...), or A Philosophic Discourse concerning Man; which the Reader may peruse
at his leisure.

6. In all manner of Uterine Affects or Diseases of the Womb, these Waters may
be recommended. I shall not dispute whether Hysteric Passions, or Fits of the
Mother, proceed from the Womb, as Sennertus, Riverius, and other famous Authors
tell us; or from the Explosion of the Animal Spirits in the Nerves, as the
Renowned Willis will have it; or else from the more than ordinary Effervescence
or Ebullition of the thinner and more flatulent Blood in the Heart and Lungs,
as Dr. Highmore asserts; whence (he says) the Heart and the Pneumatic Vessels
are apprest and straightened, difficulty of Breathing caused, and a kind of Rising
in the Throat. But whatever the primary and original Cause of it is, we find by
experience, that by these Waters it may be removed. They are likewise proper in all those Distempers peculiar to Women, as Obstructions of the Courses,
immoderate Fluxes, Whites, Suffocations of the Womb, the raging and unbridled
Furor Vlterinus, Inflammations of the Womb, Barrenness, etc.

7. Nothing more proper and beneficial in great Surfeits, than to dilute the
Blood, and separate from it those impure Mixtures wherewith 'twas surfeited, by
drinking of these wholesome Medicinal Waters.

8. In the beginning of a Hectic, See the Cause of a Consumption, in a
Discourse of that Distemper* which I lately published.
and a tendency to a Consumption, nothing can be safer than these Waters. Where
a Consumption is feared, and the Body inclinable to it, these Waters, if drank
in a sufficient quantity every day, for some Weeks, will in all probability
prevent it.

9. In a Cachexy, or il Habit of Body proceeding from undue and depraved
Concoctions, these Waters are certainly effectual: For by being often drank,
they assist Concoction, by taking away what was injurious to it; and whet the
Appetite, by correcting the vitiated Acid in the Stomach; purify the Blood, by
separating from it what is heterogenious, and leaving some of its wholesome
Particles with it; and so in a short time the whole Body is reduced to a
regular Crasis and Eutaxy.

We might here add several other Maladies for which these Waters are of great
use and efficacy; as, Preternatural Vomitings, Pains at the Stomach, Heats of
the Liver and Bowels, Thirst and Bitter Tastes in the Mouth, Obstructions of
the Mesentery and other Bowels, Sarpness of Urine, and Difficulty of making
Water, Ulcers of the Reins, Bladder, and Yard, Tumors of the Hemorrhoids or
the Piles, Colics both Bilose and Nephritic, Dysenteries or Bloody Flux, Worms,
Headache, Meagrim, Giddiness, Bleedings at Nose, Palpitations of the Heart, the
Itch, Bastard-Leprosie, Scabs, or other Breakings-out or Eruptions in the Skin.
In fine, we may safely say of these Waters Petr. Givrius Arcanum Ac^dula^um, c.
10.
as a very late Author writes in praise of the Spaw-waters in Germany;Non
arbitror omnes Medicos tam Antiquos quam Modernos ullum unquam remedium
adinvenisse adeo proficium adeoque amicum humanae naturae, quod uno eodemque
tempore purgat, deterget, temper at and corrobor at omnia viscera, and tot
tamque diversis morbis auxiliatur; I do not think (says he) that the Ancient
or Modern Physicians have ever yet found out a Remedy so beneficial, so
agreeable to Humane Nature, which at one and the same time purges, detergeth,
temperates, and corroborates all the Bowels, and is helpful in so many and so
differing Distempers. To apply this; I would not be understood, that I think no
Physicians can by their Endeavors make Waters Artificially, which may be as
good as these: but my Opinion is (as I have already asserted). That no Form of
Medicines do in any respect equal that of Mineral Water. Much more might be
said in Commendation of these Waters; but I have already exceeded my limited
Bounds.

These Waters may be drank from One Quart to Two and Three in a Morning: The
Person that drinks them is to use moderate Exercise, as Walking, Playing at
Bowls, Ninepins, etc. after them: About two Hours after he may drink a Glass of
Wine, which will help their Passage: He must not eat til two or three Hours
after he has drank them, nor use any violent Motion. He must use a moderate
Diet during the whole time of his drinking them, not overcharging the Stomach
with too much or too great Variety of Food: His constant Drink is to be clear,
fresh, and not too strong; neither new, nor too stale. He may now and then rest
a day or two, and then drink again. It Is convenient to purge gently, after he
has drank them a fortnight or three weeks. Such as please may have them made
stronger, by adding some of the Essence of these Waters to them, and so may
drink them in lesser Quantities.

What I have farther to add concerning these Waters, I shall reserve til a
Treatise of Observations that may be made upon the Bath and Spaw, which we hope
to finish by next Summer, shall be published.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 98. line 1. read Scorvey. p. 99. l. 1. r. cariate. p. 102. l. 14. r.
Endemic. p. 111. l. 4. r. oppressed. l. 17. r. Vterinus.


