PROTEUS REDIVIVUS: OR THE Art of Wheedling, OR INSINUATION, Obtained by
GENERAL CONVERSATION, AND Extracted from the several Humors, Inclinations, and
Passions of both Sexes, respecting their several Ages, and suiting each
Profession or Occupation.

Collected and Methodized By the AUTHOR of the First Part of the ENGLISH ROGUE.

Thy Credit wary keep, it is quickly gone,
B'ing got by many Actions, lost by one.
LONDON, Printed by W. D. and are to be sold at the Sign of the Ship in St.
Mary Axe, and by most Booksellers, 1675.

THE AUTHORS EPISTLE and APOLOGY TO HIS INGENIOUS FRIEND N. W. Esquire
SIR,
IN a late Conference between you and me, (retiring our selves from the
unpleasant discords of rattling Carts and Coaches, and the Confusion of
City-cries, (which obstruct the Freedom of an Active Fancy) you may be pleased
to remember the Complaints I then made against the misunderstanding Vulgar, in
censuring so severely the Author of the English Rogue, concluding him to be the
Actor too: how irrational that Opinion is, I shall leave to any indifferent
Person to judge, without Suggesting this; that as it is impossible for any one
man to act all those Villainies contained in that Book so if any one committed
but the tith of them, certainly Justice, though Blind, would soon find him out,
and lop him off as an useless, Rotten, and Pernicious Member of the
Common-welath, and not let him live at home in quietness so long as I have
done, without ever appearing before the face of Justice upon any account, much
less as a Criminal.

I cannot say I have done well in the publication of some Books, yet I intended
no ill; for my design was not to prepagate Vice, but so to detect it, that at
the sight of its uggly loathsomness, men should shun it worse then the greatest
Contagion.

But you may say, to detect Sin, is to teach Sin; the discovery of Vice, like
the Hydra's heads, does rather increase, then decrease the Vicious; for Virtue
is seldom found to spring from overflowing glasses, and Chastity from Bawdy
Aretins lascivious Pictures: that wicked Persons, and wicked Actions, should
rather be damned in obscurity, then by the Pen preserved to Eternity; that it
is a Sin against Piety to give Wickedness any life of Memory; so the Villain
became lost that set fire on Diana's Temple, and Manlius was forgot in Rome
that did an injury to Rome: wicked Names dishonor fair Report, and if by
compulsion the Pen must glance upon them, they ought ever to be accompanied
with execrations, and Devil must be their only appellation.

I cannot deny but all this is true; yet consider Brutus, and his Confederates,
are not forgot in Livy; Sinon lives in Virgil, and Pandarus in Homer; there is
a Layis memorable in Corinth, and a Lamia in Athens, and why should we not
match those Rampant Whores with a pair of as lusty Rogues, one Spanish, and the
other English; not but that other Countries have as large a stock of each, but
only want recording. If Vice should lie concealed, how should we know good from
evil; the Minister, it is true, Discovers, Arraigns and Condemns it, and with
that severity Executes it in the Pulpit, that none can stand before him but
with fear and trembling; the Law has several punishments for offenses besides
down right hanging: thus, though I have not played the immediate Executioner of
such Vices as I have presented to public view, yet I have lasht some at the
Carts arse, others I have Carted, and given others the opportunity, as well as
my self, to pelt Villainy with the rotten Eggs of scorn and reproach, whilst
every one that would, might pour on her head the Piss-pots of what ignominy
they pleased.

I need not urge more arguments to prove the honesty of my Intention in
Printing the Witty Extravagant, and that my principal aim was not private
advantage, but the general benefit of every individual Person, and that it
should not be imputed as a fault in me, if any make a bad use thereof, or wrong
construction; some vainly, and falsely supposing me, not only so mere a Fool, to
relate my own extravagances, but so great a Beast, nay Monster, to wrong the
known Piety of my Parents.

According to the promise made in my Postscript to the first Part of the
English Rogue, I purposed to have finished that Book in a Second Part,
traveling him through the gentiler parts of Europe, Topographically discribing
all places of eminency, with an account of what Tricks and Rogueries he
committed where ever he came; but the Cudgels were snatched out of my hands
before I had fairly laid them down, I intending to have had but one more bout
at the same Weapons, and so have completed the Rogue, but seeing the
Continuator has already added three Parts to the former, and never (as far as
I can see) will make an end of pestering the World with more Volumes, and large
Editions, I diverted my intention into this Subject, The Art of Wheedling, or
Insinuation, wherein, I have been at no small pains in the Method and
Contexture: what I have Collected has been out of the Choicest French and
English Authors, not so much as casting an eye upon any Copy of the aforesaid
Continuator, that might any ways assist me in this Composure. I would not
willingly do him any prejudice, though I have been injured, and abused by him,
and his instigating others, yet his unkindness I repay with respect, and would
not be indebted to him for that Character he gave me in his second Part of the
Rogue, but that I fear I should wrong his Reputation by ill wording his
Encomium; wherefore I shall be silent, and refer you to his Unlucky Citizen,
and Books of Knight Errantry, etc. which lowdly speak his Panagyrick; as for
those Yelping Curs he he formerly kept, I shall not vouchsafe a backward look
upon them, whilst they snarle undeserved Malice, and bark nonsense at my heels.

Not to tire you Sir, with a tedious Epistle, I shall only give you a short
account of this present Publication, and conclude. Though in this Treatise I
have endeavored to detect the most remarkable Wheedles of several Trades and
Professions, yet I have avoided all reflection on particular Persons: and as it
is impossible to recount the Wheedles of all Mysteries and Occupations, so it
is not requisite to meddle with some subjects, too inferior for discourse: but
you may wonder why I left out Book-selling, a Trade that is called a Mystery,
and so it is, the Cabal of deep Intrigues and Stratagems: Sir, I may be very
well excused, if upon no other grounds, than that I was a quondam Member of
that mysterious Occupation, and that is an ill Bird (according to the old
saying) that befouls its own Nest: besides, would it not be madness to run the
hazard of stinging to death by approaching too near the Nests of Wasps and
Hornets, when with safety a man may walk another way: I love my Brother too
well to cut his throat, and then hang my self to make him amends; if any have
been so inconsiderate to do it, by this time they have found but little praise,
and lesser profit for their pains.

My main drift in this Discovery, is to come to the knowledge of our Selves, by
the knowledge of others. That incomparable sentence, Nosce te ipsum (Proceeding
from that Exchequer of all knowledge, Pithagoras) ought to be engraven on the
Frontispiece of every man's, heart, evermore in a practice applicative, that it
may prove the Elixir Salutis, the never failing Recipe of human Welfare: but to
know a man's self is not so proper (says Menander) as to know others; and
certainly, had he lived in these Hypocritical and debauched times, necessity
would have compelld him to be laboriously studious in this Art, carefully
inspecting the variety of men's humors to prevent the prejudice proceeding from
the practices of such men, who are generally well read in all the Subtle Arts
of Circumvention. According to my ability, I have discovered some, and as these
shall prove Succesful in the acceptance of the World, I shall bestow my pains
in a further Collection, and shall Correct my present defects in some other
Impression.

Therefore, without the knowledge of our Selves and Others, we are like Crazy
Vessels, yet richly laden, which are tossed up and down in the Ocean of
Ignorance so long, till we are either shattered in pieces against the Rocks of
disordered desires and affections, or else boarded, and made prize by such, who
live on Pyracy and Rapine, Cruzing on the Coasts of Craft and Circumvention.

The secret of Wisdom consists in this, That a man knows what he is himself,
what he may do, and what he ought to do; and the Soul of Prudence lies in this,
that a Man knows what others are, what they may do, and what they are desirous
to do; he that has gained this knowledge, has acquired the greatest
advantages of life; and may sail, or safely ride it out at Anchor in the
greatest Storm that can happen.

To study well the Knowledge of our selves, is the ready way to come to the
knowledge of others; and though the Art of knowing others seems to have no
other ends than to discover the Inclinations, Motions of the Soul, Virtues, and
Vices, and what for advantage may be observable in others, yet does with the
same labor teach every one to find out in himself what is either good or bad,
and to deduce more rational and impartial judgments thereof, than if he first
considered them in his own person. We cannot by our selves come to a perfect
knowledge of our Selves; for if, as in a Mirror, the Soul attempts the
beholding of her self in that Self-reflection, Self-love corrupts and poisons
all the judgments she makes thereof: thus Men transported with Anger, though
ever so injurious in that action, by beating or reviling, think all the Reason
and Justice on their side: the Covetuous Man thinks his fordid cares the
effects of Prudence and necessity; the Prodigals expenses are excused by the
undeserved name of generosity; The Philautist or self-admirer being raised by
the indulgent hand of Fortune, to the top of Natures pre-eminence; as a petty
God, directs his imagination far beyond the level of Humility, and thinks his
worst of actions best, but at last is lost in his own foolish
Self-contemplation; and indeed every man commonly looks upon himself through a
Magnifying Glass, so that he cannot behold his true proportion. In short, as
all our Inclinations and Habits please and honor us, so all our Passions seem
rational to us; that we may therefore apprehend their imperfections, it is
requisite we saw them in another, that being a Glass which flatters not, le
Miroir quine flat Point.

The knowledge of a Man's self, as it principally concerns the Soul, so it
neglects not the Body, and has a careful and watchful eye for its
Preservation, endeavoring to save the Viol from cracking, as well as the
infused Aqua Caelestis from corrupting: Thus the perfect and sound estate of
Soul and Body is maintained by the knowledge thereof, and that chiefly by the
due observation of such things as may be hurtful, or helpful thereunto; this is
an Art obtained by a very few.

As to the knowledge of others, we have been in the study of it since there
were but three men in the World, yet if what we have purchased by much travel
and inquiry, were put into the Balance with what we have not attained to, I
believe you will find (Sir) that the Scale of Ignorance, will outweigh that of
Knowledge. Certainly there is no Art so full of uncertainty, as for one Man to
know another, and though there are several helps, as the lineaments of the
Face, lines of the Hand, and Constitutions of the Body; yet these are
insufficient to lead us into a perfect knowledge. We cannot deny that Vultus
est Index amini; and though the eyes are the Casement of the Soul, yet they
frequently prove false Glasses; though as the Turk believes every man's fate and
fancy be written in his Forehead, yet the letters are so obscure, that we
cannot read them. The most probable way to get this Art, is by Conversation
according to the Italian Proverb, I saw thee at Rome, I knew thee at Venice;
and without this, it is impossible for any to practice the Art of Wheedling, or
Insinuation, and it is pity so bad a use should be made thereof, which is not
my intent in this Persent Publication; for I Will assure you my sole intent is
only to discover how knavishly some Wheedle for advantage, and to teach men to
be wary of hypocritcial underminding Insinuations.

For my own part I shall endeavor to be in the defensive part only, and shall
make no (...)use of what Wheedles I observe in ^^hers, then to preserve my
self, ever prefering an honest reputation before an ill gotten fortune, this is
the sincere resolution of,

SIR, Your faithful, and most obliged Servant, R. H.

PROTEUS REDIVIVUS, Or the ART of WHEEDLING OR INSINUATION.
CHAP. I. The signification of the word Wheedle.
THis mysterious word Wheedle, without offense to the signification, in my
opinion pleads no great antiquity, neither can it boast it self the legitimate
offspring of any learned Language. I neither find it registered in the Moldy
Glossaries, nor an inhabitant in the new World of Words. Since then the English
Expositors give us neither the etymology nor signification of this word, we
must apply our selves to the Canting Dictionary, as the ultimum refugium of our
better information; where you shall find the word, Wheedle, imports a subtle
insinuation into the nature, humors and inclinations of such we converse with,
working upon them so effectually, that we possess them with a belief that all
our actions and services tend to their pleasure and profit, whereas it is but
seemingly so, that we may wo^k on them our real advantage. Vid. English Rogue,
The Devil's Cabinet broke open, etc. VVheedling, quasi wheeling, inde Wealings
near Flushing a refuge in necessity.

CHAP. II. The Nature of Wheedling, and what the Practice thereof directly
drives at.
THe art of Wheedling is a Science, wherein is taught, by conversation, a
general knowledge of the Humors, Passions, and Inclinations of male and female,
according to their several Ages, Sexes, Professions and Occupations, whereby
the Professors of this profound Art, suiting their designs to the nature of the
Person, and Profession, they take effect according to their desires and
expectations. Advantage is the soul or center of this Art, regarding no other
interest but its own, and subservient to none but for present or future profit;
the practice hereof is extremely beneficial to all persons, and in all places,
both in City and Country.

This Art of Wheedling, which some would have called Complaisance, is in plain
terms, nothing else but the Art of Insinuation, or Dissimulation, compounded of
mental reservation, seeming patience and humility, (self-obliging) civility,
and a more than common affability, all which club to please, and consequently
to gain by conversation.

This profitable (if rightly practiced) Art of Dissimulation has something
more in it than barely wealth, which persuades men to follow its dictates, or
directions, for the welfare of the whole body depends, and moves upon its
hinges; this admirable Art, by a secret and most powerful charm, calms the rage
and greatest displeasures of the most Potent, disarms our enemies, when in the
greatest fury, and wrests the sword out of that hand, that is just about
sheathing it in a bloody, fleshy scabberd; this and much more it does by
feigned submissions, and by pretending an untainted entire friendship, whereas,
if there be not downright enmity, yet there is no other respect for the person
than what is in outward appearance, to engage him either to lay aside his
present anger, or persuade, and oblige him to some kindness extraordinary.
Wherefore the Wheedle, as he must have a care of falling into too low a
condescension, so in a special manner let him avoid all sharp contradictions,
and all his negatives must little differ from his affirmatives. How could the
Town-shifts live as they do, were it not for their applauding things done by
the glittering Fops, though unworthy of every honest man's approbation,
imitating those Greeks, of whom that ingenuous tell-troth Satyrist Juvenal
gives so pleasant a relation; these men (says he) will conform themselves to
all sorts of company; do you laugh, they will strive to laugh louder; if you
are pensive and sad, and prone to weep, they shall instantly deluge themselves
in tears; if you complain of cold, they shiver, as in the extremity of a
Tertian Ague-fit; and if you do but say the weather's very warm, they will cry
out they are swelter'd with heat.

-- Rides? Majore cachinno
Concutitur: flet, si lachrymas conspexit amici,
Nec doiet, igniculum Brumae si tempore poscas,
Accipit Endromidem; si dixeris, aestuo, sudat.
Juven. Sat. 4. If you tell a lie, though never so grossly false, they shall
swear to the truth of it, without a Subpaena; in the middle of your discourse
they shall say; it is so indeed, not in the least understanding what you meant.
In short, without feeling any of your passions, or understanding any of your
actions, they appear more affected and concerned than your self, and never fail
to compose and conform their countenances to yours. They are like a fish called
a Polypus, of whom it is storied, that it has the power of converting its
color into that which is nearest it, and most contiguous for
self-preservation; these Protei of this loose age can turn themselves into any
shape, so that the conversion of the form will produce any profit or advantage.

CHAP. III. What Qualifications are requisite in a General Wheedle, or
Dissembler.
ANtiquity has reason to say, that the case is the same with Sciences, as with
Seeds, and Plants, which never bring forth any thing, if they meet not with a
soil fit for them: it is certain, that there is not any wherein that Truth may
be more evident than in this Science, which is not only a bare Art of
Wheedling, or dissembling with Men, but likewise an Art or Science, wherein
every one is taught the knowledge of Men, through Conversation, and by their
several Temperaments, Inclinations, and Passions; for it will become barren,
and of no advantage, if it meets not with a Genius, and dispositions necessary
thereto. As few Men are qualified for this Art, so some Men's Professions, and
others tender Consciences will not permit, nay, rather absolutely deter them
from the Study and Practice thereof. There is no man so fit to make use of this
damnable Science, as he that has Shipwrack'd his Conscience in the tempestuous
discovery of an Estate; whose mind must be illuminated with secret lights, and
guides of some invisible Demon, directing him through the difficult ways, and
various Meanders of this Diabolical Art and Science. This black Hellish Brat
must be clothed like an Angel of light, and when he prays, it must be to this
purpose,

-- Da Justum, sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
Let me seem just, and holy, let the night
Ore-cast my frauds, let clouds obscure their light.
Let me now dissect this Wheedle, or take him in pieces, and you shall find his
principal Members are, Reservation, Dissimulation, Flattery, pretended Patience
and Humility, Civility, Affability, Plausability, with other ingredients
hereafter mentioned, which make up his composition.

But before I insist upon all these singly, it is requisite to inform you, that
it is impossible for a Wheedle, or Town-shift to exercise any of those
qualities to his advantage, unless he have a good natural Genius, which must be
likewise improved, by Experience and Languages, though there are a great many
insinuating Rascals, who successfully Wheedle only by common sense, with the
help of a little reason; wherefore in the first place I shall discover what
Genius a Wheedle ought to have, and how qualified by Art.

The first Qualification of a Wheedle, a Good Genius; adorned with Real or
Counterfeit Learning, or Languages acquired by Travel.
IT is not to be called in question, that no man is more capable of all manner
of business, than he, who having good natural parts, is endued also with a
competent stock of Learning, guilt over with foreign speculation and
experience.

A good Genius is able to do much of it self, but it will act wonders, when
Learning, Language, and Experience are inoculated therein. Wit alone, though
natural, yet if active, and acute, can apparel it self with more variable
delightful colors, and suit it self with more pleasant resemblances, than the
Polypus, or Chamaeleon; yet still Learning ought to be the fuel to the fire of
this wit; for, if it wants the feeding, it will eat out, and consume it self.

Moreover if this good Genius be not frequently practiced with men, and brushed
over with ingenious conversation, it will become so soiled, and dustv, that
little shall appear in it legible, but the Characters of Ignorance, and
Rusticity.

Excellent parts without Learning, may be said to be in Ore, unwrought,
untried, which Letters, Time and Experience fashion and refine. Such a man so
qualified has good metal in the inside, though rough, which only wants
scowring, and pollishing without; and he that has these roughet parts made
smooth, and filed, out-vies all other splendors of this world, and is the
greatest benefit to the Universe, and Himself.

Such a person whose natural and acquired parts contend for ptiority in
excellence, scorns these his better parts should play the Bawd to any base
action, or that they should Pimp for him by an ignoble Wheedle, or Insinuation
for preferment: He is happy enough already in what he enjoys; and his happiness
is the greater in this, that he cannot be dispossessed of what he holds in
Capite, which gives him so great a satisfaction in the contemplation of that
perfection he has brought it to by his indefatigable study and industry, that
no worldly honor or advancement can raise him to an higher pitch of
contentment.

It is the Pretender to Learning (having an indifferent Genius) of whom I shall
discourse, which is the first qualification of our Wheedle; a Fellow, who must
so well act the part of a Scholar-Mountebank, that his Art may prove other men's
delusions. He must be tricked up in all the accoutrements of Learning, having
the terms of Art of most Sciences, and his mouth stuffed with variety of
Sentences, (like a Juglers with small Ribbonds of several colors) collected
from Classical Authors, as well Poetical as Historical, which he may disgorge
upon all occasions to the admiration of the Non-intelligent. And the better to
persuade some, that he is a very contemplative man, and a profound Scholar,
when he walks it is near some public place, where he may be seen with a Book
in his hand; if in the Church, he has a Greek Testament, or Hebrew Bible in
his Pocket, which he will not trouble himself to open, unless he observe some
stander by look over him.

In Company, more learned than himself, he has the wit to hold his tongue; for
though he has no real Learning, yet he has so much cunning not to let the
World know it, to avoid being laughed at for an Insignifico; thus this poor
Devil fools himself most, by endeavoring to cheat others; for he conceits
nothing in Learning, but the opinion, which he endeavors to purchase without
it; whereas did he rightly understand himself, he might with less labor cure
his ignorance, than go about to conceal it.

To the intent he may pre-possess his Auditors with a good opinion of him, he
is still citing for himself, That a Candle should not be hid under a Bushel,
and for his part he will be sure not to hide his own, though it be but a Snuff,
or Rush-Candle.

Some good parts we will allow him to have, of whom he is over-sensible, and is
no Niggard in displaying them to advantage; like a Lottery, that shows more
than belongs properly to the Master, and is like it to in this, that nothing
parts from it, or him, but that the Trumpet sounds, filled with the breath of
vanity and vainglory.

By these Artifices, viz. Terms of Art, scraps of Latin, and scrapings from
ingenious Company, he hopes to gain a splendid reputation in the world; he is a
great Plagiary of Tavern, and Dramatick wit, which he uses to bring in upon
such and such hints; he crowds his memory with new Songs, witty Sayings, and
far fercht A-la-mode words, and seldom fails of an opportunity to wind them in.

These are his accomplishments, which (with the good Armor of his face, which
is Cannon proof, for he is dashed out of any thing, sooner than countenance) he
hopes will bring him into the acquaintance of a great many, and Great men too.
With whomsoever he gets acquainted he Registers their Names, Lodgings, and
Habitations, least he should lose the least hope of doing himself a kindness;
for that end he carries a Table book in his Pocket, in which he writes every
days advantageous promise made him, or whatsoever observations he made of any
man's words, or actions, which may tend to the future benefit of himself, or
friend, if it be possible for him to entertain a friendship for any person.

He carefully observes duly, and seasonably to perform his visits or
attendance; and thus at last Preferment stumbles on him, not so much for
desert, but because he is still in the way. The third branch of this first (and
threefold) qualification of our Wheedle is Travel, with the profits attending.

St. Augustine calls this world a great book, (then Men are the Epitome's) and
certainly none study these books so much as the Traveller. They who never stir
from home, can hardly be said to have read a leaf of the greater, and are in a
manner as ignorant as that Taunton woman, who having never been a mile out of
the place of her Nativity, and being married to one living about twenty miles
from that place, as she traveled to her new home, still cried out, John, John,
What do mean to do? carry me to the worlds end? Bringing her home with much
ado, he told her (according to the best of his knowledge) that the world was a
hundred times, at least, as wide, and large as the ground they had rid over; to
which she replied, John, If thou were not my Husband, chud zay, thou art a
greater Liar than the world thou talk on.

It Is true, a man may read men at home, but if he go no farther, he shall never
have the reputation of a man generally read, but be like that dull fellow in
Pliny, who could never learn to count above five. Homer sets forth andV;lisses,
as the wisest of all the Grecians, because he had traveled much, and had seen
Multorum hominum mores, and andV;rbes: thus Seneca says, Imperitum est animal
homo, and sine magna experientia rerum, si circumscribatur Natalis soli sui
fine. Man is a raw unskilful animal, and void of experience, who is still
confined within the narrow limits of his own Country.

As Travel furnishes man with universal knowledge, so it acquaints him with
hardship, and so adapts him to endure patiently whatever mean condition
perverse fortune has thrown upon him, till his own wit by Services, and
insinuation shall redeem him from that slavery, and place him to his better
satisfaction. It was an excellent saying of Seneca; Malo tibi male esse, quam
molliter; I had rather thou should be sick, than soft. It is reported that
the Coral Tree is neither red, nor hard, till taken from its Maritine
habitation; nor can man, in my opinion, make the best advantage of his
knowledge, till he has in some manner imitated the Romans, in putting out
their Children to be Nursed by Lacedemonian women, till they were three years
old, then they were removed to their Unckles, till seven, or ten, then they
sent them to Tuscany to be instructed in Religion, and at last into Greece to
study Philosophy.

Now what greater advantage can accrue to him that would live merely by his
wits, than diversity of tongues, by which he shall understand, and be
understood, nay and beloved by all Nations? This advantage travel produces, in
that it does in some manner take off that aborigenal curse the Confusion of
Tongues, which is such a curse indeed, that it makes men who are of one kind,
and made to be sociable, so strangely to fly one another, that as an eminent
Father of the Church said, A man had rather be with his dog, than with a man
whose language he understands not. Nay, this diversity of languages makes a
wise man pass for a fool in a strange Country, and a fool to pass for a wise
man, when he speaks that language perfectly to them who understand it but in
part, or who have but some small glimmering light to lead them into the depth
thereof. This makes the poor wandering Exotic thrive indifferently where e're
he comes, and Monsieurs services courted for the French Tongue, though he has
neither wit not person to render him more acceptable, though ragged; this soon
metamorphoseth him into the garb of the times, and by a narrow inspection you
shall find it his Imprimis, and all the Items; whose fantastical cringes to
Ladies are his daily study, and only devotions; and though born with the art of
talking idly, yet some female French admirers love him the better for it, being
by that the more suitable to their company. My own experience informs me this;
for I knew a Gentlewoman of good quality, who would not admit of the caresses
and courtship of her Lover in English, and could not prove succesful in his
love, till he made his addresses in a foreign Dialect. Nay, such is the love
and respect we bear all Tradesmen whatever, who speak any other Language than
our own, or go under the notion of Outlandish, that we desert our own
Contrymen, though every way as ingenuous in any Art or Mystery, to follow
them, which is the general and just complaint of thousand of Artificers in the
City, and through the whole Kingdom.

We may farther understand the advantages of knowing and speaking more
Languages than our own from the general Itch, which possesses the better sort
of people to be acquainted with them; so that now adays you cannot come into
any mixed Company, where a Pantaloon, or habit a la mode, endeavors to hide
the imperfection of its Master, but that you must imagine Babel is revived; for
every one endeavors to gloss his slender parts by those Languages, he has
learned by Travail, or otherwise; some snuffling out the French, others
blustering out the Dutch, as if they intended to blow their Cheeks into
Bag-pipes; whilst others are endeavoring to make the lofty High Dutch to pass
for Greek amongst the Ignorant. Now he that can best suit any Language that is
spoke in Society, by his good proficiency therein, is sure to make a conquest
of one heart at least; if withal he apply himself to his wonted flattery, by
possessing the speaker (though what he delivers be imperfect in sense, for want
of words, as well as in pronunciation) that he speaks the Language like a
Native: This (though false applause) oftentimes so swells him, causing him to
look so high that he cannot see the hand of Mr. Wheedle, who by this means,
most certainly and securely picks his Pocket.

And here I cannot omit the relation, how one was soundly basted for his
arrogance and ignorance upon the like account; This Gentleman was a Grammar
Frenchman, who was flattered by his Wheedling Master, that he had made a
wonderful, and more than common proficiency in the French Tongue, for so short
a time; this unmerted praise did not only melt the Money in Monsieur English
his Pocket, but likewise prompted, and emboldned him to engage with all French
Discourses he happened to meet with, glorying in that courtly embellishment; it
happened unfortunately that he fell into some Company, where was a Gentleman born
in France, who could speak little or no English, but speaking all together his
Mother tongue, he was applauded by this talkative Fop (not knowing justly what
Countryman he was) in these words, Monsieur ma foy vous parlez Francois comme
un Naturel: which is, you speak French like a Natural: intending to say, you
speak French like a Native of France; Monsieur at first, and second time took
little notice of it, but the other persisting in that abusive Encomium, in a
very great passion, called him Bougre, Jean Foutre, and I know not what beside,
and not satisfied with that he did so beat and kick him, that he could neither
speak French or English for half an hour after.

The French have a significant Proverb to this purpose, Parlez bien, ou parlez
rien, speak well, or don't speak at all; which is somewhat like the Irish, Aber
began, aber ghemah; Speak a little, and speak it well; this caution our Wheedle
ought to take special notice of; for if he do not, instead of advancing his
reputation, he may either lessen or destroy it. Wherefore if he speak to the
judicious, let him speak nothing but what is proper, and if pressed in a
discourse beyond his ability, there are twenty slights by which he may shift
his neck out of the collar, by his humble submission, acknowledging his
insufficiency to proceed farther; and by this yielding a conquest to others, he
may probably gain an absolute victory over their hearts, or at least he shall
have the title of a modest man conferred upon him.

Though the Italian and Spanish are elegant Languages, and very useful in the
building up a structure of Knowledge, yet the French is more generally
entertained by our Gentry, who had need to have good lungs; for a long sentence
seems by the pronunciation to be but one word: it is my opinion, by a long
converse among them one might understand them by the gestures of their body,
and motion of their fingers, as well as by their tongue, they abound so much in
both whilst they are discoursing; but as for the gentile shrug, (as they call
it) it may be mistaken by the Scotch for a lousie remove.

To conclude, besides the aforesaid profits which attend a Traveller, it makes
most affairs succesful he takes in hand; it enricheth him with a world of
experimental knowledge; it makes him an hardy and knowing Soldier; it enables
him to be a spy in all companies; for by pretending ignorance in the Language
they speak, and mingling with them, he finds out their designs, and can cross
or cherish them as he thinks it may tend to his advantage.

Lastly, it makes him welcome to all men, sought after by his betters, and
listened to with admiration by his inferiors, especially if he have the glib
faculty of sliding over his relations and reports, and thus whilst he lugs them
by the ears, he has full hold of their hearts, which by prudence he may form
to the assistance of his necessity, or most important affairs.

The second Qualification of a Wheedle, Reservation.
THE Pilot that steers him steady in the turbulent Sea of worldly business, and
with safety too, amidst the most subtle practices and contrivances of men, is
his reservation, concealing himself from the knowledge of others, whilst he is
most busily employed in the knowledge of other men's affairs. He is like a
cunning Gamester, who whilst he prudently conceals his own Game, he has an eye
of his own prying into his adversaries hand, or another employed to that
purpose, by a stander by, his Confident. Showing of Cards before they come to
be played, occasions not only loss to him that so imprudently does it, but also
to those whose interest is twisted and engaged with his; by keeping close his
hand, as at Put, he makes you believe his Game is better than it is; for
without boldness you will seldom win at that sport, putting boldly many times
at a (careless) six, or seven, when the adversary, by that confidence, believes
it a Duce, or Tray, and not daring to see it, is a loser thereby: thus his good
clothes are his Coatcards, which he will give you a glimpse of, that you may
suspect his hand is better furnished than it is, but fearing the loss of his
designed success will permit you to inspect no farther.

He holds this as an undeniable maxim, that no wise man will put confidence in
him, who at any rate will discover himself, and fearing from hence, that he may
be left to himself, void of advice in the necessity of his affairs, he will
keep his mouth close shut, though he hazard a drowning within, for want of
opening the fludgate of his body to give some vent to that ocean of liquor he
drank, for the glibber carrying on some notable design. If he discourse any
thing, it shall be about matters indifferent; and if he pretend to tell you a
secret, engaging you to silence, it is only to try your trust, for it is so
well contrived, he matters not what man hears it.

I have often been ready to laugh outright when I have seen him affronted or
abused with expressions more than civil: in bridling of his Choleric just
resentment; Oh how he has chewed upon the bit; flesh and blood would not
swallow those words; those bitter Pills the stomach rifes against; yet prudence
made him do it, though he pricked his chops, like the Ass eating thistles:
reason told him he could not do amiss in hiding the resentment of such affronts
and offenses; because it gave him not only the better means of revenge, if the
matter deserved it, but also to prevent a further provocation, lest he who has
offended him, should bury him in greater mischiefs, thereby to disenable him
for ever from prosecuting a revenge. Not but that he knows there are some
occasions wherein silence would be suspected; for where a great offense is
committed, and the person suffering is silent, any rational man will look upon
him either as a senseless lump of stupidity, or that his anger is only stopped
for the present, that it may break out with greater violence in the execution
of its vengance: wherefore he will sometimes express his displeasure, but in
such a manner, that the lightness of the complaint may make him believe, that
for the future, the remembrance of it shall be obliterated, and no revenge
shall ensue hereafter.

Whatever he hears material, he treasures up in his breast, and is hardly
induced to make any one the Secretary of his intelligence: He never
communicates any thing of that stock, but when he sees a palpable advantage
will accrue thereby; for if he discover any thing said, or is to be done to the
injury or great prejudice of his supposed Friend, he does it only to insinuate
himself into Credit and Confidence, and when the report is found true, if he be
a grateful man, he cannot go without reward.

Sometimes he finds it necessary to separate two, by forging Lies one against
the other, so subtly contrived, that by circumstances they shall believe them
real truths: This he does by pretending a real Friendship to both, and no
prejudice to either, till he has made the wounds of their Friendship
incurable, and then is his time to step in, and supply the place of him he
lately dispossessed.

More shall be said hereafter, in what particular cases this reserved humor
stands him most in stead; and therefore I shall pass to the next Member, which
is Dissimulation, none of the least requisite Qualifications of a Wheedle.

The third Qualification of a Wheedle; Dissimulation.
HE thinks there is as absolute a necessity of dissembling his words, as saying
his prayers, and is never better pleased with them, than when they look like
Janus, with two Faces, or like the Devils Oracles, with a double construction:
And thus he will protest how entirely he loves you, when he hates you mortally;
much like a Neopolitan, who will embrace you with one arm, and with the other
hand stab you to the heart. Should he be really a servant to as many as he
seems to be, when he cries Your Humble Servant, he would have as many Masters as
London's Conflagration consumed Houses. To all these he vows an absolute
Command, but they must be possessed of more Rhetoric than ever Quintillian was
Master of, if they can entreat him to do any thing but what shall tend to his
own advantage; if you had followed him as close at the heels as I have done,
you would not forbear smiling to observe how many he has beguiled with his
kind proffers, who had not the discretion to distinguish between a general
promise, and that which is particular; for all his proffers, as they are
universal, so he looks not upon them as binding: For example, he protests
solemnly he will do any thing for you; but come to the push, he will do nothing
but what future profit shall persuade him to; ask to borrow money of him, he
tells you he was obliged by his Wife, before Marriage, to the contrary; desire
him to be bound with you, the Scrivener shall have an Item from him not to take
him as Security sufficient; if arrested, entreat him by Note to be your Bail,
and ten to one he will send you word himself, that he is not within. Never mind
his promises; for, as Mr. Earl says in his Characters, he accounts them but a
kind of unmannerly words, and in the expectation of your manners not to exact
them, if you do, he wonders at your ill breeding, that you cannot distinguish
between what is spoken, and what is meant.

He may be fitly compared to the civil Ghosts Aeneas met with in his descent to
Hell, that were Friends to talk with, and Men to look on, but grasping them he
found them Air which glided through his Fist. One great part of his time he
imploys in the study of pleasing expressions, and fine phrases, of which he is
no Niggard, but keeps open house with them for all Comers and Goers; if any one
is taken with them, and so mistakes the Broacher of them for a Friend, instead
of Juno he grasps an empty Cloud, for these are the baits he catches Gudgeons
with, and the gaudy Artificial Flies the unwary rash Trout is betrayed by to
its destruction. If he get any one by the Ear, his breath is so infectious,
that it is ten to one he Fly-blows it, and Maggots his understanding; and from
the corrupting of his manners, he works him into what form he pleases, and
frames him as he list; and when he has effected his designs to the utmost, all
the Fop-Gallant can say, is, that he was cheated in a very fair obliging
manner, and abused with the greatest respect.

Take a view of him as he walks in the streets, and you shall observe his
company, if it be not good, yet it shall be gaudy; and who can distinguish men
by their outsides? external appearances frequently deceive our imaginations,
and hood-wink our understandings; goodness of Apparel frequently belyes the
greatness of an Estate, in telling the World, that the Globes of the
Door-posts being guilt without, the house contains nothing but Gold within.

Sometimes this Wheedling Rascal will insinuate himself into Society that is
really Virtuous, and Noble, and then his greatest ambition is to be seen, and
uses an hundred stratagems to be publicly taken notice of in that company;
for this he knows must pass for a Rule infallible, that men shall go under the
same account, and character of the company they consort with: Pares cum paribus
facilime congregantur; like to like, quoth the Devil to the Colliar; and
therefore our Wheedling Politician will never appear abroad, if he can help it,
accompanied with persons, whose habits do, or actions have rendered them
scandalous, or villainous, fearing lest the censure of the people should justly
fall on him for such Association. Mistake me not, he never desired to be good,
but he would not seem bad, and for no other reason, than that he finds it a
prejudice to business; and therefore he is a constant Hearer, and goes to
Church, not for any love he bears to it, but for fear of censuring-Neighbours.
Oaths he hates, because they are unprofitable; and when he hears them belcht
through a profane sulphurous mouth, he flies from them faster, than Satan at
the Name of Jesus.

Lies he looks not on as half so sinful, and sometimes questions whether they
are a sin or not, when a round sum has been the Product of their falsity; yet
he hates to tell a Lie so, that every one may take notice of it: He lays his
Lies close, and has always some pretense in readiness to justify them; if he
fears he shall be detected, he plays the Hocus, and like a Jugler with his
Ball, cries Praesto, be gone; then by a quick conveyance tells you he has none
of it, but such a one has it, and so shifts off the infamy to another. By
these means, and a thousand other Wheedling tricks, (too many to insert in this
Chapter) does this crafty Dissembler endeavor to palliate his own faults, and
by a seeming Sanctity obtain the good Opinion of the people, that he may cheat
them more infallibly, and with less suspicion.

(...).
Seipsum nullus fatetur esse malum.
There is another sort of Wheedle, (of whom I shall treat of in his due place)
but he is a Fellow than is debaucht in the highest degree, and yet he too would
fain have some excuse for his sins and trespasses, though profanely; for if any
one tax him with Venery, and condemn him for making his body a Burnt-offering
to his inflamed Lust, he will seek to justify, and acquit himself with this
Plea, and to seem wittily wicked, asks you, What did David ail when he
complained of his bones, and his sore ran down in the nigh? If that will not stop
the mouths of his Accusers, but they still reproach him for a common
Placket-hunter, whom Plague, nor Pox, no nor the dreadful sight of his late
Fluxing Surgeon can stop in the carier of his Lust and Whoring, he then
pleads, that though Solomon was the wisest of men, yet was he overruled by
Women, and so addicted to their Society, and delighted in variety, that the
House wherein he kept them for his own use, exceeded in greatness the Grand
Seraglio, as much as London does St. Albans: if he build Sconces, and run every
where on score; then he pleads that S. Paul pawned his Cloak. This is he that
is like a Tumbler, and dares show tricks of activity upon the very brink and
Precipice of Hell, and play at hide and seek with the Devil, till at last he
catches him in his Clutches, as the Cat does her wanton prey, and so spoils his
sport on a sudden, when possessed with the greatest security.

The fourth Qualification of a Wheedle, Flattery.
THe next thing we shall inspect is the Flattery of this Philautist, or
Wheedle, whereby he captivates Fools, neither can the wisest at all times
escape him; for he is the Picture of a Friend, and by that means is mistaken
for what he is not; and as it is commonly observed, that Pictures usually
flatter, so he ever shows fairer than the substance; and although there be a
vast disproportion between him and a true Friend, yet in all outward
appearances of Friendship he is more pleasing, because he seems to love for no
other end than advantage; whereas a true Friend, unbyassed by interest, will
take the liberty to tell his Friend what faults are observeable in him, whereas
he dare not do it for fear of offense, and so will not loose his hold, for fear
of losing his design.

And that he may not have his labor for his pains, by undertaking any
fruitless work, he will never yoke himself with one whom Fortune has rendered
incapable of losing any thing worth the taking notice of; his aim is at such
who stand aloft, or such whose plentiful condition tempt his pains to deceive
them. Such men are his Books, which he continually studies; he plumbs their
understanding, then gets a perfect knowledge of their humors, inclinations,
passions, etc. having learned them so well, that he knows them better than
themselves: by this door, by this breach he has made in their affections, he
enters upon their Souls, of which he is able at last to take the very mark, or
impression, and fashion his own by it, like a false Key to open all your
choicest secrets. Having thus riggled himself into a familiar acquaintance with
your inward Faculties, he then makes his affections jump even with yours; nay,
he will be so perfectly skilled in all those he intends to bubble, that he will
be beforehand with them with their thoughts, and be able, in a manner, to
suggest them to themselves. He never commends any thing to you, but what he
knows you like; and what you like, if not considerable, he will strain his
Credit to purchase to make you a Present thereof for his future benefit: A
piece of policy I used when I was a Child, to borrow pence of my Brothers to
buy my Parents Fairings, or New Years Gifts, whereby my Pennies multiplied into
Shillings. This, as a Juvenile practice to Relations, is not excusable only,
but allowable; but where Gifts are otherwise bestowed, as snares to entrap the
Receiver, which he takes as men do Vomits or Pills, which undoubtedly will work
with him, to the purgation and clearing his Pocket of a sum ten times the
value, it is not. Martial complains ingeniously of such fordid actions to
Gargilianus, Epig. lib. 1.

Sordidius nihil est, nihil est te spurcius ano,
Qui potes insidias dona vocare tuas.
Sic avidis fallax indulget Pifcibus hamus;
Callida sic stultat decipit efca feras.
There Is naught more vile than thee, no baser shift,
Who cal'st thy snares by the false name of gift.
So the false Hook for greedy Fish does wait,
And foolish Beasts caught by another bait.
He will borrow money of you to try how good his credit is, and he will be sure
to pay it according to his time, that thereby he may have the opportunity of
borrowing a larget sum he never intends to pay; and he knows afterward how to
keep out of the danger of an Arrest, by changing Lodgings, as often as Whores
change Names, and Lovers.

To conclude with the Flattery of our Wheedle-Master-General; as he takes an
Inventory of your humors, inclinations, and passions, so he has a Catalogue
of your Friends and Foes strangely Registered in his Memory, not easy to be
eradicated. To your Friends he speaks nothing but Panegyricks in your behalf,
knowing they will tell you how much beholding you are to him for his good
Opinion; to your Enemies all his discourse is nothing but aspersions, and
reproaches, and whatsoever he gathers from them, tending to your disrepute and
detriment, he hastily runs to inform you, with all the aggravating
circumstances the Devil can invent: in requital of this kindness you cannot but
esteem him your Friend, especially when you hear him say, I protest I speak not
this out of any prejudice I have entertained against such and such, but only
that I hate to hear my Friend abused, and I not tell him of it.

He has one pretty knack in making a man believe himself to be a very wise
man, and of a deep judgment, by framing or forging a secret, which with a
strict injunction to silence, he whispers in his ear, and then beseeches his
advice and counsel, and whatsoever he says, is persuaded. To what he speaks, he
listens with as much attention, as a Malefactor receiving Sentence; and if he
object any thing, it shall be some trifle on purpose to be confuted, and then
with a small elevated cast of the eye, he swears, I never thought of that,
which is as good counsel as the whole World can afford; and then with a smiling
hug, and a thousand thanks, he vows he will follow it to an hairs breadth; and
taking his leave, he never thinks of it afterward, unless asked the question.

If he happen to be in the company of VVitpretenders, where he espies a fit
thing to be made a Friend, and a Fool of, he narrowly watches every word which
drops from his mouth; and if casually any ingenious Froth should hang at the
corner of his Jaw, he bids the whole Company to take notice of it, whilst he is
ready to burst with an overflowing strained laughter; and left the others
treacherous memory should not treasure up this Golden (worthless) saying, he
remembers it for him to all Companies, and will laugh longer again than any can
laugh with him: Rides? Majore cachinno consutitur. Juven. This causless
laughter puts one in mind of Carisophus the Parasite to Dionysius, who standing
at a great distance, and seeing his Master laugh with some of his Friends, he
fell also into so loud a fit of laughter, that Dionysius asked him why he
laughed; Because (said he) seeing you laugh, I imagined you spoke something
deserving laughter.

Clisophus, another Parasite to Philip of Macedon, pretended himself lame,
because the King had broke his Leg, and being about to be set, made the same
gtimaces, or scurvy faces, the pain extorted from King Philip: Suitable to what
is storied in our own Country, that because Richard the Third held his Head
aside, the Courtiers (he being their President) made it a Fashion. Thus Martial
does describe a Flatterer, Epig. lib. 12.

Mentiris? credo: recitas mala carmina? laudo.
Cantas? canto: bibis Pontiliane? bibo.
Pedis? dissimulo; gemma vis ludere? vincor.
Res una est sine me quam facis, and taceo.
Nil tamen omnino praestat mihi mortuus, inquit,
Accipiam been te nil volo, sed morere.
Lie? I believe. Thy verses bad? I praise.
Do sing or drink? My voice and Boul I raise.
Do fart? I Am deaf. Do play? thou have conquered me.
What e're thou do, is all alike to me.
But, says Pontilian, don't me death deny:
I Will except nothing, but I Am loath to dye.
This Flatterer will not adventure to child you for your Vices, but (which is
strange) for your Virtues; as, you are too good, too just, too pious, or too
temperate; Religion is not so severe to exact such Penance from you; there is
more liberty given you, than you take, etc. His aim in this is to chide you out
of your Virtues, which he has nothing to do with, it is your Vice he makes use
of, and wherein you may best use him; for he is never more active than in the
worst diligences. Lastly, having dispossessed you of your self, you are his, or
any man's that will give him a hire to betray you. This Fellow is the Devils
Principal Secretary of State, who for his own Advantage, and the Ruin of
others, can like the Cameleon, turn himself into all colors but Red and White,
the Emblems of Shamefacedness and Innocence. Thus Alciat in Adulatores, Emb. 53.

Semper hiat, semper tenuem, qua vescitur; auram
Reci procat Chamaeleon:
Et mutat faciem, varios sumetque colores,
Praeter rubrum, vel candidum,
Sic and Adulator populari vescitur aura,
Hiansque cuncta devorat:
Et solum mores imitatur Principis atros,
Albi and pudici nescius.
Chamaeleons always fed with Air that is thin,
Gaping for more, it turns that back again.
It changes shape, nay changes color too,
But with the Red and White has naught to do:
Thus Adulators fed by vulgar breath,
Gape, and devour still, till devoured by Death.
Great men's black sins they Ape with healths expense,
And lives, and dies, not knowing Innocence.
The Fifth Qualification of a Wheedle, Feigned Patience.
A Pretended Patience is none of the least advantageous Qualifications
appertaining to our Wheedle; who if he will be excellent in his Art, must
endeavor to bridle his passion upon all accounts: Let him often con that
saying of Bion; Magnum malum esse, non posse serre malum, that it is a great
evil not to be able to endure an evil.

This Patience is employed two ways, in speaking, and doing; in speaking, when
by reproachful provoking expressions choler prompts a man to return an answer
suitable; but that is imprudence, according to Euripides, (...), etc. Altero
duorum colloquentium indignante, is, quiuse non opponit, plus sapit. He is the
wisest man that shuns opposition, and controversy; but if he cannot so avoid
it, but that he must be engaged therein, let him discourse as unconcerned as he
may, lest his rash heat may make him lose the opportunity by losing him he did
intend to make his Friend: But above all, let him have a care of opposing him
in whose power it lies to do him an injury, but rather suffer all, and not
contravert any thing, though it may seem never so contradictory to Sense and
Reason. Thus was Lucius Metellus (as you may read in Tacitus) his Wisdom by his
Patience seen; when sitting in Senate, and unworthily reviled by a Great Man,
he only answered, Potentia tua, non patientia mea est accusanda; thy Power, and
not my Patience is to be condemned.

Patience may be most advantagiously used, by supporting and dissembling of
injuries: There is nothing betrays a man to more folly, than babbling passion,
by which men are frequently displaced, and thrown out of very considerable
employments, who when the heat is over, are ready to hang themselves for being
so rash and inconsiderate. It Is true, the venting of a Splenitick Humor,
highly obliges the Fancy for the present, but it is the Cutthroat of all
future designs. That Courtier doubtlesly had never continued so long in favor
of the Court, had he not bridled his passion; who being asked by a Nobleman
what means he used to keep himself thus firm, for so many years, in Courtly
esteem, answered, It was by a patient supporting injuries, and returning thanks
in lieu of revenge, where he saw he could not effect it to any advantage: And
to avenge a man's self unprofitably, (though it be sweet) is in my Opinion as
great a madness, as for an injured revengeful Italian to drink up a Pint of the
rankest Poison, so that his Enemy will drink but half the quantity.

Now as our Wheedle must patiently endure all the affronts and contumelies that
are thrown upon him by them, from whom he hopes for gain, abandoning his own
humor, and giving the full swing to theirs, how ridiculous soever, if not
hurtful; so he must exercise his Patience, by being diligent in the management
of his affairs, and not to be dismayed, or desist if he meet with obstacles and
repulses, not resting himself on one single event, but with perseverance, and
against all opposition, must still carry on his design; but with this caution,
that he precipitate nothing, but always wait upon occasion. Of this I shall
speak more at large in that Chapter, wherein I shall declare how a Serving-man,
or any other Servant, exercises the Art of Wheedling for Self-interest.

The Sixth Qualification of a Wheedle, Humility.
IF you will but consider, how ambitious man is, and how much he covets honor,
and respect, you will then conclude Humility to be an excellent Trap or Gin to
catch such Wood-cocks, who having nothing splendid in themselves, seek, nay
dearly purchase sometimes these outward appearances, and submissions from
others, to force or extort an Estimation from the people; and never do these
Fops more betray how conscious they are of the poorness of their own Merit,
than when they liberally reward their cringing Admirers. Humility, as it is the
lowest step to the highest Staircase, so it is always the dirtiest, and yet it
is the first step to the top: he that will safely mount, and that securely too,
to the summity of Honor, ought gradually to ascend, beginning with the lowest
step, Humility, if otherwise, by precipitating, he may endanger the breaking of
his Neck.

The wary Wheedle knows this very well, and will not omit any opportunity,
wherein he may make use of so gainful, though seeming poor and ragged
companion: and though he entertain within never so great a Pride; and Ambition,
yet it is prejudicial to show it, and therefore he conceals that Vice with a
pretended Humility, which he makes appear in his outward Behavior five several
ways; in his Apparel, Countenance, Gestures, Words, and Actions.

First, his garb he suits according to the people he is concerned withal; If
this Proteus has any business with sober Citizens, he endeavors to Cloth
himself civilly, not Phantastically A la mode, whose Breeches prevent the
question, What, would you have your Arse hung with Points? Yet his Clothes are
not so absolutely out of Fashion, but that they have some Affinity and Relation
to what is in present Vogue and Estimation, at least they stand Neuter, or
equally concerned with the present and precedent fashion.

If his business lie among the Saints, (as they call themselves, those perverse
and obstinate Dissenters from the Church of England) he then attires himself as
contrary to the Mode, as he can find presidents among them, and cares not how
ridiculous his garments appear in the Eyes of the Wicked, so that thereby he
may Cheat and Cozen the Godly.

As for his Countenance, he frames that according to the Nature of the People
he is to converse withal that day; if with Merchants, or wealthy Tradesmen, he
takes a modest liberty to be cheerful, with a moderate laughter, not loud, not
flouting, and if he fears he has exceeded his bounds therein, he soon recalls
himself by a modest regard, and reconciles himself to himself, and the Company
by what obsequious and respectful Ceremonies he can think of, proper to the
present occasion.

If he be in a Phanatical Society, he takes special cognizance of their
countenances, and frames his as like them as he can, which is a hard matter for
him to do, (by reason of the Variety) without a great deal of Practice. As
first for his Eyes, they must for a while be fixed, and stand still, as the Sun
in Joshua's time, and then on a sudden, lest any should say, black is his eye,
there is nothing to be seen but the whites; for his sight is gone, into the
Labyrinth of his Brain; in search of his Soul, to ask the Question, whether she
is ready for her Journey to Heaven. Next he imitates the pulling down of the
nether Jaw to make his face look long and lean, the certain indicium of the
Mortification of the flesh; the next is the contraction of his Lips, the
gathering up of his Chin, the thrusting out of his Head, and the sour Faces he
makes, would make one believe, that he is about to make a Close-stool of his
Breeches, and being very Costive, he strains hard, but cannot do it without the
help of a skilful Midwife, a known Professor.

In the third place we must consider his words, which are very pleasant, and
always like blancht Almonds set in white Sugar; when he has tickled your Ears
so long as his Invention will hold out, or the occasion permit, he then will
give others leave to speak, and will hearken with profound Reverence and
Attention, applauding every thing that is spoken, not daring to interrupt with
the least contradiction, and at the end of the Discourse, concludes he never
heard more Reason till then uttered, in so short a time; that each syllable
contained a whole world of deep wisdom and understanding; and then a little
after, takes him aside whom he has thus applauded, and by some plausible
pretense, borrows an Angel of him to be his Guardian to his Habitation.
Sometimes as his necessity compels him, he steps into a Meeting House, and
there takes his Cue to hold forth a while, and being out of breath, he
concludes his Nonsense with the Persecution of the Saints; and by laying open
their grievances, he tacitly hints at his own Poverty, and exhorts them to
Brotherly love and Compassion, and is then recompensed for his vain Babble by a
plain Contribution: but more of this in its proper Chapter of the Nonconforming
Teacher.

Lastly, let us take a view of his Humility in his Actions, and that in a
threefold manner; first, to Superiors let there be all Reverence and respect
shown, that thereby he may give them to understand how well he knows his Duty,
and how much he admires, and honors their Dignity and Persons, by this means
he invades their Affections, and by the perseverance of this respectful
Deportment, he in time so overcomes, or conquers their former Indifferency to
do him good, that now they zealously study how to promote his Interest.

Secondly, where any thing is to be gotten, he will descend below his Equals,
filling their Bladder with the wind of vain Applauses, knowing when to prick
and let it out again when he pleases. This condescension gains him very great
Estimation amongst the Sober and Judicious, who look upon him to be a very
humble man indeed that will submit to his Equals; but especially in the third
place, when they see he does it even to those who are Beneath him, and are his
Inferiors; this gains him credit, whether a Tradesman or not; for every one
Believes as he is no proud Man, he cannot easily be a profuse Man, and he that
has so much discretion in his humble Carriage, has so much judgment to manage
his business and expense with Prudence and Moderation, by which means the fear
of what money is lent, or goods entrusted, will not be mis-imployed, but having
made proper and good use thereof, the Creditor will in due time be repaid
satisfactorily, and with gratitude.

Before I conclude this Chapter, it is requisite I tell you how cautious our
Wheedle is in the practice of his Humility; for he carefully observes a
Mediocrity, not debasing himself too low, lest it should render him Despicable,
but restraining his Humility within the bounds of Courtesy, and decent
Affability; by his gentile Salutations and civil carriage, he obliges all,
either Superior, Equal, or Inferior, imitating Caesar, who wone the Peoples
hearts by Caressing, and flattering even the vilest that were among them; and
if we will but look home, we shall find several of our Nobles and Gentry have
risen to a vast height of popularity, by being not indebted to the Commonalty
for Civility, but rather making them their Debtors, by giving them such
Presidents of an Humble, Sweet, and generous Deportment, that it was impossible
for them to imitate; but I must desist from further enlarging this Chapter,
having unawares fallen into the Seventh Qualification of a Wheedle.

The Seventh Qualification of a Wheedle, Civility.
CIvility is another Ingredient which contributes to the composition of our
Wheedling Proteus; and this is most observable in these four things, Choaths,
Countenance, Words, and Actions.

His habit ought to be suited according to the people he is to concern himself
withal, never superfluous or Fantastic, yet proper and sometimes
indifferently Fashionable, sometimes improper, when (as I have said before)
treating of his humility, necessity compels him to join with the Brethren for
the edification, and building up of the outward man. He must have a special
care of his Countenance, it must be full of Kindness, continually smiling,
avoiding feigned or affected simpering, for that is utterly destructive
discovering the Hypocrisy of his heart too plainly; and all sour looks must be
utterly banished his company; in short his looks much be like the Companies, in
every respect conformable.

His manner of speaking must be yielding, obliging, and not polemical, or
opposing, concluding with what every one says, though nonsense, it is right
indeed; your proposition is undeniable; or all your Arguments are invincible.

Lastly, his actions seem to aim at nothing more than what is honest, and just,
whilst he draws his arrow at profit only; when he is amongst Irreligious
persons, who make a scoff at Divinity, he will be then as Debaucht as the
worst, Drink, Drab, and draw his Sword, according as the honorable company is
inclined; for those three Vices, if he finds them in rich men (into whose
acquaintance he has subtly insinuated himself) he makes them his Exchequer,
which suplies him with Money, as necessity requires; for Drinking breeds
Surfeits, which call upon the Physician for remedy, and such a one he knows
Skilful enough to kill the Patient, with whom he goes Snips; Whores he has
enough of all Sizes and Complexions, from Female perfection in Epitome, to the
largest Volume of the Sex, whom he furnishes with Customers of his own
acquaintance, and they repay the kindness with a Pox to 'em. What more
necessary man in this extremity, or fitter to be sent for, than Mr. Wheedle, to
consult about the Cure, who is a man of known Secrecy, and will procure an able
Surgeon, who will faithfully and speedily perfect the Cure; he need not go
far for such a one, having always two or three brace of them at his command,
with whom he agrees in gross by the year, by reason of the multiplicity of
Patients he helps them to, and hardly one of them Clapped, but by his Procuration.

Lastly, he is infinitely pleased if any of his company in their Cups is so
Foolhardy as to draw, no man then shall be more active than himself to part
them, blaming them much for their unadvised rashness, and pretends with his
utmost power to make them Friends, whereas in effect, he makes their breach the
wider, on purpose in that sudden heat they may challenge each other, and
knowing the next day, in cool Blood, they will be sorry for what was done, he
hugs himself to think what fine work he will make with them both (especially if
inclined to Cowardice) in reconciling them together. He hath-been so often
employed in deciding differences arising from drunken Quarrels and Challenges,
that he is not ignorant in the way of doing it, but will not stir a foot,
unless he is certain to receive (as the Sergeant does) Money on both sides:
Sometimes he will seem to espouse the quarrel himself, and Fight for his
Friend, (when he is sure there is no fear of danger) and this must pass for
such an infinite Obligation, that no satisfaction can be made, answerable to so
great a tender of Friendship.

The Eight Qualification of a Wheedle, Affability.
AFfability differs little from Courtesy or Civility, for they both consist in
all outward signs and caresses, that may make a man Believe, and that
confidently too, there is no person more Esteemed and better Beloved, than they
by this subtle insinuating Wheedle.

To this end, by civil Entertainments, and Treats at Taverns, he encourages his
Guests (on whom he designs an advantage) to a freedom, and near familiarity
with him, and the more to endear them to him, he makes a thousand Protestations
of Love and Service, and that they may not doubt this Reality, he will
diligently wait, and never be at Rest, till he has found out some slight
occasion to show them he is as good as his word, and thereupon says, he is
troubled the kindness is no greater, wishing the occasion of a higher concern
might be the Probat of his hearty Services.

He hates to interrupt the Discourse of another, (especially if it be about
business) hoping to gather from thence some advantageous intelligence; besides,
interruption or contradiction is no ways grateful to the Speaker, and therefore
he gives him his utmost liberty, harkening attentively with some evident signs
of satisfaction and contentment, this cannot but please him, and this provokes
him to discourse on, nay, to the discovery of his very Thoughts and Designs,
where he finds so much Affability; Thus Mr. Wheedle, by the Practice of this
Art, has got a Gilt secretly to unlock Men's hearts at pleasure.

To speak the Truth, that man who rashly interrupts the Discourse of another
with eager reparties, or takes the words out of his mouth, endeavoring to
Midwife his Fancy for him, or gives not attention to what is said, but tells a
Story, either to that purpose, or to any other, before the person has ended
his, is not only a testimony of contempt, but is a great piece of Ill-breeding,
Rudeness, and Unmannerliness.

This Wheedle has learned so much Prudence, as not to lose his Friend for an
inconsiderable Jest, or biting Reply, and is so wise, as not to be strange, or
offended at any Jest thrown upon him, because by so doing, he does in a manner
acknowledge the truth thereof; wherefore like a Cunningham seems to slight it,
and so makes others Believe there is nothing in it, thus he knows it passes
without leaving any ill, or disadvantagious impression of him in the minds of
the Hearers,

Lastly, having received any Pledge of Amity, either in Actions or Expressions,
by promises of Kindnesses, etc. he often makes grateful acknowledgments
thereof, attributing all to the goodness of the Donors Nature, fraught with
every thing that is excellent in Mankind, to which he gives so much the more
Credit, by how much every one is apt to be deceived with Philauty or Self-love,
and too easily will persuade himself, that others believe he possesses those
qualities which render him agreeable, and esteemed of all men.

The Ninth Qualification of a Wheedle, Plausibility.
THe Affable and Plausible Man are much alike, whose aim is the general
Opinion, and therefore the Wheedle will be acquainted will Plausibility and
practice it too, because he makes a Benefit of that esteem his Plausible
carriage has extorted from the Vulgar undeservedly; in his behavior there is
observable a kind of fashionable Respect, but no Friendship. He has an
excellent Command over his Patience (as I said before) and his Tongue, which
last he accommodates always to the Times and Persons, and seldom speaks what is
sincere, but what is civil. He considers who are Friends to the Company, and
speaks well where he is sure to heat of it again. He has this admirable
Faculty in him, he can listen to a Foolish discourse with an Applausive
Attention, and conceals his Laughter at Nonsense, unless he thinks he can
conveniently oblige the Fop therewith, and so blind him with an Erroneous
opinion of himself, that he may pick his Pocket with greater facility.

Having thus given you a short, but true Account of the Nine Cardinal
Qualifications of a Wheedle, I shall here insert some other observations as I
gathered them here and there scattered in his subtle Practices and Delusions.

He is one that thrusts himself violently into all Business, most commonly
unsent for, unfee'd, and usually unthankt; every man's Business he makes his
own, and, in his eager bustling, keeps ado, and does nothing in it at all, yet
he cries, I have done what I can. This man is wholly determined in himself and
his own ends, and his Instrument herein is any thing that will do it. His
Friends, which he has made so by his Specious Delusive Pretenses, are a part
of his Engines, and as they serve to his Operations and Designs, are either
used, or laid aside; to tell you the Truth, he knows not what a Friend
signifies, as having never put it in Practice, but if he give any the Name, it
is an infallible Sign he has a Plot upon that Person. Never more Active in his
Business, than when they are mixed with some detriment to other men's Estates;
and he accounts it his best Play at this Game (as at Boards-end) to strike off,
and lie in the place. Succesful he is frequently in these undertakings, because
he passes smoothly those Rubs which others stumble at, as Conscience, Religion,
and the like, and gratulates himself much in the advantage. Oaths and Falsehood
he accounts the nearest cut to a plentiful Estate, and loves not by any means
to go about by the tedious way of Honesty, and Plain-Dealing; and holds him to
be a Madman or a Fool, who says, That Honesty is the best Policy. He never
hears a man speak in the praise of Plain-dealing, but his Choler is ready to
over-swell its Banks, and ready to be suffocated therewith, because he dares
not give it vent: in his thoughts he makes a pish at Religion, yet he uses it
too, and it may be as an Elder, or a strict Professor, and is never more
dangerously a Devil, than when he Personates a Saint. His deepest endearments
is a Communication of Mischief, and in his Conclusion, he either mounts to the
height of an Estate, or the top of a Ladder.

This Sordid fellow has no Esteem for any, but Men of Estates, and such who
can and will do him a courtesy, and when they speak, he takes a world of pains
to persuade them they speak nothing but Oracles, when they are hardly guilty of
common sense. One that justifies nothing out of Fashion, nor any Opinion out of
the applauded way, and therefore will at any time confidently Swear, That the
Pope is no man, because the generality call him the Whore of Babylon. He hates
the judicious, and men of parts, for no other reason, but because he finds it a
difficult thing to circumvent them. Every man's happiness he measures by their
Money, and therefore nicknames Thrive-well to do well, and Preferment he
profanely calls the Grace of God. He knows no other content, than when his
Plots hit right, purchasing him Money, Gallantry, and the variety of
Town-pleasures; at these Marks all his Studies aim at, and he holds as an idle
thing all other speculation.

Thus much of the Wheedle in general; I shall more at large Characterize, or
Paint him in his proper Colors, when I shall treat of the several sorts of
Wheedles or Town-shifts, in the variety of their Mysterious Practices and
Devices.

CHAP. IV. What are the Praecognita, or things first necessary to be known,
before the Student in this Art of Wheedling, enter upon the Practice of the
Profession.
I Have in the foregoing Chapters, given you an Account of the Nine first
requisite Qualifications of our Wheedle; in the next place I shall endeavor to
discover what other things he consults for his Advantage, before he puts in
practice his Art of Insinuation, which indeed are the principal discoverers in
the profitable Science of reading or knowing Men.

Man is a difficult Book to be read, if we only take an outward view of his
Person and Actions; for without much caution, and circumspection, they may both
prove dangerously deceitful, though it is said, That the Face is the Index of
the Mind, yet Experience tells us, it is no infallible Indicium of the Nature
or Disposition of the Person. For which cause Socrates would not believe his
own Eyes, but his Ears rather; for, when a Youth was highly commended to him
for his excellent Parts, and great endowments of Mind, he did not pry into his
outward Feature, which was admirable, and needed not to have demurred his
approbation of him, if that lovely hew, and sweet countenance would have done
it, but took a contrary way, by asking him, Loquere puer, ut te videam, which
Seneca alluded to in one of his Epistles, Videre, and non eloqui, nec videre
est, which puts me in mind of an Italian Proverb, A Lucca te vidi, a Pisa te
conobbi, I saw thee at Lucca, I knew thee at Pisa; he had an external
superficial View of him at one place, but by converse he gained an inward
acquaintance with him in another.

Yet it must nor be denied, but that the Eye is the Casement of the Soul,
through which we may plainly see it, as one lately saw the Pride of a Rich
Phanatick through his threadbare holy Cloak, as he was going to a Conventicle,
upon one of his own Solemn Days of Humiliation.

The Tongue is the truest Touchstone of the Heart, and Herald of the Mind, but
not always; for what is more deceitful and treacherous than it; how sweetly
will it Wheedle to obtain its end; lie and flatter to propagate Interest; and
has so full a command, and power over the Heart, that it can utter nothing
without her assistance; and when the Tongue pleases, will corruptedly speak
what the Heart dictated.

Again, (as one well observes) all is not Gold that glisters; and it was well
observed by a Philosopher, concerning a young man that was well proportioned
and spoke ill, a Leaden Rapier in a Golden Sheath; Nero's Beard in a Golden
Box; wrinkled Faces, and rugged Brows, lurk under smooth Paint; a rotten Nutmeg
gilt over, or a gaudy outside with a Baudy rotten inside; an old deformed Woman
in a New-fashion'd Gown; yet on the other side, when we see a Body well framed,
as wrought out of the purest Virgin-wax, as tempered with the cunning hands of
beauty and favor, enriched with the very prodigality of Nature; shall we say
this golden Mine affords only leaden Metal? This is no wonder, no rare thing to
see Wit, Wisdom, and Virtue in fellowship, or in one Household with Beauty;
wherefore we must not censure too far by the outward resemblance, or else to
instruct knowledge it self in this: That always to see, is not to know.

Neither can any see the Deformity of the Soul by the blemishes of the Body;
not but that a man may give a shrewd conjecture, and many a hanging look has
presaged his certain going to the Gallows, some years before the approach of
that sad Catastrophe.

I cannot deny but that we may gather something from outward appearances; for
men largely sized are seldom witty Men we find; little Eyes in men betoken
crafty, and circumventing Dispositions; in Women, salacity or lechery, with an
obstinate selfish humor: a great head, a small wit; goggle eyes, a stark
staring fool; great ears, a dull heavy Ass; large breasted, long lived; a plain
unfurrowed brow, liberal; thick nails, harsh hair, and a gross hard skin, are
certain signs of a dull understanding; a fat belly bespeaks a little ingenie,
because the subtle Spirits are affected with gross and turbulent Fumes which
darken the understanding.

Fat Panches make lean Pates, and grosser bits
Enrich the Ribs, but Bankrupt quite the Wits.
This will not hold good, if you examine the great Wit, notwithstanding the
corpulent Body, of Doctor R. W.

Now since these are no certain Signs, which may direct us to the knowledge of
Mankind, let us consider what other helps remain, which I find to be four, very
important and necessary to be understood by all the Students of this Art or
Science, viz. The four Temperaments or Humors, Inclinations, Passions, and
Conversation: of these I shall speak in order.

CHAP. V. Of the four Principal Humors or Complexions. Of the Sanguine.
ALL Natural Bodies have their composition of the mixture of the four Elements;
Fire, Air, Water, and Earth: from the Dominion of any of these, or their
qualities, each Temperament or Constitution has its Denomination: thus
Sanguine has its original from Air, Choler from Fire, Phlegm from Water, and
Melancholy from Earth; now, the Blood is hot and moist; Choler hot and dry;
Water cold and moist; the Earth cold and dry.

The golden Crasis, or Sanguine Complexion, is (as T. W. describes it at
large, with much Learning and Rhetoric) The Pride of Humors, the Paragon of
Complexions, and the Prince of all Temperaments: And as a Potentate he
continues his Metaphor thus: You cannot but admire him, if you view him in
those Princely Scarlet Robes he is always invested with, seated in a Kingly
Throne, and placed in the midst of our Earthly City; next take notice of his
Officers, (I mean the Veins and Arteries) which are spread throughout his whole
Politeia, yea, dispersed in every Angle, to execute his Commands, and carry the
lively influence of his goodness, reviving those remote parts, which without
his influence, would be frettished with a chilness, and in a short time be
mortified. Then consider his wise subtle Counselors, which daily consort with
him, for the welfare of his whole Kingdom; the limpid Spirits, the very seat of
Divine reason it self, the fountains of Policy, etc.

If we poize all these together, with many more, we cannot but imagine that the
blood is a Celestial Majesty, or a Terrestrial Deity, and he that is nearest
allied thereunto, comes nearest to that Eucrasia, the best (but only conceited)
Temperament, called by Physicians Temperamentum ad Pondus, which never man yet
perfectly enjoyed. And is it not ten Thousand pitty's, that this excellent
Temperament should lie liable to more abuses than any of the rest; that though
its Spirits have the most exact temper of all wherewith the Soul, as being in a
Paradise, is most delighted, and for wit surpassing all, yet is the disposition
so facile, and easy to be wrought on, that our Wheedle finds him a dish of meat
made ready to his hands at any time to feed upon; but more of this hereafter.

The External signs by which he is known, are a live look, with a fresh ruddy
Complexion; in speech affable, with a graceful delivery: there are some
excellent qualification in him, which are no ways to the purpose for our
Wheedle to take notice of, savoring of too much goodness and virtue for him to
imitate or profit by, but his other qualities (which are to him as his panis
quotidianus) are these.

First as he knows him to be a great Lover of Wit; there is not an applauded
Book in that respect newly minted, but that he either purchases it for him, or
directs him where he may have it; and the more to engage him, he is his
Intelligencer-generall for all manner of witty conceits, which he gleans here
and there, either in Taverns, Bawdy-houses, or Wits Coffee-houses, which he
bundles up promiscuously together; and loads his memory therewith, or fearing
by its carelessness any may be scattered by the way, he binds them up safe in
his Table Book, which he studiously cons two or three hour's before he gives
them vent, that they may the better pass for his own; and in the delivery how
thoroughly and eagerly he consults the countenance of this our well featured,
and good natured Gentleman, and if he finds they pleasantly relish the Palate
of his Fancy, he gives him more borrowed Sugar-plums of the like nature, till
he has sweetened him for his own swallow.

By daily conversing with him, this Rascal finds him, not only extraordinary
kind, and affectionate to his Friend, but very liberal also; on both of these
he works to his advantage; as to the first, he makes it his business to
persuade him by some external demonstrations, that he is a real Friend, not
only by protestations of Friendship, but by some petty Services which may
intimate as much, and having possessed him with that Belief, by a pretended
present necessity, he may borrow money of him, or by an Arrest of his own
ordering, may draw him into such obligations, that the releif of the one,
commonly proves the untimely destruction of the other.

Now, by reason of that lively abounding humor, he knows him to be salacious,
or venereally inclined, or a great Lover of Music and Harmony, and being very
sociable, and willing to condescend to any Motion that may make an augmentation
to Pleasure, he is easily persuaded to drink plentifully; these are three such
knacks the Devil could not invent better to pick men's Pockets with; and what
damnable use does this Wheedling Villain make of them, when he has got them
together. First, the Wench must be procured, which is soon done, according as
he finds out his harmless Bubbles inclination: he carries perpetually about him
a Catalogue of all the Whores he can hear of about the Town, ranking them into
three Columes apart, and thus distinguished; the Flamer, Frisker, and
Wast-coateer: The two first are new names given the Does, or Bona Roba's (as
the Italian calls a Whore) and they are the upper, and middle sort; the last
pitiful and mean, who by her incomes, or plying, never could purchase her self
clothes becoming the Society of Gentlemen. This meretricious Catalogue he
digests Alphabetically, by reason of the vast quantity of those white Cloven
Devils, with large white spaces between to insert the names of such he has
found out by new discovery; and he takes so good a method for finding them out,
that though they change their Names and Lodgings ever so often, yet knowing how
great a Friend he is to them, they all send him word when occasion serves of
such alterations, which he puts down de novo in his Book; and though one of
these Whores in a years time may have twenty names, yet she can have but one
body, which he suits his Bubble with, according as he finds his inclination
bend, either to black, brown, red, flaxen, or any complexion whatever: but
present bounds, before I have too far run beyond present bounds before I was
aware on it, designing to speak of this more at large in its proper place, when
I shall come to describe the subtle Wheedling practices of Bawds, Whores,
Pimps, Bully's, etc.

The Wench being brought, which is in a garb always agreeable to the Amorist,
and of price according to his ability or desire; this delicate bit will not
seem half so palatable without a dish of Music, which lest the ravishing
Consort should convert his Brutish desires into Seraphick Love (for to that the
Sanguine too is naturally inclined) Madam Van Harlot takes him aside into
another Room, pretending to speak with him about business, and there for a
double expense gives him the opportunity to cool his Concupiscence. Wine he
makes use of to wind up the bottom, playing on the freeness of his
disposition, and being tired with the excess of these various delights, Madam
and the Music is dismissed, as things no longer pertinent to his design, which
is in courtesy to wait upon him home, that he may have the better opportunity
to pick his Pocket; and if he finds the intoxicated fumes of Wine have not so
fully contributed their assistance to his purpose, as he would have them, yet
he knows by their heat they have done enough to soften the Wax of his good
Nature, that thereby he has a fair opportunity to make what advantageous
impression he pleases upon him.

Of Choler.
WEre it pertinent to my Subject, I might here give you a description of
Choler, and how many sorts there are of it, which the Latins call Bilis, but I
shall only name them, because they have been so much discourst already; there
is bilis vitellina, of a pale yellow, Porracea, greenish; caerulea, azure, or
bluish, and aeruginosa, of a rusty color.

The Signs whereby a man may discern a man of this Choleric Complexion, are a
yellowish countenance, or swarthy, red-hair'd, or of a brownish color, very
meagre and thin, are soon angry, and soon pleased, like the Sanguine, but
differs from him in this, that he is all fire, in a moment inflamed, and
violent in the prosecution of his Revenge, and no man obliges him more, than
he that will any way assist him in it,

He then that will insinuate into his affections, must flatter him in his
unjust Wrath, prompt him to Revenge, inculcating the sweetness thereof; thus
when he has engaged him in a Quarrel, as the Rat and the Frog in the Fable,
he, like the Eagle, may hover aloft out of harms way, and safely make a prey of
them both. How easily may such a thing be guld, since his rash actions, for the
most part, put a leg before his Judgment, and most commonly outrun it; for his
Passion or hot Fancy is the Signal that sets him forward, whilst his Reason
comes lagging in the Rear; by all men that are wise, he is accounted
indiscreet, because he is so changable and inconstant in his determinations,
ever disliking what he before approved; now, none will deny that mutableness,
and inconstancy are the intimates and badges whereby Fools are known, and every
one knows, that Fools are the constant Food which Knaves do feed upon, which
made a crafty Knavish Broker (whom I knew) say, I will not part with my Fools
for an Annuity of two hundred pounds.

But this the Knave must do, if he intend to fit his humor to a hair, to be as
precipitate as he, in all attempts or enterprises: for when any thing comes
into his head, which he would have effected, he hates all considerate delays,
and will not stay the leisure of a second thought; for the first is his
Resolution, and never considers what the event may be. Have a care Mr. Wheedle
how deeply you engage, or concern your self with this Hot-spur, or Furioso; for
since the ground he goes on, is, hap what may, something may happen by the way,
in which nothing shall stop you, till you come to Tyburn: and thus as an
obstinate, I will, was his Prologue, so I would I had not, may be your
Epilogue. To conclude, this advantage may be made of him, in a humor of
quarrelling, he will grossly abuse a man, and in another humor undo himself to
make him amends.

Of Phlegm.
THe External Signs whereby a Phlegmatic man may be distinguished from all
other Temperaments, are natural paleness of color, (Pallor in ore sedet)
drowsy headed, weakly constituted by reason of the debility of Nature,
occasioned by an extreme cold moisture, correspondent to the watery Element,
which extinguisheth the Natural Heat in humane Bodies.

There is Phlegma natural, et non natural, from whence proceed the Crassum,
Gypseum, Salsum, Acetosum, and Tenue, all which contribute to man's dissolution,
if not timely hindered in their progression; as to the causes and nature of them
distinctly, with the maladies attending, I shall leave to the care of the
Physician, and meddle no further with the Phlegmatic man, than to discover how
our Insinuator or Wheedle makes his humor an advantageous thing to work upon.

First, it will be requisite to continue my above commenced description of him,
whereby he may be easily known; besides his pallid hue, drowsy head, and
debile constitution, he is dull in conceiving and apprehending: mild natured,
difficultly incensed, or provoked to Anger, and egregiously Cow-hearted.

There are two qualities in this weakly indigested Phlegmatic person (who
always looks like an old Paritan dow-baked) very advantageous for any, who have
a mind to practice upon him: first, the dullness of his Apprehension, and
Conception; being slenderly furnished with what makes a man; I do not mean form,
or feature, but reason, and understanding; for he is to be dealt withal no
otherways than as a child, (for he is always a Boy at Man's estate) and no man
questions the facility of cokesing, and cheating such an ignorant Innocent with
any Toy, bearing a glittering outside; or if it make but a noise in his Ear,
(as a Rattle) it will either still him for the present, or lull him into such a
sleep, that you may run away with the House over his Head, with whatsoever
thereunto belongs, before he awakes, or if he does, and as in a maze asks you
where he is, what he has done, and what is become of this or that, it is but
throwing the Child the other Play-thing, and ten to one he leaves of crying,
and goes to sleep again.

Certainly Nature hudled up this thing in have, and left his better part
unfurnisht, or unfinisht; for every part of him is grown up to a perfect man,
only his Brains lag behind; wherefore he wants a Tutor, though he be too old to
have one, but our Wheedle thinks it never too late to instruct the simple and
ignorant, not caring at what rate they purchase their experience.

I do not hence infer, that all Phlegmatic Persons are Fools, but those who
have that humor over abounding; as they are half a dozen steps above a Fool,
so they are a great many below a Wise man: he is a man of a good harmless
Nature, and well meaning Mind, and wanting judgment to distinguish when good or
harm is designed, his mistake in either becomes equally destructive.

The second advantage is made on the mildness of his Nature, and his
Cow-heartedness.

He is a man flexible enough, but not given to loquacity, whatever you propose
to him, he returns not his answer of liking or disliking; you must take his
Silence for Consent, and if you would have it done, you must take him by the
hand and lead him to it; if he hangs an Arse, a threat will prick him forward,
and if you abuse him, no man takes it more patiently; or if he should ill
resent it, it is but re-acting it, and then you abuse him into a reconcilement.

He that intends to make him his Creature, must often huff him, or now and then
relate what desperate things he has gone through, how many Duels, how many
Skirmishes, etc. though he never saw any other Military Body but the
Train'd-bands, nor never a Sword drawn, but in a Cutlers shop; for this is a
certain rule, that the Opinion of Valor is a good Protection to those that
dare not use it. Thus you may get Courtesies by falling out with him, and as
the business is rightly managed, his fear will prompt him to bribe you into a
Pacification.

In short he is a dull heavy Animal, who in Company will drink, and smoke as
much as any, but speak as seldom as Baalam's Ass, and not half so much to
purpose; he is only fit to pay Reckonings, and carry burdens, and if the beast
be fat, he is the better for our Wheedle to ride upon; but let him have a care
he preserve him for his own use, for lending him out to others will founder and
spoil him quite. Cullies and Bubbles must be kept as Spaniards do their Wives,
keeping them from the sight of all, and so they have the whole use of them to
themselves. Great beauties, and fat Fools must be used alike, the sight of
either tempts men to rob us of them, who would never have thought on it,
otherwise, but by seeing the Temptation. The Goose may be turned out, when the
feathers are pulled, till then, the rich Fop is dealt with by the Wheedle, as a
wife was by her husband, who swear to her, he would make as much of her as he
could, and so he did; for, having spent her money, he sold her very clothes from
her back.

Of Melancholy.
OF all the four Temperaments, this is the greatest enemy to life and good
society; as to the first, because its qualities being Cold and Dry, do most of
all disagree from the lively qualities, Heat, and Moisture; either with its
Coldness extinguishing natural inherent heat, or with its Dryness sucking up
the native Moisture. As to the second, Society, as all Creatures whatever
delight in it, so he is averse to it, and seems to be a man, made to be alone.
He may curse his Godfather Saturn for his ill qualities; for he had them all
from him; a fellow of that malignant nature, that let him be in Copulation with
the best (though with Madam Venu^, when she is in a merry pin, and in good
humor) yet will he dull, and obscure their benevolent influencies.

A man of his temper, by his contemplative faculty, and by the assiduity of sad
and serious meditation may prove a dangerous Machiavilian, and may happily invent
such stratagems, whims and policies, as were never put in practice, and which
may have a happy success,; but he is no man for a nimble denterical, pregnant,
and extemporary Invention; no man at a pleasant Conceit, a Comical Jest, quaint
Expressions, varnished Metaphors, nor graceful Delivery; wherefore, he that
intends to ingratiate himself into his acquaintance, must not think to do it
with A la mode Songs, repetition of Witty Verses, as Epigrams, Epithalamiums,
etc. nor with culd ingenious Sentences out of Plays; he had rather hear a Wolf
howl at Midnight, or a Consort of Screech-Owles, accompanied with the
scratching Courtship of a dozen Cats promiscuously generating; if you Laugh,
and show your Teeth to him, he had rather see a Bear grin at him; and the sound
of a Violin is more dreadful to him than the crowing of a Cock to a Lion. If
you intend to win his heart, you must endeavor to look like Lazarus, newly
risen from the Dead; or like the Daemoniacks coming out of the Tombs; you must
make no noise, not so much as open your Mouth, for fear the Air should whistle
through your Teeth, and if you must speak, let it be so, as if you intended
never to speak more.

I pity that man that is troubled with this Malignant constitution, for it is
the Spring of all sad and bad Humors, the Aqua Fortis of good Company; for he
is a contemplative Slumberer, and sleeps waking.

He is distinguished from the other three complexions, by his black swarthy
Visage, slow pace, and sad countenance; he entertains hatred a long time in his
Breast, and is rarely reconciled to his Enemy. It is a long time before he can
be made a Friend, yet he is of a kind Nature to them with whom he has long
conversed, and is constant in his affection and Friendship; and he that will
obtain it, must humor his ridiculous Passions, of which he has too many; what
he Conceits, you must Swear is Real; for he hates contradiction, being so much
Wedded to his own fond opinion. If he vainly imagine he is made of Glass, (as I
have read of one that did) keep your distance, lest coming too near him, he
suspect you for an Enemy, and that by a justle you design his Ruin, breaking
his brittle Fabric into pieces; if as another, he thinks himself composed of
Butter, you must half starve with him in the cold, rather than injure his
conceit, by persuading him to sit by the Fire, and hazard his dissolution; if
(as Burton relates of one) he thinks he has a Nose so big, that the Room
wherein he sits is too little to contain it; you must when you give him a
visit, squeez your self into it, for fear of hurting his Nose, till you come to
the back of his Chair, there without injury to discourse with him; if as
another, who thought himself Dead, and therefore would not Eat, you must sit
with him in a VVinding Sheet at a Table furnished with Meat, and confessing your
self to be Dead too, fall on, that by your Example you may persuade him to Eat
too, since his Brother Dead-man does it; if as another, who took a conceit he
was a God, you must seemingly worship his Deity, till by your Knavish dealing
with him, you make him confess his Humanity; if as another, he fancy he is so
light, that he must wear Iron Shoes to hinder the VVind from tripping up his
heels, lay your Politic weights and Stratagems on his Shoulders, till he groan
under the weight of your Cozenage and Deceits. In short, you must deal with him
as with men of all other complexions, by a congruity, and suiting with the
humor of the Person; for without this, the Wheedle shall miss of his intended
advantage.

CHAP. VII. How to Wheedle or Dissemble with all sorts of Persons according to
their several Humors, Ages, and Conditions.
WHosoever intends to insinuate himself into the affection or Friendship of any
person, Male or Female, of what Age soever, (proportioning his respects
according to the Quality, Riches and Merit of him to whom he does address them)
must thoroughly Study, and perfectly understand the several Temperaments,
Inclinations, and various Motions of the will of that Man, and must practice a
conformity and suitableness to his Humors and Passions. With a person of a
Sanguine constitution, who is of a sweet Nature, you must suit and accommodate
your self to the mildness of his Inclinations; you must not prompt him to
Revenge, for he is apt of himself to excuse the greatest Injury that is done
him, and therefore if you would ingratiate your self with him, you must
mitigate offenses committed; persuading him, with reason and good advice, to
take a moderate satisfaction; this in a very high manner obliges him, as being
so agreeable and consentaneous to his loving and merciful disposition.

With that person, who is agitated and tossed to and fro in a turbulent
tempestuous Sea of Choler, you must act otherwise; for as it is his humor
openly to complain of Injuries received, so you must amplify them with what
aggravations you can most properly suggest; as his Choleric Vessel is full
fraught with Revenge, (and being fearless of danger, ready to enterprise any
thing that may gratify that destructive Humor) so you must lay aside all
consideration, and sailing with him in that desperate Resolution, you must be
guided by the Compass of his rash will, pursuing all his angry designs with
equal precipitation.

If he rails against any one, that has injured or offended him, you must play
the Billings-gate against him too; if he intends to procure, or create this man
a thousand Enemies, for a small offense, you must endeavor (or seem) to raise
him as many more.

In short, he that would accommodate himself to him that is transported with
Choler, must imitate him in some of his Actions, and seem not only to approve
of his Passion as just, and truly grounded, but likewise to give him to
understand, that your Apefying anger proceeded from the same cause as his did,
ever accusing and reviling the causer thereof, praising Revenge, and prompting
him to a speedy Execution of it.

The Phlegmatic person is generally fearful, and therefore takes into
consideration all kind of Dangers, and his fear looking through a Microscope,
they appear to the deceived eye of his judgment much bigger than they are; a
small Mite in a Cheese appears as big as a shaggy Bear, and an Ant as large as
an Elephant; it is to no boot then to persuade him to be bold and courageous;
talk to him of Wars, and you wound him to the Heart; tell him of a great Army
that is preparing against his Countrymen, and he fanfies they are already at
the Townsend; always the evil seems to approach nearer than it does, and
discovers his distrust and distraction, by his words and countenance.

Now to condemn this man to his Face or otherwise, for his base fear and
Cowardice, is to disoblige him; for though he know himself to be a rank Coward,
he knows withal, that it is a disparagement to be thought so, and therefore you
cannot please him better, than to persuade the world that he is no such Person,
and you must justify his fears by reason; that his aversion to quarrel and
disputes proceeds from prudence; that Wisdom always hinders her Children from
fighting for trifles, or were the matter considerable, yet discretion should
teach us to put up injuries, and not hazard a man's all in this world for an
Airy satisfaction.

To counterfeit an agreeable fearfulness, is the way to win much upon him, and
therefore in discourse, Valor, and all bold enterprises, should be decryed as
the effects of rashness and temerity, and that their consequences are always
dangerous, and most commonly destructive. Inculcate frequently the Proverb, and
comment upon it, That one pair of legs is worth two pair of hands; That to fly
is better than to die, commending Falstaff in the Play, deriding Sir Henry
Blunt that was slain; there lies grinning Honor, etc. In short, let safety and
security be above all things applauded.

Whereas on the other side, he that has to do with a bold resolute and
confident Person, who never enters into a consideration of any thing that may
represent Fear and Danger, must seem courageous and stout, though he be not so,
by pretending promptness to prosecute his hazardous designs; and that he may
not be suspected, all his actions, which are the forerunners to any desperate
design, must be accompanied with a cheerful and joyful countenance, as if he
was more forward than the other, to enterprise any design whatever, though
attended with all the danger imaginable, yet may he use an hundred Stratagems
to divert him from putting any thing in Execution which may prove prejudicial
to them both.

If this person does any thing, though never so inconsiderable, the action must
be praised above measure, whatsoere it be, though bad, it must not want
applause, but if others will not forbear speaking of it opprobriously, as it
deserves, and coming to his Ear, he seems too sensible of the shame and
disgrace, you must then contemn that too great regard that is given to the
opinion and censure of men, to which those who subject themselves, are Slaves,
that none but Fools regard what the world says of them; that there is no heed
to be taken of the giddy multitude, who will be talking, though they talk
nothing; and therefore persuades him not to be regulated by the measure of
censuring severity. Here by the way observe to praise, respect, and seemingly
love whosoever is beloved by him, in whom you intend to gain an Interest; and
those he hates, you must hate too, and let him know you do it, by aggravating
all their ill Offices, rejoicing at any bad, and grieving at any good shall
befall them.

If you would accommodate your self to ungrateful Persons, (which are a sort of
Cattle I may call without offense, Hells first Inhabitants) you must then
lessen whatsoever kindnesses he receives from others, and magnify whatsoever
he bestows; always inculcating into his Ear, that such a thing was done out of
design, or that he could do no less than to repay one favor, since there was
so many due upon sundry occasions.

The Envious must be dealt with after another manner, and that is, when you
find him transported with Indignation and Envy, for the good which happens to
any one; then must the worth of this person be vilified, that there is nothing
in him which deserves such Boons from the hand of Fortune, but hanged she is
blind and inconstant, and knows not how to reward Merit and Desert.

And to gratify the more this Diabolical humor, there is nothing does it more
effectually, than to parallel him who is thus Envious, with him that is Envied,
exalting the first, and debasing the last; magnifying the least good quality
discernable in the one, and lessening that which is perspicuously good in the
other; and that the bad actions in his life may smother and stifle his better
qualifications, and virtuous inclinations, all the stains or blots of his whole
Life and Conversation, must be strictly looked into, and numbered, to be ready
for Repetition when the Envious shall maliciously exclaim against this Person.

Lastly, though the Wheedle knows the Temperament of men, with their
Inclinations and Passions, yet he is to understand this, that a man is not
always in one humor; he may be Sour, Cross, and Morose in a Morning upon an
hungry Stomach, yet may be Pleasant and Courteous after Dinner, when he has
crammed his Crib; and for the benefit of Concoction, has warmed his Stomach
with half a dozen glasses of brisk Claret; and therefore some have that Policy
or insight into Men's dispositions, that they will not Negotiate or treat about
any portant affair with any Merchant, till he has laid the Basis of his Design
on a good Breakfast, or a plentiful Mornings draught.

Moreover, as a man may be out of humor, by reason of that acid humor within,
which proves a Canibal oftentimes, and feeds upon the Stomach, for want of
other sustenance, so gain and loss, good and bad News, success or crosses in
any design, etc. will suddenly and strangely alter a man's humout from Joy to
Sorrow, and so vice versa. Sometimes a man's countenance (like the Sun in April)
shall look for a while pleasant and cheerful, and in an instant, some cloudy
discontent obseures its Face, and then it falls a Raining.

Now, since Joy and Sorrow govern differently, Joy being never willing with
Venus to admit Sorrow into her Society, (Non solet in lecto triste venire
Venus) there must be therefore a special care had, how the present mirth of
others be discomposed or diverted, by some unseasonable sorrowful action or
expression; with the Joyful and Merry there must be a corresponding jollity. On
the other side, if one in the depth of another man's sorrowful condition should
be exercising his Buffoonry; by this means he would render himself disagreeable
and importunate; but he must accommodate himself to the parties grief, and
suffer with him for a while; and at length by sliding by degrees out of that
dumpish humor, you draw him after you, leaving the sorrow to come limping
after. Man's nature is more inclined to pleasure, than to any other thing, and
therefore is the more willing to embrace it; but then it must be done with a
sweet insinuation, and he that has that excellent faculty, what may not that
man effect according to the humor he is to work upon. The Man that is
Melancholy, or any ways disturbed in mind, needs no other Physician, which he
knows; and therefore no man's company more acceptable than his: O for Mr. --
such a one (cries the sorrowful) where is he? send for him. Were he here, his
pleasant discourse would assuage my sorrow, his company is the Antidote for an
afflicted person: and being come, who so welcome as he, what thing too good for
him; whilst they both live, by this means he is like to have his loving look,
and ten to one after Death his large Legacies.

In short the Wheedle, concludes whilst there is a man living on the Earth,
there is a necessity for him to imitate the Vices and debauches, as well as the
Virtues of those with whom we converse. Alcibiades, who was both on Orator and
Philosopher, being at Athens, when he was amongst the Lacedaemonians, his
conversation was crabbed and austere; when amongst the Thracians a very spruce
Gallant, and would play the Bacchanalian stoutly. Amongst the Jonians, he
addicted himself to all those pleasures they most delighted themselves in,
being very jovial, and as they were fantastic so was he: When he was among
the Persians, he imitated them in their gallantry of apparel, with other
Sumptuous and Splendid habits and accoutrements, according to the humor of
that (then) luxurious Nation.

A man qualified with such a Spirit cannot fail to reap his advantages
wherever he comes, but especially at Court, or Princes Palaces, where men must
comply, and render themselves easy to conform to all sort of Humors and
Manners, as if it proceeded from a natural inclination, and not from any
fawning imitation.

CHAP. VIII. Some general Observations tending to a further discovery of Men's
Inclinations.
IN the preceding Chapters it is indifferently proved, that the Temperaments
are the most general and most eminent causes of the Inclinations of both Sexes,
Men being inclined to such and such Passions, according to the quality of the
Humors which are predominant in the Body; thus the Melancholic person, as he
is sad and serious, so he is commonly Politic and Ingenious: the Choleric
active, angry, and inconstant: the Sanguine jovial and affable: the Phlegmatic
stupid and faithful.

Besides these Internal Characters, there are also many that are External,
which are as Letters by which man is read and understood; for largeness of the
Breast (according to common experience) denotes nimbleness, and strength of the
junctures: openness of the Nostrils, and wideness of the Mouth, are Marks of
courage and gluttony: a thick Neck, the flesh hard and musculous, and the
extremities large, are signs of bodily strength, and strong judgment: the
Square Forehead, Nose somewhat big, Lips thin, and the Chin of an indifferent
largeness, declare magnanimity and greatness of courage: the Stature tall and
straight, the Eyebrows elevated, a Majestic gate, and sprightly eyes,
signify ambition and desire of honor: the Forehead and Face of a square
figure, and the Head of a convenient bigness, are marks of Wisdom, Constancy
and Justice. If you will be further acquainted with these and other external
signs belonging to men's Bodies, and would know their signification according to
experience, consult that excellent and elaborate Piece of Mr. Sanders, treating
at large of Physiognomy and Chiromancy; where you will find, and whence it may
be affirmed, that of all the parts belonging to Man or Woman, there is not one,
but which denotes some particular Vice or Virtue.

Now, though these aforementioned signs, with these which follow, are admirable
discoverers of intricate Man, viz. motion of the Body, Gate, Gesture, and
carriage of it, Beauty and Deformity, Color, Air of the Countenance, quality
of the Skin, Voice, fleshiness of the Body, figure and largness of the Parts,
all which proceed from External or Internal causes, yet some say, that these
signs are not certain; but may fail in sundry respects: first as to the
external; a man may become crooked, or crump Shouldered by a fluxion, or by a
fall; a man may squint by imitating another (when he was young) who looked
obliquely; secondly, as to the internal, a man may go slowly, through weakness
by sickness; thus the air of the Countenance, the Voice, Skin, and fleshiness
of the Parts, may receive alteration upon the same account; an hundred
instances I could here insert to the like purpose; which will not much avail my
present purpose in hand; there is no rule so general, but it will admit of some
exception; yet let me advise the Reader, to take special notice of this
caution, Caveto ab iis, quos Deus notavit; beware of them, whom God has marked,
I believe it is meant in Vtero, such as come so marked into the world, who are
like Parsons Sons, most commonly upon the extremes, either very good, or very
bad; some natural marks I have taken special notice of, as men's Eyes of
different colors, sometimes one bigger than the other; a tuft of hair white,
and the rest black, etc. whosoever deals with such men ought to have much
circumspection; for they are generally Crafty and Knavish; wherever you see a
black or brown hair'd man with a reddish Beard, conclude him no Woman-hater,
but a hater of honest Women.

To conclude, he that has attained to the discovery of the Inclinations,
Manners, and designs of other men we cannot then but acknowledge, that he has
gotten the surest Guide that can be taken for a man's conduct in the whole
course of his life, and shall in the right use thereof, not only avoid a
thousand dangers, and inconveniences, into which, from time to time he runs the
hazard of falling into; but likewise supports himself hereby, though in the
most tottering condition. For it shows the opportunities, and favorable
conjunctures of time, wherein a man ought to speak or act any thing to the best
advantage, and teaches him the manner how to do it, and if it be requisite to
suggest an advice, to inspire a Passion, or a design, it knows all the Passages
through which it is to be derived into the Soul.

In the completing the study of this Art, there is nothing more requisite,
than the right knowledge of Physiognomy, which discovers the disposition and
inclination of men, as much as any thing; now he that has got a good
understanding therein, need not complain against Nature, for not putting a
window before men's hearts, that their thoughts, and secret designs might be
seen; for those things fall not under the senses; for though the eyes saw the
very bottom, and all the windings, and turnings of the heart, yet could they
not observe any thing therein, from whence they might derive the knowedge of
it: Nature has made other provision for this discovery; to wit, not only voice
and tongue (the Interpreters of the thoughts) but also lest (out of a distrust)
man should abuse them, Nature has contrived a language in his forehead and
eyes, to give the other the lie, in case they should not prove faithful. In
short, she has exposed his Soul to be observed on the outside, so that there
is no necessity of any window to see his motions, inclinations, and passions,
since they are apparent in his face, and are there written in such visible, and
manifest characters; yet for all this, few have the Art of reading them, for
want of humane observation: let us then pass to things that are more legible,
and those are the Passions.

CHAP. IX. Of the Passions in General, by which we come to know, and win upon
men.
AS the depths of the Earth are obscure places, which are not penetrated by the
radiant light of the Sun, where Night and Horror seem to sojourn, and there
have their dwelling; so is the heart of man environed with darkness, which is
not to be dissipated, and whatsoever it conceives is so hidden, as we can
guess thereat but by conjecture, and all the rules, and observations we have,
or may lay down are not so infallible, but that they lie liable to mistakes.
For words are not always faithful representations of the hearts conceptions;
neither are actions always to be credited. Humane wisdom (which vaunts it self
to see far into what is to come) is much troubled to discover man's intentions;
and the greatest work a Statesman can undertake, is, when by his dexterity he
endeavors to expound a dissembling Hypocritical heart, and there to observe
such thoughts, and designs, as are endeavored to be kept concealed.

Thus our Wheedle by policy arrives to this knowledge, which gives him rules
how to sound these depths, which seem to have no bottom. He judges of men's
Meanings, by their Humors and Actions, and reads in the eyes and face, the
most secret motions of the Soul, and its inclinations. He observes their nature
by their designs, and studies man so well, that he can give ashrewd guess at
their very thoughts, and by one piece of subtilty and cunning, discover that,
which they by another seek to conceal. But of all these ways I find none more
easy, and more certain than that of the Passions; for they escape us against
our will and betray us by their Promptness, and likeness, as Seneca says,
nulla vehementior intra cogitatio est quae nihil moveat in vultu. Daily
experience tells us this, that it is much more hard to withhold a man's Choler,
than his hand, and to impose silence to his sufferings, than to his mouth. They
mutiny without our leave, and by an impression which they make in our
countenance, they teach our enemies all that lies within our hearts, and invite
the Wheedle to come, and banquet on our follies. Horace terms the Passions
Tortures; Vino tortus and Ira; and rightly too; for as they torture us through
their rigor, so by Violence they force us to confess the truth. A man must be
very faithful to himself, if he do not declare himself, either by hatred, or
vanity, and he must have great power, and keep them under, when our Skilful
Artist undertakes to move them upon some Wheedling account. The wisest men
frequently forget their prudent resolutions, and oftentimes a Praise, or a
Reproach draws a truth from them, which wisdom had a long time kept concealed.

Tiberius, the Emperor, is judged by the Learned to be the greatest Dissembler
that ever swayed a Scepter, and therefore the Senate trembled as often as they
were to treat with a Prince so close, and so cunning; for all his words were
Aenigmas, and his actions so obscure, as that none could discover his
intentions; notwithstanding, one word of Agrippina's so incensed him, as to to
make him say a thing which so agitated him, that doubtless he would have
concealed it, had he continued in his ordinary Temper; thus was the most
concealed man in the world betrayed by the heat of Passion, and by an
indiscreet answer discovered the bottom of his heart. Our Wheedle has a
special care of this; for as he he is reserved in his speeches, so he his
Master of his affections in such sort, as that they appear not in his visage,
nor sparkle out in his words, nor actions; all the doors of his Soul are shut
up, but one small Postern for Flattery to issue out at, by which means no man
shall fathom his depth, and those that will take the pains to know him, must
consult Report; which way is very uncertain; for Fame is fickle, Enemies are
Liars, and Friends are Flatterers.

Whilst he is thus reserved to himself he neglects not to inquire into other
men's Inclinations, and reads in those faithful Glasses the most secret motions
of their hearts. He diligently examins what Passion is out of order; for if any
one be, it is impossible to conceal it, and when it has discovered its self,
he presently makes use thereof to his own benefit, but their certain prejudice.
If women did not discover how much they are delighted with idle discourse, they
would not run much danger in their honor; for when this Wheedle has
discovered their Weakness, and shall observe, that they are pleased in being
praised, he insinuates himself into their likings by Flattery, and makes
himself beloved by them, by approving of what they love. The ambitious man has
no fence against him, when he has discovered his Passions; as he esteems of
nothing more than Vainglory, he foregoes any thing he has to acquire it, and
thinks to be a greater gainer by the Exchange, wherein he parts with real goods
for empty words; and to be brief, the whole World must confess, that our
Passions are chains which make us Slaves to all such as know how to manage them
well.

When the Paricide, Cataline, had vowed the ruin of his Country, and had
resolved to change the Roman Commonwealth into a cruel Tyranny, he corrupted
all the young men by accomodating himself to their desires; he appeased
Confederates by flattering their humor; he won their good wills, by following
their inclinations; and by promising Preferment to such as were ambitious;
women to such as were lascivious; and riches to the avaritious.

Thus must the Wheedle act if he intends his design shall prove prosperous; and
herein he exactly imitates the Devil, who has great lights (though he be
Prince of darkness;) and as he knows all men's tempers, he fits all his
suggestions to their desires, and propounds nothing to them which is not
conformable to their inclinations. To the proud he proffers honor, he awakens
the Passion which possesses them, and engages them in unlawful ways to
compass pernicious designs, and endeavors to persuade them, that whatsoever
they commit (though never so bad, if reputation may he gotten thereby) is
glorious, and praise worthy. He sollicits the voluptuous by infamous pleasures;
if he cannot commend their Villainies, he seeks out names to excuse them: he
terms that natural, which is irrational, and, as if Nature and Reason were at
Enmity, he counsels them to follow the former, and forsake the latter. He
encourages the Furious to Revenge; he gives gallant Titles to shameful
Passions; he endeavors to make the resentment of an injury pass for an act of
Justice and Gallantry, and contradicting all Maxims of Christianity, he
establishes the greatness of courage in hatred and Murder. He persuades the
avaritious that there is nothing more generally sought after than Riches: that
our Ancestors have reverenced it, that our Successors will honor it; that
people who differ in other opinions, agree in the reputation they put hereupon;
that Poverty is infamous, that it is the contempt of Rich men, and indeed the
scorn of most men.

Non habet infoelix Paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit -- --
There Is naught in Poverty so bad as this,
Applaudits never attend it, but an Hiss.
In fine, these two colloguing Enemies, the Wheedle, and the Devil, undo alike
by flattering men; they gain upon their understandings by their affections, so
beat them with their own Weapons, and by a dangerous piece of cunning employ
their Passions to corrupt their wills. In what manner the Wheedle works upon
the Passions to his advantage, shall be discoursed in some following Chapters.

CHAP. X. Of the Number of the Passions.
Diverse are the Opinions of men about the Passions; some will have them placed
in the neathermost parts of the Soul; some imagine they are framed in the Body;
and thus they differ too about their numbers; some will acknowledge but two, as
Aristotle, etc. The Academicks admit of four principal Passions, Desire and
Fear, Joy and Sorrow, and that all others are comprehended by them; thus Hope,
Audacity, and Choler, are ranked under Desire; Despair, and Aversion under
Fear, and that all of them together do determine in Joy or Sorrow. The
Peripateticks did multiply them, and grounded their Number upon the diverse
motions of the Soul; for the Soul (say they) has either an inclination or
aversion to the Objects with which she is either pleased or displeased; and
this is Love or Hatred; or else she shuns them, and this is Eschewing; or she
draws near unto them, and this is Desire; or she promises to her self the
fruition of what she wishes, and this is Hope; or she cannot defend her self
from the Evil which she apprehends, and this is Despair; or she endeavors to
withstand it, and this is Audacity; or she chears her self up to overcome it,
and this is Choler: Lastly, she either possesses the good, and this is Joy, or
suffers the evil, and this is Sorrow.

Others will have the Passions to be in Number just Eleven, Love, Desire,
Delight, Hatred, Abomination, Sorrow, Hope, Despair, Fear, Ire, and Audacity:
this may be experimented in most Beasts, but especially in a Wolf preying on a
Sheep, and rescued by the Shepherd and his Dogs.

A French Philosopher, and a very witty and wise man, ranks the Passions after
this manner, which he calls simple Passions, and thus he defines them.

First, Love, whereby the Soul does issue out of her self, and is a motion of
the Appetite, whereby the Soul is inclined toward a supposed good in order to
its union thereunto. Monsieur Senault is of the same opinion with St.
Augustine, maintaining, that Love is the only Passion which does agitate us, or
has operations in us; for all the motions which molest the Soul are but so
many disguised Loves; our Fears, and Desires, our Hopes, and Despairs, our
Delights, and Sorrows, are countenances which Love puts on, according to the
events of good, or bad success, and as the Sea carries diverse names, according
to the different parts of the Earth which are thereby watered; so does Love
change her name according to the different estates wherein she finds her self;
or as among the Heathen, every perfection of the Almighty past for a several
Deity, so amongst Philosophers the different qualities of Love have been taken
for different Passions.

Secondly, Hate, whereby the Soul retires into her self, and, separating her
self, recedes from the Evil.

Thirdly, Pleasure is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is dilated,
and spreads her self into the Good, in order to her more absolute Possession
thereof.

Fourthly, Grief is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul contracts her
self to shun the Evil which presses upon her.

Fifthly, Constancy is a motion whereby the Soul is fortified, and grows
resolute in order to the resistance of those ills that set upon her.

Sixthly, Consternation is a motion, whereby the Soul is weakened, and gives way
to the violence of the Evil.

Seventhly, Audacity violently bestirs her self against the Evil to overcome it.

Eighthly, Fear faintly retreats, and with a certain precipitation shuns the
Evil, which she sees coming upon her. The compounded Passions according to his
opinion are, Hope, Arrogance, Impudence, Emulation, Anger, Repentance, Shame,
Jealousy, Compassion, Envy, and Agony.

First, Hope is a mixture of the Good, and the constancy a man expresses in
opposing the difficulties whereby it is encompassed.

Secondly, Arrogance proceeds from Philauty, or Self-love, and the audacity a
man has to surprise another.

Thirdly, Impudence is framed of the pleasure and confidence a man has to do
unhandsom things.

Fourthly, Emulation is a mixture of grief, unto which man is subject, for not
being Master of those Perfections, with which he imagins another to be
invested, and the hope of being able to acquire them.

Fifthly, Anger consists in the grief which a man endures for an injury
received, and the audacity he has to retort it.

Sixthly, Repentance proceeds from the grief which a man conceives from the
Evil which he has committed, attended by a detestation of it, which may be
termed a kind of Audacity.

Seventhly, Shame proceeds from a mixture of Grief, and fear of Infamy.

Eighthly, Jealousy is a composition of Love, Hate, Fear, and Despair.

Ninthly, Compassion consists of the grief which other men's misfortunes raise
in us, and a fear that we our selves may fall into the like inconveniences.

Tenthly, Envy is a mixture of grief, and a certain Despair of coming to the
enjoyment of that good which we see happen to others.

Lastly, Agony is a mixture of grief, fear, and audacity.

To give you a particular account of all the Passions, with their Characters at
large, describing all the good and bad uses that are to be made of them, will
be a task too remote from my present subject; however I shall acquaint you how
the Wheedle fingles out some of them, and what large advantages he makes of
them, thriving like a Toad, by feeding on what is bad or venomous.

CHAP. XI. That Passions are the seeds of Vice, from whence the Wheedle
receives frequently a plentiful Harvest.
WE must in the first place presuppose, that the sensual appetite is divided
into two parts, Concupiscible, and Irascible, one coveting, the other invading,
yet are not two faculties, or powers of the Soul, but one only power and
faculty, which has two inclinations; for, as there is but one power of
hearing, and seeing, though with two Ears, and two Eyes; so we have one sensual
Appetite with a double inclination, one coveting, and desiring, and the other
invading, and oppugning; by the former it pursues good, and shuns evil; by the
latter, it either complies with, or opposes the difficulties which present
themselves. For, as the Universe consists, and is full of things contrary, and
opposite one to the other; so there is not any thing can continue in it without
meeting with Enemies, which assault and endeavor to destroy it. Wherefore, it
was the work of the Providence of Nature to bestow on every individual thing,
not only the virtues which were necessary for the Execution of its ordinary,
and as it were of its Domestic functions, but also those, which should secure
it against the attempts of others, and prevent the violences which it might be
exposed to abroad.

Upon this account it is, that all things have some qualities conducive to the
preservation of their being, and others enabling them to oppose what is
contrary thereunto. Man above all the Creatures of the Creation might boast of,
and rejoice in his safety and security, continually guarded by Reason, were it
not for the Passions, which (since our ejectment out of the State of Innocence)
have revolted from Reason, whence they had their orders, and are become
disloyal, no longer acknowledging the voice of their Sovereign, but obey what
first commands them, and take part with a Tyrant, as with their legitimate
Prince. This is nothing to be wondered at, since the Passions are no farther
distant from Vices, than they are from Virtue; as in the confusion of the
Chaos, Fire and water were mingled together, so is evil with good in the
affections of the Soul, and from those fatal Mines, Iron is as well drawn out
as Gold; Man ought therefore to keep himself always on his guard, and knowing
that he carries about him in his Bosom both Life and Death, it behooves him to
be as circumspect in his comportments, as those, who walk upon the edge of a
Precipice.

These Passions, as they are highly prejudicial, nay, sometimes destructive to
every particular person in whom they are disordered; so are the greatest
mischiefs in general hatched, or occasioned by these insolent affections; if
Love and Hatred could be exiled from the Earth, Murder, and Adultery, could not
there be found. Men may accuse Poets for Fictions, but these Passions have
committed more Errors than the others have invented.

An unlawful Love put all Greece into Arms, and the flames thereof reduced the
goodliest City of all Asia to Ashes. How infinite is the number of private
families, which have been utterly ruined by this Passion, instigated by
Villainous men, expecting from their fall a rise considerable.

Jealousy between Caesar and Pompey, was the loss of the lives of more than a
Million of Men; the world was divided in their quarrel, their Ambition put Arms
into the hands of all people, and the world does yet bemoan this Disaster, the
spoils of this Shipwreck are yet seen, and the States of Europe are but so many
pieces, which did compose the Body of that Puissant Commonwealth.

Thus Jealousy, when irritated and heightened, becomes destructive to private
persons; how many horrid Murders are committed yearly upon that account alone
in Italy: where is there a place, wherein men are not strangely agitated by
this Passion, in such sort, that at last they prove the fatal Instruments of
their own ruin.

What advantage our Wheedle can make of this Passion, I know not, unless
persuaded by lust to make a separation between Man and Wife, he hopes thereby
to gain the enjoyment and possession of her. The jealous or superstitious man
of all men is the unfittest person for him to deal with, being given so much to
mistrust, that it is impossible for one to make him believe any thing above a
quarter of an hour, and if any thing intervene in that time, which seems to
contradict that Report, he takes you for his Enemy, and he becomes yours
implacable without a cause. No man need to plot mischief against him, for he is
one that watches it himself, with a learing eye for fear it should escape him.
Much circumspection and caution must be had when you are in his company, how
you speak; for most words he takes in a wrong sense, and thinks whatever ill is
spoken of another reflects upon him; and not a jest can be thrown, but he will
make it hit him; and herein you will find his humor insupportable, he shall
stamp, swear, sweat, and chafe, that he is abused, and at last fretting, fling
out of the room with a quarrel to every man, stung and gald, and no men know
less the occasion, than they that have given it.

Have a care how you laugh in his company, it is of a dangerous consequence,
for he imagins it can be at nothing, but at him; and should you whisper, it is
absolute Conspiracy. Such men can never have friends, because they cannot trust
so far; they are continually wronging others, because they think they wrong
them, and as they continually accuse others, when they are not guilty, so they
are always defending themselves when they are not accused: finally, you were
best let them alone, for behave your self how you will, it shall go hard, but
that you must abuse them whether you will or no, and not one Bodle for your
labor.

Of LOVE.
IT is pity, that Love, which is the holiest Passion of the Soul, should meet
with so many impious Persons which corrupt it, and, contrary to its own
inclinations, make it deserve their designs, by turning natural Love into
self-Love, making the Spring head of good, the Original of all out Evil: For
before Adams fall, man had no love save only for good, but since his
disobedience, his love changed Nature; he, who looked on another man's
advantage, and his own with the same eye, began to separate them, and forgeting
what he owed to God, he made a God of himself, ruling his affections by his own
interests, and resolving to Love no longer any thing, but what was profitable
and pleasing unto him.

This mischief, like Poison, dispersed it self through the whole Fabric of
Nature, and who is there now (nay amongst the Religious, and Severe Professers)
who is not a Philautist, who is so much a self-lover, that he makes most of his
designs Pimping Procurers to his benefit and delight. For self-love (which
leans always toward the flesh) will have the Slave to govern the Master, and
that the Body command over the Soul. Self-love commands us to follow our own
inclinations, and to govern our desires only acording to our vanity; flatters
our ambition, and to insinuate it self into us, gives us leave to do what we
please; it makes a man labor only for his own pleasure, or glory; it makes
this the end of all his actions, and does so bind man up within himself, as
that it suffers him not to consider any other interest than his own; if he
does his Country or any particular Person any good, it is to do himself a
kindness. Certainly this man must be ungrateful and unfaithful, who is so much
in Love with himself.

From this Springhead of Michief flow three Rivers, which deluge the whole
Universe. The first is Venereal Love, or a Love of women, for face, and
features, and this is called Incontinency. The Second is the Love of Wealth,
and a large Revenue, and this is called Covetousness; The third, and last is
the Love of Titles of Honnour, and Splendid preferments, and this is termed
Ambition: all these pleasing Enemies of mankind are hardly to be overcome by
Reason; for besides their natural Forces, they have Auxiliaries, which they
collect from our inclinations and habits: Now the Wheedle that knows the
operations of these three Passions in himself, and how much they tickle him who
is possessed with them, understands how to conform to any of them so long, till
thereby he has gratified his own designs.

Of DESIRE.
ONe would think (since in all creatures, as well as men, there is a certain
instinct for selfpreservation) man could not harm himself by having his Desires
changed into effects; for, it is the ordinary wish which our friends, and
nearest Relations bestow upon us, and undoutedly were they well regulated,
nothing would be more greateful, and useful in their accomplishment; and we
should esteem our selves (from thence) the happiest of men, if after a long
pursuance, we should arrive to the complement of our desires; but, as these
wishes are almost always unjust, so their success is frequently injurious. And,
here I cannot omit inserting a most incomparable saying of Seneca, Bonae animae
male precantur, and si vis foelix esse, Deum ora, ne quid tibi ex his quos
optantur, eveniat. We must pray to the Omnipotent, that nothing may befall us,
which is wished to us; and in this, it is not improbable that our best friends
may innocently wish us ill, when they make vows in our behalf: this is a
pardon, not so difficult to be understood, if you will but consult the
dangerous practices of the Wheelde in feeding, and fomenting that Self-love he
discovers in any Person, by indulging (if possible) all his wishes, and
desires, working upon the imagination the more to irritate them, which probable
might be quiet enough, did not this embroiling Power put them in disorder.

Nature (of her Self) is contented with a very little, and that mean too; she
only makes head, to oppose what either does molest, or would destroy; she
covets not stately structures, and, so that she be but preserved from the
injury of the Weather, she values not their ornaments; she minds not gaudy
habiliments, and cares not how plain her garments are, so that they hide her
nakedness, and fence her body from the rigor of the cold; she hunts not after
delights, which are excesful in meat, and drink, so that they quench Thirst,
and satisfy Hunger: but imagination, which seems to have no other employment
since the Fall, continually is busied in inventing new delights, and adds
dissoluteness to our desires, and makes our, wishes altogether irregalar; it is
she that makes the whole Nature labor to satisfy our Pride and Luxury; she
dives into the Bowels of the Earth, and into the depths of the Sea, to find out
Pearls, and precious Stones, with what other ornaments they afford to deck the
body.

In fine, she inquisitively seeks after curiosity of delicate food, and admits
of none, but what is exquisit; she confounds the Seasons to afford man
pleasure, and in spite of a sultry Summer, preserves Snow and Ice to cool the
Wine, that it may please the better. These things the sensual Wheedle suggests
to him by the strength of imagination (to fatten his own carcass) and having
possessed him with an opinion of the excellency of their enjoyment, impatient of
delay, and winged with desires, he takes his flight, and never desists till he
has seized the Quarry; and at length, by greediness, is either gorged, or
surfeited into an Hospital, having not so much money left, as will procure him
one single Purgation.

How cunningly will this Wheedle insinuate himself into the Society of young
Men, and knowing how prone they are to prosecute pleasure of all sorts, he has
an Inventory of all places of Pleasure and Pastimes; then he tells them of such
an excellent New-Spring-Garden; such a Match at Bowls, where so much Money will
be laid; such a Race; such a Match at Hunting, etc. if none of these will take,
he has twenty more; some of which will hit; after this a glass of Wine, over
which he discourses of several excellent Beauties, he has had the honor to be
acquainted with, such who were never blown upon by the infectious Air of the
City or Suburbs, but fresher than Flora in all her sweet smelling gaiety; these
are the Traps he lays, when he has warmed their Bloods with Liquors, and
poisons them with Wine and Women, as men do Rats with Sponge and sweet Malago.

Of HOPE.
HOpe is the next thing our Wheedle makes use of for his advantage, abusing it
by an employment contrary to the intent of Nature, and making it serve an
unworthy Master, whereby Cunning or Violence turns it out of the pure Stream,
wherein Virtue smoothly glides, and by diverting her from her legitimate
Object, he proposes others unto her incongruous to her Nature. For, according
to the opinion of the Learned, this Passion ought to respect good that is
absent, difficult, yet possible; wherefore Honors, Profits, and Pleasures,
cannot be true Objects; for they have only the appearance of good; it is
Opinion (that knows not rightly how to name things) has given them Titles they
deserve not; for, to say the Truth, Riches and swelling Titles have no other
valuation, than what Ignorance or Falsehood have bestowed upon them. Honor
depends so strongly upon Opinion, as it is her mere Workmanship. The Pleasures
of this life are too pernicious to man to be numbered among his good things;
for Shame and Sorrow always attend them, making them bear the punishment of all
their extravagancies they have committed; which our Wheedle takes care to
conceal from men's knowledge, lest knowing the fad effects, they should repent,
and desist from prosecuting them: he represents them otherwise to the deceived
eye of his Bubble, showing him Pictures, which are in effect nothing less than
what they appear to his Senses; and thus the poor ignorant Gull, judging of the
deceitful workmanship of those Pictures only by the eye, thinks he sees Birds
hovering in the Air, and, standing at a distance, imagins by the crafty
Landscape, that he sees Hills, Plains, and Woods of a vast extent, but drawing
nearer, finds only some few strokes of a Pencil, drawn on Canvass, which
deceived his Senses, and made him see what was not; or had they been real
representations, and not painted appearances, he has a thousand pretenses to
keep them out of his Clutches, and yet buoy up his Hope still with empty
promises.

All men are apt to flatter themselves with vain hopes, and therefore it is a
matter of no great difficulty, to infuse Hopes into the credulous Prisoner for
Debt; though he be under never so many Executions of merciless Creditors, yet
he promises himself liberty, which the Wheedle understanding, cherishes in
him those groundless Hopes, by telling him there is nothing impossible; that he
has effected more difficult things of the like Nature; further insisting on
the great authority he has over such, and such of his Creditors, and that he
questions not, but by his persuasion, he shall work them to a good agreement:
this extracts part of the remaining money out of his pocket, which should have
bought him bread, and leaving him, adds more misery to his deplorable condition.

A Criminal condemned (though under the Hangmans hands) by Hope persuades
himself he shall escape the Gallows, which his Wheedle assures him of, and
receives from him the remainder of his ill gotten money, but leaves him in his
greatest extremity, and thus the Rope puts a period to his Hope. This is
certain, that there is none so miserable, who do not (indiscreetly) feed
themselves with some imaginary happiness; thinking, that the Stars will club
their influencies to do Miracles for their sakes, and that the order of the
Universe shall be changed to fulfill their desires; these are the men whose
company he dearly loves, for they are one main Pillar which supports his house,
which was built out of the ruins of many others; he leads them by the Nose (as
the Bear-heard does Tom-Dove up and down the Town) to this Lords house, and
that Noblemans, pretending to help them to Preferments, or what else he can
gather from them, they either hope for, or desire, but to less purpose for
them, than the pennyless Pilgrimage to Scotland; for these deluded Fops see
none of these Great men, on whom their hopes depend by his persuasion, nor do I
see, how they can by his means; for, he knows them not, and if he has heard of
their names and abode, that is all; now whilst their gaping Hopes gaze on
something, they know not what, and never shall attain to, he dives into their
pockets, and sends them home plucked as (Widgeons and Woodcocks) foundered and
tired with the travel, and trouble of waiting upon nothing. Nor shall the old
man escape him, who hopes to live a little longer, a man to be pitied more than
any other; for though in a Glass, (if he has any glimmering sight left) he may
see Death lively Portrayed in his countenance, does yet promise himself
longaevity; they are sensible, that every day, they lose the use of some part
of their body; they see not but by art; they hear not without difficulty; they
walk not without pain; and in every thing that they do, they have new proofs of
their weakness, yet they hope to live, and, to confirm him in that believe, our
Wheedling Sophister tells him how our forefathers lived many ages, and why may
not he one half Century of years beyond the common custom; it is not so long
ago since old Parr lived; it is but having a care of themselves, and they may
fence their (old, though sound) carcasses from Death, and so taste a favor that
has not been granted, excepting to such as had not as yet lost all Innocence.
He will run up and down the whole Town to find out Women old and leacherous,
(very usually) and soon ingratiares himself into their Society, by telling them
they look younger, and younger, (which they believe before he told them so)
then persuades them to go in Habits more youthful; if Teeth are wanting, he
supplies them; if the Head be bald, he has Tours in store of all sorts; if the
Face be pale and wrinkled, he has Paint to plaster up the chaps, or fill
those deep furrows Age has plowed up; if the Breath stink, and the (scarce
moving) Carcass be foetid, he has Pastils to perfume the one, and Essences to
sweeten the other; by these Artifices he assuredly helps her to an Husband or a
Stallion, and is well satisfied for dealing with such rotten Commodities.

By these ridiculous persuasions he wins the heart of these old Dotards to give
him a present Boon, knowing, or guessing at least, that they hardly have so
much time left, as might be taken up in writing their last Wills and Testaments.

Of AUDACITY.
MR. Wheedle pretends to an intimate acquaintance with this Passion too, but he
mistakes it, by calling or nick-naming Audacity by that of convenient Boldness,
as he terms it, which in plain English is Impudence; he will thrust himself
into any strange company without enquiry who they are; for the better benefit
of exercising his Pride, that he may be thought some great man, or at least a
man of some authority; happily he may by his Wheedling and Insinuation, get into
some beneficial employment, and then he straight changes his face upon this
preferment, because his own was not bred to it. His actions and countenance
seem to strive which should bespeak how much he is; now, if you chance not to
mind him, it is ten to one he will mind you, and give you to understand how
remiss you are in your non-observance, and will take pains to do it, that all
the company may take notice of it, and concludes every period with his Place;
much like a Constable that was in Office upon his Sacred Majesty's
Restoration, who for some years after, seldom mist in his Discourse,
frequently to repeat what he had seen at such a time, he being then Constable,
but mistook most abominably at last, saying, When his Majesty had the honor to
come through the City, I was Constable that time.

Whilst you have any thing to use him in, take notice you are his Vassal for
that time, and must give him the patience of any injury, which he does to show
what he may do. In this condition, whilst you are necessitated for his help, he
will snap you up most imperiously, not for any reason, but because he will be
offended, and tells you, that you are saucy and troublesome, and sometimes takes
your money in that language. In short, he is a man of little merit, and makes
out in Pride and Impudence, what he wants in worth, fencing himself with a
stately kind of Behavior from that contempt would pursue him.

This is a Fellow, whom I may call more Fool than Wheedle, for he that
endeavors to raise himself higher and higher in worldly estimation must wrap up
Ambition and Pride in the Mantle of pretended Humility; by seeming to adore
Superiors, condescending to Equals, and by an even deportment to Inferiors.

If Mr. Wheedle come from Sea, or pretends to have been there; (where note he
is Jack of all Trades, and free of most Mysteries, Professions, and
Occupations) I say, if he would have the World believe that he is a Stout man,
there is no man truly Valiant will say, he is half so much endued with
Fortitude and Audacity as himself, and since he knows not how to give any other
proof there of than words, he proclaims himself the invincible Sir Frederick
Fight-all, Captain Al-Man-Sir, -- By your leave friend H. C: one Paragraph of
your Coffee-house Character is so proper to this purpose, and so Satirical,
sharp, and witty, that at first I thought to have turned Paper-Pad, and robbed
you; but upon second thoughts I looked upon that course ignoble to a friend,
when he may have the liberty to borrow.

I say, this Wheedling Huff, that needs would be Captain, -- I know not what,
Is the Man of Mouth, with a Face as blustering as that of Eolus, and his four
Sons in Painting, and a voice louder than the Speaking-Trumpet; he begins you
the Story of a Sea Fight; and though he were never by water farther than the
Bear-garden, or Cuckolds-Haven, yet having pyrated the names of Ships and
Captains, he persuades you himself was present, and performed Miracles; that he
waded Knee-deep in blood on the upper Deck, and never thought Serenade to his
Mistress so pleasant, as the Bullets whistling; how he stopped a Vice Admiral of
the Enemies under full Sail, till she was boarded, with his single Arm instead
of Grapling-Irons, and puffed out with his breath a Fire-ship that fell foul on
them. All this he relates sitting in a Cloud of Smoke, and belching so many
Cannon-Oaths to vouch it, you can scarce guess whether the real Engagement, or
his Romancing account of it be the more dreadful. However, he concludes with
railing at the Conduct of some eminent Officers, (that perhaps he never saw)
and protests, had they taken his advice at a Council of War, not a Sail had
escaped us.

How ridiculously does this Fool mistake himself, thinking by his bouncing, to
leap into the reputation of a valiant Man, whereas on the contrary, the wise
will look on him no more than a Liar, and consequently a Coward: True Valor
never speaks much of it self. He must then have some other design in the
venting of his Rhodomontado's, which this way cannot be great, but creeping on
all four like his fortune: it may be the relation of what dreadful things he
has seen, may squeeze a dinner or a drunken bout out of some, who have spent
most of their time in reading Books of Chivalry, and therefore love to hear of
bloody exploits; dulce bellum Inexpertis: it may be another upon the
supposition of his being a desperate man may be threatened, or frightened out of
the loan of a Crown, but using it too often, the other is forced to be rid of
him at last by trying his valor, and in the contest finds him what he is made
of, a mere man to look on.

I like his subtlety well in following Natures dictates, making use of what
ever tends to self-preservation, knowing what dangers men are called to, who are
the true Professors of Fortitude and Audacity; fighting is her ordinary
exercise, and she often times bathes her self in tears or Blood; she is always
encompassed with dangers, and on what side soever she turns, she sees nothing
but ghastly images, fearful apparitions; these are fights his timorous Soul
will not permit him once to look on. To conclude, he looks on the actions of
the Valiant to be little less than the effects of Madness, and will never
venture farther than his safety will permit him.

Of ANGER.
THere are few errors which men commit, but have their excuses attending them,
and perrsist in the disorders, not only for the esteem they place upon them,
but like wise for the Rationality which seems to back, and justify them: thus
the Angry, and Choleric prosecutes his revenge, because it is sweet in the
exceution, though bitter afterward, and he thinks it both Reason and Justice
to right himself when wronged: the Incontinent excuse themselves upon their
weakness, and call their continual active Leachery, an Infirmity. Detractors
have their pretenses too, for what opprobriums, and calumnies they utter
against others: now Revenge and Choler, believing themselves to be grounded
upon Reason, demean themselves insolently, and would persuade us that all their
excursions are as just, as courageous and valiant: This he confidently
believes, and he cannot be his friend that disswades him out of that opinion;
he hugs himself in it, and our Wheedle comes, and embraces them both therein;
there is no way for him to bring about his end, but floating with him in that
Torrent, which is to no boot to oppose; for it bears down all before it. He
subtlely insinuates into his Ear the gallantry, and legality of this unjust
passion: because it is used, and too too much practiced, among Great Ones: he
tells him further, that it cannot but be noble and generous; because it
frequently dwells in the Breasts of Dukes, Earls, Kings, and Emperors; and then
slily commends Alexander, for being so Passionate, and revengful, as not to
spare his dearest friends when in his wrath, and imputes all his Victories to
that rash Passion; inferring further, that though some condemn him for
rashness, yet none can deny, but that he was fortunate in it: these things so
tickle that humor, which he cannot but follow, that no man pleases him more
than he that suggests them.

Such like flatteries, and insinuations with great Men make them require from
their Inferiors such shameful obsequiousness to their inordinate desires, that
they become offended with a just liberty among their Equals. They take good
advice for neglect, and rational Counsels for an undermining of their
Authority. Fortune has made them so tender, as Suspicions serve them for
proofs to condemn the Innocent. O what excellent work does the Wheedle make
with such a Person; he knows that the truth is odious to him, and he cannot
bear with fidelity in his Domestics; he will not swallow down a Truth unless
corrupted, which the Wheedle prepares according to his fancy; and the temper of
his mind is so low, and weak, that sincerity in a servant is able to offend
him; for he thinks there is some design against his Honor, when his faults are
reprehended, and though it be done in the most circumspect and mildest manner
imaginable, yet it is always taken by him for an injury, or affront. To please
him in the removal of these faithful Tel-troths, and to serve himself in his
future designs, the Wheedle inveighs against them, accuses them of sauciness,
ambition, indiscretion, and what not, till he has rooted them out of the
family, in whose places he introduces flattering insinuating Rascals, who will
say, and swear any thing, and are more his Creatures, than their Masters: thus
working on that Choler, which transports him, he makes him know (it may be when
it is too late) that his Greatness, is meet Weakness, and that at length the
Man's the Master.

Here by the way, give me leave to tell how the She Wheedle operates, and
kneads this Passion, (where know that there are as many female Wheedles in
their several Functions, and Occupation as Male.)

When she meets with any, who subject themselves to her power, and patiently
suffer themselves to be born away by her motions, she then takes the liberty,
and freedom to fly at all, and believes she may promise her self any thing from
a Slave, who can refuse her nothing: If she possess the Soul of a Great Man, or
a Man of a great Estate, who has neither Resolution nor Courage sufficient to
defend himself against her Tyranny, she makes use of the weakness of his mind
and the strength of his purse, to execute her designs; the subtlety of her wit
penetrates the grossness of his, and makes the Dunghill of his little
understanding manure and fatten her barren Land, and seizing on his head, she
takes Possession of the whole man, and converts him and his appurtenances (as
much as she can) to her own proper use and benefit.

Much more might be spoken of such like intrigues, which I relate not, as I
approve, or would have any imitate the Wheedles endeavors, but condemn their
designs; for if he that commits a fault is not innocent, he that provokes one
to it, must be faulty; the one commences the Crime, and the other finishes it,
and both are alike guilty: the one makes a Challenge (as in this case) and the
other Accepts it; the second is not more just, than the first, save that the
injury he has received serves for a pretense to another.

Of Delight or Pleasure.
WHat Epicurus innocently, and with a good intent proposed to men, viz. the
enjoyment of Pleasure, our Wheedle following the Example of his debauched
Disciples, does beastly, and knavishly abuse.

The Sect of the Epicureans taking notice of the difficulty which attended
Virtue, which made her hated, and condemned by vulgar, lazy, terrene Souls, and
that the labor that went to the acquisition thereof, made them lose the
longing after her, they strove to persuade them, that she was pleasant, and
delightsom; upon their word, some began to court her, and thinking to find all
manner of delight, and pleasure in her Retinue, they made their amorous
addresses to Madam Virtue; but, finding nothing about her which made any
impression upon the senses, they changed their design, and made Love to
Voluptuousness. Of which Sect our Wheedle is Master of Art; not that he was
ever a true Disciple of Epicurus, who would never have proposed Voluptuousness
to men, but to make them in love with Virtue; yet, because his design was
unhappy, and met not with desired success, he could not avoid calumny; and the
Zeal of his Adversaries confounded his Opinion with his Disciples Error.

This voluptuous Wheedle has his Disciples too, and are rankt under several
Classes; The Whoremaster, Drunkard, Glutton, Gamster, Pimp, Bawd, Whore, Cuff
and Kick, Bully, Huff, Bully Ruffin, the Sloathful, the Ambitions, the
Conceited, the Lascivious, the Affected, the Coward, the Impudent, the
Ignorant, the Insolent, with many more.

For the instruction of his Disciples, he has many Schools, or Academies, viz.
Taverns, Bawdyhouses, or Coffee-houses, Inns, Alehouses, Gardinhouses,
Ordinaries, Tennis-courts, etc. and his Desks to write upon are a Pair of
Tables, Shuffleboards, or Billiard-tables, etc.

When he has a mind to instruct his Scholars abroad, he then turns
Peripatetick, and walks them to Bowling-greens, Bowling-allies, nay
Pidgeonholes, Nin-pin-allyes, or for further exercise to Whetstones-park; but
of these more hereafter.

When he intends to take the fresh air, Hidepark is no small advantage to him;
on a fair Mayday he repairs thither, as to a Mart, where he picks up more
Baubles, than at Bartholomew-Fair, or our Ladies in South-wark; and the Lodge
is his grand Shop, where he takes up all sorts of Commodities upon trust; the
Coaches are his Movingstands, where he furnishes some of his Customers with
plenty of Linen, only for taking up; others pay so dearly for it, that it
proves their Shrowds, or Winding-sheets. Here he picks out and culls the men on
Horseback, and by slight of hand with wonderful celerity, dismounts their
Georgies; or shuffles in among the dusty, sweaty, Rabble, and will venture the
defiling of his clothes, to guild his pockets: not an Apple-woman shall escape
him, but he will-reap some Fruit of her. In this promiscuous Rendez-vouz of
different people, he indifferently lays his baits for all, and if he tickle not
a Trout, he will infallibly catch some Gudgeon.

His greatest Mart, and longest of continuance, is Epsom, or Tunbridge Wells,
where (blindfold) he cannot miss of Misses enough to mislead, and of Males to
unman for his profit. The first he picks up for his amorous Disciples; both pay
him Custom for Procuration; he rarely uses them himself, yet no Woman hater,
but hates the Woman, that with her Milk will not give down her Money. On the
latter he exercises himself by diving into their humors, and that he may not
be looked upon as unsociable, he shows himself conformable unto them. He comes
not there only to drink Physical Waters, but inflaming intoxicating Wine; not
but that he drinks them too, for fashion sake, and to pick up company; and
having deluged their guts with that cold insipid stuff, and dung'd the
neighboring land with yellow Marle, vulgarly called excrement; he tells them
of that imminent danger of a Quartan, which attends them if they warm not
speedily their chil'd, and benumbed body with a glass of wine, briskly going
round.

They agree, and by a general consent the glass does freely pass about, and
none so seemingly free to drink as Mr. Wheedle, but by shifting his Wine, he
keeps his head less annoyed with fumes, whilst the others, inspired with
extravagant fancies, betray their humors to his observation, and so become a
prey to his Stratagems. The Proverb says, When the Wine is in, the Wit is out,
which they find next Morning by woeful experience; having nothing left them,
but their Ears standing. For when the blood is heated by the overflowing wine,
which the Wheedle observes by the face, or discourse, a game at Tables is then
proposed; if that dislike, then Cards are produced; or formonies quick
dispatch, Box and Dice Nicks them infallibly. For variety a Game at Nine-pins
must not be despised, wherein the Wheedle is so dexterous, and so skillful at
it, that he will not fail once in five times to knock down a single pin,
throwing the Bowl over an house, and, though on horseback, tip down all Nine
so certain, and so often, as to make the Looser swear, the Wheedle has put
false Nine-pins on him.

On Tunbridge-Wells.
AT five this Morn, when Phoebus raised his head
From Thetis Lap, I raised my self from bed,
And mounting Steed, I trotted to the Waters,
The Rendez-vouz of feigned, or sickly Praters,
Cuckolds, Whores, Citizens, their Wives and Daughters,
My squeamish Stomach I with Wine had bribed,
To undertake the Dose it was prescribed;
But turning head, a sudden noisome view
(That Innocent provision over-threw)
And without drinking, made me Purge, and Spew.
Looking on the other side a thing I saw,
Who (some men said.) could handle Sword and Law.
It stalkt, it star'd, and up and down did strut,
And seemed as furious as a Stagg at Rut.
As wise as Calf, it looked, as big, as Bully,
But bandled, proved a mere Sir Nich'las Cully.
A Bawling Fop, a natural Noaks, and yet,
He dared to censure, as if he had Wit.
In short, no malice need on him be thrown,
Nature has done the business of Lampoon,
And in his looks, his Character has shown.
Endeavoring this irksom sight to baulk,
And a more irksom noise his silly talk,
I silently slunk down to the Lower Walk.
But often, when one would Carybdis shun,
Down upon Scylla it is ones fate to run:
So here it was my cursed Fate to find
As great a Fop, though of another kind;
A tall stiff Fool, who walked in Spanish guise;
The Buckram Poppet never stirred it is eyes,
But grave as Owl it looked, as Woodcock wise.
He scorned the empty talking of this Age,
And spoke all Proverb, Sentence and Adage,
A man of parts, and yet he can dispense
With the formality of speaking sense.
From hence unto the upper end I ran,
Where a new Scene of foppery began,
Amongst the serious, and Phanatick Elves:
(Fit company for none, besides themselves.)
Assembled thus, each his Distemper told,
Scurvy, Stone, Stranguery. Some were so bold
To charge the Spleen to be their Misery,
And on the wise Disease bring infamy.
But none were half so Modest to complain,
Their want of Learning, Honesty and Brain,
The general diseases of that Train.
These call themselves Ambassadors of Heaven,
And saucily pretend Commissions given,
But should an Indian King, whose small command,
Seldom extends above ten miles of Land,
Send forth such wretched Fools in an Embassage,
He Would sind but small effects of such a Message.
Next after these a foolish whining Crew
Of Sisters frail were offered to my view.
The things did talk, but the hearing what they said,
I did my self the kindness to evade.
Looking about, I saw some Gypsies too,
(Faith Brethren they can Cant as well as you.)
Nature has placed these VVretches beneath scorn,
They cannot be called so vil'd, as they are born.
Amidst the crowd, next I my self convay'd,
For now were come (White-wash, and paint being laid)
Mother and Daughters, Mistress and the Maid,
And Squire with VVigg and Pantaloons displayed,
But never could Conventicle, Play or Fair
For a true Medley with this Herd compare.
Here Squires, Ladies, (and some say) Countesses,
Chandlers, Egg, Bacon-women and Semstresses
Were mixed together, nor did they agree
More in their humors, than their quality.
Here waiting for Gallant young Damsel stood,
Leaning on Cane, and muffled up in hood.
The VVould-be-wit, whose business was to woo,
With that removed, and solemn scrape of shoo
Advances bowing, then gentilely shrugs,
And ruffled Foretop into order Tugs.
And thus accosts her, Madam, methinks the weather
Is grown much more serene, since you came hither.
You influence the heavens; and should the Sun
Withdraw himself to see his rays outdone,
Your brighter Eyes could then supply the Morn,
And make a Day, before a Day be born.
With mouth scru'd up, conceited winking eyes,
And breasts thrust forwards, Lord, Sir, she replies,
It is your goodness, and not my deserts,
Which makes you show this Learning, Wit and Parts,
He Puzl'd, bites his nail, both to display
The sparkling Ring, and think what next to say.
And thus breaks forth afresh, Madam, I Gad,
Your luck at Cards last Night was very bad.
At Cribidge fifty nine, and the next show
To make the game, and yet to want those two.
Gad Damme, Madam, I Am the Son of a Whore,
If in my life I saw the like before.
Tired with this dismal stuff, away I ran
Where were two Wives with Girls just fit for Man,
Short Breathed, with pallid Lips, and Visage wan.
Some Court'sies past, and the old Complement
Of being glad to see each other, spent,
With hand in hand they lovingly did walk,
And one began thus to renew the talk.
I pray (Good Madam) if it may be thought
No Rudeness, what cause was it hither brought
Your Ladyship? She soon replying, smiled,
We have a good Estate, but have no Child;
And I Am informed these Wells will make a barren
Woman, as fruitful as a Coney-warren.
The first returned, for this cause I am come,
For I can have no quietness at home:
My Husband grumbles, though we have got one,
This poor young Girl, and mutters for a Son.
Is It so (quoth the other) faith, I pity then
Your Husband much, and all such sapless Men.
Poor foolish Fribbles, who by subtlety
Of Midwife (truest Friend to Lechery)
Persuaded are to be at pains and charge,
To give their Wives occasion to enlarge
Their silly heads; for here walk Cuff and Kick,
Who wait for Women, or lay wait to Nick.
From these the Waters got the Reputation,
Of good Assistants unto Generation.
Now Warlike men were got into the throng,
With hair tied back, singing a Bawdy Song.
Not much afraid, I got a nearer view,
And 'twas my chance to know the dreadful Crew;
Who are (though gaudily they thus appear)
Damned to the stint of Thirty pound a year.
With Hawk on fist, or Greyhound led in hand;
The Dogs and Foot-boys they command.
And having trimmed a cast off Spavind-horse;
With three hard pincht for Guinnys in the Purse;
Two rusty Pistols, Scarf about the Arse,
Coat lined with Red, they here presume to swell;
This goes for Captain, that for Colonel.
So the Bear-Garden-Ape on his Steed mounted,
No longer is a Jackanapes accounted,
But is by virtue of his Trumpery, then
Called by the Name of the Young Gentleman.
Bless me thought I, what thing is man, that thus
In all his Shapes he is ridiculous?
Our selves with noise of Reason we do please,
In vain Humanity is our worst disease.
Thrice happy Beasts are, who because they be
Of Reason void, are so of Foppery.
Troth I was so ashamed, that with remorse,
I used the Insolence to mount my Horse;
For He doing only things fit for his Nature,
Did seem to me (by much) the Wiser Creature.
The next things we shall insist upon must necessarily be the Passions, which
are opposite to the six former we have already discourst of; the first was Love,
and its contrary is

HATRED.
IF the Wheedle were an universal good, he would love every particular good,
and were he endued with all the perfections that are found in all men, he would
find none that would contrary him; but he is unjust, because he is poor, and
his aversion takes its original from his Poverty. Hatred then, as it is a
weakness in his Nature, so it is a proof of his indigence, and a Passion which
he cannot with Reason employ against any of his Fellow Creatures, nor irritate,
or provoke one against the other, for any selfish design.

Self-love is a considerable Propagator of this disorder; for were he more
regulate in his affections, he would be more moderate in his aversions, and not
consulting his own interests he would hate nothing, but what is truly odious;
but he is so unjust as to judge of things only by the credit he bears them,
condemning them when they displease, and approving them when they like; he
would have them change qualities too, according to his several humors, that,
like Chamelions they should assume his Colors, and accomodate themselves to
his desires; nay he would be (if it were possible) the Center of the World, and
that all Creatures should have no other Inclinations than what he possesses.
Whatsoever is most fair, seems ugly to him, if it likes him not; the bright
beams of Virtue dazzle his eyes, because that Virtue condemns his faults; and
Truth becomes the object of his Hatred, because she censures his Lyings,
Flatteries and abominations.

To conclude he loves none, but whom he may gain by, and hates all that any way
impede, or obstruct his crafty designs; yet he carries his hatred to all so
closely, that Revenge shall be executed before any discovery can be made, and
knows how to excuse it too to the offended, and by throwing the fault on some
other of his supposed foes, obtains the benefit of a double Revenge. In short
he loves himself so well that he can be a real friend to none, and the best way
to secure your self from him, is to have no correspondence with him; but if you
needs must, let him never enter into a familiarity with you, and then like the
Adder, losing his forked Sting, his Love, and Hatred will be useless, and
ineffectual: The next Passion we treated on was Desire and its opposite, is,

Eschewing, or Shunning.
SInce punishment is more sensible than Vice, it is eschew'd with the greater
care and fear, and there are few People who do not rather love to be faulty,
than unfortunate. We run from an infected City in such Droves, as if we were
going to defend the Fronteers from some Foreign invasion, and a Lord have
mercy on us writ on a door, will make us go a mile about to shun the infection,
and yet we draw near to all sorts of bad and infectious Company, so long, till
the Lord knows what will become of us. Pestilential Infections may work an
alteration in our health, but evil Society will tob us of our innocence. Good
natures by compliance to company are frequently depraved, and though they have
a natural love to good things, yet the Wheedle by contrary suggestions choaks
those honest desires, for he never gets by Virtue; it is Vice that is the
Iackawl which finds him out his sustenance, and to this end he defends Vice,
who to enlarge the Empire thereof, endeavors to make it appear lovely and
glorious; but he has a special care not to show her by daylight, he hids her
in dark and obscure places, and none but accomplices are witnesses of her beauty.
Sometimes the Wheedle with his other Partakers, will raise her on a Throne, and
use their utmost craft to win her glory; they cover it with the Mantle of
Virtue, and if it has any thing of affinity with its Enemy, by changing names,
they make one pass for the other; thus Revenge they call greatness of courage:
Incontinency, Natures irresistible commands, etc. and no wonder if the ignorant
are deluded with these false titles, when the best Wits suffer themselves to be
persuaded and led away by their loose and lewd Reasons.

In a word all that the Wheedle can act as to this Passion is to hinder men
from loving Virtue, and to stop their desires in seeking after her, and by his
evil Counsel lead them a quite different way, teaching them to lay traps for
chastity; prompting them to pleasure, exciting to Choler, and at last losing
all shame and fear they give freedom to all their Passions, to their utter
ruin and destruction.

OF DESPAIR.
MAny are the advantages which men make of Hope, buoying it up in others, for
their own particular advantage: but as to the contrary Passion, Despair, I know
not what use the Wheedle can make of it, unless it be to persuade some of his
Rich Relations to hang themselves, as a Father or an elder Brother, or a
perverse peevish wife, whom he would have to quit the stage of the world, that
another (whom he has already unlawfully chosen) may act her part with him in
her stead.

But now if we rightly consider the nature of Despair, we shall find it does as
well prompt us to consult our preservation, as precipitate us into destruction;
Let others, when threatened with some great disaster, or involved amongst a
thousand intolerable Evils, lay violent hands on themselves, this VVheedle
will make another use of this Passion; for he prudently observes that as this
Passion takes men off from the pursuit of a difficult good which surpasses
their power, so are there a thousand occasions met withal in man's life, wherein
she may be advantagiously made use of, and there is no condition how great so
ever in this world, which needs not her asistance. For men's powers are
limited, and the Greater part of their designs are very difficult, or
impossible; Hope and Audacity which animate them, have more of heat than
government; Led on by these blind Guides they would throw themselves headlong
into precipices, did not Despair withhold them, and by knowing their
weaknesses, divert them from their rash enterprises: Hope engages us too
easily in a danger, but then we must praise Despair which finds a means to free
us from it.

Our Wheedle always implores the assistance of Despair before things are gone
too far, and reduced to an extremity. If Princes took this course, and so
measure their forces before they undertake a war, they would not be enforced to
make a dishonorable peace. If they know their forces inferior to those of
their enemies, whereby the advantage lies not on their side, Despair, wisely
managed, causes them to retreat, and this Passion repairing the faults of Hope
and Audacity makes them keep their Soldiers till another time, when they may
assuredly promise themselves the Victory; for Despair is more cautious than
courageous, and aims more at the safety than glory of a Nation.

In short, these are the two Principal uses are to be made of this Passion.
First, Despair in its birth is fearful, and has no other design than to divert
the Soul from the vain seeking after an impossible good; this is a great piece
of prudence and policy, to keep aloof from a difficult good, which we think we
cannot compass. Secondly, and lastly, when the mischief is extreme, and the
danger is so great as it cannot be evaded, then must we make a Virtue of
necessity, and give battle to an enemy, which Hope it self durst not assail,
it often plucks the Laurel from the Conquerours head, and performs actions
which may pass for Miracles.

Of FEAR.
NAture seems to have given us two Passions (Hope and Fear) for our
Counselors in the diverse adventures of our life; the first is without doubt
more pleasing, but Fear, the second, is more faithful; Hope flatters, to
deceive us; Fear frightens, to secure us. For Fear is natural wisdom, which
frequently frees us from danger by making us apprehensive thereof; thence we
grow shye, and affrightned with the evils she discovers: She studies not what
is past, save only to know what is to come, and she governs the present time,
only to assure her self of the future, which draws along with it a prodigious
train of adventures, which cause a thousand alterations in Individual men; so
as suturity is the chief object of wisdom, which considers the other
differences of time, only that she may the better judge of this. The time to
come is as doubtful, as concealed, and therefore it behooves every man to look
out sharply to foresee a danger approaching, and to avoid it; to discern a
little Cloud, but a hands breadth, which brings a storm with it next akin to an
Hurricane.

Much may be said of this prudent, and provident Passion, but I shall refer you
to those who have writ largely upon that subject, and pass to another sort of
fear, which some call Cowardice, of which the Wheedle must have a special care
he seem not guilty, or tainted therewith: if he be, farewell all plots, and
crafty projects, for he will be the contempt of all men, and be like a
Football kicked from Parish to Parish, till they have lost him.

To prevent this insufferable mischief, the Wheedle (though the rankest Coward
living) must endeavor by all means imaginable to seem Stout and Courageous; he
must look big, and his Speech must be conformable; he must continually make the
Coward the subject of his raillery, and yet have a care of provoking the man
that will fight: Amongst innocent harmless things he may thunder where he is
sure no danger, or mischief will ensue, and Lighten the reckoning on them in
conclusion: this way of hussing (with the dreadful appearance of a Toledo
blade) has made many a tame Fop go home without ever a penny in his pocket,
well contended, and glad he came off so, though they made him swallow so many
false Dice, as had like to have choakt him, and not satisfied with this, gave
him the Box to boot. In the next place I should treat of Choler and Sorrow,
which last Passion is in opposition to Delight, but I shall desist, having
spoak already of them in those Chapters which contain the Temperaments.

The Policy of the Passions briefly sum'd up.
SInce Men by Nature are addicted to Conversation, and one depends upon
another, therefore it is a business of importance for a man to know how to
second or cross other men's affections, how we may please, or displease them;
making them our Friends, or Enemies: but since the Subject is infinite, I will
only set down some general Rules, whereby the Wheedle makes his advantage in
all Societies what ever.

First all men (commonly) are pleased with them whom they see affected with
those Passions whereunto they are subject and inclined. The reason of this Rule
is this; all likeliness causes love; it follows therefore that he who would
advantagiously please must apparel himself with the affections of them he
converseth withal; love, where they love, and hate, where they hate, no matter
whether real or pretended; soothing of other men's humors (so that it be not
discovered to be Flattery) is the path that leads men into an universal
friendship, and how advantageous a general friendship is, I will leave it to
any one to judge; out of this Rule may be deduced this

Second, which ought no less to be observed in conversation than the former;
that men usually hate those, who they know to be of contrary Passions; hence
comes that Proverb, He that hates whom I love, how can he love me? Fire and
fire may, but fire and water will never agree.

Thirdly credulity must be avoided, having danger continually for its
attendant, and yet there must be a seeming belief; as we must not believe every
thing, so we must have a care of believing nothing that is said; there is a
mediocrity to be observed, you may hear and say (in a thing that is very
doubtful) it may be so, but never conclude any thing to be so, till you have
evident demonstrations thereof before your eyes; a crafty proposal (weli backed)
may make a man believe things contrary to sense, and reason; wherefore it
behooves every man to stand upon his guard when an overture of advantage is
made: every man is for himself, and he that has attained to the greatest
height in the Art of Persuasion, is capable of Out-Wheedling all the rest.

Fourthly, let judgment be suspended where a question is demanded, or evaded,
and put off upon some other, by whose arguments you may find his weakness, and
means to strengthen your own.

Fifthly, There is no opposing any vehement Passion by reprehension, or
indignation; the Wheedle always complies with it, or says nothing, or wisely
withdraws the matter of anger out of sight.

Sixthly, no man ought to be employed to any Office, nor put upon any design,
act, or exercise contraty to his humor, passion, and inclination. This
observation very much concerns all sorts of Persons, in all Professions, and
Occupations; Masters in the employment of Servants; Parents in the education of
their Children; Schoolmasters in the instruction of their Scholars; Vide Examen
d'los Ingenios; the Trial of Wits in English, etc. and every one knows a Play
must be rightly cast, or it cannot be so well acted, as to Merit an Applause.

Seventhly, and this Rule has a respect to great Persons, who seldom resist
their Passions, therefore if a man once understand their inordinate affections,
he may be very well assured to have gained much ground in prevailing with them.
Whosoever then intends to work upon such a person addicted to this or that
affection, to win upon him, he must foster up such fancies in him; if delighted
in Music, he must furnish him with Voices, or instruments; if Venereally
inclined, Pimp for him, and prostitute his Wife, rather than lose an
opportunity for preferment; if he delights in riding, he must play the Iockey,
and show him horses well shaped, far Fetched and dear Bought; if in hunting, he
must procure him Dogs; If he disesteems his own Country-breed, he must present
to his View such as are really so, yet must swear that they were stolen from
several Noblemen in France, brought hither with great labor and expense, and
for no other intent than his Recreation. If his delight consist in books, he
must bring him the Annual Catalogues of Franckfort Mart, or what are printed
elsewhere, that out of them all he may pick what is most agreeable to his study;
and if he have so much ingenie to play the part of a cunning Bookseller, he may
recommend waste paper for commendable pieces, and with a little prejudice to
the Buyers time, he shall not only have the large thanks of the Seller, for
vending his bad commodities but reap some more substantial benefit to himself.

To these general Rules let me add these cautions, which ought to be imprinted
in all men's memories.

Before the Ingenious, and Judicious, beware of showing either Extravagancy, or
Stupidity.

Before the Wise, or Considerate, seem not Heedless or Sottish.

Before the Prudent, and well advised, seem neither Simple, nor Crafty.

Before the Diligent, be neither Slothful, nor over hasty.

Before Just and Honest men, be not Mischievous.

Before the Modest, be not Bold, or Impudent.

Before the Temperate, be not Immoderate.

Before the Religious, be not Profain or Impious.

Before the Faithful, and the downright man, avoid Flattery.

Before the Affable, and the Civil, show no Rusticity.

Before the Continent, be not Petulant.

Before the Liberal, be not Avaritious, or Covetous.

Before the Compassionate, show no symptoms of Cruelty.

Before the Frugal, be not Prodigal.

Before the Moderate, be not Voluptuous.

Before the Humble, or Ambitious, be not Proud, or Lofty.

Before the Magnanimous, be not Presumptuous, or Pusillanimous.

Before the Cheerful, be not Sour, or austere.

Before the Serious, play not the Mimick, or Buffoon.

Some Centuries of such like Sentences might be here inserted, which I
pretermit for brevity sake; hastening to the discovery of the practices of the
several Wheedles of the times, according to each Sex and Profession; but before
I enter upon it, I shall conclude the preceding Theory with a short account of
Conversation.

CHAP. XII. Of Acquaintance and Conversation.
SOciety is that which is coveted, and desired by all Creatures, nothing in the
Creation is averse to it, but the Melancholic, the malignity of whose humor
and solitary inclination renders him unfit to live, being so incongruous to the
sociable Inhabitants of the Universe. Rather than be absolutely alone, Ovid
said it was something to live with sharp and cruel winds.

Scilicet est aliquid cum Saevis vivere ventis.

But how dangerous a thing it is to venture into a general acquaintance, every
one knows that has been accounted a Company-keeper. It is not the Multitude of
Acquaintance, but the goodness thereof should be coveted, and it is impossible
but he must be soiled with Vice, who runs into all Companies: this was it which
made Seneca thus complain; Avarior redeo, ambitiosior, imo crudelior, and
inhumanior quia inter homines fui.

But what cares our Wheedle with whom he associates, they cannot be worse than
himself; he cares not what their Vices are, so that he can extract the best
benefit from them; and the larger his acquaintance is the better for him,
having more variety of subjects to work upon, and his comfort is, he cannot
want them, since there is nothing easier than to create them; the mere being in
company once does it, and this shall be reason sufficient for him, if he meet
the Person some years after, to shake him by the hand, and with a counterfeit
countenance of joy embracing him, invite him to the Tavern, where ten to one he
makes him pay the reckoning for this unexpected salutation: if he will be
borrowing money of him, there is no better way for that Person that would be
rid of him, than to lend him some; for, this shall keep him at a greater
distance with his Creditor, than if his constant Companions were Pox,
Pestilential Bubo's, and a thousand Carbuncles: not but that he will borrow
money sometime for no other end than to pay it exactly according to time
prefixed, that by his honest punctuality he may have a better opportunity of
borrowing a greater Sum, of which he never intends to pay a farthing.

Acquaintance is the first draught of those whom he designs to make his
friends, and lays them down often before him, as the foul Copy before he can
write perfect and true; from hence, as from a Probation, he takes his degree in
Men's respects, till at last he wholly possess them: by this means he
impropriates, and encloses to himself what before lay in common to others. The
ordinary use of acquaintance is but somewhat a more boldness in Society, a
Copartnership in discourse, News, Mirth, Meat, and Recreation; but our Wheedle
makes a further advantage by making all these subservient to some design,
according to the nature of them. For, as to discourse, the gingling words of
others don't delight him so much as their giddy brains; and no talk so
pleasant, as that which detects the intrigues of other men; he is then all Ear,
and if he speak it is but to provoke others to talk on for further discovery:
if he talk himself, it is with submission to the company, and concludes that
condescension with Your faithful friend, and Servant, and being gone never
thinks of any of them, but when he must use them, or stands in need of their
assistance. Next as to News, he finds it more beneficial to him than an Office
of Intelligence to others, and picks thence more beneficial matter, than if he
had picked up in the Street Rings, Watches, etc. so often mentioned in the
Gazette to have been casually dropped, and lost: as to meat, drink, mirth and
recreation he makes them not only satisfy Nature, and please the Senses, but he
makes them also instrumental in clothing the body, and that not meanly, as
occasion shall require; and this is a thing so easily to be done, that in this
case, I judge it needless to demonstrate it in what manner.

Friendship, like Children, is engendered by a more inward mixture, and coupling
together; wherefore when the Wheedle intends an invasion on the Secrets of
other men's hearts, he first discovers some of his own (of no great consequence)
with a thousand injunctions, and engagements not to discover the least tittle
thereof to any Soul living; by this he engages the other to a bold discovery of
his own faults, Passions, and Vicious inclinations, his fear, shame, and, it
may be, something that may tend to the ruin of the Relator, if it be
discovered, which the Wheedle vows shall never be so done by him till death,
nor then neither; yet, for this unadvised folly he will be sure to make him his
slave all the days of his life, and fear shall so shackle him, that he must
neither displease, nor deny him any thing that lies within the Verge of his
estates ability. A Secret, when discovered, no longer is our own, but his that
hears it, and is no longer his than there is a compliance with the humor of
that Person: at length being prostituted by two many owners, it becomes the
shame, and infamy of the first imprudent Guardian.

Much more might be said of Acquaintance, the subject being very large; now to
avoid prolixity I shall skip from this, and fall upon the next branch of this
Chapter, viz. Conversation, which renders men sociable, and makes up the
greatest commerce of our lives, and therefore we cannot take too much care to
render our discourse pleasing, and profitable.

It is not my intent to discover the means conducible to make every man
(justly) succesful in conversation, but I will only declare (as briefly, as I
may) what course the Wheedle undertakes to make his designs hit, according to
the nature of those Persons with whom he has converse. He has (or ought to
have) a Memory inricht with variety of matter, in conjunction with such a
Judgment, that may both regulate his speech, and engage him to view with
circumspection what he is obliged to observe: for Example sake; would it not be
ridiculous instead of amorous courtship to entertain a young Lady with
Schoolboy questions, as what is Latin for a Dripping-pan, and Greek for a Pair
of Tongs; or to talk of nothing for an hour together to a Quaker, but what rare
sport there was the other day at the Bear-Garden, or, to tell him what
excellent Scenes there are in Macbeth, and the late rectified inimitable
Tempest? Things as incongruous to some company I have seen brought in by head
and shoulders in discourse, but the Wheedle taking notice what great offense it
gave, and how tedious, and intolerable such talk was to those whose humors
were at enmity with such Conversation, keeps aloof from this dangerous way of
speaking, and takes a course not to displease, by talking well upon that
subject he understands, (it not, to be silent) and likewise by taking special
notice of the Time, and Place wherein he does discourse, and in that, as all
men ought to have a regard to Truth, he does not, yet loves it well in others:
he holds this as one principal Article in his Creed, that none can thrive
apace, and prosper without a continual dissimulation, and profession of never
speaking his thoughts aright; so far he may be excused, that if he is about
some good Employ, or some advantageous design by Bargain or Sale, etc. I hold
it not requisite, nay ridiculous, if he proclaim his pretentions, or discover
the means he intends to use for advantage; for should he be so indiscreet he
then would give light to others to anticipate, and prejudice his projections. A
prudent dissimulation is allowable, especially of some dangerous truth, when
the effects of it will be only an unseasonable exasperation, and perhaps draw
upon our selves, Envy, Hate, or Contempt. It is the continuallying and
dissimulation that must be condemned, and hated, if for no other Reason, than
that in process of time no man will believe its constant Practiser; for though
he caress well, promise much, be civil, and obliging; yet, by his frequent
lying, he will at length be found out; then will all his actions be narrowly
scanned, and by them found to be as an Hireling in a Playhouse; who says what
he thinks not; whose only care is to acquit himself well of that part he has
undertaken to Act, knowing he shall not (when the Play is ended) go without his
Reward, with future encouragement.

As he can in other discourse lie, reserve, and equivocate for his own benefit,
so by the help of Nature, and his own Labors, he has treasured up in his
Memory, a great number of choice things, which makes him restitution, when he
has occasion to make use of them, which is a great and necessary succor to
him when he intends to delight, and win upon the company by his Railery, which
by its designed delicacy and fineness, heightens conversation when it is
flagging, and infinitely obliges in Society. When he jests himself, he speaks
so indifferently, and is so seemingly unconcerned, that onewould think he
understood not what he said; but this is his cunning, that thereby he may the
more pleasingly surprise, and by his silence make room for others laughter; but
when others jest, there shall be nothing wanting in his face which may not
express a more than common satisfaction. He studies Jokes, Repartees, etc. to
no other end than to please in Conversation; for, nothing contributes more to
delightful diversion, than returns which are facetiously surprising; wherefore
he takes special care to muzzle all his biting jests, and never lets them show
their Teeth, till he is too Satyrically overwitted, and then, to the rescue of
his reputation, he freely lets them run without constraint.

Sometimes the Wheedle (persuaded by his good clothes, and pusht forward by his
confidence) gets admittance into the Society of such as are much above him,
where if he hear any vain, effeminate, and impertinent person, eagerly
discoursing the conduct of some amorous Female Conquests, as the Wife of Mr.
Fribble, my Ladies Woman, or an Actoress, I say, if it be his chance, or
design, that cast him into that Company, he will give all attention imaginable,
and with as much astonishment, as at the description of some Bloody Siege, if
in the Relation, the Amorish borrows Metaphors from War to illustrate the
Infamy of that Victory.

To please this Lump of Brutality the more by his words and behavior, he makes
him believe, that in such an adventure he ought to esteem himself the happiest
of Lovers, by magnifying his Victory, not depending on Chance, or the weakness
of the Sex vanquished; but to his irristible Person, Wit, and Eloquence, adding
other commendations which may make his Masculine Vigor and Courage look big in
his own Eye, so that he may believe himself to be in no capacity of fear for
any Competitor, and an absolute Conqueror when ever he intends to attaque any
Maiden Fortress, or well fortified Old Garrison.

Having possessed him with so good an Opinion of his own excellencies in general,
he then singles him out, and for further proof of his prodigious Valor,
whispers him in the Ear, where lies the perfect pattern of all Beauty, and its
concomitants, insinuating withal the greatness of her Virtue and severe
Continence; that this admired piece deserves his trial, having tired all her
Assailants by the long continued Siege, and none could ever yet make a breach
in her Walls; that if he could (coming last) storm, or enter this Citadel by a
voluntary surrender, he might then conclude the total conquests of all other
Worlds of Women, and sit down at length with Alexander, and weep there are no
more to conquer.

The Gallant thus pricked on, and animated to make this bold attempt, is
impatient till he enter the Lists; the Wheedle shows him then where this
Enchanted Castle lies; what Avenues there are to it; what inestimable Treasures
it contains; how guarded and defended by two mighty Giants, Chastity and
Temperance; two Angels her constant Sentinels; how deeply Moated and
Entrenched; two Ivory Pillars standing at the Entrance of the Gate, etc. all
these do rather encourage, than dishearten the bold Knight, who without any
help (nay, not so much as his Squires) boldly makes an Onset, and in the
attempt, surpriseth the Sentinels, destroys the Giants, dams up the Moat,
enters the Trenches, and with his single hand makes himself Commander of the
place, but endeavoring to find out where the Treasure lay hid, was blown up by
a Mine of White-Gun-Powder, which though it made no Report, yet did Execution
to his great damage and dishonor.

But to return to our purpose; let the Wheedle be where he will, and in what
company soever, he is very cautious how he speaks to the disadvantage of
another, but to the advantage; and though some impute this way of speaking to
flattery, since it is advantageous, he holds it excusable; thus some are of
opinion, That if a lie bring damage to none, and is of profit to some, it may
be dispensed with, if the nature of the Subject forbid it not.

Superiors, and those from whom he expects some kindness, he seldom or never
contradicts, fearing to offend, and so lose them; and the truth of it is,
contradictions are seldom grateful and acceptable to any. The opinions of
others, though in themselves very extravagant, he glibly swallows as approved
Maxims in appearance, and the little follies, indiscretions and levities, which
are committed in his company, he is so far from reproving, that he reproves
himself thereby, by approving seemingly of them, and by considering wherein
they may be profitable to him, whether for the present entertainment, or future
accomplishment of any other design.

There is no remedy but that there must be some indulgence to flattery, but not
in all its kinds: for great flatteries sometimes succeed worse, than if there
were used none at all; because, he who is so flattered, is apt to enter into an
opinion that there is an intention of deceiving.

To sum up all, as well Princes as other men are composed of the four Humors,
and are thereby inclined in their affections, according to the degree of the
humor which is most predominant in them, regarding their change by Age,
Affairs, and Conversations, so the manner of the Wheedles procedure changes
too, and answers the inclinations of both Sexes, which are various, and almost
infinite. To the Voluptuous, he is a Pimp to serve his pleasures; with the
Drunkard he will drink, so that he may advance himself thereby, as a mean Scab
was preferred before many Noblemen of Rome to the Questure, because he had
pledged Tiberius a whole Amphora of wine; with the falacious Nero he will be
Tigilinus, or a Petronius to be Arbiter of the elegance of his Luxury. I need
not produce more instances how he Insinuates into all humors, but conclude,
that he who will (like the Wheedle) gain the favor of all men, and make
advantages of them in all respects, must comply with, or second their
Inclinations and Passions.

Give me leave to add some few Observations concerning the Age, and Fortune of
Men, and I shall conclude the Theorical part of the Art of Wheedling.

He that intends to be skilful in this Art, must well observe the exterior
conditions of Persons, which are subservient to the judging of the interior,
and whence they proceed, viz. from Age, or from their Fortune; the Age of Man,
in which the difference of manners are principally to be observed, are Youth,
Manhood, and Old Age.

The young man is soon led away, ready to execute his desires, ardent in the
prosecution, and not easily satisfied in the enjoyment of Pleasures,
Inconstant, soon Choleric, Profuse, or Prodigal, as having never tried what
want means, Having never had the Black Ox tread on his Toe. he is simple for
want of Observation and Experience, which were enough to lay him too open to
the subtlety of the selfish Insinuator, if the foregoing qualities were left
out.

Moreover young men having never been deceived, nor cheated any way by the
Wheedling Crafts-Masters of the Town, knows not what it means, and being puffed
up with Hope, they promise to themselves Mountains, and are buoyed up by the
fair promising pretenses of these Townshifts, till they have an opportunity to
effect their ends. These young men's hopes are great, and being Choleric to
boot, they readily enterprise any thing, and the hopes they have of effecting
what they propose to themselves, makes them afraid of nothing, and do easily
enter into a confidence of themselves and others: Danger is never nearer than
when security lies at the Door: and following rather splendid Vanities than
what is profitable, they either by the subtle instigations of the Wheedle
disable their flight, by singing their wings at the flame of a (glittering)
Candle, or being suffocated with Sweets, lie Buried in a Hony-pot.

Love and Friendship is more strong in youth than any other Age, and both of
them (without great caution) prove equally destructive.

Old men are of a quite different humor; for by their long abode in the world,
and converse with men of diverse sorts, they have been frequently cheated and
deceived, and therefore are suspicious and distrustful; the effects of that
fear which freezes their hearts, and the experience they have of the infidelity
of men, makes them love none, and are jealous of all; wherefore the premises
considered, I know not what advantages can be made of him (if he be covetous
too, which is natural to all aged people) unless, like the Hog, after decease
to feed his Relations, whom in his life time he half starved by his boundless
Avarice.

From these two Extremities it is easy to describe the Age of Manhood, who is
at an equal distance from the presumption of the Young, and timerousness of the
Ancient; and if there be adjoined unto it all the advantages which are separate
from young and old Age, and the defects and excesses of Ages more moderate, so
that Age becomes less liable to the prejudices the Wheedle does design against
it.

From the Ages of man I should proceed to their different Fortunes and
conditions, but that is a work I design for the following Section, where I
shall endeavor to give you a faithful account of several private and public
Practicers of this mysterious Art and Science.

PROTEUS REDIVIVUS, OR THE SECOND PART OF THE ART of WHEEDLING. Containing a
true account of several private and public Practicers of this Mysterious
Science.
CHAP. I. Of the variety of Wheedles or Insinuators.
FRom the Signification of the word Wheedle, which (as I have already said)
imports a crasty Insinuation into the affections of one another, by consulting,
and studying the Temperaments, Inclinations, and Passions of each other,
whereby he that can best comply and suit with them, reaps the most certain
advantage to himself, if also he takes his measure from their several Ages, and
Professions; I say, from this Interpretation of the word Wheedle, we may be
bold to say, that there are as many several Wheedles as there are Professions
and Occupations amongst both Sexes, which are weaker or stronger, less happy or
more succesful in the conduct of their projects and contrivances, according to
the Sex and Age that governs them.

It is impossible for me to enumerate the hundred thousand part of all those
subtle ways, and stratagems Men and Women use to bring about their own designs,
nay Children must not be exempted out of their number, since they no sooner
begin to prattle and run about, but they study their little plots, and use
their fallacies to delude their School-fellows of their play things; and being
abused find out ways for revenge; nay in this tender age they will adventure to
set upon Father, Mother, Uncle, Aunt, or any whom they know do love them, and
having dexterously and ingeniously, cheated or persuaded them out of what they
had a mind to have, go away rejoicing in their childish conquests to the no
small satisfaction of their Relations, to see their young kindred so forward to
live in the world by Wit, Circumvention, and Insinuation.

As all Wheedles whatever must, if they intend to thrive by it (as I have said)
study the nature of men, and know their inclinations and passions by
conversation; so from the very breast the Infant begins to study the Mothers
disposition, and as he grows more intelligible, he examins his Fathers; if the
child have any promising natural parts he will soon show them, by discovering
his knowledge of the Father and Mothers humor, what will please, what
displease, how to abscond his juvenile errors from their sight, and be acting
still before them what he finds they most delight in, and every day produces
some little invention which more and more rivets him in their affections, till
by this continued pleasing Insinuation, from rewards getting into their hearts,
he at last takes possession of their whole Estate. It is not so much natural
affection, as subtle insinuation that most commonly so engages the hearts of
Parents toward their Children; do not we daily see that (like Jacob and Esau)
brethren rob one another of their birthright only by their deportment: Elder
Brothers have been disinherited for not complying with the insufferable humors
of a cross Father, whilst the colloguing younger Son has run away with all; I
might give you an hundred instances of the like nature, but let this suffice,
and so proceed.

If we look into the City, and number the several Trades and Professions
contained therein, we shall find, that as we know not how to manage any one
Trade, scarcely, to which we served no time to learn that Art or Mystery; so,
did we know and understand their mannal operations, yet we should never
understand every man's particular Wheedling-way in procuring customers in
vending good commodities at a dear rate, and putting off bad in Trucks or
otherwise; in getting credit at first, and either keep it when thus gotten, or
support it when tottering, and finally secure something after cracking. Now
since we cannot give an account of all, yet we will lay open as many as come
within the verge of our knowledge, discovered by a severe and strick
indagation: in order thereunto we will begin with the most general Wheedle
called the Town-shift.

CHAP. II. The Gentile Town-shift.
THe Town-shift as he changes his Lodgings often, so he goes by diverse names
of his own invention, besides those which his actions bestow on him; and though
those names seem to belong to several Persons of different Professions, yet in
the winding up we shall find, that there is but one Soul in one body which
animates it in diverse actions.

This Town-shift is sometimes called Wheedle, Bully, Huff, Rook, Pad,
Reformade, Pamponio, Guarde-lupanie, Philo-puteinist, Ruffin Shabbaroon,
Subtler, with many more I cannot well remember, which titles distinguish the
diversity of his employs, which he fashions himself to, according to the
opportunity offered for him to make use thereof.

There are two sorts of them eminently taken notice of in this City, whose
original extraction are as different in Splendour, as the two Poles, or Zenith,
and Nadir are distant, and remote each from the other.

The one is a younger Brother, and him I call the Gentile Town-shift, whom his
Father dealt withal, as Pharaoh with the Children of Jsrael, that expected they
should make brick, and gave them no straw; so he makes him live at home as a
Gentleman, and leaves him nothing to maintain it; he hates with the Irishman,
that his Son should be a Tradesman, for fear of murdering his gentility, and
yet never thinks, that after his decease the Gentleman must be converted into a
Serving-man, and it is well if it be no worse; so that the Pride of his house
has undone him.

What would you have this poor Gentleman do; the Father being dead, his
Brothers old suits and he are much alike in request, and cast off both together
with a little money in his pocket, that the sight and memory of him, and his
Father, may perish together.

To London he comes, (having spent it may be almost all what he had given him
to be rid of him to France he goes, there to learn the Language of these
inconstant Times, their Alamode Shrugs, Cringes, and ridiculously Antic
fashions) I say, coming thither, his Birth and bringing up will not suffer him
to descend to the means to get wealth, and so is forced to stand to the Mercy
of the World; but Nature foreseeing into what extremities the imprudence and
improvidence of his Father must reduce him, in Compassion furnished him with a
greater stock of Wit than his Brother, having no other Revenue to subsist upon.

Having gained a general Experience by Observation in Company with men, and
soft conversation of the smooth and milder Sex, by which he comes to understand
the humors of the Town not without several brisk rencounters with the Jacobin
and Holbornian Furioso's, he then sets up for himself, and makes all the Places
of public resort, in or about the City, his Exchanges, leaving his other
Brother Wheedles of meaner, or Dunghill extraction to act by themselves apart;
who according to the baseness of their birth and breeding perpetrate vild and
unworthy things, and if by chance any of them have the courage to mount (comme
les Gens des Arms) and dare boldly bid a man stand, it is not long before
either their own imprudence, or the treachery of their Associates pulls off
their Vizard Mask, by which he is discovered to Justice, and so their blooming
extravagancies make their timely Exits at Tyborn: more shall be spoken of these
in the next Chapter.

As others trim up their shops by ornaments of paint and other things, so he
furnishes up his body after travel with a Suit Alamode, if he has not money,
the first trial of his wit is, by procuring them some other way, either by a
letter to this person of quality, or to the other (for we must allow him the
knowledge of persons of worth by reason of his gentile family) in which
missives must be represented the meaness of his condition occasioned by Travel,
and the unkindness of relations; that he is ashamed to be seen till better
garb'd etc. if this produce no good effects, a Poetical Panegyric on some
proud Lady, or conceited Gentlewoman may do it with a whisper in the ear by the
Messenger, that the Author would have presented them with his own hands, but
that newly coming from some foreign Country, and not furnished with habiliments
proper for a visit to a Person of so much worth, he must be patient till he
hear out of the Country; if this will not do, the poor Gentleman has hard
fortune, and must apply himself to his wonted, and last refuge, his
unconscionable Tailor, who with a shrug, where it does not bite, and some
feigned scruples, he becomes so good natured as to compassionate the Gentleman,
by making him a suit for Twenty pound which might have been bought for Seven
with ready money.

The first thing he does, is to wind himself into the Society of men eminent
for their dignity and fortune, and has learned, that nothing gains upon them
more than Complaisance and respect, which they take the more kindly and
cordially from him, as knowing, or hearing that he is well born, and better
educated, better I say, for birth without breeding is not much to be valued,
and an extraordinary breeding (though meanly born is to be preferred before some
eminent births, that have little or no good education.

Toward these he behaves himself with all humility and submission, and in his
words and actions expresses nothing more than reverence, knowing, there is
nothing more engages the affections of men, than a handsome address with
graceful language, nay his manner of behavior is not only full of humility and
submission, but of such a degree, as therein he abaseth himself very much; no
matter so that this his lowly deportment raise him high in their esteems, and
finally, by their own means at first, be placed little inferior to themselves.

In all his actions and motions he is so careful (whether walking, standing,
eating, or sitting) to cloth them with such a mien and grace, as may evince,
that he not only reverenceth his Superiors, but adores them. This he has
learned as a Maxim, That no man ever miscarried through excess of respect, nor
was disgraced for retaining a constant and proportionate sense of the quality
or merit of his Superior; Not but that he knows how to be intimate enough with
some, though of an honorable quality, but then he knows their humors with
whom he uses this familiarity, who will command, rather than condemn his blunt
freedom, and recompense his boldness.

His general practice is to proportion his respects according to the quality,
and Wealth of those to whom he does address them, by which means he often times
gets into some good employ under them, or if there be no vacancy, they give him
a turn over to some other person in authority by a Letter recommendatory, and
that may prove every whit as profitable; if he aims not that way, yet, by these
gentile deportments and submissions, he may so far ingratiate himself with the
whole family, that he may have his admission when he desires it, either
publicly or privately, and having Madam and her woman's good opinion and
estimation, I know not what may be secured in the whole house from his
handling, and to make them amends at last for all their favors, it may be
steals the Heiress, or some Neice belonging to that family.

This last instance (before I was a ware) runs me upon the gentile Town-shifts
conversation with Gentlewomen, who by his frequent attendance on Ladies, and
Persons of Quality, has acquired that air of the world, and that politeness
which no Lecture from the best Master of Gentiless could give him.

In his discourse with that tenderhearted merciful Sex, he avoids all rough,
and bristly language of War, and is not guilty of the incorrigible folly of
some, whose head being full of Fire, and Sword, Assaults, and Batteries, speak
of nothing but Sieges, or Sea Fights; what a great slaughter of men there was
at the taking of Maestricht; how the Turks in one City did put a 1000. Souls,
Men, Women, and Children to the Sword; or how in the last Engagement the fight
was so bloody, that the Decks of each ship seemed like a Shambles of man's flesh
to be sold by the piece or Mammock; this way of entertaining the Ladies would
rather make them afraid, than give them any desire to seek his Conversation.
He takes another course, and is very cautious that nothing may be offensive in
his language, or in his Countenance, but studies all manner of ways to please,
and accomodate himself to their manner of behavior.

He entertains them with a new Song, a smart Epigram, witty sayings culd out of
Plays, and if he finds them in a brisk jolly humor, he reads them some Lampoon
lately made on some great Person, and cunningly skips over the Bawdry. Instead
of speaking in the form of Syllogisms, and Pedantry, like things newly
fluttered out of the University, and being not thoroughly fledged come hopping
to Town, I say, he endeavors not to puzzle them that way, but divert them with
what they understand, by telling them of Balls, where such and such Ladies are
bravely entertained this night, and to morrow what excellent new Play is to be
acted; if he perceive them melancholy he proposes to them Music; if they are
resolved to be serious, he can be so too; if he sees any wantonly inclined, he
knows how to single her out (not to give offense to the rest) and can give her
her belly full of toying: from whom he quickly retires for fear of cloying, for
it is not to his benefit to dwell too long in one Chamber; he has variety, and
makes his visits accordingly, and his feigned deportment (with his good clothes,
gives him frequent admittance into the company of those he was never in before.
For his prudent expense in habits bears him through all; it opens all doors to
him, and always procures him an obliging reception: as the exterior part,
striking first the sight, is that which makes the first impression in our
Spirits, so he takes a very great care to render that impression favorable.

As the furniture of his body very much captivates the eye and heart of the
young Ladies and Gentlewomen, so his pregnant Wit renders him as capable to
please the ear, being able to raise diversion out of every small occurrence:
when in one Scene he has given a Lady all the delights he can, he shifts into
another, never continuing in one humor so long till it become disgustful;
choicest delights do soonest surfeit, and feeding always on one dish (though
ever so good) will nauseate the Stomach; he varies therefore his diversions
conformable to the humor of that Sex, which makes his visits always acceptable,
longed for, and his departure is never without regret.

This amorous gentile Town-shift has always leisure enough to wait on this Sex
(unless when his attendance on some great man is required in the expectation of
some boon for himself, or the advantageous soliciting for another) and if they
have a mind to be treated he does it with much generosity and gallantry, and
knows how to pay himself in the conclusion.

Out of his uninclosed Seraglio he plays the Grand Seignor, and picks out one
of the crowd, waits upon her at a Play, to a Ball, or to the Park, each of
which does infinitely please, giving her the opportunity of making oftentation
of her Beauty and Gallantry; and whilst she is endeavoring by all her Arts and
Subtleties, to set her self off for sale, she little thinks how near her
Chapman sets, who will without scruple take her Commodity on trust: and that he
may not tickle his Trout too long, and so lose her, an Assignation (with some
few doubts and difficulties) is made, and hand and seal binds her in a Bond of
perpetual friendship and affection.

As he does by one, so he deals with all, but by different means; for there is
much variety of humors, inclinations and Passions in women, as there are in
men, and must be wrought upon accordingly by a due conformity for advantage. It
lies not within the reach of my knowledge to discover all the Stratagems,
Plots, Snares, Whims, Contrivances, Projects, Insinuations, and Flatteries he
uses himself, and by Proxy Procuress, to riggle himself first into
Gentlewomens affections, and having made himself Secretary to their honor, he
disposes of their Reputation and Estate, according to his own discretion.

He now begins to look upon his Elder Brother with scorn, who not long since
beheld him with a countenance of stern awe, and checked him oftener than his
Liveries. He treads the streets boldly, triumphing over his former mean
fortune, and looks another way when he meets his quondam Tailor though he owe
him nothing.

His garb and attendance differ him in nothing from a Person of Honor, which
now capacitate him for few, but such company, and can dispense in some measure
with the largeness of their expense; will now and then throw away a hundred
Guinneys on a horse-hoof, knowing so well how to take the length of a woman's
foot; at a Cockpit he will lay ten to one, and win the Battle; for by instinct
he knows the best Cocks, being himself of a Game-brood; but here is the
mischief of it, he is now and then addicted to play with the great Ones with
Box and dice, by whom he is Nickt out of all he got by Minutes in a Nights
time. He recruits his pockets again, it may be, but not being able to recruit
his bodily strength, and rally his routed Spirits, he becomes a greater object
of the female scorn, than he was formerly of their love, and untimely growing
old, and infeebled per nimiam Venerem, they more endeavor to avoid his
company, than before they desired it; which he timely observing tacks about and
steers another course.

His crazy, leaky Vessel (for there is as many holes near his Keel as there are
in a Cullender) he now thinks fit to lay up in safe harbor, whose lading is
Guinney-gold, Silks, Stuffs, Hats, Linen, Perriwigs, Ivory (i. e. artificial
Teeth) Perfumes, Ribbons, and Looking-glasses cum mill aliis.

Applying himself to his former Air of Wheedling (being an excellent
Tongue-pad) he, in a little time, with some pains finds a Customer that will
take all his commodities of him by the lump; and Mort-gage an Estate to him to
make him what satisfaction he pleases; to say the truth, the Merchant may nor
be looked upon so contemptible, but that he deserves a good price for his Ware;
he is a man proper enough, and has a good face, but that it looks somewhat
pale and thin by a late fit of sickness: as for the Nodes in his head and
front, gotten by a desperate surfeit, those his twelve pound flaxen Wigg
absconds; what Pustulae circumvolve his body, the goodness of his clothes both
hide and grace: it is pity those Stilts, on which this seemingly fine Fabric
stands, had not a covering too; but what needs that now I think on it, since his
Stockings are bolster'd, to make his calves look the bigger. Let all these
things pass, it is enough that he is gentilely born, and from thence derives
his Art of making a Gentlewoman, wherewith he baits some rich Widow, that is
hungry after his blood; besides this, he wants not various gilded pretenses to
set himself off so advantagiously, yet delusively that at length he involves
this wealthy Veterane in the Labyrinth of Wedlock, that he may the better cheat
her by Authority. In the end, finding out each others imperfections and
corruptions; she his pocky distempers; he her old halting leacherous humors,
they both consent to a voluntary divorce, she living upon what he pleases to
give her (who might have lived as she pleased but for her dotage) whilst he can
hardly live himself by the vast expense he is at on Doctors, Surgeons, and
Apothecaries to support the tottering Fabric of decayed nature.

CHAP. III. The Ordinary Town shift.
THere are several sorts of ordinary Town-shifts, but since it will be too
tedious to particularize them, I shall include them all under this general
head; the Vulgar or ordinary Town-shift. It is a fellow that pretends to
greatness of birth, and to back the reputation he would force from thence,
gives a large account of his rich Relations, who shall live too remote for any
one to inquire into them. Yet if any one is desirous to know his extraction, he
need not trouble himself any farther than to examine his Name, and he shall
know the Parish wherein the crew! Whore his Mother bare him, by his bearing the
same Name of the Patron of that Church.

Some of these ordinary Town-shifts come out of the Country, who not daring to
live there longer (their rogueries being so generally known) hoof it to London,
who by the way, for food sake, are any ones Servants that will employ them, and
for want of that must go supperless to their bed of straw, and glad they lie so
well. Coming to London their happy stars (it may be) directs them to an Inn,
where immediately for some eminent parts, they commence Boot-Ketchers, from
thence they proceed gradually to under Hostlers; whilst in that employ, some
one may be observed by his Mistress to have good features and well limbed, who
(out of pity to the strippling, whom for the kindling love she bears him,
thinks him better born than he is) removes him from the Stable to be a
Chamberlain, and intrusting him with the sheets, has a months mind to lie in a
Bed of his making. By so unexpected a favor, and not able to manage this
fortune, he grows Proud, Insolent, and Talkative, for which he is kicked out of
doors, and meeting with a debaucht City Rambler, (a Renegado from his Trade,
and one who is resolved to be wicked, maugre all the good counsel of Master and
Relations) he finds him a fit Instrument of Mischief to join with, and so they
become both sworn Brethren in Iniquity, and joining with others of the same
stamp, make up a Corporation of Divelism, and act according to the Hellish
Precepts which their Grand Master dictates to them. To add to the number of
these Miscreants, some broken Credit-crackt-fellow steps in among them, whom
all other means has failed, and now resolves to live by his shifts; a needy
fellow cashir'd out of all civil company; for the World has flung him off, and
he would willingly be reconciled unto it, but wants some wealthy Arbitrators to
decide the controversy between them. He may be fitly compared to one drowning,
who fastens upon any thing that is next at hand, and if he must sink, whatever
he lays hold on shall down with him. Amongst other of his Shipwracks, he has
happily lost Shame, and this want supplies him; for by his confidence, or
impudence rather, he will shuffle himself into any company, and what he cannot
do by fair means, he will effect (if he can) by foul; if his Wheedling
persuasions, and crafty insinuations produce not their desired effects, he then
applies himself to threats and violence; by the one he frightens some Fops into
an humor to do him a kindness, by the other he compels them. That little wit
he has, he imploys to the utmost advantage; for as his Life is a daily
invention, so his Meat, Drink, Lodging, Clothes, and all that belongs to him,
are the Products of his Stratagems. When he wants money, his borrowings are like
Subsidies, and desires the loan of money, according to the quality of the
person, or what he has about him; and rather than be totally denied, he will
accept of the loan of a shilling, though his request be twenty; he borrows so
often, that few of his acquaintance but are his Creditors, and they fear, and
shun him in the conclusion, as much as if they were indebted to him. They know
his Wheedling tricks so well, that they dare not show him any countenance, for
fear of renewing acquaintance; at first, finding him a good fellow, and
Complaisant Companion, they never looked further till experience taught them
what he drove at, interest, which (though never so small) should not escape
him; if toward dinner time he find but a good look, which promises his
welcome, he becomes their half boarder, and haunts the threshold so long till
he forces good natures to a quarrel, and yet know not how to be rid of him,
like the poor Scholars thredbare Cloak, a long hanger-on, and being willing to
be rid on it, walking in Moor-fields dropped it in one of the Quarters, and then
ran from it as fast as he could; but the people at sight hereof cried out to
him, do you hear, Sir, do you hear, Sir, you have left your Cloak behind: which
made him with regret return and take it up again.

Much more might be said of his Character in general, but designing brevity I
shall supply in some nature what is deficient in his particular Wheedles
following.

CHAP. IV. Wheedles between the Town-shift, Vintner, and Drawers.
MOney with the Town-shift Ebbs and Flows, sometimes it over-flows the banks of
his Pockets, and at other times they lie dry. Borrowing, Pimping, Padding,
Filing, Gilting, Budging etc. are his Exchequer, whence he is continually
supplied with money, till Tyborn shuts it up, and his Pay-offices, or Houses of
Disbursements are Taverns, Bawdy-houses, Inns, and Coffee-houses, etc. of which
I shall treat in their due places.

Having money he scorns an Alehouse, but he is all for the Tavern, which is
three Stories higher than that paltry-house as he calls it, and there he may be
drunk sooner, and with greater credit, and then the thoughts of a Coffee-house
shall not come within his noddle, but to make him more sober to be drunk again.

First he pitches on that Tavern in which he never drank before, and having
acquainted half a dozen of his Com-rogues with his design of being merry, and
to have Money and Wine to boot, a Footboy is dispatched to the place designed,
with a Guinny to be delivered to the Master of the house, ordering him to
provide such and such dishes for the next days dinner; if the Boy be demanded
his Masters name, he readily tells him (with a submissive bow) -- Squire etc.
-- at the time appointed they come all as well apparel'd as their Roguerys can
furnish them, and being seated, behave themselves with more civility than they
commonly use; wine passes about freely, but not entravagantly, and dinner being
ready the Master or Mistress is invited up, and with much importunity one is
placed at the Table. According as it was designed before, their ordinary
discourse is interlin'd with their pretended great concerns in the country, and
each takes a seeming modest liberty to praise one another estates, which each
endeavors to lessen, and magnify the others, but dwell not long upon this
subject to avoid suspicion, and to add to the happiness of their conditions
they all go for Bachelors.

The Cloth being removed, the good Gentlewoman of the house, well warmed with
wine, with-draws, to make room for her husband, and in this they are much like
two Buckets in a Well, when one descends, the other mounts up, who (with the
common saying, do you call, Sir.) invites himself to sponge, and so anticipates
their desires, for that is the thing they would have.

My Gentlemen now fall to Repetition, saying before him, what they said before
his wife, to the same effect, though in different terms; and having drank very
briskly, a reckoning is called for, a Bill is brought, the total only looked
upon, without examining the Items, and the money paid to a farthing, with
something to the Drawer. Hereupon my Landlords Bottle (and that really a
flower) rides post up the stairs to the breaking of the Drawers shins for haste.

This is so high an obligation, that they all swear they will make this their
house, and will engage their friends likewise, and to seal the bargain, they
must drink one Bottle of the same wine with their landlady at the Bar: where
all the discourse is about their kind usage, the goodness of the wine, the well
ordering of their meat, and the civility of the house; the Bottle being almost
out, a young Gentlewoman is espied peeping behind the Bar, and she must be
known who she is by all means; being informed she is the daughter of the house,
with a Con Licencia they enter the Kitching, where they pass such complements,
and devoirs as become men of better quality, and having drank a Bottle or two
more (dropping a shilling into the Cook-maids hand) they take their leave.

The house being cleared, and the Master and Mistress having liberty and
leisure to talk of that days proceedings, they particularly discourse on this,
thanking their kind stars for sending them such good Customers, concluding them
persons of no mean quality.

The next day some of the Gang (especially the Contriver) comes and asks for
the rest, who though they find them not there, yet will have the civility to
dine there, before they go in quest of them. This repetition of the first
kindness it may be obliges the Vintner to give them the civility of his Cellar,
and the rather that he may show them how well stockt he is of all sorts.

To be short they visit him so long till they are not only intimately
acquainted with the good Man, but inwardly with his Wife, and Daughter, and now
it is high time for them to think of picking up their expenses.

The Ale-draper uses to say, that the Tap is a great Thief if not well looked
after, but many Vintners, to their great grief, may say, the Bar is a greater,
which had it been carefully eyed, Dublin and other places would not have been
so peopled with Drawers, quondam Vintners of London.

To enlarge their credit in the house, they sum up what money they can
together, and pretend to play; one seemingly losing all, sees how much he can
borrow in the house, and observes with what willingness it is lent, that he may
know how to steer his course for the future: what ever is borrowed, is
thankfully paid the next day, and whatsoever Wine is sent home, as they call
it, (not trusting any body with it but a Porter, a Creature of their own) is
paid for in like manner; so that suspicion cannot fasten on such honest
dealing: but to wind up all, they borrow money of the husband, without the
knowledge of his wife of the wife, without his knowledge, and of the Daughter,
without the knowledge of them both, but the Bar pays for all; the wife dares
not acquaint the husband of what she has done, lest the loan of the money
should confirm the growing jealousy of her disloyalty; the Daughter dares not
speak a word of her deeds of darkness; for, should she do it, she knows she
should receive a double punishment for a double offense, in picking her Mothers
pockets, and robbing her of her pleasure.

These generous Guests not coming to the house as they were wont, makes the
poor Vintner run horn-mad, swearing for the loss of his money, and vowing
revenge by an arrest, this frightens his wife out of her wits, fearing the
action might provoke them to a discovery of their past amorous intrigues. The
Town-shift, foreseing what would be the effects of this stratagem, sends a Spy
into the house to ask for him of the Mistress, who, glad to hear of her errant
Lover, enquires more after him, than the Messenger, who whispers her in the
ear, says, he is not far off, but dares not come by reason of a debt due to her
husband; she overjoyed that she should see him, puts the money into her pocket,
and is conveyed where he is, who after some dalliance receives the money of
her, and with it pays the poor Cuckold in his own kind, which he would not have
done, but that otherwise he must lose a friend that will continually supply him.

If She be Rich and handsome, on my life,
No better Friend than is a Vintners Wife.
There are several sorts of Tavern Wheedles, and so numerous, that it is an
impossible thing to give an account of them all, wherefore I shall conclude
this Chapter with some observations tending thereunto.

There is a base sensual sneaking fellow, who to save his money, and to gorge
himself with Wine, makes it his business to be acquainted with as many Drawers
as he can (whose Masters live not too near the Compters) a small expense
informs him of their names, then he dives into their inclinations; whether they
fancy Fencing, Dancing, Gaming, Wenching with other pastimes which youth takes
most delight in, and as their desires tend, he fits them most agreeably; this
so infinitely engages the young Dash to gratify his Palate, that if there be
any one Faucet that can betray neat Wine to the Bar it shall be arraigned
before him sooner than before a Person of Quality.

He is not long in making himself acquainted; the 2d sight shall be sufficient
to call him honest Jack, or Tom, and making him (Sans Ceremony) sit down,
obliges him to drink a full glass, and is a Pledge for his safety, whilst he
drinks, by carefully peeping through the jarring door, to see whether Master or
any else are coming to disturb them in the interim. This action makes honest
Jack grow confident, insomuch that his Pint is offered at his Masters cost, and
another being sacrificed on the same account, John's Brains begin to crow, and
though his Head be full, and belly too, yet not content, he will have his
Breeches as full as they.

The Wheedle by this means, has struck his Fish not easily to get loose again,
yet gives him line enough to play up and down, till by a sudden jerk he is
thrown out of a deep River of plenty, into a contrary Element, that proves his
Ruin and Destruction.

Whilst humored by this Wheedle, the Drawer studies to please him, by undoing
his Master, and himself too; for Canary he cries a Pint of White; and for
variety a Bottle of Claret, whereas it is Sack coated with Red-wine; or he will
bring a Bottle in his Codpiece, saying, jocosely and roguishly, Sir, take this
to supply the other when it is out, but let but one be seen at a time; my
Master has a good Estate, but no Children; wherefore since he is able, as long
as I am his Servant, I will make him treat his friends; at length by these
frequent practices he is discovered, and turned out of doors; and having been
Wheedled out of all credit, he at length for five shillings learns to play upon
the Tongs, or upon a Violin, taught by some Barber (whose chiefest Music is a
Cittern) and with these accomplishments is admitted as a Menial into a
Minstrel-Bawdy-house.

This Wheedle has more strings to his Bow than one, two, or half a score, so
that as he breaks one, he fastens on another, whom, when he has once
corrupted, he makes him his perpetual Slave to serve his unlawful desires, by
threatening a discovery of all without a present compliance to his propositions.

Some Drawers are so crafty they will not be Wheedled by any Cunningham of them
all, pretending how much it goes against his conscience to deceive his Master,
that he had rather spend his own money, than wrong him of a farthing, yet will
Wheedle for himself so closely, that none shall discover him, no not his
Master, but by his sensible decay, by his Servants purloinings, by scoring
less, yet taking the whole reckoning; by scoring justly, yet taking more; by
drawing continually Flowers, or the choicest Wines for reward; and principally
in the Night, by conveying whole Rundlets away. If his Master anger him, he
shows no discontent, but very patiently steps into the Cellar, and there to be
friends with his Master, drinks a health to him in a glass of Sack, not
omitting the remembrance of the least of his progeny, though there were
twenty, and will see that his Fellow Servants, honest Ralph, shall do him
Reason; if their Fish want Butter, as they think no greater injury can be done
them, so they will revenge it, by making it (after it is eaten) to swim in good
Canary; much better Housewifery in the Mistress, if she had allowed them two
pounds of Butter to three Sprats, and so have pleased them, than to be at that
expense.

It is now high time to speak a little of the Vintners Wheedle in his Guests.
If he be wise, and crafty for his own ends, he must be all submission to the
Velvet-Coat, Pantaloon, or splendid Thing that is in fashion, and make a noise
with his Bell, and Mouth, as if the house were all in Flames, the one jangling
to alarm the people, and his mouth speaking nothing but Tom, Will, John, show a
Room, which because it cannot be heard by the insufferable noise of the jarring
Bell, one would think he called out for Buckets, and water to quench the Fire.
The noise somewhat allayed, he begins again with his feet and hasty running up,
that he may have the first honor to serve the Gentlemen with bad Wine, having
more authority to brazen it out with a lie; his hat is under his Arm, and
understanding what Wine it is they will drink, he instantly swears they shall
not drink better Wine in London, though they cannot drink worse elsewhere, and
it may be puzzle a good judgment whether it be Wine or no. Their Palats being
displeased, the Master in all haste is called for, whose place is supplied by
John, who cringingly desires to know their Worships pleasure, and understanding
thev dislike the wine, he then asks what fault they find with it, to no other
intent than to try their judgments; if they want Vintners terms, and say the
Wine is sweet, he straight way cries, I will draw you greener, Gentlemen; if
they say it is sour, he then proposes Richer; but if they say it is foul, for
no benefit to himself, and little to his Master, he mortgages his Soul to the
Devil, by swearing damnedly there is not a cleaner piece of Wine between
Aldgate and Westminster, however he will change it, if they please; it is done,
and somewhat better than the former, yet not so good, but that the Master must
be called up again, who, excusing himself that he is very busy, doing nothing,
at length comes up, and delivering a Key (which never belonged to any Lock of
his knowledge) to his servant in their sight, bids him bring up a Bottle of
that Wine which is to be sent in to his Grace, the Duke of-this must take, or
else the Devils in it; sometimes he bids the Drawer go to the Third next the
wall, and though it be a common draught, the Faucet shown in the mouth must
evince the contrary, and so between the Master and the Man, it is well if the
Guest drinks one third of Wine that is tolerable, and if you have a good
farewell at last, you must not thank the kindness of the house so much, as the
Drawers expectation of a Six pence, or the evening of the reckoning.

I shall say nothing of his large Bills, nor his dark working in his Vaults and
Cellars, where he so subtlely plays the Brewer, that Anniseed Clear had never
Combatants about her never half so crafty in their Art of composition; the
sending Mum to Sea, brewed at St. Katherines, to purge it self, and so come in
for Mr. Brumswick, is a mere Bauble to this profound Mystery: Now, since it is
impossible to detect the Art and Mystery of a Vintner, (but indifferently)
without serving a time to the Profession, and that those who have served two
Apprentiships are still Novices in their own Trade, I shall leave them amongst
their Cans, Tubs, Casks, Cranes, Bellows, etc. and being in the dark, groap my
way up stairs, and creep into the Bar, which shall be the subject of my next
observation.

The Daughter or Kinswoman, which is handsomest of the two, is Bar-keeper,
which frequently proves more beneficial to the house within, than the entising
Sign without, and yet both use the same artifices of painting to allure and
delude, yet differ very much in their composition and substance, the one being
a gravid heavy body, supported by almost a rising Constables estate in Iron
work, the other is (it may be) gravid too, yet very light, whom a Feather
placed in the contrary scale, will weigh down, and not blush at it, and yet her
clothes in her finery, is sold to the best advantage, would amount to a portion
fit for a Country Bride, and raise her husband, if a Citizen, to a large
fortune.

In the Bar she sits with much accustomed patience, and her good face and
clothes angles for all sorts of customers, whilst her eyes are groaping for
Trouts, whom she intends to tickle for her own particular advantage. All in
civility lowr their Top-sail as they pass by her, but if with the usual
welcome she bestows on them a gracious and pleasant Smile, though under Sail in
a stiff gale, this is the Remora that stops the Vessel, and makes it ride per
force without dropping Anchor.

Where there is a noted Beauty a Bar-keeper, she draws custom from all parts of
the Town, as cunning Pidgeon Merchants with baits store their own Dove-coats
from other men's, and at length engross more of that commodity than they know
well what to do with.

In the forenoon she is retired, to be the better attired, and when best dressed,
she shows her willingness to be undrest, and cares not how soon, so she may be
assured her pleasure is not greater than her profit; to that end she leaves her
Honeypot sometimes uncovered on purpose, that the gaudy Wasps, and Humble-Bees,
may lick and taste thereof, till with it is glutinous quality, like Bird-lime,
some so stick therein, that they cannot get out, till they have dearly paid for
their stolen sweets: though she has broken her leg, she is sound enough for a
Drawer newly out of his time, who having credit for wine, his house is
furnished with the money that did set his wifes broken leg, with some addition
of her Uncles; besides, we must not imagine she was so carcless of her self in
the management of the Bar, but that she laid by something for a lying in in the
Country, if need required: being thus married, and set up, either on the
Merchants credit, or on Tunnage, they are now more at liberty to Wheedle for
themselves than formerly, he is all complaisance and cringe, and will be sure
to score a bottle in the reckoning extraordinary, that he may present that
company with one upon their going, the more to endear them to the house; he is
very free of his flesh without exception, and is full of invitations,
especially to a Sundays Dinner; for usually he has then something more than
ordinary, and then drinks, and says, you are heartily welcome, and drinks, and
tells you so again so often, that in the end you will find it cheaper to Dine
at a Crown Ordinary; and yet still stand obliged for these eating kindnesses.

Here note, that in whatsoever Wine you drink to the Mistress of the house of
your own calling for, she modestly refuses, though she like it better than any
other sort, that, you knowing her dislike, may call for what she only desires
to augment the reckoning; and to oblige you for that kindness, she becomes free
in your company, both in speech and behavior, to enlarge your hopes of a
future fruition, which by continual expense, and lying close Siege, may be
obtained, but when all is summed up, the Besieger will find himself a great
loser by the Surrender. Trading growing bad, (and so it must be when forced)
the young man, and his younger wife lay their heads together, how they shall
shore up their falling house; she cries leave all to me, (and all shall be well
enough) and then she thinks of leaving him; hereupon she takes all, and pays
all, and if any comes to him for money, he sends them to his wife, as loath to be
troubled in the weighty concern of drinking, and sponging with every body; if
he be sober, and but few or no guests in the house, he treads more steps up
stairs and down stairs in an hour, than a Porter in a Crane does for half a
day; running into this Room, then into that, balling aloud, that he may be
heard in the Street, Harry, Tom, Will, etc. speak in the Dolphin, speak in the
Moon, etc. having before lighted Candles in every Room, as a lightning before
Death; the Bell goes incessantly all the while, which happily may Toll some
company in, with whom our young Master will drink, or it shall cost him a fall,
at length he gets drunk, or seems to be so, and going to Bed, shows how
confident he is of his Wifes honesty, who wrongs him no more in her Person,
than in his Estate, and at length, seeing her husband sink, she adds more
weight, and then shifts for her self; not long after she may be seen in a
Bawdyhouse, or an Hospital, whilst the poor helpless man lies buried alive in
some Prison, where he receives no other kindness from his friends and
relations, than what will barely contribute to to the support of his life, and
by the prolongation thereof, becomes more sensibly miserable.

If the Daughter keep the Bar, she is more reserved, and less toying in it than
the other, not for any aversion she has to petulant expressions, the Parents
of wanton thoughts, and loose actions, but for fear she displease her rich
Father and Mother, who guard their Daughters chastity with as much care and
vigilance as the Golden-Fleece of old. All private conferences are forbidden;
if some humourists will be dialoguing with her, there is, it may be, a retiring
room behind the Bar; the Matron then supplies the Daughters place, who under
the pretense of securing her honor, is more willing to receive the shock her
self, for her design is, that her Daughter shall be only seen there and heard,
not felt and understood. The pride of the Vintner makes him look on better
Matches for his Daughter than she deserves, to be too mean; and by reason of
his money, is so long choosing an Husband for her, that she is almost past
choosing, and therefore those that make their own indifferent choice, are not
much to be condemned; a notable Wheedling story I have heard tending to this
purpose, which I shall not omit, and so conclude this Chapter.

A Vintner of eminent note having a very handsome young Gentlewoman to his
Daughter, was Courted by a Country-Gentleman, who had an Estate of about
Sixscore Pounds, a year, which though considerable, appeared so contemptible in
the eye of this ambitious Vintner, that hearing what proposals were made, as to
Marriage, he was so irrationally angry, and highly incensed, that he not only
committed his Daughter close Prisoner to her own Chamber, but forewarned the
Gentleman the house, notwithstanding he was before this Courtship, and since, a
considerable Guest to the house; the Gentleman, it seems, had so plied his
business before he discovered his intentions to the old Ones, that the young
Gentlewoman was totally at his devotion by solemn promise, and other ties, for
a perpetual union in affection.

Somewhat troubled, the Gentleman retired into the Country, not without
contriving a way by the Maidservant to have mutual conversation with each
other at a distance by Letter. The young Gentlewoman impatient of her Lovers
absence, and not being able to endure the cruelty of her passionate Father,
sent him word, if he would come up to London on such a day, she would make an
escape out, and be married to him, he, overjoyed, obeyed the Summons, and
meeting each other were by a Minister lawfully Married; and to confirm it the
more, went instantly to bed, where lying about two hours, she arose, and
dressing her self, went with the Maid, her Guardian, home again unsuspected.
Tasting those sweets of Love which before she was unacquainted with, prompted
her ingenuity to find out ways how to repeat their charming visits; in which a
woman's wit is seldom unsuccessful. The pleasure she enjoyed began now to
discover it self by too many apparent symptoms to the Mother, as Paleness,
Puking, Qualms, etc. who examining her Daughter very stricktly, confessed she
was with Child, and gotten by such a Gentleman; the Mother, thinking it was
illegitimately begotten, called her Whore, Stainer of their Family, and
hitherto untainted Reputation, with such like Villifying expressions: having
given vent to her immoderate anger, she considered that what was done, could
not be undone, and now all her thoughts were impoly'd about the means of
concealing this infamy from her Husband, whose humor she had been too well
acquainted with, and knew his Pride at this affront would make him run raving
mad; seeing it was impossible to do it, she made it known to him, preparing him
as well as she could beforehand, but when once he came to understand it, his
rage bare down what ever reason could be alleged to pacify him. The good old
people having vexed themselves sick by raving by themselves, and scolding with
the Daughter, they at length consider, what is to be done in a business of this
importance, and it was concluded that a threatening reproachful letter should be
sent into the Country to this Gentleman, to see how he would take it, he
returned them another in like manner, reviling them for abusing him, taxing
them with unkindness, and laying the fault on their Daughters easiness, not his
eagerness; that if they would force him to keep the Child, he could not avoid
it; but then he hoped that they would be so just as to see their Daughter
severely punished, and the like; this netled the old People to the heart,
however they sent another letter, but in much milder terms, desiring him to
come up and discourse with them; he sent them word again, that he had business
of more importance there than to neglect it, to look after Bastards, etc. the
third time they sent again, with so many powerful charms contained in that
paper, that yielding to their requests, he came to London, and was invited by
them to a sumptuous dinner, at which you may imagine Wine nor good Cheer was
wanting, to express their gallantry, and his welcome; after dinner they fell
into discourse concerning their Daughter, which he seemed to slight, alleging
that his estate was sufficient for a very good Match, though they looked on it
contemptibly; besides, if he had a love for their Daughter heretofore, this
wanton act of hers had in a manner extinguished his flame, etc. To be short,
they offered him a thousand pound if he would repair, their Daughters honor by
marriage, which he refused; seeing that, they cause her to be dressed in as
splendid a manner as the shortness of the time would permit, and caused her to
be ushered in to tempt him to an acceptance of their proffer; but this wrought
no effects; they seeing his obstinacy offered him a thousand pound more if he
would be instantly married, he now thought it time to close, accepting the
proffer, provided they would give him five hundred pound more at the birth of
the Child, if it were a boy; which was likewise agreed to and a Minister sent
for, which was the same who had Married them before; according to instruction
whilst the Parson was going about to commence the Ceremony, the Gentleman burst
out into laughter, which strangely amazed the old man, who asked him what he
meant, not to be married now, quoth he, but you shall said the other (I have
you fast enough) or I Will make your land fly into the air; hereupon the Son and
Daughter kneeling down gave their former certificate into their Fathers hand,
asking him blessing, with some pause, and with much more astonishment it was
granted, and taking them up in his arms, he hugged his new Son-in-law saying,
well, since thou have so outwitted me, I will cheat my self voluntarily of one
five hundred pounds more, to make up the even sum of three thousand; and
afterward lived a long time, not only to their own great contentment, but the
general satisfaction of their Relations.

CHAP. V. Wheedles of a Town-shift in a Coffee-house, Ordinary, Theater, Inn,
on the Road, with the Watch, and his Lodgings.
THis Wheedle in the first place takes great care in keeping good clothes on
his back, and he is to be commended for it, for they not only usher him into
better Company than himself, but likewise procure him estimation where ere he
goes. By means of some small scraps of learning, matched with a far greater
stock of confidence, a voluble tongue, and a bold delivery, he has the luck to
be celebrated by the vulgar for a man of parts, especially if he have a lucky
hit at quibling, and can introduce now and then an odd Metaphor, a conceited
Irony, a wild fetch, an unexpected inference, and has withal a pleasing knack
in humouring a Tale, and is resolved never to be dashed out of countenance; by
these arts, dexterously managed, he engrosses a vast repute: he can speak
extempore on all subjects, and this emboldens him to venture himself in any
Company, where he strains himself to the utmost, to be accounted a notable
Headpiece, and scatters his wit as Beggars do Lice, or Muskcats perfumes, not
that he values popular applause on any other account than to enrich his pocket,
and makes men pay dearly for the over-rate they put upon him. Vide Character of
a Coffee-house.

A Coffee-house is this Wheedles Bubbling-Pond, where he angles for Fops,
singles out his man, insinuates an acquaintance, offers the Wine, and at next
Tavern sets upon him with high or low Fullams, Goads, etc. and so plucks my
Widgeon, and sends him home featherless.

Full fraught with this success, he steers his course to an Ordinary the day
following, and will be sure to be there about eleven, that he may the better
take notice of the voluntary uninvited Guests, who thither do resort, and
walking up and down scornfully and carelessly, selects some particular Person to
associate with in his traverses, such a one who may set him off, and publish
him better than the Playhouse, with whom he discourses much, no matter to how
little purpose, so that he make but a noise, and laugh in fashion; and changing
the Scene of his countenance, he clothes it on a sudden with grim looks, to
promise quarrelling, whether necessity or not require it: and to make himself
the more observed, he urges how frequently he has Duell'd, and not a Dutch
fight in which he has not been engaged; that, being Captain, he was forced to
shift his Ship twice, that De Reuter coming up, he made him with a warm
reception loof, and stand another way; that then the Prince hearing of his
eminent service in the Fleet, etc. here he stops, and cries, but no matter, I
scorn to trumpet out my own praise, though upon this very ground I was desired
to attend his Grace against Maestricht, that I was the next man that entered
after him, etc. Perceiving the untravell'd Company swallow down this glibly, he
plyes them with more stuff of the like nature, how he, as simply as he looks,
interpreted between the Emperor and the French King, and this he makes use of
as an Herald to proclaim his knowledge of Languages, if he has any, which he
prodigally flings about the table, but will hardly be induced to venture upon
Latin, it is too general.

Sometimes he will pretend to have great favor at Court, and then all his
discourse tends to the obtaining of suits, and cunningly sifts every man's
inclinations, who would make use of the interest of a Great Man to the King,
and having not so much Grace left in him as to blush, he thanks his kind Stars
in bestowing on him so great an influence over powerful men, though he knows in
his own Conscience he dares not (but only upon the privilege of handsome
fashionable clothes) presume to peep within the Court-gate.

Dinner being ended, which is commonly extraordinary, to entice Guests to come,
and though the Master loses by it, yet he knows he shall lick himself whole by
the benefit of the Box, I say after dinner the general proposition is play,
which crosses the Proverb, for though their Bellies be full yet they will not
let the Bones be at rest; Box and Dice are made ready and Waiters to attend.

Hear note, that the prudent Gamester will not swear at play, because it argues
a violent impatience of parting with his money, and betrays his want and
neediness, and, therefore, that none may undervalue him for his supposed
necessity, when he has lost his money, he sits down as patiently as a disarmed
man does, when he is in the hands of unmerciful Sergeants.

By daylight he can do little, and therefore patiently waits as an idle
Spectator till the nigh approach, at which time Beasts of prey do rove abroad,
and so do Rooks of all sorts, as Huffs, Setters, Biters, Cross-biters, etc. the
Candles being lighted, he then is busied in a continual motion from one Table
to the other, till he can discover some unexperienced person, and unskil'd in
the black Art and mystery of Gaming, whom the Wheedle calls a Lamb, and like a
Wolf does seize and prey upon him, by engaging him in some advantageous Bets at
first, to draw him on, and having won all his money, the common saying is the
Lamb is bitten.

He is a careful observer of the Winners, of whom it shall go hard but he will
borrow money by some plausible pretense. If he throws himself, he will
frequently let the Box-keeper go with him, that the Rascal, by violating his
trust for advantage, may lend him, when he sees good, a Tickler, that shall do
his business. If he sees a Winner dropping off, he presently closes with him,
and by wishing him joy in his success, and commending his prudence in leaving
off a gainer, as he pretendedly has done, he proffers him a glass of Wine, and
warming him therewith, makes him repay at the Tavern that kindness with the
loss of all he won, with what he had besides. If any time he thus picks up a
sure Bubble, he will purposely lose some small matter at first, that he may
engage him the more freely to bleed, (as they call it) and if he suffer him to
go off a Winner let him look to himself the next meeting, where Wine and good
Cheer shall be plentiful, but before he goes he shall pay for the roast,

When it grows late and the Table becomes thin, then is the time for the
Wheedle to use his Hocus Pocus Tricks, and if there be none left whom he
supposes bubbleable, to keep his hand in action, and that it may not cool, he
will venture his money among those of his own profession, and then cheat that
cheat can; these of late are called Rats, and when they thus engage, and
playing for Coats or Cloaks, wanting money, the winner then according to the
term of Art, says, he has bit of such a Rats tail.

I might enlarge my self very much upon this subject, but since it has been
treated of already, I shall forbear Cramben his coctam apponere, and refer you
to a Book called the Complete Gamester, discovering the manner of playing and
cheating in most Games, either originally our own, or foreign invention.

From the Ordinary we will wait upon this Wheedle to his Lodging, and observe
his deportment by the way; and first, if he meet with a drunken man, he will
offer him his assistance in conducting him home, and pay himself for the
trouble, either by picking his pocket, or pretend an abuse offered him, then
beat him causelessly, and finally rub off with an upper Garment; if a wench
chance to cross him, feigning himself more than half drunk, he swears dam him,
he will give her one Bottle, the silly Whore accepts of it, and then he carries
her where he is known; Venery is the least of his thoughts, it may be, some
deeper design is on foot, to get money; for having drank a glass or two, he
suddenly cries out his pocket is picked, the house is alarmed hereupon, and the
Master being his friend, she is threatened with a Constable, who conscious to
her self of former guilt of this nature (though not of this) dares not stand
the test, but parting with what moneys she has about her, is forced likewise
to leave a petticoat behind in Mortgage for further satisfaction.

In his going home, if he fear meeting with the Watch, he obliges the Drawer
to accompany him, and having given him his Lesson, approaching the Constable,
he falls a railing at his man in a language as lofty as High Dutch, because he
has used him so like a Rascal, in not giving him attendance, and vows the next
morning to pull his blew Livery over his cars, though he pay but eighteen pence
a Week for his Lodging, and that in a Garret. If he meets with the Grand Round,
he then orders his Will-with-a-Wisp to speak aloud, Sir John, will you turn
this way, or down that street; if he be alone, to escape the danger, he
pretends to speak no English, but has more discretion than one had, to tell
the Constable so in the same Language.

If he chance to go home seasonably to his new Lodging, (for his Rogueries
oblige him to change often) he then picks up some of his gentiler acquaintance,
and drawing near the door, he talks of none but Persons of Quality, with whom
he has been that day, and played a game at Cribbidge; about to enter his
Lodging, he salutes his Companions by no other Titles than Squire, or Sir
William, though all a pack of pitiful beggarly Rascals; and to raise himself a
further reputation in the house, he tells his Landlady, being more credulous
than her Husband, that he and his Shoal of Gallants swam through an Ocean of
Canary, that he danced so much out of heels, and that in Wild-foul there flew
away so much, and to confirm them in this belief, he before hand draws up a
large Tavern Bill-of-fare, and dropping it in the house, loses it on purpose
to be found, and read to the increase of his reputation.

He is very solicitous to get acquaintance with some of the Actors, not out of
any respect he bears to their Ingenuity, but to gain so far an interest in
them, as to be let into the house now and then gratis, and upon no other score,
than to pick up a Bubble, or some unpractised young Female, whom he pinches by
the Fingers, and cries, Damme, Madam, were you but sensible of that Passion I
have for you, you could not but instantly show some pity to your languishing
Vassal, this he utters at first sight, and if the first show him no
countenance, the next he comes at shall have the same Compliment; having trimmed
his Wigg and careen'd his Breeches, he cruseth to and fro the Pit, (not minding
the Players who Act their parts so well on the Stage, that Ladies send for them
to act in their Chambers) and never is at quiet till he has made prize of some
or other, whom he tows off to a Tavern, and there rummages the Hold at pleasure.

When he intends to go on the Pad, then Inns some time before are the chief
places whither he resorts, to get information of Hostler, Tapster or
Chamberlain what booties they can inform him of, and by knowing the time of the
Travelers setting out, and which way he goes, he knows accordingly when and
how to surprise him; it is needless here to insert what Wheedles the Pad uses
to effect his designs, since they are at large discovered in Clavels
Recantation, and in the life of the English Rogue, or the Witty Extravagant.

CHAP. VI. The Wheedles of a Quacking Astrological Doctor.
BEfore I shall relate to you how Doctor Cunning-man Wheedles with his poor
ignorant Patients, it is requisite I describe him by the way as briefly as I
can, acknowledging my self beholding to his Character ingeniously written by my
very good friend. This fellow is the fagend or Pug of a Conjurer, who wanting
courage, never durst look his Grand-Sire in the face, yet loves dearly to hear
of Him, and his infernal Relations; to that end he has got Cornelius Agrippa
by heart, and though he understands not Latin, yet he reads every day
Trithemius his Stegonographia, the better to imprint the names of his Brethren
in his memory, and to furnish his Mouth with such words as may become as
dreadful to the Non-intelligent as his exorcisms, or amagical Circle with
Devils crawling round it. By his serious looks he bespeaks the reputation of a
knowing man, and undertakes to tell other men's fortunes merely to supply the
pinching necessities of his own, and that he may avoid the censures of the
Vulgar, he by his Bills (which Chequer every pissing place) proclaims himself
Secretary to God and Nature, and the Stars Privy-Councillor, that it lies in
his power to jilt the Cabinet of the Destinies, and steal thence their greatest
secrets, whereas he is nothing but a mere Hocus, and his whole Art is but a
well contrived faculty or Legerdemain to bubble inquisitive and credulous Fools
of their money.

His natural impudence and a stolen Ephemeris set him up, and he begins at
once to be a Student and a Professor. No sooner has he learned the mystery to
erect a scheme, but he fancies himself a whole Sphere above Tycho Brahe, etc.
and thence forward his cloven tongue is tipped with Prophecy; let the discourse
be what it will, he still speaks Astrology, and never opens his Mouth but it is
bearded with a Planet.

Some say he took his beginning from a Cunningwoman, and stole this Black-art
from her, whilst he made her Sea-coal fires; whose impudence and ignorance so
suited with hers, that she could do no less than take him from that drudgery,
and employ him in a greater, by marrying him, and making him Copartner in her
secrets; if he will not condescend to this, she thrusts him out of his warm
Nest half fledgd, and rambling up and down, he knows not where, hardly escaping
the Cage, at length he percheth where some famed Figure flinger lived before,
and so raises himself upon his reputation.

To supply his defects in learning, he will frequently quote, Ptolomy, Cardan,
Eichstadius, Argol, and several others, yet never read his Accidence, however
he has raked together a damnable many hard words, with which he startles his
trembling Querents, who take them for names of his Confederate Devils; which he
conjures not up all at once, but intermixeth his discourse with Transition,
Direction, Schemes Profectional, Radix Genethliacal, Excentrick, Epicycle,
Sextile, Trine, Quartile, Acronick, Helio-centrical, and a thousand more words
as terrifying. I have often wondered why so many Knights of the Cross-legd Order
have been great Proficients in this deep Art and Mystery, it may be, sitting in
a Garret four stories high, they have the beetter opportunity to contemplate
the celestial bodies, and search out the meaning of their respective
Twincklings; But that which makes me wonder most of all, is that a parcel of
pitiful, debaucht, atheistical Fellows, should so frequently look upwards, and
perpetually pore on Heaven, busying themselves about a place they are never
like to come to.

His groundless Guesses he calls Resolves, and compels the Stars (like Knights
of the Post) to depose things they know no more than the Man in the Moon.

Some of them have so much practice they scorn to meddle with Theft, whereas it
is nothing but fear that hinders him from picking the Querents pockets to help
to his goods again. A poor servant that has lost but a Silver Bodkin must put
a shilling to his mouth before she can unskrew his jaws, and when she has got
them open, Baalams Ass spoke a thousand times to more purpose. Since Plate
triumphed so much in every petty Alehouse, he has been forced to use some
other means than his uncertain Art, and I commend him, he took an excellent
course for a more certain discovery of goods stolen or lost either by
maintaining a strict correspondence, with Budges, Gilts and Lifters, as some
raw young Physical Practicers, with applauding Midwives, and recommending
Nurses, or else by laying aside (into what house he comes) Bowl, Beaker, Spoon,
Tankerd, or any other thing he can, undiscovered, lay his hands upon: by the
first he keeps up his credit by the same Hermetick learning Mall-cut-purse here
tofore professed; and by the latter means he buoys it up to no less admiration;
for he tells them how and where it lies, to the Eastward of the house, in such
an Angle, under such and such rubbish. O Wonderful! but surely he that hides
can find.

At other times laying aside his Art, he has recourse to his never failing way
of sifting; if by subtle interrogatories he pumps out any thing from the
Querent, he is sure to remember it so as to make use on it; and to avoid the
suspicion that his prediction proceeds from conjecture, he spends some time in
scrawling out a Scheme, and plays the part of an Herald at Arms in ordering the
Planets in their proper places, but goes no further till he receive his money,
and herein imitates a Welsh Custom; The Minister at a funeral stops half way in
reading the Ceremonies for the deceased, and proceeds not till some Relation
pays him his fees and then goes on; then he begins to tell him back his own
Tale in other language, and he takes that for Divination which is but
Repetition, neither regarding ancient Rules or the true positions of the
Heavens, but follows his own fancy and says what he thinks will please most;
and sending home some brisk young maid big with the hopes of being speedily
married, she brings whole Shoals with her the next day to be resolved of the
same question.

In his greener practice he meddles much with stolen goods, but being arrived
to a Velvet Jacket, by the success of his Wheedling and crafty delusions, he
then sends his petty Clients to the young fry of the Astrological Art, and
reserves the better sort to himself to practice upon.

The young Gallant bribes him with a Guinny to know when his covetous Father
will have the civility to go to Heaven, and is so pious as to double it, if by
Art he can expedite his journey. The old toothless, stumpless, nay sapless Lady,
cannot be quiet till he has resolved her concerning the seventh Husband, the
Married that are wearied by length of time, and other ways, inquire which shall
dye first, Male or Female; the broken Citizen, flying confinement as a
Contagion, asks him which way he were best his course for advantage; a young
woman comes to know whether Mr. such a one will marry her to sawder up that
crack he made in her virginity; to all these he dispences Oracles with a
confidence equaled by nothing but his ignorance, and if any presume to scruple
his judgment, the room will be too little to hold him and them, and if they go
not voluntary out, it is ten to one he will be so saucy as to tell them, their
company is troublesome to his studious retirement.

Hell has not three such Ministers in all its territories for amorous
Intrigues, as the Midwife, Nurse, and this Astrological Bill-Doctor; for he
will Pimp for a Stallion if he will bring him on his back a load of Hay. He
will betray a considerable Fortune to a Footboy, and if he may go snips in the
portion, he knows an hundred ways how to effect his design; by furnishing the
young man with good clothes as Bawds do Whores, that they may ply their
business to the better advantage; then Wheedles with the Heiress, and tells her
at such a time a young man, so complexion'd, featured, formed, and in such a
habit, she will accidentally see as she is walking home, the Stats have decreed
shall be her husband, that there is no resistance to be used against their all
powerful influence, and that if she should be so imprudent as to oppose their
powers, she will never meet with the like opportunity, and die miserably and
unpittied in a single condition. If unhapily by his means two are conjoy'd of
different humors and conditions, and they condemn him for being the unlucky
instrument of their misery, he excuses himself and lays the fault on Heaven by
saying it is their destiny. He gives out that he is the only Love-procurer in
Europe, the noise hereof attracts to his lodgings every day whole Flocks of
Turtle-Doves of both kinds, who poor silly creatures buy his powder of
Cuckow-pintle for an excellent Ph^lter, who did they not use some better means
would never reap the enjoyment of their desired billing. He makes young Bubbles
believe he knows the Minute, the critical precise minute wherein it is
impossible for the chastest woman living to hold out, and to that purpose
appoints them meetings which shall be most safe and least obnoxious to
discovery.

Now as some Creatures are amphibious; living like Rats and Frogs both on Land
and water, so this cunning Devil of a Doctor is equally skilled at Scheme and
Vrinal, and fearing he shall want mouths to praise him (being conscious to
himself of his own defects and Inabilities) he opens his own wide, and where
ever he comes brags out his own eulogies in running over a long Catalogue of
what dangerous distempers he has cured, and lest what he tells every one
should not leave an impression deep enough in their memories, he Prints his
Bills so often upon tick, that he is forced to remove his Lodgings as often, if
for no other cause than to shun the incessant clamours of the needy Ballad
Printer. If by Wheedling he can cheat the people into an opinion of his
abilities, and make them believe he is a Scholar, because now and then he lards
his lean discourse with small slices of Latin, and by this means gets a little
money into his pocket, he then has the impudence of publishing a Book of
another writing, having neither Wit nor judgment sufficient to do it himself,
with his Picture prefixed, done by an Engraver whom he bribed to make it not
like but handsome, and as his stock increases, he will have diverse of them by
him cut in Brass, not half so brazen as his face, one in a Perriwig, another
without, one in a Coat, and the other in a Doctors Gown and Cap, although he
was never dubbed Doctor but by a License from the Commons.

When he is in the company of men he draws forth some of his Paper-Books, and
scatters them about, as a prodigal Goose flutters about her feathers, and then
with a loud voice and serious countenance, he relates what cures both internal
and external he has effected in such a County, and shows you in his book their
names printed, besides several written Certificates he carries about him,
pretending they came too late to be inserted. Thus he persuades the sound man
to make himself sick, if for no other reason than to experiment his famous
Physic; and you must not refuse to take a Box of his rare universal Pill, with
a Pamphlet to wait upon it, to keep the Viper from doing you any harm; sure it
must work wonderful effects in the body of man, since the supposed Author at
first knew not how to write the name he gave it, but past thus from him, and
the Printer, as ignorant as himself, Pillulae radiis Solis extractum, and being
laughed at for it, was constrein'd to bribe a boy of one of the lower Class to
reconcile the difference he had made between the Substantive and Adjective.

If he be in Female Society his discourse runs in another Chanel, but fouler
and polluted; for if he have not read the learned Rodericus a Castro de morbis
Multerum, or the sportive Italian Sinibaldus his Gyneanthropeia; he is sure to
con over and over the Man-Midwife, Culpepers Midwifery, etc. to furnish him
with the names of Women's diseases and their cures: and having sifted some
Servant of the house, who is sick therein, or disordered, according to the Age
and Distemper of the Person, he possesses the Mistress thereof with a strange
opinion of what wonderful feats he can do, as thus, if she has been married
any while and has no Children, he then whispers her in the ear that her Womb
is foul, and must be cleansed, for which purpose he has incomparable Pillulae
Foemininae of a purgative cleansing faculty, opening Obstructions of the lower
Region, and Vains leading to the Matrix and Privy parts, by which it takes away
the accidental causes of Barrenness, or he has a Pessary, if she please to use
it, etc. If he see any in the family that are troubled with the Green Sickness,
Suffocations of the Womb, Fits of the Mother, or the like, he has other
Feminine Pills, which infallibly carry all offending matter from those parts
incident to that Sex, and to forward or perfect the cure, he has Restaurator
Naturae (as it is called) being an excellent Spirit to restore Nature, to heal,
knit and strengthen, Reins, Loin, Womb, and Spermatick Parts, strengthen
conception, preventeth miscarriages, eases after pains; as for weeping of the
Womb, Whites, or Running of the Reins he has a never failing Pill, whose name
is not to be remembered without difficulty; in short, there is no disease,
belonging to the body of mankind, of which he pretends not the perfect cure,
and could he do all, or one half of what his Bills contain, we might then truly
say, that Miracles are not ceased yet, and we might allow him to boast his
knowledge in Medicine as he does, and should not blame him for saying, that
these remedies are prepared by a skilful hand, and rightly adapted from a true
and perfect knowledge of Nature, grounded on the soundest Reason and maturest
Judgment, and that, by long Experience, these Preparations are far beyond any
Elixir, whatever, and are not inferior to the best Arcanums in the Universe.
Admirable Operator! that can skin a Flint, make leaf Gold of the Rays of the
Sun, and make ten pounds in Silver from the powder of a Brick-bat.

As in cheating there is a Bonum utile, so in being cheated there is a Bonum
jucundum, the Wheedling Quacking Impostor, impressing an expectation more
pleasant than ordinary on his Patients fancies, which does not a little tickle
their dull Spleen, as rare Cordial Waters for languishing People, called by
strange names, viz. Elixir Proprietatis, Elixir Salutis, etc. restoring
Drooping Spirits to life and vigor, curing old and inveterate Consumtions,
Dropsies, Scurvies, and what not, cheers the heart, and are Health and Life's
Preservers, and prolongers. And, as I have heard some Mountebancks in a
Rhodomontado humor swear, he deserves not to practice Physic, that cannot at
any time plentifully supply his necessities with money gotten out of a
Brick-bat pulverized, so it is generally known how a Heel-maker arrived to an
estate of many thousands, by selling Barley water with a few drops of Spirit of
Salt in it. It is strange that Persons should suffer their Purses to be gelded,
and their Bodies Ana^^^^zed by an huddle of such Wheedling E(...)s, as the
Hatband-maker once of Moor*(...) G(...)smith in Barbican, and that old (...)
piece of Nonsense in South-wark.

Since the practices of such Ignoram^^es are of so general and dangerous a
consequence to such as use them, I shall now open to your sight the Skulls of
such as are commonly entrusted with your Health, where you may behold the
Wheels of their Brain framing subtle practices to drain your Dropsical Purses,
and play the Knave and Fool with your consumptive Bodies.

The Knacks and Wheedles of this Quacking Practitioner consists in three
Notions. First, that a Patients grievance is either a discernable evident
disease, which his own confession makes known what it is; or, Secondly, an
inward Pain; or thirdly and lastly, Endemick Diseases, as Scurvy, Consumption,
or Pox, this is his Theory, which is so deeply engrafted on his Dura Matter,
which he either acquires at home by a fourteen years study, after he has left
making Fires for some Chemical Operator, or abroad by his money, which he
gradually, or by little and little, stole from his Master, when sleep and the
sumes of wine had rendered him unsensible of the Cheat; it is no difficult
matter for a man's Coin to be dubbed Doctor in Foreign places, the formality
whereof most commonly consists in this, Accipiamus Pecuniam, and dimittamus
Asinum.

But now let us consider how he makes applycation of the aforesaid three
Notions. The Doctor demanding of his Patient the cause of his complaint, or
where his grief does lie, he replies, it may be, that he is troubled with
Vomiting, Looseness, want of Appetite, Cough, bad Digesture, Difficulty of
Breathing, Faintness, Jaundice, Dropsy, Gout, Palsy, Ague, Fever, etc. all
these are evident; if the Disease be not evident, the Dr. then concludes, it
must be either an inward Pain, or an Endemick Distemper. The Patient then
complaining of an inward Pain, the Doctor then falls to his old trade of
guessing, enquiring first in what part; if in the right side under the short
ribs, he tells him it is an Obstruction in the Liver; if in the left side, then
in the Spleen, if in the Belly, he calls it the Colic, if in the Back, he
persuades him it is the Gravel or Stone; if a Stitch in the Breast, he terms it
wind or Pleurisy; and if the Person be reduced to a poor and lean Carcass,
then he tells him that he is in a Consumption, but being troubled with several
pains at once, as want of Stomach, change of Complexion, Looking Yellowish,
Duskish, or Greenish, then Mr. Wheedle whispers him in the ear, that he is
troubled with the Scurvy, or if he have running sores, spots, pimples, or
botches in the Face, Arms, etc. or Nodes in the head, he calls that the Scurvy
too, if the Person have the discretion to behave himself as a sober discreet
man, that can go in, and come out of Brothels at such convenient times, and in
such various Disguises, that, with the help of a Muffling Cloak, he passes
undiscovered though he meet his wife at the Threshold; otherwise if the Patient
be youthful and inclined to Venery by his Complexion, then the forementioned
Disease must be called an inveterate Clap, or in down right English the Pox.

In Diseases of Women, the Mother or Matrix he accuses: If a Child, within the
space of six Months, be sick without the appearance of an evident distemper,
then he affirms it is troubled with the gripes, which, if not speedily
remedied, will turn to a Convulsion, but if that happen not according to his
prognostication, to prevent the forfeiture of his skill and repute, he then
cunningly acquaints the Mother it had inward fits, and so craftily Wheedls with
her, that she poor silly Woman verily believes it: if after seven months, the
Child be discomposed, it is the^ breeding Teeth; having bred all the Teeth, i^
it fall ill, then he avoucheth it is troubled with Worms.

Let us a little farther consider the subtlety of his fancy in groaping out the
cause of Diseases, which though clothed with the darkest Clouds yet by virtue
of this following Principle, he aims at this mark immediately, viz. that most
Diseases are caused by the four Temperaments; Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, or
abundance of Blood; of these, two are hot and two cold, and so are causes of
hot and cold distempers; now these four being reduced to two general Categories
under the notion of hot and cold, any one, having but the sense of
distinguishing Winter from Summer, may instantly appoint a cause for almost
every disease; hereupon the Patient complaining, Mr. Wheedle the Doctor has no
more to do but to take him by the fist, to feel whether he be hot or cold; if
cold, he summons in his cold causes, as Phlegm and Melancholy, which ready
pronouncing of the Cause upon a mere touch stupifies the Patient through
admiration of this Aesculapian Oracle, hitting him in the right Vein to an
hairs breadth, and upon this the Patient confesses that the Doctor undoubtedly
understands his Distemper; for every morning, (quoth he) as soon as I wake, I
spit such a deal of Phlegm, and moreover I am much inclined to Melancholy. This
jumping in opinions betwixt them makes the Doctor swell with expectation of a
large Fee, which the Patient most freely forces upon him, and so the Fool and
his money are soon parted; and it is two to one but both are disappointed, the
one in his judgment, the other in his belief; for suppose the Disease takes its
growth from Choler or abundance of blood, there is scarce one in an hundred but
is subject to spit in the Morning, and being reduced to weakness by his
sickness, and in continual pain, cannot otherwise choose but be Melancholy; for
mirth and cheerfu'ness seldom lodge in indisposed bodies.

I doubt I have been some what too serious for my subject in this discovery of
his physical knowledge, which is no more than what any ordinary Person may
arrive at in a very little time, only he has a greater stock of Impudence to
push him forward, subtlety to conceal his Ignorance in the Art and mystery of
Physic, and Craft to insinuate himself into Families and acquaintance, whom he
makes believe he can do wonders, and if he effect but one Cure in an hundred,
that Person shall be continually quoted (nay after death) for one among some
thousands on whom he has wrought miracles by his skill in Physic. Here I
might give you an account how he manageth a Stage to his advantage both in City
and Country, what Tools and Cattle he carries with him (for he is not so
confined to a Chamber but that he will sometimes mount the stage, whereon He
and Merry-Andrew play the Fool to please a company of gaping Fools and
Pick-pockets, but none so dexterous at that Art as the worshipful Mr. Doctor) I
say so much might be said concerning his practices on the stage, that it would
afford matter to fill a volume. How first his Buffoonries are exhibited in
public to attract the People, and having congregated a great many, Mr. Doctor,
who is in ken, comes and ascends the Stage, where having walked to and fro very
stately, and filling his hands with papers, and small vials, he then begins to
disgorge the names of those diseases he not long since swallowed, which, like
vomits, will no longer be contained; he then tells you what excellent Pills,
Plasters, Powders, Spirits, Ointments, Balsoms, Waters, and Elixirs he has
for all diseases that ever were, or shall be; how he did cut off such a Wen,
such a sore Breast, healed such an Harelip, and in confirmation hereof whole
crowds of diseased persons, cured by him, ascend the Stage, and confirm the
truth of his saying; to raise him further credit, he openly proclaims he will
cure the Poor for Gods-sake, but those who buy his ingredients shall in the
price pay for such Poor and themselves together. At length about to depart out
of the Town, wherein he has sojourned some time, and being on the Stage, he in
a studied Speech acknowledges to the People how much he has been beholding to
them, and, to express his gratitude, if the Poor will assemble here to morrow
(for he informs them he must go away that day) as many as come shall have
twelve pence apiece, the People with abundance of Poor assembled the next day,
and those that are able bought several of his ingredients, and fearing they
should never see this worthy charitable Doctor again stored themselves with
something of every thing he exposed there to sale; when he had done vending,
now said he I must be as good as my promise to the Poor, and so I shall, in
bestowing upon every one of them a shilling, look you then said he, here is a
Powder good for all Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, etc. the price I sell it for is
two shillings, I will take but one: here is a rich Cordial water, the price
half a Crown, I will take but eighteen pence, and so after that rate went on,
but when the Poor saw themselves deluded by this Wheedling knavish Doctor, they
began to handle his Stage so roughly, that had not he presently fled for it,
and mounting rode in all haste away, I know not but (like De Wit by the Dutch
Rabble) they would have made him a sacrifice to their revenge.

But (...) proceed, our Doctor Wheedles best by Proxy, (...) more succesfully;
for if he make a true so^^d on the Trebble of the females fancy, it will
p^^duce such a Harmony as shall sound his prais^ ^^^ough City and Country, and
indeed without ^^^^e female instruments, or she-trumpets it is (...) impossible
for our Doctor (notwithstanding his own Wheedles) to arrive to a famou^ (...)t,
who having once by the music of his (...) ^^chanted the women, does by the
same (...) ^ubiect the opinions of men to his advant^^^ (...) generally
usurping or impropriatin^ it of their husbands health to their (...): for if a
man chance to fall si^^ ^ his wife what Doctor he shall (...) gives her
direction to him ^ last.

(...) shows himself (...) in Genesis, who (...)nt first to k(...)

T(...) Wheedles with his female Patient. First, (as I have said before) if she
has had no Children, he pretends to put her into the way how she may have
them, than which nothing can oblige her more, most of the Sex being of Rachels
humor in some measure, Give me Children, or I dye. If she be with Child, he
tells her ways how to strengthen the womb, facilitate labor etc. If at any
time she seems to be disordered, He knows she loves to be told that she is
melancholy, though of never so merry a Composure, and in that part of the
Litany this Doctor is a perfect Reader; if she complain of drowsiness, want of
Stomach, Cough etc. he presently tells her that she is in an ill state,
attended with many dangerous diseases; which all proceed from Melancholy, or
probably, quoth he, from the unkindness of husband or Relations, which
instantly makes the Poor Heart put finger in eye, force a deep sigh, and all
this for being denied what she requested of him; this certainly assures her the
impression of that Melancholy to be the Original of her distemper, since her
Physician discourses to her as much, though some months or years past, and for
so doing admires him, withal intending to give an ample testimony to the World
of her Doctors profound skill: but this is not all, he pursues his business,
peeps into her eyes, where spying a small wrinkle or two in the inward or
lesser angle, he tells her she has had a child or two, then persuades her at
her last lying in her Midwife did not perform her Office skilfully, whereby she
received prejudice; by taking cold, displacing the Womb, etc. which instance
squaring so exactly with the premeditated sense and opinion of his She-Patient
(most women though never so well accomodated in their labor being prone to
call the behavior of their Midwife in question) he has now produced a far
greater confidence than before: and last of all to complete his work, now at
the exit, of his gulled or Wheedled Patient, of rendering her thoughts,
opinion, and confidence Vassals to his Service, same, and advantage, makes one
overture more of a great cause of some of her Symptoms, declaring to her she is
much subject to fits of the Mother, occasioning a choking in her throat: and
here also they jump in their sentiments, scarce one woman in an hundred but one
time or other is assaulted by those uterine steems, especially upon a Tempest
of any of her Passions, of fright, anger, love, etc.

In the next place let us consider this Astrologicophysical Wheedle, as he is a
Water-Gazer or Water-Caster also, who by the streams of the Urine pretends to
gratify his Patients nice curiosity of being resolved what was, what is, and
what disease is to come; and what is more, he sometimes by his great pretended
cunning aims to discover as much by the Urinal, as he does by the Stars.

By the way give me leave to relate you a story how an English Doctor at
Leyden, not many years since, promoted himself by his most wonderful sagacity
in Urins, hundreds, nay rather thousands repairing to this stupendous Oracle
to have by that means the state of their body described. Upon his arrival, at
the place forementioned, he had in his company a bold fellow that haunted the
most noted Taverns and Houses of entertainment, where by way of discourse
divulged the good fortune that was come to the Town by the arrival of an
English Doctor, whose great learning and particular skill in Vrins would soon
render him famous to all the Inhabitants; this being pronounced with a
confidence suitable to the subject, occasioned three sick Scholars (two
Hecticks and one Hydropical) then present, to make trial of the truth of his
words; the next morning, agreeing to mix all their several waters in one Urina
and commit the carriage of it to him that was Dropsical. In the mean time Mr.
Doctor is advertised of it by his Companion, which made him so skilful, that
when the Dropsical Scholar presented him with the Vrinal to know the state of
his diseased body, he soon gravely replied, that he observed three Vrins in
this one Vrinal, whereof the two lowermost parts of the Urine, appeared to him
to be consumptive, and the third that floated atop Dropsical, withal that their
conditions appeared desperate, and that at the expiration of six months they
should be all lodged in their graves. This admirable dexterity of discerning
diseases by the urinal was soon proclaimed by the Scholars themselves, who all
having finished the course of their lives within the prefixd time proved an
undoubted argument of his unparalled parts in the Art of Physic, which
immediately procured him an incredible concourse of people for many years.

That the effects of confederacy in promoting a Physician to a popular vogue
are as powerful as disingenious may evidently be deduced, not only from this
Narrative, but from the common design of vulgar Empericks, who to raise their
fame high as a Pytamid send forth several Mouthers to Mouth in all public
places, Taverns, Coffee and Alehouses their vast Abilities, expecting with
that bait to hook in as many Patients as will swallow it.

Sometimes, to counterfeit his great practice, he will order an Apothecary, or
some other, to call him out of the Church at an afternoon Sermon to hasten with
all speed to some suborned Patient, to the intent the People may be advertised
of the weighty business the Doctor is concerned in. At other times by
insinuating into the Speaking-men and Holders-forth in Conventicles he entises
a far greater employ, than his real capacity in Physic can pretend to, and
mounting himself there by turns tail to those who held the Stirrup to him; and
by his Equipage, eminent house, and by the frequent waiting of his hired
Patients on him, he gains so great a reputation in the world, as to purchase
quickly either an Estate or a Prison.

To sum up all, when he is in Company where he dares presume to talk, his
discourse is all Aphorisms though his Reading be only the School of Physic,
Alexis Secrets, or the Regiment of Health. The best cure he has done is upon
his own Purse, which from a lean sickliness he has made lusty and in flesh.
His learning consists much in reckoning up the hard names of diseases, and the
superscription of Gally-pots in an Apothecaries shop, and must be admired for
his going a Simpling annually. He is hardly languag'd otherwise than in
diseases, and speaks Greek many times when he knows not. He makes it one great
part of his business to intrude himself where Physicians of note are consulting
about some desperate cure; if he escape the ignominy of not being excluded the
society, and the Patient recover, his whole discourse for a month shall be, how
he and such and such Doctors of note consulting about a desperate recovery,
following his advice, the Person is now in good health though given over by
half the College, and this breeds his reputation, and that his practice.

CHAP. VII. Phanatick Wheedles of a Self-Edifying Non Conformist.
THe word Nonconformist includes all Separatists from the Church of England,
and therefore I have made use of it to the end I may not tire the Reader with a
character of the division of their Sects, and the several Fryes that are
contained under them, and seeing the distinctions would be infinite, I shall
not confound him with sub-divisions and new names: for every Sect takes up a
new Name with the old Villainies, they change the name but retain the Sin: he
that can persuade the People that from an old Sinner he is become a New man,
may under that disguise cheat with greater liberty, and by the Saints Practice
prove, It is lawful for the Saints to cheat the Wicked.

You may know this sort of Cattle by these Marks: their words and their works
do seldom agree; they are infinitely conceited and opinionated of their own
perfections and condemn all others. A Lie in their own or a Brothers mouth is
truer than truth it self in another man's. They suspect and conclude all men to
be wicked but themselves.

They begin all their mischiefs in the name of the Lord, and what is unjust in
another man's case, is most just in theirs. They will believe none but the
confiding men of their own party. In a word the world is their Stage, and they
act the Devils part thereon in the shape of an Angel of Light, a part that has
been acting ever since the world began, and will not be finished until the
worlds end. They are a People generally subtle, Frugal, and wary in their
dealing, by which, and their large pretensions to a punctual honesty, they have
engrossed a great part of the Nations Trade; and since that equivocation is as
common to them as Oaths and Curses to a Losing Gamester, he that deals with
them has need of more eyes then Poets bestow on Argus, for they out-wit a
Genoes for subtlety, and an Amsterdam Few may serve as their Apprentice, and by
their crasty trading can teach him how to make his best advantage: for, Self is
the Center whereunto the lines of all their actions tend, and like an Hedg-Hog,
wrapped up in his own warm Down, turns out bristles to all the world besides.
They would not appear in a plain habit but to gain thereby, and therefore it
was well observed by the Ingenious Satyrist against Hypocrites,

Meekness they preach, yet study to control.
Money they would have when they cry out, Poor Soul;
And angry, will not have, Our Father said,
Cause it prays not enough for Daily bread.A
Their Conventicles are but a holy cheat at best, where Extempore effusions,
Sanctified Nonsense, and ridiculous Fopperies flow as insensibly as excrements
from desperately sickPersons, and if any accuse them for their poor, flat,
jejune, impertinent, seditious and Blasphemous expressions, he is reviled by
them for abasing by Nicknames those precious Soul-piercing, yea Soul-saving,
heartbreaking, Sin-destroying, yea Faith-comforting truths: calling them
Boanergeses, Sons of Thunder, and so they are in some sense Sons of Thunder,
for, instead of Soul-saving truths, they thunder out Soul-destroying,
State-desturbing, King-reproaching doctrine: this they thunder out so
powerfully, that the Sisters, those Weaker Vessels cannot choose but fall before
them, and prostrating themselves, petition the ablest Members to stand to them,
professing their readiness at all times, especially in these days of more
Light, or rather more light days, to lay down themselves with their whole
substance, and though they may fall back a little, yet not totally fall away.

These are a parcel of Fellows who beat more on the Cushion than the Text and
make the Pulpit groan more than the Hearers; thus otherwise expressed,

Sans Compliment the precious man begins,
The suffering Pulpit groans for Isreal's Sins,
Sins which in number many though they be,
And crying ones, are yet less Loud than He:
Half melted, but more out of breath He cries,
Not knowing what to say, He wipes his eyes;
And then at last that he may raise new fears,
And make his Gang shake their mysterious ears,
All is not well he doubts --
He is much admired and beloved too for having the Art of Memory to retain
Nonsense; he speaks all by heart, never looking into his Book; indeed it is no
wonder, for it was a thing he never was accustomed to use. He will hardly
condescend (for fear of spoiling his reputation) to open his Bible when he
names the Text; and if he does it is,

-- As you will find it writ,
Repeats his Text, and takes his leave of it,
And straight to's Sermon in such furious wise,
As made it what 'twas called an Exercise.
It is impossible for him to make a Preachment, but that he must rail against
the Pope, calling him by an hundred more beastly names than the Grand Seignor
has titles, hating no Whore worse than her of Babylon; in the interim a prick
eared Brother is endeavoring to gratify the Old man with a kind green Apron
whom he has in view, and the bawling Impertinence being finished, he singles
her out, and by a Lecherous touch of the hand, under the pretense of a purer
salutation, he finds by her rampant pulse and tempting turning up of the Whites
that her desires are at flood, and so they retire together for mutual
edification.

The Speaker having raved two hours like Mahomet in his falling fits, or the
Devils Priests at Delphos (who never delivered their lying Oracles but with
extravagant gestures and strange destortions of body) he then consults his
carnal interest too, and will not privately in the company of friends refuse
the refreshing Bottle, provided it be not known in Gath, nor published among
the wicked of A^kalon, for he confesses the use of the creature (especially
when it comes on free cost) to be exceeding lawful.

There is a certain fellow called a Wet-Quaker, and rightly so named, for I
have seen him drink his liquor like a Fish, and after the same fashion without
passing the cup about; this man dares drink in public, whereas his preciser
Brethren do it only in private, and there is none of them all, of what Sect
soever, who desire not to fare deliciously and with plenty.

On Geese and Capons with what Zeal they feed,
And wondering cry, a goodly Bird indeed.
Their speech and habits they cannot endure should be like their Neighbors,
and are very curious to be in all things contrary to the common mode, that they
may be taken notice of for singular men, (only private venery and luxury
excepted) and are so stuffed with contradiction, that they will do nothing
commanded by Authority; so that the only way to have them do any thing is to
forbid them the doing of it on pain of death. Having screwed his face into a
religious form and tuned his voice to a puling sanctimonious Key, he uses it as
a Low-Bell to catch Larks, or rather such Owls as will be bubbled out of their
money, merely on the repute of his conscientious dealing; though by Yea and Nay
he will cheat worse than a Long-Lane Broaker; for the pretense of dealing at a
word is the Hook by which he draws in his Customers, and that which engages
them to come again to be cheated is, I tell thee plainly friend, and to let the
world know his punctuality to his word, if his Customer tells him he will not
give him so much yet returns and offers him his price he sends him away without
the commodity, yet with a reproof, saying, friend, I will not be guilty of thy
lie, yet values not his own; for though he will not swear, because it is
unprofitable, yet lies in many cases he holds venial, and in two meritorious,
either when they make for the interest of the beloved seed, or reflect scandal
on the Government.

Now since lying is so generally used and practiced among this sort of People,
give me leave to hold forth a little, and show you what pleasure and profit
they make of Lying.

Lying in general as it is nakedly, and abstractly considered, first implies
rest, for by this means we enjoy rest, that which all things even to the lowest
inanimates tend unto with a strong propension.

Secondly, Lying implies health, that is to say in women, according to the
French Proverb, La femme est bien malade quand' elle nese peut tenir sur le dos.

Thirdly, Lying implies pleasure that is, quand' l'homme Couche avec la femme:
but these are not the lyings I intend to insist upon, there are three other
sorts of lying which shall be my present subject, and they are the officious,
Jocose, and Pernicious lying,

First, an officious lying, and that is when a man lies with his own wife, but
this is a thing out of fashion now adays, and therefore I Will but lightly touch
upon it.

Every man that would be accounted honest, ought to lie with his wife ex
Officio, but this Age it seems is generally grown wiser, and will not tie
themselves to duty in this kind; Therefore the Italians say, Glihuomini da been
si maritano Glisavii no; honest men marry, but wise men tarry.

But there is another sort of Officious lying, hurtful to none, but profitable
to most men, and may be lawfully used sometimes; as thus, if a General of an
Army should see a kind of despondency in his Soldiers, and he encourage them by
telling there are auxiliary forces coming to their succor though it be false,
yet it may be dispensed with: Plato allowed a Lie lawful, either to save a
Citizen, or deceive an Enemy; this kind of Lying Abraham used with Pharaoh, and
Abimeleck, and his Servants, and the Hebrew Midwives in Egypt.

This is of such universal use, that there is no living for Tradesmen without
it, and it passes as a secret Maxim not to be denied among the Self-edifying
Brethren; No Lying, no Living: There are no wares scarce vended without it,
either at home or abroad; they think they can gain no Custom, without this
custom of Lying: oh says one, it cost me more, when you have bid money for a
Commodity; this is commonly practiced in the Exchange, where scarce any thing
is sold without the exchange of a Lie; and if you should seem to suspect the
truth of what they say, the woman will be apt to fall on you Tooth and Nail,
and you shall be pelted with the Hailstones of opprobrious words, which will
fall thick about your ears like Fishwomen, who rail at their Customers for
biding one third less than they demand, yet in that scolding raving fit take it.

In all Ages people have been so vicious, as to swallow a Lie glibly, if
benefit accrues thereby; when Livia the wife of Augustus the Emperor promised
Numerius Attieus five and twenty thousand Crowns if he would swear that he saw
Augustus Caesar after his death ascend into Heaven, think you he was so great a
Fool, nay Sot, to refuse so tall a Sum for an Oaths sake, no, no, Quis potest
tot armatis resistere. Nay the very Brotherhood (as I have hinted before) will
make no bones of being head of a Faction, nor will they Scruple to have for
benefit a hand in Faction.

There is lying too for credit, as well as profit, but such a one as tells a
Lie to save his Credit, wipes his Nose on his sleeve to save his Handkerchief.
I shall say no more of this first head of Officious Lying; the next is jocose
Lying; but since it is not much to our purpose, I shall skip it over, and come
to the third; and that is pernicious Lying, and this is twofold; one is when a
man Lies, and has neither pleasure nor profit by his Lying; he that is guilty
hereof deserves to be severely censured: the second is when one has a little
pleasure at first, and has dolor afterward; now this is such a Lying that is
destructive and hurtful to both parties; for Example, when a man Lies in the
Torrid Zone of a Betty Br -- -- or a Moll Sn -- - etc. or some other
prostituted vitiated she-bed-fellow, and gets such an heat that he can never
claw off again; this sort of Lying you see is very dangerous, and healths
destroyer, according to the Italian Proverb Quello che ha un pie in Bordello ha
l'altro nello Spedale: he who has the one Foot in a Bawdy House, has the
other in an Hospital. Those Persons that do so freely indulge themselves in
such wild ranges, little consider how much their desultory promiscuous
conjunctions do disturb the mind, and render it unfit to undertake serious
matters; they are so much for Generation work, that at the last they wholly
incapacitate themselves for the serving of their Generations; besides the many
mischiefs the body receives by those fatal venerable encounters, which are
often times the productives of Misery and infamy, which they intail to their
posterity; for though their stolen waters seem at first to be sweet, and you
shall have some Gallants in the apprehension thereof risque Fortune, honor,
nay, life it self, and all to enjoy a Miss, yet they will prove waters of Marah
bitter in the end.

To wind up all, I shall declare in the last place, that Lying is very
edifying, it tends much to edification, for by that means the Sisters being
wrought upon, will greatly increase and multiply, and they being extraordinary
plumpt up before, it is a pregnant argument of their thriving condition; now
you must know, they edify not alike under all Teachers, those that they most
edify by, are a certain confident sort of declamers, who mount the Pulpit as
Mountebanks do the Stage, with equal impudence and ignorance, they vent the
foolish and ridiculous whimsies of their distempered brain, for profound and
solid Divinity; they admire these most, and account them the ablest men,
especially that are of long standing, not caring how short they are of
understanding: much more might be said, but let this suffice for this time.

There are another sort of Godly Wheedles, who labor wonderfully till they
sweat again in their Weekly exercises, where a Fleet of Coaches arive laden
with sanctified Silk, and other rich Commodities to truck for Wind, as
Mariners at Lapland do with Witches.

These babbling Pains-takers are those Medusas heads environed with Snakes,
whose Carcasses are crammed with venom, and yet have such lovely flattering
outsides as would deceive Eve again if she lived in Paradise, and do beguile
her progeny to this day, whose Groans and Whinings have deluded more than
Mahomet and his Pidgeon: and with their laboring hands they have so molded
that silly Sex, called women, that they will receive no other form but that of
Nonconformity. They have heard their Teachers talk so often of the Rag of
Rome, that they think Popery a very sluttish Religion, and rail at the Whore of
Babylon for a very naughty Woman. They look upon it as a damnable Sin (if in
health) not to be present at Weekdayes Exercise, and esteem them above Sundays,
because devotion being customary, theirs is lost in the Multitude, and cannot
be observed.

At one of these meetings, how does the precious Man melt the strong and stony
hearts of the Sister-hood. Into how many forms does he distort his Face to
insinuate into the Auditory; he sometimes shuts his eyes so close as if he were
ashamed of himself, place and company, and then suddenly blasts them up, as if
he intended to caper through the Roof to be rid of them.

What an heart-converting sight is he in a Conventicle, when he heth exalted
himself and is doing Penance in the surface of a white Cap environed with a
long Mourning Cloak, which helps instead of an Hum or Ha to spend time by
pulling it forwards, first on one shoulder, than on the other, whilst the
unwilling matter which sticks below is pulled up and brought to utterance, and
then it is hard if any escape conversion, I mean of being converted to his use;
by his divine Rhetoric he conquers the men, and consequently must overcome the
women, and though his pretenses are Piety, for the most part, you shall find
his designs are nothing else but honor and profit; he endeavors to be admired
and esteemed by the Brethren as a precious Heavenly-minded man, whilst in the
mean time he aims at nothing more than self-interest: thus elegantly expressed by
a late Satyrist.

Two Caps he had, and turns up that within;
You Would think he were a Black-Jack tipped with Tinn,
Now when he did relate, how little wit
The Foolish Virgins had, then they do sit
Weeping with watery eyes, and making vows
One to have Preachers always in her house,
To dine 'em well, and breakfast 'em with Gellies,
And Candles hot to warm their wambling Bellies;
And if the Cash (where she could not unlock it)
Were close secured, to pick her Husbands pocket.
And as by all outward demonstrations of sanctity he endeavors to make himself
famous among such as are of his Congregation, so by his Example he teaches
them to gain a reputation one amongst the other by the same way of pretended
Piety, and that they may the more infallibly effect their design, they seldom
pray but it shall be next the street, and at such times as the noise in the
street shall not be so loud as their voices; and after evening Sermon it will
not be amiss for him to sing a Psalm, it will add very much to his credit, and
the continual practice of it, for ought I know, may keep him from being
Shipwrackt in the turbulent Ocean of his greatest misfortunes.

Here I might expose our Wheedling Saint to shame enough by discovering his
nakedness, and pulling off that Vizard-Mask with which he does deceive the
World: but when I consider that it is impossible to enumerate half his cheats,
and they are so frequently practiced that every one meets with them, I
purposely forbear any particular account, referring you not only to the History
of the late times, wherein they swarm, but likewise to your own experience.

To conclude, instead of a Catalogue I present you with a Chariot, which, like
Phaeton's, sets the world on fire. This Chariot is the Self-edifying Phanaticks
cheat I now speak of; the Wheels are the Ignorance of the People, and the
Admiration they have of him; the Horses that draw this Chariot are his Pride
and Covetousness; the Self-edifyer is the Driver, and a Conventicle is his
Whip. The Chariot has almost a Stage in every Town of all Countries, and
travels up and down the World being carried to every thing by the Horses Pride
and Covetousness.

The first Wheel is Ignorance, and this is a good Wheel, on this the Chariot
runs swiftly; where the People are learned the Chariot moves slowly; Letters
are like Clogs, and good Rudiments are such a But then it cannot stir; where
men are well educated in the principles of Religion this Chariot can hardly
pass, but amongst the Ignorant it runs post.

The Second Wheel is Admiration, which is as good as the other; for when he has
once insinuated himself into them, so that they have a good opinion of him and
admire him, then the Chariot gets ground and flies merrily, then all he says is
Gospel, nay more authentic than the Gospel it self, and having thus gotten
possession of their hearts, he can seize when he pleases any part or parcel of
their estates; and their whole families are at his devotion.

Of the Horses, Pride or Covetousness, I cannot tell which excels. Pride has
most Mettle, but Covetousness is the surest Drawer. To be applauded for
Excellent parts, for a Singular man, for a Gifted man, for a Leading man, to be
called Rabbi, to be esteemed a sure Guide of Souls, a true setter of
Conscience, to be wiser than those that follow him; to have liberty to speak
what he pleases, and that more to the Nodification than Edification of the
Beholders, these preheminences puff up, and make him presume to take the wall
of his Betters, and sp ak imperiously to his superiors. A little Pride many
times induces a great Cheat, yet this Horse is often jaded; for although our
seeming Saints ambition makes him aspire above Heaven itself, yet frequently I
have known, when Covetuousness draws one way and Pride another, Covetuousness
has got the better, and went away with the Chariot. To be Head of an Assembly,
Sole Teacher and Instructor is very acceptable; but a good Living, a Fat
Benefice has made our Saint leave them all, and be subordinate to legal
Authority; it is but Preaching a Recantation Sermon at most, and if the great
government should change (as God forbid it should) it is but face about again.

Thus have I known Mechanics lay aside their Trade being lazy or not able to
live upon it, and first turn seekers, and from thence travel through as many
Various strange opinions as there are in Ross's Pansebeia, at length, having
gotten by religious prating enough to subsist upon, have turned tail to all and
having tried all Religions have in the end acknowledged none: This again
according to the Saiyrist.

Every Mechanic, either wanting stock
Or wit to keep his Trade, must have a Flock;
The Spirit cries he moves me unto it,
And what the Spirit bids, must not I do it?
But profiting more than his Flock by teaching,
And stepped into Authority by Preaching,
For Lay-office leaves the Spirits motion,
And straight retreateth from his first devotion.
But to return where I left off, which was the Second Horse in this Chariot,
Covetuousness; this is it which makes him prey upon the Brethren themselves, he
has warmed their Zeal so hot by pressing the Duty upon them of raising Money to
build a Conventicle, they have contributed one would think enough to build one,
but that is not sufficient had it been twice as much, but more being raised,
the foundation is laid and the structure is raised but cannot be finished
without a third contribution, which is pressed, after the Sermon is ended, in
this or the like manner. Beloved, you are not insensible of the pains I have
taken to raise an house for the Lord for his glory and our mutual comfort, yet
all my endeavors will become as nothingness, I shall sink under the burden if
you lend me not once more your assisting hands. Beloved, in a Word, do as a
Widow did in this present Congregation; when she heard that the work of the
Lord was began, though a poor Cinder woman, she brought me five shillings,
professing she had but two groats left to buy her and her children food till
she had wrought for more, and I took it kindly from her; when she saw this good
work so nearly finished as you now see it, she then brought me ten shillings,
which she said was all she had, and I took it from her; Beloved, rather than
the work of the Lord should not go on but stand still as the Sun did in Joshuas
time, be as this poor Widow, bring again and again, and think not much to lay
out all for Christ, etc. This Conventicling house in now finished, which at a
distance appeared to me to be some Noblemans house newly built for the benefit
of the air, but when I was told it was a new erected Conventicle, it impudently
stood so near an orthodox Church, that I thought this fanatical Cathedral had
robbed Stepney of her Steeple.

Another had money sufficient given him to build a Conventicle, and when it was
built he made use of the House for himself, and turned the Brethren out,
telling them the House was not so convenient as he thought it would have been,
and that he knew of another place much fitter for the purpose, and wrought upon
them so that they made a new collection and built another House: and thus this
Self-edifier has served then so three or four times, converting their
Conventicles into dwelling Houses.

Ah, This Horse, Covetousness, is an unruly Beast, he draws our Saint to all
manner of Vices, to Lying, Hypocrisy, knavery in dealing, nay even to the sins
of the flesh; many yea many a time has he drawn our Saint to his Neighbors
wife, and there so kicked and frisked that he has thrown him upon her; ah!
threw him even upon her.

This Horse is so ungoverned that no man can live in quiet near this Saint, he
breaks down his Neighbors fences, eats up his grass and his corn, and is so
often taken damage fesant, that was he not a serviceable Horse, and very
profitable to this Saint, he would not keep him.

One faculty this Horse has which makes his Master highly prize him, he is an
excellent Stretcher of Conscience, take him in a morning when he is fresh, and
put him to the Self-edifying Saints Conscience, he will draw it so wide that
'twill swallow any thing. In the next place we come to the Whip, which is no
common whip, but a whip of many Cords most suitable to his designs, and that is
a Conventicle, and in which are many rich men, and they serve as so many Cords
for the Horse, Covetousness; in it are many Admirers of this Pseudo-hagist, and
they serve as so many Lashes for the other Horse, Pride. These motives are the
Spurs that prick on the Palfreys which hurry away the Chariot.

He is never so rampant as at a Conventicle; here his Pride snorts and prances,
spurns against Government, condemning and contemning all that are not of his
way, and scornsully pitting all those poor lost Creatures that gainsay a
Meeting House. Ah poor Souls! they live in sin, they are stupefied, and have no
sense of the joy and Refreshments that we have at our Meetings, etc.

In the mean time Covetuousness claps his Tail betwixt his Legs, lays his ears
close to his head and leers at the rich and wealthy Brethren. He pulls the
Chariot hard toward the Sisters Silver and Gold Bodkins, and with such
Concupiscence, that sometimes he gets Bodkin Sister and all.

It is fit I should now inform you how he handles his Whip, and the place where
Policy has taught him to put the Whip: That Alehouse, that Inn, that Tavern is
best situated, and most dexterously contrived that has a thorough-fair (as
it is called) in it, for by that convenience custom is gained; so our Saint that
has all the Tricks of a Tavern or Tipling-house, has likewise this, and
places his Conventicle where there may be a Common way or passage through it,
in hopes thereby to catch some silly Gudgeon or other that comes near his Net;
so Mountebanks gain Company: and he well knows that many persons fall into the
loose sport of Pidgeon-holes merely upon the occasion of passing by them.

In a word his whole life is nothing but an holy Wheedle, he prays with men at
home one day to beg or borrow the next; he preaches himself into a sweat till
he stink again in the Conventicle, that concluding his Sermon with a prayer for
the people, he may then use that opportunity to pray them to consider his
necessities, and having reminded them of their former liberal contributions he
then reproves them for slackning their hands. Ah! says be, are not these sad
times? Is not this a sad Age? When the Saints and Children of God are so slow
to good works. Mistake me not, the sadness does not arise from my want of that
abundance of money your liberal contributions used to suply me with, but from
this that your defect herein is a sign you are fallen from Grace, it is a sign
your Zeal is not so warm as it has been, it is a sign the Doctrine we preach has
not such an influence upon you as it ought, it is a sign of a dissolution, and
that the World will be at an end.

The Wheedle of the Shopkeeper.
MEthinks I see him standing at his Shopdoor this cold Weather, either blowing
his fingers, eagerly waiting (if he be a young Man) for one kick at the Ball,
or basting his sides with his own hand, and so makes every cold day a
Good Friday to chastise him for the sins he has committed. If any person pass
by him, and but looks into his shop, he fondly imagins him a Customer, and
entreats for his own necessities by asking others what they lack; if any chance
to step in, he has Hocus tricks enough to delude them, and rarely shall they
stir out, like sheep engaged in Briars, but they shall leave some Fleece behind
them.

Some have dark shops, with false lights, which wonderfully set off a
commodity: others for want of that make use of their tongues, arogantly
commending their own things, and protesting whatever they exhibit to view is
best in the Town, though the worst in his shop; his words are like his wares,
twenty of one sort, and he goes over them alike to all Comers; and when he has
done with his yard, he invites you to the Tavern, to oblige you for the future;
you may there soon measure his understanding, which extends no further than the
Longitude of his shop, but for the latitude of his Conscience it is as little
known as the North-west-passage: Others say that he has no such thing now as
Conscience; for finding it a thing that was likely to lie upon his hands, he
was forced to put it off, and in its stead took upon him the pretense of
Religion, that by the profession thereof he might take the greater liberty of
Lying, which he does by rote, having spent most of his time in learning that
Art, and the language, and crafty phrase of selling dear, and that to his
friends, and acquaintance, rather than other persons, knowing he can make more
bold to cheat them, than Strangers; from hence you may gather that he never
speaks more truly than when he says he will use you as his own Brother, you may
believe him, for he will not stick to abuse the nearest Relation he has in
this kind, and in his Shop thinks it lawful. He is commonly of that Religion
which brings him in most Customers, and is never more angry at others tenets,
than when they bring him in no profit, and so by a mis-interpreted sense of
Scripture, to him Godliness is great gain. How obsequious, and full of cringes
he is to him that pays ready money, but where he does befriend a man, he is a
Tyrant, and by his frequent duns makes a man weary of his native Country. One
thing I like in him very well, he takes special care of not letting Conyes
borough in his Shopbook, knowing 'twill be hard ferretting them out again.

In he be rich, he not only commands a credit, but has the benefit and
previledge of paying his money when he pleases, and the poor Creditor many
times when necessitated for it dares not make a demand for fear of losing his
Customer; the intrigues of buying and selling are infinite, nor is it possible
for any to enumerate them but A Jack-of-all-Trades; Wherefore I shall leave him
with all his tricks, and delusive devices, and come to the poor cracking
Shopkeeper, whose credit being out at Elbows, what hard shifts does he make to
keep himself from sinking, and lays hold on every petty thing that is next him;
like a Lover, he is so continually tired with breaking of Oaths, Faith, Vows,
and promises, that he has neither time, nor strength to perform any other
exploit.

A Saturday is the Mclancholiest part of the whole Weck, not so much by reason
of the frappish, and humoursom Planet that governs it, but by reason of too
many insufferable Dunns who tread the streets in terror, and that is the reason
some Citizens can as well be hanged as keep out of Nine-pin-houses in
Moor-Fields on this day, to be out of the sight of those ghastly apparitions
that haunt their Ghosts at the heel of the Week. Poverty, and Necessity, the
God of the Andreans, that could stop the mouth of Themistocles, cannot appease
the wrath of a City creditor, whose empty money bag twisted about his hand is as
killing as a Gorgons head; and therefore it is well the poor man is out of the
way, and is only practicing those sports which are like to be his only
livelihood in short time; and what a kindness it is for a man to be removed
from the cares, and labors of this world to the sweet pleasures of drinking,
smoking, and other sportive recreations.

It Is well these Desperado's in Estate are not so strong as Sampson, for they
would then not put their Landlords key underneath the door, but take away key,
house, and all. What abundance of Travelers should we meet upon the Road with
Houses, and Shops furnished? And what Landlord seeing a man standing on the
Seashore with his house upon his back, swearing he would send it to the bottom
of the Ocean, but would come to any composition? Besides they were out of the
reach of the Law; for there is no Statute in Bolton against removing Houses, so
a man carry them whole without breaking; but the lineaments of Fate are
certain; the Cobbler cannot go beyond his Last: therefore now adays it is better
for Debtors to fall to their prayers, beseech, as Daniel out of the Lions Den,
or Jonas out of the Whales belly.

I shall conclude with a word of advice, he that has a Creditor over-cholerick,
let him not be too hasty; for it is time, and Straw that mellow Medlors; but
should thy Adversary make use of a Lawyer, do thou make use of a Lawyer and an
half, and having brought thy Noble to Nine-pence, never spare at the bottom,
and having whitten thy Mil-post to a Pudding-prick, in the full of the Moon go
hang thy self, lest Poverty and cold Weather overtake thee napping together.

CHAP. VIII. The Practicing APOTHECARY;
IN Galens time, and many Ages after him; Medicines, for their greater secrecy,
were prepared and composed by Physicians only; but people growing numerous, and
diseases increasing by intemperance, their multiplicity imposed a necessity
upon Physicians (being unable to attend all their Patients as formerly) to
dismember their Art into three Parts, the servile into Chyrurgery and Pharmacy.

The Physician (as I said before) having variety of Patients, and having not
leisure to make up his own Medicines, caused his servant to setch them already
prepared from the Apothecary, and from thence to convey them to the Patient, by
which means the Apothecary was kept in ignorance, as to the Application and Use
of the said Medicines, not being suffered to be acquainted with the Patient,
nor the Diseases, lest they should presume to venture on Practice. In time, the
Physicians honor and vast riches in the eye of the Chyrurgion and Apothecary,
proved seeds sown in their minds, that budded into Ambition of becoming Master,
and inro covetousness of equalling them in wealth, both which they thought
themselves capable enough of aspiring to by an Empyrical skill, the neglect of
their Masters had given them occasion to attain unto, for they sent them to
their Patients with Medicines, and did entrust them with the preparation of
their greatest secrets.

This trust they soon betrayed, for having insinuated into a familiar
acquaintance with their Patients, persuaded them, that those that had made and
dispensed the Medicines, were able to apply them to the like distempers, as
well as they that had prescribed them; by this means they arrived to a
Copartnership with their Masters in reputation, title and estate, and having
got enough, they scorn to take pains by manual operation, as formerly, but leap
boldly out of a shop into a Doctorship. The Booksellers original in some
measure runs parallel with the Apothecaries: Before Printing was there was
Book-binding, for what Manuscripts were then in being, were made public by
transcribing them, by certain Clerks writing a good Hand, and made a livelihood
thereof; the written Books were conveyed to the Binder, who bound them after
what manner the Owner directed him, as Authors and Books increased, so did his
profit by his Trade, insomuch that some of these Binders g w rich, and
purchased so many Manuscripts as to furnish a Shop indifferently according to
those times, and dying left their sons well stockt; but Printing comeing in,
broke the neck of the writing Clerks, but yet gave a considerable lift to the
rising Book-binder, who not only bound for others but himself, and Printing his
own Copies, had work enough to do to bind his own books, his stock increasing
by the benefit of Printing, it was business enough for him to mind his Shop,
and see that his servants pleased his Customers, and now resolves to work no
more: His sewing-Press lies moldy in the Garret, his Plow neglected lies, and
his Knives rust; the skrews of his standing and his cutting-Presses have forgot
their wonted duty, and stubbornly will not stir an inch for any; his
Marble-moody-beatingstone weeps incessantly to see the weighty Hammer lie
rusting in a corner unregarded: In short, if he work it is for his pleasure,
and what pains he takes now and then in binding of a book is his Pastime. The
Son after his Fathers Decease scorns the mean Title of a Bookbinder, and
therefore employs others, and is henceforward styled a Bookseller; and the rest
of his Brethren, who are able, follow his example. Thus, as Binding formerly
was the Rise of a lazy Bookseller, so many a Doctor now adays had formerly a
hand in scouring the skillets, and having with slavery and difficulty served
his time, set up, but having very little interest in the Doctors of the
College, and other Grandees, whose single Practice is enough to make an
Apothecary, he takes pet, and leaving his shop out of spite, takes at first a
Chamber, and hangs it with Pots, Glasses, Boxes, etc. and the ruins or remains
of his broken Profession, and by them and his Bills gets the reputation of an
able Doctor.

And now give me leave to touch a little upon his Wheedles. Suppose your self
to be troubled with any distemper, it matters not which, for all is one to him,
or his like you send to; upon his Arrival he feels your Pulse, and with a fixed
eye on your countenance tells you your spirits are low, and therefore it is high
time for a Cordial. The next Interrogatory he gravely puts to you, as, When
were you at stool, Sir? If not to day, he promises to send you a
Laxative-Glister by and by; and if you complain you have a Looseness, then in
stead of one Laxative, he will send you two healing Glisters: if besides, you
intimate a pain in your stomach, back and sides; then responding to each pain
you shall have a stomach-Plaister, another for the right and left side, and
another for the back, and so you are like to be well patched or clowted every
way.

Now before we proceed, let us compute the charges of the first day: Here is a
Cordial composed by the directions of an old dusty Bill on his File, out of two
or three mustie Waters, especially if it be toward the latter end of the year,
it be a Citron, a Borrage, and a Bawm water, all very full of spirits, if
River-water may be so accounted; To these is to be added an ounce of that
miraculous Treacle-water, then to be dissolved, an ounce of Confectio Alkermes,
and an ounce of nauseous Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers; this being well shaken
in the Viol, you shall spy a great quantity of Gold swimming in leaves up and
down, for which your Conscience would be burdened, should you give him less
then five shillings for it; from the meanest Tradesman, without the least
abatement, he expects three shillings six pence. The Glister shall be prepared
out of two or three handfuls of Mallow-leaves, and an ounce of common
Fennil-seed, boiled in water to a Pint, which strained, shall be thickened with
the common Lenitive-Electuary, Rape-Oyl and brown Sugar, and seasoned with
Salt; This shall be conveyed into your Guts by this young Doctors man, through
an Instrument he commonly carries about him, which makes him smell so wholesome,
for which piece of service, if you present your Engineer below half a Crown, he
will think himself worse dealt with then those who empty the Close-stool-Pan.
The Master places to account for the Gut-Medicine (though it were no more then
water and salt, and for the use of his man which he calls Porteridge) eight
groats. Item, for a Stomachick, Hepatick, Splenetick and Nephretick Plaster,
for each half a Crown. The next Afternoon or Evening returns the
Doctor-Apothecary himself to give you a visit, for should he appear in the
Morning, it would argue he had little to do, and finding upon examination you
are rather worse than better, by reason those Plasters caused a melting of the
gross humors about the bowels, and dissolved them into winds and vapors,
which fuming to the head, cause there a great pain with dullness and
drowsiness, and part of 'em being dispersed through the Guts and Belly,
discommode you with a Cholick, a swelling of the Belly, and an universal pain
or lassirude in all your Limbs; thus you see one day makes work for another.
However he has the wit to Wheedle you into an opinion that they are the signs
of the operation of Yesterdays means, beginning to move and dissolve the
humors; which successful work is to be promoted by a cordial Apozem, the
repetition of a Carminitive Glister, another cordial to take by Spoonfulls, and
because your sleep has been interrupted, by the unquietness of swelling
humors, he will endeavor to procure you for this next night a Truce with your
disease by an Hyprotick potion, that shall occasion rest. Neither will he give
you other cause then to imagine him a most careful man. and so circumspect that
scarce a symptom shall escape his particular regard, and therefore to remove
your Headache by retracting the humors, he will order his young Mercury to
apply a Vesicatory to the Nape of your Neck, and with a warm hand to besmear
your belly and all your joints, with a good comfortable Ointment for to appease
your pains. The Cordial Apozem is a Decoction that shall derive its virtue
from two or three unfavoury Roots, as many Herbs and Seeds, with a little Syrup
of Gilly-flowers, for three or four times taking, which because you shall not
undervalue, by having it brought to you all in one Glass, you shall have it
sent in so many Viols and Draughts, and for every one of 'em shall be placed
three shillings to your account, which is five parts more then the whole stands
him in; for the Cordial potion as much, and as much for the Hyprotick; the like
price for the Carminative Glister; and for the Epispatick Plaster a shilling.
Thus with the increase of your disease, you may see the increase of your Bill.
The third day producing an addition of new symptoms, and an augmentation of the
old ones, the Patient stands in need of new comfort from his Doctor, who tells
him that Nature begins to work more strong, and therefore all things go well;
but because Nature requires all possible assistance from Cordials and small
Evacuations, he must expect the same Cordials over again, but with the addition
of greater Ingredients, it may be Magistery of Pearl, or Oriental Bezoar in
powder, the former being ofttimes but Mother of Pearl dissolved in distilled
Vinegar, the latter a Cheat the Armenians put upon the Christians, by ramming
Pebbles down a Goats throat, afterward killing him, and extracting the stones
before witness out of his Maw, which they sell for those rare Bezoars, whereof
the quantity of fifteen Grains has been taken by a Child of a year old, that
lay ill of the Small Pox, without the least effect of Sweat, or any expulsion
through the Pores. And besides, the repetition of a Glister, and the renewing
of your Plasters for the profit of your Physician, you must be persuaded to
accept of a comfortable Electuary for the stomach, to promote digestion; of a
Collusion to wash the slime and filth of your Tongue, and to secure your Gums
from the Scurvey; of a Melilot plaster to apply to the blister that was drawn
the night before; of some spirit of Salt to drop into your beer at meals; of
three pills of Ruffi to be swallowed down that night, and three next morning,
which possibly may pleasure you with three stools, but are to be computed as
two Doses, each at a shilling: the spirit of Salt a Crown the ounce; for the
Stomach-Electuary as much, for the Glister as before, for your Cordial in
relation to the Pearl and Bezoar, their weight in Gold, which is two pence a
Grain, the greatest cheat of all; for dressing of your blister a shilling, for
the plaster as formerly. Now if you shall reflect on the Total, that shall
arise out of this Arithmetical progression of charge of a Fortnights physic,
modestly computed, at fifteen shillings a day, without the inclusion of what
you please to present him for his care, trouble, and attendance. I will not
harbor so ill an opinion of him, or give so r'gid a censure as your self
shall, upon the following Oration, your Glister-pipe-Doctor delivers to you
with a Melancholy Accent in these terms: Sir, I have made use of my best skill
and endeavors, my Master was one of the ablest Apothecaries in and about
London, whom I faithfully and carefully served eight years, in which time, and
since I have administered for my self, I have seen the best practice of our
London Physicians, and I Will assare you I have given you the best Cordialls that
can be prescribed, yet all will not do, your case is dangerous, and I think if
you send for such a one, Doctor -- he is an eminent man, and one I know very
well. Now would I fain know how the Patients pulse does beat, to hear this
practicing Apothecary preach him his Funeral Sermon whilst he is yet living,
and the loss of his money cannot but add to his pain, had he not at first been
penny-wise and pound foolish, he might have prevented all this by sending for a
Physician, who for the small merit of a City-Fee, would have struck at the root
of the Distemper, without tampering at its symptoms and branches; and now
should this Apothecary be called to an account, as to what he has administered,
he shall answer (I warrant you) that he has given him nothing but Cordials,
which word Cordial, he supposes to be a sufficient protection for his erroneous
Wheedling-practice. Should this his Cordial-Method be continued in a Fever, or
any other acute distemper, for eight or ten days, the Patients Heirs would
have been particularly obliged to him for giving him so Cordial a remove out of
his possession.

Lest I should be accused of Partiality, by concealing what may be pleaded, for
the practice of Apothecaries, I shall conclude this Chapter with a short
Apology; for so doing, in the first place consider that many a substantial
Citizen may have the ill luck to have a servant taken sick in his house, why
should he upon every slight occasion or accident fling away ten shillings on a
Doctor, when an Apothecary, at a venture, by Vomit, Purge or Glister, may for
the charge of a shilling or two remove the Distemper, his success herein
sometimes makes him bold and confident, especially considering that he
practices on his inferiors, for if they miscarry he excuses whatever error he
has committed, by asserting he was importuned, or rather forced to it by their
Master. On the other side, should an Apothecary, being thus called unto a sick
servant, or a mean Tradesman, whose condition by reason of his charge of Family
is little better, refuse this assistance, disobliges the Master, loses the
practice of his Family, and turning away his Patient, shall immediately send to
the next, who shall most willingly embrace the employ; whence may be observed,
the one necessarily fpurs on the other to practice, and he that can wheedle
best skrews himself into most Families. A third import greater then any of the
former is, that Doctors all or most, being tied to particular Apothecaries,
prescribe their bills in terms so obscure, that they force all chance Patients
to repair to their own Apothecaries, pretending a particular secret, which only
they have the Key to unlock, whereas in effect, it is no more then the
commonest of Medicines, disguised under an unusual name, on design to direct
them to an Apothecary, between whom and the Physician there is a private
compact of going snips, out of the most unreasonable rates of the said
Medicines, wherein if a redress be sought by showing the bill to the Doctor, he
shall most religiously aver, it is the cheapest he ever read, the consequence
whereof is a double fraud, but they have greater, or it would never be said,
Three goed Patients in the Spring makes the Doctors Pot boil all the Year.

And as to the Apothecaries in general, their number bearing the proportion of
at least ten parts to one of noted Physicians, to whom allowing each his
Covenant-Apothecary, who constituting but one part of the ten, the remaining
nine parts of the number, are compelled either to sit still, or to Quack for a
livelihood; or at least eight of 'em, for we'll one part of the nine in a
possibility of acquiring competent estates, in a way more honest then that of
the Covenanteers, by their wholesale trade of fitting Chyrurgions Chests for
sea, and supplying Countrey-Apothecaries with Compositions.

And now to conclude, I must not omit the injuries the Covenant-Apothecary
does, not only to the ignorant Patient, but the learned Physician, by his
ignoble wheedling and insinuation. Being sent for by a Patient, after a short
Essay of a Cordial, he instantly overpowers him by persuasion, to call in a
Doctor who shall be no other then his Covenant-Physician, by which means the
former Physician, that by his extraordinary care and skill had obliged the
Family before, shall be passed by, and lose the practice of that Patient. And
should it happen, the sense of gratitude of the forementioned Patient, should
engage him to continue the use of his former Physician, yet this
Covenant-Apothecary shall privately cavil at every Bill, and impute the
appearance of every new small pain or symptom, (which necessarily in the course
of a Disease will happen) to his ill Address in the Art of Physic, and shall
not give over before he has introduced his Covenanteer, whose authority in the
fraud of a Physick-bill he supposes to be most necessary.

I might have insisted on the excellency of form and feature of an Apothecary,
relating how many advantages he has over others of his occupation, that has a
face and body so well qualified; but since it is of general use to all Wheedles
whatsoever, I shall say no more then this, that if an Apothecary be handsome and
young, he has an infinite influence over all the Females wheree're he comes,
and rather then be without bewitching visits, they will be sick on purpose; if
sick some are, the sight of him works more healingly then his physic, and in
their hot distempers, were it not for shame, they would deprive the Women of
their wonted Office, and none should administer them a cooling Glister but
himself.

CHAP. IX. The Countrey-Attorney, Pettifogger, and other Law-Hangers-on.
THE Inns of Court are the General Rendez-vouz of young Gentlemen from all
parts of England, some whereof are not more noted for their Extraction, as for
their Education, excellent Parts and Learning; yet as the purest flower has
some bran, so these refined Wits are not without the mixture of talkative,
impertinent, trifling and debautched persons; Here it is that you may see in a
Winter-Tearm, at Dinnertime, in their Halls, a drowsy Company of formal
fellows, stand purring over a fire, who after a long and painful study, of
thirty years have attained to the wonderful and gainful ^rt of speaking
nonsense, with the greatest confidence in the world, and when they walk, to
carry their eyes and noses directly before them, not daring to turn their
weighty noddles on either side, for fear of forfeiting their Gravity. There are
another brood of men, who start from the Desk; and snatch up a Gown, and having
first in their infancy been swadled and nursed up in rags of paper, are at
riper years (sometimes out of Poverty) put Clerks to Attorneys, from whence,
without the least taste of University-Learning, they advance, swelled with
Presumption, and full of ignorance and impudence, to the Bar; profit and lucre
then becomes the only subject of their conversation; Gain gives motion to all
their actions' and that also is the end of all their Arguments, whilst Reason
and Honesty are often made Factors to their avarice; if ever you have occasions
that force you to make use of these Persons, or to seek any favor from them,
they expect from you the greatest attendance and submissions; but where money
is to be gotten, they on the contrary will be as base and servile in their
flatteries; how repugnant soever this is, you must dispose your self, (if you
intend, as well as they, to act the Wheedle advantageously) and when your
thoughts are at strife about it, call it a submission to necessity and
occasion. Vide L' Art du Complair, elegantly translated, and called The Art of
Complaisance. Lord, one would wonder some of these Upstarts should so strut it
in Gown and other Finery, since their ancient beginning was but a blew Coat,
and as I have been told, the Wearers thereof stood at the Hall-Gate, as Plying
Watermen at the Stairs; And as the one cries to London-hay, the other cried
(seeing any approach) Do You want a Pleader, do you want a Pleader? My young
Attorney, newly hatched under a Lawyer, and whilst but pen-feather'd, nests for
himself, and either practices in another name for half-fees (which he makes
whole by acting too as a Solicitor) or else by the hoorded pence of an
indulgent Mother, purchases an Office, two Desks, and a quire of paper, with a
pint of Ink, and an hundred of Quills, and a Penknife true set, set him up;
his Office shall be lined with green, and the wood adorned with Taffarels and
carved work, his shelves filled with paper and parchment, and a Practice of
Piety lies not more certainly in a Brothel, as The Statutes at large, or some
Folio Law-book in his window; These in time purchase him an App^entice or two,
with a considerable sum, and his success in two or three common Causes proclaim
him an able Attorney; this procures him Clients, more then he can mind, and
they produce him money, more then he knows well what to do with, and having
gotten a wife with a good estate, minds the Tavern more than the Court.

Some of them have the smatch of a Scholar, and yet use Latin very hardly, and
lest it should accuse them, cut it off in the midst, and will not let it speak
out; and fearing that his Handwriting should prove Traitor to his actions, it
is as difficult to be understood as his countenance, which always looks
sollicitous, (unless disordered by some liberal Treat, it matters not at whose
cost, whether Plaintiff or Defendant, so that it brings in Grist to the Mill,
and benefit from both sides) I say, to amuse the ignorant his looks seem
careful, importing much have and dispatch, whilst he only waits for an Habeas
Corpus to delay the Suit for three Terms, and that he may not be suspected as
idle or little employed, he is never to be seen without his Hands full of
business, that is, of paper: to illustrate what I have said, I must not omit
the insertion of this Example. B was Arrested at the suit of A, B advised with
an Attorney what to do, not having Bail, he replied, Give me my Fee, and I Will
appear for you, and save you the trouble of Bail: The Term following, a
Declaration is Filed against the Defendant, who thereupon consults his
Attorney, and he cries nothing, but Give me my Fee, and I Will defend it; He
delays the Suit till next Term, at which time he must plead, and then calls on
his Client for money to that end and purpose, besides his own Fee afresh; the
Assize coming on, the Cause proceeds to Aniall; then cries the Attorney again,
Give me my Fees for Counsel and charge of the Court, and I Will defend it; At the
Trial, a Verdict passes for the Plaintiff. Oh! What must be done now, cries
the Defendant? Then says the Attorney, The Declaration is naught, I Will move the
Court this next Term in Arrest of Judgment. The Motion being made, the Court
confirms Judgment; And Execution thereupon is coming out; What shall we do now?
cries the Defendant, We are lost, undone, quite undone: Not so yet, cries the
Attorney; Give me my Fee, and I Will bring a Writ of Error, and keep off
Execution two or three Terms. But now observe, the Error is at length argued,
and Judgment affirmed thereupon for the Plaintiff, with increase of Costs,
for the Delay, no Error being found in the Proceedings, the poor Defendant, at
his Wits-ends, not knowing what to do, with a face more miserable then the
first lines of an Humble Petition, asks his Attorney, What he shall do now?
Have any moneys, cries the Attorney? If so, we will get an Injunction, and
bring it into Chancery. Here it may be the Cause hangs three or four Terms; at
length, no Equity being found, the Complainants Bill is dismissed with Cost
allowed to the Defendant; hereupon the Client, willing to purchase more Advice,
asks, What must be done now? the Attorney having no more delays to make
advantage of, with a shrug in much haste, cries, There Is no more to be said, Go
pay the Knave his money, he is a Rascal, and I Am satisfied. Thus Hudibras in
Rhyme Burlesque.

So Lawyers, lest the Bear Defendant,
And Plaintiff Dog should make an end on it,
Do stave and tail with Writs of Error,
Reverse of Judgments, and Demurrer,
To let them breath a while, and then
Hoop-and so set 'em on again.
But to proceed, I say his face seems as intricate as the most winding Cause,
and talks of nothing but Statutes, Presidents, Reports' and the Lord knows
what, as if the first time he had mooted, was when he was in Hanging Sleeves,
and that from that time he had fed on nothing but what a Judge had Cooked for
his learned Stomach, whereas he had no other Porridge-pot but his Ink-horne,
which could not boil him sustenance, but for the fuel of his deluded Clients.
All his actions, words, and gestures are very stiff, and affectedly
constrained, his conversation is obstinate, and full of Contradiction, and
contrary to the pliable Complaisant wheedle, grows rich by strise and
wrangling. What a man of worship is he, when living in a Country Village. all
fear him, but few love him, the dread of him so aws some spirits, that they are
at a treble charge to fence their own grounds, lest leaveing open any gap, it
should give him an inlet to take possession of their Land, whilst others wear
out more shoes and hob nails by scraping at him, in one Twelvemonth, then
would conveniently serve them in their necessary labors for seven years; the
business he creates to set himself on work, will not give him leave to think of
his Conscience; and when the Term is ended, and the time of his life is
expiring, he minds not Doomsday, hoping still, according to his wonted course,
he has a trick to reverse Judgment.

I would say more of these Practicers of the Law, but that their ways are past
finding out, as to what is already spoken. I would be willingly understood
aright, I do not any ways reflect or throw disgrace upon the glorious
Profession of the Law, which has in all Ages raised so many eminent Persons to
the first Honors of the Realm, and have left their Posterities engrafted in
the Nobility, but on such whose matchless impudence and ignorance, yet Knavery,
have by their specious pretenses, and indirect illegal courses, ruined by
insinuation, only for self ends or 'malice, thousands of Families. It is now
time to make Hue and Cry after a worser sort of Vermin, and a Caterpillar that
is far more dangerous, a mere Blood-hound, Cannibal, or Man-eater, who not
content to feed on humane flesh, till he; has made Dice of his bones, but will
swallow an estate at a Morsel; one who when he has put a man upon the Rack,
and has tormented him even to death, will then deliver him to the Lawyer for
Exeeution.

Some call him modestly Solicitor, a name not inglorious, and did his actions
merit that appellation, I should not grudge it him, it being an employ
(Honestly managed) that deserves reputation in the World. And is so absolutely
necessary, that I know not what the middle, nay most sort of people unskilful
in the Law can do without it: It is not he that is the subject of my present
discourse, but the Splitter, a pitiful Pettifogging fellow, it may be one that
can neither Write, nor Read, or one, who living unbeloved, and selling Ale, not
knowing how to Wheedle custom to his house, but by Splitting of causes, gives
out how knowing he is in the Law, and lest his own word should not pass (as I
wonder how it should) he is never without his Bribed Avouchers, both at home
and abroad to Justify his Honesty, as well as Excellency of parts, though the
meerest Ignoramus in the Universe, and no matter so he get but money, for which
like, the Golden Calf, he is worshipped, or Sir Revrenced by the Vulgar.

If the Splitters Law-knowledge brooded and hatched in one Gaol, and received
its increment from many more, he proves a Cockatrice, and kills, or maims in
fallibly at first sight; He knows all the Windings and turns of a Prison, and
by pretending liberty to others, by the Machines of his own mischievous brain,
at last procures his own, and being out speaks of nothing but fire and sword
against his quondam- Keepers for pretended abuses, and having his legs at
liberty he will not let a cause of note escape him; from Court-proceedings he
gleans something to advise others about, he hardly knows what, yet tells them
his judgment in that particular is infallible, and so deludes his Hearers, not
on a sudden, but by degrees, that he may not lessen his expected benefit.

Should I characterize him to the full, I must anatomize the Devil, but since
it is impossible, I shall only enumerate some of those cheats he frequently
Commits.

Frequenting the Courts (as Ravens do Carrion) and getting into the
acquaintance of Attorneys, or their servants, he by them informs himself who
are sued to an Outlawry, either for Debt in the Court of Common Pleas, and
sometimes for other Causes of Action, or in the Crown-Office, for Contempts,
etc. having learned their names, under pretense of belonging to either Court,
he writes a Note to this effect; Sir, I am an Attorney or Solicitor belonging
to a Court, wherein you are sued unknown, and will be Outlawed, if you please
to content the Bearer, and gratify Prae nonitus for this civility, I will for
a small matter bring you off, etc. venienti occurrite morbo; The Party hereupon
mistaking this Knave, and by this Action thinking him a very honest man, not
only gratifies him for the present, but also employs him for the future, so
long, till by woeful experience he finds his former kindness was but a Decoy to
ensnare him by it.

Knavery is so implanted in his Nature, that he cannot forbear cheating the
dearest friend that entrusts him, and circumventing every one he deals with,
that has more honesty then himself, betraying them sor any small advantage
that may accrue thereby. He frequently takes money on both sides, and will
advise the Defendant against his Plaintiff-Client; In short, his Roguery and
crafty Projects are so many, that they will swell into a large Folio, were but
the tith of them described, wherefore I shall only add some few that were
lately practiced by a pretended Solicitor, a fellow I might name, but that the
Pillory first, and then the Gallows next have made him known to all.

At the first he was a Scriveners Clerk, and having learned to engross an
Indenture, he began to peep into his Masters Actions, and so emproved his
Knavery by those Presidents, that in a little time he excelled him in all
villainy imaginable. A little before the last dreadful Gontagion, he took a
Shop, or an Office of Deceit, in which he acted a thousand Rogueries, by
forging Leases, Bonds, etc. and the better to effect his designs, he had
variety of knights of the Post at his command; but who the Devil dubbed these
clipped forlorn dregs of Mortality by the name of knights, and for what cause I
know not; fellows that will swear any thing: however they came by the title it
matters not much, but certainly Proteus was their father, which I Conjecture
from the several Longlane Shapes, and dresses they appear in, for sometimes
they are in a Canoni call Garb, sometimes they seem as Country Gentlemen, at
other times like Doctors, Sober Citizens, or Serving men, as the thing to be
sworn to Requires: Heaven certainly can never entertain them, since Perjury is
the only crime punishable among the Gods; one very well observes that they are
an apparent argument for the Excellency of man, above Angels, Corruption optima
est pessima, therefore are men so much the more excellent than Angels, by how
much they the more Currup ion of mankind are worse than Devils. Mistaking the
true meaning, and intention of that pleasant Philosopher Epicurus, they place
their chief, nay, only happiness in this world, and think they live well, when
they eat and drink well, and never think themselves in the Road to Heaven, but
when their heads ride post on a pottle of Canary.

Ram-Ally, and the walks they as constantly Visit, as the Rooks do the Trees,
and are seldom absent, but at feeding time, or doing mischief, to which they
are so accustomed, that they dream of nothing else, and to still Conscience (if
they have any) force themselves to believe the mortality of the Soul, otherwise
they would never sell their Salvation so cheap, half a crown a time, come as
often as you please. This Generation of Vipers were of great use to this
Scrivener, Pettisogger or what other name you will call him by (for you cannot
call him bad enough) and when he came with these pernicious Finishing Tools, to
complete a Title, there was no resistance, the case being mace so plain. Then
might a man see, without the help of Necromancy, or Black Art, the strange
motions of Terra Firma, out of one family into another. Mountains without the
help of faith removed out of one man's possession, into the possession of
another. Should a man be so wicked as to aim at the life of a man, and
acquaint them with the design, they will outdo a revengful Italian in his
subtle Poisons, doing his work so Gently, and so legally, that he shall get
repute by the Prosecution. They will swear that such a one being asleep, they
saw his soul go out of his mouth, booted and Spurd, take horse, ride to such a
place, do such a Murder, Commit such a Felony, or act such and such Treasons;
now because, as one says, it is so hard a matter to punish a false oath,
without discouraging a true one; such as padd on the Road, though the Robbery
be not twenty shillings shall be hanged, and these Villains (sons of Belial)
that strike at the root of life, estate and fortune, shall only be Pilloried,
or lose their ears, which they value no more then the senseless earth in parting
with a pair of Mushroms; insignificant pieces of flesh, which they hold, made
in opposition to the great Maxim in Philosophy, that Nature does nothing in
vain, as being of no use in the body of man.

This Rascal was seldom without a Guard of those Fanizaries at his heels,
especially in Tearm-time, who Pimp so cordially for the Devil, as if they
thought him to be Disposer of all Inheritances, as Lord of the World. They have
made a Feoffment of their souls, with livery and seisin to Satan, only taking a
short Lease back again, and therefore are resolved to make all people they have
to deal with turn Tenants to their Landlord: And if a Councellor or Attorney
chance to take their Fee, What Villainies must he not conceal? what Treacheries?
what Forgeries is he not bound to be privy to? what Defenses must he not make
of injustice and wrong? what the worst of actions must he not strive to
palliate and daub over with the Fucus of forced Eloquence, quite contrary to
the dictates of either Reason or Conscience? Those that have Calculated their
Nativity, banish them from the society of men, as the most dangerous and
treacherous persons in the world, and wander, finding it so threatened, by the
stars, that no more of them are hanged, there being no crime in the world that
more deserves it.

When he went to Drink with any single Gentleman, who came to him about some
concern, he still ordered it so, that two of his knights should come and
inquire for him, where he was, and having taken good notice of the Gentleman,
Drink a glass. And pretending business, be gone again, the same day the
Scrivener draws a Bond, making the Person become obliged to him in so much, he
not knowing of it, and these two Rogues set their hands unto it. Most commonly
he made the party Drunk before he did it. And when the (Bond came dueSued and
Recovered) by such like practices he became so Notorious, that none would come
near his Shop, so that he was forced to shut up, and thereupon turned
Solicitor, as he called himself, and then had more an Oar in every man's Boat
then before; but the Sickness increasing he could do little, however he was not
idle, for every day he took his Rounds, visiting his friends and acquaintance,
for the sick he made their Wills, and in them put in his own, never failing to
go a snack with the surviving Relations; besides, such was the Mortality, that
every day not only helped him to a Last Will and Testament, but the opportunity
of helping others to Husbands and Wives, for which sometimes he received a
considerable gratuity; where they all died out of the house he made himself
sole Executor, and swept away all; nay, I have been informed that the Rogue
frequently fed the Nurses where any thing was to be had, to hasten the Diseased
in their Journey to Eternity.

Such was his success in all these villainous Enterprises, that he grew very
rich, and being single, made an addition to his fortune, by marrying a young
Gentlewoman with a considerable sum left her by her Parents, who all died of
the Pestilence; in three weeks time he buried her, and was married again to a
rich Widow that day seven night; In short, and in truth, he buried five Wives
in nine weeks: This may seem strange, but upon enquiry you will find at that
time, that several, in three months, were married twice or thrice, by which
means such Ministers who stayed in London, and durst look Death in the face,
got as much by Marriages as others did by Burials.

The heat of the Contagion being much abated, he took a larger uncontrouled
freedom to range abroad, seeking (like the Devil) whom he might devour; and as
the Devil would have it, a Widow (well stricken in years) fell into his
clutches, a Gentlewoman who had lived creditably in the World, but falling to
decay, took a house in a convenient place, and had no other dependence than
upon Lodgers; and that she might be capacitated for the reception of the better
sort, she furnished her house in a very splendid manner, supplying her want of
money by credit; but her Lodgers, though sure, yet being slow Pay-Masters, her
Creditors severely dun'd her for money, and fearing an Arrest, advised with
this Knavish Solicitor, who knowing what debts she had abroad, and how well
stockt she was at home, promised to procure her fifty pounds, or an hundred on
good security; but she telling him she knew not how to do it, he whispers her
in the ear, pretending much kindness, and in short, assures her it was not
convenient to trouble her friends in this business, and that she need not, so
she would sign a Warrant of Attorney to be friend the Lender, and give him
Procuration-money, which was more then the use came to, however she consented,
and meeting the next day in order to sealing, there was but fifty pound in
money produced, the other fifty was in commodities, as braided stuffs, silks,
and fashion-ribbons, etc. prized higher then they were sold for at first,
however seeing she could not have the money without them, being pincht at that
time for money, and over-perswaded by her treacherous friend, she confessed
Judgment with a Defeazance, for six months, as she thought, whereas it was
unlimited; the Solicitor had for his pains twelve-pence in the pound presently
for the whole hundred, though half goods, and the Villain, his Accomplice, in a
short time after seized on all she had, to her utter ruin, for that slender
sum, for which, if for nothing else, Old Nick may pick his bones hereafter:

This was another thing he frequently practiced, if any of his acquaintance
dyed, or others he could hear of, whose Relations durst not Administer on his
Estate, but leave all to the Creditors, then would he be sure to make himself a
principal Creditor by a forged Bond, or otherwise, and thereupon sue out
Letters of Administration, and sweeping all away wipe the Nose of those to whom
the Deceased was really indebted. One time above the rest he cheated his
greatest Confident and best friend he then had living, after this manner. A
Gentleman bought some houses in the City, and being uninhabited, empowered the
Splitter to let them by Lease and Fine, he being not able to do it himself for
some time, by reason of some extraordinary business which called him away into
the Country, and would detain him thereabout a month or two; This faithless
Trustee, as soon as the Gentleman was gone, pretended the houses were his own,
and by his plausible carriage smooth wheedling tongue, and other knacks of
designed Roguery, he so far insinuated into the belief of a well-meaning
Shopkeeper, that he persuaded him to take a Lease from him of one of the
biggest houses, paying him an hundred pound Fine, the Rent being but small, and
had been a real good penniworth, had the Title been good; Having succeeded so
well in his first Enterprise, he made all the haste he could to put off the
rest, not mattering the Rent, so that he could advance the Fine, and so brought
about his business, that just as he had let all the houses with Fines in his
own name, the right owner of them Returned. By his Spies he had intelligence
thereof, and therefore in time absconds himself. The Gentleman not finding his
Trustee, went to the Tenants and demanded by what power and Authority they
inhabited those dwellings. They readily satisfied him by showing their Leases,
and telling him what Fines they had paid. The right Landlord by this means saw
that his Friendship was not only abused, but that they were also knavishly
cheated of their moneys, and to be short, told them the whole Truth of every
thing, which they not believing, he was forced to eject them all. Leaving them
to the law, to require satisfaction of their Impostor Landlord. If any should
have chanced to nap him; he would have served them as hundreds before, never
left them till ruin had fallen on them, for by Fob-Actions, Indictments,
Informations, Swearing, Forswearing, and the like, he so impoverished them,
that as they were reduced thereby to a condition incapable of helping
themselves, so it lay not in the power of their pocket to prejudice or hurt him
much, and so force from them a Confession, that they had better to have sat
down with their first loss, than to struggle for their amends. And had they
known what a Conscience he had that scrupled nothing for advantage. with
Instruments that never stumbled at an Oath, it had been the best course they
could have taken.

Getting the better still of those that contended with him, got him the general
reputation of a very shrewd knowing man, so that if any intricate Controversy,
Reference or Lawsuit arose among his neighbors, he was the only person pitched
on to arbitrate the difference, and was well paid for his pains, having purse
and paunch so crammed, they must disgorge.

That his clothes might speak him a man of worth, as well as his lying,
flattering and deceitful tongue, he garb'd himself very splendidly, and when he
walked abroad to perpetrate some notorious piece of Roguery, he had always two
of his perjured Rascals with him following him as his Attendants. One day as he
past by a lovely Seat, newly built in the Suburbs, a sudden stratagem came into
his head, and his fancy strongly persuaded him, that he might with ease make
himself Master thereof: Having consulted a while with his hellish Cabal and
laid down his Plot (at which he was always nimble) he caused one of his
pretended servants to go and knock at the Gate, and know whether the Gentleman
the Master of the House was within; it was done accordingly, and the Master
happening to be at home, came out himself to know who it was would speak with
him; This impudent Splitter here upon advanced, and passing a Complement or
two, told him his business, that it was only to see the inside of that house,
whose outward parts appeared so lovely to his eye; the Gentleman mistrusting
not so good a garb, kindly invited him in, and having showed him what he could,
civilly treated him; In fine, this gaudy Splitter desired one favor more, and
that was, to have leave to take a Model or Draught of the house, for no other
reason, then that being about to build a house, he was so well pleased with
that Structure, that he much desired to have one built as like it as he could;
the Request being granted they parted; but not many days before he came again
with a House-Carpenter, whom he had pre-informed that he was about buying of an
house in such a place, and that he would have his judgment in it, enjoining him
silence, lest talking should be the loss of a bargain. Arriving at the place
they are entertained civilly as before, and he like a Person of Quality. The
Carpenter in Paper took the Dimensions of the house exactly, with its buttings
and boundings, and having been well satisfied for his pains was dismissed. This
Cheat coming to London, drew a Leaf by that Paper as from this Gentleman, with
a considerable Fine mentioned therein, to have bin at delivery, but the Rent not
worth a naming; and to make good the bargain, those two Rogues his pretended
Servants were Witnesses thereunto: shortly after he demanded possession, but the
Gentleman thereupon thinking him in a frolic laughed hearrilv; but this demand
proved in the end not the subject of a Comedy, for he was immediately sued, and
at Trial his two Witnesses, with what the Carpenter could say in that behalf,
cast the poor Gentleman, who hearing what a very Rogue this Solicitor was,
first Arrested Judgment, and afterward by Friends persuasions and by threats
brought him to a Composition. Examples of this kind, I verily believe, I could
nominate five hundred, besides what already I have discovered in the First Part
of the English Rogae or Witty Extravigant; these already recited are sufficient
to manifest what a deal of mischief the worser sort of Sollicitors or Splitters
do in City and Country; and therefore I think it was wisely done of James of
Arragon, who banished Semeng Rada a great Pettifogger, for being famous only
for cunning querks and quillets in the Law; but better did Galeatius of Milan,
who hanged another for his excellent Art in multiplying Lawsuits; and indeed
the multiplication of these fellows proves a greater Plague to this Kingdom,
then Lice with other Vermin to the Egyptians.

One word to the Attorneys of Westminster and Guild Hall, and I have done.
Though in the head of this Chapter, an Attorney is mentioned, yet I mean none
of you, but such as are (conscious to your selves) of some unjust proceedings
therein contained; it is the Ignorant Knavish Countrey-Attorney that I have had
a fling at all this while, or some beardless Fops, who fluttering up and down
Presumptuously, assume that Creditable name, that the Boys may be thought men
of understanding, many whereof are only fit to make a noise at a Court of
Py-Pouder, louder than the Jack-Puddings in Bartholomew-Fair, and yet are bold
to tread other Courts too often, where they as frequently make Combinations
against their Clients, and though not seldom they take exo^bitant Fees, they
have a trick to let go Judgment on Default.

It cannot be expected that in this well-governed Kingdom, Lawsuits should be
as little in use as they were in the well-regulated Commonwealth of the
Lacedaemonians seldom heard, but I could wish it were so ordered here as it was
by Charles the Ninth of France, who to prevent needless and numberless Suits of
law, ordered that whosoever Commenced a Suit should deposite such a sum with
the Judge, to receive it back again if his cause were good, or forfeit it if
the same proved frivolous; people then would grow weary of wurrying one
another; Places in the Hall and Compters would not then be sold at such dear,
nay, excessive rates, nor would there be such variety of Juries, as Farriers
have shoes, fitting all sizes ready at hand, according as they are bespoke:
Whereas now men have not their Offices for nothing but pay soundly for them,
and therefore must lick themselves whole out of poor men's necessities,
certainly sale of Offices is the greatest wrong can be done in a Commonwealth.

CHAP. X. The Catch-Pole, or Tenter-Hook.
THIS Fellow, among those many great Judgments God inflicts on the World for
the many-crying sins therein committed, is none of the least, for having
cracked, (it may be twice or thrice) he only reserves so much money as will
purchase him a Commission for Napping, to make others as sensible of being in
debt, as himself was formerly, and having the nature of the Devil in him, is
restless, and in perpetual motion, seeking whom he may devour, and is never
better pleased, then when he has made a poor debtor acquainted with the
Torments of that Purgatory, he himself has layn pickled up in for many years.
For which cause, the indigent and insolvent look upon him as the properest
shape wherein they fancy Satan, fearing that one time or other he will meet
with them, and drag them to an Hell, from whence they never shall return.
Others look upon him as a Goss-Hawk on the wing, taking a circumference at a
distance, seeming not to mind the wary Heron, who is using the same stratagems
in winding to get alost, but all in vain; for when the bold and crafty Hawk
has got above her in his soaring, 'ware Hawk, or any other advice avails but
little with him, and will pounce her, though he venture the striking himself
through with the long bill of his Opponent. Thus have we known several of these
Vermin violate places, that are privileged by ancient custom, and defended by
the Gallantry of the Defendants, who have made them suffer for their
insolences, sometimes too severely by death; at other times sportively, by
clipping, shaving: And lastly, by throwing them into the Bog-house, to send
them whom sweet-sented to their Dulcina del Tubosa's, or reaking Hecuba's.

Notwithstanding these deadly or dreadful punishments, they will confidently
adventure out again, having first got some loving Cracks or others, to mundify
their loathsome Carcasses, that they may not poison their Iessimy-Barbers, who
otherwise instead of sweet fragrant Effences must be forced to bring a
Brandy-Bottle, or some other spirits to keep them from Fainting. Whilst they
are endeavoring to even the difference between their Hair and Beards on both
sides. Having new cased themselves (for their employment obliges them to have
diversity of Garments by them for Disguises) and having perriwigg'd their
shaved crowns, they boldly walk the streets and by-lanes again, and makes them
more dangerous to some than the Highways, for they are Moveable Prisons, and
their hands two Manacles not to be filed off. They are the Remora's to young
Gentlemen, and breaking Shopkeepers, when at Anchor they find they can ride it
out no longer, they either cut or slip, and when under a stiff gale they think
safely to sail from that dangerous Port, to some other of better Anchorage,
they are stopped by the way, and can go no further till their unlucky Pilots moor
them where they please, most commonly to their utter ruin. If any one of them
seem to be merciful to the poor Prisoner, it is for no other end than to make
his own advantage. For should he immediately stop a man in either Counter, or
some other Prison, it is not for his benefit, therefore he protracts the
Execution, and with much seeming willingness delays as long as money's
stirring. He will respit you in no place at first but a Tavern, where he sels
his Minutes dearer than a Watch-Maker, and though he venture half a drowning in
Canary, or what other wine he most esteems; Yet that will not stop his mouth
unless his hands be stuff't, and Pocket crammed continually. With a leg of a
Fowl in his hand, and a wing on his Trencher unroucht, he cries, Come, we
cannot stay, we must be gone; whilst his eyes are greedily feeding on the
Sides-men, or the Merry thought, wishing every bit may choke others that goes
not down his gormandizing Gullet: no more Angels appearing, and fearing his
over-drinking may disinable him from securing his prisoner, he instantly
removes him to his own house, or the suburbs of a Gaol, where he visits him
twice a day, but the poor man having no more money to gratify his forbearance,
and the large Fees of the house two shillings a night, etc. a Prison then must
be his Mansion, and being a Freeman has the benefic of a Duce, which some call
an Horse, and thence he rides to Ludgate, where he may chance to lie some years
in the sweat of his Keepers Toes.

A Suburbian-Trader's credit is no sooner flyblown, but the Magot-Bailiffs are
rooting in his Tail immediately; Money is the only way to blind them so they
shall not see you, which you must either send or give them, and then though
they have a Writ in their Pockets, and the person walks just under their Noses,
yet they cannot see him for their lives, which Astrologers say, proceed from a
wonderful Conjunction of Sol and Luna in Palm of the right hand; I have heard
of an Officer that was stoneblinde to a friend of mine, and that for a long
time, (yet had the eye of a Linx to all others) but at length it was discovered
to the Creditor, that, they used sometimes to fuddle together, whereupon he
blamed much the Officer, calling him Knave, Cheat, and what not, in taking his
money, and not performing his Office; the other denied it, and though the other
urged it was so, he could get no other Reply, then the World's a Cheat, and he
is a Fool that has not a hand in it.

If a Person abscond himself for debt, he shall be taught to know his own worth
in a very little time; for a Sergeant or a Bailiff shall dig him out of the
Earth with as much diligence, as if he were the Oar of Mexico, and never ceases
till he has hid again in some obscure place or other, never to be found out,
but by chance, like a Pot of old Roman Coin, but he shall not be half so much
hugged by the Finder, for fear of being lousie, or infected by the Running
Plague Sore of Poverty.

A man in this condition may be said to be totally Eclipsed. For as the Sun is
Eclipsed by the Interposition of the Moon between it, and the Earth; so man is
Eclipsed by an Interposition of a Stone-Dublet between him and the Street; but
he is but half Eclipsed, when first arrested and carried to the Coach and
Horses, Hen and Chickens, or Rose and Crown (to the unspeakable scandal of the
Law, at the expense (as I said before) of two shillings Per night for lodging
only, besides the continual visits of Officers, who like Physicians will have
their Fee, and seldom go away empty.

I cannot invent a name evil enough to bestow on these Tenter-Hooks; in short,
they are the Sweepings and Scum of the Nation, and would men discover from
daily experience what tricks they play, what Leiger-de-main they use, what
Juggling there is among them, it would be as creditable to keep the Hangman
company as some of them: I shall instance some few of their abuses and
stratagems they use in their Arrests, and so conclude this Chapter.

If a Gentleman they lay wait for, has laid himself up, and will not stir
abroad, they have several tricks to catch him notwithstanding, Sometimes they
will personate a Porter, putting on a frock with knot and Ropes about their
middle, which would have becomed and fitted their Necks much better, and with a
Letter in their hand directed to the Gentleman they intend to Arrest, the
Gentleman not suspecting that Garb admits the seeming Porter, who having
delivered the Letter, instantly draws his Mace, and being commonly one of the
lustiest Rogues in the Pack, runs him to rights down stairs, and at the door is
received by half a dozen Janissaries more of the same Brotherhood; sometimes
they have adventured to come into Greys-Inn-Walks; and watching the Person as
he came to the wall looking into the Bowling-Green that was, this Desperado
instantly takes him up in his arms, and (Neck or nothing) throws himself over
with his arms full, who is presently assisted by others that waited there for
the finishing the Plot, and with all celerity carry him off sans reskue.
Another I knew was thrown over the wall in the Temple-Garden, and the Officer
leapt after him at High Water, and were both taken up into a Boat that attended
this Exploit. Others I have known, who dressing themselves in every respect
like an Orthodox Minister in Canonical Robes, have got admitance into a
Gentleman's chamber by that means, and by arresting him for lucre of an
extraordinary reward, have undone the poor Gentleman for ever. Another
Gentleman, I knew, was ruined also by them, but after another fashion, in this
manner; A Bailiff was promised he should have a considerable sum, if he would
undertake the Artesting such a Gentleman; having agreed upon the sum, the first
thing he did was to enquire what acquaintancehe had thereabout, and being
informed thereof, he watched such as went to visit him, (for his debts being
great he durst not stir out, and was besides very wary lest he should be
surprised) among the rest he observed one to go often to him, having a lusty
fellow to wait on him, and much about his stature; hereupon he clothed himself
in every respect like him, and knocking at the door, he was asked what he came
for, who replied, that he was servant to such a Gentleman, naming him, and that
he came from his Master to him about business: that very Gentleman happened to be
in the chamber, and by that means judged it was a plot, who understanding that
there was but one at the door, drawing their swords they opened the door,
bidding him come in, who seeing them in that posture, trusted rather to his
feet then his hands, and for haste knew not whether he made one or two steps to
the bottom of the stairs, venturing a Neck-breaking, rather then to have his
soul infallibly pusht out of his body by their Rapiers. One would have thought
this should have been a fair warning to him; yet for all this he undauntedly
persisted in his Resolution, and soon found out a way to effect his design in
this manner; He had strictly observed, from a house almost opposite to this
Gentleman's Chamber, that a dish of meat was frequently sent thither about
dinner time: a little before that time he got a dish Prepared. And putting on a
white Wastecoat, Cap, and Apron, went in that posture to the Gentleman, whose
ill luck was such, that he looking out of his Window, and seeing this meat
coming toward him, persuaded by the rash eagerness of his Stomach, he had got
the door open ere the fellow was half up the stairs, and Mistrusting nothing,
gave him entrance, who setting down the Dish, first seized the Gentleman's sword
that lay neglected on the Table, and then secured his Prisoner.

Of all the cunning tricks they use to captivate poor Debtors, I was never
pleased with any more than this which Follows. Because the contriver was by
heaven justly punished for his treachery. In short it is thus, a Gentleman,
owing much money, kept within doors a long time, by reason of which he much
coveted the Air, but daring not to stir abroad, he was content to take the
benefit of it as he could, and that was early in the morning at his Window. The
Bailiffs laid several plots to take him, but to no Effect, at length a Smith,
that lived opposite to this Gentleman's Chamber, and knowing the design of these
Rascals, agreed with them for so much to betray him into their hands, and
informed them after what manner it should be done. They approved of it, and the
next morning was the time appointed, accordingly these varlets planted
themselves in Ambuscado, whilst the Smith very early gets upon the Grind-stone,
which stood under his shed, and fastening a rope to a small Beam, put the nooze
over his Neck, and having so done, fell to his prayers, the Gentleman
(according to his Custom) looking out, and seeing an object of desperation
before his eyes ready to dispatch himself, in pure pity (which overcame all
thoughts of danger) ran with all speed he could, to prevent this wretched
fellow from being his own Executioner; But all would not do, neither his own
aversion, nor the others opposition, since heaven had decreed him an example of
divine Vengeance, for injustice; for the Bailiffs, seizing the Gentleman,
carried him away with all the speed imaginable. And the Smith turning his head
about to see which way they went, the Grindstone turned, and slipping off, was
hanged unregarded by the Bailiffs. And unpittied for his labor.

All their political plots, and projects are so many (new ones daily taking
place) that it will be irrequisit to discourse them further. Wherefore to
conclude I shall only touch upon some few of their many thousand Wheedles, and
leave the Reader to his woeful Experience for the rest.

Having Arrested a man (as they agreed before) one must be the Lion, the other
the Lamb; When one is Rampant, the other is Couchant; And here note, that they
are never both either passionate, or mighty furious, but when they are like to
be Beaten. The next thing they do, is subtly to sift out of the Prisoner,
whether he was ever Arrested before, if not, they know the better how to work
upon his ignorance; if they find the Person arrested has been an old
Truth-Breaker, and that he is much indebted, though they have but one Action
against him, they will persuade him that they have ten; however if he will
presently put in Bail, (lest his other Creditors should come upon him) and
satisfy them well for their pains, they will be very civil, and what they take
of you they will not receive as their due Fees, lest they should be pincht (as
some of late have been) for Extortion, wherefore they cry, Give it us freely,
or not at all.

Under pretense of being a man's sincere friend, they will advise, and by subtle
ways they have squeezed out of him what his debts are, and to whom they are
due, persuading him that they have the Art of Composing all such differences,
having got out of him who they are, to whom he is obliged; in the first place,
one of them assures him how sorry he is for him, and had he known so much as
now he does he should never have bin Arrested for them, however he will go and
see what may be done with the Creditor that has entered the present Action,
whilst he goes to no other intent then to advise some other Creditor to enter
an Action; for this (as far as he sees) is his time or never; and having
persuaded him to it, keeps this as a reserve to lay upon him when he has
bailed the other; and if he be strengthened with four or five more, he thinks it
so much the better, which he will execute in order; at last, having sucked out
the very hearts-blood of his Pocket, the Compter or Ludgate must be his Ultimum
Refugium.

All men who stand in fear of an Arrest, (if they know it) must be their
slaves, for they will pretend when they meet them, that they have a Commission
to give them a Cast of their Office, to no other end then that they should cast
them half a Crown, or a good Breakfast in their way.

Their Civility (for self-interest) is no small advantage to them, sending to a
Person (against whom an Action is entered) either to keep out of the way, or
put in Bail, if the Creditor be not by, it is usual for them to be blinded
with a flaming Angel, and then tell the Creditor he is a man very difficult to
be found. At length he is forced to Napp him, (after the Cat has played a long
time with the Mouse) and swallows his pretended friend, with as little
difficulty as a Whale may do a Gudgeon.

CHAP. XI. The Miseries in, and Wheedles of a Prison:
AS there are many Prisons in and about the City, so their Nature and Customs
are different, yet the Wbeedles that are practiced therein, are much alike, so
many and so various, that the Description of them all would take up so much
room, as that I should have but little left to prosecute some other subjects, I
must necessarily touch upon.

In short, a Prison is the Bankrupts Banqueting House, where he feeds on Dishes
borrowed from other Men's Tables; or it may be called, The Prodigals Purgatory,
or, A Pesthouse for decayed Citizens, wherein is contained as many maladies and
mischiefs as flew out of Pandora's Box, when opened by Epimetheus. It is the
Grave of the living, or a place where men are buried alive, and the Worms that
gnaw upon them are their own discontented thoughts, and the racking of the
Master-Keeper, and that which aggravates their misery is the frequent curbs of
under -Officers; yet herein lies some little comfort, that their Creditort dare
as well be damned as come there to rail at them for non-solvency, or upbraid
them with Knavery; for Custom has empowered them to inflict within their own
Territories punishment on such Billingsgate-Offenders.

At my first being acquainted with the place, the Prisoners (methought) walking
up and down the Watch-Hall looked like so many Wracks upon the Sea; Here the
ribs of a thousand pounds beating against the Needles, those dangerous rocks,
Credulity; here floated to and fro Silks, Stuffs, Camolets, Velvet, Cloth of
Gold, Cloth of Silver, etc. without giving place to each other according to
their dignity, and after them swims the Owner, making to shore on his Yard,
mistaking it for the Main-Yard-Arm of the Foundred Vessel, and after him drives
another swimming on his Shop books, which bear him up like Bladders for the
present; here floated so many Pipes of Canary, belonging to a Vintner or
Cooper, whose Bung-holes lying open, were so damaged, that the Merchant may go
hoop for his money; look upon it in general, and it is a spectacle of more pity
then Tyburn-Executions.

How welcome is a new Commer amongst them; every one strives who shall get him
into his chamber, if there be a vacancy, not so much for friendships sake, as
Garnish: one will tell him that he has an excellent room, wherein there is
lodged but four; Another tells him, that his room is better, for though it be
VVinter now, and may seem to be too bleak and cold, yet it will be the best
room in the whole house in Summertime, being near the Leads; and this benefit
he has too, that he cannot take the benefit of the Air thereon, but that he
must of necessity see those places, by taking the Air too often, which club'd
to his undoing; ten to one this Proposal puts the new-come Prisoner into a
passion, thinking himself abused to be thought he should be confined so long;
but by his good leave, I can assure him, I knew a Citizen booted and spurred
taken as he was going out of town, and brought in thither, who swore he would
not have his boots pulled off till he was at liberty, so confident he was of
his speedy enlargement, yet contrary to expectation he remained a Prisoner
sixteen years and upwards.

A Prison is an Exchange for all sorts of Trades, but without Commodities,
unless what are female, and they are for the most part braided, and out of
fashion, being the Relics of some Defunct; Now and then some Cracking
Sempstress, or Free Trader, for taking up too much linen, and over-trading
with Holland-Factors, have the ill hap to be Confined within this stony
Band-box; how will the Baggages then pule, and whine, and putting finger in
eye, and cry, He might have been more kind, if all were rightly understood, and
not call me his back friend -- Suppose I was, there was no harm done him by it.
Well, well it was a most un-Gentleman like part of him, to un do a young Woman
in both senses. The report of her Confinement brings a great concourse of men,
whoever took any of her Linen upon trust, and by way of gratitude, pay her
ransom; if no such assistance happen to her, she then sends some Female
VVheedle of her Function, with a Letter to her Creditor, all blubberd with
tears, desiring to speak with him, who over-perswaded, goes, and at sight of
her, his heart melts faster then her eyes, or any other part, and not being
able to refrain, seals her Release with flesh in stead of wax. Hence we may
infer this, that they that deny Prisons to be Bawdy-houses are very much
mistaken, and may as well gainsay, that Mother Nabbs who lived in the Park,
never stood in the Pillory, that Venus was translated to the sky for being a
Nun, and not for being a Whore; as that Salisbury-Court, Shoo-lane, and places
adjoining, are not the most General Rendezvous for fashionable Bona Roba's of
the better sort.

And now by the way, give me leave to express what I find commendable in a
Prison, and let any one judge, whether this be not a very great commendation
belonging to it, in that it renders Matrimony most savoury, where the pleasures
thereof are most stolen; but it most extremely commends their Charity one to
another, for lending their chambers to their Fellow -Prisoners; Others, that
are for the more the more noble way of Pimping defend themselves by the example
of Heliogabulus, who was wont to lend his Baths and Wenches to his friends and
acquaintance whenever they desired it. If a man would thoroughly inspect the
house, he will find little Mortification among the confined, they being
generally of Aristetle's opinion, that Whores are not only useful, but
necessary in a well-instituted Commonwealth, such is the Fleet and Ludgate,
whose inhabitants cry, Corporeal Recreations mitigate Corporeal punishments;
and as one very well observes, that it was never recorded among them, that any
one that was ever put in ever prayed himself out. The looseness of the Company
corrupts the good intentions of most men. Thus Prisons are like a Lough in
Ireland, called Lough-neaugh, whose Waters (in some time) turn the tenderer
substance of wood into stone, and from a piece of Holly is produced an
excellent stone; so when a man is confined within the grates of a Gaol, his
heart becomes petrefied, to that excess, that neither the soft words of a
flattering Creditor, nor the most sharp and piercing execrations of a
passionate one can make the least impression therein.

I have told you what is commendable; I must now give you a short account of
what is discommendable in those Pinks and Common Sewers, into which all the
Malice, Envy, Rancour and Hatred of inveterate Persons, spend it self. Where
the Tenter-Hooks of Oppression always stand in public view, or sit there at
Receipt of injury, and mourn at the Tranquillity and peace of Neighbors; cruel
Giants of these Enchanted Castles, not suffering a poor Debtor pass by them,
but one steps out and cries, Fee, fa, fumm, I smell the blood of one in debt,
and I must needs have sum.

Within these strong Holds there are a sort of people, who were men once, but
coming into Office, are on a sudden changed into Tigers, Wolves and Man-eaters;
strange Monsters that will eat a couple of poor men at a Meal, who are more
cruel then Diomed who fed his horses with humane flesh: they are more inhumane,
more merciless then the great Robbers, Sciron or Pytiolanthes; more terrible
then the Lerenean Monster: should they be broiled, roasted, gridled, toasted,
singed, baked, ten thousand years in Purgatory, they would be as black and
sooty as when first put in. They strut it in fine Clothes, and are fat with
feasting on the forbidden fruits of Extortion, and selling unlawful liberty at
unlawful rates; yet, what will not a Prisoner do that has it? what will he not
expend to conjure down, and appease the evil Demon, that so torments and haunts
him, worse then the trembling cold and hot Fits of a Quartane Ague? How
dreadfully does he appear with his thick Battoon, when he says, Master -- -
(meaning the Master-Keeper) must speak with you; which is one and the same
thing, as if he should have said, I have order to lock you up; what fumbling
then in the Pocket to stop one gaping mouth of Cerberus, with a Glass of Wine
to boot, and a hundred Promises at the end of it, that such a time he will
clear all his Chamber-rent, with a thousand thanks for that liberty, which is
like to be beneficial to him; for, if the Prisoner be Poetically inclined, he
then says, That the noise of a Prison was very distracting and injurious to his
Fancy; that since he has been abroad, his Invention has wrought Miracles;
that he has a Copy (almost finished) which a Bookseller offered so much for it,
with Privilege to dedicate it to my Lord -- -- who has seen it, applauds it,
and doubts not but to receive, not only a considerable reward from him, but
much more, by threescore several Dedications he intends of the same Book to
others, and none under Knight or Lady. Whereas all this while (it may be) poor
man, he has been studying de die in diem, how to eat and drink in abundance,
that should he be taken up, he may be stored with flesh to withstand a three
weeks siege against the Poverty of a Prison, and that he might drown in
Oblivion, the Miseries that he has already run through, and the thoughts of
what he may run into for the future, he was not so idly employed to write in
laudem Pulicis, or, Encomium strepitus, but he was translating that learned and
elaborate Piece of that deep and profound Author Obsopoeus, who writ a Treatise
in Latin verse, de Art bibendi, which Art he reduced into practice, and taught
it (in his Peripateticks) to his young disciples.

If a Shopkeeper (that is a Milch-Cow) be sent for, and he be driven lowing to
his Stall, if they halt by the way, as it is ten to one but they do for the
benefit of baiting, then out comes the Almanac, wherein is registered some of
his best debts, which were canceled in his Debt books, that they might not be
known to Wife or Creditor, and then tells him, That he was with such and such,
that such a Person a very honest Gentleman promised him such a day, to pay him
so much. That he had received a little from him to day; that there was so much
for his Pains, and desires, that with his thanks and humble service he will
present so much to his Master, -- where note, if this charge be not constantly
paid he is inexorable to all Prayers, and entreaties. We read, that the Faylor
in the Acts, fell down at the feet of his two Prisoners, when he saw such a
terrible Habeas Corpus come from Heaven to remove them. But it is to be feared,
had those Prisoners been here now, the Earth might have shook as well as the
Prison, ere it could have shaken some Prison-Petty-Tyrants in the Kingdom.

In the next place, let us consider the evils that proceed from the Master
Keepers, letting his Cellar at a rack Rent, which indeed must inevitably follow
from his paying so dear for the Custody of his Den.

The Cellar-man, or Tapster, which you will, is (whilst money is stirring
Plentifully) Extraordinary kind at home, and that you may pay for it abroad. If
you have a desire to take the Air, he will proffer sometimes the kindness to be
your Keeper, and you need not fear he will tire you with walking. For he shall
only carry you to the next Crony-Tavern of his acquaintance. And then if you
are not drunk for joy, that you are abroad, and spew to gratify his courtefie,
you understand not what it is to have a Prison-Tapster to your friend. As your
money shortens he slackens his favors; at length he cannot hear you when you
call for Beer and Tobaccho, yet in hope to be paid one time or other; and
partly out of the lechery they have in couzening and cheating, with short
measures and confounded Mundungus, is at length persuaded to let his dear
Euridices, his Beer and his Brandy, take a little Air out of his infernal
Regions; but the hot Strumpet leaves such violent Claps behind her, in the
Pockets of the poor Prisoners, that no Aqua Fortis eats so violently into a
Fob, as she does. Only the Cellar-man has one Recipe, to stop the violence of
the Gonorrhea, by crying in a tone like a Bear, I Will trust no more; and so he
might say as often and as currishly as he pleased, might the doors stand open,
and men might have the liberty of coming in, or out, as they pleased. For in
such places there is the worst, least, and dearest of all things, whereas the
poor Prisoners ought to have the most, best, and cheapest. However, this brings
in a great annuity to the Master-Keeper. Though this is none of the least of
his benefits, yet he has a great many more than I can tell you, proceeding
from his Iron-Barr'd Limbeck, and in his Chemistry acts contrary to Nature,
while he makes it his business all his life to extract something out of
nothing, and by reducing men to nothing, out of the Caput Mortuum, of their
perished Estates, makes himself something. However there lies a Curse upon him,
for as it is observed, from the highest to the lowest, that never any one of
them dyed worth a groat, their reign feldom exceeds the length of a Popes,
being Poisoned quickly (in five or six years) by excessive drinking, Lim'd
Sack, stum'd Glaret, and high Feeding.

Now should there prove a Conspiracy between the Sheep and Goose, (who out of
pure revenge on them who devoured their dead Carcasses, are resolved to devour
them whilst living, by aiding and assisting their enemies with implements to
draw up a formidable thing, called commonly an Habeas Corpus, by which their
Persons are seized, and carried over the Gulf Thamesis, and then incarcerated
in the Kings Bench) it is a thing worth the noting, that the filliest of
Creatures should be too hard for most cunning Foxes; nay, by a Sheep-skin
conveyed violently into the Hesperian Gardens of Southwark, where though there
are no Golden Apple Trees growing, yet they shall find many Lions waking for
their security. Some say, the Prisoners themselves are changed into Golden
Apple Trees, to whom as long as they bear fruit, the Lion is as gentle as a Red
Herring, but if they wither and grow dry, they are presently cut down, and made
sewel for the Common Gaol. Nay, your brace of Guardian Angels will forsake you,
for want of a little chamber-rent, otherwise Polyphemus himself is civil
enough, and will be content to have his own eye put out for a while, while
Ulysses escapes under the belly of the Golden-Fleece.

Now under what Planets the Tip-staves and Waiters were borne, the best
Figure-Flingers cannot tell; some believe Mercury, though not as he was a god,
but an English Gusman. They are a sort of Vermin, that believe not only the
Moon, but all Mankind to be made of green Cheese, so like Rats and Mice do they
altogether live and feed upon it.

And now to the unspeakable comfort of the Creditor, let us a little look into
the Counsels and Deportment of their Debtors, under Confinement.

In a full meeting or assembly this Question is Started, Whether a man ought to
be compelled against his will, to pay his debts. A Sage person, much indebted,
and a long time a Prisoner, and therefore more capable of being a Lawgiver,
was positively in the negative. And thus he proved it, If, volenti non fit
injuria, no injury can be done to him that is willing, then it follows, that
all injury must be done to him that is unwilling; now, what greater injury can
be done to a man then to compel him to pay money against his will, whether he
has it or no? Again, no man was ever compelled to lend money, what reason then
is there that a man should be compelled to repay it? Otherwise, lending of
money seems a kind of invention of Man to trepan his fellowcreature, to lend
him money that he may afterward make him his miserable slave and vassal, and
triumph over his calamity. It was concluded on all sides, that there can be no
greater mischief done to man than to captivate his body, and deprive him of his
divine privilege of freedom, he then yet intends the ruin of another, ought
to have the same ruin intended to himself. Hereupon the Counsel broke up, and
every one applied himself to the usual holy exercises there performed, as
Dicig, Drinking, Drabbling etc. Venus is very powerful here, but Bacchus much
more, being indeed the very Baal-Peor of this place. As for the Stars of the
first Magnitude they resorted to the Leg, or Golden Lion. The lesser bestowed
their influences on Alehouses, Brandy-Shops, etc.

And now dear friends, you who are Creditors to these Persons, how do you think
you shall be satisfied your debts, when nothing will serve your turns, but to
make Dice of their Bones, a slender satisfaction, considering how dearly you
pay for every Bale that is made out of them. Alas! you don't consider they live
in the Land of Oblivion, not as a quartern of Brandy, but is an Antidote
against Sorrow, and two quarts of Canary is perfect Lethe. In a short while
they forget you, and in a long time you forget them.

Consider again, should all men pay their debts, some would have nothing left,
and others would have all, there would be no Ebbing nor flowing of Fortune,
should the Tide run all one way: besides, Cheating would have too great an
encouragement should it always prosper, yet loss is the spur to make them run
the same course over again; and I believe, these Debtors are not so unjust,
but, that should it be proved, that in any Age of the World all men paid their
debts, I dare engage that you should have it so again. Be not so vain, as to
think that Natures course must be altered to gratify your humors. Again, they
complain of their trusting too, as well as your Worships; where lies the
difference then since you are both Creditors; and were you in their condition,
I question, though you now complain of their Knavery, whether you would not be
as very Knaves as themselves; you rail at them, and they again at others. The
Mercer cries, Was ever Man so Hocuss'd? however, I have enough to maintain me
here, and cries, Hang sorrow, cast away care. The Milliner is much in the same
tone, and cries, Hang it too, Give me the other Class of Sack, it is well it is no
worse. The Tailor cries, Was ever a man so mistaken, the Gentleman seemed as
honest a man as ever pissed; but I may thank my Wife for this, A Pox on her,
she was always too willing to entertain handsome Gentlemen.

After all this, if the Creditor will have any Music to revive his drooping
spirits, let him step to the Fleet, where he shall find some (over a Chirping
Cup) sing like Canary-Birds; and it is ten to one after the Song is ended, but a
Health shall go round to the Confusion of their Creditors; whilst others are
exercising themselves in the Noble Art of Cheese-Bowling, where some shall cry,
Two pieces on the single Cast, five to one cries another on the Cast, whilst
another steps in and proffers to lay ten Guiny's on the Game. A pleasant
Harmony in the ears of a Creditor who has entrusted these men, who have laid
up their Estates in Lavender, that they may the more freely follow their
Recreation, and will not be Confined to Humors, though Humors Confined them.

Thus you see, if men can Wheedle themselves into a large credit, yet keep
their Estates, what care they for a Capias or a Latitat; and it is but feeing
often and liberally the Clerk, and it lies not in the power of a Creditor to
keep them from their Recreation there, or where they please.

And now Gentlemen-debtors, a word to you, and I have done. When all your money
is gone, farewell all kindness of this nature; for they will prove as obdurate
as Hell, and will as soon trust their Souls with the Devil, as a Prisoner with
a shilling; and therefore as little as you may, and only when necessity compels
you to it, make use of their civilities, as they call them; keep money in your
pockets, and lie as little out as you can upon security. You will find it but a
scurvy thing to be visited once a week by the Clerk, and his two Gog-Magogs,
with rugged Cudgels, and rough-hewen faces, when the end is only to milk the
Cow as they call you: Endeavor to be one of Solamons sons, and keep company
with none of them; if you do, blame nor the Stars, but your own folly, which
became your ruin. Extremities will happen to all sorts of Persons, as well
good as bad, and therefore they determine best, that best determine for their
own safety.

CHAP. XII. The Wheedles, of an handsome Hostess.
OF these Hostesses there are several sorts. There is the City-Hostess, the
Countrey-Town- Hostess, and the Hostess on the Road; the two first have
frequenter opportunities to Wheedle by reason of the variety, multiplicity, and
constancy of their Guests, yet, the last does it as certainly, and less
controulably than the former, but all three in a different manner. The
City-Hostess takes more state upon her, and uses a freedom which would seem
scandalous, to the other in the Country; for she will frequently admit of
Treats abroad and, that her person may be noted at public Meetings, Balls and
Theaters, her splendid habiliments shall forcibly attract the eyes of the
Spectators, causing in men an admiration, and an emulation in the women, for
rather then they will want any thing of that Modish finery they observe in
others. They will make their husbands pawn their Consciences, as well as their
Credits, for that Point de Venice, or for another story of lace, more upon
their Petty-coats; as if women thought men's fancies did not climb fast enough
without such a Lecherous Love-Ladder. She never stirs out, but in her choicest
ornaments, and is rarely seen within doors by her better Guests, but when she
thinks her self most charmingly adorned. Whereas the Countrey-Hostess never
studies or consults her fineries, but against some Fair, or usual Market-days,
which she endeavors to grace with her best habiliments, as much as she will do
a Neighbors Christning. If her leisure will permit her to step to the Gate to
show her dressing, and thereby invite her Guests to taste of her dish (which who
can refrain, seeing it so well Guarnisht) she then seems to proclaim to all,
that she is a fairer Commendation of her Inn, above the fair Sign although the
Painting, Tafferels, and other Curiosities cost the value of the Estate of a
rising Constable. In this posture, as she stands, she proves a Loadstone that
attracts not only men of Iron, but the Black-coat, and sober Citizens; if the
first (that mighty man of Buff, and Feather) come but near her, he sometimes
cleaves so long, that he is not easily got off, and will not only command
Accommodation for himself, and horse, less beast than himself, but sometimes
too for his beastly Companions.

The man that will not eat, and drink well, is not for her diet; for the first
she knows by experience, that he that cannot eat well, will never do the feat
well: besides, the sober man is not for her turn, because being always guarded:
by Reason, all the assaults her Wheedles makes against him are bootless
ineffectual; he is her man that will be drunk, who will be a man it may be
tomorrow morning, but for the present she can make him what she please; for
having let go himself from the hold, and stay of Reason, she knows he lies open
to the mercy of all temptations, and suits them according to his present
inclinations. No lust but finds him disarmed, and fenceless, and with the least
assault enters; if he be rich, how will she humor him, and under the pretense
of pleasing him with any thing, either eatably or liquid, she franckly calls
for it to oblige her own pallat, and she shall pay dearly for it to boot; and
to make him believe how much she loves him, will not stir from him but when
business calls upon her: And when she returns, it shall be with such speed and
cheerfulness, that if he be not quite drowned in his liquor, with half an eye
he may see the greatness of her love and kindness, and to make a demonstration
thereof, the Husband, by her persuasions, and his compliance to her
Wheedling-contrivances, shall go to bed, and so give them the opportunity of a
private Conference; Now out-comes all his passions, vanities, and those
shamefuller humors, which discretion clothes, all which she converts to her
own advantage; at length (with a thousand Protestations, she never admitted any
to that freedom before, but her Husband, though a hundred preceded him) she
sends him to bed, fully assured of his future, as well as present, happiness.

Of all men the young man is her Darling, whom she can best shape and fashion
as she pleases, and can persuade him to any thing, for he sees but the outside
of men and things, and conceives them according to their appearing glister, and
out of this ignorance believes them: thus she makes all her flatteries pass for
real kindnesses; and the more to endear him to her, he must call her Mother,
and will not beangry with her son if he commit Incest with her; and lest the
rest of her adopted children should take exceptions at it she will give all of
them (who have a mind to it) the same liberty. This Obligation ties them to the
house, as firmly as a Galley-slave to the Oar, and this is for a while the only
Rendez-vouz of all their Revels.

The truth on it is, she need not use many Wheedles to this sort of people to
effect her designs; for since their Reason seems not to curb, but only to
understand their appetites; they prosecute the motions thereof with such eager
earnestness, that being themselves their own temptation, they need not Satan to
prompt them, if Wine and Women be in their company.

Of all her Guests there is none makes her such incomparable sport as the Fop,
What dye lack, Sir? or the mere Trading-bubble of the City, when he comes into
the Country, as ignorant as the Clown, both of them being much about the same
model and pitch of brain, only the ones ignorance is a little more finical. She
knows him by his garb and bawling deportment when he rides into the yard, and
indeed his posture in riding only is enough to discover him, and the better to
humor his vanity, she makes as great a noise as he, in calling on her servants
to give him attendance, and then waits him at the Parlor door to welcome him
with her smiles and courtesies, whilst she is screwing her mouth into a round
plumpness, that the warmth of her lips may signify the glowing of her other
parts, and the fervency of that zeal she has to serve him. The wine being
brought (which must be a Pint of Mul'd Sack if in winter time,) Ninny drinks to
Mystress Craftsby, which she kindly receives, and will not let the liquor cool
in her hand by any means, but nimbly possess the cup till the pint be out: A
cessation of sipping for a while being concluded on, they still proceed in the
exercise of their mouths, by talking and billing: both their chief education
lie in their Occupation, which endeavors to Apify the humors and manners of
their best Guests, or Customers: the frequent visits of finical Gentlemen, fine
Ladies and Gallants, Antartick to the City fashion (who have a mode in Speech,
as well as habit, peculiar to themselves) I say, from these he draws the
infection of Eloquence and Fopperies, and catching any one word, which he
imagines extraordinary (although he understand not the Etymology thereof)
wears it for ever, and regards not how Threadbare it is, by his often using
it, so his habit be not in that condition. As he takes up Wares on Credit, so
he does words, and in time, it may he, makes himself a Bankrupt as to both; for
as he is affected with Complements, and gingling Expressions, so no man pays
dearer for them, since several debts in his Shop. Books are often paid by
them. And this our subtle Hostess knows full well, and therefore fits him to a
Hair, having had the same, or larger advantages of various society than
himself. Having first tickled his ear with what pretty pleasant collections of
wit, she has collected from the ingenious frequenters of her house, she then
endeavors to inform her self what his profession is, and knowing that, not
only praises the function, but promises to buy of him what she or her friends
has occasion to make use of; and that she may make it appear, that she has
not only rich Relations, but acquaintance of good quality, she recounts the
names of such and such men of known Estates and Reputation; in hopes of such
good Customers he calls freely, and drinks as plentifully, and having plied him
with warm clothes, she gives him some small Encouragements of attaining her;
the temptation takes, and every kiss proves a conspiracy; at length her
petulant deportment gains over him a total conquest, yet staves him off
Fruition, by holding him in expectation, and Encouraging his hopes, she makes
his shop-commodities dance after hers, and her Inn or house must be his home:
If in the City, he willingly drinks no where else, obliges his friends to go
with him, and institutes Clubs of several Trades, not to propagate their
interest in the least but his own, and raise his reputation with the Hostess:
If in the Country, he takes the benefit of the Air very often (as he calls it)
for his healths sake, and so deludes his indulgent Wife, that she may not
grumble at his absence, nor suspect his intentions, which are fully bent in the
prosecution of his designed pleasures; and, that he may be the more made
welcome when he comes alone, he often seduceth his Neighbors to accompany him
abroad, who (good natured men) will not deny him that civility, and, though it
be often repeated, (with great expense) yet they grutch it not, finding from
their Country delights so full a compensation. The instigator to these rural
Rambles is better satisfied in his thoughts, having cunningly persuaded them to
club toward that satisfaction he has propounded to himself, which he believes
they never shall have the happiness to enjoy, and probably he neither: for if
she be wife and prudent, she has her Booms to keep off those who design to
clap her aboard; and, haling in her Guns she may seem to be a fenceless
Merchant-man, to invite the Enemy to atraque her, but presently run them out
again, and so make prize of him that would have done the like to her. Her
interest may in some measure be her excuse, when she makes a more then common
familiarity, play the Broker to vend her commodities faster, and at a better
rate. What will not a Wink, a clap on the shoulder, a tread on the Toe, a
wringing by the hand, a leer of the eye, or a low whispering, What say st'a
do, when man's stubborn treacherous design has banished his forecast; the good
features of her face is the sole Center of all his desires, what then can she
desire within the Circle of his ability, which she may not have? what obedience
will he not show? what Tyranny may she not use, when she has gained the
Conquest of his heart, if she can but keep possession of her self; it is true, a
Man of War may board her again and again, and yet she values him not, and never
shall rummidge her Hold, knowing how and when to clear her self of him, by
blowing up her false Decks, not but that she will let a Man freely enter, so
that he be no Picqueroon or Caper, but an honest Merchant, that will not only
largely pay her for the Freight, but make her Supracargo too.

The bucksom lusty man is he (with money in his Pockets) whom she best
esteems; a good face, and a proportionable body shall little avail, where only
Wheedling words, and not expense shall put a value on him; though she love her
pleasure well, yet she will not cut the throat of her profit for its sake;
There are indeed a sort of silly Things, who admire a man for his Parts, and
are infinitely taken with his expressions, which are so many fine Phrases set
together, which serve equally for all Women and are equally to no purpose,
unless sometimes they work upon their weakness; and lest the barrenness of his
invention should not supply him with stuff to entertain these ignorant Pieces
of wantonness; he is very careful of his dress, in the ordering of which he
employs all the faculties of his own soul, and his Tailors; This is the man
they are so taken with, and this is that ill designing Simpleton that will
persuade them to run from their Husbands, with what money or credit they can
carry with them, and accompany him, who shall travel them the whole Kingdom
over till all the money be spent; his Nagg then, that was before so mettlesom,
tires all of a sudden; and to the intent he may be rid of them, it may be he
will do them the kindness, being friend-less, money-less, and in a strange
place, to acquaint their Husbands where their Beasts have strayed, whilst he,
fearing to be called to an account for making a Market of them, is gone another
way, whilst the poor over-ridden Jades are driven home to their shameful
habitations. Methinks it is enough to make the worst of the whole Female Sex to
blush, when they shall consider the greatness of the number of such women, who
consulting their own lust and luxury, never consider the ruin of themselves
and Family. The Wheedling Hostess (that I here describe) is of another
principle; what she does she conceals from the eye of the World if she can;
however, she will so warily demean her self, that the Censorious shall have no
other grounds for their ill report, but bare suspicion, and that dis-reputation
she knows how to house-wife to advantage, winking at the little talk of
Neighbors, that by her silence she may give some occasion to believe, that what
is said of her is a truth, that thereby they may be encouraged to make the like
attempt; Mistake her not, as she is no Niggard of her pleasure, so she is no
Prodigal of her profit, the one being subservient to, and the supporter of each
other; and that she may not lose any of her conquered people, she suffers them
not to lie at Rack and Manger, but diets them for fear of surfeting, for she
knows their constitution, and that their love is like their stomach, feeding on
what it loves, and in the end loath what it loved, till a fresh appetite
re-kindle them, which she does by Denials. Put-offs, Jealousies, Jarrings, and
an hundred other studied humors; all which are as prevalent as the deluding
faces of as many Misses. Her ways are like a Serpent on a Rock, and therefore
shall not trace her any further; yet I might have drawn some observations from
her management of the Kitchen, and her profound advice to the Female-Servants,
how they shall deport themselves to the Guests, neither prostituting nor
denying, but subtly decoying those who make proffers of private kindnesses,
but let this at present be sufficient.

CHAP. XIII. The Master of a Ship, and his Owners.
BEfore we come to display the Wheedles and fallacies that are too frequently
practiced, between the Master of a Ship, and his Owners, 'twill not be
irrequisit to give an account of the Original of this Master, and by what means
he came to rise to the dignity of a Commander.

As to his birth, we will not doubt but that he may be well extracted, but ill
educated, or having too many aboriginall vicious inclinations in him, he too
soon becomes an old sinner of a young man: for conceiving his youth to be the
season of his Lust, and the hour wherein he ought to be bad, or never, full
speed he puts on into all manner of extravagancies, and fearing lest he should
lose this time, he spends it, and so is bringing on his head a deal of misery,
yet is happy in this, that he is insensible; and though he be like a ship
without Pilot or Tackling, driven to and fro, by every blast of his irregular
desires, yet we oftentimes see such as he has been steered by Fortune only,
into the Haven of an unexpected Honor and Happiness.

His Parents at length despairing of any Reformation, having used a thousand
devices to reclaim him, resolve at once to be rid of their shame and care by
fending him to Sea, which willingly receivs into her bosom what is spewed out
of the Land as nauseous.

From a lend Lad ashore he becomes a more wicked Cabbin-boy of a Ship, for
every Storm is his Tutor, teaching him not only how to slight danger, nay,
death it self, but also to curse and pray all in a breath; and when the Tempest
is over, forget how to say his Paternoster; in stead thereof, his Matins and
Vespers are the orderly repeating the Points of the Compass backwards and
forwards, not so much in obedience to his Master, or the Captains Command, as
for fear of the Capstain, to which his neglect in this, and his inbred
Rogueries besides, do cause him frequently to be seized, where the Boat-Swain
rectifies his mistakes in the number of the Points of the Compass, by the
quantity of blows he receives on his back from the Cat of nine Tails.

As he grows in years, so does his knowledge increase in the Art of Navigation,
and in the confidence of that understanding he looks out yearly for employment
and preferment, being bold in his demands, as he is resolute in his designs,
and fears not to speak to his Superiors, though with a mis-becoming
confidence, having bin so accustomed to the astonishing Rhetoric of
loud-speaking Canons.

His many successful Voyages he has made to many remote parts of the Universe,
at length not only furnishes his Pockets with money, but brings him into a
repute and good esteem, among the Merchants of the Exchange, and elsewhere
amongst other people. And to keep up his Reputation among them, his resort to
and about the Royal Exchange, is as certain, and as constant as a Nun, to the
place of her Devotion.

To effect his designs, he finds nothing more expedient than the practice, and
therefore has thoroughly studied the Art of Conformity; among sober persons he
is very serious; among the lighter sort he is jocular, and merry, and let what
will be the company, he never forgets to enlarge the benefits may be made by
traffic abroad, and how successful and prosperous he has been in all his
Voyages, and all to persuade them that he is not only a knowing, but a lucky
man.

According as he finds his designing discourse make an impression on any
Person, so he continually urges it, with whatsoever Reasons and demonstrations
he can produce, and that you should not doubt the truth of what he says, for
confirmation thereof, he refers you to such a Person, who is so much his
friend, nay, creature, that he shall averr the verity thereof, after what
manner best pleases you, either by I Profess, I vow; let me never see my Wife,
nor Children; or Damme 'its as true, as God's in Heaven. Though it is as very a
lie, as ever the Devil, that grand Seducer of mankind, prompted him to utter.

In every respect he studies to imitate an honest man, both in words and
actions, which with his large pretenses, and fair promises, procure him a Wife,
with a round sum of money, and then he makes his projects hit as he please
himself; if not, he has got a credit to be believ'd-that what he says is real,
and how advantageous such a Voyage would prove, had he but Owners according to
his mind, with whom he might Conjoyn, and that he might strike some, whilst he
then is in discourse, he insinuates the smalness of the charge in fitting out a
Vessel; that it will amount but to so much a man, that so many in Conjunction
can be no great Losers, should the Ship miscarry, but should she return in
safety (which by Gods providence he questions not) how great will the incom be
then, and that as long as she is able to float (which may be many years) she
will be a moving Indian-Mine, and will bring them home gold enough, without any
labor or digging into the bowels of the Earth to find it.

By many persuasions of great profits accrewing, he induces some to engage with
him, in the purchase of a Vessel, but having not completed his number of
Owners, he gets into Partnership a Sail-maker, a Rope-mak'r, a Butcher, a
Baker, and it may be too a Block maker: All these are very necessary Implements
to work upon, and Instruments to work by, as hereafter shall be demonstrated,
all the rest are mere Novices in Sea-affairs.

Having completed the four whole Parts of the Ship, by Sixths, Eighths,
Twelfths, or from a Third to a Sixteenth: He then tries all his friends,
acquaints them with his buying a Ship, that he wants money to perform the
Voyage, that whatsoever they supply him with he will faithfully repay upon his
return, and by this means borrows considerable sums: to others that are more
diffident, he will upon the loan of money make over his Quarter-Part for their
security, obliging them to silence, because if it be known it may prejudice a
credit he expects from several. Sometimes when he has got so many real Owners
as make up his Complement, by his subtle Infinuation, and deluding Promises,
he draws in as many more, and so of his Ship makes two and thirty Sixteenths:
This I can assure you has bin done, but it is hard to conceal the Intrigue,
unless the Manager have more craft then ordinary. At last, it is ten to one but
that he bubbles the crafty Scrivener too; for when he has engaged in
Partnership as many as he can, and taken up what money is possible to be had
among his friends and acquaintance, he then singles out some Scrivener (alias,
Goose-quill) to whom he relates his whole Concern, not truly as it is, but as
he would have it, and by making him swallow the Pills of an unconscionable and
uncustomary interest he enlarges his stock by Bottomry, or Bomery,

Rigged, Manned and Victuall'd to his hearts content, with his Own and Owners
stocks aboard, he hoists up sail, and having a fair Gale he has little to do
but walk on the Decks, or go into his Cabin, and there seriously consult with
himself how he shall cheat the Merchant and his Owners. Coming to his Port, and
finding his Markets good, he improves his own stock largely, by shipping from
his Owners, and though he does it unreasonably (besides his Trading to Ports he
had no Commission to sail to, keeping the Vessel out longer then need, to the
Owners great charge, to which he has an excuse should they know it* saying,
that he was put in thither by stress of Weather,) I say, not so satisfied, he
charges them with such a large account, that the expense of the Voyage eats not
only through the profit, but into the very bowels of the Principle. Had not the
Voyage proved considerably gainful, undoubtedly the honest Master would have
taken that care, that the Ship should have been no eyesore to them, or a
Remembrancer, when they saw her what a costly: Whore she has bin unto them,
and in requital of providing for her so well, she at last picked their Pockets;
but he brings her safe into the Thames, to the great joy of his Partners, whom
he prevents coming aboard of him, by going ashore immediately, lest one and the
same joy should bring the real and deluded Owners together, and so his Knavery
would be detected.

Who so brisk upon the Exchange as now he is? and well he may, having secured
most of his own goods without paying Custom, which he knew very well how to do,
having the complete Art of Smugling at his fingers ends: his Owners treat him,
and others court him, and nothing for a while is done, but feasting; but the
Goods being delivered, and the Ship cleared, it is high time for our Master to
come to an account with his Owners: If he meets them all at one time he is
utterly undone; Wherefore such a day he appoints one part to meet, and a day or
two after the other: his friends and relations, to whom he sold what did not
properly belong unto him: or such, who either sent adventures by him or lent
him money, are the first he promises to meet, to be sure, at some Tavern
unknown to the other Party, where Wine and good Cheer is his welcome ashore:
After dinner he acquaints them, that his Voyage proved very indifferent, that
they were for the present but small Gainers, however, he questioned not but the
next time it would be more beneficial; that though his pains proved not so
gainful as he expected, yet there was so much money for them, notwithstanding
the great charges he was at in the Voyage, the Particulars you shall understand
hereafter. Indifferently well satisfied with his serious Protestations and
future Promises, they depart, leaving him to that business he pretends does
immediately call him aboard, whereas all he has now to do, is to put himself
into a fit posture to receive his other sort of Owners, who we will suppose are
met at a Tavern, expecting, according to his hour, the coming of their honest
Master, who is a punctual man, for which they all commend him. Here note, the
better to pass his unjust Accounts, he has paid the Baker for the biscuit, the
Butcher for beef and pork, and the Brewer for his beer, giving them their own
Rates, and snipping with them in their over-charging the Ships Account for such
Provisions: the Rope and Sail-Maker are satisfied in like manner, whilst the
other ignorant Owners are only in expectation of their Dividend.

Having eat and drank plentifully, the Master then produces his Account, which
runs much after this manner: For so many men and boys aboard, amongst whom,
(though the number be defective he charges his Owners with) he goes for two,
that is, as he is Master, and yet supplies the place of a Chyrurgeon, whose
Chest he pretends likewise to furnish at his own charge, for a general benefit
to his sickly men, though there be hardly so much as will serve his own turn.
Item, for fresh Provision, Fruit, Sugar, and the like, he took in at such a
Port, for his weak and sick men, though he came not near that Port within 50
Leagues, which money he charges, though never disburst, to help out the expenses
of his own extravagancies, Item, for an Anchor and Cable lost riding in a
dangerous Bay, Or Harbor, which he was forced to cut, and stand off to Sea, to
save the ship and Seamens lives, which Anchor if lost, was no otherwise than by
Mooring his Crazie-Vessel in a Brandy-House, and by the same consequence, might
have put to account the loss of his Bow-Sprit and Main-yard, Item, for a
Fore-Topsail, which was blown away, or out of pure kindness flew to shore, to
make his female Creditors amends for taking up their Linen, and not making
Equivalent satisfaction. Item, for a new one (that cost forty shillings) four
pounds. Item, for Extraordinary charges in lying Wind-Bound so long in such a
Port, and such a Port, being forced to buy fresh provisions to save the
victuals, stowed for the maintenance of the Voyage; though his only stay was
to traffic for himself that while. Item, for another Cable, which in the dead
of the night crawled out of a Port-hole, and swam like an Eel under water, that
it might not be discovered; for if it was, the poor thing knew it would be
hindered of its design, in getting home before the Ship, that it might been
tweez'd in pieces; and so be made capable of serving its Masters Neck, in a
slenderer condition. Item, for a Main-topsail a little cut on purpose by the
Boat-swain, that by the connivance of the Master it might be doomed as
unserviceable, and so taken off the yard to be made saleable. Item, for the
damage the said Master sustained in his part by the loss of the said sail, by
the Roguery of the Seamen, who, seeing their Officers commit greater offenses
than they had as yet committed, converted this sail to their own uses by
cutting out each man his Snack, one a Doublet, another Breeches, or what might
serve to accommodatetheir nakedness. Item, for a Mainmast that in a dreadful
storm come by the board, though they were becalmed, or wanted a convenient
brisk breeze all the Voyage.

These are not half the Imprimis and the Items he gives them an account of,
which one would think were enough to startle a New Sea- Adventurer, who
wondering how all these accidents should happen, is silenced by the crafty Sail
or Rope-maker, and backed by the Brewer, Baker and Butcher, who unanimously
affirm, that such like casualties are usual, that they themselves have woefully
experienced them, and therefore were the less troubled at them now. The Master
hereupon drawing what money he had purposed to pay his Owners beforehand,
throws it on the Table; some refuse to pass the Account, whilst the
major-interested part cry, Come, come, Gentlemen, the Account is fair enough,
pass it, you see we do; and so in the end, to their considerable loss, they are
all wrought to a compliance.

The Master having perfected his Accounts, moves for a Stock against the next
Voyage; after some pause it is granted, and the Owners aforesaid, whose Trades
correspond for fitting out the Ship, act their parts as they did before; Nor is
he negligent in Wheedling his other deceived Owners, who with much ado, it may
be, contribute something to his Proposals, though not so much as formerly, yet
enough with what he received from the rest to do his business: for having
secured abroad in safe hands what was committed to his trust, in his return he
knocks the Ship in the Head, by running her aground wilfully, or otherwise; with
a Proviso, that he is sure to save all their lives; After this, being unwilling
to be one of Jobs Messengers, he absconds himself in foreign parts, leaving
his Creditors at home to bewail their misfortunes, and condemn their Credulity.

Some of them have an excellent way to cheat their Owners of their Slaves as
they come from Guinny, thus; It may be the Master may take in threescore or
fourscore Blacks, which he intends for the Barbados or some other places, the
Purser, according to orders and connivance, enters on board so many short; the
Doctor or Chyrurgeon, supposing more in the Hold then entered in the Pursers
Book, makes a private search for his benefit, for half a crown per head is his
due, and finding twenty it may be supernumerary, acquaints the Captain or
Master therewith, who tells him (probably after some dispute) that what he says
is true, however he would not have him make any words of it, if so he will give
him his Fee, and somewhat over -plus; the same thing he promises likewise to
the Purser, on this condition, they will set their Hands to an Instrument, that
he shipped from Guinny such a number of slaves, and no more; they relying upon
his word and promise, franckly do it; but returning into England, and demanding
of the Master the performance of his promise, he denies that ever he made any
such thing, and peremptorily tells them, as he will not give them a farthing,
so he values them not a Fart, and dares them to do their worst; irritated by
this Language they complain to the Owners, and before the Masters face accuse
him for Cheating them of so many Slaves; he denies it, and cunningly drawing
out their Acknowledgement under hand and seal, asks them whether they know
their own act and deed; They not denying it, Look you here, Gentlemen, (says
he) are not these a Parcel of pure Rogues and Rascals, that durst offer to
stain my Reputation, by accusing me of Cheating and Injustice, when here is
their, own Hands to condemn their lying Tongues.

Another I heard of, who being Masters-Mate in a long Voyage, the Master died,
and thereupon he assumed his place, and undertook the whole Concerns of the
Ship, of which the Deceased had a considerable part, coming home, he applied
himself to the Widow, who was left in a very good condition, and so pli^d her
with Protestations of love and affection, that she verily believed him to be in
earnest; and that she might not seem indebted to him for kindnesses received,
she retalliated all his, not only by possessing him of what Concerns she had
in the World, but also gave him liberty to taste those Sweets which properly
belong to the Marriage Bed; by this means he made a total Conquest of her
person and estate, and by their juggling together baffled the other Owners; but
when he had gotten all into his hands he baffled her that baffled them, for
fear of being baffled himself also. I shall say no more of him but this, which
was a pleasant repartie of his Owner, who asking him for a Mizen-sail to save
two, Replied; thou shall have it Master to save two, since in all my life time
I never knew thou could save one.

A thousand of their tricks and Cozenages might be here inserted, which for
want of information, at present I omit, but in due time, as soon as they shall
come to my knowledge I Will freely impart them to my Reader.

CHAP. XIV. The Scrivener.
THE Scrivener being already ingeniously dissected, in a Character not long
since Printed, I shall forbear Killing him again, but only give you a short
Account of some remarkable Passages in his Life and Conversation.

Upon his first starting into the World, having but little moneys in his hands
of his own, or others, being but a young man, and moneyed men fearful of
trusting him, he is forced to employ what he has by him to the best advantage;
and like an honest man that intends to thrive in this World, though he be
damned for it for ever in the World to come, he first tries how widely his
Conscience will stretch, and, if he finds it hide-bound, he will pinch it with
his teeth, as a Shoemaker his leather, but that he will make it give way.
Having gotten the Conquest over that, he begins to feed on the Poor, as the
Great Eater of Kent did on Offals, by lending them petty sums, and receive it
again by so much per week: if forty shillings were the sum to be lent, the
Borrower had but five and thirty, and out of that paid twelve pence for the
Bond, which money must be paid each week, by twelve pence for every pound. If
the Sum were any thing considerable, though he had the money by him, yet he
would make use of his accustomed delays, though he knew the Borrower
responsible, and would not part with a farthing, till he had made enquiry after
that he knew as well as any man could tell him; and in the end must have
Procuration for his own money, and if Continuation be required, he shall pay
sauce for it. Though the Law allows but six per Cent. yet he knows several ways
to make forty, by making in the first place a Bond, which shall be due to a
Confident of his, a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, and recovering the penalty at
Common Law, leaves the poor Debtor to sue for relief in Chancery one that is a
Prisoner; By lending half-money, half goods in the next place, fifty pounds in
money, and fifty pounds in goods, which shall not be worth much above fifteen:
By lending in the next place, fifty pound to a person, who shall become bound
with one of his acquaintance for one hundred, who is going beyond sea, to whom
he shall give privately a discharge, and the other shall be left to pay the
money: And lastly, (not to trouble you with more instances) by taking
Judgments, or Warrants of Attorney, and for a little money sweep away three
times the value in commodities, to the utter ruin of many Families. A
Mort-gage is a sweet gain to him; what a fine Bill of Charges will he reckon:
Fifteen shillings for two or three days Horse-hire to view the estate, for his
expenses in the Journey eighteen shillings, though he did eat nothing but Bread
and Cheese all the time he was out, so much for his pains, so much for loss of
time, and so much for expedition; all which must be deducted out of what is to
be received, and if the money be not duly paid, he infallibly seals a Lease of
Ejectment, and enters on the Premises, and (to make as sure of it as he can)
he presently passes it over to another, one of his Confederates; and do so
order the business between them, that the Borrower, shall find but little
satisfaction in a Suit of Chancery.

To be short, the Tricks and Wheedles of a Scrivener are so many, that they are
innumerable. How many devices has he in Last Wills and Testaments, not only
altering the mind of the Testator, but many times making himself Executor? How
many Knavish Partialities does he use in Lease? What benefit does he not make
by Arbitrations, by drawing up an Award, making it void or obliging to whom he
pleases; by Counter-Bonds and Letters of Attorney, by putting in his use for my
use? Lastly, consider his dexterity and ability in counterfeiting Bonds, by
which and other indirect means he has gotten a plentiful estate, to live
pleasantly here, to be miserable hereafter.

FINIS.

