A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, January xvj. 1675/6.

By ROGER HAYWARD, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to HIS MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the Sign of the George, near St.
Dunstan's Church, in Fleetstreet, 1676.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
The Prophet Malachi in the 3d chapter of his Prophecy and the 14th verse,
complains thus of the Jews: Ye have said it is vain to serve God, and what
profit is there that we have kept his ordinance?

Wisdom and Goodness do not delight to exact those services, which are neither
for the advantage of the imposer nor observer, and when power enforces such it
renders them and it self irksom and tedious: Since the righteousness of men
cannot profit their Maker, we cannot reasonably think He should enjoin them any
thing, which it is not their advantage to observe: Were His Commandments
fruitless, they would unavoidably prevent that cheerful obedience they do
require, by stifling those hopes that should inspire it; some few superstitious
Flatterers, they might gain upon, Lovers and Friends they would have none; to
labor for the wind which satisfies not, would chill the warmest affections,
and force the humblest heart to complain as those in my Text do.

Of whom I have only this to note, when lately they sat by the waters of
Babylon they wept when they remembered Sion, and their language then no doubt
was, O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of hosts! one day in thy Courts
is better than a thousand! And now through the mercies of God they are there:
But scarce was the Altar warm with the Sacrifice, but the vows and the tears
they had offered for the House of God when she lay in the dust, are turned into
scorn and contempt now she is in her glory; and they talk at such a rate, as if
they had never been, either in Babylon or in the Temple; Your words have been
stout against me, verse the 13th; stout indeed, for,

Ye have said it is vain to serve God, and what profit is there that we have
kept his ordinance? A Bold charge! that the Service of God was a stale useless
device, an unprofitable imposition on their labor and time, their Folds and
their Granaries were emptied, their business and pleasures interrupted, their
spirits and wits palled, and they nothing advantaged by it; and therefore in
the next verse they go on in the same strain, the proud are happy, those that
work wickedness prosper, and those that tempt God (by such bold defiance, and
never trouble themselves with crowching before Him) are delivered: How happy
was Harpalus, who never was at the charge of a grain of Incense on the Gods? I
would this language were as obsolete as it is truly barbarous! and that there
were none that gloried in it as a brave and lofty Idiom! But though there were
none that publicly avowed, or secretly thought the Service of the Lord of
Lords is useless; yet since our evil lusts are continually endeavoring (with
so much success) to make it so, I hope it will not be lost time (on both
accounts) to justify the wisdom of our being here; and show, that we are no
where employed on a better account, than in the Courts of the Lord's House, and
that he never required it of us to seek his face in vain.

And in order to it, I hope I may take the Being of a God, and the right of His
service, for granted, and if any in the mad hurry of their lusts deny the one,
or the other, I would only desire to know of them, how they came by their own
Beings; and what title they can show to any service they expect, which is not
merely of others courtesy, and may not soon be cut off, if there be none due
to God.

I have then no more to do, but to declare,

1. What the Service here meant is. 2. What the certain profits of it are. 3.
What are the causes of that vanity men are so ready to charge it with.
The sense of the Divine Perfections naturally seizes us with admiration, and
this (if our guilt interpose not, to turn the light of his countenance into a
consuming fire) soon grows into the highest veneration and love, which is the
principal, the eternal service of God, which (if it be not toiled and weakened
by our worldly lusts) cannot lie cloister d in our breasts, but must, by its
mighty force, break out into that lowly homage and ready obedience, which are
the necessary products of it, and the other services that we owe him: The first
of these (his worship) is the subject of the Text, as the whole scope of the
Prophet shows, which is to regulate those abuses, to correct that Heathenism,
which stole with them out of the Captivity into the second Temple: This being a
Duty we owe to Him, first as his Creatures, then as sinful and miserable, but
not past hope, consists of those acts which are the clearest acknowledgments of
our entire dependence on his goodness, and subjection to his authority, such
are our humble confessions, prayers, praises, and meek receiving his laws, for
what other solemn recognition of our honor of Him can we make, than the
devoting our selves to his Mercy and his Government.

The Ordinance of Sacrifice, mentioned in the Text, seems indeed to have been
the whole of the Jewish Temple Service, but if we observe, from the Prophets,
the low account God made of it, we must conclude, that (what antiquity soever
it boast) it was but the shadow of this reasonable service; What designed
prospect it had (as a Type or visible Prophecy) on the Sacrifice of our
Saviors Body, I do not enquire, since there is not any notice taken of it by
Moses in his Laws, to excite the Peoples Faith or Devotion; Jer. 7.23. Psalm.
50.5.
but that (besides that obedience which it chiefly intended) it was an oblation
of the Offerer himself, by his representative, to God, (...) as Philo describes
it, visible confessions, prayers, and praises, is so obvious a meaning of it,
that none can miss or doubt of; nor was this way of Worship merely trifling and
scenical, but (if we consider the time, the place, the temper of that People)
necessary to save them from falling into the tempting Idolatries of the
Nations, 'till such time as the World was prepared for the Holy Offering
foretold in the 1. chapter, 11. verse, the (...), Apol. 2.
as Justin Martyr renders it, Con. Marc. c. 22.
mundities sacrificorum, as Tertullian, the sacrifices of prayer, praises, and
a broken and contrite Spirit. Ps. 50.14, 15.


This is that true spiritual Worship our Blessed Savior has established,
having scattered those clouds of smoke, ashes, and blood, that darkened the
Temple, by the clear discoveries of Gods Will, and the doubts and fears which
darkened Men's Souls, by the greatest encouragements of his Spirit to assist, and
Himself to intercede for them; and those two positive Rites he has superadded
to it, are only the early dedication, and frequent rendition of our selves to
God, ratified by the usual Solemnities of Baptizing and Feasting, which he
consecrated to the remembrance of the two greatest Blessings, His Spirit, and
His Blood.

By which it appears, how necessary the revelation of the Gospel was to our
comfortable and acceptable Service of God; had he not shown us Himself by his
Son, told us how, and in what Name we are to approach Him, what we are to ask
of Him, and what will please Him, we must have wandered in the dark after the
Heathens, multiplied our Gods and our Altars, and at length, being tired with a
vain search, have reared one to the unknown God.

Lastly, as for those Rites and Modes Men are so fierce against, would they
would believe us when we plainly avow, they are no parts of the Christian
Worship, but since the Gospel (not meant for a ritual but rule of
righteousness) gives not one direct Precept for any the most material
Circumstance in it, and confusion and disorder must, without miracles, expose
and ruin it, therefore it is necessary, that some should be appointed and
observed: And those that are scared from the Service of God, by every little
Mode in it that is not of Divine institution, must leave, not this but all
Churches, and finally fall out with their own most careful Addresses to God; so
uneasy to it self, as well as others, is this superstitious fear of offending
God by such little things, as do not deserve his most wise and glorious Anger,
yea so unfriendly to the very Service it self has it proved, that I fear it
has emboldened too many, that are more hardy, to lay it by wholly, as a nice
and troublesome, or to trifle with it as an indifferent thing, and made it too
necessary for us to prove, that it is not in vain for us to serve God, which is
the next thing I am to do.

As our inward Honor is the Principle of our outward Service, so is this
Service the nourishment of that Honor, and so the whole proof will lie upon
this Enquiry, What real benefit redounds to our Souls, and to the World, by the
Reverence of God upheld therein? We dare not think so meanly of Him, as that He
designs any advantage to Himself by it; if we think the glory He requires of us
by it is any new accession to Him, or any thing more than the communication of
his Goodness to us, under the pretense of adoring Him, we advance our selves,
as if we with our hands lift up, with our Halelujahs, did support his Throne.

Again, that his Service is useful to procure the pardon of our sins, the care
of his Providence, and Eternal Life we are all assured, but who is so foolish
as to think, that there is any natural virtue in our breath, which grows cold
upon our lips, to draw down these Heavenly Influences? or so immodest to
presume, that these great favors are the just purchase of a few good words, a
little patient attendance, and lowly behavior? It remains then, that the great
profit of our Worship is not in any effects or impressions it makes upon God,
with whom is no shadow of change, but in those dispositions it begets in us,
whereby we are fitted for the Divine Bounty; therefore the first and immediate
benefit of it is to our Souls, and the good influence it has upon them, is to
frame them to the Divine Likeness.

'Twas the sense of the best Heathens; that the imitation of God is the best
Worship of Him, that it is the proper result of it, if we do not flatter with
our lips, is evident, because the true veneration of any thing, transforms all
the thoughts and desires into its resemblance, 2 Cor.3.18.
beholding the glory of God we are changed into the same image; which Image is
not a dead Idol of the Brain, the fantastic wealth of that wild Athenian, who
told all the Ships in the Haven for his own, but vital Goodness, Righteousness
and true Holiness, which are the only participation of the Divine Nature we are
capable of. Behold then the Treasures of the Temple! for sure all the Graces of
Gods Spirit, and all those Divine and Heavenly Dispositions, that enlarge,
strengthen, and adorn the Spirit of a Man, that make it equal to all good
actions and evil accidents, that fit him to be a God to others, a Heaven to
himself, and a Friend to his God, do amount to no contemptible store: Those
that will allow Virtue to be no more than some common Matter, stamped with
Authority, do by that grant it to be current Coin, but certainly it is hard for
any to be in earnest and say, that those Excellencies which have civilized the
World, and support Societies, which put Men in the firmest possession of their
own and one another Hearts, which all Men admire, and the worst counterfeit,
should not be worth the looking after.

To show how effectual an Instrument the Worship of God is to the obtaining of
them, I shall not insist upon the Divine Appointment, which yet, were it but
clay and spittle, were enough to justify its sufficiency, for we live in an
Age, wherein not all other only, but even the Divine Authority is suspected,
and to quote the Text is judged by some as unconcluding in Divinity, as by
others in Philosophy. Nor will I urge the approbation of those, who have
faithfully tried it, and by its Ministry arrived to be great Examples of
Goodness, and the vicious Habits and Lives of those that despise and neglect
it: However this may be evaded, yet the force of these plain Considerations
may, I hope, by Gods grace, make it undeniable.

1. That the Reverence of God is the only firm Foundation to build a true and
stable Goodness on: The Laws of Nature, by that mixture of Natures that is in
us, are so easy to be misinterpreted, confounded, and shaken, that the
structure must needs be tottering that is built upon them; and how faint and
flexible must all outward engagements to it be, when a more cogent
inconvenience presses it, so that these leave it a mere chance thing, just as
circumstances fall out, whether there be any obligation to it or no: But the
Reverence of the Great God preserves it ever firm and inviolable, over-awes all
powers that may assault it, and makes the strongest temptations against it to
be its greatest glory; Genesis 17.1^.
Walk before me (says God to Abraham) and be perfect. But how can this
Reverence be preserved in our hearts, without frequent and solemn attendance
and adoration of Him, any more than the Authority of a King, without his Courts
of Justice and Judgment? The strongest habits, yea those natural affections,
that are most deeply engraved on our hearts, wear away gradually by disuse and
strangeness: The Principles of Reason, Consent of Nations, Order and Beauty of
the Universe, may keep alive the Belief of his Being; but these (without the
frequent and solemn proclamation of his Will, and invocation of his Name) are
but as the dead Records of a Chronicle or Calendar, which will no better keep
up the Honor of the Creator, than they do the Wonders of the Creation. Soon
would the incursions of worldly vanities, seconded with our own sensual lusts,
bear down that (...), Clem. Alex.
that natural inclination we have to God, and all the Characters he has left
of Himself in our Conscience, or in the Creation, if they were not often
quickened and refreshed by the most devout remembrances; and that deep
forgetfulness of God (which we call Atheism) is not born with, nor suddenly
seizes upon any, but creeps upon them insensibly, by the disuse of his Service.

2. But supposing we could preserve the Reverence of God without it, yet
neither can this, or any other Principle make us good, without his assistance
to make it present and powerful. This is a Truth, which the Conscience of the
worst Men seals, for why else do they fly to Nature, Necessity, and
Impossibility, to be their Compurgators? And the Confessions of the best do
avow, who finding the greatest difficulty to be rooted in themselves, cry out
with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
Oh wretched men that we are who shall deliver us! Yea, and those that never
heard of the mighty Wind on Pentecoste, yet would not grant, that any could be
excellent, sine afflatu divino, so the Orator; (...), so Hierocles. And however
Men may pride themselves in their (...), and think their Souls can mend
themselves when they list, yet they dare not trust their Bodies, when sick and
languishing, to the weak remains of life and strength, to effect their own
recovery; Arise, take up thy bed and walk, would be a scornful taunt from any
Mouth but our Makers; some new Spirits and Succors they are forced to fly to,
to join with and reinforce their poor baffled powers, for what can they do,
when they themselves are oppressed and out of order? There is indeed an (...), a
self-moving power in the Soul, which can never be lost, there is an Elatery, a
motus restitutionis, an endeavor to Goodness in the Conscience, which cannot
be extinguished; but when this power is corrupted, when this spring is rusted,
and a mighty weight lies upon it, what weak effects are we to expect from it?
When the light within us is darkness, when reason it self (the (...)) has
tamely given up its Sovereignty, to be led captive by diverse lusts, how can it
alone bring about its restoration?

And now, if the one necessity of the Divine Assistance be admitted, I know not
how the other of humble applications to Him can modestly be denied. Gods Grace
descends not like the common Blessings of the Light and Showers, whether Men
desire it or no, it were not grace but force, not assistance but violence, were
it not earnestly and humbly sought; Mat. 7.7
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find. And of the success of this
there can be no doubt, if we consider in the next place,

3. The direct propriety our Worship of God has to make us good: There are but
two ways, without miracle, whereby we may ever hope it, by being clearly
instructed, and sufficiently obliged and encouraged to it, whatsoever does
these does edify, all else is but empty noise and rituality. Now what clearer
accounts of Goodness can we desire, than those we have from the Laws and Life
of Goodness it self, which took a Body and dwelt among us? and what stronger
bonds could Wisdom and Love heve knit, than those of Duty and Interest, of
Gratitude and Hope, of Assistance and Success? where our Maker entreats, our
Savior bleeds, his Spirit and our Consciences contend with us, where his
terrors do beset us, his bowels of compassion yern toward us, and the Heavens
are opened before us, how is it possible we break through all to our ruin?
These are the engagements God lays on us in his Worship, but we are not merely
passive there, we come not to be enchanted and chained, but to bind all these
upon our selves by our own act and deed; when we confess, we do not tell a sad
story, but abjure our iniquities before God, his Holy Angels, and Men; when we
pray, we do not plead or argue with God, but we humbly declare our purposes,
and our requests, if they are serious, become our vows; when we praise him, we
cause not our voices to be heard on high, but we humbly breath out our hearts
to him, having no greater present for his Love. Lastly, when we receive the
Holy Communion, we devote our selves to Him with all the solemnities of fealty
and friendship, and how stupendous soever a misery some have made of that Act
of Worship, (by straining the holy Expressions of the Fathers into an (...) of
it) yet in this our plain despised notion, it is an excellent Instrument of
uniting us to the Holy Jesus in spirit, and if we believe Him, the flesh
profits nothing. John 6.63.


Briefly, the sum of all that Goodness, that can make us acceptable to God, to
others, to our selves, is Humility, Charity, and purity of Spirit. For the
first, Men never see themselves in a true light (those especially who have few
or none superior to them upon Earth) but when they stand in His Presence,
there the shadows fly away, and they (as Job) see and abhor themselves in dust
and ashes, Job 42.5, 6.
there men of all degrees are found to be lighter than vanity. How great
improvement Charity gains by it, will be the next enquiry: But how is it
possible, that we, who live in continual familiarity with the World (chiefly
those who are under no restraints of want or fear) should keep our selves
undefiled, without those solemn retirements from it, whereby we may disintangle
our Minds from the Cares and Pleasures of it, and by tasting the good things of
the world to come, correct the keenness of our Appetites to this?

It Is to be expected, that some should reply to this Discourse, Has the Temple
then monopoliz'd all Goodness? Is Grace appropriated only to the Priests Lips?
Can Reason do nothing without those dull Formalities? Were not Greece and Rome
as fruitful of happy Spirits, as the City that was watered with the River of
God?

God forbid, 2 Cor. 4.7.
that we poor earthen Vessels should ever arrogate any power over the Treasures
committed to us! And would to God all the Courts of Princes, the Seats of
Justice, and Schools of Learning, were holy as the Courts of the Lords House!
But if many of the (...), of the best natural dispositions, of the strongest
faculties, and of the greatest advantages of education and observation, do yet
fall short of those Virtues that may thence be expected, there is no reason to
be given for it, but their neglects of the Ministry of Religion; and by this
God lets the World see, that He is not to be left out in a business that so
wholly depends upon Him, that whosoever plants or waters, 1 Cor. 3.6.
He alone must give the increase. It Is no doubt, but the Capitol in Rome, and
the Schools at Athens, had some Souls in them, not commonly to be matched in
our best Oratories, but we find none such, who had not a strong sense of, and
awful regard to the Deity, though their Notions and Worship run muddy and foul,
falling into the Country stream; and if they were better with less help than
we, the more only is our blame: Let us not charge the Vineyard of Gods own
planting for a barren Soil, since the Wilderness has been so fruitful.

2. But this is not all the benefit we gain by our Service of God; when the
World is well awakened out of its enthusiastic slumber and giddiness, Men will
see that Religion was not shorn for a Recluse to the Church, but whatever is
good for the Souls, is likewise so for the Societies of Men: Now the Worship of
God being so fit (as I have shown) to beget in us those dispositions, which are
(not the Ornaments of a Cloister, but the Pillars of the Earth, and) as
necessary to the very Being of a Society, as the Air they breath in, or the
Ground they tread on, does on that score turn to a vast account: Upon which the
wisest Heathens have declared it to be (...): Plut.
But of this I shall give but two Instances, but they are such, wherein the
peace and prosperity of Men is wholly bound.

1. A cheerful submission and regard to their several Superiors.

2. A mutual confidence in one another.

How mean and humble soever Piety looks, though it dazles not the Eyes as
spendour, nor terrifies the Fancy as power does, yet it arrests the Heart with
a more irresistible force than either; for it slakes that envy, tames that
stubbornness, and lays those jealousies, which those are apt to raise, and
haunt uneasy minds: For who will grudge to submit to, fear any evil from, or
dare any evil to him, that is a lover and beloved of his God? So the Authority
of Parents, Priests, Masters, and Magistrates, is at once sweetened and
reinforced. Thus the Heathens descents of their Rulers from their Gods, their
frequent inspirations by, and familiar converses with them, were not the
contrivance of their Fancy, but their Wisdom: 'Twas the Sacrifice that served
both the Capitol and the Camp, whetted their Wits and their Swords, made them
strong Laws, won them rich Provinces, and two of the widest Empires now in the
World stand upon the Credit of a Prophet and a Priest. Thus Moses his continual
Addresses to God, awed that stubborn People, as much as his powerful Rod, that
turned the hard Rock into a Spring of Waters. But we need not go so far, we our
selves have sufficiently felt the deep impressions of a pretended devotion,
when a days fasting (or seeking God) has more enraged Men to the spoil, than
the greatest largess could. And though the most barbarous usage of the most
Pious King, may seem to weaken the security of Religion, yet we must remember,
that there were a People, from whose fury the real Divinity of our Savior,
without his Legions of Angels, could not defend Him. But I hope there are none
among us so far relapsed, whom after so much mercy, an equal Piety would not
recover and overcome.

2. The Worship of God begets a good confidence among Men: Did it no more than
make them known and familiar to each other, and remove that strangeness which
begets suspicion, it were not quite contemptible; but this is the least of its
virtue. Freedom of converse is the best means to assure Men of each other, they
that communicate their thoughts and purposes exchange minds, and give the
greatest mutual hostages they can. Now if our Tongues keep pace with our
Service, and our Hearts with them, there is none more intimate, though not so
particular, conversation as here, where, if we mark what we say, we jointly
discover our weightiest thoughts, our highest designs, our nearest
inclinations, yea, so ingenuous and free we are, as not to dissemble our very
necessities and infirmities: All this we do, or we do nothing, when we confess
and pray together; and to hatch us yet closer, our Prayers are Vows of Charity,
when we lift up our hands to Heaven, we strike them with each other, for we beg
Gods compassion and mercies, on condition of our own; and what is all we come
to hear, but such Arguments, such Examples of Love and good will, as will link
us together, either in love or condemnation: But if we go higher, to the Feast
of Charity, there are all those endearments of bleeding love, and flowing
plenty, which may tame and win the fiercest Natures; in all which (behold and
wonder!) the God of Love and Peace Himself becomes a Mediator betwixt us, using
all the motives of his Authority and Love, to lay our quarrelsom lusts, and
unite us in an everlasting friendship. But if our Service reach not the
perfection of its design, yet this great good it usually does, it begets a good
opinion of Men's Consciences, which is the best hold they can have of each
other; so the Easterns ratified their Covenants with Sacrifice, and the foulest
Character of Doeg's Treachery to David was, Psalm. 55.14.
that they took sweet counsel together, and went into the House of God like
friends. And now, if our worshipping God together proves not so strong a cement
of friendship as trading, or fighting, or drinking together, it is because we
make our gain, our glory, and our belly our God, in that the mediation of these
is more powerful with us, than that of our great God and Savior. Lastly, it is
to be hoped, that (after so sad experience) none will lay the charge of those
Contentions and Wars, that have wasted the Church, at her doors; it is not Gods
Service, but the service of Men's lusts and passions (that for their better
credit take that name) which has done those mischiefs, but if the Religious
Feuds have still been (as is observed) the most fatal, it makes good the truth,
for their Friendships have at the same time been most firm.

3. Lastly, if at the foot of this account I add, that the Service of God fits
us for his eternal vision, it will (to us that hope and pray for that
happiness) be judged very profitable; so closely are the Interests of both
Worlds connected, that whatever disposes us to live well and happily here, fits
us likewise for life eternal; for neither will our Natures be otherwise
changed, than from the bondage of our corruptible bodies; Phil. 3. last.
nor our Service, than from those rudiments of this world, prayer and
penitence, which our present sinful and necessitous state of Pilgrimage
requires; the Blessed Angels ever hearken to the Voice of his Word, Psalm. 103.20
and never cease to give glory and honor to God; Rev. 4.8.
Men's future portions will not be assigned them according to their hopes, but
their habits; they therefore that have spent all their days in the Tents of
wickedness, whose tongues have been full of cursing and bitterness, whose hands
have never been lift up but to violence or vanity, without some more sudden,
violent, and miraculous change, than they have any ground to hope for, would be
utterly incapable to be happy in that Society, in those Employments, to which
they have been so wholly estranged. But how easy, how pleasant will our
passage be, from the Courts of Gods House to the Holy of Holies? How ready, how
joyful shall we be, to join with the Heavenly Quire in their Hallelujahs?

Thus useful it is to serve God, to our Souls, to our Societies, to our Hopes
of Heaven; and yet it is too sadly true, that too many are neither the fitter
to live nor to dye for it, and that is the matter of the last Enquiry, viz.

3. How it becomes so vain, it must be from one of these Causes: 1. That Men
misapply it to a wrong end, or 2. That they manage it a wrong way, either of
which must needs render the best things useless.


1. There are too many so gross, as to think there is no profit but 20 per
cent. nor gain but ready money. This was the Jews humor, who brought their
Sacrifice as to a Market, not an Altar, and came to barter the Flesh and Blood
of their Beasts for fair Harvests and full Vintages, and when they missed,
complained all was in vain. That the Service of God has a friendly regard to
worldly prosperity, is evident, because it inclines Men to be serious, engages
them to be honest, diligent, and temperate in all things, and inspires them
with that calmness of mind, and comfortable trust in Gods Providence, which are
surer ways to prosperity, than all the little slights of the Mammonist; but if
we expect more from it, we defeat it, and deceive our selves.

Others, that would be more spiritual, put not their Devotion to that drudgery,
which is fitter for the sweat of their brows; all the gain they expect from it,
is to have their Fancies a little refreshed, their Wits exercised, their
Opinions, and perhaps their Lusts soothed, and (if it so happen) away go they,
well satisfied, though indeed poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked; but,
if this be all their aim, they might have gained as much in the Fields or the
Theater. Great is that joy, and full of glory, that all pious Souls have in
their Devotions; but it is not such as is born of noise or art, and dies with
it, but that more solid and lasting, that springs from the sense of Goodness
entering like light and health into the Soul.

Lastly, some perhaps are so vain, as to hope by their Service to raise a
mighty Interest in Heaven, and by their loud importunities, or more studied
addresses, to be able to tire or charm the Almighty, to do what they will,
without any regard to any impressions made on their own Spirits. What a wild
conceit is this of our Service, which is enough to spoil it, were it winged
with the ardours of Angels? Can Men be serious, and think that their
Confessions can inform Him of more than He knows of them? that their Petitions
can direct Him what to do? or that their Language and Passions can overcome Him
against his Will? No, no! we confess only to the melting down our own Iron
necks, we pray to excite and engage our own stupid and false hearts, we
intercede to enlarge our charity, we praise and laud Him to increase his love
in us; so much as is the influence of our Service upon our selves, so much only
is our gain; if this be not our aim, we only sow the Wind, and may reap the
Whirlwind.

2. The other Cause of the vanity of our Service, is our using it a wrong way.
It Is too common with us to post it off (as a piece of Knightservice) to a
Proxy, and to think we have nothing to do in it, but to lend an Eye, or an Ear,
to make a dumb show, or a formal noise. Were the Holy Offices of Religion some
common vile drudgery, or some powerful Charms or Spells, they would not deserve
or need our thoughts; but they are of another nature, wise and reasonable
Instruments for our good, and therefore require an intent mind, and an honest
and good heart, to make them effectual. If Men come beforehand resolved, that
hearing they will not hear, nor consider, though the Angels, or the Holy Jesus
would again descend, they would baffle their Ministry. The Ground we stand on
is not so Holy, but if we do not (...), Pyth. Symb. Eccles. 5.1.
keep our feet when we come into the House of God, we may return as impure as
we came; nor is the Air so fine, as to cleanse us from all pollution, by the
mere ventilation of it; Moses his Tabernacle, nor Solomon's Temple, (though
they had the Shecinah, the Glory of the Lord filling them) could not hallow a
careless Worshipper: Did we negotiate our business, our Trade, with as little
thoughtfulness as we pray and hear, our gains would come in but slowly; we need
not indeed that subtilty, and those cautions, in our dealings with God, as with
Men, yet certainly He alone is not to be served, nor our Souls only to be
improved, without any thoughts or care for them. And indeed, how is it
possible, that such excellent Prayers, so often sent up to the Throne of Grace,
should perish in the Air? that all the powerful perswasives to Goodness, that
Heaven and Earth afford, which ring continually in our Ears, should never reach
our Hearts? that having one Advocate within us to help our Infirmities, and
another in Heaven to present our Services, yet they should be still
ineffectual? It could not be, but that we only are inexorable, and will not
hear our own Prayers; we are imperswasible, and will not believe our own
selves, our own Consciences: We hear and approve, and yet we reject the
Counsels of God; we cry to God for mercy, and yet will have none upon our
selves; we ask for grace, and yet will not take it when it is offered to us, or
turn it into wantonness. Thus, whilst we anticipate our latter end, and stand
like Tombs in the Church, full of uncleanness, what good can we expect? When
the sacrifice fell, but the beast lived in Men; when the incense ascended, but
their filthiness remained in their skirts; when the Air was filled, and every
thing moved with their cries, but their own insensate hearts; then had the
Prophet reason to complain, Jer. 7.4, 8.
Ye trust in lying words, saying, the Temple of the Lord; the Temple of the
Lord, ye trust in lying words which cannot profit; and it is no wonder to hear
themselves complain, It is in vain to serve God.

And now upon the whole we may conclude, 1. what a necessary connection there is
betwixt the Services of Worship and Obedience: I pray it may never happen to
these, as it has done to others as near Allies (Faith and Good Works, Reason
and Grace) to be put at odds, and both to lose by a needless competition; and
yet our practice bids too fair for putting a doctrinal difference betwixt
these; why else do we offer God, an hour or two's attendance for a whole weeks
licentiousness, a few bows and Amens for a many high provocations? We run
deeply in debt to his Justice, in confidence, that the next time we wait on Him
in his House, we shall clear all, and then, as if we had left Him our Debtor,
we forbear not any thing our lusts do call for. Thus we make our Christian
Sabbath and Service a rest from our sins, but in the worst sense, that is, only
a short pause, to take breath and heart to pursue them with a greater
resolution. Were our God some Topical one, as those of the Hills and Valleys of
old, whose Authority were shut up within their Walls, then this might pass for
Worship, but whatever we call it, it is but a base and scornful Flattery, fit
for an Idol that is nothing. God forbid we should any of us serve our Friend,
our Benefactor, our King, as we do our God! that is, come and stand demurely in
his presence, accuse our selves and vow amendment; hear all he can promise or
threaten to engage us to it, and immediately take every trifling occasion to
rebel against him. If we need not obey Him, why are we so foolish to worship
Him? If we must worship Him, why are we so false to disobey Him? Is his Being
so glorious, to deserve that; and are his Laws so contemptible, to endure this?
We need not use so much ceremony to be wicked and miserable: Let us take heed
lest He justly reward us for such daring mockery, that is, laugh at our
calamity, Prove. 1.26, 27.
and mock when our fear comes as desolation, and our destruction as a
whirlwind.

And as our worship without obedience is vain, so our obedience without worship
is impossible: We complain against the corrupt manners of the Age, and cry out,
Is. 1.16.
From the sole of the feet even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but
wounds and bruises and putrefying sores; and what do our complaints, but only
fret and exasperate? what can all our Arts do, but only palliate the Evil? How
shall we be mended, whilst our Souls are out of frame? and how shall we ever
recover our ancient Virtues, without that ancient seriousness in Religion,
which has ever been observed to be the particular Genius of this Nation, yea
even then, when it fell infinitely short of those great advantages it now
enjoys? Can Virtue rise out of the dust, or Righteousness spring out of the
earth, or Sobriety and Purity grow out of our corrupt lusts? Can knowledge or
reasoning alone subdue those evil habits, they have been so long used to abet
and maintain? Mercies have made us wanton, and Judgments stupid, and we have
been too miserable, and are yet too happy to be mended, without the mighty
grace of God. This then is the great, the fundamental Evil, the sourse of all
the rest, that we neglect or pervert the greatest and only remedy he has
appointed for our cure, that we trifle with God in his Service, that should
procure those succors, without which we shall never be better; whilst some Men
make it their sport, others their trade, some the matter of their contention,
and some few the entertainment of their idle time: Whilst we thus abuse Gods
counsel and assistance, what hope can remain for us? Were that breath bestowed
in hearty prayers, that is spent in fruitless murmurings, did we use that
thoughtfulness in our addresses to God, that we lose in our vain contrivances,
they would no doubt turn to a better account than they do: When we have wearied
our selves with our loud complaints, and our little remedies, we may find at
length, that it is as impossible to mend, as to make a World, or a Soul, without
God. And however in the days of our prosperity we trifle with Him as an useless
thing, without whom we can shift well enough, Prove. 7.28.
yet when distress and anguish comes upon us, we shall, with much more
earnestness, but as little success, call upon him, but he will not answer, seek
him early, but shall not find him, Luke 16.19.
as the tormented Glutton in Hell (where there is a faith though trembling, a
devotion though despairing) begged one drop of refreshment, but it could not be
granted him. What help then are we to expect from these, who talk at the rate
of those in the Text, I mean not the wild Enthusiasts only, (whose zeal is as
keen against Courts as Churches, were they not better guarded) but those that
would be the Restorers of Reason, the Defenders of the Liberties of Nature, who
would free the Country from the impostures of those wily Craftsmen, who cry up
this their Diana to get them utterance for their shrines. Whosoever he be, that
makes Gods Worship an Engine to keep up his own, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4, 8.
whoever he be that sits in the Temple of God, to exalt himself above all that
is called God, we pray, as the Apostle prophesies, that God would destroy them
with the spirit of his mouth. But sure all Scripture is not Bell and the
Dragon, nor all houses of prayer become dens of thieves; were there any close
mysteries, any secret adyta, any pretenses to inspirations or miraculous
powers, in our Worship, then they might suspect some juggling; but when every
part and passage is plain and open (as the Book that contains it) to the
meanest Worshipper, what is it they can be jealous of? And would they would
consider, e're they cry down with it, even to the ground, whither Schools, and
Colleges, and Courts, do not lean on the same Foundation! Were the Names of
Virtue and Goodness, were Men's own Nature, and the Happiness of the World,
truly dear to them, the Names of the Great God the Maker of the World, Father
of Spirits, and Fountain of Goodness, and of the Holy Jesus the Restorer and
Savior of them, would be highly venerable to them, and all the Offices of
Adoration to them would be the most wise and serious actions of their life. How
much then do they deserve the care and love of us all! those especially, who
have not only the Government of Men, but the highest, the tenderest Trust
imaginable (greater than that of Durandus his Angels) committed to their
charge; Bak. Chron. Canutus.
who though they cannot with their foot stop the swelling Tide, yet by their
hands and tongue may check the Landflood of profaneness and barbarism, and by
Gods blessing say, Thou shall go no further, and so help to save an Age of
Souls, which else must perish at their charge; whose Examples are able to
retort all the Arguments of Irreligion upon its own breast, whose very
countenance and behavior is able to demonstrate, far more effectually than all
our faint breath, that It Is not in vain to serve God.

To conclude, This weak account I have given of the usefulness of Religious
Worship, has no other desire than to remove that ugly vizor, that has
disfigured, not only the Faces of the Votaries, but even that of Religion it
self, and made it look like a dismal and chagrene thing; and so has it
disguised its native loveliness, that some enjoin it, most look upon it as a
mere penance, and to be sad and devout, to be religious and ghastly, are grown
the same; so those in the Text make the Service of God consist in walking
mournfully before him, which whether it relate to their gate, look, habit or
temper, or Ezra's fasting, 'twas nothing that God required of them; the Good
God never intended his Service should waste any Man's spirits, damp their
hearts, drein their estates, or disturb the World; if any therefore be sick, be
poor, be dispirited, or contentious, it is not this that has made them so.
There are indeed in Religion some sharp Medicines, and if these put Men to pain
and sorrow, they are to blame their intemperance, that has made them
necessary, and to call in the hopes of health, to make them tolerable; and yet
there is not any the least bodily necessity, the meanest worldly advantage, no
nor the vilest lust, but puts Men to more torment and slavery, forces them to
bow, to watch, to pray, to kiss the dust, more than the most painful addresses
of the humblest Suppliant and Penitent, under the first and purest Discipline
of the Church.

Did God require some hard and heavy things of us, Josh. 9.23.
were our Service in the Church as tiresome as that of the Gibeonites in the
Temple; 1 Kings 18.28, 29.
or as cruel as that of Baals Votaries, and to as little purpose; then might we
say, as they do, ( chapter 1.13.) What a weariness is it? But since He asks no
more, than that we rest from our labors, and come together into his presence,
that we worship, and fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker, that we
laud and love his Name, that we confess and forsake our sins which have no
other fruit but sorrow and shame, and that we hear and obey his Laws that our
Souls may live; let us never repine to give Him this reasonable Service, which
will so abundantly reward us, enrich our Souls with goodness, unite our hearts
in love, and prepare us for the service and joys of Angels and perfected
Spirits, by the Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior: To whom, with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Worship, and Obedience given, world without
end. AMEN.

FINIS.

