THE English Rogue Continued in the Life Of Meriton Latroon, AND OTHER
EXTRAVAGANTS: Comprehending the Most Eminent Cheats OF Most Trades and
Professions.

The Second Part.

Licensed Feb. 22. 1668.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be Sold by William Rands in
Duck-lane, 1680.

A. an East India Iunck. B. an Indian House Flatt and Terrasod on the Top. C.
an Indian Coach drawn with Oxen. D. an Indian Wagon drawn with Oxen. E.
Persee Burial place. F. Banians Washing. G. Banians Worship under green
trees. H. the Banians Marriages. I. the Banians Burialls.




THE English Rogue; Continued in the Life of MERITON LATROON And other
EXTRAVAGANTS Part II.
CHAP. I.
He discourses the manner of Government, of the Inhabitants of the East Indies;
a small Voyage by Sea, where he is in danger by a Tempest, and a Malabar Man of
War, but escapes both; he makes some rambles into the Country, and returning
home has some reflections on his fore-passed life.

I Was now arrived at the Meridian of my age, and enjoyed such a plenty of
every thing, that I soon forgot the many miseries I had lately suffered, since
my banishment from England. I governed my Family with a most absolute command,
and received a willing obedience as well from my Wife, as all our Servants, and
during the stay of our English Ships, I gained very much by entertaining my
Countrymen with necessaries. I kept so punctual a correspondence with the
Banian Merchants, that I could command any thing; and by their means found the
way of Trading, by which I considerably enriched my self so that at the
departure of the English Fleet, I having cast up an account of my Estate,
found that I had gained above 2000 Rupees, (which being the Country money, and
worth about 2 s. a piece, amounted to 200 l.) also I had a good parcel of
Diamonds, besides those I had cheated the Banian of at my first arrival;
several other Commodities I had by me, which (with my Housholdstuff which was
considerable) did in all amount to a great value. The Fleet being departed, the
chief of our Trading ceased, and now it was vacation time* and I (hating
idleness, and somewhat weary of my Wives company) being desirous of Novelty,
set out to view the Country: to which end taking money with me, and all other
necessaries, I hired an Indian Coach, which is a kind of a Chariot with two
wheels, and will hold about four persons; this Coach was drawn with two Oxen,
who will travel about thirty miles a day: my charge was not much for about
eighteen pence a day paid my Coachman, and kept his Cattle. Thus did I ramble
about the Country, visiting other of my acquaintance, where I had a full
enjoyment of every thing the Country afforded: for we had notonly the Country
drink called Toddee which is made of the juice of several Trees, and Punch
which is made of Rack-lime, or lime-vva^er, Sugar, Spice^ and sometimes the
addition of Ambergreese, but we likevvi^e drank great quantities of Persian
Wine, which is much like Claret, and brought from that Country in Bottles.
These were our drinks vvherof we drank plentifully, and oftentimes to excess;
our meat was chiefly Rice, with Beans, and Turkeys Beef and Mutton, and
sometimes Veal and Lamb; this was my ordinary diet, but the Banians eat no
flesh accounting it criminal, it being contrary to their Religion to kill any
thing; the chiefest exercise we had was playing at Nine-pins, a game I was well
acquainted with in England and therefore could well enough deal with the
Natives, though they were expert there in. Though I pleased my self in these
things yet there was still vvanti^g the only thing which had alvvayes made my
life pleasant to me, and that was the company of Women* for without their
pleasing society in a full enjoyment I reckoned I had nothing, and therefore
upon every turn found them out; but I must now be contented with the Natives,
who although they are not so fair as the women of our European Countries, yet
they may pass well enough, for their complexions are commonly of a tavvny
bievv but they are richly adorned with pearl and other Jewels speak of those
who were Mercenary. There is no Town but has two or th^ee of these Brothel
houses, which were allowed of; neither was it any disgrace to be seen
^herein the handsomest women are here: the Matron of the house is furnished
with several, who she purchases sometimes of their own Parents, who sell them,
not accounting it an injury to d^spose them to this purpose. These old Bavvds
are as cuning as those of our Country, for they will sell a Maiden-headtwo or
three times over for which they will some times have twenty or thirty Rupees,
according to the goodness of the Comodity, and good will of the purchaser, who
shall enjoy his bargain for 2 or 3 days or nights together either at their
lodgings, or at home at their own houses; neither do their wives dare to
contradict their Husbands therein, for they will oftentimes bring home one of
these Lasses, and lodge them in a Cot in the same Room with their Wives, and
lie with them as often as they please, and when they have done with them send
them home again.

I try^d several of these Bona Roba^s, who pleased me very well for what they
wanted in beauty they supplied in respect and willingness to comply with and
plea^e me in all my desires; and though many times they have the Pox, by reason
of their heat and activity yet they value it not for they are so well
acquainted and furnished with remedies: that they soon cure themselves, and the
men who accompany them: my ramble being finished I returned home, and though my
Wife knew I had been at several of the^e Brothels yet I was joyfully received
and welcomed by her. We keeping a public house, had all sorts of guests, and
now being at leisure I di^coursed with several of the Brammanes who are their
Priests, who informed me not only of the Civil but Ecclesiastical Government of
the Nation for though I supposed them Heathens, yet I found that they followed
a rule in their livings to which they strictly tied themselves: They in general
gave me this account, that they are governed by a K^ngly Monarch, who is called
the Great Mogul he is absolute in his Dominions, and all his subjects are his
slaves; all the Land and Houses throughout his Dominions are his own, and the
Inhabitants or occupiers are only his Tenants, and pay a valua^le rent for what
they enjoy, which is ^nually collected by Officers to that purpose appointed
and paid into his Exchequer this he bestows at his own pleasure, or spends in
making War with his Enemies, who are chiefly the Tartars, and sometimes the
Persians; they have frequently civil Wars amongst themselves upon the death of
their Prince, if he leaves more Sons then one behind him; for he who lastruled,
and was Father of this present Mogul, made his way to the Empire by the death
of 11 of his Brethren he himself being the youngest when he dyed, which is not
long since; 3 of his Sons survived him, who all immediately raised great Armies
either to gain the Empire, or lose their lives in general.

The 2 youngest having assembled all their well-willers and friends, with
considerable Armies approached one another, a River now only parting them

The eldest of the two dispatched a Messenger to his Brother, t^ tell him that
he was very well satisfied in his taking Arms and since he was in such
readiness if he plea^ed he would join forces with him, and assault their elder
Brother, who being vanquished they would divide the Government. The youngest
^rother willingly assenting to these propositions, came over to him, but no
sooner was he in his power, but he caused both his eyes to be put out, (thereby
disenabling him from the Government) and soon gaining the Captains of his
Brothers Army to his party, he joined Forces, and causing his blind Brother to
be carried with him, advanced to meet and oppose his elder Brother, in short
time they met, and fought each other with various success, but in fine he
conquered his Brother* and depriving him of life, as the other of sight he now
remains sole Monarch of this large Empire.

The old Mogul died infinitely rich, for he left eight Tancks of coined Money,
each Tanck esteemed to hold ten millions of Rupees; and indeed it is no great
marvel, for he has some of his Subjects, especially the Banian Merchants, that
are very rich all whose treasure he will command at his own will there is one
Banian whose name is Vergore, who was the chiefest Merchant of his Tribe, and
has most of the Stocks of his fellows in his hand, to him the Great Mogul sent
for money to which message he sent this answer, That he would presently furnish
his Highness with a Hundred Carts laden with ready money. The Mogul hearing
this, ordered him ^o keep it till he sent again, or had further occasion The
English have great privileges, for they pay less Duties and Customs than the
Natives, for the Banian Merchants will sometimes hire an English man to go to
Sea with them in their Juncks, which are great Barks not to do any service in
the voyage, but only to own the goods, that they may save several Taxes and
Duties thatelse must be paid, as Anchorage and Moorage I one time was asked by
a Banian of my acquaintance whether I would go to Sea with him, and he would
give me a considerable recompense, he told me that I should only wear my hat
eat my victuals and when we came to our port own the Goods; being desirous of
seeing fashions I consented* and our Junck being laden we set sail and
departed: but never was I acompanied with such Sailers, for the Junck (which is
much like a close Lighter) was deeply laden with ^alli^oes it carried above
1000 Tun; the wind being fair, all the tackling was nailed down and fastened, so
that when we had been four days at Sea, the wind contrary to custom changed,
but though it began to be tempestuous yet all our men being then at dinner
there was none would leave their eating to handle the sails or alter the
tackling, dinner being ended, I persuaded them with much ado to go to workbut
it was some hours ere they had loosned their tackling so as to lower their
sails, and by that time we were driven out of knowledge; the winds there are
usually so constant, that they never make provisions to handle their sails, and
alter them, but commonly as they fix them at their fetting out, so they
continue till they come to their Port, where instead of an Anchor they carry a
very great stone, fastened by an iron ring to their Cable, which they let down
while they stay, but take up when they go away; and then they alter their
sails, fitting them to the wind to bring them back; they continue in that
manner to the end of the Voyage. But now it falling out otherwise, great was
their trouble, not knowinghow to behave themselves: and although there was
forty men on board, and they all well enough acquainted with Navigation in
those parts, yet I that was but of one years standing was their bent
instructor, or else we had been lost and perished; most of our sails being now
taken down, and the wind ceasing we by the next day came into our knowledge,
but met with another misfortune, which was like to prove worse then the former,
^or we discovered a Junck though nothing near so big as ours, yet better manned
and was indeed a Malabar Man of War, and our professed Enemy, who are used to
infest those Seas with their Pyracies; our Seamen being sensible of the
desperateness of ou^ condition* were greatly dismayed but I (who was formerly
used to be dead hearted enough) did now become Valerous, and encouraged them by
words and Actions, for considering the badness of my condition being likely not
only to ^ose what Estate I had lately gathered, but at least wise my liberty,
and it may be my life, (for many of these Malabars do kill and feed on their
Prisoners) these considerations I say possessed me with so much courage, that I
was resolved to try my utmost power to defend my self from my Enemies; we were
by chance accompanied by ten Moors called Rashpoots, who being always brought
up in Wars, never go unarmed; these persons being more courageous then the
rest, by my example, put themselves into a posture of defense, and the other
Seamen had Swords and other weapons put into their hands, to keep the Enemy
from boarding us: we had eight great Guns in our Junck, which were carried more
for ornament then use, for they knew not how to discharge them against an Enemy
to advantage (they being a well as their tackling and sails, fixed to one
place) only served to be shot off in triumph, and make a noise, but would not
be well levelled to carry a Bullet to do execution. I seeing this
inconvenience, took such order therein that the Guns were placed so as to
damage our Enemy, who now approaching us, came close up toward us, but he
found a hotter entertainment then he expected, for we killed several of his men
with our first broad side; the only weapons our Enemies had were great stones
which they threw at us in abundance; but we having again charged our great
Guns, and all the small ones we had aboard, gave them such a peal as was the
funeral knel to many of them; by this time they were discouraged, and our men
seeing the good success we had came all in sight and every one taking a great
stone, which had been thrown to us by the Enemy, gave them such an onset with
the stones as now made them to think of giving over their enterprise, which we
compelled them to do, so soon as we had given them another broadside, and once
more discharged all our small guns* thi^ gave them so general a blow that they
Vered about and let us to prosecute our Voyage. Our Enemies being gone, I
called all our men together to see what damage we had sustained, and upon
enquiry found that we had not lost a man: but about half a dozen broken heads
and faces was all the harm we had received.

I was generally applauded for my courage, and the chief owner of the Goods not
only rendered me infinite thanks, but promised me a great reward, which was
Justly paid me at the end of our Voyage: I told them that I much wondered at the
manner of o^r Enemies fight but I received this answer, that they seldom used
any other Weapons t^en stones, which they carried in great plenty, trusting to
them and their great numbers, for the Bark that set upon us had above a hundred
men in her, and would have certainly taken us, had I not made so good a fight
with our Guns which was a thing unusual for them to meet with not suspecting
that we could make any use of them, otherwise then to shoot upright as was
usual, but they found the contrary to their cost: for I suppose we had the good
fortune to kill ^everal of them which so disheartened them, that they left us as
I told you: and thus we meeting with no more ob^truction, in two months time
finished our Voyage, and returned home, where I received 500 Rupees as a
recompense for my good service.

I was joyfully received at home by my Wife and acquired a very good esteem of
all by t^is my valerous exploit, and had many advantageous offers to go again
on the same account; but I valuing my pleasure more then profit, which was
hazardous declined the propo^itions, and now rested my self at home only making
some excursions to visit the best of my friends who failed not to welcome me,
the honestest Women to whom I made my self welcome sometimes. I traveled to
the adjacent Towns where I visited the pleasant Gardens, and other times I went
further to the Cities which being well built with brick, had pleasant
Platformes or Terrets on the top; many of the Cities were Walled and fortifyed
with Castles for their defense: I seldom went without a couple of attendants
which are called Puisn's who were my daily servants* these were a sort of
Banians who served me for four shillings a month a piece, and out of that found
themselves diet, unless they traveled far from home, and then I allowed each
of them all out three half pence a piece per day to buy them victuals and
drink, which was only Cutkeree Butters Toddee with which they were very well
satisfied, neither indeed does the Consul give much more to his serviters, for
his chief Puisn has but twelve shillings per month; and out of that he keeps a
horse and a servant to attend him. They are very dilligent and faithf^l in what
they are entrusted with, but so soon as they perceive a new Moon they tell
their master of it that they may pay them their wages.

Having now satisfied my curiosity in these travels, and being returned home I
began to consider with my self my fore passed life: then it was I did run over
those several accidents that had formerly befallen me.

A^ first how I committed Rogueries, when but a boy and ran away from my Mother
(of whom I had never since so much as heard or enquired) I had some reflections
thereupon and what my Mother might Judge was become of me: then did I call to
mind the Rogueries I committed, when among the Gypsies and Beggars, and how
with them I first tried and tasted the pleasure of a Female Companion, from
that my apprentiship and the several adventures I had, and pleasant nights
lodgings I enjoyed not only with the Maid but the Mistress: how after the Maid
whom I had gotten with child was delivered, I dispatched her and child to
Virginia, and soon after by mine and my Mistresses extravagancies sent my
Master first to Prison, and so out of the world my Mistress her self not long
surviving him: being then a freeman I married, but was justly enough fitted for
my disloyalty by my wives incontinency which with my own prodigality soon
consumed me, enforcing me to leave England for Ireland, which being my first
great remove, I seriously reflected on, not knowing where I should end my days,
I being now far distant from the place of my Nativity but I bethinking my self
that my only livelihood depended there in my vital strength, not that I was
exposed to carry burdens or labor in the day time, but in the night in
Venerial combats, where I received equal pleasure: and indeed I having run
through the whole course of my life, found that by the favorable and goood
opinion of women (which was not undeserved) I had not only preserved my self,
but many times raised my self a sufficient fortune: as I had lately done by
Marrying with my Moerish Wife, in which present condition I concluded my self
much better then when I was in Ireland tied to my old woman, who only paid me
and gave me money according to the service I did her, and was then again old and
peevish, and above all things very jealous; whereas now I was my own
play master, and though my bedfellow was not fair, yet she was young and
pleasant and so far from jealousy, that she her self sometimes would procure
me a young girl, the fairest in the country to lie with me, and she also lying
by me, and taking much pleasure therein.

Then did I proceed in the thoughts of my former life, and considered the many
dangers I under went all the time I followed my Padding employment* and though
I then u^ually wore money enough in my Pocket, and sometimes met with some
female adventures, as the Farmers Daughter, the Poetic Widow, and my Female
Robbers and others in whose converse I took much pleasure, yet I ^as in all
these pleasures still accompanied with fear of being snapt, as indeed I was at
last and likely to be trus't up: but that my penitence wrought so upon my
friends as to procure my sentence of death, to be altered into that of
banishment: which had through many miseries and cross adventures brought me
hither, where I received the full enjoyment of all things: this consideration
took me up much t^me, and possessed me with some virtuous thoughts, believing
that I had not been preserved and reserved from so many hazards but for some
good end, and now I had a fair opportunity of declining Vice, and living
virtuously, I not being likely to be expo^ed to any such Rogui^h shifts or
courses as formerly, these thoughts of Virtue made way for those of Religion,
and now it was that I seriously considered of that Word in genes al, and being
(though little practiced in) yet well enough acquainted with the Chr^stian
Religion, I wondered at the a^surdity of the Religion of other Nations,
especially of the Cou^t^y wherein I now lived, and having been curious in
enquiry of the grounds thereof, I had received a good-account, though little
satisfaction; but since it is a Novelty, and may well enough ^uit with the
following discourse which will consist of several and variety of Knaveries and
Cheatings, whereof I suppose this of this Countries Religion may very well bear
a part: I shall give you a sho^t account thereof in this following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
The Original Religion and Worship of the Banians Persees, with all their Casts
and Tribes.

THis large part of the World which is governed by the Great Mogul, is
inhabited by these three sort of People, Banians, Moor-men or Rashpoots, and
Persees: the several Religions or Worships of the first and last, viz. the
Banians and Persees, I shall here give you an account of: but for the Moors or
Rashpoots, they have little esteem ^or any Religion in particular, and being
^or the most part Soldiers, are of the Great Moguls Religion, which is partly
Mohammedan: I shall therefore begin with the Banians, who believe in one God,
and that he created the World out of nothing, and that after this manner: first
he having the 4 Elements of Air, Earth, Fire and water for a groundwork, by
some great cane or such like instruments: blew upon the Waters which arose into
a bubble of a round form like an Egg, which spreading it self made the
firmament so clear and transparent, which now compasses the world about, after
this there remaining true liquid substance in the earth, God made of both these
together a thing round like a ball, which is called the lower World the more
solid part became earth, the liquid Sea, both which making one Glob: he by a
great noise or huming sound placed them in the midst of the firmament, there he
created the Sun and Moon to distinguish times and seasons, and the four
elements which were before mixed,, were now separated and assigned to their
several places, and discharged their several officies the Air filled up the
empty parts, the fire nourished with heat, the earth and sea brought forth
their living creatures, and then was the World created, and as it had its
beginning from four Elements, so it was measured by four points: As East, West,
North and South, and was to be continued for four Ages, to be peopled by four
Casts or sorts of men who were to be married to four sort of women appointed
for them. The world being made, man was likewise made out of the earth, God
putting into him life, and he Worshipping his Creator* woman was like-wise made
and given to him as a companion, the first man's name was Poucous and the woman's
name was Parcontee, and they lived together as man and wife, feeding on the
fruits of the earth, not destroying any living Creature.

These two had four sons called Brammon, Cuttery, Shaddery and Wise, who were
of different and distinct nature from each other, for Brammon was of an earthly
constitution, and therefore Melancholy: Gutte^y fiery, and therefore Martial:
Shaddery Flogmatic, and therefore peaceable: Wise airey, and therefore full of
contrivances and inventions, Brammon being melancholy and ingenious, God gave
him knowledge and appointed him to impart his laws, and therefore gave him a
book containing the form of Divine Worship and Religion; Cuttery being Martial
had power to Govern Kingdoms and therefore had a sword given him. Shaddery
being mild and conversable, it was thought fit that be should be a Merchant and
Tr^ffick, and therefore had a pair of balances and a bag of waits hung at his
Girdle: and Wise being aerie, was appointed for a Mechanic or handicrafts man,
and therefore had a bag of several sorts of tools.

These were the first men and these their qualities (according to the Banian
tradition) that peopled the earth, Poucous and Parcontee had no daughters
because the sons should go else where to find them Wives which were made for
them, and p^aced at the four winds, the four sons being grown up to man's estate
were commanded to travel. And,

Frst Bramon with his Book in his hand took his journey toward the rising of
the Sun in the East; for the place where they were born, and their Parents
created, was in the Middle or Navel of the World, the Sun at Noonday casting
no shadow. Brammon taking his journey, as is said, toward the East, arrived
at a goodly Mountain, before which was a Valley through which there passed a
Brook; in the descent of which there appeared a Woman a drinking. This Woman
was of black hair, yellow complexion, of an indifferent size, and a modest
aspect, and indeed in every thing made, as if made for her beholder; who being
naked* and seeing her to be so too, was more bashful than the Woman who make
silence, by questioning the cause of his coming thither.

Brammon hearing her speak, an^ that in his own Language, thus replied, That
the great God who made all things had sent him thither: The Woman seeing his
Book, asked the use of it; whereupon he opening it, showed her the Contents
thereof* and after some other di^course she consented to be married to him,
acording to the form prescribed in that book, which being d^ne, they lay
together, and had many children who peopled the East part of the world: this
woman's name was Savatree:

Cuttery the 2d Brother, was sent upon the same account to the West part of the
world and taking his sword in his hand, he advanced on his journey, but not
meeting with any adventure or occasion to make use thereof, he was much
troubled; desiring, above all things, that he might meet with some people
whereon he might exercise his courage: thus impatiently did he proceed on his
journey, till he arrived near a high Mountain, where he might behold a
Personage who was walking with a Martial pace, and coming nearer, found to be a
Woman armed with a weapon called a Chuckery: They were no sooner met, but they
encountered, and set upon one another, but though he expected a sudden conquest,
yet was he deceived therein, for his adversary held him in play all that day,
till night parted them. The next day also they wholly spent in fight; he gained
no advanrage over his female enemy, only at the cloze of the day, he had the
fortune to cut her weapon in two, but the night coming on, she escaped from him
without any further damage.

The next day she was provided with Bovv and A^rovvs, and then had a great
advantage over them because she could wound him at a distance, and he could not
hurt her without a close fight; he being sensible of this odds clozed with her,
and by main strength threw her down holding her by the hair of the head; when
having a perfect view of her beauty, instead of an enemy, he became a lover of
his beautiful object; and that he might gain her affections, he threw by his
weapons and applied himself to her in fair speeches, to which she was
attentive, and he at length became so prevalent, that they at present plighted
troths to one another, and of enemies; not only at that instant became friends;
but in short time after living together, and Nature dictating to them what must
be done for the procreation of the like, they tasted the fruit of Loves garden,
and had many children, who peopled the West part of the World; this Woman's name
was Toddicastree.

Chuddery the 3 d. Son, who was the Merchant-man was sent to the North with his
balance and weights, and he after much travel happened on a place where he
found Pearls, and a Rock or mine of Diamonds, and believing them (by reason of
their great luster in the dark) of some extraordinary value, took some of them
with him, and special notice of the place, that he might find it again; and so
proceeding on his journey, came to the place where was the Woman that was to be
his Wife, who was wandering by the si^e of a wood; she, seeing him, became
fearful; but he coming to her, and giving her good words, won upon her to stay
and receive him into her company; and after an account of his journey, which
she concluded was purposely designed to her, because they understood one
another speech, he bestowed some of his Pearls and Diamonds upon her; in time
they proving the comforts of the conjoined joined state, had several children,
who peopled the North part of the World, and became Merchantmn: he afterward
traveling with them, showed them the rock of Diamonds; this Woman's name was
Visagundah.

Wise, the 4th. and youngest of the Brethren, wen also to the South parts of
the World, and carried his tools with him, whereby he was able to build a
house, or per^orm any other piece of work needful for the use of man; he was
forced to pass over seven Seas, at each place making a Vessel and leaving it
behind him: the last Sea was called Pashurbate^, and brought him to a Land
called Derpe, where he built him a house to live in, which he did with much
content, till the Woman appointed for him came thither to behold the same: She
was very amiable and wh^te; and her hair was powdered with Saunders and other
Odours: She first spoke to him, demanding how he came thither; He answered her,
that the Almighty had sent him and had taken great pains by coming over seven
Seas to wait on her. She was displeased with his discourse and house telling
him that she needed him not; and notwithstanding all his persuasions, left him:
he after wards met her walking in the Woods; but could not prevail with her to
continue with him; but left him much troubled. After this* he being in a
profound melancholy, walking abroad, came too parcel of trees, under which he
placed himself and there prayed to his Creator, that he might not lose his
labor, in coming so far to ^ind a Woman that would not converse with him: To
this Prayer he had answer, that his reque^t should be granted, on cond^tion
tha^ for the future he would erect Images, and adore, and worship them under
green ^^ees: To this he consented, and at the next meeting he gained the good
will of this Woman who was named Ie^unnogundah, so that she became his wife by
whom he had several children that peopled the South.

These Four Brethren being thus dispersed at the 4 several parts of the earth,
and having peopled the same, were all desirous of returning to their own
Country from whence they came; to see their Father and Mother, and recount
their several adventures to them, and to that end, leaving their children
behind, they and their Wives traveled so long* till they came to the place;
where they were first joyfully received of their Parents, and then of each
other ^there they likewise had several other children, begetting several
generations, that all the World might be instructed in their several qualities
by Bramo^ in matters of Religion, by Cuttery in Rule and Governments, by
Shuddery in Traffic and Merchandise, and by Wise in matters of Handicrafts; of
which four Casts the world consists, every one of them living in his several
quality, keeping his tribe free from confusion or interfering; and thus the
World was peopled: but in time, multitude begat differen^e and disorder, and
mischief, and every Person disagreed with the other, every one producing new
and various differences, as well in matters of Religion and Worship, as in all
other affairs, when the Almighty for the wickedness of mankind sent a flood
which came and destroyed all the Creatures of the earth; and this according to
the tradition of the Banians, was the first Age of the World.

This world of Creatures being destroyed, others were made in this manner: The
Almighty first made out of the earth these three Creatures, Breman Visteny
(...) to Breman he gave the power of making Creatures because say the Banians,
as great persons do not their work but by Deputies, so neither was it fit that
God should be ^ervile to his Creatures, but give to them their being by his
Instruments To the second* which was Vistney, he gave charge to preserve the
creatures But to the third, which was ^udde^y, he gave power to destroy them,
because he knew they would be wicked, and deserve Judgments. Breman was to be
taken up to Heaven in conclusion of the second age. Vistney was to live as long
aga^n as Breman and Ruddery was to continue three times as long, and then he
should destroy all the world, which should be the great day of Judgment.

Breman according to the power given him, produced Man and Woman out of his own
bowels, who being instructed by him gave worship to God, and reverence to him:
the Man was by him named Mamaw, and the Woman Ceterrupa they were ent to the
East and there they had three sons and three daughters, who were sent severally
to the West, North and South, which were peopled by them: thus man being made
by Breman, Vistney provided things necessary for them, and Ruddery dispersed
afflictions sicknesses and death, as Men did deserve them.

It was now necessary say the Banians, that the Law should be given according
to which they should live; and therefore Breman being called up into a Mountain
the Almighty gave him out of a cloud a book, which the Banians call the
Shaster, wherein was written their Laws; this book consisted of three Tracts.

The first, whereof contained their Moral Law, and an Explication or
Appropriation of the precepts to every several Tribe and Cast.

The second, was their Ceremonial Law.

The third, distinguished them into Casts or Tribes with peculiar observations
for each Cast and T^ibe.

The first Tract of the moral Law contained eight commandments 1. That they
should kill no living Creature, because like Man it ^ad a soul. 2. That they
should make a Covenant with their five senses: the Eyes not to see evil tkings,
the Ears not to hear evil things, the Tongue not to speak evil, the Pallat not
to taste, as wine or flesh, the hands not to touch any thing defiled. 3. That
they should duly observe the times of devotion in washing, worship, etc. 4,
That they should not tell false tales to deceive. 5. That they should be
charitable to the poar. 6. That they should not oppress their poor brethren. 7.
That they should celebrate certain Festivals, not pampering the body, but
fa^ting and watching, to be fitter for devotion. 8. That they should not steal,
though never so little.


These eight are bestowed among the four Tribes or Casts, to each two
Commandments: to the Brammanes, which are the Priests, the first and second,
as being strictest in Religion. To Shuddery they appropriate the third and
fourth, as most proper to them. To Cuttery the fifth and sixth* and to Wys^ the
seventh and eighth: they are all enjoined to keep all the Commandments; but
more particularly those tha^ ^re appropriated to their several Casts.

The second Tract of the book delivered to Bre^an comprised certain ceremonial
injunctions which ^re these.

First washing their bodies in Rivers, in memory of the deluge, in which they
use this Ceremony: first they besmear their bodies in the mud of the River, as
an Emblem of man's filthiness; and then coming into the water and turning their
faces toward the Sun the Bramman prays, that as the body which is foul as the
mud of the River which is cleansed by the water, so that his sin may be in like
manner cleansed; and then the party plunging himself three times in the River,
and shaking in his hand some grains of Rice as an offering on the water: he
receives absolution for his sins past, and is dismissed.

2. The ceremony of anointing the fore head with red painting, as a peculiar
mark which they often renew.

3. They are enjoined to tender certain prayers and offerings under green
trees, the original of which custom they derive from Wise, to whom they say God
appeared in a vision under a tree; the tree particularly appropriated for this
Worship* is called Fi^u Indica, as vide. Sr. W. Rawleigh, for which tree they
have a great esteem.

4. They are enjoined prayers in their Temples, where they offer to Images with
ringing and loud tinckling of bells and such like impertinent, services.

5. They are enjoined Pilgrimage to rivers remote* as ^a^g^s, where they throw
in as, offerings, Jewels, and Treasure of great value.

6. They use Invocation of Saints, and for all their affairs they have several
Saints they invoke for assistance.

7. There law binds them to give worship to God upon sight of any of his
Creatures first seen after Sun rise, especially to the Sun and Moon, which they
call the two eyes of God, as al^o to some Beasts.

8. In baptizing children, there is difference in the Casts, for the Brammanes
are extraordinary: the rest of the children are only washed in water, with a
short prayer, that God would write good things in the front of the child, all
present saying Amen. They name the child, putting a red ointment on the midst
of his forehead, and the ceremony is done. But the children of the Cast of the
Brammanes are not only washed with water, but anointed with oil with these
words: Oh Lord we present unto thee this child, born of a holy Tribe, anointed
with oil, and cleansed with water; unto which they add other ceremonies, then
they enquire the exact time of the child's birth, and calculate his Nativity,
which they keep by them and give them at the day of their marriage.

9. As for their marriages, their time is different from other Nations, for
they marry at 7 years of age, they are usually contracted by their Parents;
which being agreed on they send presents, and use many triumphant
preambulations about the town for two days; and then at the going down of the
Sun they use this ceremony. A fire is made and interposed between the young
couple, to imitate the ardency of their affections; then there is a silken
string that encloses both their bodies, to witness the insolveable bond of
wedlock; after this bond, there is a cloth interposed betwixt them, a custom
taken from the meeting of Brammon and Savatre, who covered themselves till the
words of Matrimony were uttered, so the Brammanes pronouncing certain words,
enjoining the man to provide for the woman, and her to loyalty and pronouncing
the blessing of a fruitful issue the speech is concluded; the cloth interposed,
is taken away; the bond which ingirted them unloosed; full freedom is given
them to communicate with one another; they give no dowry, only the Jewels worn
on the Bridal day; none come to the feast, but those of the same Tribe or Cast:
no Woman is admitted to second marriage; except the Tribe of Wise; which are
the handicraf^s Men in all Tribes may marry twice except the Bramanes every
Tribe marries in their own Casts, and the Tribe of the Wise not only marry in
their own Tribe, but in their own trade: as a Barber or Smiths son must marry a
Barber or Smiths daughter of the same Tribe.

10. Which is the last, is the cerimony of their burials, when any is sick to
death* they enjoin him to utter Narrane* which is one of the names of God
importing mercy to sinners; they pour fair water into his hand, praying to
Kistnetuppon, the God of the water, to present him pure to God, he being dead,
his body is washed, and after buried in this manner, They carry the body to a
rivers side and being set down, the Brammane utters these words. Oh earth! we
commend unto thee this our brother, whilst he lived thou had an inte^est in
him, of the earth he was made, by the blessing of the earth he was fed, and
therefore now he is dead, we surrender him to thee: after this putting
combustible matter to the body, lighted by the help of sweet Oil, the Brammane
says, Oh fire, whilst he lived then had a claim in him, by whose natural
heat he subsisted, we return therefore his body to thee that thou should
purge it. Then the son of the deceased set two pots, one with water, and the
other with milk on the ground the pot o^ milk on the top of the other and with
a stone breaks the pot of water whereby the water and milk are both spoiled;
upon which account the son thus moralizeth, That as the stone makes the Vessels
yield, so did sickness ruin his Fathers body, which is then burnt to ashes,
which are thrown into the Air, the Brammane uttering these words, Oh air,
whilst he lived by thee he breathed, and now having breathed his last, we yield
him to thee. The ashes falling on the water, the Brammane says, Oh wate^,
whilst he lived, thy moisture did sustain him, and now his body is dispersed,
take thy part in him. This being done, the Brammane reads (to the Son or
nearest of kin to the deceased) the law of mourners, That for ten days he must
eat no beetle, nor oil his head, nor put on clean clothes, but once a month
make a feast, and visit the River whose water drank up his Fathers ashes.
Besides this, there was a custom which is brought into a Law, for the wives of
the deceased to accompany their Husbands in death, by burning themselves with
his body; and this is still used among persons of greatest worth, the Women
voluntary exposing their bodies to the flames. And this is the sum of the
second Tract of the book delivered to Breman.

The third Tract consists of their being dis^inguished into Casts and Tribes,
with peculiar observations for e^ch. The Brammanes being first, have their name
either of Brammon, who was the first of that Tribe; or else from Breman, who
was the first of the second Age to whom the Law was delivered, of which there
are two sorts, the common, and the more special; the common Brammane has
eighty two Casts or Tribes, which are distinguished by the names of the places
of their first habitations. These discharge the Ministerial function, in
praying and reading their Law to the People, in which they use a kind of
minical fantastical gesture, and a singing tone. They are first received into
that Order at seven years of age, using the ceremony of washing and shaving
their heads, only leaving one lock; they are bound to a Pythagorean silence,
and prohibited haulking, spitting or coughing, wearing about there loins a
girdle of an Antilopes skin, and another thong of the same about their neck,
descending under the left arm: At fourteen years of age they are admitted to be
Brammanes; exchanging those leather thongs for four sealing threads that come
over the right shoulder, and under the right arm, which they sleep withal, in
honor of God and the three Persons; they are, enjoined to keep all things in
the Brammanes Law.

The more special sort of Brammanes are of the Cast of the Shuderys or
Merchant-man, who for devotion take this condition; He wears a woollen garment
of white, reaching down to the middle of the thigh, the rest is naked: his head
is always uncovered; they do not shave, but pluck off all the hair from their
heads and beards, leaving only one lock.

There are several Casts of these, that live more strictly then the rest; for
these never marry, are very moderate in their diet, and drink nothing but water
boiled, that so the vapor, which they suppose to be life, may go out; they
sweep away and disperse their dung, lest it should generate worms that may have
life, and be destroyed, they keep an Hospital of lame and maimed flying fowl,
which they redeem with a price* they have all things common, but place no faith
in outward washings, but rather embrace a careless and sordid nastine^s.

The second Tribe or Cast was Cutteryes, who had their name from Cuttery, the
second Son of Ponrous, who having Dominion and Rule committed to him* therefore
all Soldiers and Kings are said to be of his Tri^e.

That particular of Bremans Book that concerned this Cast, contained certain
precepts of Government and Policy, which being of common import, I chose to
omit, and shall only tell you that in their flourishing Estate they were the
ancient Kings of India, especially of that part that is called Guzzarat, and
were called by the name of Racab^, which signifies a King; they are said to
have thirty six Tribes, and none were admitted to rule or govern but out of
these Tribes. But in time these R^cabs were most of them put from the
Government, and destroyed by the Mahometans, who oppressed them, some of them
^till remain, and are called Rashpoots; which I have before named; some are as
yet unconquered, and sometimes fight with and against the great Mogul.

The third Son of Ponrous being called Shuddery, and Merchandising being
appointed him, all Merchants therefore are comprised under this Name. The
particular of Bremans Book that concerned this Cast, was a Seminary of
Religious advertizement, enjoining them to truths in their words and dealings
These are they that are most properly called Banians, which name signifies a
harmless People, that will not endure to see a fly, or worm, or any living
thing to be injured, and being themselves stricken, bear it patiently without
resistance, they are equal in number of their Casts to the Brammanes, and being
like to them, do more strictly follow their injunctions. Their form and
contract in buying and selling is something notable; for the Broker that
beats the price with him that sells, loses his Pamerin that is folded
about his wast, and spreading it upon his knee, with hands folded underneath,
by their fingers ends the price of pounds, shillings or pence is fixed, as the
Chapman is intended to give: The seller in like manner intimates how much he
purposes to have; which silent composition their Law enjoyneth.

Lastly, as the Son of Ponrous was called Wise and was ma^ter of merchants or
Handicrafts so all Handicrafts are of that Tribe. The directions that were in
Bremans book for these, were touching their behaviors in their Callings: The
name Wise signifies one that is servile or instrumentary, these People are now
commonly called Gentiles, which are of two sorts; first, the purer Gentile,
such as diet themselves as the Banians, not eating flesh, fish or wine, and the
impure eat of all sorts, and are commonly H^sbandmen, and u^ually called
Coulees. Those of the purer sort have thirty six Ca^ts, according to the number
of the Trade practiced among them, in which they make as few instruments serve
for the effecting of diverse works, as may be; and whatever they do is contrary
to the Christian form of working, for the most part. ^his is the substance of
the third Tract of the Book delivered to Breman* concerning the manner of the
four Tribes.

This Book was by Breman communicated to the Brammanes to be published to the
People, who did give a^solute obedience to these injunctions, but in time,
fraud, violence and all manner of wickedness being committed, God grew angry,
and acquainted Breman that he would destroy the world: who acquainted the
People herewith but to little purpose for soon after they fell to their
wickedness, and God took Breman up into his bosom who had interceeded for
mankind: then also Vistney (whose nature and Office it was to p^e^erve the
People) did interceed, but God would not be pacified, but gave charge to
Ruddery (whose Office it was to destroy) to cause the bowels of the earth to
send out a wind to sweep the Nations as the dust from the face of the earth:
this command was accordingly executed, and all people were destroyed, saving a
few that God permitted Vis^ney to cover with the skirts of his preservation,
reserved to propagate mankind in the third Age, and so this Age concluded.

The wickedness and ill government of the Kings and Rulers, being the chief
cause of destroying the last age: therefore all those of Cutteries Tribe were
all destroyed. Now because it was necessary that there should be some of tha^
Cast as well as others, wherefore God raised that Tribe again out of the Cast
of the Bramanes: the name of him who renewed and raised this Tribe was called
Ram, who was a good King and lived piously, but his successors did not so* but
committed so much wickedness that God again destroyed the world, ^y the opening
of the earth* which swallowed up all mankind, ^ut a few of the four Tribes who
were left to new people the world again, and this was the conclusion of the
third Age.

At the beginning of the fourth Age, there was one Kistney, a famous Ruler, and
pious King, who wonder^ully promoted Religion* Vistney was now taken ^p into
Heaven, there being no further need of his preservation, ^or when this Age is
concluded, there shall be a full end of all things. The Brammanes suppose this
Age shall be longer then any of the rest in the end whereof Ruddery shall be
taken ^p into Heaven: these four ages they call by these four names, Curtain,
Duauper, Tetrajoo and Ko^ee, they hold the manner of these last judgments
shall be by fire when all shall be destroyed, and so the four Ages of the world
shall be destroyed by the four Elements. And then shall Ruddery carry up the
souls of all people to Heaven with him, to rest in Gods bosom, but the bodies
shall all perish: so that they believe not the resurrection; for they say
Heaven being a place that is pure, they hold it cannot be Capable of such gross
substances.

This is the sum of the Banians Religion, wherein you find much of fancy and
conceit as to make it be so Ancient, and the number four to be used so often,
as you have heard the meaning of the three Creatures, I suppose alludes to the
Trinity; but instead of a confirmation and proof of a Trinity, they would make
a Quaternity thereof; In the name, I suppose, they (as well as other Nations
who differ from us in Religion) had read over our Bible, and supposing that but
fictions, were resolved to make a Law of their own, to be somewhat like that of
ours; which how they have done you have already heard: I shall now likewise
give you a brief account of the Religion used by the Persees, and so put an end
to this Chapter.

These Persees are a People descended from the ancient Persians, who lived in
much splendour, but wars coming among them, they were dissipated, and the
Mah^m^tans who invaded them, compelled several to leave their ancient Religion
for that of the Mohammedan: which they refusing exposed themselves to a
voluntary banishment, and therefore carried what of their substanee they could
with them: they sought for a new pla^e of habitation, and at length found it in
this Country, where they now inhabit, being admitted ^o use their own Religion,
but yielding themselves in subjection to the government of the Nation, and
paying homage and t^ibute, their Religion being different from the rest of the
Inhabitants, I shall thus describe to you.

Th^^ affirm that before any thing was, there was a God, who made the Heavens,
and the Earth and all things therein contained: at six times or labors, and
between each labor, ^e rested five days, first, He made the Heavens with
their Orbs adorned with great lights and lesser, as the Sun, Moon and Stars,
also the Angels whom he placed in their several orders, according to their
dignities, which place he ordained to be for the habitations of such as should
live holy in this life; this being done, he rested five days. Then he made Hell
in the lower parts of the world, from which he banished all light and comfort
wherein were several Mansions that exce^ded each other in dolor, propo^tioned
for the degrees of Offenders; about which time Lucifer the chief of Angels,
with other of his Order* conspiring against God, to agin the Sover^ignty and
command over all; God threw him first from the Orb of his happine^s, together
with his confederates and accomplices, damned him to Hell, the ^lace that was
made for Offenders and turned them from their glorious shapes, into shapes
black, ugly and deformed, till the end of the world, when all o^fenders shall
receive punishment, this was the second labor, After this God created the
earth and waters, making this world like a ball, in that admirable manner that
now it is; this was the third labor. The fourth was to make the Trees and
Herbs; the fifth was to make Beasts, Fowls and Fishes; and the sixth and last,
Man and Woman, whose names were Adamah and Evah and by these the world was
propagated in this manner; God, as they affirm, did cause Evah to bring forth
two twins every day for a thousand years together, and none dyed Lucifer being
malicious, and endeavoring to do mischief, God set certain Supervisors over
his creatures; Hamull had charge of the Heavens, Acob of the Angels, Foder of
the Sun, Moon and Stars, Soreb of the Earth, Josah of the Waters; Sumbolah of
the Bea^^s of the Field, Daloo of the Fish of the Sea, Rocan of the Tree, Cooz
of Man and Woman, and Settan and Asud were Guardians of Lucifer and other evil
spirits who for all that did some mischief, the ^ins of men occasioned the
destruction of the world by a flood which spared only a few to people the
Earth, which was done accordingly; and this is their opinion o^ the Creation
and first Age. As to their Religion, it was given them by a Lawgiver, whose
name was Zerto^st whose birth was strange, and breeding and visions miraculous;
the names of his Father and Mother were Espintaman and Do^oo, he was born in
China, and great fame going of him when young, the King of that Country
endeavored his destruction, but could not bring it to pas^, for those who were
sent to destroy him had their sinews shrunk he being twelve or thirteen years
of age was taken with a great sickness, the King hearing the^eof sent
Physicians to destroy him; but Zertoost sensible of their practice, re^u^e^
their Physic, and fled with his Father and Mother into Persia in his way
meeting with Rivers he congealed them to ice and so went over: he arrived at
Persia in the time of the Reign of K. Gustasph it was in that Country that at
his request to God he being purified, was carried up into Heaven, where he
heard the Almighty speaking as in flames of fire who revealed to him the works
of the Creation, and what was to come and gave him Laws for the better
government and e^tablishment of Religion: Zertoost desired to live always, that
he might instruct the wo^ld in Religion; but God answered, That if he should
live never so long, yet Lucifer would do more ^a^m then he should do good; but
if he desired to live long as the World endured he might. God also presented to
Zertoo^^ the seven ages o^ times of the Persian Monarchy; the first was the
Golden age, the d^ys of Guiomaras; second, the Silver, the days of Fraydhun,
third, the Brazen, the days of Kaykobod, the fourth, the Tin, the days of
Lorasph, fifth, Leaden, the days of Bahaman, sixth, the Steel; the days of
Darah Segner; the seventh, the Iron Age, in the Reign of Yesdegerd: He finding
by this that the times would be worse and worse, desired to live no longer than
till he had discharged his Message and then that he might be translated to the
same place of glory; so he was reduced to his proper sense, and remained in
heaven many days; and then having received the Book of the Law, and the
heavenly fire, he was conveyed by an Angel to Earth again. But the Angel had no
sooner left him, but Lucifer met him; but notwithstanding his persuasions, he
went on in his designs of revealing the Law, which he did first to his Father
and Mother, and by their means it came to the ears of Gustasph, then King of
Persia, who sending for him, he told the King every circumstance, so that the
King began to incline to his religion, often sending for, and conversing with
him. The Churchmen of that time endeavored to put infamy upon Zerto^st, by
persuading the King, that he was an Impostor, and of unclean living, for that
he ^ad the bones of humane bodies under his bed, the King hearing this sent to
search, and found it so to be, for these Churchmen had caused them to be
conveyed thither; wherefore Zertoost, by order of the King was put in Prison:
but there happened an occasion, that he was not only soon released, but also
brought into the Kings favor; for the King having a Horse that he prized, that
fell sick, and no person able to cure him, Zeroost undertook the cure, and
performed it; and working some other miracles, was now of good credit, and
esteemed as a man come from God; so that now his Book gained an esteem, and the
King himself told him, That if he would grant him four demands, he would
believe his Law, and be a Professor thereof. The demands were these; First,
That he might ascend to Heaven, and descend when he list. Secondly, That he
might know what God would do at present, and in time to come. Thirdly, That he
might never dye. Fourthly, That no instrument whatso^ver might have power to
wound or hurt him. Zertoost did consent that all this might ^e done, but not by
one person; and therefore to the first, Gustasph had power to ascend to, and
descend from Heaven granted to him. The second, which was to know what would
fall out, present and hereafter, was granted to the Kings Churchman. The
third, which was to live for ever, was granted to Gustasph's eldest Son, named
Dischuon, who yet lives as they say, at a place in Persia, called Demawando
Lohoo, in a high Mountain, with a guard of thirty men; to which place all
living creatures are forbidden to approach, lest they should live for ever, as
they do who abide there The last, which was never to be wounded with instrument
or weapon, was granted to the youngest Son of Gvstasph, called Esplandiar. So
Gustasph, and the other three mentioned, proving the power of these several
gifts, all determined to live according to the precepts in Zertoosts Book, he
unfolding the contents thereof, which were these: This Book contained three
several Tracts, the first whereof was of Judicial Astrology; the second was of
Physic; the third, was called Zertoost, and this was of matters of Religion:
And these three Tracts were delivered to the Magis, Physicians and Churchmen,
called Darooes, the^e Tracts were divided into Chapters, seven were in the
Wisemen or Iesopps Book, seven in the Physicians, and seven in the Darooes
Book; the two first is unlawful or unnecessary, I shall omit it, and proceed to
the third. The Dicision of men being Laity and Clergy; and those of the Clergy
being ordinary or extraordinary, It pleased God, say the Persees to divide and
apportion his Law among these men First, therefore, to the Layman God gave
five Commandments: 1. To have shame over them, as a remedy against sin for that
will keep them from oppressing his inferiors, from stealing, from being drunk,
and from bearing false witness. 2. To have fear always present, that they
might not commit sin. 3. When they go about any thing, to think whether it be
good or bad so to do it or to let it alone. 4. That the sight of God^s
creatures, in the morning, put them in mind to give God thanks for them. 5 That
when they pray by day, they turn their faces toward the Sun; and by night
toward the Moon.


These are the precepts enjoined the Laymen, those of the common Churchman
follow, who are bound to keep, not only these appropriated to him; but the
proceeding precepts.

1. To pray after the manner is described in the Zundavestaw, for God is best
pleased with that form. 2. To keep his eyes from coveting any thing that is
another. 3. To have a great care to speak the truth always because Lucifer is
the father of falsehood. 4. To meddle with no bodies business but his own, and
not meddle with the things of the world, for the Layman shall provide all
things needful for him. 5. To learn the Zundavestaw by heart* that he may teach
the Layman. 6. To keep himself pure as from dead carcases, or unclean meats
lest he be defiled. 7. To forgive all injuries, in imitation of God, who daily
forgives us. 8. To teach the common people to pray, to pray with them for any
good: and when they come to the place of worship, to join in common prayer
together. 9. To give license for Marriage, and to marry men and women, the
Parents not having power to do it without the consent of the Herbood. 10. To
spend the greatest part of their time in the Temple, that he may be ready on
all occasions. 11. and last Injunction is, upon pai^ of Damnation, to believe
no other Law but that of Zertoost, and not to add to it, nor diminish it.
These are the precepts enjoined the Herbood, the Des^oore being the High
Priest, who commands all the rest, is e^joyned not only these of the Laymon or
Behedin. these of the Herbood or Churchmen, but 13 more of his own, which are
these that follow.

1. That he must never touch any of a strange Caft or Sect of what Religion
soever, nor any Layman of his own Religion, but he must wash himself. 2. That
he must do all his own work, in token of humility, and for purity, viz. Set his
own herbs sow his own grain and dress his own meat, unless he have a Wife to do
it for him. which is not usual. 3. That he take Tyth or Tenth of the Behedin,
as Gods due, and despose of it as he th^nks fit. 4. That he must use no pomp or
superfluity, by either give all away in charity, or bestow it in building of
Temples. 5. That his house be near the Church, where he must retire himself,
living recluse in Prayer. 6. That he must live purer then others, both in
frequent washings and diet, and also sequester himself from his Wife in time of
her pollutions. 7. That he be learned* and knowing all the several Books of
Zertoost as well the Astrological and Physical parts* as the other. 8. That he
must never eat and drink excessively. 9. That he fear no body but God, and sin,
and not fear what Lucifer can do to him. 10. That God having given him power in
matters of the soul; therefore when any Man sins he may tell him of it, be he
never so great; and every man is to obey him, as one that speaks not his own
cause, but Gods. 11. That he be able to discern in what manner God comes to
reveal himself, in what manner Lucifer. 12. That he reveal not what God
madifesteth to him by Visions. 13. That he keep an ever-living fire, that never
may ^o out, which being kindled by that fire that Zertoost brought from Heaven,
may endure for all ages, till fire shall come to destroy all the world, and
that he say his prayers over it.
This is a Summary of those precepts contained in the book of their Law, that
Zertoost is by them affirmed to bring from heaven, and that Religion which
Guslasph with his followers embraced, persuaded by the aforementioned miracles
wrought by Zertoost amongst them.

The 3 d. particular in this Tract is the rights and ceremonies observed by
this Sect, differencing them from others.

First, Though their Law allows them great libe^ty inmeats and drinks; yet
because they will not displease the Banians and Moors, they abstain from Kine
and Hogs-flesh; they eat alone, and drink in several Cups.

2. They observe 6 Feasts in the year, according to the 6 works of the Creation.

3. As for their Fasts, after every one of the^^ Feasts they eat but one Meal a
day for 5 days together; and when they eat Flesh they carry part of ^t to the
Temple as an offering.

Their worship of Fire is taken from Z^rt^^^ts bringing it from Heaven, and it
being enjoined them for the nature of it, that which he brought, c^^ld not be
extinguished; whether that be prefer^ed is unknown, but upon effect thereof
they are licensed to compose a fire of several mixtures which is o^ even sorts;
when they meet about that ceremony bestowed on this Fire, the Defloore or
Herbood, together with the Assembly encompass it about, and ^^andi^g about 11
or 12 foot distance, the De^loore or H^^^ood utters this speech. That
forasmuch as (...) was ^^l^vered to Zertoost their Lawgiver from God ^lmigh^y
who pronounced it to be his virtue and excel^^nce, that therefore they should
reverence it, and not abuse (...) the ordinary use thereof, as to put water in
it, or spit in it, etc.

At the birth of a child the Dacoo or Churchman is sent for, who calculates the
Nativity of the Child, and the Mother names it without any ceremony ^f^^r this
it is carried to the Church, and water is p^^r^d thereon, and prayer used, That
God would cleanse it from the uncleanness of the Father, and menstruous
pollutionis of the Mother. At 7 years of age he is led by the Parents into the
Church to have Confirmation, where he is taught Prayers, and instructed in
Religion and being washed, he is clothed in a Linen Cassock and other habits,
which he ordinarily wears and so is admi^ted into their Sect.

They have a five-fold kind of marriage, for which they have several terms; the
most singular, is that of hiring a man's Son or Daughter to be matched to their
dead Daughter or Son, with whom they are contracted The ceremony observed in
their Marriages is performed at Midnight, not in the Church, but upon a bed, by
two Churchmen, one in behalf of the man, the other in behalf of the Woman, who
ask if they are willing to be married, and they join hands, the man promising
to provide for the Woman and give her some Gold to bind her to him; and the
woman promises all she has is his; then the Churchmen scattering rice, prays
that they may be fruitful, and so they conclude, celebrating the marriage feast
for 8 days together.

As for burial they have two places or Tombs, built of a round form, a pretty
height from the ground; within they are paved with stone, in a shelving manner
in the midst a hollow pit to receive the consumed bones about the walls are the
shrouded and sheeted carcasses laid both of men and women, exposed to the open
Air. These 2 Tombs are distant from one another; the one is for good livers,
the other for the wicked. When any are sick unto death, the Herbood is sent
for, who prays in the ears of the sick man; and when he is dead he is carried
on anIron biere; all who accompany them are interdicted all speech; only the
Churchman, when the dody is laid in the burial place, says thus, Thi^ our
Brother whilst he lived consisted of the 4 Elements now he is dead let each
take his own, Earth to Earth, Air to Air Water to Water, and Fire to Fire. This
done they pray to Sertun and Asud, that they would keep the Devils from their
deceased Brother when he repairs to their holy fire to purge himself; for they
suppose the Soul wandreth three days on the earth, in which time Luoifer
molesteth it, for security from which molestation, it flies to their ^ire,
seeking preservation here; which time concluded, it receives justice or
reward, Hell or Heaven; and therefore they for those three days offer up
Prayers Morning Noon and Night, that God would be merciful to the Soul
departed, and forgive his sins. After three days are expired they make a
Festival, and conclude their mourning.

CHAP. III.
The Arrival of the English Fleet, his entertaining of six Engl^sh-men, an
account of whose Adventures is promised him by one of the Company. The
Travell^r describes the place of his birth and Parents, the death of his elder
Brother, and how through the persuasions of his Father, he resolved to follow
thieving.

I Had now spent several Months in my Voyage by Sea, perambulations by Land,
and observations of the Country in general, and this more particular discovery
of the Laws and manner both of Civil and Eccle^iastical of the Inhabitants a
just account whereof I have given you in the foregoing Chapters: And now we
daily expected the return of Ships from England, and therefore every one
provided to be ^urnished with all things necessary against their arrival: The
Merchants who were re^ident on shore had every day several sorts of commodities
brought out of the Country in Wagons drawn by Oxen, so that their Storehouses
were filled; and I for my part prov^ded my self with all sorts of Liquor and
Victuals that the Country afforded

All the time usual the Fleet arrived, which cnosisted of 4 ^hips, whereof 3
was on the account of the Company, and the 4th. by their permission, came a^ an
Interloper: those that came on the account of the company were provided with
all things necessary, by the order of the Consul or President; and the other
Ships company being left to shift for themselves, took up my house for their
quarters The chief of the company that lodged with me consisted of 6 persons,
two whereof seemed to be very hansome young men, of about 18 years of age;
these two were very well respected as well by the Captain as the others his
Companions, they were all very frolic, blithe, and merry, and several times
laughed at several adventures that had befallen them during the Voyage.

Though the Captain of this Ship came not on the Companies account, yet he was
very richly laden, and was directed to such persons of this Country as would
be sure to do his business for him; neither was he a stranger therein, for he
had been here twice before, and was acqu^inted with most of the Banians, who
are so curious and diligent observers, that if they see a man but once, if he
ever return though several years after, yet they will know him again,
especially if they have had any trading with them; and they have so good a
conceit of our Countrymen, that they will oftentimes trust a Captain with 2 or
300 l. worth of Commodities from one year to another; only giving them common
interest; and as to their ordinary dealing and bargaining, they are at a word
and there is money to be saved by dealing with them, and trusting them, for if
you distrust them, then you shall pay so much the more; if you trust them they
will provide your goods as cheap or cheaper than you can your self do it,
though never so well experienced therein. I needed not to acquainted our
Captain with any of their fashions, for he well enough understood it himself;
but I assi^ted him and some of the rest in exchanging their Moneys, for the
Banians allow no more for any silver or gold Coin than it weighs; for it will
never go current there, till it be changed or minted into the coin of that
Country.

Four o^ my Guests, viz. The Captain, and three of the rest did employ
themselves in looking after the Ships unlading, but the other two, who were the
youngest (and there ore, as I thought, fittest to take pains) did still stay at
home in my own house, or else walk out for their recreation* This, and some
other things that I observed made me curious in my observations of them in all
their actions, suspecting they were either personages of greater quality than
ordinary, or that there was some other Mystery in the case: but they being as
cunning as my self concealed that from me which I since knew, though I tried
them with several speeches and discourses; in which I thought my self cunning
enough; I observed this, that these two young men never lay together, but
sometimes the Captain lay with one of them, and another persons of his company
with the other The greatest part of their business being for the present
dispatched* they oftentimes staid at home and feasted where they drank of
great quantities of Persia^ Wine* and other the Country drinks, the best I
could get for them, They having all drank one time to a good height, and being
very merry, the Captain asked which was the best house for handsome Women now.
I informed him of ^he bent I knew* but says he, ye have no English Girls here,
no said I seldom any such bles^ings come into this Country we are forced to
content our selves with the brown Natives: I believe, said the Captain, if
these two young men, William and George, for such was the names of the two
young Men I spoke of) were handsomely dressed in Women's clothes, they would pass
for handsome Women. I then of a sudden turning my eyes toward the parties he
spoke of, saw that their cheeks were died of a Vermillion hue, deeper then they
had lately been acquired by drinking: This caused me to di^^rust ^omething; but
the rest of the company falling into a kind of a laughter, which I supposed was
somewhat force^, they altered their discourse* and began a fresh health to all
their friends in Englan^, which I pledged them with a very good will, telling
them that I had some, whose company I had heartily wished for what are they,
said the Captain; Sir, sai^^ they are such as I believe you love, that is
hand^ome women in general; and of these I had the good fortune to be
particularly and intimately acquainted with several. At the ending of this
discourse, I was called for down to attend some of my guests who were going,
which having done. I again went up, where I found the Captain and the rest in a
standing posture, ready likewise to be gone, at which I wondered* but let them
take their pleasures: so five or six of my guests left me, and he had gone too
had he not been a little fluster'd, and then a sleep. After they were gone
several thoughts possessed my mind, of what these two youngest persons should be;
and it was long ere I could hit upon the right, but having one person in the
house; with whom I was more intimate than the rest, I resolved to use my utmost
interest with him to be satisfied: he in few hours awaked, and would have been
gone after his companions; but I so far prevailed with him, that he lay there
that night; and because I would have the better opportunity for my discourse, I
lay with him; when we were in bed, I told him that I could heartily wish I
could accommodate him with a Female Bedfellow; he replied that would do very
w^ll, I offered my assistance in procuring the best of our country, but he was
cold in his reply; whereupon I told him, that by that time he had been so long
in the country as I had, he would be glad of one of those whom I sometimes made
a shift to spend a night with: but continued I, I had rather be ^t Mother Cr --
in Moor-fields: Are you acquainted there replied my Bedfellow, yes, said I, and
at most of those houses of hospitality in or about London, to which colleges I
was a good Benefactor, why, said my Bedfellow you have been right, or else I
had never come hither said I: whereupon I acquainted him with many of my
rambles about London, and gave him such satisfaction in my discourse that he
began to be more free with me; and then I conjured him to deal truly with me in
resolving me one question, to which he promised me, that he would, I having
gained thus much upon him: told him that my reque^t was to know what those two
young Persons were; which were called William and George: truly said he, you
could not have asked me any thing that I should be more unwilling to di^cover
then that; but since I have promised you, I will tell you, and that the truth
without any disguise, provided you swear to me, not to discover or take any
notice thereof, without my consent, to this I agreed, and having sworn to him
he told me, that they were not of those names, nor sex, that they went for, but
women, I told him I had long since doubted so much, and now I knew it, I would
take no notice thereof: but rather assist then hinder any design wherein there
was so much pleasure, for I had been as very a wag as any of them, and had in
my time run through as many and various adventures as any man of my age; he
hearing me say so, asked me where I had lived, and the most part of my life, I
without any dissembling gave him a short account of my life, which so pleased
him, that we spent most part of the night therein, and at my earnest requ^st he
promised me that the next day, he would give me an account of his life, and
adventures, wherein said he, you will find so many different chances of
fortune, as had hardly befallen any man, and I hope said he, I shall be able to
give you a good account thereof: for since my coming from England, I have had
time to recollect my self of some things that else I had forgotten, but now I
have placed the chief passages of my life into such a Method, as I shall be
very exact in, though I was impatient to hear what he promised me, yet the
night being far spent sleep seized on us both for some hour^, but awaking in
the morning, and putting him in mind of his promise, after a mornings draught
taken and a command that none should interrupt us, he began as follows.

I was born in Golding la^e, a place scitutate in the Suburbs of London, my
Fathers name was Isaac, and by reason of his small stature was commonly c^lled
little Isaac, being a native of the same place, and by profession a Cobbler, but
such was his courage that he was much troubled when any one called him Cobbler*
and would reply, that he was a Translat^r, or a Transmographer of shoes. His
Wife who I believe was my Mother, was named Vrsula; she was in the beginning of
her days one of those sort of people that we call Gypsies, or Canting-Beggars,
and my Father traveling into the country, and wanting money to pay for a bed
at night, he was forced to take up his lodging in a Barn, where he first came
to be acquainted with my Mother; whether they were ever married or no, I cannot
tell, though I suppose they only took each others words as being willing to
save the charge of a Priests hire. But notwithstanding the darkness of her
complexion (as those sort of people commonly have) there is not so bad a Jill,
but there is as bad a Jack for it was not long before she hornified my Father,
by a Banbury Tinker: which thing was so well known amongst the neighbors, that
they would commonly make horns with their fingers, and point at him as he
passed along the streets. My eldest brother at seven years of age attained to
such ingenuity that he seldom carried ^ome any mended shoes to a Gentleman's or
Citizens house, but he would filch either linen, silver spoons, or something
else of worth, which by negligent servants was not laid up safely; which trade
he drove for some space of time, being by reason of his childish years not in
the least suspected; but the pitcher goes not so often to the well, but at
length it coms broken home, in process of time he was taken with the theft,
and for the same carried to Newgate, where ^ore little Angel (peace be with him)
he dyed in Prison under the penance of a discipling which was applied to him
with a little too much rigor:

Our whole family ^ma^ted in his punishment, my fathert sighed, my mother
sobbed, and I wanted my part of those dainty morsels which his theft furnished
us withal, for by him my father drove a prett^ tra^e, having those who always
furnished him with ready money for whatsoever he brought* and indeed his loss'
would have utterly disconsolated my father but the great ^opes that he had in
me who was now come to the same age that my brother wa^ of when, he first began
to exercise his gifts in the mystery of theivery; and that I might tread the
same step tha^ my brother had done before me, my father (upon a certain day
when my mother and he and I were alone by our selves) began thus for to
endoctrinate me.

My son (said she) the profession o^ a theif is not of so base repute as the
world gives it out, considring what brave men have in former time exercised
themselves in this way: I have hard the Clark of our parish say, who I assure
you was a well read man, that Robin Hood that famous thief was in his younger
days Earl of Huntington^ and that Alexander the great was no better then a
th^ef in robbing other Princes of their Kingdoms and Crowns. ( This it seems be
spoke in vi^dication of the Sexton, who used to rob the dead co^ps of their
sheets and shirts and those other necess^ries which they carried along with
them in their voyage to Heaven) I tell thee he who steals not, knows ^ot how to
li^e in this world, nay does not almost each thing in the world teach u^ for to
steal? do ^e not see youth steal upon infancy, manhood steal upon ^outh and old
age upon manhood, until at last death steals upon us undiscerned and brings
us to our long homes; How does Summer steal on the Spring? Autumn on Summer,
and Winter on Autumn, until all the whole year is stole out of our sight. Pray
what do rich Farmers and griping Cormorants, but steal when they exact in their
prices of Corn, and grind the faces of the poor; and how can Shopkeepers wipe
off the aspersion of theft from themselves when they sell a commodity for twice
the worth of it, and thereby cozen the buyer; so that we see if things be
rightly scanned, there be more thieves in the World than only Tailors, Millers
and Weavers: and what I pray you makes Sergeants, Bailiffs, and Catch-poles so
to envy us, and persecute as they do, but that one trade still envies, and
malignes another, and would by their good wills suffer no other thieves but
themselves; this it is that makes them so double diligent in the surprizal of
us, though oftentimes our craft forestalls their malice, as I shall instance to
you in one memorable example.

My self and two of my comrades had agreed to rob a rich Userer whose younger
brother having vitiously wasted his Estate, was forced to take this his
brothers house for sanctuary, where he kept as close as a snail in his shell,
unless only at such times when as he imagined the darkness of the night might
shrewd him in obscurity, he so dreaded these shoulder clappers, who stick
closer t^ a man than a bur on his cloak for being once got into their clu^ches,
you may as soon wring Hercules club out of his fist, as get free from there
fingers; and herein have thieves a great privilege over debtors, for the mos^
notorious thief that ever was, once in a months time he is carted out of
Prison, as others for smaller matters are freed from durance by following the
cart, where a fellow with a cat of nine-tails does play him such a lesson, as
makes him to skip and mount for joy of his deliverance; but wi^h a poor debtor
the case is far different for being once in prison, the best team of Horses
that ever drew in a Wagon, cannot draw him out from thence without a silver
hook.

But to speak of that (some) which more properly belongs unto thee (for I
suppose thou will never attain to such credit as for to be laid up in Prison
for de^t^) by the help of a servant of the house, who went sharers with us in
our prey, we got a false key made to the back door, whereby (one night) we
attained an easy entrance, and loaded our selves to our hearts content; but in
our return one of our companions chanced to sneeze, and therewithal brake wind
so violently behind, that it awaked the old Userer, who suspicious of the least
noise presently cried out, Thieves thieves: Trusty Roger his man was very ready
to rise at first allarm, fearing that our discovery might prove prejudicial to
his liberty, and lighting a Candle pretended to search every hole in the house
into which it was possible for a mouse to enter; In the mean time we lay close,
yet not unperceived by this false servant, who very formally told his Ma^ter
that all was safe and well, and that he might take his rest without any fear;
But the dread of his hearing us prolonged our stay, so long that day began to
approach, whereupon fearing more danger from without than from within, we
prepared for our departure, but having opened the door, we found that we had
leapt out ^f the drying pan into the fire, and by shunning Scylla were fallen
into Char^bdes, for four of these Catch-poles were waiting at the door for the
Userers Brother, having intelligence belike that he used to make the dusky
morning, and dark evening, the two shrouds that car^ied him safely in and out
to his Brothers house; Now going out of the door first one of these robustious
fellows laid hands upon me taking me for the party they waited for, my
companions endeavoring to rescue me were seized on by the other three
Bailiffs, so that we seeing no hopes of escape, resolved to cry whore first,
and with full mouth cried out Thieves, thieves; Trusty Roger and the man that
should have been arrested, hearing this cry, took weapons in their hands and
out of doors they came, where Roger soon perceiving how the business went, ah
you Rogues (said he) do you come to rob my Master? and thereupon laid so nimbly
about him, being seconded by the other, that the Bailiffs were glad to let us
go to defend themselves. Whilst they were thus busied in pelting each other, we
slipped away with our prize, and to take a full revenge of those Catch-poles,
raised several of the neighbors, whom we sent to the apprehending of the
Bailiffs; whilst we marched away in safety, what became of them afterward I do
not know only this I tell thee, to let thee see that there is not ^^y danger
whatsoever so great, but by wit and cun^^gness may be avoided. This story I
heard with ^^eat attention, which so wrought upon my mind ^^t I thought my self
no less then a second Robin Hood (...) little John, and thereupon resolved to
put in speedy ^^ecution my ^athers dictates which yet proved very ^^fortunate
to me, as you will find by that which ^^^lows.

CHAP. IV.
His robbing of Orchards, how he was caught by a Night-spell, the extremity
their family was brought unto, and how to relieve it, he robbed a Grocer, he
cheateth a Cutler, afterward robs a Bacon-man, his Father is pressed away for
a Soldier, his Mother ayeth, and he being left alone, goes to live with an
uncle, where he acts many Rogueries.

MY mind being thus fully fixed to follow thieving I began my trade in robbing
of Orchards, returning home with laden thighs, the Trophies and spoil of
Cherry-Trees, Pear Trees, and Plumb-trees* My Mother instead of correcting me
for what I had done, encouraged me to proceed on as I had begun; for indeed
hunger had pinched us sorely ever since my Brothers death, my Fathers credit
being so eclipsed thereby, that until people saw he would mend his Life scarce
any one would employ him to mend their shoes. One Orchard I especially,
haunted, it being stor^d with most gallant fruit, whose very looks me thought
did cry, Come eat me: but so often I frequented the same, especially one tree
of more choice fruit than all the rest that the owner of the Orchard (being a
rich miserable chuff, and one who knew on which side his bread was buttered)
began to mistrust the same, and therefore that his apples might not depart away
without first taking leave of him, he resolved for the future to prevent the
same, and having some little skill in Negromancy against my next coming, he
enchanted his Orchard with a Night-spell.

This he placed at the four corners of his Orchard in the hour of Mars, and is
of such force being rightly applied, that whoever comes within the bounds
thereof, must be forced to stay there till Sunrising. Now I that knew not any
thing of what was done, according to my accustomed course, having the dark
night for my coverture, boldly entered the Orchard, and with winged ^ast
ascended upon one of the trees, where having filled a bag with Apples which my
Mother had fu^nished me withal for that purpose, I thought to depart away as
formerly I had done, but the case was quite altered from what was before, for I
found my self in such a Labyrinth that the best clue of my invention could not
wind me out; Here did I wander about with my bag on my shoulders (having not
the power in the least to lay it down) till such time as Aurora begun to usher
in the day, when the old chuff entered his Orchard to see what fish his net had
caught, resolving with severity to punish the Cains that had stolen away his
goods, but instead of a Gudgeon finding but a Sp^at, beholding my Childish
years, he could not imagine me to be the Author of so much wrong as he had
received and thereupon altering his resolution of breaking arms and legs as he
first intended, he stepped back to his house, and fetched from thence a great
burchin rod, the instrument wherewith he intended to chastise me withal, with
much silence he approached unto me; (for a words speaking would dissolve the
charm) and having with some struggling untrust my Breeches, laying me over his
knee, he began to exercise the office of a Pedagogue upon me; now I having for
some space of time before eaten nothing but green fruit, had gotten a terrible
looseness, which with the fright that I was in, and the smart that I felt,
wrought such effects in my belly, that opening my posteriors, I discharged a
whole volley of excrements in his face. This action of mine made him at once to
shut his eyes, open his mouth* and unloose his hands, so that the charm being
broken, and my body at liberty, I quickly conveyed my self out of the Orchard,
leaving the old catterpillar in a very stinking condition, not to be remedied
without the benefit of that cleansing element of water.

Warned by this disa^ter, I was very fearful to enter into any more Orchards,
and indeed had I met no Remora in my proceedings, yet this trade would soon
have failed; for not long after the Apples were all transplanted out of the
Orchard into the Cellar, and winter began to hasten on apace. And now hunger
which will not be treated vvithal without bread began to reign Lord and King
in our Family; the Chandler would let us have no more cheese for chalk, nor
^enny loaves for round O's, we had made a black poast white already with our
score, and his belief would extend no further to trust us for any more: nay*
the very Ale-house-keeper (to whom we were such constant Customers) was now
grown such a Nullifidian, that he would not believe us for small-beer,
wherefore we were forced to make a virtue of necessity, and to prevent
starving, our household goods marched away one after another; the first thing
that we sold was the Cupboard as the most unnecessary thing in all the house,
having no victuals to put therein; soon after follovved the Table as an
Appendix to it, for seeing the Table will hold no victuals thereon for us to
eat, we in revenge thereof did eat up the Table; That with some joynt-stools
belonging to it) being de^^oured and gone, our stomachs were so hot that it
soon melted away the pewter dishe^; for we considered with our selves that good
meat might be eaten out of wooden platters then followed the napkins and
Table-cloathes, for we were not so much cloyed with fat meat but that a little
linen would serve to wipe the grease off of our fingers; in fine this pinching
hunger was the Habeas Corpus that removed all our goods out of the Hou^e unto
the Brokers, and now our dwel^ing place corresponded with our bellies, being
alike both empty

In this comfortle^s condition we remained for the space of three days, having
neither money nor any thing to make money of being thus sadly necessitated, my
father and I set our wits upon the Tenterhooks which way to recruit our decayed
estate, many inventions we had for that purpose, and present necessity urged us
to make a speedy use of one of them which not long after we brought to pass in
this manner.

It being then winter time, the Evenings long and dark, we bought a Link for
three pence, the remainder of our whole estate; with this about ten of the
clock in the night we marc^ed out, resolving to fasten on the fairest
opportunity that should present its self to our sight* many streets we
traversed, but found not any thing that might answer either our intent or
expectation. Coming at last to Basing-lane and casting our wandering eyes into a
Shop we there e^pyed a Grocer telling of money on a ^ounter, being lighted only
by a single Candle; this made for our purpose, whereupon my (...) planting
himself, I boldly entered the Shop, desiring him to give me leave to light my
Link; which being granted I with the same soon popt out his Candle snatching up
a handful of mone^ ran out of the doors with the same as fast as I could; the
Grocer hasted after me amain, in the mean time my father stepped into the Shop,
and took away the remainder of the money. My nimbleness had soon out stripped
the Grocer, who returned back, found that the Devil migh dance upon his Counter
for there was never a cross to keep him from it. About an hour after we met
together at home, where having counted our purchase, we found that it amounted
to seven pounds eighteen shillings and six pence So long as this money lasted,
the pot, the spit* and Pitcher was never idle; but what was thus got over the
Devils back was soon spent under his belly, and ^n a short time we were reduced
to as great want as we were in before.

Necessity is the best whetstone to sharpen the edge of a man's invention, when
the gutts being to grumble against the belly for want of food, Oh in what a
confusion is then this little microcosme of ours? How is the invention racked,
tortur^d and stretched forth to supply that defect, my hungry belly found this
to be too true, which made me set my wits on work for a speedy remedy; a
project quickly came into my head but to effect the same I wanted money; this
was a double task for me to do, but a willing mind overcomes all difficulties,
away went I to a Cut^ers, where in the cheaping of one knife, I stole another,
and lest the Cutler should mistr^st me, I came up to his price, but pretended I
had forgotten my money, and therefore must go home and fetch it this stolen
knife I sold for a great, which money I intended for a bait to catch a bigger
fish some few streets I traversed before my project would fasten, at last
coming to Warwicklane I saw in a Bacon-shop a fellow standing in a pocket blew
apron whose Innocent looks gave me confident hopes of a golden prize, in I went
and asked him the price of a pound of Bacon? six pence boy said he of the Rib,
and four pence of the Gammo^; then give me a pound of the Gammon (said I and
here is a ^roat the whole estate of a poor boy who has been a long time in
getting the same. Whilst he was weighing it I told him I had a cursed Mother in
la^, who fed me only with a bit and a knock, which made me to go with an empty
belly and an heart full of sorrow, that if she should know that I am in
possession of so eatable a commodity, she would take it from me, and that she
did often search my pockets for that purpose: I therefore desired him to
prevent the worst that might happen, to put the same down my back betwixt my
doublet and shirt, which whilst he was doing, I leaning my head against him,
with a short knife cut the pocket out of his apron, and having thanked him very
kindly away I went, leaving my poor Bacon-man with a bottomless pennyless pocket

My purchased prize was about thirty shillings, of which some four of it was in
brass farthings, but all was current coin that came into my hands, for I made
no scruple at all in the receiv^ng it; with this ^ returned home, thinking to
be received with much joy, as having gotten that in my pocket which would make
us all merry, but the case was quite altered from what was before, my Mother
was on a sudden fallen sick, my Father pressed for a Soldier, and hurried away.
This much abated the edge of my mirth but my years not being capable of much
sorrow, although thou^h my Mothers death ensued not long after, yet it was soon
over, and ^ndeed her outward condition was so deplorable, it had been ^lmost
impiety to have wished her longer life.

Now though my cond^tion was bad enough before, yet by my Mothers death it was
much worse, I was now left to the wide world friendless, monyless, and
pittyless, for not any one of the Neighbors would give me entertainment,
expecting no good fruit from the sciens of such a bad stock. To follow my Trade
of thieving I began to d^ead, for every line, rope, and halter that I saw, me
thoughts did admonish me to leave it off, for fear I came home short at last,
and to follow the occupation of begging was then a ^ery bad time to begin in,
it being about the depth of winter: at last I remembered my Mother had a Brother
a Barber-Chyrurgion, living in St. Martins; thither I went, acquainted him
with his sisters death my own sad condition, and what a boy I would prove if
it would please him to give me ente^tainment; he being ignorant o^ the Trade
tha^ I drove, and moved with compassion at my pitiful tale, told me if I
performed what I promised, I should not want for any thing he could assist me
in; hereupon I was had into the House, and though my Aunt scovvled on me, my
Uncle commanded my rags to be taken off* and a suit of one of my Cousins p^t
upon me, as being the more durable, although my own were a thousand strong.

Having thus with the snake cast my skin, attained to good diet and lodging, I
quickly began to be as brisk as a body lowse, and to vapor amongst the boys
like a Crovv in a Gutter, and (notvvithstanding my promise) my mind was now
wholy fixed upon Roguery, but in a lovver orb than what I pra^tised before,
tending rather to mirth then much mischief; to do this I had several in^entions
according as time and place were convenient; one of my first exploits was but
being sent of an errant to a Grocers shop in a froscy morni^g, where a pan of
coals to warm their fingers I secretly convayed therein some Guinney-peper,
which set the Prentice in such a vilent coughing fit they were not able to
speak to a Cu^tomer, their Mistress hearing this noise below, came running down
stairs where scenting the matter, she begen to speak aloud at both ends, and
being something laxative by dri^king of Sider, she bewrayed in what a condition
she was in by what was scattered on the flour.

Sometimes would I in a clean place where wenches were to pass, lay a trane of
Gun-pouder, and at the very instant that they went along set fire ^o it which
was a great pleasure to my Worship to see ho^ the poor Girls would skip and
leap, just like a horse when he has a netle under his tail. At other times in
the night would I tie a ^ine from one side of the street to the other about
half a foot high, whereby those that came next were sure to h^ve a fall nay I
could not forbear to act my Rogueries in the Church it self having Goo^e
quills ^ led with lice and fleas, which I would purchase of the Beggars for
broken meat; these would I blow into the necks of the daintiest Gentle women
that I could see. At other times would I with a needle and thread (which I
always carried about with me in my p^cket) ^ow men's cloaks and women's Gowns
together as they stood in the Crowd, so that when they went a way, there would
be such pulling of one another, that they would never leave until one of there
Garments had a piece of it rent out

Amongst other instruments of mischief wherewith I exercised my self, one was
a hallow trunck to shoot with, in which I was such an Artist that I seldom mist
hitting the mark I aimed at; and that I might be the better undiscovered I on
purpose brake a hole in the glass window, through which I used to shoot at my
pleasure, scarce could an Oyster-wench, or Kitching-stuff-wench pass by, but I
would hit her on the neck, hands, or some naked place, which would set her a
railing and scolding for a quarter of an hour together at she knew not whom.
One Monday morning a Shoomakers maid had been fetching a great Pitcher of Beer
for the Crispins to begin their weeks work withal; now as she sailed along
with the Pitcher in her hand, which with the weight thereof drew her quite a
one side, to prevent the Wenches growing crooked thereby I levelled so right
that I hit her on the fingers, so that down came the Pitcher and with the
weight thereof brake all in pieces, and spilt the good liquor, the poor Wench
cried pitifully, the Crispins stormed for loosing their mornings draughts, and
being informed it was I that did it, they vowed to be revenged one me, which
not long after they brought to pass.

For I that could not live without Roguery, no more then a ^ish without water,
still continued my trade, notwithstanding all their threats. One day whilst I
was watching for my prey, through the hole of the glass window aforesaid, there
came by a man with a basket of drinking glasses on his head; scarce was h^ past
me, when I saluted him with a dirt-bullet on the Calf of his Leg,, which made
him give such a leap, that down came the basket with the glasses clattering
upon the stones making such a murder amongst them that never was a Citizen
(though he owed ten thousand pound more than he was worth) so much broken as
they. The fellow seeing his glasses thus mor^ified cursed most bitterly
breathing forth nothing but revenge, if he did but know who it was that did it.
I who was conscious of my own guilt, hearing him so to thunder thought some of
his anger might lighten on me, and therefore to prevent the worst, I ran up the
stairs, and hid my self under the bed; but he that has a bad name is worse
then half hanged, the Shoomakers who I had mischiefed before, right or wrong
said positively that it was I, urging him on to revenge him self on my Uncles
glass-windows; the fellow who was easily induced to believe what they said, and
to a^t accordingly made no more ado but up with his empty basket, and to
revenge his quarrel made such havoc of the windows, that there was scarcely
ever a q^arrel left O how did my Uncle look and my Aunt scold to see their
house thus metamorpho^ed into the shape of a Bawdy House; but it was in vain
for them to complain every one took the man's part and laid all the blame of the
mischief upon me; hereupon was a privy search made all the house over for me
and being found my poor buttocks paid full dearly for the breaking the windows,
my Aunt standing by all the while to see execution done upon me, and urging my
Uncle on to beat me* for which I cursed her in my heart most bitterly.

CHAP. V.
He d^scovers his Aunts playing loose with a Shopkeeper, his uncles invective
against Women. His Aunt and the Maid join together, and by a blind wager make
him to be laughed and hooted at by the boys, he is s^undly revenged on them
both for the same.

MY Aunts unkindness to me vexed me to the heart, so that I vowed t^ my self to
be revenged on her; the print of the rod did not stick so fast on my buttocks,
as the remembrance of her words did stick in my mind; Io was not so watched by
A^gus as I watched her, for I knew that Women were subject to many faults, and
my Aunt as subject as any of the rest; One Shopkeeper used constantly to haunt
our house, not a day passed in which we had not his company: This Man my Uncle
entertained with very much respect, for what reason I know not, unless it were
that of the Poets: Experience plainly does unto us show,
Cuckolds are kind to them that make them so.


One day my Uncle went forth to dress a Patient, no sooner was be gone but the
Shopkeeper wa^ there; Now our whole Family consisted only of four persons, my
Uncle and Aunt, a Maid and my self; in order therefore for their more privacy,
the Maid was sent to the M^rket to buy eggs, and my self had liberty to go
forth to play; I kindly thanked my Aunt for this courtesy, and taking my hat,
with a seeming forwardness, pretended to go forth: but clapping to the doo^ on
the insid^, I softly sneaked back and hid my self under the stairs, where
undiscerned I could plainly see all the passages between my Aunt and the
Shopkeeper. He thinking us gone, took my Aunt by the hand, and clasping his arm
about her neck, fell to kissing her with as much eagerness as a hungry dog
snatcheth at a bone, no doubt but her li^^ were very sweet, for he was still
hanging at them as if he had taken a lease of them for three lives; at last my
Aunt began to struggle (I suppose for want of breath) and opening her mouth
(which I wished a hundred times had been closed eternally) she thus said to him:
Nay yish, why do you thus trifle? now that the Coast is clear, let us take time
by the fore-lock, lest we be prevented of our design, in sooth you are so long
about the prologue, as may chance to mar the Comedy; make not such a long stop
at the porch, but enter loves Citadel, and ransack all her treasures, and so
giving him a short kiss, hand in hand up stairs they went. No sooner were they
gone, but I slipped out of my peeping hole, and coming to the door at the stairs
foot, softly looked the same, and putting the key in my pocket, with as little
noise conveyed my self out of the house.

Thus whilst they were playing their game* I resolved to play mine, and hiring
a Porter, sent him to my Uncle, to certify him that my Aunt was swounded away,
and laid upon the bed in such a condition as would grieve him to the heart to
^ehold it, desiring him to make all the ha^t home that possibly he could; and
having given him his me^sage, I stepped aside to a neighbors house to observe
(when my Uncle came home) how the project would take.

The Porter quickly dispatched his errand, and my Uncle suddenly posted home,
where entering the hou^e and finding not any one within, he began first to call
for the Maid, then for me, and last of all for my Aunt; but receiving no
answer, he attempted to go up stairs, when the locksmiths daughter denied him
entrance. The two Lovers (who by this time h^d verified the saying to be true,
that a man may be made a Cuckold in the short t^me of going to a Neighbors
house, as well as going a voyage to the West Indies) hearing my Uncle below;
were almost distracted with this surprise, my Aunt dreaded my Uncles anger,
knowing him to be of a very chollerick disposition; and the poor Shopkeeper
feared to be served as the Country clown served the Curate whom he took in bed
with his Wife, and whom he thus menaced: Make me a Cuckold, reading Rogue
No Pulpit serve but Susan's,
Must Susans smock your surplice be?
I Will take away that Nuisance.
And though Priest wept, and wife did beg,
Churl slighted words and tears.
And at one gash from Curate took
Musket and Bandaliers.


The fear of loosing his Genitals, made him to shake worse than if he had had a
Tertian Ague, and therefore to prevent it he crept underneath the Bed; whilst
my Aunt went down stairs intending to smother up all with a dissembling kiss;
but when she saw the door was fast, and my Uncle asking her why she locked it?
she could not tell what answer to make at present* but being well principled in
the mysteries of Venus, she soon recollected her self, and with a sorrowful
voice (as if she had been sick of a Fever for a fortnight together) she pewled
out these words: oh dear Husband (said she) I was lately taken with such a
great sweaming in my head, as not able to sit up longer, I was forced to go up
stairs and lie down upon the bed* in the mean time I suppose your unhappy
ki^sman (who minds nothing but mischief) has in revenge of me, for causing him
to be beaten locked the door and thrown away the key. Whilst she was thus
exclaiming on me, I came in puffing and blowing as seeming quite orewearied
with play as if ignorant of what had happened, asked very earnestly what was
the matter? My Aunt though she were mued up like a hawk, yet hearing my tongue,
could not forbear to vend her spleen against me in these words: You impudent
young Rogue (said she) do you act mischief and then pl^ad ignorance? O that I
were but well for thy sake, I would make every limb of thee feel the weight of
my displeasure, concluding her invective with as horrid a yelling as an old
Woman grown hoarse with cr^ing of Sprats or a company of dogs when they ^ark at
the Moon.

My Uncle who was of the same nature that other Cuckolds a^e commonly of, to
believe whatsoever their Wives do say unto them: hearing her so positively to
affirm it was I that did it he began presently to ransack my pockets for the
key, protesting if he found the same about me, he would make me an example of
his severity. But I who always dreaded what might ensue to prevent such after
claps, had before bestowed the ^ame in a house of office. No sooner had my
Uncle examined my pockets, (where was not any thing to be found that might do
me a prejudice) but I began to enveigh against my Aunts malice in blaming my
innocence, and to persuade him it could be no other then some thief, who whilst
my Aunt slept, having locked the door, had hid himself in one of the Chambers.
This though it carried but little show of probability in i^, yet the fear of
loosing his Mammon made him believe any thing, and therefore presently sent me
for a Smith to break open the door which being done, we all three ascended the
stairs to search for this hidden thief, although my Aunt vehemently urged the
contrary* alleging it was impossible that any one should go up the stairs but
she must needs hear them; however my Uncle would not be so pacified, but
searching about, he at last spyed the poor Shopkeeper as he lay shaking
underneath the bed half dead with fear. But when he saw who it was, turned to
my Aunt he said You impudent whore, do you abuse me thus? you could feign
sickness with a pox to you, when you were so rampant as to Cornut^ me in my
absence; is this your pretended chastity and reservation? I shall take a time
when to be even with you; In the mean time Master Shopkeeper (said he) I will
have my penny-worths out of you, and thereupon falling on him with his fists,
(anger giving him at once both strength and courage) he so buffeted the
Shopkeeper, that had not the Smith interposed, I suppose he would go near to
have killed him* but after an hundred or above of blows, the Smith stepped in
betwixt them, giving the Shopkeeper liberty to run away, bearing along with him
the marks of my Uncles anger, which he wore as badges in his face for a long
time after.

My Aunt seeing how bad the Shopkeeper had sped, and knowing the business too
apparent to be denied, fell down on her knees, desiring my Uncle to pardon her
for what was past, and protesting amendment for the time to come; this her
humiliation much mollified the edge of my Uncles anger, who instead of beating
her (which I heartily wished) fell a railing on the whole Sex of women in
general, in these or the like words.

O Nature! why did thou create such a plague for men as women; how happy were
men had they never been; Oh why could not Nature infuse the gift of procreation
in men alone without the help of women? then should we never be acquainted with
the deceitful devices of those Devils, Harpies, Cockatrices, the very Curse of
man, dissembl^ng monsters, only patcht up to cozen and gull men; borrowing
their hair from one, Comp^exions from another, nothing their own that is
pleasing, all dissembled, not so much as their very breath is sophisticated
with amber pellets and kissing causes, and all to train poor man unto his
ruin. A woman she is an Angel at ten, a Saint at fifteen, a Devil at forty, and
a witch at fourscore, so stuffed with vice as leaves no place for virtue to
inhabit; of such crooked conditions, and corrupt actions, that if all the world
were paper, the Sea Ink, trees and plants, pens, and all men Clerks, Scribes,
and Notaries, yet would all that paper be scribled over, the Ink wasted* pens
worn to the stumps, and all the Scriveners weary, before they could describe
the hundredth part of a woman's wickedness, so that I may very well conclude
with the Poet, There is not one good woman to be found;
And if one were* she merits to be Crowned.


This my uncles invective puts me in mind of a story which I have heard since,
concerning the scarcity of good women, that above five hundred years ago there
was a great sickness almost throughout the whole world, wherein there dyed
forty four milions, eight hundred seventy two thousand, six hundred and eighty
three good women, and of bad women only two hundred and fourteen; by reason
whereof there ha^h been such a scarcity of good women ever since, the whole
breed of them being then almost utterly extinct

Never was Prentice more subject to a Master then my Aunt was to my Uncle after
the discovery of her leachery; his desires were commands, and those commands
laws which were by her put in speedy execution, if he bid her go, she would
run; do that, it was no sooner said then done, but the greatest mirac^e of all
was, that if she were never so busy in talking, yet if he said but peace, she
would suddenly hold her tongue, which before used to be in perpetual motion and
was as hard to be stopped as a stream when it has over-flown its banks, or the
sails of a mill when the wind blows in its greatest violence, so that a serene
sky seemed to have succeeded that storm that all things were pacified, and that
my Uncle had contente^ly put his horns in his pocket.

But though she carried fair weather in her countenance, she had storms of
revenge in her heart toward me; for she did more then conjecture that it was I
which had caused her all this mischief; and therefore since she durst not vend
her spleen upon me her self, she used the help of her Maid, who brought the
same to pass after this manner

One evening (my Uncle being abroad) whilst she, the maid, and I were sitting
alone by the fire after some other discourse the maid proffered to lay a wager
with me that I could not blind solded with my tongue lick forth a six pence
from betwixt her breasts, this I thought so ea^y a thing to do, that I
willingly laid a shilling with her on the same, and presently accorded for to
be blinded: which whilst she was doing* my Aunt (^s it was before agreed)
stepped forth of doors and called in a Boy who was to act their de^ign, as also
some of the Neighbors to be spe^tators of this my folly. Now instead of the
maids breasts the Boye^ hose were put down* and his naked breech exposed to be
the object for me to lick whch I greedily persued, but presently hearing a
gigling, and scenting a rank smell, I soon desisted as being very apprehensive
what the matter was. But when I was unblinded and beholding my shame before my
eyes, I hung down my bead and looked like a dog that had stole a pudding much
blaming my credulity, and bitterly cursing the great cause of that their joll^ty

For a long time after I could not walk the streets, I was ^o laughed and
hooted at by the Boys, my Aunt and the maid having spread the same abroad in
every plac^ flesh and blood could not endure this, to see my e^emies (...) in
my shame, so that noth^ng now run in my mind but revenge, the very thought of
mis^hief was more sweet unto me than Mu^adu^e and eggs, and from I thought upon
a way for to do it. One of our Neighbors (who beared as little love to my
Aunt, as she did to me, o^ loyalty to my Uncle) having a burning Glass, I
imparted my project unto him, who applauding my in^ention, willingly lent me
the same; thus sitted with an Instrument, I soon found out an opportunity ^o
work my revenge. My Aunt being extremely proud, used to wear Lawn R^^fs of a
great value. One Sun-shiny day, sitting in the Shop a sowing with her lack
toward me, I took the burning glass and by attra^^ing the Sun beams set her
Ruffs on a same about her neck, which made her to shreik and bellow m^st
hideously; whereupon I started up and as if a^^righted snatched up a payl of
dirty water away from the Maid wherewith she was washing the Kitchen, and
poured the same on my Aunts head; this (though it made her to look like a Bawd
that was newly alighted from the Cart wherein she had ridden for the sin of
Leachery) did she take as a great courtesy at my hands, having thereby
extinguished the fire wherein otherwise she might (she said) have perished; not
in the least judging it was I that did it, but imputing it as a just Judgment
upon her for her intolerable pride, and vovving thereafter to be more humble
in her carriage and loving unto me.

Now though I thought I had plenary satisfaction for my abu^e, of my Aunt, yet
I resolved that the maid should in no case go scot-free, but that her disgrace
should be equal with mine; Being thus resolved, I procured some Emmets Eggs by
the help of a Countryman; the nature of which are, that being taken in broth,
posset, ale, or the like, they ^ill set the parties so on farting as if they
would break their very twatling strings therewith. The very next day after I
had gotten them, my Uncle had invited some Guests to dinner wherefore I
resolved to put my resolution in execution then. That morning the maid to stren
then her the better to go through her work, had provided her self a Candle she
being of the same nature that most women are of, to know very well what is good
for themselves) no sooner was her back turned, but I conveyed the Eggs into the
same, which she ver^ freely drank off, but presently her Belly began to wamble
and her backside proclaimed aloud that she was very much troubled with Wind;
such loud reports she gave, and so fast they came one after another, that the
Good wife in the tale of the Friar and the Boy, was a mere nothing to her. I
could not forbear laughing if I should have been hang^d to hear how fast she
trumpt it about, which gave her occasion to mistrust that I had done something
unto her, but when she went to rail at me; her tongue could not be heard for
the exceeding noise that she made with her tail. By this time my Aunt was come
down off her chamber, but hearing how the Maid talked to her at both ends, she
could not forbear laughing neither, which vexed the Maid worse then before. My
Uncle hearing the great noise that was made, came also to see what was the
matter, but Jane (for so was the Maids name) was so ashamed that she could not
speak one word for blushing, only that her tail proclaimed that she had a very
great Civil War within her belly: poor Jane did all she could to hold it in,
but it would not do, but out it f^ew with such impetuosity, that my Uncle could
less forbear then we, but laughed as if he would have split himself. This
treb^le noise of laughter made Jane to think that we had all conspired against
her* wherefore she got into her chamber, and notwithstanding dinner was to
dress, yet locking the door, all the Rhe^orick that could be u^ed to her, could
not prevail with her to quit her Chamber all that day.

Next morning (her body being now in a quiet temper) she appeared out of berden
but who should then have seen her looks might plainly perceive how anger and
shame strove which should have most predominancy in her, at first her clack
began to go, but my Aunt pacifying her, she fell to her work as she was
accustomed. Now overnight I had so divulged it among the boys, that when that
forenoon she was sent to market, she had not been far out of doors, but she had
a hundred boys at her heels, farting with their mouths, and making such loud
hoots and hollows that she was forced to return back again, where enclosing her
self within her chamber till night, she packt up her clothes, and in the dusk
of the Evening departed away whither I never saw her afterward.

CHAP. VI.
Some abuses of Chyrurgions, the knavery of Tapsters, Hostle^s, and
Chamberlains; with a brief character of a drunken Host.

HAving now attained to about twelve years of age my Uncle began to instruct me
somewhat in his art of Chyrurgery, intending when I had attained to some small
perfection therein* to send me to Sea, although my mind never stood that way,
resolving not to be mue^d up in a wooden Cage, where there was but some few
inches distance continually betwixt me and death. In this small tract of time
that I was thus employed with my Uncle, I found out much cunningness in his art
whereby to gain money, for if it were but a pricked finger, he would make a great
matter of it and tell you what danger you had been in if you had but staid a
minute longer instancing how such a one his Patient by only cutting of a Corn,
and drawing blood is turned to a Gangreen, which by bad handling of unskilful
Chyrurgions growing worse and worse, they were at last enforced to send for
him, who in a few days made him perfectly sound; that otherwise (had he not
come to him) must inevetably have perished.

Now because monyed Customers were something rare, when they did come we made
b^th their bodies and purses smart for it, lengthning out the healing of their
wounds, the better to wiredraw their purses, Indeed we were not so much
beholding to the Wars, as we were to the Stews, unless sometimes a Tavern
quarrel brought us a Patient; but then what a brave incitement we had to make
him part with his money, telling him he might recover that and ten times more
of his Adversary, that we would be witness for him, and that if he had not met
with a skilful Chyrurgeon, it would have cost him his life; when as perhaps it
was but a little scratch, his ^lock-head being too hard for ^o receive any deep
wound.

One story of a Patient I shall relate, not so much to show the rarity of his
cure, but the malice of a woman which occasioned his hurt.

The fellow by his profession was a Plaisterer, who had a most damnable scold
to his Wife. That used to fetch him from the Alehouse with a Hor^e-pox; one
night coming home three quarters drunk, she acted the part of Zantippe and made
the house to ring with her s^^lding; th^s music was so untur^^^e in her
Husban^s ears that getting a Cudgel in his hands, he fell to belabouring her as
Seamen do stock fis^, until he made her to ask him forgiveness, and promise him
never to ^cold so again: Having thus as he t^ought got an absolute conquest
over her tongue, he went quietly to bed, where he slept soundly whilst she lay
awake studying of mischief. In the morning before he wake't she examined his
pockets for money (...) common tricks of a great many Women) but (...) nothing
in them, save only some lath-nails, (...) did she take and set upright all
a^out the Cha^^^^er^ which done she gets a pail of water in her hand^, and
calling aloud, commands him to rise, which he refused to do she throws the pail
of water upon the bed, this so vexed him that starting suddenly up, he went to
run after her, when his naked feet lighting upon the lath nails, he was forced
to slacken his pace, being so mortified with them, that for three quarters of a
year afterward he lay under my Uncles hands.

But to return where I left. I had not been long at the Trade, when my Uncle
one day walking down to Wapping, provided me of a Master to go to Sea, which
(as ^ told you before) I was fully resolved against, and therefore very
peremptorily I told him that I would not go, which so incensed him that he
vowed that I should not stay any longer in his house, I was the less troubled
at his words, because the day before I had heard of a Tapster in an Inn not far
off that wanted a Boy; thither therefore went I and proffered my service unto
him, which he as readily accepted, and the same night was I entertained into
the House, he having heard the cause of my departure from my Uncle, for which
he rather blamed him than me.

Now was I in my Kingdom having store of company, and my fill of strong drink,
which two things I dearly loved. I applied my self to my calling very
diligently, and soon learned to cry (...) Sir, and By and by, with as much
alacrity as the best Tapsters Boy in ^hristendom. My Master taught me how to
nick the Canns and f^oth the Jugs and with the crotched chalk to score up two
flaggons for one, and I quickly found the way when Company was d^inking to take
away flaggons before they were half empty* and full Tobacco-pipes amongst the
foul ones. When Company first came in, I always observed to bring them of the
best liquor, but when they were half drunk, then that which run on ^ilt, or the
drappings of the ta^ should serve their turn; if they found fault, I would take
it away to change it, but nevertheless they should be sure to pay for it, as if
they had drunk it:

One thing I observed of my Master; that if the Reckoning once came to be above
three shillings, he would be sure to bring in 6 pence or eight pence more than
it was, then when the Company were going away he would say Nay stay Gentlemen
and take my half dozen Cans before you go, which most commonly produced another
reckoning, the Gentlemen knowing not how to retalliate his kindness without
doing so, by this means getting their money with thanks to boot. If Gentlemen
brought Tobacco of their o^n, we would say it stunk were it never so good, and
feigning a Cough as if half stifled cry out, Who is ^t that takes of this
stinking stuff? this is enough to s^ffocate the Devil. Which would make some
Gentlemen to throw away their pipes and say. Pox on this Groc^r he has cheated
me damnably come give us three p^pes of your Tobacco, which when they have had
they wou^d commend for superexcellent although perhaps twelve pence in the
pound worse than his own, by which may be proved that Tobacco is nothing e^se
but a mere fancy.

I seeing my master cozen Gentlemen so frequently thought with my self that I
might cozen them al^^, or at least wise cozen my Master who so often cozened
others, being warranted thereto by that of the Poet.

Cozen the Cozener, commonly they be
Profain, let their own snare their ruin be.
And therefore when he was out of the way, to the reckoning, I would add a
groat, six pence, eight pence, or twelve pence, according as it was in bigne^s
which yet I would also score up, lest if he came in the way before it was paid
and should tell the score, I might be mistrusted; but i^ I received the money
before he came, then the overplus went into my pocket* which could not be
discovered when the chalk was wiped out.

In Summer, when people drank in Cans, if my Master were in company (as
oft-times he was invited by Guests to drink with them) we had a Can with a
false bottom that held not above a quarter of a pint, which in the delivery of
them I always so ordered as that Can came to his hands, which he would drink
off leisurely, and then turning the bottom upwards, it past undiscerned, saving
thereby much beer in a day keeping himself sober to drink in other companies.

In Winter for mornings draughts we furnished our Guests with Gravesend toasts,
which is bread toasted over night, our plenty of Guests not permitting us to do
it in the morning; if we put any of them into drink before our Guests (as
sometimes we were forced to do) we would be sure to warm the beer or ale
beforehand, and in putting in the toast cry siz^, although it were as cold as
a stone.

But my Ma^ter and I were not all the cozeners that belonged to the Inn, the
Hostler claimed as great a share in that mystery as we. His chief cunning
consisted in tallowing Horse-teeth that they should not eat no Hay, or when a
Gentleman gave his Horse oats no sooner was his back turned, but he would steal
them half away telling the Gentleman, his Horse must (...) ^av^d w^ll (...) his
Meat. If a Gentleman's saddle we^^ any thing ^orn he would be sure to make it so
^ad, that he could not ri^e no further with it without mending, as also to
spoil the shoes on the Horses feet, that he must be forced to have new ones,
for which he had pensions from the Smith and the Sadler.

Nor m^st I here forg^t the Chamberlain, who d^served to be rancked with the
foremost for Roguery; he was a ^ly thief, and used to cheat Guests with foul
sheets, p^etending them to be clean, when as they had been lain in three or
four times, and then a little water strowed on them* and foulded up and pressed*
made them seem as if new washed. He was a very diligent observer of Gentlemen's
Cloak-^ags* whether they had good si^ver linings in them o^ no which if he
found to be ponderous, his next ^^re was to inquire what Country men they were,
which way they traveled, and the like, which having found, he gave
intelligence accordingly to a Gang of Highway-men, with whom he was in
continual pay.

These were the Servants that belonged to this (...) such a parcel of
Canary-birds as well deserved (...) look through a Hempen Ca^ement at the three
^^^^er'd renement in the Highway betwixt London and (...) too. Were not those
Guests well blessed ^^^nk ye, which happened in such a place where none but knaves,
thieves, and cheate^s were their attendants? Now you cannot but imagine that
the Master of such Servants was well worthy of his place, I shall therefore
only give you a brief character of the Host himself, and so preceed on in my
discourse.

He seemed by his bulk to be of the race of the old Giants, and though his
belly were not so big as the run at He^a^burgh, yet a flaggon of beer therein
seemed no more then a man in ^auls. He commanded with as much imperiousness, as
if he were the great Cham of Tartaria, and had an excellent faculty to strut
along the streets with the top of his staff bobbing against hi^ ^ips, he could
call the young wenches Whores with a great grace; and when he took tobacco, his
mouth vented smoke like the funnel of a Chimney. He much blamed the E^glish for
affecting to drink Wine preferring beer and ale before all foreign liquors
whatsoever. To show his loving nature he would drink with all companies, and
would toss off a Can with celerity and dexterity. He would not be jealous,
though he saw another man kissing his Wife, knowing such her familiarity to be
the greatest ^o^d-stone that attracted Guests to his horse in sum his forenoons
work was to scoop in beer by the Quart and the most part of the afternoon to
spend in sleeping.

In this house I wasted away my time nigh three quarters of a year, but then a
sad accident befell my Master, which left me again to shift for my self; he had
belike ^een dabling in private with Prudence, one of the maids belonging to the
house, I know not what the business was, but she looked so bigly on him that he
could not endure her sight, and therefore to avoid it, he privately put off his
C^llar to another, and having received his money, marched off ^^cognito,
leaving me to the wide world; for this new Tapster having a boy of his own,
dismissed me to shift for my self.

CHAP. VII.
The cheats of Cooks, a story of the Spirit in the Buttery, he steals a silver
bowl* the Cozenages of Astrologers, the death of his Father being k^lled in a
drunken brangling, the abuses of Nurses, and keepers of sick people, his Master
dies, the knavery of his Executor both in his Trade and Office; he lives with
a Lock-smith, the knavery of that trade.

LOng I was not without a Master, being entertained into a Cooks service, of
which I rejoiced not a little, being in good hope however the World went, that
I should not be starved in a Cooks shop, one extraordinary privilege I had by
living in this service, for if the old Proverb be true, that the (...) bone,
the sweeter the flesh, then I always eat of the sweetest diet, my diet being to
pick the bones that came off of Gentlemen's Tables. During the time that I lived
here, although I had been a young wench, I should not needed to have feared
being troubled wi^h the Green sickness, running up and down stairs so many
score times in a day would have cured me of that malady those that had seen my
nimbleness would have absolutely judged that my shoes were made of cork, I was
as light heel^d as she who has made her Husband a Cucko^d seven and twenty
times over. My Master drove a great trade, not only in boiled meat and roast
meat, but also in baking small pies, which the Women cried up and down the
streets for him. Every Friday I observed we had brought in a Porters basket
full or two of pieces of raw meat, which though me thought they smelt very
unsavory, yet were they made use of, some minced, others pepper^d and salted,
and put into pie, ere the week went about they all marched off. I wondered for a
great while from whence this meat came at last I was informed by one of the
Prentices, that it was such pieces as were cut off the stinking raw hides, that
were brought into Lea^e^hall to sell there on Fridays; bless me thought I, what
deceit is here! then did I think on the old Proverb, that the blind eats many a
fly. No marvel that sicknesses are so ri^e since such unw^olsome food must
needs introduce them. Now because those pieces of meat were lean and dry, they
used to mix with them such fat pieces of meat as Gentlemen left, adding thereto
some dripping, and such like stuff, which all together made a gallant hodg podg
for hungry stomachs.

To roast meat twice over is so commonly now used amongst most Cooks that I
think I shall not need to mention this as a rarity in my Master; and yet would
not that, nor what I mentioned before, nor his buying of Carrion, such meat as
would have dyed alone had it not been killed, being diseased or maimed* and
selling it for good; all this (I say) would not do, notvvithstanding all his
great pains, but still he went backvvards in the World, which puts me in mind
of a story that I have heard some while ago, concerning an evil spirit that
haunts the houses of such persons who use unconscionable vvays whereby to grow
rich, which though it be nothing as conc^rning my life, yet I think it not
amiss to relate the same, as being not altogether impertinent to our pu^pose.

In the City of Bristol (a place which may c^mpare with the choicest o^
England for the fairness of the buildings, and richness of trading) within the
memory of our Fathers, there lived a young man named Fra^cisco who although
Prentice to a Baker, yet when his Time came out set up the Trade of a ^ook.
This young man was very desirous to gain a great Estate quickly, and so
impatient he was of being rich on a sudden, that he resolved to leave no means
unattempted which should lie in his way whereby he might effect his desire, for
so ^e might gain* he stood not upon what means whereby he might do it* bad
infected meat he sold for good, nickt h^s Cans froath his Jugs, scored up two
flaggons for one, yea what not? but all his endeavors arrived (...) to that
height which he expected for notvviths^anding he went forvvard in Trading, do
what he could he went ba^kwards in thriving. This Francisco had a Priest to his
Uncle, that lived about some 20 miles off him* who had bestovved some small
matter on him when his Time came out vvhere^y to set him up and two years
being expired he repaired to his Nephew to see how fortune had favored him,
and whether he had made any improvement of that little he had given him. The
Nephew entertained him kindly, and feasted him royally, but when his Uncle
asked him how the World went with him, he could not choose but sigh, telling
him what endeavors he had u^ed whereby to increase his Estate* but that all
p^^ved fruitle^s. Ah Cozen (said the old Man) come along with me, and I will
show you the thief that steals away all your gains, and thereupon taking him by
the hand he led him into the Cellar, where when they were come, they beheld a
big fellow with a paunch like a tun, his eyes strutting out with fatness, his
thighs like to mill-posts so unvveildy that he could hardly go: there they saw
him gurmandizing on the cold meat that was left, devouring more in a minute
then six hungry Plough-men could do in half an hour: after he had so eaten, he
takes a flaggon in his hand, and of the best beer, svvallovvs down five or six
of them full one after another, which being done he vanished away: this Cousin
(said the Priest) is the Spirit of the Buttery, who so long as you use
unconscionable vvays by cheating of people, has power over what you have,
which he will so invisibly devour, that do what you can for the gaining of
an estate, it is but all in vain; and therefore if you intend to thrive, you
must take a clean contrary course to what you have done, and by dealing
honestly, there is no question but a blessing will follow upon your endeavors.

The young man promised very faithfully to do according to his Uncles
directions, who thereupon returned home again: accordingly when his Uncl^ was
gone* he began to work a through reformation, bought of the best meat, sold good
penny-worths, filled his flaggons, scored right, and dealt justly in all his
acting, doing this, he quickly begins to thrive in the world, grows rich,
purchases house and land, and has a great stock by him besides; in so much
that his wealth being taken notice of, he was soon after chosen one of the
Aldermen of the City. His Uncle afterward comes again to visit him, to whom he
relates his change of condition, and how God had blessed him with a plentiful
estate Now Cousin (said the old Priest) let us again visit your Cellar; when
they came there, they beheld a thin, lean, meager faced fellow, one that seemed
more like an Anatomy than a man; his ribbs appeared through his Clothes, his
eyes were sunk into his head, his cheeks look^d like to shriveld parchment, and
his legs (which were no bigger than cat-sticks that boys use at trap-ball) were
so, weak as would hardly support his body. He went to a platter of cold meat,
but had not strength enough to lift it up to his head; afterward he assayed to
draw some beer, but could not pull the tap out of the fasset, so that seeing his
endeavors were in vain, with a deep sigh he vanished away. Now Nephew (said the
old Priest) you may plainly perceive what it was that hindered you from thriving
before and therefore now since you are thoroughly instructed whereby to be rich,
I shall take my leave of you, wishing with all my heart that all of your
profession would leave off their cheating and cozening tricks* and take the
same course of life whereby to thrive as you have done.

Now, said he, what think you of this discourse? is this quite besides the
matter or no? in truth (quoth) I, I think it is very pertinent to the purpose,
and I wish all tradesmen would follow the example, for when they have done all
they can; they will find in the end that honesty is the best policy, and to
deal justly the highway to grow rich: the best bedfellow to sleep with is a
good conscience, and well doing (were there no reward for it in the world to
come) yet were it a sufficient recompense in it self. But leaving this
discourse, as that which is rather to be wished for, than ascertained to be
practiced in this evil age of ours* let me entered you to proceed in the
discourse of your life, as a thing whithal much desire to hear.

That shall I gladly do, said head know then that after I had been at this tooks
some small space of time, my Father returned home from being a Soldier, in that
Voyage he was pressed out as I told you of before, now though he did not go out
full, he returned home more empty than he went out; without clothes, and
without money to buy any; and which was worst so pinched with hunger, that he
looked like a scarecrow, or one newly risen from the dead. It grieved my heart
to see him in this condition, but how to remedy it I did not know; some little
money I had which was left of that I ^nipt in the Tapsters service, which I
very reely bestowed upon him, but alas that was gone as soon almost as
received, and I having no more to supply him, he asked me if we had no Plate,
that went about house? I told him we had; then (said he) to furnish me, you
must at such a time as your house is full of Guests upon their going away
convey a silver bowl into a secure place, which you may afterward deliver for
me to one whom I will send for that purpose, for I will not come to your house
my self, because there shall be no suspicion of me: I promised him to do as he
bid me, appointing him the time when he should send the man, which was the next
day, accordingly he came and I delivered him a large silver bowl, which he
carried cleverly away. At night when my Master came to lock up his plate, the
best bowl was missing, which put all the house into disorder, my Master swore,
my Mistress scolded the Servants grumbled but who to blame not any one could
tell; only the maid said she saw it in my hand that afternoon for which I
wished her ^ongue in a clest stick, but stoutly denied that I had seen it that
day: indeed my Master had a great conceit of my honesty or else her bawling
might have discovered me, for had they charged me with it strongly, I should
not have had the impudence to have stood out in the denial of it, having that
within me which strongly checked me for doing it. But after some small
inquisition about it, it was generally agreed that some of the Guests had
stolen it away; then next was inquiry made what several companies we had that
day, and which of them was the most to be suspected; but the more they thought,
the worse they were satisfied not one appearing more probable than another;
therefore it was agreed by a general consent, that the next morning the maid
and I should go to a cunning Astrologer about it, one who was cried up for art
to be little inferior to Friar Bacon, for though he could not make a brazen
head to speak, yet he had such a brazen face of his own, as could out fac^ the
Devil himself for lying.

I was not afraid to go, though I knew my own ^uilt, because I always judged
that Art to be a mere cheat, and though they lay their nets very plausibly to
take the people; yet they seldom catch any but owls and wood-cocks. Knocking at
the door, Master Astrologer came out unto us so wraped up in his Purple Gown
that you could scarcely see ere an honest limb of him; he had on his head a
black cap with a white one under it, which was turned up some part over the
black one, that it looked like a black Jack tipped with silver. After we had
discovered our business unto him, he told us the price of his Art was a
shilling whether he found out the thief or no; we knew it was in vain for us to
contend with him, and therefore we very freely gave it him, by which he
perceived that the stars were very au^pitious to him in that hour, or else (for
ought I know) he might have gone without his mornings draught. When he had
received our money he very formally set himself down in a Chair, having a piece
of white-paper before him, and then taking a pen in his hand, he made thereon
several Triangles and Quadrangles, with other Crotchets and Whimsies which he
called the twelve Houses. Jupiter said he being Lord of the Ascendent,
signifies good luck for the gaining your Cup again, did not Mars interpose with
an evil aspect toward Mercury. Now Venus being on the fiery Trigon denotes the
party that had it lives either East or West; and Saturn being Retrograde, and
in the Cusp of Taurus, it must needs be that it is hidden under ground either
North or South. Then asked he us if there were not a red hair'd man there that
day? we told him no, nor a black hair'd man neither said he? we still
answered no; nor was there not (said he) a brown hair'd man there, with gray
Clothes, not very tall, nor very low? we told him yes; then asked he us if we
knew him or no? we answered no. The Sun said he being ill posited in the
eleventh House, and Mercury in Trine with Virgo, it was without all doubt a
brown haired man that had your bowl. Then asked I him if it might not be a
woman as well as a man? this put him something to his trumps, but when the maid
said that could not be, for there was never a strange woman there all that day;
he grew bold and answered no; for Venus said he being weak in reception with
Gemini, and the Moon in her detriment, both Feminine Planets does plainly tell
that it was a man, and one betwixt forty and fifty years of age. Upon my life
said the Maid, I saw the party that had it, he was a curled pated fellow, with
a whitish cloak and a sad coloued suit about 30 years of age, he dined in the
half Moon, and had six worth of roast Beef to his dinner but if ever I see the
Rogue again i will teach him to steal bowls with a murrain to him I could not choose
but laugh to my self at the wenches confidence and the chea^ of the Astrologer,
and to think how poor silly people are cozened by these Jugling-Artists; for no
better term can I give them as believing no truth at all in their praedictions;
for let me ask them this question, whether the Stars do compel or only incline?
if they say they compel, they speak little less than blasphemy, by ascribing
too much to Nature, and derogating from the Deity. If they only inclined then
what sure ground work can there be for what they say, when their conjectures
are but only probable? And for their Doctrine of nativities that if a man be
born under such a Planet, his destiny will be so and so, and he will come to
such an end; we see often times that in a barrel ^a Canon bullet kills five or
six at one instant, who no doubt were born under several Planets, and yet come
all to one fate; or if they say it is possible so many might be born under one
and the self same Planet and aspects; yet let me go further with them; we have
known battles at Sea, when by an unhappy shot a ship has sunk in an instant
with six or seven hundred men in her, who have all been drowned in the deep.
Will they say these were all born under one Planet* ^^terily if they should so
say, I should not believe them therefore I may say of but Astrologers as Gato
said of the Aruspices of Rome (...) his time, that he wondered how one of them
could forbear to laugh, when he me^ with any of his fellow^, to see how they
deceived (...) bid made a great number of simple ones in the City. But I hire
your patience with this digression; for I expect not my words will work any
Reformation in them seeing they may say with Demetrius in the Acts of the
Apostles that by this Craft they get their wealth.

To return therefore where we left, hav^ng taken leave of the Astrologer, away
we went home again fraught with a Sackful of news to tell our Master. No sooner
were we within doors, but the Maid set her clack agoing; Master (said she) the
Cunning man has told us exactly who it was that stole your bowl; he has
described him fully from top to toe, not so much as his very shoostring but he
told us of what color they were of, his hat, his hair, his beard his doublet
breeches, hose, not one thing that he omitted I served the Rogue that stole it
with Roast-Beef my self, the Devil choke him with it, for I think silver will
not; but if ever he comes here again or that I meet him in the streets, i will
serve him such a trick us shall make him wish he had never drank out of any
thing in his life but a wooden dish. I said nothing all this while; and though
I knew she lied most abominably in what the Astrologer said, yet I confirmed
her speeches, hoping this would for ever take away suspicion from me of being
culpable, only I thought with my self if that party she imagined to have it
should come again to the House, what a coil she would make with him: but
whether he forgot his Physiognomy, or that the man never came there again; I
never after that heard any more of the matter:

In the mean time my father had disposed of the purchased prize, bought him an
old suit with some part of the money, and ranted it in the Alehouse with the
rest of it, for what is this gotten over the Devils back is for the most part
spent under his belly. At last his sinful life had a Tragical conclusion for
one of his Comrades and he being sudling together they chanced to fall out, and
from words proceeded to blows, where my Father received such a knock on his
pate with a flaggon, that though it killed him not outright yet he survived
not long after; making his end answerable to his life: for as he led a
troublesome life all the days he lived, so he put the Parish to some trouble at
his death, who were forced to be at the charge of burying him.

I was the less grieved for the death of my Father, knowing, if he had lived he
would have brought me to the Gallows for he would have been always in want, and
urging me to supply him, which I could not do any other ways then by theft; but
that now he was dead I resolved q^ite to give over the practice of it, for fear
in the end, it should bring me to look through a hempen casement. And now I
bent all my endeavors to please my Master, knowing I had few friends to rely
upon; I was up with the first, and down with the last, and refused no work I
was set unto, and I found the benefit of my diligence at last, for it pleased
God to visit our Family with the Pestilence, which in a weeks space, swept away
all the whole Household but my Master and I. In this Weeks time I observed the
abuses and cheats of Nurses and Keepers, such who look to people who are
visited with the sickness.

Two of these Jades we had in our house, who when my Mistress lay distracted
with the distemper; took away her keys and ransack't her Trunks, from whence
they took a purse full of Money, most of it Gold* which she had gathered
unknown to my Master* intending to keep it for her further need, (or as we say)
against a rainy day, Thus these Jades convey^d away together, with a great deal
of the best linen in the house, which was done by the help of the Watchman
that guarded the door, who was son in law, to one of the Queans; and now that
my Master might not discover their theft, they sent her of an Errant to her
long home, by giving her drinks and other slops, quite contrary to what the
Physicians prescribed, by the same way they dispatched the Maid, and the
Prentices, with a little Girl, the only Child my Master had; and now was none
remaining but my Master and I, whom they intended should have followed after
the rest, then they might have plundered without control, but I seeing how soon
my fellows were gone, and observing that they all dyed presently after they had
received any of their slops, would have nothing to do with them, persuading my
Master to do the like, affirming it ^ven before their faces, that they were the
persons that had killed my Mistress and the rest, and would if let alone, make
a hand of us too. But these impudent Jades hearing me begin to discover their
villainies, would have persuaded my Master that I was also infected, and that it
had already taken my brain, which caused me to talk so idly, and so began to
seize upon me, intending to have tied me into a bed, which if they had done I
should never have come out of it alive, but my Master interposing bid them let
me alone, for he himself was of the same mind with me. These bold Queans
hearing him say so, one of them flew at him, you old dotard said she, do you
begin to talk idly too, we must tame y^u in faith, and so attempted to pull him
down, whilst the other was as busy with me: my Master and I struggling with
them what we could: but perceiving them to be too hard for us (for they were
two stout Mastiff Queans) we got to the Window and cried as loud as we could,
and thereby gathered a great many people together to know what was the matter,
to whom we related the great danger we were in of being murdered by the two
Women that were with us, desiring by all means, that we might be rid of them,
they being the greatest plague we were infected withal at the present; and whom
we dreaded as much as death it self; Amongst others that came (alarmed by this
outcry) was ^ Shoemaker that lived not far off who was near of kin to my
Master, and thought himself no mean fellow; he being at that time Overfeer of
the Poor, this man kept a great bustle, commanding the door to be broken open;
which being done with as much imperiousness as a Country Justice domineers
over a hedge-breaker, he commands the two Women to depart out of the house,
which they (being conscious of a self guilt) accordingly did to the no little
joy of my Master and me, who feared we should have perish^d under their
merciless hands.

Being rid of these two Harpyes, I was more than double diligent toward my
Master, well hoping that Death with his beesom would sweep him away also, which
I judged the rather could come to pass; because the thread of his life was spun
out to a fair g^eater length than mine, not at all considering, that the
Pestilence m^kes no difference betwixt age, and youth; or if it does sooner
seizes upon youth than age, as ha^ing more matter to work upon. But I was so
confi^ent that my Master would die, and that I should live; that I would
rather perform all offices toward him, than to admit of a partner to plunder
the House with me when he was dead. But three days being passed, and no
alteration at all appearing in him, I began then t^ alter my opinion, and
feared he would escape and not have it at all and therefore I began to cast my
Wits about, and consider with my self what I had best to do; now I knevv
conceit would do much with him, and therefore I first begun to tell him, that
he looked very ill as of a sudden asking if he felt no alteration in his body?
which at first he said, no; but afterward upon my persuasions that he must
needs be sick, he soon grew conceited that he was so indeed, in so much, that
at last I told him, that he had the perfect symptoms of a dying man upon him;
those words struck him to the very heart, that without further delay he went to
the Window, called for a Porter, and sent him for the Shoemaker I spoke of
before to come to him presently, and bring a Scrivener along with him. I asked
him what he would do with a Scrivener? but when he told me it was to make his
Will. I wa^ ready to swound, fearing he would take an inventory of his Goods
al^o, and so hinder my pilfering when he was dead, for I was now fully minded
to thieve from him what I could, notwithstanding my resolution but a little
before to leave it off, I feared to be known for stealing the silver boul^; so
hard it is for those that are principled in wickedness* to leave off that vice
they have been accustomed unto; however I praised him for his care therein,
that he would settle his mind as to outward affairs, they might be no
hinderance to his more pious thoughts, which now should be bent altogether to
Heaven-wards.

Scarce had I made an end of praising his good intentions but that the
Shoemaker and the Scrivener were come, to whom out of the Window he declared
his mind for the disposing of his estate, First he commended his Soul unto
Heaven, and his Body to Earth, which I wished had been racked up in it,
before the Scrivener came. Next (said he) for the good and faithful service he
has done me, I bequeath to my Boy Gregory (for that is my name) the sum of
twenty pounds, whereof ten pound to be bestowed on him in Schooling, the other
ten pound to buy him Clothes, and put him out to Apprentice to some Handicraft
Trade. I hearing my Master to say this, could not but reflect upon my monstrous
Ingratitude that I should go to kill him that was so kind to me, and had so
much care for my future livelihood; but covetousness cancels all obligations,
and therefore is well termed the Spring head of all ungodliness. Next (said he)
I bequeath to the poor of the Parish wherein I live, the sum of fiv^ pounds,
three pounds thereof to be laid out on clothes for them, to make them apparel,
and bestowed on ^uch as my Executor shall see most needful, and the other forty
shillings to be laid out in bread for them, and to be distributed the next four
Sundays after my decease, each Sunday alike till it be out. The rest of his
estate he gave unto the Shoemaker, whom he made his full and sole Executor,
giving him a great charge to be careful on me, and so having subscribed, and
sealed it, he betook him to his bed, as prepared to die, and free leave he had
to go, both of me and the Shoemaker also.

To hasten him on the more; I persuaded him to sweat, which he was willing to
do, so I covered him with as many Clothes, as he was able to bear, and being in
a violent sweat, he called for some strong Waters, whereupon I went to the Pump
and filled him a pint of such sober liquor as that yielded, and brought it to
him; which having tasted, he asked me what I had brought him? I told him it was
excellent good white anny seed, he said, it tasted like fair water; I told him,
that was only the badness of his Pallet which could not distinguish any thing;
truly (said he) it tastes so small, that I think you may leave the word Anny
seed out and call it only white-water. Yet notwithstanding this he found such
fault, his parching thirst caused him to drink it all off, which gave such a
sudden chill to his blood, that what with that and some other slops that I gave
him, in three days time he turned up his heels and dyed.

No sooner was his breath out of his body, but I began to put in execution what
before I had intended and first I examined his pockets, wherein I found the sum
of fourteen shillings and nine pence; eleven shillings whereof I took, leaving
some* that I might not be suspected to have taken any, but this was nothing to
what I thought to find in his Trunck, which I opened with an expectation to
have mine eyes blessed with the sight of store of white and yellow pieces, but
the clouds dropped no such rain, the Trunk courted not me as Jupiter did Diana
with a Golden shovvre; some plate was in it, some Bonds and other Writings,
but no money. This was a shrevv'd cooling card to my high hopes; which
promised me Mountains and performed not mole-hills; for as for the plate the
Executor knevv of each piece in the house, and Bills and Bonds signified no
more to me, than meat an hungry man which he might see and not come at;
wherefore seeing it would be no better, I armed my self with patience,
considering I had not lost by his death, he having given me twenty pound for
the bringing me up to some learning and putting me out Apprentice, by which I
hoped to be sufficiently able to live in the World; and therefore having
secured the eleven shillings in the Collar of my doublet (mistrusting my
pockets might be searched) I called for a messenger, and sent the Executor word
of his death, not bidding him to have a care of frighting him in the delivering
of his message, for I did not think the sudden news of his death would make him
to break his heart with sorrow, there was less fear in that, then of a Userer
undoing a young Heir, when he once gets him into bonds. He having received the
nevvs, he made no long tarriance before he came to me, bringing a couple of old
Women along with him to search the dead corpse, that an account might be given
what he dyed of, which is a thing (you know) is usual. But before I proceed
any further (having occasion here to speak of these searchers) give me leave to
mention some abu^es, and cheats which I have observed to be practiced by them.

They are indeed very necessary, especially in great Cities, that an account
may be given of what diseases people dye of, and that men may not have their
lives shortened by violence, which appearing after their deaths, may be by them
discovered; but these women have their cheats too, for notwithstanding they are
sworn to give a true information to the Parish Clarks; yet money can so blind
their eyes, that if a man be poisoned, they can bring it in that he died of the
French Pox; and though a house be visited with the sickness, yet if the Master
thereof be unwilling to be shut up for loosing his trading, if he do but greaze
them in the fist with some money they will make the Pestilence to be surfeit,
and the spotted fever (which is little inferior to the Plague) the Swine-pox,
and sometimes the Measles; nay once I knew two of those Searchers that for
money brought it in, that the party who had the spotted fever, died of nothing
else but the toothache: Thus you see that it is an undeniable maxim, that
there is Knavery in all trades, people being now grown so villainous in their
practices, that they make the very dead to be accessory to their Cheats.

But to return to my story: The Shoemaker standing in the street, whilst the
Women came in, called to me, and bid me if any of the Trunks were open, to lock
them up; and throw the keys down to him which I accordingly did, the fear of
loosing his Mammen making him to dispense with any danger that might accrue to
him by taking the keys. That night was my old Master buried, and a fortnight
after (the Bedding and Clothes being aired in the mean time, and I continuing
sound) I was removed to his house, where I took special notice of his great
care in performing my Masters Will, and first for the three pounds that was
given to buy the poor Clothes, he bestowed the same on two suits for his own
Boys, proving it to be the Will of the dead it should be so; for (said he) they
are poor who are in want; and his Sons wanting clothes therefore they were to
be reckoned in the number of the poor, and policy bids us this, always to
provide for our own poor first. Then for the bread, he ordered with the Baker
so, that for every ten dozen, he would have a twelve penny-loaf, and yet were
they made fifteen to the dozen, which over-pluss above twelve, he also took to
himself, so that the penny loaves shrunk to the bigness of half penny ones, and
only for the name there was no difference. I seeing how he had dealt by the
poor, thought with my self that my Legacy would shrink also like Northern
Cloth in the wetting, and my twenty pound come to twenty shillings; but
whilst I had cause for my self, I would not complain of his dealing by
others, and therefore expected the event with patience.

Soon after I was set to School with a fellow that went in black Clothes, and
therefore taken for a man of learning because so habited; this man and his
Scholars were both of one mind, for he cared not how little he taught them for
there money, and they cared not how little they learned for it; but I who had
friends to rely on for bestowing any thing upon me afterward, resolved not to
neglect opportunity, but to gain what learning I could thinking it might stand
me in great stead another day, and therefore I so plied my book, that in a
short time I could read English very perfectly, and had some skill in writing
and casting accounts.

During this time that I went to school, I plied not my book so altogether, but
that I observed some practices of the shoemaker, both in his trade and in his
office; and first for his trade, I saw he used two sorts of leather, whereof
was men's leather, which was strong, fast and would last well, the other he
called woman's leather, which was not half taned, and would not last ten miles
going; this last sort of leather (because it was cheap) he used most,
especially in women's shoes and the inner soles of men's? and sometimes I
observed that if the inner soles were to little he would slit them in the
middle to make them appear on both sides, and at other times with his teeth he
would strech his leather as for gain he would streach his Consience, Then for
his office, for the bread that was given to poor at the Church on Sunday, he
had a weekly fee from the Baker for his custom; and for other gifts that were
to be distributed (as there was some Quarterly) that poor man that received
them, must either do a days work grat^s for him, or else present ^im with
some gift vvorth half of what he was to receive, or else he was sure to go
without it; so that in respect of his office, these verses of Withe^s were
very applicable unto him: The Poor's neglector, O I pardon crave.
Collector I should say, may play the knave:
The f^el I would have said* but choose you whether
He may be both, and so he may be neither.


^ut before I had been at School long, my Guardian told me, the ten pound was
out for my board, (for I paid a Roast-meat price for my diet, although I fed
most commonly on bread and chief) and therefore I must prepare to go to
Prentice; I thought it was in vain to contend with him, and therefore bid him
provide me a master as soon as he would for I was vvilling I told him to go.
He quickly heard of one (for bad masters are as easy to be found as bad
servants) one that was a true Bacchana^i^n a Son of Vulcan by profession a
Lock-smith, what the Executor was to give with me I know not, but thither I
went some fevv days upon liking; and indeed ^t was but a few days I was there
in all, for there was found Knavery in that Trade as well as others. My new
Master had belike driven an old trade with pick-pockets, h^u^e-breakers, and
such kind of people whom he furnished with store of p^ck-locks, and inst^uments
to break open Shop-doors and Windows; he also drove a great Trade with thievish
Prentices for false keys for their Masters counting-houses and Trunks, they
bringing him the print of them either in Wax or Clay, with some of which he was
sharers in their purchase, He had also his Emissaries abroad, which would steal
Iron bars from Cellar-windows, and sometimes fetch a short jaunt into the
Country, and steal the Coulters and Shares from the Ploughs, as also hooks and
hinges from Gates, which he bought for a small price and used to work them out
in the night for fear of discovery, yet all would not do wicked actions have
bad endings; one of these Prentices who had made use of him, and thereby much
wronged his Master, spending that Money riotously which he had got naughtily,
his excess brought him to a surfeit that occasioned his end, when upon his
deathbed, reflecting on his former vicious practices, he detected my Master,
who was thereupon apprehended and carried before a Justice of the Peace, that
sent him to Newgate; how he sped I know not, but if he had his desert. I am
sure he could not escape hanging.

CHAP. VIII.
He is bound Prentice to a Tailor, the knavery of that Trade, his Master of a
stitch, he is turned over to a Bak^r, who misusing him he runs away. He
serves a Plaisterer, shows some Cheats in that Trade; he is even with the
Maid of the house for her sloth, and punishing him, gives his Master a fall
from the Scaffold, and runs away from him into the Country.

MY next Master forsooth was a Tailor, a dapper fellow, to whom the Shoemaker
(because he would be sure to be rid of me) bound me Prentice the first day I
went to him, after I had been there a little while, whether it be the nature of
the Trade, or what it was I know not, but all my mind ran upon penny-loaves and
pudding pies, and whereas before I was more given to drink than to eat, now my
whole appetite was for feeding. If I went by a Bakers shop, oh how would I cast
mine eyes upon the penny l^aves wishing my belly a Cupboard to contain such
precious Jewels, neither could it sink into my faith, that there was any Trade
in the World comparable to a Bakers, but that which made me the more hungry, I
conceive was that we were much pinched in our diet: for my Master made us
observe more fasting-days, then were set down in the Kallender, and then with a
counterfeit zeal he would preach a long Lecture of sobriety unto his Prentices,
not that he had any Religion in him (for at another man's table he would
gurmundize like an Epicure) but to save victuals, and when we fell short at
meals as we oftentimes did) he would put us off with an old Proverb, that many
a sack is tied up before it be f^ll, for his other qualifications and
endowments, take a brief view in this short but true character of him.

He was such another as Sir Thomas Overbury speaks of, a creature made up of
shreds that were pared off from Adam when he was rough cast. His chiefest care
was, how to cloth other men's backs, and feed his own belly; how to make them
fine, and himself fat again Christmas, Easter or Whitsontide; he was a man of
some repute but most time else like a thick Cloak in Summer, hang^d behind the
door. His offensive and defensive weapons were only a n^edle and a thimble;
with the first he murdered many Egyptian vermin, and the last he made a
Gauntlet for the top of his middle finger, which at other times jingling in his
pocket with his bodkin* made the Ale-wife to think he had money in his pocket,
which caused often times a flagon to be scored up behind the door. His chief
upholder was the sin of pride, a new fashion being to him like the Term to a
Lawyer* to gain which he used to frequent those Churches and places where
Gallants most resorted, when on a sudden the Mechanics wifes and kitchenmaids
Gowns came trowling in to be altered, for out of the fashion out of the World.
He differed altogether from God, for with him the best pieces were still marked
out for damnation, and without hope of recovery cast down into Hell, for though
he had many bottoms, yet his conscience was bottomless. Of all Weapons he most
affected the long Bill, and he who paid him but one half; he would be sure to
be no looser by him.

An ancient Gentleman one day brought a suit of Clothes to our Shop to be made;
who that he might have them the warmer, had bou^ht two yards of bays to cotton
his breeches in the inner-side; my Master thought that was too good for such an
use and therefore took it to himself, and supplied the place with old painting
cloth. It happened afterward the Gentleman wearing those clothes, going to
Islington, as he went over a style, a snag or cleft of the same took hold of
his Breeches and rent a great slash or gap in them, that quite discovered my
Masters theft; for right against the hole, was the picture of a Devil with a
muck-fork in his hand, which made the Gentleman to admire how the Devil he
should come there; searching further he found more of his fellows, and all of
them with muck-forks in their hands, tormenti^g of Dives in the flames; this
put him in a great rage, to consider how that by the knavery of the Tailor, he
should carry Hellfire in his Breech, ripping the other Slop there was the
Prodigal on Horseback, his journey into a far Country; Hawks and his Whores, his
feeding Husks with Swine, with his returning to his Father, and the killing the
fatted Calf, wherefore in great rage he came to my Master, calling him Knave,
Thief, and a great many other names, such as came first to his tongues end, my
Master desired him to be quiet, told him it was stole off his Shop-board, but
for his part, he wished if he had it that he might find it in Hell, meaning the
Hell under his Shop-board, which was the recep^acle for all his stolen goods.

Now those pieces which were condemned to this Hell, were termed Cabbidge, and
we never made any Clothes either for Men or Women, in which he snipt no some
pieces from them, sometimes out o^ a Suit and loak, enough to make a Boy a pair
of Breeches, or a Doublet, and sometimes enough for Breeches and Dou^let too.
Then we drove a trade with the Sadlers, for pieces of Clothes to make seats for
Saddles. The Cabbidge of course Cloth was to make dust-cloaths for the legs of
Country Ploughmen Woollen caps, and mittens for old Women; all was fish that
came to net. When a Gentleman bought a Suit and loak of good cloth, if my
Master could but persuade four or five more to buy of the same, out of them all
he would steal a suit and cloak for himself. Then for Women's clothes the
cabbidge of cloth of silver, branc^t Satin, and the like, went for pin
cushions, pin-pillows, Women's purses: and if black, Churchwardens caps,
Cabbidge of Tabbee, colored Tasfaty and Sarcenet, for facings for the hands of
Doublets, etc. when we set on gold and silver lace, we should stretch it so,
that in four or five ya^ds we would get a quarter of a yard, which with old
silver buttons, and such like stuff, went for ends of gold and silver; and
sometimes in rich laces, we would rub them so on our knees, that in eight or
nine ounces, half an ounce would come off which went also to the increase of
ends of gold and silver.

Now being the Under-Prentice, my chief employment was to run on errands, so
that having thereby an opportunity, I often visited the Dagger in Foster-lane
for Pudding-pies, my mouth always either penny-loaf or Pudding-pie fashion.
Amongst other places that I went to, one of the chief was a Mercers in
Paternoster Row, from whence my Master received a small snip for every Gown he
helped him to custom withal. Now their way of dealing was thus; my Master
bought the stuff, then the Mercer was to justify that it cost him so much a
yard, perhaps eight or ten shillings more in the Gown than it did, for which my
master when he brought customers to him, was to persuade them to the stuff,
avouching there was not such another pennyworth in the Town, and that he was
confident that he saved little or nothing by it; but only for to gain their
custom; by which you see he who carries a Tailor with him to help him buy
clothes, carries a Thief instead of a Friend, for the mercer and Tailor was
both agreed, and what the first says, the other will swear to. Now to hear them
muster up the names of their stuffs, would make you swear they were raising so
many Devils, there^s your Parragon, Burragon, Phillippine, Cheny Grogrum,
Mowhair, Damasilly, Novato, Pinckanilly, Pinckadino, Prunella, Itiliano,
Castiliano, Perpetuana, Sempiternum, Tamme, Tammet, Tameletto, and a thousand
more besides, such as Adam never gave names to, being more for pride than for
warmth, and rather to cloth sin, than to cover nakedness.

But ere I could attain to any perfection in the Trade, my master dyed of that
which he lived by, the Stich, being taken with it as he was contriving a new
fashion for a Woman's placket, that it should be neither before, nor behind, nor
on either side* but before he could finish his project he was taken with this
Stich, so that that invention was utterly lost thereby: now because he dyed of
such a disease, I mustered up all my wit and invention together, and made for
him this Epitaph.

A Tailor in this Grave does lie,
Who by the Stich did live and die;
Longe^ his life's thread might have been,
But death with^s shears came him between,
Wound up his bottom, bound his feet,
And sowed him up in swinding-sheet.
My Mistress not continuing the Trade, I wa^ turned over to a Baker, at which I
rejoiced exceedingly; being heartily desirous to be dealing with Belly-timber,
remem^ring how I was full fed when as I lived before with the Cook. Here I
found the maxim to be still true that there is Knavery in all trades, for as my
last master thieved from peoples backs, so this robbed their bellies; and was
in one sort worse than a ^aylor, for Tailors commonly filch their cabbid^e only
from the rich, who can the better, spare it; but a Baker by making his bread
lesser than it should be; ^tealeth it out of the poor peoples bellies, for
doing which he deserves the same fate to attend on him as did Pharoahs Bake^,
viz hanging; or at least wise to loo^ through an Oaken plank, and show the
people a knaves he^d.

He would be sure to be in fee with the Clark of the market* and pretended
great love to him, though he hated him as his Executioner. By this means he had
always timely notice of my Lord Mayors going abo^t when he would be ^ure to
have his bread full weight stand at his Window; and if at any time he chanced
to be caught oh how he would rep^ne at his forced c^arity, to see his bread
given to the poor, hating Justice it self for the weigh scales sak^, though it
d^d the Beggars as much good as their dinner, to see his ba^ket sent to the
Prison.

When we had any stale moldy bread, such as we could not sell our selves, or
was returned us again by our customers, we used to soak it in water; and so
mould it up again in our dough, which in Summer time at four days end would
roap so, that if you pul^d it in pieces it would appear as if it were all
Cobwebs which made us always to sell such bread new. Now what other Knaveries
he used in his trade, I was not there long enough to know them: for because I
used to forget to rise betimes in the morning, my master would remember me with
a good ashen wand, which he alwa^s kept in store by him, wherewith he would
beat me as your Seamen do Stock Fish, insomuch that my flesh had on it all the
colors in the Rainbow, viz black, blew, green* red, yellow, white, etc. above
all things in the World I liked not beating* wherefore I re^olved to march off,
yet before I went I purposed to be in part revenged on him for those many blows
he had given me. Now so it was that he lay above stairs, and I below, and
when he came down, if he found me not up and about my business, he would so
ri^-roast me that I could have felt no cold although it had been frosty
weather. Against that morning I intended to be gone, I had pa^ched some pease
in the oven, that they were almost as hard as leaden bullets them did I strew
here and th^re upon the stairs against my masters coming down, and so having
put up my things, and made my self ready, I staid expecting what the event
would be, anon my master called me at the stairs head, I heard him very well,
but made him no answer; wherefore he supposing I was asleep, was coming
down to give me the bastinado, when treading on the pease his heels flevv up,
and down he came tumbling from the top to the bottom; swearing all the Way he
was falling that this damned Rogue (meaning me) intended for to break his
neck; I hearing him to thunder so loud thought it would lighten upon my Jacket
presently; and therefore to prevent it, I opened the door and showed him a fair
pair of heels, leaving him sore bruised with his fall, and more vexed that he
could not come at me; to revenge himself of me for the same.

I was now grown a good sturdy Lad; and it being then the spring of the year, I
was entertained into a Plaisterers service, I imagined with my self that there
could be no knavery in this trade but after I had been there a while, I found
there was a great deal of difference in our labor when we workt by the day,
and when we wrought by the great; in the one I could not be too quick for my
master in the other he cared not how slow; dispatching that in six days in the
one, which we would hardly do in ten days in the other, in the one we minded
only our work, in the other we u^ed to lengthen out the time with discourses of
wenches, football playing, and such like; for so we brought the day to an end,
we cared not so much for our ^ork going forward, seeing our wages ran parallel
with the day, and when that was done, we counted our money due* whether we
earned it or no. In this service I lived like a Prince to my hearts content,
for my master wou^d not only wink at any rogueries that I committed, but also
countenance me in the doing of them. When we wrought upon scaffolds in the
^treet it was a great pleasure to me to throw the mortar upon the heads of
young Wenches, as they passed by; and at other times with our Whiting to
bespatter Gentlemen's Cloaks as they walked under us; that they looked as if the
^row had shit upon them. My master kept a maid who was none of those huswifes
that use to disturb other peoples sleeps by their early rising; she would
endure three calls in a morning, and when she began to stir, she would groan
sadly, stretching out her arms and legs, and giving a two or three has to get
upon her breech, where she would sit in her bed half an hour lacing of her
boddice, and throwing of her coats over her head, so that we were forced to put
up the victuals we carried with us our selves. My master asked me if I could
not invent a way to punish her sloth? I told him I would do my best endeavor;
so that day I got some Horse-hair, and shred it fit for my purpose, telling my
master what I would do with it; at night when he came home; he sent the m^id
for two pots of Ale, when she was gone for it, I took my shred hair, and
strowed the same in her bed betwixt the sheets which plagued her worse then if
she had had half a peck of six footed vermin to her bedfellovvs; a good while
she endured it, being exceeding loath to be at the pains of putting on her
Clothes, for she always accounted the trouble of dressing and undressing her
self to be a great plague inflicted on mortals to disturb them of their ease,
accounting the Birds in a far happier condition than men, who go to bed and
rise with their doublet and breeches on, and was resolved if she changed her
Religion to have turned Adamite, that she mig^t have saved that labor of
dressing her self; but the hair tormented her so abominably, that nolens
v^lens, she was forced to rise, and sit up until the morning, when looking
in the sheets she found the cause of her disquietness; the cunning Jade made no
speech of it at all, but was as pleasant that morning as if she had ailed
nothing all night, which made me to mistrust my art, and think I had not done
my business right. All that day she was busied with her thoughts in contriving
mischief against me the result where of was, that she took the sheets from off
her bed and laid them on mine, whereby she paid me home in my own coin, and
whereof I could not justly complain, seeing what was sauce for a Goose was
sauce for a Gander, I had worked very hard that day, and would willingly have
taken some rest at night, but it was in v^in to think of it, I might almost
have lain as well upon pins and needles as on what I did, I then thought upon
the story which is usually told boys when they first come to be Prentices
concerning their enroling, that they must be rol^d in a Barrel drove full of
nails, with the points sti^king up, and thought this punishment to be little
inferior to that; flesh and blood could not endure it, wherefore I got up and
uncased my bed of the sheets, creeping in betwixt the blankets where I lay all
night. In the morning the Maid asked me how I slept tha^ night? I told her very
well, for my skin was armor of proof against the biting of fleas, or any other
disturbance whatsoever, but though I carried fair weather in my countenance, my
heart boiled in revenge against her, wherefore tha^ day I went and bought two
penny-vorth of Cow-itch, which is a drug of that nature, that where it touches
the flesh, it will make t^em so scrub seventeen times worse than if they we^e
plagued with the itch, with this I anointed her sheets in the same manner as I
strowed them with horse-hair before, but if the hair netled, this fleyed, she
had needed to have had Briarius hundred hands to have scratcht her self at
once, for when she came to be a little hot in her bed, she fared like a mad
woman; the more she scratcht the more it itcht, so that by what she seek't to
allay her pain, she increased it: the going out of her bed would not cure her
now, she carried her distemper along with her, so that knowing not how to ease
her self, she bellowed like a Bull, and made such a quarter, that the whole
hou^e was disturbed with her bellowing. All night she continued thus; in the
morning I began to play upon her, told her that the scratching of her arse
signified we should have butter cheap, and that ^ow ever things wents she would
be sure to Rub through with them, but had I not took my heels, she had so
rubbed my ears for it as would have turned my mirth into mourning. That day was
very fatal to me, and my running from the Maid in the morning prognosticated I
should run from my master before night. It so happened that we had some work to
do that day at a Tavern in Thames Street, the backside whereof adjoined to the
Thames, which the Vintner would have beautified next to the waterside; now for
to make him a scaffold to work on, he put the ends of two long sticks out at
the window, laying a board over them for him to stand on the out side: and on
the inside fa^tned the end of the one with a Cord, but wanti^g a Cord for the
other, he bid me to sit on it, thereby to keep it from kicking up, thus was all
things ordered, my Master gotten up upon his scaffold, which was just over the
water, and I s^tting on the end of the stick; he fell a singing as he was
accustomed to do at his work, and I fell a nodding* being lulled a sleep with
his singing; in my sleep I dreamed that my old Master the Cook was alive again,
that I lived with him, and that our House was full of Guests* by and by some
Gentlemen knocked in the next room, I hearing them, imagined that I was called,
and thereupon cried out, Anon, Anon, I come I come Sir, and thereupon fell a
running, when presently up flew the stick, and down fell my Master, crying all
the way he fell help, help, I shall be drown^d the noise he made waked me out
of my sleep, when looking forth so the window, I saw my Master floating like a
shitle-cock upon the water. I seeing what had happened, thought more upon
saving my self than him, imagining if he were drowned, that I should be hanged,
and therefore that I might not die the death of a dog, to prevent it, I run
away, leaving my Master to shift for himself, whom though yet I loved well, and
would not have parted from him but for this accident.

I made great have in going, and yet knevv not whither to go; East, West,
North, or South, all was indifferent to me for it is impossible he can be out
of his way to whom all vvays are alike. London though large and populous I
judged no Coverture for me, I wanting those two great helps of concealment,
money and friends. The Country therefore I p^tcht upon, invited thereto the
more, it being then the merry month of May, the pleasantest time of all the
year, the earth having then put on her richest apparel, the meadow clothed in
green, the fields beautified with flowers, and the Woods adorned with Violets,
Cowslips, and Primroses; the winged Choristers of the Forest, warbled forth
their ditties very harmoniously, the Lambs friskt and leapt, dancing lavalto^s
on the flowery pastures, and the murmuring stream made a noise like to a chime
of Bells, running through their winding Meanders. As I walked thus in the
Country, encircled with pleasures, and every where having my eyes satiated with
variety of pleasing objects I thought my self to be in Paradise, and imagined
no pleasure in the world comparable to that of a Country life; Happy, yea
thrice happy (thought I) is he who not playing with his wings in the golden
flames of the Court, not setting his foot in the busy throngs of the City, not
running up and down in the intricate mazes of the Law can be content in the
winter to sit by a Country fire, and in the Summer to lay his head on the green
pillows of the Earth. The Country Cottage is neither battered down by the Canon
in time of War, nor pestered with clamorous Suits in time of peace. The fall of
Cedars that tumble from the tops of Kingdoms, the ruin of great Houses that
bury Families in their overthrow, and the ways of shipwracks, that begat even
shrieks in the heart of Cities, never send their terrors thither: that place
stand as safe from the shock of such violent storms as the Bay tree does from
lightening; their sleeps are secure from such dangers, and their wakings as
pleasant as golden dreams. In the homely village art thou more safe, than in a
fortified Castle; the stings of Envy, nor the bullets of Treason are never shot
through those thin walls: sound healths are drunk out of the wholesome wooden
dish, when the Cup of Gold boyles over with Poison. Have thou a desire to rule?
get up to the Mountains, and thou shall see the greatest trees stand trembling
before thee, to do thee Reverence, those may thou call thy Nobles. Thou
shall have ranks of oak on each side of thee, which thou may call thy Guard;
thou shall see Willows bending at every blast; whom thou may call thy
flatterers: thou shall see valleys humbled at thy feet; whom thou may term
thy slaves. Would thou behold battles? step into the fields, there shall
thou behold excellent Combats between the standing Corn and the winds. Art
thou a tyrant? and delightest in the fall of great ones? muster then thy
Harvesters together, and down with those proud Summer Lords when they are at
highest. Would thou have Subsidies paid thee? the Plough sends thee in Corn,
the Meadow gives thee her pasture, the Trees pay thee custom with their fruit,
the Ox bestows upon thee his labor, the Sheep his wool, the Cow her milk, the
Fowls their feathers, etc. Do thou call for Music? n^ Prince in the world
keeps more s^ilful Musicians, the Birds are thy Con^orts, and the wind
instruments they play upon yield ten thousand tunes.

Thus went I on contemplating the S^mmers pride and the earths bravery, and
from them both conc^u^ed the great felicity of a Country life, as if the one
would never fade, and the other always endure resolving in my thoughts never to
see London again, being ravished with the delights of the verdant fields and
enamored on the beauties of the Spring, accounting none truly happy, but he
who enjoyed the felicities of a Country life; Is he addicted to study, Heaven
is the Library; the Sun, Moon and Stars his books to teach him Astronomy, that
great volume his E^h^merides out of which he may Calculate predictions of times
to follow; yea in the very clouds are written lessons of Divinity for him to
instru^t him in wi^dom, the turning over their leaves, teach him the variation
of seasons, and how to dispose his business for all weathers who therefore
would not consume his youth in such delightful studies, that have power in them
to keep off old age longer than it would? or when old age does come, is able to
give it the livelihood and vigor of youth? who would not rather sit at the
foot of a hill, tending a flock of sheep than at the helm of Authority,
controuling the stuborn and unruly mul^itude? Better it is in the solitary
woods and in the wide fields, to be a man among Beasts, than in the midst of a
peopled City, to be a beast amongst men.

As I was thus stricken into admiration of these beauties, and wholly taken up
in contemplation of the felicities of a retired life, being already in my
thoughts an absolute Countryman, I being now some miles distant from the
Metropolitan City of our fruitful Albion, on a sudden the welkin began to roar,
and send forth terrible peals of thunder* the serene Sky was over shadowed, and
Phoebus hid his head behind a cloud the Heavens began first to weep small
tears, afterward to pour them in full Rivolets upon the thirsty earth, I had
then no Pent-house to walk under to keep me from the rain, nor was there a red
lattice at every nuke and corner (as at London) to give me enterta^nment; the
spreading boughs of the sturdy oak were too feeble to defend me from being wet;
I looked like a drencht Mouse, having never a dry thread on me; what to do I
knew not money I had but little, friends none a stranger both to the place and
people, unexperienced in the world, as i^ the way where I traveled the
consideration of those things made me add more moisture to the earth by the
salt tears that trickled from my eyes; to stand still I thought was in vain, so
forwards I went, wet without and dry within (sorrow they say causes drowth) at
length I spied by a corner of a Wood a little thatcht Cottage, thither I went,
and found by an old rotten stick that darted out of it, in imitation of a
Sign-post, that it was an Alehouse, this someth^ng revived my drooping pirits,
so in I went, to dry my outside and wet my inside, where I found a good fire,
and store of company of both Sexes merrily trouling the boul about, singing of
Catches, and smoking Tobacco; no sooner was I entered, but one of them drank
to me a full cup, so down I sat amongst them, being all alike free Citizens of
the vvide World, the Strong Ale soon vvashed away all sorrovv from my heart,
and now that I had a vvarm fire to sit by, and a house over my head, I bid a
fig for all foul Weather.

CHAP. IX.
He lights on a company of Canting Beggars, and is stalled one of their
Society, is married to a Doxy, with the manner of their Wedding; the orders and
Degrees of the Canting Beggars, Men and Women with their several quallities and
manner of life.

THis company that I thus happened into was a Crew of Canting Beggars, Pilgrims
of the vast earth, the offspring of Cain, vagabonds and wanderers, over the
whole World, fit Companions for such who made a trade for Idleness and Roguery,
and these were at this time fit companions for me, who seeing the merry life
they led, resolved to make one of their company whereupon (after I had a little
more ingratiated my self amongst them, and taken two or three cups more of
Rum-booz) I imparted my inventions to one of the chief of them, telling him
that I was a Prentice who had a cursed Master, whose cruelties had caused me to
run away from him, and that what ever fortune might betide me, yet should not
the most necessitous condition I could be plunged into, ever make me to return
to him again, and therefore if I might be admitted into their society I should
faithfully observe and perform what rules and orders were imposed upon me.

He very much applauded me for my resolutions, telling me that to be a Beggar
was to be a brave man, since it was now in fashion for brave men to beg. Do not
we (said he) come all into the World like arrant Beggars, without a rag upon
us; and do not we all go out of the World like Beggars, without a rag upon us?
and do not we all go out of the World like Beggars without any thing saving
only an old sheet to cover us? shall we then be ashamed to walk up and down in
the World like Beggars, with old Blankets pined about us? no, no, that were a
shame to us indeed; have we not the whole Kingdom to walk at our pleasure? are
we afraid of the approach of Q^arter day? do we walk in fear of Bailiffs,
Sergeants and ^atch poles? who ever knew an arrant Beggar arrested for debt? is
not our meat dressed in every man's Kitchen? does not every man's Cellar afford ^s
beer? and the best men's purses keep a penny for us to spend.

Having by these words (as he thought) fully fixed me in love with begging, he
then acquainted the Company with my desires, who were all of them very joyful
thereof, being as glad to add one to their society, as a Turk is to gain a
Proselite to Mahomet. The first question that they asked me was, if I had any
Lour^ in my Bung? I stared on them not knowing what they meant, till at last
one told me it was money in my pur^e, I told them I had but eighteen pence,
which I freely gave them; this by a general vote was condemned to be spent in
Bouse for my initiation. Then they commanded me to kneel down, which being
done, one of the chief of them took a Gage of Bowse, which is a quart of drink,
and poure^ the same on my head, saying, I do by virtue of this Sovereign Liquor
stall th^e to the Rogue, and make thee a free Denizon of our ragged Regiment;
so that henceforth it shall be lawful for thee to Cant and to carry a Doxy or
Mort along with thee only observing these rules. First that thou art not to
wander up and down all Countries, but to keep only to that Quarter which is
allotted to thee! and secondly, thou art to give way to any of us that have
born all the Offices of the Wallet before thee, and upon holding up a finger to
avoid any Town or Country Village where thou see we are forraging to victual
our army that march along with us. Observing these two rules* we take thee into
our protection, and adopt thee a Brother of our numerous society.

He having ended his oration, I rose up, and was congratulated by all the
Company, hanging about me like so many dogs about a Bear, and leaping and
shouting like so many mad men, making such a confused noise with their gabling,
that the melody of a dozen oyster wives at ^illingsgate, the scolding at ten
Conduits, and the Gossipings of fifteen Bakehouses were not comparable unto it.
At length he that stalled m^ cried out for silence, bidding the French and
English Pox to light on their throats for making such a yelping; then fixing
his eyes upon me, he read a Lecture to me out of the Devils Horn book as
follows.

Now (says he) that thou art entered into our fraternity thou must not scruple
to act any villainies which thou shall be able to perform; whether it be to nip
a bung, bite the Peter, Cloy the Lurries, Crash either a Bleating cheat,
Cackling cheat, grunting chtat, quacking cheat, Tib oath buttery, Margery
prater, or to Cloy a Mish from the Crackmans; that is, to cut a purse, steal a
Cloak-bag or Portmantle, convey away all manner of Cl^at^s* either a Sheep,
Chicken, sucking Pig, Duck, Coose, Hen, or steal a shirt from the hedge; for he
that will be a Quier Cove, a professed Rogue, must observe this rule, set down by
an ancient Patrico in these words.

Will thou a begging go,
O per se o, o per se o,
Then must thou God forsake
And to the Devil thee betake,
O per se o, etc.
And because thou art as yet but a Novice in begging, and understandest not the
mysteries of the Canting language, to principle thee the better; thou shall
have a Doxy to be thy Companion, by whom thou may receive fit inst^uctions
for thy purpose. And thereupon he singled me out a young Girl of about fourteen
years of age, which tickled my fancy very much that I had gotten a young wanton
to dally withal; but this was not all, I must presently be married unto her
after their fashion by their Patrico (who amongst Beggars is their Priest)
which was done after this manner.

They got a Hen, and having cut off the head of it, laid the dead body upon the
ground, placing me on the one side of it, and my Doxy on the other; this being
done; the Patrico standing by, with a loud voice bid us live together till
death did us part: then one of the Company went into the Yard and fetched a dry
Cow-turd, which was broken over my Doxy's head in imitation of a Bride-cake;
and so shaking hands, and kissing each other, the Ceremony of the Wedding was
over* and for joy of the marriage we fell to drinking afresh, till we were all
as drunk as Beggars, but then to hear the gabling noise we made would have made
you to have blessed your self, to hear such a Babel of confusion among us, some
were jabbering in the Canting language* others in their own some did nothing
but weep and protest love to their Morts, other swore swords and daggers to cut
the throats of their Doxy^s if they found them tripping one would drink a
health to the Bride till he slavered again, some were for singing Baudy songs,
others were divising curses for Justices of Peace, Headbor^u^hs and ^onstables;
at last night approaching, and all their money being spent, we betook us to a
Barn not far off, where we coucht a Hogshead in the darkmans, and went to sleep.

Though my lodging was homely, my bedfellow pleased me yet though she were so
young, I could not boast of the purchase of her Maiden-bead, that being a
dainty always bestowed on the Upright-men, (the chief of the Rogues, who must
have the first taste of such morsels, and then they are free for any of the
Brotherhood The whole night was spent in prigging wapping, and telling of
drunken stories; in the morning as soon as Phoe^us began to dart some of his
beams through the crannies of the Walls* the Patrico began to set up his larum,
and to ^waken the rest with this song.

This is Bien Bowse, this is Bien Bowse,
Too little is my skew.
I Bowse no Lage, but a whole Gage
Of this i will Bowse to you
This Bowse is better than Rom-Bowse,
It sets the Began a gigling;
The Autem Mort finds better sport
In Bowsing than in nigling.
It Is better than Peckidge, Plannam,
Then Yarum, Loure, or Lage;
Then lift the same up to thy Nab
And Bowse off a whole Gage.
Being thus roused, and having shaken our ears a little, the Upright-man (who
was the ^el-weather of the flock) appointed out the station where every one
should go, prefixing a day wherein we were all to meet again. My Doxy and I had
a particular walk assigned unto us, wherein we were to travel, and not to
entrench upon any of the others limits; whilst I thus rambled about with her;
learned of her the several Qualities and Offices of the Brother hood, and how
they were distinguished from each other according to their degrees of
superiority and inferiority: the Men were divided into these twenty several
sorts.

1 Upright men. 2 Rufflers. 3 Anglers. 4 Rogues. 5 Wild Rogues. 6 Priggers of
Prancers. 7 Palliards or, Clapper-dugcons. 8 Fraters. 9 Quire Birds. 10
Abraham-men. 11 Whip-jacks. 12 Counterfeit Cranks 13 Dummerars. 14 Iack-men. 15
Patrico's. 16 Irish Toyls. 17 Swigmen. 18 Glymm^rars. 19 Curtalls. 20 Kinchen
Co's.
Of the Women kind were only these six.

1 Kitchen Morts 2 Dells. 3 Doxies. 4 Walking Morts 5 Autem Morts. 6 Bawdy
Baskets.
And now what these several sorts of people are, you shall hearby their
descriptions.

1 An Upright man is the chief of all the Ragged Regiment, he walks like a
Commander with a short Truncheon in his hand which he calls his Filch-man;
pretends himself to be a decayed Soldier, and claims a share in all the
Booties which any other inferior Rogue do get; he has all the Morts and
Doxies at his beck, and can command them from any other of the Gang at his
pleasure. By this description you see there is a great deal of difference
betwixt an Upright-m^n and an honest man.

2 A Ruffler is the same in Conditions as an Upright man, like to like quoth
the Devil to the Collier; they both of them pretend themselves to be decayed
Soldiers, are both of them very imperious over the in^erior Subjects of their
Common wealth-receiving tribute also from Rogues Palliards, Morts, Doxies, etc.

3 The next are Anglers, but they seldom catch Fish till they go up Westward
for Flounders. The Rod they angle with is a staff of five or six foot in
length, having a hole bored through it within an inch of the top, into which
hole do they put an iron hook, and with the same do they angle at window about
midnight, drawing therewith apparel sheets, coverlets, or whatsoever they lay
hold on, All is Fish that comes to Net.

4 A Rogue who^e very name does show his nature, and therefore he shall not
need any further description.

5 A Wild Rogue is of the same nature as a Rogue only this is the difference,
that the one falls into this infamous and detestable course of life, either
through laziness, death of Parents, cruelty of Masters, or the like, the wild
Rogue is bred up to it from his swaddling clouts, born a Rogue, lives all his
whole life a Rogue, and disdains to take upon him any calling or profession
whatsoever, but as he lives, so dies a Rogue.

6 Priggers of Prancers are Horse-stealers, for to Prig, ^ignifies in the
Canting language to steal, and Prancer signifies a Horse, the Farmers in the
Country, and Gentlemen that keep Horses, know these sorts of Rogue, too well,
by dear experience.

7 Palliards, or otherwise called Clapperdugeons, who go always with their
Morts at their heels, and draw people the more to pity them, with Sperewort or
Arsnick raise blisters on their legs, which they can cure again at their
pleasure. When they come into the streets of a Town or Country village, they
divide themselves, and beg one on one side of the street, and the other on the
other side; the purchase which they thus get. They sell to poor Tradse-men, or
other laboring people, and with the money are merry at the Bowsing-ken.

8 A Frater is one that with a Counterfeit Parent goes about with a wallet at
his back, and a black box at his girdle, to beg for some Hospital or
Spittle-house; he has always a Doxy whom he meets withal at night at some
tippling house, where they lewdly spend what was given him in the day by
charitable well minded people.

9 Quire Birds are those in whom the Proverb is verified, Birds of a feather,
Rogues together, they are such as formerly sung in such Cages as Newgate, the
White-Lyon, or some other Country Goal.

10 Abraham men, or a Tom of Bedam is a man whom by his black and blew arms you
may see to be much beaten to the world; he counterfeits madness and by many
Fantastic tricks gets from silly Country people Bacon, and such other
victuals as will fetch him ready money; he has but two names, for all people
whatsoever, and that is Tom and Bess. No man shifts his linen oftener than he
does his Wenches.

11 Whipjacks are such as travel about from town to town under the notion of
Ship wrackt Sea-m^n, with a counterfeit license to beg, which license they call
a Gybe, and the seals to it Iarks their talk is all of Sea Voyages, but the end
of their Land-voyage is for what they can get, and to rob Boo^hs at Fairs,
which they call Heaving of the Booth, at which they are very expert.

12 Counterfeit Cranks are such as pretend themselves to have the
Falling Sickness, and by putting a piece of white soap into the corner of their
mouths, will make the froath to come boiling forth to cause pity in the
beholders; they stare wildly with their eyes to appear as if distracted, and go
half naked to move the greater compassion. These Cranks have likewise their
meetings, and their wenches at command.

13 The Dummerar is Cousin-German to the Cranks, for as the one counterfeits
the falling sickness so this counterfeits dumbness, making a horrid noise
instead of speech by doubling his tongue in his mouth, but if you give him
nothing, he can then open his mouth to curse you privately. This Jack has also
his I^ll, upon whom he spends his Loure at the Bowsingken.

14 A Iackman is one that can write and read, ye some of them have a smattering
in the Latin tongue; which learning of theirs advances them in office amongst
the Beggars, as to be Clark of their Hall, or the like. His employment is to
make Gybes with Iarks to them, which are counterfeit licenses with seals, by
which he gets store of money to make himself drunk withal.

15 The Patrico is their Priest, every hedge is his Parish, and every wandering
Rogue and Whore is his Parishioner. His service is only marrying of couples, by
bidding them go together and multiply, and fill the World with a generation of
vagabonds.

16. Irish Toyls are lusty Rogues who go about with a wallet at their back, in
which they carry pins, points, saces, and such like, and under color of
selling such wares commit many villainies.

17 A Swigman is a degree higher than an Irish-toyle, as a Tavern exceeds an
Alehouse, for he carries a pack behind him instead of a wallet, and is stored
with more sorts of ware than the other, yet differs little from him in honesty;
they both pay tribute to the Upright man, as to their chief.

18 Glymmerars are such as travel up and down with licenses to beg because
their houses have been consumed with fire, for Glymer in the Canting tongue
signifies fire. They use a very sad tone in their begging, and tell a
lamentable story how the fire destroyed their Baros, Stables, etc. by which
lying tales they get store of Loure to buy Bub at the Bowsingken.

19 Curtals are so called because they wear short Cloaks, being of the same
nature as the Rogues described before

20 The last rank of this Rambling Crew are termed Kinchin Co^s, being little
Boys, whose Parents were formerly Beggars, but are now dead, or else such as
have run away from their Masters, and instead of a trade to live by, follow
this kind of life to be lousy by. The first thing they do is to learn how to
Cant, and the only thing they practice is to creep in at windows or Cellar
doors.

Thus have I given you a brief description of the men, by which you may give a
shrewd guess of the women; for you cannot imagine if the one were Devils that
the other would be Saints, take them therefore in their own Character.

1 Of this sort; the first of them are called Ki^chen Morts, their Mothers
carry at their backs in their Slates, id^est, she^ts. When the Morts beg, they
use to prick their Kinchens with pins, that by their crying they may move
people to a speedier distribution of their alms.

2 Dells are young wenches that have not lost their maiden-heads, but being
once deflowred, (which commonly is when they are very young) they then change
the name of Dell into Doxy, even as maids when they come to be married, loose
that appellation, and are called women.

3 Doxys are such as have been deflowred by the Upright men, and are after
common to any of the Brother hood. They will if they see convenient for a small
piece of money prostitute their bodies to any that will deal with them, and do
too often murder those Infants which are so gotten. They have one special
badge to be known by, for most of them go working of laces and shirt strings or
such like stuff, only to give color to their idle wandering.

4. A walking Most is one that has increased the World with Lullaby-cheats or
young Children, yet was never married, they are very dangerous Queans to meet
withal, being cunning in dissembling, and without all fear of God and good
Laws; and are kept in awe only by the Upright-men, who oftentimes rifle them of
all that they have.

5. An Autem Mort is another sort of these she-devils, and differs only from a
walking Mort in that she is married; for Autem in the Canting tongue signifies
a Church, although that be a place she seldom comes at. They commonly walk
with their Wallets on their shoulders, and Slates or sheets at their backs, and
will pilser any thing that lies carelessly about houses, which they call in
their language Nilling of the ken. Their Husbands commonly are Rufflers,
Upright men, Wild Rogues, etc.

6. The last of this Ragged Regiment are called Bawdy Baskets which are Women
that walks with Baskets or Cap-cases on their arms, wherein they have pins,
points, needles, and such like things to sell* going thus from house to house
to sell their ware; buy Cunny-skins* and steal what they can lay their hands
on, driving three trades at once. They are very fair spoken, and will seldom
swear whilst they are selling their wares, but will lie with any man that has
a mind to them. The Upright-men and these are in perfect league and amity one
with another.

Thus have I briefly dissected to you this knot of Vipers; who may very fitly
be termed the Devils black Guard. Whose whole life con^isteth of a continued
act of all impiety, no sin within their verge but is frequently committed
amongst them, especially that sin of letchery; to which end you shall find
sometimes together in a Barn forty of these Upright-men, Rufflers,
Clapperdugeons, etc. ingendring Begga^s with their Morts. Adultery they boast
of, Incest they laugh at, Sodomy they Jest at, being all of the Family of Love,
or Lust rather, rope ripe, Nuts for the Devils cracking, and fit fuel for
firing for his Kitchen. But I have dwelt too long upon this filthy subject, I
shall only give you a brief Character of a Canting Rogue, and so return to the
progress of my own life.

He should seem by his rambling mind to be begot by some Intelligencer under a
hedge, for he is wholly addicted to travel, and has one especial privilege
above most Travelers that he is never out of the way. He is not troubled with
making of Joynctures; he can divorce himself without the Fee of a Proctor, nor
fears he the cruelty of Overseers of his Will; for there is small danger of his
Children being cheated of their Estates, by which means he makes not work for
the Lawyers after his decease. He leaves his children all the World to Cant in,
and all the people to be their fathers to provide for them. His language is
always one and the same; the Northern speech differs from the South, Welsh from
the Cornish, but Canting is general, nor never could be altered by Conquest of
the Saxon, Dane, or Norman. He will not beg out of the limit prescribed him by
the Upright-man, though he starve nor falsify his oath, if he swear by his
Solomon (which is the Mass) though you hang him, and to show himself a true
subject of their Commonwealth, he pays his custom as truly to his Grand Rogue
as tribute is paid to the Great Turk.

The Spring is as welcome to him as a warm Bed to a weary Traveller, for then
begins his progress after a hard Winter; and the Sun which breeds Agues in
others, he adores it like the Indians. Ostlers cannot endure him, for he is of
the Infantry, and serves bes^ on foot; and if through sickness at any time he
ride his stage is but to the next Town, and that in a Dung-cart. He offends not
the Statute against the excess of Apparel; the fuller of rags the more
fashionable for his Calling, and to go naked, he accounts but a voluntary
penance. Forty of them will lie in a Barn together, yet are never sued upon
the Statute of In-mates. He shifts Lodgings oftener than men shift their shirts,
and has more change of Morts and Doxies, than he has of Lodgings. If he were
learned, no man could make a better Description of England, for he has
surveyed it more exactly than the best Cosmographer whatsoever, having
traveled it over and over. Lastly, he can brag of this, that repairing of
houses will never undo him and that though he eats and drinks every day, yet he
shall not die one penny in debt either to the Brewer, or to the Butcher.

CHAP. X.
In prosecution of his begging he steals a Hen, is taken in the manner; and
whipped, and imprisoned in the Cage; from whence he escapes, and assists in the
robbing of a House, where he gets a good Booty and escapes, but his Companions
are caught; one hanged, and two transported: He hearing this, makes have to
London. In his journey to London* he overtakes a Trooper and a Wench; he lies
with her and two more of her Companions, and after this frollick he goes with
them all to London.

IT was then the Spring of the year when I took this lazy trade of life upon
me; the harmony of the Birds singing and the variety of the Flowers which
beautified the verdant Fields, made me the more willing to embrace this sordid
course, not think^ng of a winter that would strike dumb those winged
Choristers, and invest the Earth with a robe of Snow, instead of all her
painted Bravery. Custom had soon habituated me to a liking of lodging in straw,
attracted the more by my amorous Bedfellow and so long as I had my fill of
ease, I could well be contented to ast from Dainties. But for my life I could
not bring my tongue to the right tone o^ Begging, although I were habited fit
for the purpose with a dirty Nightcap loathsome to behold my face all smearen,
my clothes set full with pa^che^ upon the whole cloth, a red clout upon my
leg, and supporting my body with a staff as if I had been a mere criple. Many a
mile we rambled, yet keeping still in our own station, for fear of the
Upright-man: but my counterfeit plea for begging was at last discovered, and
to all my dainties I had whipping cheer added; for going one day not far off
from a Farm house, the straggling Hens invited me to have a throw at them with
my staff and having struck one of them. I had forgotten my lameness, but very
nimbly ran and took her up, putting her under my patcht Coat, where I had a
bag sevved in that was a receptacle for all stolen goods. It chanced that the
Farmer himself was then on the other side of the hedge, who undiscovered by
me, savv my activity in the stealing of his Hen, and was resolved, though I
put it up that he would not. But I dreading nothing, thinking my self unseen,
went directly to the House, and as soon as I came into the yard fell to my old
trade leaning on my staff, and drawing my leg after me, as if scarce able to
stand, much less to run. Having gotten to the door, I began to set up my tone
with a Good tender hearted people be pleased to bestow your charity upon a poor
miserable wretch that is both lame and hungry; one penny of silver to buy him
salvs for his sore leg, or one morsel of victuals to put into his belly that
has had nothing come in it this couple of days. No sooner had I ended my
Maunding, thinking to mump the Farmer out of some money, or at leastwise some
bread to my Hen, but he having watched me now seized hold of my arm, and told
me, that though it might be true that I had not lately eaten, yet he saw I was
resolved to be better provided for the future and so turning back my Coat
discovered my bag, where was not only the Hen, but some other (...) their
provant, I had lately purchased. I finding my self caught, would gladly have
given him the slip, but some of his servants, as well as himself stopped me,
without any more ado the Harman-beck was sent for, who being a neighbor was
quickly come, and by this time I had a great train of Boys and Girls to attend
me: I needed not much examination being thus taken in the manner, but however
they were all desirous to see my sore leg; I was forced to let them do what
they would with me, knowing there was no remedy but patience, and so I suffered
them to unrowl and take off the Clouts and Rowlers that was upon it, when
coming to the skin, that was as whole and as sound as a fish; but though my leg
was well and whole, my heart was now almost broken with consideration of what
they would do with me; some proposed one punishment, and some another, but at
length to the Whipping Post I was led, where my doublet and shirt being stripped
off, my back was so long laced with a Cart-whip that I Capered and flounced
like a Horse in a quagmire, and I was as fast too, being hand-cuffd so that I
could not stir. It was well it was the Spring time, for I lost blood enough to
purge away the gross humors without the help of a Surgeon, that office being
supplied by a Thrasher who took as much pains upon me as would have Thrashed a
bushel of Pease; but at length there was a cessation, and a new parley began
wherein it was propounded that further course should be taken with me, and
considering that there was a kind of Felony committed upon the Hen; they
advised and agreed to lead me to the next Justice of the Peace to have his
Judgment in the Case though I thought it unreasonable to suffer punishment
first, and then to be Judged; yet it was to no purpose to complain, and all I
could say would not prevail with them to let me go, but they would conduct me
to the Justice, so that I having put on my Clothes my shirt stuck to my back
and made me sensible that I had lost leather; but for all that on I must, and
the Justice living a mile off, the Thrasher who had lashed me, and two or three
others made holliday to attend me: when we came before the Justice, he hearing
that I had been punished already, was content at my importunity to acquit me
from any other, and only to make a Pass to send me home to London, being the
place where I told them I was born: I not having power to contradict; was
forced to consent to what was commanded, and that Constable attending me out of
his liberties to another Constable, left me: this new Constable, who now had me
in keeping not being willing to go further with me; for that night put me up in
the Cage, where I was locked up, but not so safely, but I made shift to break
out, and traveling all night; by the next morning I was far enough off for
them to overtake me, for all that day I concealed my self in a wood, and when
night came I proceeded on my Journey; but it so happened that on the second
night of my travel, about midnight I was over taken by three persons who
demanded where I was going? I told them any whether: what I was? I replied a
wretched person whom fortune had persecuted, and therefore I was indifferent
whether I went, or what I did. Hearing me say so, they retired a little to
consult about their affairs, and then one of them coming up to me, demanded
several questions of me of my late course of life? To all their questions I
returned them such answers as caused them to conclude me to be a Rambler, and
therefore fit for their society, and therefore they asked me if I were vvilling
to hazard my self in enterprizing somewhat, that though it might be something
dangerous, yet it should be very profitable. To this I answered, that they
should soon find my willingness expressed in the boldness of my actions, and if
seconded or assisted by them, I should act any thing that they would direct and
appoint.

They hearing my resolution, soon consented to admit me into their society, and
acquainted me with their present purpose, which was to rob a house not far from
that place: They told me that I must be valiant and bold not in fighting, for
they knew they should meet with little occasion to exercise any weapon, but in
entering the House, and performing other such matters as they should instruct me
in. I told them I consented to what they should propose, and therefore desired
them to tell me what part I was to act in this Enterprise, and as for a part of
the purchase, I should leave that to them, which I desired them to give me as I
should deserve. Then one of these persons told me, that he was very well
acquainted in the house, and gave me an account of the several ways and
passages into every Room, and who was lodged in such Chambers. In fine, I
discovered that there was but two men, and three women-kind in the house, and
he being a Coachman, had lately brought the Master of the house home with two
hundred pound, of which he had a desire to rob him; and therefore had joined
these two persons with him in the Confederacy. Being thus instructed, we
proceed and arriving at the house, I was put in at a window, and directed how
to open the doors, which I did, the the Coachman stayed below stairs, and we
other three by his directions went up into the Chambers; the doors we soon
opened, and coming to the bed side where the Master of the house and his Wife
was, we dravving our swords (for I had the Coach-mans delivered to me) opened
our dark Lanthorns, and seeing the man and woman, without many words we bound
and gagged them: and they leaving me to watch them, went into the other
Chambers to do the like to the rest: I being left alone in this Room was not
idle; but rummaged about, and found a Gold Watch a few Rings, and twenty pieces
of Gold, these I secured for my self, and soon after my Companions returned;
when taking the Keys out of the Gentlewomans pocket, we soon found what we came
for, the two hundred pound, and so marched off without any stay, or the l^ast
interruption: the Coachman stayed below in the Hall, where he had made a
strict search, and had likewise plundered something from thence which after
turned little to his profit: but we all left the hou^e with the doors open, and
marched with the spoi^s of the field, bag and baggage, to a house about a mile
distant, where they were so courteous as to give me fifteen pound out of the
profits of their Adventure. I (being sensible that I was well enough paid, in
regard of the Gold and other things I had concealed) thankfully received it,
and so left them, marching on further to the next great To^n, where the next
day I understood a great Fair was to be kept, and therefore I thought that
place the most fitting to conceal my self in, and be freest from suspicion, I
got in a Barn and rested my self, taking some sleep; but was much disturbed,
being in great fear lest some misfortune might befall me; And to the end that I
might be the freer from suspect, in case of a Hue and cry, I went to a
Sales-mans Booth, which was in the Fair* and furnished we with a sad colored
Suit and Cloak, Citizen like, that I might pass for such a one if occasion were
my old clothes I left behind me in the Barn where I stripped my self. Thus did
I escape all danger, but my Companions fared worse than I, for the covetous
Coachman not having any thing else whereon to exercise himself; stole a
Looking-glass which was below stairs, while we were above, and to conceal it
from the rest of his Companions, put it in his Codpiece. When they had
sufficiently stayed at the house where I left them, and had shared the prize
they went to go homewards, but being flustred with the Bottles of Wine they had
for joy drank off, they made it so long, that it was seven of the Clock in the
morning ere they parted, and then were they overtaken by the Hue and cry, with
a Constable who though he knew the Coachman very well, and did not suspect
him; yet seeing him and his two companions ^o flustred, and somewhat to hang
out at the knees of the Coach-mans Breeches, they made some stay, asking
whether he had latel^ been at some Wedding and had Bride-laces, which he had
put in his breeches. The Coachman being somewhat blank^d at this discovery,
knew not what answer readi^y to return: This cau^ed them to examine him who
they were that were his companions, and where they had been? They were all now
deeplier surprised than before, which gave so great suspicion that occasioned a
search, and in the end they found what they sought for, (the Money;) and that
which hung out at the coach-mans breeches, were some Ribbonds that were fastened
to the Looking Glass. Upon this Discovery they were all Apprehended, carried
before a Justice, and upon examination being found directly guilty, committed
to Goal This did I hear of at the Fair that Afternoon as I was drinking in a
booth: At the recital of this story, if any one had observed me, they might
have easily conjectured that I was concerned therein; for I was possessed with
so much fear, that I looked like one rather dead then alive: but there was no
occasion to suspect me, for the three others my companions being taken and with
them the greatest part of the money, there was no occasion to make any further
enquiry. ^hen did I bless my good fortune that I had left them so suddenly, and
was so much out of danger, and that Evening I proceeded further on in my way
toward London; but being well furnished with Silver and Gold, I took up my
Quarters in a very good Inn, where I had a good Supper and soft bed: and slept
very well, considering the trouble I was in. At this Inn I stayed several days
to hear what would become of my companions, ^or the Assizes were then at hand.
I received this satisfaction, that they being Tried, were all cast for their
Lives; the coachman hanged, and the other two were to be transported. This was
the end of my piece of Thievery, and I did then resolve never to hazard my self
again in such matters, lest I came o^f with as bad succeess as the Coachman. I
stayed so long in this Inn, pretending to wait the coming of a ^ister of mine,
that one day who should arrive there but the Maidservant who lived with the
Plaisterer I had served, and as I suppose was the cause of his drowning: now
was I in greater fear then before, for I had lately escaped hanging for theft;
and now expected it for murder; and I knew that this Wench was malicious
enough against me, and would rather ^jure me by her exclamations, than secure
me by her silence; I therefore intended to give her the go-by, but could not,
for she had now cast her eye upon me and discovered me, and came straight up to
me to speak with me. How now, says she, you have made a fair Ramble! Is it not
time to return? Well said I; be silent a little, and let me speak with you in
private; and thereupon taking her by the hand, I led her into a private Room;
where calling for some dr^nk, I enquired of her how all our friends did, and
more particular for my Master. Why, said she, you know well enough that he is
dead. At this word I was more dead than alive, neither was I for the present
able to ask her any more questions.

The Drink being brought in, she drank to me; Well, said she, however I am glad
to see you here; so am not I (thought I:) but recovering my lost senses I
demanded of her how long my Master had been dead. She replied, a fortnight.
Nay* thought I, then the Case is not so bad as I suspected, and therefore I
proceeded in questioning of her how he died, and many other questions. She
answered, that he died of a Feavour, which kept him not above fourteen days
sick; and he being dead, she was now returning into the Country to visit her
Friends.

Now was I fully satisfied that I needed not fear any danger, wherefore I
called for a Bottle of Canary, which we drank off, and she related to me that
he was not much hurt by the fall that I gave him for he went again to work the
next day, and had made much enquiry after me, but as yet in vain. I told her
that I indeed doubted that he had been drowned by the fall which he had
received into the water, and therefore had absented my self ever since from
London, wandering up and down in several Disguises; But, said I, I will now go
to London again but never to serve out my Time at that Trade; for if I come
upon a Scaffold again, I shall be much frighted with the remembrance of that
disaster. She told me* that now indeed I was free to dispose of my self since
my Master was dead, and might choose my Trade and Master.

Thus did we spin out several hours of that day and night together till it was
time to go to Bed, and then we parted; she the next morning proceeded in her
Journey into the Country, and I pursuing my resolutions of going to London,
likewise went forward. But by the way met with an Adventure, which I shall
relate to you.

I was now resolved nothing should hinder me from proceeding in my Journey to
London, and that I might get thither the sooner, I endeavored to borrow a
horse, but could not procure one, I being a stranger, every Person was
unwilling to trust me: but at noonday staying for a bait, I happened into the
company of a Trooper, who was likewise traveling to London; we dined together,
and he asking whither I was going? I told him he said he should be glad of my
company. I said, that would be very pleasing to me if I might enjoy his; but I
could not because he was better furnished for a Journey than I, being provided
with a Horse, and I on Foot; he told me that inconveniency might be supplied,
for there were Horses in the Stable to be let. I told him that I would give any
consideration for the hire of one, and that he, if acquainted, might do me much
kindness in procuring one for me: he seeing me full of Money, quickly procured
me a Horse, engaging himself that I should leave the beast at his London
quarters. My Host being well acquainted with him, and he being to ride along
with me, was contented: and I paying five shillings for his hire, had the horse
delivered to me, and on his back I mounted, thinking my self to be some brave
fellow: As we rid along together* we overtook a female Creature, young and
handsome, in somewhat an ancient decayed, but Gentile garb. The Trooper being a
notable well experienced blade, soon fell into discourse with her* and found
her to be a Rambling Baggage, whose journey was now intended for London, and
would be glad of our company, were she accommodated with a horse: to that I
offered her my service, and agreed that she should ride behind me; to which she
assenting, soon mounted; and now we merrily put on, holding a pleasant
discourse with our female companion. I had a great desire to take a better view
of her than I could, being thus on Horseback together, and therefore persuaded
the Trooper to make a halt at the next Town which we came to, where we all
dismoun^ed, and I saluted my Lady, who kindly received my courtesy. The
Trooper after some discourse, wa^ well enough acquainted with the Lady, having
oftentimes been merry with her, and others, at the house where she lodged in
London. He called me on one side, and told me, that she was a person whom he
had been formerly acquainted with, and so might I too if I would, and if I had
any desire thereto, he could and would assist me

I told him he had done me many kindnesses in the small time of my
acquaintance, and now he had offered that which exceeded all; for indeed I was
much taken with her beauty, and very de^irous I was to enjoy her.

Well, said he, let us be going from hence, and make you your bargain with her
as you ride along by the way, and I will take such care in the business that
you shall be entertained as Man and Wife at my quarters, and there lie
together. I was in^nitely glad of this his kind prosfer, and thankfully
accepted thereof; and so after some little longer stay, we again mounted our
steeds and put forwards: according to his instruction I courted my Mistress,
and without much difficulty obtained her promise to permit me to lie with her,
and so we rid on till we arrived at the Troopers quarters* where he told his
Landlady, that he had brought her some guests; for this young ^an and his Wife,
(said he) pointing to us, will stay here all night: they shall be we come said
the Hostess, and so a supper was provided; for as we did eat and drink with a
very good appetite, and my Land^ady did accompany us, who I found was very well
respected, and ^amiliar with the Trooper; and bed time being come which I ^ad
much de^ired, I and my Lady went to bed, neither did the Trooper^ie alone, for
our Landlady was his bedfellow; how he spent the night I know not, but I am
sure for our parts we slept but little, for it was the first time that I ever
enjoy^d a Woman naked in my arms all night, and I was ravished with delight,
never having had so much pleasure. My bedfellow was well enough contented with
the entertainment I gave her; we discoursed of one another ^ortunes* but
whether she told me the truth of hers, I know not, but I disguised mine wholly
from her, not thinking it fit to make her acquainted with my late adventures:
she told me, that the occasion of her late travel was this, that she and two
Women more of her acquaintance had been persuaded by three Gentlemen to a
ramble, and had gone-down to such a City in a Coach, that they had for some
time continued together as three men and wives a^ an Inn, and there had enjoyed
a full plenty of every thing; but at length the three Gentlemen had basely left
them to pay a great reckoning in a strange place, and all they had would not
make the one half of it, that they had for some time waited in expectation of
the return of their friends, but in vain, o that at last it was agreed that one
of us, said she, should go f^r London, and procure money to redeem the rest,
and the lot falling on me, I have prosecuted the journey; and hope to raise
money to relieve and redeem my companions. I hearing this story was sensibly
troubled thereat and offered her my assistance, and she so far prevailed with
me, that I le^t her five pound to send to her companions, she promi^ing me to
continue either there, or at any other p^ace with me so long as I should please
and at our coming to her quarters at London to repay me my money with many
thanks. To all this I agreed, and the next day she conveyed mo^^ part of the
money to her companions by a ^oach that traveled ^^ither: and thu^ did I enjoy
this Lady for many nights together, and lying at Rack and Manger: the Hor^e I
^ent back at the directions of the Trooper, who like^ise continued with his
Hoste^s, and only my purse paid for all; but indeed we lived sparingly enough,
the Trooper being one of the honeste^t Travelers that ever I met with. The
Coachman who carried the money to the a^^licted and distressed Damoysels,
returned, and with him the Ladies, very glad of their safe ^e^urn, and very
thankful were they, not only to their companions who sent it, but also to me of
whom she said she procured it, and now we ^ll thought of removing to London,
but one night more we lay at o^r old quarters, where I had the greatest frolic
I was ever guilty of, for that night I kissed with all three of the women, and
pleased them round, by giving each of them a trial of my skill. Wha^ now could
I desire to enjoy further? I thought my self to be as brave a fellow as the
great Turk in his Seraglio, he having but his choice of Women. which I now
enjoyed to my f^ll content. But morning coming, we took leave of our Hostess,
and the Trooper, and all four taking Coach, soon came to London, where I took
up my Quarters with my three Damsels, who made very much of me, and indeed they
were the ho^estest Wenches, and I had the best frolic that I ever had in my
life, but in time I was weary of this life, for what man can last out always?
And I finding my pocket begin to shrink, bethought me that it was fit to leave
off in time, for all my Silver was gone; and ten pound of my twenty pound in
Gold: but I selling my Watch and Rings raised ten pound more; with this stock
of twenty pound I was resolved to retire, and fit my self for some employment.
My three Ladies never offered to return me the five pound I had lent them,
neither indeed could I handsomely expect it; for they had been very liberal in
their expenses, and had declined all other company to accommodate me. They
heard of their three Gentlemen who had trapan^d them in the Country, and so
wisely played their Cards that they gained all their money again, I ass^sting
them, and pretending the man of the house had assigned the money to me. I
scorned to pocket any of it, but gave it amongst them; and so being resolved to
take another course of life, I retired my self from them: and to the end that I
might be fitted for an employment, I hired one who was well known therein, to
teach me to write more perfectly than I could formerly, as also Arithmetic; I
likewise hired several Books of a Stationer, for which I gave him so much per
week; These being chiefly Knight-Errantry and Romances, I took much pleasure
therein. I had a mind to diversion and went to visit my Damoyselles and thus
did I live the pleasantest life in the World; but I had so much reason as to
think that things would not last long as they were, and I had no inclination
to stealing, more virtuous thoughts had now possessed me, and therefore a Trade
being the only thing that would maintain me; I enquired for one, and settled my
self, as you shall hear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
He being new come to London, puts himself Prentice to a Tailor; he gets
acquaintance with Prentices of all sorts; is with them at their
Tavern-frollicks: he is employed by a Scrivener to make Clothes for a Wench, he
goes with him to her, and returning, the Scrivener promises him an account of
that trade; the Scrivener recounts the Waggeries he committed the first three
years of his Apprenticeship, and his Masters first cheats by counterfeiting a
Seal.

BEing now tome to London, I was resolved not to be idle, but settle my self to
some one Trade, that I might be able to get a living; and having already had
trial of several at fitst a Barber-Surgeon, then a Tapster, a Cook a Lock
smith. Tailor, Baker and Plaisterer: and being still forced for some reason or
other to leave them all, did now resolve to fix upon one that should do my
business, and whereby I might at all times, and in all plaees, be able to live
by my hands, for Lands I had none. I considered of all the Trades I had already
been a practitioner in, and many others none suited so well with my humor as
that of a Tailor; wherefore I sought for several Masters, but they were all
unwilling to take me for less than seven years, it being the custom of London
that none can be bound for less time, nor be made a Freeman till they have
served so long. I was unwilling to bind my self on those terms, knowing my
temper was variable, and did believe, I should not hold out to serve such a
term: but after several enquiries and trials, I did light upon a Master who was
willing to take me for five years, only this I persuaded him to do in regard I
already had a good hand in working and being industrious in my employment, so
that though I was bound for seven years, yet I had a Writing under my Masters
hand; that the last two years I should dispose of my self as I pleased, and yet
he could make me a Freeman at seven years end.

My Master was not only a Tailor, but kept a Brokers Shop, wherein he sold all
sorts of Clothes, new and old; He lived in one of the prineipallest Streets of
the City, and was in good esteem with his Neighbors, who were all persons of
some quality not of the meaner sort but substantial Tradesmen, as Goldsmiths,
Grocers, Drugsters, Scriveners, Stationers etc and I (being now well fitted
with Clothes, and having m^ pockets pretty well lined with money which I had
still kept by me) was a fit and welcome Companion to the best sort of
Apprentices, in whose society I did soon insinuate my self, and having money to
spend equal with the best, I came acquainted with a whole Gang of such Blades
that all my former knowledge was nothing in comparison to what I soon
experimented from them; for their Masters being of the vvealthiest sort of
Citizens, and keeping Country-houses at Newington, Hackney, Stepney, etc. they
often had opportunity in their absence to meet and keep their Club or general
Rendezvous, which was commonly every other night, at one of the Taverns near
adjoining: and my Master (who did well enough understand that I was frequently
abroad (...) behold, my face all smearen, my clothes set full with patches upon
the whole cloth, a red clout upon my leg, and supporting my body with a staff,
as if I had been a mere cripple. Many a mile we rambled, yet keeping still in
our own station, for fear of the Vpright-man: but my counterfeit Plea for
begging was at last discovered, and to all my dainties, I had whipping cheer
added; for going one day not far off from a Farm house, the straggling Hens
invited me to have a throw at them with my staff, and having struck one of
them, I had forgotten my lameness, but very nimbly ran and took her up, putting
her under my pacht Coat, where I had a bag sewed in that was a receptacle for
all stolen goods. It chanced that the Farmer himself was then on the other
side of the hedge, who undiscovered by me, saw my activity in the stealing of
his Hen, and was resolved, though I put it up, that he would not. But I
dreading nothing, thinking my self unseen, went directly to the House, and as
soon as I came into the yard, fell to my old trade, leaning on my staff, and
drawing my leg after me, as if scarce able to stand, much less to run. Having
gotten to the door, I began to set up my tone with a Good tender hearted
people, be pleased to bestow your charity upon a poor miserable wretch that is
both lam^ and hungry; one penny of silver to buy him salve for his sore leg, or
one morsel of victuals to put into his belly that has had nothing come in it
this couple of days. No sooner had I ended my Maunding, thinking to mump the
Farmer out of some money, or at leastwise some bread to my Hen, but he having
watched me now, seized hold on my arm, and told me, that though it might be
true that I had not latel^ eaten, yet he saw I was resolved to be better
provided for the future, and so turning back my Coat, discovered my bag, where
was not only the Hen, but some other provant I had lately purchased. I finding
my self caught, would gladly have given him the slip, but some of his servants,
as well as himself, stopped me, without any more ado, the Harman-beck was sent
for, who being a Neighbor, quickly came, and by this time, I had a great train
of Boys and Girls to attend me: I needed not much Examination being thus taken
in the manner, but however, they were all desirous to see my sore Leg; I was
forced to let them do what they would with me, knowing there was no remedy but
patience, suffered them to unrowl and take off the Clouts and Rowlers that was
upon it, when coming to the skin, that was as whole and as sound as a fish; but
though my Leg was well and whole, my Heart was now almost broken with
consideration of what they would do with me; some proposed one punishment, and
some another, but at length to the Whipping-Post I was led, where my Doublet
and shirt being stripped off, my back was so long laced with a Cartwhip, that I
caper'd and flownc'd like a Horse in a Quagmire, and I was as fast too, being
hand-cuffed so that I could not stir. It was well it was the Spring time, for I
lost Blood enough to purge away the gross humors without the help of a
Surgeon; that office being supplied by a Thrasher, who took as much pains upon
me, as would have Thrash'd a Bushel of Pease; but at length there was a
Cessation, and a new Parlee began, wherein it was propounded, that further
course should be taken with me, and considering that there was a kind of Felony
committed upon the Hen, they advised, and agreed to lead me to the next Justice
of the Peace to have his Judgment in the Case, tho I thought it unreasonable to
suffer Punishment first, and then to be Judged; yet it was to no purpose to
complain, and all I could say, would not prevail with them to let me go, but
they would conduct me to the Justice, so that I having put on my Clothes, my
shirt stuck to my back, and made me sensible that I had lost leather, but for
all that, on I must, and the Justice living a mile off, the Thrasher who had
lashed me, and two or three others, made Holliday to attend me: when we came
before the Justice, he hearing that I had been punished already, was pleased,
at my opportunity, to acquit me from any other, and only to make a Pass to
send me home to London, being the place where I told them I was born: I not
having power to contradict, was forced to consent to what was commanded, and
that Constable attending me out of his Liberties to another Constable, left me:
This new Constable, who now had me in keeping, not being willing to go further
with me, for that Night put me up in the Cage, where I was locked up, but not
so safely, but I made shift to break out, and traveling all Night, by the next
morning, I was far enough off for them to overtake me, for all that day I
concealed my self in a Wood, and when Night came, I proceeded on my Journey;
but it so happened, that on the second Night of my Travel, about Midnight, I
was overtaken with three Persons, who demanded where I was going, I told them
any whither; they asked me, what I was, I replied, a wretched Person whom
Fortune had Persecuted, and therefore I was indifferent whether I went, or what
I did. Hearing me say so, they retired to consult about their affairs, and then
one of them coming up to me, demanded several questions of me concerning my
late course of life; To all these questions I returned them such answers, as
caused them to conclude me a Rambler, and therefore fit for their Society, and
therefore they asked me if I were willing to hazard my self in enterprising
somewhat, that though it might be something dangerous, yet it should be very
profitable. To this I answered, that they should soon find my willingness
expressed in the boldness of my actions, and if seconded or assisted by them, I
should act any thing they would direct and appoint.

They hearing my Reso^ution, soon consented to admit me into their Society, and
acquainted me with their present purpose, which was to Rob a house not far from
that place: They told me that I must be valiant and bold, (not in fighting) for
they knew they should meet with little occasion to exercise any weapon, but in
entering the House, and performing other such matters as they should instruct me
in. I told them I consented to what they should propose, and therefore desired
them to tell me what part I was to act in this Enterprise, and as for a part of
the purchase, I should leave that to them, which I desired them to give me as I
should deserve. Then one of these persons told me, that he was very well
acquainted in the house, and gave me an account of the several ways and
passages into every Room, and who was lodged in such Chambers. In fine, I
discovered that there was but two Men, and three Women-kind in the House, and
he being a Coachman, had lately brought the Master of the house home with two
hundred pound, of which he had a desire to Rob him* and therefore had joined
these two persons with him in the confederacy. Being thus instructed, we
proceed, and being Arrived at the house, I was put in at a window, and directed
how to open the doors, which I did, the Coachman stayed below-stairs, and we
other three by his directions went up into the Chambers, the doors we soon
opened, and coming to the Bedside, where the Master of the house and his Wife
was, we drawing our Swords, (for I had the Coachmans delivered to me) opened
our dark Lanthorns, and seeing the man and woman, without many words, we bound
and gagged them; and they leaving me to watch them, went into the other
Chambers to do the like by the rest: I being left alone in this Room, was not
idle, but rummaged about, and found a Gold Watch, a few Rings, and twenty
pieces of Gold, these I secured for my self, and soon after my companions
returned, when taking the Keys out of the Gentlewomans Pocket, we soon found
what we came for, the two hundre^ pounds, and so marched off without any stay,
or the least interruption: the Coachman stayed below in the Hall, where he had
made a strict search, and had likewise plundered something from thence which
after turned little to his profit: but we all left the house with the doors
open, and marched with the spoils of the field, bag and baggage, to a house
about a mile distant, where they were so courteous as to give me fifteen, pound
out of the profits of their Adventure. I (being sensible that I was well enough
paid, in regard of the Gold and other things I had concealed) thankfully
received it, and so left them, marching on further to the next great Town,
where the next day I understood a great Fair was to be kept, and therefore I
thought that place the most fitting to conceal my self in, and be freest from
suspicion. I got in a Barn and rested my self, taking some sleep; but was much
disturbed, being in great fear lest some misfortune might befall me: And to
the end that I might be the freer from suspect, in case of a Hue and Cry, I
went to a Sales man's Booth which was in the Fair, and furnished me with a sad
colored Suit and Cloak, Citizen-like, that I might pass for such a one if
occasion were; my old Clothes I left behind in the Barn where I stripped my
self. Thus did I escape all danger, but my companions fared worse than I, for
the covetous Coach man not having any thing else whereon to exercise himself,
stole a Looking-glass which was below stairs, while we were above, and to
conceal it from the rest of his Companions, put it in his Codpiece. When they
had sufficiently stayed at the House where I left them, and had shared the
prize, they went to go homewards, but being flustred with the Bottles of Wine
they had for joy drank off, they made it so long, that it was seven of the
Clock in the Morning ere they parted, and then were they overtaken by the Hue
and Cry, with a Constable, who thought he knew the Coachman very well, and did
not suspect him, yet seeing him and his two Companions so flustred, and
somewhat to hang out at the knees of the Coach-man's Breeches, they made some
stay, asking whether he had lately been at some Wedding and had Bride-Laces,
which he had put in his Breeches. The Coachman being somewhat blank'd at this
discovery, knew not what answer readily to return: This caused them to examine
him who they were that were his Companions, and where they had been? They were
all now deeplier surprised than before, which gave such great suspicion, that
occasioned a Search, and in the end they found what they sought for, (the
Money;) and that which hung out at the Coach-mans Breeches, were some Ribbons
that were fastened to the Looking-glass. Upon this Discovery they were all
Apprehended, carried before a Justice, and upon examination being found
directly Guilty, committed to Goal. This did I hear of at the Fair that
afternoon as I was drinking in a Booth: At the recital of this story, if any
one had observed me, they might easily have conjectured that I was concerned
therein; for I was possessed with so much fear, that I looked like one rather
dead then alive: but there was no occasion to suspect me, for the three others
my Companions being taken, and with them the greatest part of the money, there
was no occasion to make any further enquiry. Then did I bless my good fortune
that I had left them so suddenly, and was so much out of danger, and that
evening I poceeded further on in my ways toward London; but being well
furnished with Silver and Gold, I took up my Quarters in a very good Inn, where
I had a good Supper and saft Bed, and slept very well, considering the trouble
I was in. At this Inn I stayed several days to hear what would become of my
Companions, for the Assizes were then at hand. I received this satisfaction,
that they being Tried, were all cast for their Lives; the Coachman hanged, and
the other two were to be transported. This was the end of my piece of Thievery,
and I did then resolve never to hazard my self again in such matters, lest I
came off with as bad success as the Coachman. I stayed so long in this Inn,
pretending to wait the coming of a Sister of mine, that one day who should
arrive there but the Maidservant who lived with the Plaisterer I had Served,
and as I suppose was the cause of his drowning: now was I in greater fear than
before, for I had lately escaped hanging for theft, and now expected it for
murder; and I knew that this wench was malicious enough against me, and would
rather injure me by her exclamations, than secure me by her silence; I
therefore intended to give her the go-by, but could not, for she had now cast
her Eye upon me, and discovered me, and came straight up to me to speak with
me. How now says she, you have made a fair Ramble! Is it not time to return?
Well said I, be silent a little, and let me speak with you in private; and
thereupon taking her by the hand, I led her into a private room, where calling
for some drink, I enquired of her how all our Friends did, and more particular
for my Master Why said she, you know well enough that he is dead. At this word
I was more dead than alive, neither was I for the present able to ask her any
more questions.

The Drink being brought in, she drank to me; Well, said she, however I am glad
to see you here; so am not I (thought I:) but recovering my lost senses, I
demanded of her how long my Master had been dead, she replied, a fortnight,
nay, thought I, then the Case is not so bad as I suspected, and therefore I
proceeded in questioning of her how he died, and many other questions, she
answered, that he died of a Fever, which kept him not above fourteen days
sick, and he being dead, she was now returning into the country to visit her
Friends.

Now was I fully satisfied that I needed not fear any danger, wherefore I
called for a Bottle of Canary, which we drank off, and she related to me, that
he was not much hurt by the fall that I gave him, for he went again to work the
next day, and had made much enquiry after me, but as yet in vain. I told her,
that I indeed doubted that he had been drowned by the fall which he had
received into the water, and therefore had absented my self ever since from
London, wandering up and down in several Disguises: But, said I, I will now go
to London again, but never to serve out my Time at that Trade; for if I come
upon a Scaffold again, I shall be much frighted with the remembrance of that
Disaster. She told me, that now I was free to dispose of my self since my
Master was dead, and might choose my Trade and Master.

Thus did we spin out several hours of that day and night together, till it was
time to go to Bed, and then we parted; she the next morning proceeded in her
Journey into the Country, and I pursuing my resolutions of going to London,
likewise went forward, but by the way, met with an Adventure, which I shall
relate to you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
In his Journey to London, he overtakes a Trooper and a Wench, he lies with her
and two more of her Companions, and after this Frollick, he goes with them all
to London.

I Was now resolved nothing should hinder me from proceeding in my Journey to
London, and that I might get thither the sooner, I endeavored to borrow a
Horse, but could not procure one, I being a stranger, every person was
unwilling to trust me: but at noonday, staying for a bait, I happened into the
company of a Trooper, who was likewise traveling to London, we dined together,
and he asking whither I was going, I told him: he said he should be glad of my
company: I said, it would be very pleasing to me, if I might enjoy his, but
that I could not, because he was better furnished for a Journey than I was,
being provided with a horse, and I on foot: he told me, that inconveniency
might be supplied, for there were horses in the Stable to be let: I told him,
that I would give any consideration for the hire of one, and that he, if
acquainted, might do me much kindness in procuring me a Horse, engaging himself
that I should leave the Beast at his London quarters. My Host being well
acquainted with him, and he being to Ride along with me, was contented: and I
paying five shillings for his hire, had the Horse delivered to me, and on his
back I mounted, thinking my self to be some brave fellow: As we rid along
together, we overtook a Female creature, young and handsome, in somewhat an
ancient decayed, but Gentile garb. The Trooper being a notable well experienced
blade, soon fell into discourse with her, and found her to be a Rambling
Baggage, whose journey was now intended for London, and would be glad of our
company, were she accommodated with a Horse: to that I offered her my service,
and agreed that she should Ride behind me, to which she assenting, soon
mounted, and now we merrily put on, holding a pleasant discourse with our
Female companion: I had a great desire to take a better view of her than I
could, being thus on Horseback together, and therefore persuaded the Trooper
to make a halt at the next Town, which we came to, where we all dismounted, and
I saluted my Lady, who kindly received my Courtesy. The Trooper after some
discourse, was well enough acquainted with the Lady, having oftentimes been
merry with her, and others, at the house where she lodged in London. He called
me on one side, and told me, that she was a person whom he had been formerly
acquainted with, and so might I too, if I would, and if I had any desire
thereto, he could and would assist me.

I told him he had done me many kindnesses in the small time of my
acquaintance, and now he had offered that which exceeded all; for indeed, I was
much taken with her Beauty, and very desirous I was to enjoy her.

Well, said he, let us be going from hence, and make you your bargain with her
as you ride along by the way, and I will take such care in the business, that
you shall be entertained as Man and Wife at my quarters, and there lie
together. I was infinitely glad of this his kind proffer, and thankfully
accepted thereof, and so after some little longer stay, we again mounted our
Steeds, an put forwards: according to his instruction, I courted my Mistress,
and without much difficulty, obtained her promise to permit me to lie with her,
and so we Rid on till we arrived at the Troopers quarters, where he told his
Landlady, that he had brought her some Guests, for this young Man and his Wife,
(said he) pointing to us, will stay here all night; they shall be welcome said
the Hostess, and so a Supper was provided; for as we did eat and drink with a
very good appetite, and my Landlady did accompany us, who I found was very well
respected, and familiar with the Trooper; and Bedtime being come, which I much
desired, I and my Lady went to Bed, neither did the Trooper lie alone, for our
Landlady was his Bedfellow; how he spent the Night I know not, but I am sure
for our parts, we slept but little, for it was the first time that I ever
enjoyed a Woman naked in my Arms all Night, and I was ravished with delight,
never having had so much pleasure. My Bedfellow was well enough contented with
the entertainment I gave her; we discoursed of one another Fortunes, but
whether she told me the truth of hers, I know not, but I disguised mine wholly
from her, not thinking it fit to make her acquainted with my late adventures;
she told me, that the occasion of her late Travel was this, That she and two
Women more of her acquaintance, had been persuaded by three Gentlemen to a
Ramble and had gone down to such a City in a Coach, that they had for some time
continued as three Men and Wives at an Inn, and there had enjoyed a full plenty
of every thing; but at length the three Gentlemen had basely left them to pay a
great Reckoning in a strange place, and all they had, would not make the one
half of it; that they had for some time waited in expectation of the return of
their friends, but in vain, so that at last it was agreed, that one of us, said
she, should go for London, and procure money to redeem the rest, and the lot
falling on me, I have prosecuted the Journey, and hope to raise money to
relieve and redeem my Companions. I hearing this Story, was sensibly troubled
thereat, and offered her my assistance, and she so far prevailed with me, that
I lent her five pound to send to her companions, she promising me to continue
either there, or at any other place with me, so long as I should please, and at
our coming to her quarters at London, to repay me my money with many thanks. To
all this I agreed, and the next day she conveyed most part of the money to her
Companions by a Coach that traveled thither: and thus did I enjoy this Lady
for many Nights together, and lying at Rack and Manger: The Horse I sent back
at the directions of the Trooper, who likewise continued with his Hostess, and
only my Purse paid for all, but indeed we lived sparingly enough, the Trooper
being one of the honestest Travelers that I ever met with. The Coachman who
carried the money to the afflicted and distressed Damoyselles, returned, and
with him the Ladies, very glad of their safe return, and very thankful were
they, not only to their companions who s^nt it, but also to me, of whom she
said, she procured it, and now we all thought of removing to London, but one
night more we lay at our old quarters, where I had the greatest frollick I was
ever guilty of, for that Night I kissed with all three of the Women, and pleased
them round, by giving each of them a trial of my skill. What now could I desire
to enjoy further? I thought my self to be as brave a ^ellow as the great Turk
in his Seraglio, he having but his choice of Women, which I now enjoyed to my
full content. But morning coming, we took leave of our Hostess and the Trooper,
and all four taking Coach, soon came to London, where I took up my Quarters
with my three Damsels, who made very much of me, and indeed they were the
honestest Wenches, and I had the best Frollick that I ever had in my life, but
in time I was weary of this life, for what Man can last out always? And I
finding my Pocket begin to shrink, bethought me that it was fit to leave off in
time, for all my Silver was gone, and ten pound of my twenty pound in Gold: but
I selling my Watch and Rings, raised ten pound more; with this stock of Twenty
pound I was resolved to retire, and fit my self for some employment. My three
Ladies never offered to return me my five pounds I had lent them, neither
indeed could I handsomely expect it; for they had been very liberal in their
expenses, and had declined all other company to accommodate me. They heard of
their three Gentlemen who had trapan'd them in the Country, and so wisely
played their Cards, that they gained all their money again, I assisting them,
pretending the man of the House had assigned the money to me. I scorned to
Pocket any of it, but gave it amongst them, and so being resolved to take
another course of life, I retired my self from them: and to the end that I
might be fitted for an employment, I hired one who was well known therein, to
teach me to write more perfectly than I could formerly, as also Arithmetic; I
likewise hired several Books of a Stationer, for which I gave him so much per
week; they being chiefly Knight Errantry and Romances, I took much pleasure
therein. I had a mind to diversion, and went to visit my Damoyselles, and thus
did I live the pleasantest life in the world; but I had so much reason as to
think, that things would nor last long as they were, and I had no inclination
to stealing, more virtuous thoughts had now possessed me, and therefore a Trade
being the only thing that would maintain me, I enquired for one, and settled my
self, as you shall hear in the next Chapter.

The Extravagant Prentices with their Lasses at a Tavern Frollick.


CHAP. XVIII.
He being now come to London, puts himself Prentice to a Tailor; he gets
acquaintance with Prentices of all sorts, is with them at their
Tavern-frollicks: he is employed by a Scrivener to make Clothes for a Wench, he
goes with them to her, and returning, promises him an account of that Trade.

BEing now come to London, I was resolved not to be idle, but settle my self to
some one Trade, that I might be able to get a living; and having already had
trial of several, at first a Barber-Surgeon, then a Tapster, a Cook, a Lock
smith, Tailor, Baker, and Plaisterer; and being still forced for some reason or
other to leave them all, did now resolve to fix upon one that should do my
business, and whereby I might at all times, and in all places, be able to live
by my hands, for Lands I had none. I considered of all the Trades I had already
been a practitioner in, and many others, none suited so well with my humor, as
that of a Tailor, wherefore I sought for several Masters, but they were all
unwilling to take me for less than seven years, it being the custom of London
that none can be bound for less time, nor be made a Freeman till they have
served so long. I was unwilling to bind my self on those terms, knowing my
temper was variable, and did believe, I should not hold out to serve such a
term: but after several enquiries and trials, I did light upon a Master, who
was willing to take me for five years, only this I persuaded him to do, in
regard I already had agood hand in working, and being industrious in my
employment, so that though I was bound for seven years, yet I had a Writing
under my Masters hand, that the last two years I should dispose of my self as I
pleased, and yet he could make me a Freeman at seven years end.

My Master was not only a Tailor, but kept a Brokers shop, wherein he sold all
sorts of Clothes, new and old: He lived in one of the principallest Streets in
the City, and was in good esteem with his Neighbors, who were all persons of
some quality, not of the meaner sort, but substantial Tradesmen, as
Goldsmiths, Grocers, Drugsters, Scriveners, Stationers, etc. and I (being now
well fitted with Clothes, and having my Pockets pretty well lined with money,
which I had kept by me) was a fit and welcome Companion to the best sort of
Apprentices, in whose Society I did soon insinuate my self, and having money to
spend equal with the best, I came acquainted with a whole Gang of such Blades,
that all my former knowledge was nothing in comparison to what I soon
experimented from them; for their Masters being of the wealthiest sort of
Citizens, and keeping Countrey-houses at Newington, Hackney, Stepney, etc. they
often had opportunity in their absence to meet, and keep their Club or general
Randezvous, which was commonly every other night, at one of the Taverns near
adjoining: and my Master (who did well enough understand that I was frequently
abroad, and in what company I spent my time) did not in the least oppose, or
contradict me therein; for I soon found that these young Jovial Blades, though
Apprentices, yet they were my Masters best Customers, for there was none of
them but had a Suit or two of Clothes A la mode, which commonly lay at our
house, which they put on when they had any Frollick out of Town, either at
Christmas, Easter, or Whitsontide, or at any other time, when they pretending
some urgent occasions, would give their Masters the slip.

Thus was I one of the Gang, and had liberty to be with them so often as I
pleased, by the connivance of my Master, whose profit consisted in my
acquaintance with them; for I soon brought him some new Customers, out of whom
he could squeez good store of money for making their Clothes, and sometimes he
made three or four Suits at a time, yet had no money for his pains, but he was
satisfied otherwis^ in Commodities, which were more to his profit; for the
Mercer paid his Bill in stuffs, the Draper in Cloth, and the rest either in
other good Commodities, which they had of their Masters, or with which they
were furnished by their Companions. When any of them intended a new Suit for
himself, Friend, or Mistress, it was but summoning the Brethren of the Club
together, and then the Mercer brought his Stuffs or Silks, the Milliner
Buttons, Ribbons, and Lynings, for which they had in exchange such other
Commodities as the others could produce: there was only two Trades that had
little or no commodities to exchange, and that was the Scrivener and
Book^eller, and therefore I wondered from whence they should get to be so fine
as the rest; but I observed what they wanted in Wares, was supplied in Money,
which was a Commodity would command every thing else. How they should get the
Money I knew not, for I could not imagine that in making of Bills and Bonds,
the Scrivener could cheat his Master of Money, or that the Bookseller could
sell many books by the by, and put money in his own pockets, for I knew they
were not so vendible a Commodity as Cloth, Silk, etc.

But one evening we being at our general Rendezvous, where we had good Wine,
and better company, being attended by two or three Suburbian Females, who were
the Doxies of our Comerades. The Scrivener (having the finest outside, being in
his private Suit of Apparel, and having his pockets well lined with Maslin, of
Gold and Silver) took occasion to court one of the Women not only publicly but
privately; and though she were till then a stranger to him, yet he won her from
her other Friend, and to enduce her to be kind to him, he called me to him, and
ordered me to provide her a new gown and peticoat of flowred Tabbee, and
immediately calling to our Mercer who served us all, gave him as much money as
the Silk was worth, and all the engagement he desired from the Bona Roba, was
that he might have the first taking up of the peticoat, and then if she liked
her old sweetheart best, she might afterward use her pleasure, either
admitting him or the other to her embraces, or either of them as she plea^ed, to
this they all three agreed, and the Mercer who took about four pound for Silk
was ordered (by a general vote) to spend forty shillings of the money for that
present reckoning; and all the rest went Scot-free, and after a lusty cup of
wine, some dishes of meat, and fidlars; they for that time broke up their
meeting. This liberality and rather prodigality of the Scrivener put me into
some confusion, and very desirous I was to know how he gained so much money,
wherefore I speedily procured the apparel to be made, and delivers it to him
to his content, I so highly pleased him, that he desired me to go with him to
the Ladies lodging who was to wear it. I accordingly waited on him thither, and
she receiving him with much cheerfulness, accepted it; it was soon put on, and
it was not long before they retired out of the room wherein I was into another;
where I suppose she was so courteous as to permit him not only to take up the
peticoat, and somewhat else to his liking, but to dispose of her at his
pleasure, for they stayed together near an hour. Neither was I left alone, but
had the old Matron of the house, and a young Bona Roba, to accompany me, where
we were not Idle, but made the bottles of Sack and Stepony fly for it: when
their business was over (and ours almost done, for we had so plied the liquor
that our noddles were fuller of wine than wit) they briskly entered the room
where we were, and without any coyness fell stoutly to drinking; for seeing us
near thirty one, they with full bowls quickly put us out, so that I was
enforced to go to sleep, which I supposed was about 3 hours, and waking, I
found my Gallants wanting, but I believe they were not at all at that time
idle; for upon inquiry and search, I found them in another Chamber together,
where I suppose she had fully performed the agreement for her clothes to the
content of the Scrivener, who now after a fresh bottle of wine, and payment of
the reckoning which was no small one, hearty farewels given, and taken of his
Mistress, her companion, and the Matron, we left that house, and taking Coach
ordered the Coachman to drive to the next Tavern to my Master, where we called
for a room, wine and a fire, he gave me an Angel for my days service, and
shifting himself, put on his ordinary, and gave me his best clothes to lay up
at my Masters, wishing him to acquaint him that I had been in his company, and
that would be sufficient for my excuse: I thanked him for his kindness, and
Civility, and told him that his bounty had so tied me to him, that I should at
all times be joyful if I might serve him: As for my bounty, said he, I shall
for the future be more free to you, and for money you shall not want; for I am
in a capacity to furnish my friends, having the command of a great deal of cash
which I know well enough how to order to my own advantage, and it is but reason
that I should dispose of some as well as my Master; for it is in my power to
strip him of the greatest part of his estate, and ruin him in his credit. I
being inquisitive after secrets, desired him to tell me how that Trade (which I
supposed, only consisted in the making a few small writings) could be so
profitable: To this he answered, and indeed it was true, they made not many
writings, but dealt in much money, and his Master had an extraordinary way; for
(persued he) if my Master wants two or three thousand pound, he can quickly
command it, though he began with nothing, and indeed, had every Bird her
feather, he has no estate: But he has such slights, ways, and confederates,
that he can do what he lists. He has one piece of Brass has yielded him two
thousand pound: that is much said I, and there must be more in your trade then
I can imagine, and I would be very glad to be acquainted with some of your
Mysteries, and since you have promised me your friendship, whatever you shall
relate to me, shall be surely and safely closeted up in my breast, and shall
never by me be offered to your prejudice, and it may be some of your advice in
your affairs may be profitable; for I have had much more experience in the
world than you imagine. This discourse and some other arguments which I used,
induced him to give me a relation of many passages of his life: But much of the
Knaveries of that mysterious Trade, which discourse he began to me in this
manner.

CHAP. XIX.
The Scrivener recounts the Waggeries he committed the first three years of his
Apprenticeship, and his Masters first Cheats, by counterfeiting a Seal.

WHen I came first to Prentice* my Master (by reason of the Wars, which caused
a general deadness in Trading) had but little to do: but he being one of the
confiding party, did thereby get acquaintance with several Rich men, and in
short time, by reason of the pretended Sanctity, was entrusted by a Usurer to
put out five hundred pound, which he did to his content; for he had a Lease of
a City Companies which cost seven hundred pound, assigned for security. My
Master never having dealt in money before, and now finding the sweetness of
Procuration, and making of Writings, longed to be at it again: but though he
had moneys offered him to put out, yet he could not meet with any security to
content; for personal security by reason of the casualty of the Wars, was
generally disliked, and Land in the Country was for the same reason refused,
and only Leases in London, or Lands about London, was counted sufficient and
approved of, wherefore this Companies Lease, on which he had procured moneys,
did run much in his head, wishing for such another security, and projecting
somewhat, which since he had put in Execution, as I will tell you by and by:
but I will first acquaint you how I behaved my self for the first three years
of my time, whereby my Master took so good a liking to me, as to communicate
his secrets to me. My Master was always good natured, and kind to me, but on
the contrary, my Mistress was cross and froward, so that I could seldom get a
good word from her, and she would still employ me in several pieces of
drudgery, as to carry burdens from London to our Countrey-house, and then I
must bring back from thence fletten or skim'd Milk, on which we must feed two
or three days in the week, when my Master would allow good roast Beef, which
she would send for away: but I was ^till even with her for her nigardliness,
and when I came to the Country House, I would usually get my ^hare of the
Cream; and being a Lover of the Pies and Puddings, steal some from her. One
time I being in the Larder, had a great mind to a baked Pudding that was there,
but at first durst not meddle with it, because it was with other good cheer to
be served up at the Table to Dinner, where were some guess: but for all that,
the loveliness of the Pudding made me take my knife, and turning it upside
down, cut out one half of it, and so turning it down again, left it to be
served hollow to the Table: but I departed for London e're Dinner was served, I
know not how the Maids came off. At other times when I came to the
Countrey-house, if the Fruit of the Orchard were ripe, then the Gate was
locked, and I was not admitted therein, but I would have my share by day or
night; for I once invited some of my confederates to Church thither on a
Sunday, and in the Sermon time went with them and Robbed our own Orchard, which
no body else durst attempt because of our Mastiff; nay, I went once from London
at midnight, and having some of my Copesmates with me, I entered the Orchard,
and fetched out the fruit, which I would be sure should be of the best, and
choicest of all the ground, and gave it to my companions, and so we returned
laden to London; and thus did I vex her for her nigardliness, and although my
Master did well enough suspect me, yet he would only laugh at my Mistress when
she was most passionately angry, and say, she was but rightly served. But at
length my Master had a Son, who when I came first to Prentice was at a
Boarding-School; but in time growing up, his Mother had a great desire to have
him live at home and be a Clerk; for my Masters employment increasing, I gained
moneys, and bought me some fine clothes, and wore a Watch in my Pocket, at all
which she was envious, and desirous that her Son might enjoy what I did, and
therefore Bound he was to his Father, and though this happened three years
after I came, yet such was the injustice that I had done me, that he was not
only placed before me in a Seat, but I was commanded to make clean his Shoes,
and attend him, as if he had not been a Servant. This though I was forced to
comply with, yet I was resolved to be revenged of, and therefore set my wits to
work; I did clean his Shoos, but in the edges, instead of greazing them, I
anointed them with Aqua fortis, and he putting them on, and going to the
further end of London, the Soles of his Shoos fell from the Upper-leathers,
they being so eaten by the Aqua fortis, and he fate at the Coblers-stall whilst
they were Randed together again. He was of so covetous a disposition (like his
Mother) that though he had moneys in his Pocket, yet he would seldom spend any
at the Alehouse, and therefore sat at the Coblers-stall two hours, whilst his
Shoos were made fit for him to walk with, and then he came home, and was
soundly chidden by his Father, my Master, for his staying so long, which
pleased me very well that he should be blamed for that fault whereof he had
been so often guilty. He being of a sneaking peering humor, I could not be
quiet for complaints he made of me, and by his applying himself close to his
busine^s, he would dispatch as much writing as I did, though I could when I
listed, do twice as much in the time, and when he had done, he would be mending
and making his Pens ready against business came in, but I would spoil all his
Pens by cutting one neb of them away somewhat shorter than the other, so that
when he came to write, he had his Pens to mend or new make, and so curious he
was, that his Ink must be in a particular Standish by its self, whereto I would
often put Oil, so that it would not write; and then for his Parchment, he would
choose the best skins, and give me the worst and greasy, but I would in his
absence greaze his Parchment by rubbing it with a Candles end. Many other
inventions I had to hinder and cross him, I found two pair of his Gloves one
time, and bestowed some Cowlich in all the seams on the inside of them, so that
he putting them on, his hands quickly fell to itching* and he to scratching,
till they were all bloody, and so hot, that he was forced to put them in a pail
of water, and then he cut his Gloves in pieces, that he might see what was in
the inside, which was no small pleasure to me. He being a trouble and vexation
to my fellow servants as well as to me, they assisted me in my wageries and
contrivances against him. In his Mothers absence at the Country House, he kept
the key of the Cubbord and Buttery, to hinder us from the better sort of
Victuals, but I soon got another key, and had my full share of every thing, and
when missed any thing, persuaded him, the Rats and Mice bere^t him of it. When
my Mistress came to Town she would have her Lodging in the Chamber over the
Kitching, because she would hear if we sit up after her: It Was a good while er'e
I could think of a way to cause her to remove her Lodging, but understanding
that she could not endure Rats and Mice, I got a great dead Rat, and in the day
time put it into her bed between the sheets, so that she opening her bed to go
into it, and seeing the Rat, was so extremely affrighted, that she immediately
left her Lodging, and went into another Chamber: but she doubting that we would
sit up a nights after she was gone to bed, as indeed we often did, in Company
of her Daughter, who was somewhat better conditioned than her Brother, and had
many Junkets and Collations; she called her Son to watch, and he being willing
to catch us, would come down part of the stairs softly in his shirt to listen;
but we discerning his practice, strewed the stairs with pease, and nointed the
edges with soap, so that one night down he fell backwards, and almost brake his
Rib with the fall, and gave us timely notice to shift away for our selves: his
Mother hearing the noise, coming down her self to help him, was served in the
same kind, I hearing of this, and all being dark, ran in my shirt and Breeches
as if newly awaked, and instead of helping them, went to the stairs and wiped
and rubbed them, and conveyed most of the pease, so that my Master by that time
being likewise up, and having a candle, did not distrust how they had been
served, but helping them up, and I assisted my young Master to go to his Bed,
the next day he concluded the House was haunted by Spirits: By this means we
were rid of his watchings, for after he was once in his Chamber of a night, he
seldom came out again to watch us. But he would commonly stay in the Kitching
till he saw us all going to bed, neither would he permit me to come to the
fire, upon which account we had a bussel, and I gave my Gentleman such a fall,
that caused him to remember it a good while after: but his Mother remembered me
the next morning, for he having acquainted her with the matter, she took upon
her to revenge it, which she did in this manner. I according to custom coming
to the Cistern for water, to water the shop before I swept it, having one
finger of one hand in the hole at the bottom of the bottle, and my the other
being employed in holding the bottle, and being stooping at the Cock of the
Cistern, my Mistress came near me, and there standing by me in a Tub a parcel of
durty clouts wherewith the maids had newly washed down the stairs, she takes
them up and flaps them about my face, so that I looked as durty as a
Chimney-sweeper; and not contented therewith, she jouled my head against the
Cistern: I thereupon standing upright and feeling my self wet, faced her, who
now opening her mouth, made a great noise with her passionate exclamation
against me for abusing her Son; I let her go on in her discourse, and
apprehending a way to be even with her, coming very near her, let my fingger go
from the bottom of the bottle, and holding it over her, it ran all upon her, so
that she then having a great belly soon felt her self too wet through, and then
she would have been at me again, but I showed her a fair pair of heels, and ran
away. Thus was I still even with them both, and my Master would seldom do any
thing but laugh at what I did, taking much notice of my unhappy wit; for let
her and her Son do all they could, I would be sure to have my share of the best
sort of the Victuals; and she was of that dirty humor, that at Christmas when
she made a Feast, and a great deal of good cheer was dressed for her guests, she
would then afford us nothing but a dish of stewed Turnips, Milk, Pottage, or at
the best, a leg of Beef; and though much Victuals were left in Platters, and on
Trenchers, that she bestowed on the Water-bearer or Chair-woman, that they
might report what a brave House she kept, and not a bit was given to us his
Servants, unless she had kept it so long till it was moldy or worse. Once I
remember she promised us some Plumb Pottage, and at the time she made two pots
full, I asking the Maid wherefore so much was made? she informed me, that one
pot full was much better than the other; I being told which was the best, when
my Master and Mistress were at Dinner, got a good basin full of the best, and
set it by for my self, and then mixed the rest, so that we had all alike. But
to lay aside all these fooleries, and now to the purpose, my Master perceiveing
me of a pretty smart wit, and fit for his purpose, he employed me in getting of
a Seal made, the which I did, and it was like unto the Companies, which I told
you was to the writing, upon which we lent 500 l. He did not tell me the use of
it at present, but I soon found it out; for not long after a Deed was made, and
the Seal being put to it, my Master caused one who was his confederate to bring
it to our shop at such a time, as he had a Usurer in his company who wanted
security for Moneys. In comes our Gentleman, and calling my Master aside, asked
him if he could procure 500 l. upon such a Companies Lease; yes replied my
Master, if it be a good one; whereupon the Lease was produced, and the Usurer
being there present, looked on it, and liked it so well, that he agreed to lend
400 l. upon it: This at first would not please the Gentleman, because he
pretended he was to pay 500 l. but the value of the Lease being counted and
reckoned at no more than 600 l. he was contented at my Masters persuasion to
accept of 400 l. upon that security, and my Master promised him to furnish him
with a 100 l. more on his Bond of another person, a Friend of his. Thus this
business was made up, and an Assignment or Mortgage being made of this Lease,
the money was paid, and my Master, as I soon after understood, had 350 l.
thereof, and the Gentleman 50 l. and I was likewise rewarded with Twenty
shillings, which the Gentleman gave me. Thus said the Scrivener, was my Masters
first beginnings in Cheating, which indeed was but small in comparison to those
many great ones which he soon after acted; of which you shall have an account
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XX.
He Discourses of several of his Masters Cheats, whereby he gets his Estate.

WIth this Stock of 350 l. my Master set up all his Knaveries, and being
unwilling to venture it all in one bottom, he let 100 l. of it in small sums to
Housekeepers, which they paid again by the week at least 40 l. per Cent. for
the use of it; for if he lent five pound, they paid it by five shillings per
week, and had but four pound ten shillings for their money, and my Master
making the Bond in another man's name, he had commonly five shillings, and
sometimes ten shillings for Procuration, and sometimes I had a shilling or two:
thus did he dispose of some. Others he lent upon Commerce, which was thus: If
he lent ten pound, he was to have fifteen pound for it on such a day, or the
return of such a ship, which should first happen; and though there was no such
ship in the world came home, yet the time would come, and then it must be paid;
and this being counted an adventure, he could take what interest he pleased, as
it is customary with Merchants to venture upon Bottomrie; that is, on the
bottom or keel of the ship, and then for security of payment of the money,
though the ship should miscarry, they are wont to insure it at the
Insurance-Office; but my Master needed no such charge or trouble for insuring
any ship, for he was sure the day would come, though the ship never did; and
thus did he make forty or fifty pound in the hundred: but he being once bit and
sued in equity, afterward took a more strict course, for he seldom lent any
money thus but he would include in the Condition of the Bond a warrant to
confess a Judgment upon default of payment: and to be sure when the time came,
and the money not paid, he filled his Bond, which was warrant to confess
Judgment, and thereby obtained a Scieri facias, to take execution on body or
goods of the debtor, who little dreamt thereof, and then he seized all the
penalty, to the undoing of some; and he seldom lent unto any, but he had two or
three bound for security, and that he might not be blamed nor sued, he made his
Bonds and Judgments in the name of one who was his Confederate, and was a
Prisoner in the King's Bench, so that when the penalty was recovered, it was to
no purpose to sue him. And by degrees being now in Credit, and having moneys of
other persons to dispose of, he would seldom lend any but upon morgages,
because under the pretense of being paid for writings (which he would be sure
to make large enough) he would sometimes take five pound for procuring a
hundred, and say, though indeed six per Cent was as much as his friend the
Usurer would take, yet he was forced every six months to present him with
somewhat that should be equal to eight pound per Cent, and withal, that he was
at charge not only to employ one at the first to enquire of the Security, but
he was at the charge of a Coach to go to see the Estate, and then he will
reckon so much for his Pains, and so much for loss of Time, and so much for
Writings, and so much for Expenses, and so much for Expedition, and all this
must be deducted out of the money: when the six months came that the money was
due, then he must have the Interest, and so much for Continuation; and this was
a courtesy if he let them go so: but if the borrower came not, and readily at
the time brought the interest and Continuation-money, he had several ways to
bring them in, for suddenly a Declaration of Ejectment was drawn up and
delivered to the Tenant or Tenants in possession of the premises, who being
frighted at the matter, presently goes to the Landlord, who sensible of the
matter, hies him to us. If this will no do, then an Officer is feed to enter an
Action and Arest the borrower, who then is forced to come and comply upon
extraordinary disadvantageous terms; for after much entreaty, my Master may be
persuaded to continue it: the Interest money being paid, as also
Continuation-money, charge of Declarations of Ejectment (for which we will
reckon five or ten shilling paid to an Attorney, though it were done by my
Master, or me by his command) it may be twenty shillings, or forty shillings,
for the Arrest, though it may be not above half a Crown was paid for it; and
then there must be at least twenty shillings, or forty shillings, to my Master
for his pains, and if the borrower be not willing to pay all this charge, then
will my Master ^ee an Attorney in earnest, and proceed upon the Declaration of
Ejectment, and in short time get the possession of the Estate: and thus put the
poor borrower to ten pound charge, and if he refuse to pay this, he shall fair
worse; for although in Equity the Lender of the money can hold the Premises no
longer in his hands than till he is paid his Debt, Interest, and charges out of
the Rent, yet my Master will so order the matter, that the borrower shall never
have the Estate again; for (pretending that the Lender wanted his money, and
was forced to sell the Estate to raise it) he will pass it away to another, a
Confederate, for the bare Money, Interest, and Charges that is due on it, or it
may be, five or ten pound more; and this is all the poor borrower can get in
equity, which will cost him more the recovering than it is worth. Thus have we
often had an Estate worth two hundred pound, for only fifty pound and Interest,
and the poor borrower is forced to be quiet, not having any remedy. When an
Estate is Mortgaged to us, we seldom let it go out of our hands, for if the
money lent be not brought and paid just on the day, than we put the borrower
off till the next six months, refusing to deliver up the Writings, and then it
becomes forfeited, so that we force them to sell it to us, or give
extraordinary Fees, to cause us to release our Interest; especially if we
discover it to be sold to another, we refuse to show the Writings, and so weary
out the borrower with delays and pretenses, etc. But this was but small game,
to what we after played, as I shall presently tell you, for the 350 l. being
all put out in parcels* and though they often returned with profit enough, yet
it was very heard to get 400 l. together to pay the money that was borrowed,
for now it had been lent a year, and the Usurer, though he has never so good
security, yet he loves to see his money sometimes, especially when he deals
with a stranger, as the man was as borrowed it; and though my Master might have
cheated him of his money, yet he was unwilling so to give over, but proceed in
his Trade, which had gained him so much; wherefore my Master upon search and
inquiry, found that the same Company (whose Seal he had Counterfeited) had a
parcel of Land in the Country, not far from London, which they had let to a
wealthy Citizen, who had given over Trading for some years, and now lived in
the Country: my Master getting the particulars of this Land soon makes a Lease,
and with the help of his Counterfeit Seal, makes it an authentic, so that
without much trouble he procures a thousand pound to be lent upon it by another
Usurer who lived private, and the business was ordered, that the Usurer was
well enough contented without seeing the Land: my Master gave his old
Confederate forty pound to personate the borrower, and then he paid in the four
hundred pound that was formerly borrowed, so that only he thereby engaged that
the Usurer to him, who now had so good an opinion of my Master, that he soon
made it up fifteen hundred pound, and desired him to procure him either good
security, or a purchase for it: all which was done in a fair way, to the
Usurers content, and my Masters profit: and thus did our Trade increase, my
Master getting much money, and many a Crown, and half-peice came into my
pocket; for he knowing that I was privy to the first Cheat, did humor me very
much, and took his Son off from abusing me, and caused every body that borrowed
money to give me some gratuity for expedition, so that I had money enough, and
the keeping of all my Masters Cash is committed to my charge: My Master had one
rare contrivance lately, which I will tell you of whilst it is in my mind; and
thus it was, he had a Kinswoman who had long lived with him, and some moneys he
had of hers in his hands, which was a Legacy formerly given her by another.
This Maid being Courted by a Shopkeeper in way of Marriage, the match went
forwards, and was agreed upon on these terms; the Shopkeepers Father was to
give him a hundred pound in money to put him into Stock, and my Master was to
give his Kinswoman fifty pound, this being agreed on, my Master takes the young
man aside, and thus discourses him: Young man, here have I agreed to give fifty
pound with my Kinswoman, which gains you a hundred pound of your Father, now I
having not ready money by me, must borrow this fifty pound, for which you must
be bound with me, and when it becomes due, I will pay it; This I say you must
do without acquainting your Father, and so the business shall be done, and I
pray be a good Husband, etc. The young man soon consented, the marriage was
consummated, and all things went well for a while, but within twelve months the
young couple having run out all, my Masters Kinswoman came again to her Uncle
to acquaint him with their condition, and desire his advice and assistance; my
Master was much troubled at this chance, for he expected the contrary, and
intended to get back the fifty pound for which end he had the young man bound,
that he might be forced to pay the money, when in a condition; but seeing it
was otherwise, he considered the matter, and wished her to send her husband to
him, and be patient, and make no words, and all should be well: her Husband
according to order came, and after several checks past for his ill husbandry,
he asked him if his Father knew any thing of his Condition? no, said the young
man, I have kept it from his knowledge, and he thinks I thrive in the world,
and is glad of it? well them said my Master, you know I gave you fifty pound,
for which you were bound, and indeed it is still unpaid: now if you will be
contented to pay that fifty pound in, I will raise you two hundred pound, so
that you shall have fifty pound more in ready money, and see how good a Husband
you will be. To this the young man gladly consented, and my Master soon after
took an occasion to meet and drink with his Father, and after some other
discourse, they jointly talked of the young man's thriving in the world, and
were both glad of the match and good husbandry: but said my Master, now I think
on it, there is now an opportunity of doing him much good if he had more money,
and therefore you would do well to furnish them; I shall not be backward,
replies the Father, upon a good account, therefore I pray tell me the business:
My Master thereupon told him, that with two hundred pound more he might be
bravely settled and furnished, for the Lease of his House is to be sold, and I
can get it for a hundred pound, and that is a rich pennyworth, and the other
hundred pound, I would have him to lay out in furnishing his shop more
plentifully, than now it is. Truly replied the old man, this would do well: but
I have no money at present, neither if I had should I be willing to part from
any more than a hundred pound at a time; Well for that said my Master, if you
please, I will manage the matter: Thus will I procure two hundred pound for
the young man, nay, and I have so great a love for him, that I will be bound
with him for it, and when it shall be due, you shall only pay one hundred pond
of the money, and your Son the the other: To this the old man after some pause,
and a little consideration consented, the business was done, and and the money
paid. My Master indeed being acquainted with the Landlord of the young man's
House, gained a Lease of it for eighty pound, and made the young man allow a
100 l. and deducting the fifty pound he had formerly given him, he gave him
the other fifty pound. Thus had my Master his fifty pound again, and twenty pound
for his pains in the business. When the money became due, my Masters confederate
the Usurer, in whose name the Bond was made, demanded the money of the young
man, where there was none to be had; and the old man was willng to pay only a
hundred pound of it according to Contract, where shall I have the rest, said
the Usurer? why truly said the old man, if my Son cannot pay you, then let his
wives Uncle, meaning my Master: But course was soon taken otherwise, and my
Master being first and principle in the Bond, made no more ado, but confessed
Judgment, and thereupon Execution was taken out against them all, but only upon
the old man, who was forced to pay all the money. Thus my Master, by being
Principle in the Bond saved himself, regained the fifty pound he had formerly
lent, and gained twenty pound, besides making of Writings, and this, said he,
will serve to help my Kinswoman when I see occasion. I have heard him with good
attention, and considering with my self my own petty Rogueries, and how
inconsiderable they were in comparison of what he had related to me, could not
but burst out into admiration, and told him, that I saw the world was an
absolute cheat: and now I find that saying to be verified which I had often
heard, That the world consisted but of two sorts, Knaves and Fools, and that
the one lived by out-witting and cheating the other; and if there were any
honest men, they were such as only lived a contemplative life, and dealt not in
this world; their whole thoughts being taken up in the Contemplation of
another; Truly, replied the Scrivener, if you had known so much as I of all
sorts of people, (for we deal with people of all qualities and professions) you
would conclude so indeed: and as the poor man's ability will not carry him high
enough to Cheat so much at first, so he attempting it, and being discovered, is
quite lost: but if a Rich man or any who had success in Knavery sets upon it to
get an Estate, it is soon compassed, and the folly and easiness of many honest
borrowers, enriches the Knavish lender. Thus we both concluded, as sufficiently
evidenced by the Examples he had given me: and therefore I desired him to
proceed, which he did in this manner.

CHAP. XXI.
He proceeds in discovering several considerable Cheats of his Masters, whereby
he grows very rich; also some Cheats of his own, and so concludes.

MY Master (continued the Scrivener) being now possessed of a thousand pound in
ready Money, there fell out an opportunity of good advantage, (and I have
observed it, that there is no loss, but profit enough to be gained in keeping
five hundred pound always in a readiness in Cash, especially in our Trade,
where so many offers for sale of Land and Houses are daily made.) The Landlord
of my Masters house was lately dead, and his Son and Heir being a wild blade,
soon spent all the ready money his Father left, and all the Debts he could well
get in; and now to selling of some of his Houses he must go, and my Master
known to be a moneyed man, and a Scrivener, was thought to be the best
Customer: He therefore propounds borrowing of five hundred pound, but my Master
being now possessed of a round sum, and hoping to have a good pennyworth, was
very willing to buy. The young man and some friends were unwilling, and could
not agree upon terms, and my Master at last consents to lend the money,
provided he may have a Mortgage of all that Estate in that place, which
amounted to two hundred pound per annum, which was worth three thousand pound,
and said he, you shall not need to make me an absolute assignment or sale of
it, only a Lease at a Peppercorn a year for one and twenty years: But to
confirm it, and for a collateral security, you must give me a Statute Staple,
to which our young man and his friends consented. The Lease was made, and a
Statute for a thousand pound entered into it, and the money paid and lent for
six months only. The noise of this, and my Masters other Trading, brought him
into great esteem both with lenders and borrowers, so that his Name being up,
he may lie a bed till noon, and yet get money enough. A purchase of Land in the
Country was offered, and my Master bought it for a thousand five hundred pound,
of which he borrowed upon a Lease of part of it. The six months quickly came
about, wherein his young Landlord was to pay the five hundred pound: but
(according to my Masters expectation) he failed, and then it was to be sold, my
Master agreed to give two thousand five hundred pound for it, and so they
struck up a bargain, five hundred he had received before, a thousand pound he
made a shift to borrow upon the Mortgage of the Land he had lately purchased;
(for, though as I told you he had borrowed five hundred pound of the money when
he purchased the Land, and gave a mortgage of part of it for security, yet he
keeping the principal Writings in his hands, concealed that mortgage, and now
borrowed a thousand pound more of it) five hundred pound more he raised in
ready money of his own, which was two thousand pound, and for the other five
hundred pound, the remainder of the two thousand five hundred pound: his young
Landlord took his Bond for the money, not questioning his security for five
hundred pound, that could pay two thousand pound ready money, neither indeed
had he occasion as yet for it. This being concluded, the money being paid, and
writings Sealed, my master would not remember to give up the Statute he had for
a thousand pound, but he had another now for five thousand pound for security
of his bargain, and the young man never so much as desired a Defeazance upon
the Statute, but mark what followed: The youngster in short time, keeping
riotous Company, wasting his body as well as purse, died, and his younger
Brother seized on his Estate that was unspent: and among other things, on my
masters Bond of five hundred pound, and soon after demanded it, though my
master at first was nonplus'd, yet he soon bethougt him of a way how to
discharge and acquit himself of it, and thereupon returned this answer. It is
very true, your Brother and I had much dealing, and I did give him such a Bond,
which I am ready to pay to his Executor, which you tell me you are, provided
you pay me what he likewise owed unto me; why, replied the young man, did he
owe you any moneys? yea, said my Master; and whereas you produce a Bond, which
indeed is a very good specialty, I shall produce somewhat that is higher, and
indeed the highest security that can be given for any Debt, and that is a
Statute Staple: and thereupon he produced one Statute first, that was given for
a thousand pound upon borrowing of the five hundred pound; nay, but said the
young man, I suppose that this was part of the money that was for the purchase
of your dwelling house and others; for that, said my Master, I can show you a
particular Receipt for all the money under his hand and Seal, and also a
general acknowledgment in the Deed of Conveyance: wherefore this money I must
have you pay me first, and afterward I shall talk with you further; what do
you mean by further talk said the young man? why, said my Master, I mean to
have of you all that your Brother owed me, which is much more than you think
for; for he and I had great dealings together for great sums of money than all
this, as I shall further show you; and thereupon he produced the second
Statute, which was for five thousand pound. This demand of my Masters so vexed
the young man, that he departed, and soon began his course at Law against my
Master, but he took a wrong Sow by the Ear, for he finding whereabouts he
intended on his two Statutes, was too quick for this youngster, and gained a
Liberate, which he delivered to the Sheriff, who served it on all the Estate of
the Deceased, so that by this means all that was unspent of the Dead young man's
Estate (amounted in Land to the value of four thousand pound) came to my
Masters hands, and yet he says he is unsatisfied: and the young man the Brother
of the Deceased, cannot help it, for by this means he is bere^t of his Estate
to go to Law: and when money and means is wanting friends are searce; besides,
I know not how he can avoid it, his Brother not having taken a Defeazance, as
he ought to have done. Here was a matter worth playing the Knave for, and would
induce some men to leave off: but my Master had so good success in his
Proceedings, that he is resolved to proceed in them. The money that he borrowed
on all the Mortgages, both counterfeit Leases and others, he soon paid off, and
yet left himself worth above three hundred pound per annum, and money in his
Purse. Thus having a good Estate, and now being full of employment, both for
buying, selling, borrowing, and lending: he always keeps a good Bank of money.
If any purchase of Land come at twelve or thirteen years purchase, he buys it,
because he knows of a Customer that will give fifteen or sixteen. And thus he
will gain five hundred pounds in a weeks time. We lately had one business worth
all the rest, and which has now made him weary of getting money: a Knight
having a Lordship in the Country worth two thousand pound per annum, comes
first to borrow money, and grants a Lease and Statute upon the borrowing of two
thousand pound: this my Master lent himself of his own money, the Knight within
a Month or two being to Marry a Daughter, wants two thousand pound more, which
was likewise promised on the same security: by this time my Master was somewhat
dreined of his ready money, and knowing that the Knight would soon be with him
again, he casts about how to raise more: which thus he does, he borrows 1500 l.
upon a Lease of part of his purchase of his dwelling house and others, and
keeps the grand Writings in his hands; he borrows a thousand pound on his Land
in the Country, and another party he borrows fifteen hundred pound more upon a
Lease of part of his purchase of his dwelling house and others, keeping still
the grand Writings in his hands: and thus having eight thousand pound ready
money, he goes to the Knight, and upon treaty, agrees to give him thirty two
thousand pound for his Estate, which price being concluded on, he borrows two
thousand pound upon his dwelling house and others, and then parts with the
grand Writings, and Covenants that the Estate is free of Encumbrances, though
he had twice Mortgaged it in part: and thus having raised ten thousand pound,
he borrows twelve thousand pound more upon part of the new purchase, and the
Knight is contented to take the the other ten thousand pound in full of the
purchase, at two six months, and only takes my Masters Bond: this was lately
settled and agreed upon, and all Writings made, and I doubt the Knight will
come short of his money; for my Master has so many Statutes which the Knight
never dreams of, having still given them without taking Defeazances, that I
believe he will be cut off from his Debt, and so must the Usurer that lent my
Master the twelve thousand pound upon a mortgage of part of his new Lordship;
for my Master being resolved to make this a piece of wit, and to do his utmost
to cheat them all, did the next day after the Purchase was made, and Writings
sealed, caused us to sit up all Night, and make an absolute Bargain and Sale of
all that his new Purchase to two Friends in trust, for the use of his Children,
so that the Usurer who lent his twelve thousand pounds, had not his Writings of
Assignments sealed till a week or ten days after, and when the time comes for
payment, he may be choused and defeated of all, and my master being master of
an Estate of two thousand pounds per annum, may live and laugh at them all for
their crudelity; for he has so ordered it, that the Law cannot touch the
Estate, it may only reach his Person, and as for that, we know it is but a
King's Bench matter, and there he may live all his life time, and spend like a
Lord, and when he dies, his Debts are paid, and his Estate goes to his
children. But if he has success for two or three more such businesses as this
last, he need not do so, but leave the Cheat to the last cast, and grow
infinitely rich, as I question not but he will.

Thus said our Scrivener, have I given you an account of my masters way to get
money, and I have not been without mine: he would many times permit me to Cheat
a little, because I assisted him, and was privy to his concerns. I have one way
that brings me in twenty or thirty pounds per annum; for all Deeds of Bargain
and Sale are to be Enrolled in six months after the date, either in Chancery,
if it be Land or Houses out of London; or in Guild Hall, if within London, or
the Liberties thereof; and I was once forced to trot to Chancery Lane four or
five times for one Deed, before I could get it done, and when it was done, all
that was to be seen on the Deed* was, Enrolled such a Day and Year in Chancery,
per m^, such a one. I seeing that, learned to write the Hand they use in
Endorsing, and for the future only writ it my self on the backside to show our
Clients, and that was sufficient; for not one in a thousand is searched for,
and this is only done in case the Deed be lost, so that now I have got the
trick on it to write on the backside my self, and put that money the Register
should have, into my own Pocket, and that is a pretty quantity, for an
indifferent Deed comes to twenty shillings at so much per Roll. Forty other
ways have I to get moneys, and indeed, I need not invent ways, for our Trade is
so great for Procuration and Continuation, and such like, that I get money
enough, more than I can well tell how to spend.

I will now conclude, only tell you a Story or two, how I have initiated my
self in this Art of Knavery, for my time being suddenly to expire, I thought it
necessary to try some expedients, how I might live hereafter, when I came to be
for my self; and knowing that my master could not do any thing at first,
without a Confederate, (some body to help and assist him) I procured the like:
We had many indigent persons came to borrow money, some Gentlemen, others
decayed and decaying Citizens, amongst the rest a master of a Ship, who had
made so many broken Voyages, that he could make no more, for he had wearied all
his Friends with holding parts of Ships with him to their great loss; but he
holding to the Proverb, That a Seaman is never broken till his neck is broken,
was resolved to try his Fortune one bout more, and had now with the help of
Friends made a shift to buy an old Barque of near a hundred Tun, in which he
was minded to go to Sea, partly as a man of War, and withal, to bring
prohibited Goods from France. This man was an earnest Suitor to borrow an
hundred pounds upon Bottomry, or any ways, to victual and fit his Ship; I
finding him ingenious, after some conference with him, and he being willing for
any undertaking, we concluded to go half snips in the Voyage, and I would
furnish him with moneys to his content: I soon persuaded an easy Friend of
mine who had more money than wit, to lend our Captain an hundred pounds,
promising him great profit, and indeed he was to have fifty in the hundred for
that Voyage, which was to be finished in two months, and I told him he might
ensure his money at the Ensurance Office, which he did accordingly. Our Captain
being furnished with a hundred pound of the Usurer, I made bold with a hundred
pound more of my masters, which could not soon be missed out of the Cash, and
with this the Ship was so bravely fitted and provided with all Necessaries,
that he was offered Fraights enough. At last he concluded with one to bring
over some rich Goods, and the times being dangerous at Sea, by reason of men of
War at Sea, he ensured five hundred pounds upon the Ship.

The Ensurers knowing this, and that the man who had Ensured was a substantial
Merchant, mistrusted nothing; but likewise ensured five hundred pounds more to
the Captain, because he had laid out much in fitting the Ship, and did it as he
pretended for satisfaction of the Owners. All things being thus fitted, our
Captain leaving his Policy or Deed of Ensurance with me, put out to Sea,
arrived at his Port, received the Goods on Board, but having a parcel of trusty
Blades with him, and some who had shares in the purchase, he puts the best part
of the Merchandise on Board of a small Barque he had hired for that purpose,
and that being sent ashore to another Port, he soon after ran his Ship ashore
in such a place as he was not likely to come off, and there ^he perished, he
and his companions getting on shore with some small matter of Goods in the
Longboat: He being arrived on shore, soon writ to me how he had sped, and I
being acquainted very well with the Ensurers, persuaded them to pay me the
money he had ensured first, upon some small rebate; and he on the other side
selling the Merchandise on shore, put it into other commodities and sent them
home, and himself came home as a distressed Passenger, and here the Ensurers
paid for all: Such bouts as these they sometimes met with, and that ^o often,
that now adays when a Merchant has ensured, he had need to ensure on the
Ensurers, and some have done so.

When our Captain came home, we privately met and shared our profit, and by
this I gained two hundred pounds for my share, and this was a good beginning;
and though I hazarded to Sea, yet there was le^s hazard than my Master
underwent in his first attempt in Counterfeiting a Companies Seal; for should
he have been discovered, sorrow would have been his sops. I have now and then
had five or ten pound given me at a time for altering a Will, and putting in
more as a Legacy to one than the Testator intended, and this I would venture on
without much hazard, if the Testator were sick to Death. My Master once made a
Will, and instead of another, made himself Executor, and I and one more of the
Confederacy were witnesses to it, by this means he gained near three hundred
pound.

I have oftentimes had a Piece or two given me to make Writings in favor of
one more than another; for in a Lease, if Rent reserved be 100 l. per annum,
and there be no Covenant for payment of the Rent, when either of the parties
die, if any Rent be behind due to the Lessee, it cannot be recovered by the
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns; and it has been usual in all ancient
Leases, to leave that Covenant out as needless, but now people are grown wiser
by Experience.

In Arbitration between parties, there is much cunning and knavery to be used,
in drawing up an Award or final End; for the Scrivener, if he be a Friend to,
or favor either of the Parties, shall do it so as that it shall be void, or
not authentic, or not obliging to one of the parties, and yet the Arbitrators
who are commonly honest harmless men, think they have done their business, when
as they have only made work for Lawyers.

In Counter-Bonds there may be much partiality used as also in Letters of
Attorney, only putting in his use, for my use, entitles the Attorney to receive
all to his own use without any account; and such a thing as this is often slipped
over, or not understood, and many a good Piece and half-piece comes into our
Pockets in a year for these actions.

It was like to go very hard with one of my Master^ acquaintance not long
since, for he being skilled in counterfeiting of Hands, did very Artificially
counterfeit a Citizens hand (with whom he had some small dealing) to a Bond of
400 l. to pay 200 l. with Interest at a day, and when the time came he asked
him before some company to pay him that money that he then owed him: Yes, said
the Citizen, I shall do it next week, meaning a small sum which he did
directly owe him, and did then pay him, but the other then telling him of his
Bond of 400 l. and the Citizen directly denying of it, a Suit was commenced,
and the Trial was had at the King's Bench Bar in Westminster Hall, where the
Innocent Citizen (seeing the confidence of the Witnesses, and indeed his own
hand, as he supposed, to the Bond, which he could not deny, but it was so, or
very like) and having nothing to say, in a passion cried out in open Court, to
desire God to revenge his Cause, for he was utterly and absolutely wronged.
This being so solemnly protested, made not only the Judge, but the Jury a
little more inquisitive into the matter than ordinary, and called for some
papers to compare the hand with other of his handwriting, but no difference
could be found therein. The Bond thus passing about to every one of the Jury,
one of them viewing the Bond more narrowly than ordinary, craved leave of the
Judge to be discharged of his place as a Jury-man, and to be admitted and sworn
as a Witness; for my Lord, said he, I can say somewhat to the matter. This his
request was assented to, and he being sworn, began in this manner, My Lord,
this Bond here in Court is pretended to be made, sealed, and delivered nine
months since, when, my Lord, this Paper whereon it is written, has not been in
England above four months. How do you know that? said my Lord. The Jury-man
replied, My Lord, I am a Stationer or Paper-seller, and to all Paper there are
several Marks, whereby we know and distinguish them; As Pot, Pillar, Crown,
Cardinals-Armes, etc. And my Lord, this being such a sort of Paper, was made by
a young Man in France, whose mark is here, and none of it came over till within
these four Months. At this the Judge was satisfied, all people wondered, the
Defendant rejoiced, and the Plaintiff with his Swearers, were forced to sneak
out of the Court, and could not be presently heard of.

I once was called to make a Will, and the party lying speechless, another
there present dictated to me, telling me, that the Sick-man he was sure would
consent to what he said, which I believing, proceeded and finished the Will,
but when I came to have him sign it, I saw that he was dead: well, said the
party that dictated, if you will be ruled by me, this Will shall stand, and yet
no body forswear themselves, and said he to me, you shall have a good reward
for your consent; whereupon, says he, read the Will, so I did: well, says he,
you see the party does not at all contradict what is here written, and now he
shall set his Hand and Seal thereto, which he did by guiding the dead man's
hand: now, says he, if you be questioned, you may safely swear that you read
the Will to him, and he consented, or at leastwise did not contradict, and that
you saw him with his own hand, Sign, Seal, and deliver the same. Well Sir, said
I, if you are content, I am, and thereupon he gave me the promised reward, I
subscribed as Witness, and left him, who soon after by virtue of this Will,
possessed himself of the Estate. I had seen this trick of putting a Dead man's
hand to Writings, done two or three times before, and so this was no new thing,
and would not contradict any thing that was to turn to my profit.

I could tell you thousands of these Cheats, and indeed, as one said, there is
more mischief done with a dash of the Pen, than with any thing else in the way
of Knavery and Cheating. Thus did our Scrivener conclude his Discourse, and we
calling for another Pint of Wine and a Faggot, drank and warmed our selves, and
so for that time parted.

CHAP. XXII.
The Booksellers Prentice gives an account of his Masters first Tricks in
Cheating, by Printing Books that were other men's Copies.

AFter this Conference with the Scrivener, I went home, and as he told me, my
^aying to my Master, that I had been with him, was sufficient, so I found it;
for I was asked no more questions, but went to Bed, and there did I recollect
to my self, all that he had that evening told me: and though I could not
perfectly remember the several terms of Art he used, as Judgment, Execution,
Scire facias, Statute, Procuration, and Continuation, etc. Yet I was sensible
of their meaning, and did very much wonder, how any man could sleep being
guilty of so many Crimes as he and his Master were; yet I found that they slept
the better, or at leastwise fared the better by reason of their great wealth;
and then did I compare my forepast life to what I had heard of them, and it was
not worth mentioning; so that from that time, I had a more charitable opinion
for my self than formerly, and since I had so good success with my Scrivener, I
was resolved to be a little more intimate with the rest of the Society,
especially the Bookseller, that I might know how he gained his Money, and the
next day I had my desire, for meeting him abroad, we went to an Alehouse, and
there did I discover my yesterdays actions with the Scrivener, and thereby
induced him to make me this following Discourse.

Truly Brother, (for so we called one another) you have told me wonders, though
so admirable, that I could not have thought so much crafty knavery could have
been committed by any man breathing, though I did believe that there was more
than I understood, having always heard that it was a dangerous thing to squeeze
Wax, and that Scriveners in general were cunning fellows, but that any man out
of nothing should by tricks and subtle contrivances, gain to himself so great
an Estate, and yet not run into the compass of the Law, but now I see the
Proverbs verified, Nothing venture, nothing have, and that a blot is no blot
till it be hit, and give a man luck and throw him into the Sea. And although I
have thought my Master a man cunning and crafty enough, and did believe that he
who deals in Books could not be outwitted, yet I see that a piece of Parchment
with a Seal to it, is better than a great many Books, nay, then a whole
Impression* but that I may give you some satisfaction in what you desire, I
shall proceed in my Discourse, and though I cannot tell you so many, nor so
profitable contrivances as you have related to me, yet those of our calling
deserve not to go much behind, and we do our utmost good will to cheat, though
it turns not to so good an account.

My Master when I came to Prentice, had but a small stock of Books, and those
were all in his Shop, with which, together with some Paper, Parchment, Pens,
and such like Stationers ware, he made a shift to pick up an indifferent
livelihood; but he being of a reaching brain, and seeing there were very rich
people, such as gained great Estates, and lived bravely of the same Trade, he
made it his business to enquire into their way: the most sorts of Books that we
sold were Testaments, Psalters, Grammers, Accidences, and such Books as we call
Privileged ware, and indeed were Printed for the Company in general, and to be
had of some of the Stock-keepers, or Masters of the Company, or at the Hall,
and though our profit in selling these sorts of Books was but small, as not
above two pence in the shilling, yet it was a certain commodity, and the sale
sure; whereas other Books, either of Divinity, History, etc. were not so
certain, though more profitable, as commonly bringing four pence in the
shilling profit, and thus did we continue buying Books of other Booksellers, as
we were asked for them, and had occasion; my Master commonly keeping to one
man, because he could there be trusted and furnished with any Book he wanted,
it fortuned that a new Book being Printed, a small thing of about four or five
sheets of paper; it sold so well, that my Master went often for them to his
wonted place; one time they had none of them left, but desiring my Master to
stay, they would send for some, which my Master did, but the Messenger came
back without any, and brought word that he should not have any more of them
upon account or exchange, for he now held them at ready Money, and that he must
have, or he would part from none; well then, said my Master, I will go thither
and buy some my self, no, said the Master of the Shop, you shall not need, I Will
send for some this once with ready Money, and you shall have them cheaper of
me, then of him, and so h^ did, and he received them, and told me, that if he
wanted any more, he could be very well furnished with them within three or four
days, and the other had been better not to have served him so; but the Book
selling very well, all my Masters were gone that night, and I went my self to
the Bookseller who Printed them for some, the which I had; but the next day I
went again, he had none, and told me, that I could not have any in a weeks
time. I acquainted my Master herewith, who being called upon for some of them,
went to his old place to see if they had any, they told him they had none at
present, but to morrow he might have what number he pleased; accordingly the
next day I went, and brought fifty of them with me; and then my Master
(beginning to suspect that which he afterward found out) sent me to the
Booksellers who Printed them, and he had none, wherefore he then concluded,
that the Bookseller with whom he was wont to deal, had Printed them, though
they were none of his Copy, at which he wondered; for the greater sort of
Booksellers did use to inform us, that it was a most heinous and unlawful thing
to Print another man's Copy, so that I think, this was the first time that my
Master discovered this Mystery, for the Book continuing to sell, we sold in our
Shop above five hundred of them; so that my Master beginning to consider with
himself, reckoned that he had paid to his Dealer above five pounds for these
Pamplets, and yet got very well by them too: wherefore, not long after coming
into the company of a Printer, he asked what it would cost to Print 2000 of a
Book of five sheets of Paper, the Printer replied, 10 pound: by this my Master
guessed that his Dealer had gained half in half by him, for he had paid for 500
half what 2000 would cost. My Master holding some fu^ther discourse with this
Printer over a Pot of Ale, he told him, that he did work for such a man,
nameing the Bookseller with whom my Master dealt, and ^ai^h he, I lately did
two sheets for him of a Book he gained well by, for I Printed 5000 for my
share; so that at length, after conference together, they concluded, it was the
same Book my Master sold so many of, and that he had Printed it in three or
four places for expedition, and that he could not gain less than 30 l. by
Printing it: I but says my Master, how will he do to answer it to the other man
whose Copy it was? For that, said the Printer, he will do well eenough, for the
other is but a young man, and light upon his Copy by chance; and though the Law
forbids such doings, as the Printing one another Copies, yet the great ones,
commonly devour and eat up the little ones, and will venture on it being but a
small thing; and it may be this young man is indebted to the other: and indeed
it is a usual thing, and we do such Jobs very frequently, especially for the
Grand ones of the Company. But how comes it, said my Master, that some or other
do not Print their Copies, as Testaments, Psalters, etc. As for that, said the
Printer, it is very dangerous, for if they were taken, it belonging to the
whole Company, they would be sure to seize on it, and Sue the party so
offending; besides, the Books are too big for every one to venture on, and will
lie too long in hand a doing; but sometimes such things are done, but in
another way, as I can tell. Thus ended my Master and the Printer their
Discourse of this matter, and my Master desired the Printer to call on him
sometimes, and he would drink with him, and it may be have some employment for
him, and thus they parted. My Master now understanding thus much of his Trade,
more than formerly, was resolved it should not be long ere he were doing
somewhat: thus pondering in his mind, he could not tell what design to begin
with, for we sold little but Privileged Ware, and those it was dangerous
meddling with, neither would my Masters Stock reach to any thing considerable;
at last resolving to play at small game rather than stand out, he bethought
himself, and resolved to Print the A B C, a little Child's book of a sheet of
paper: he knew not then what Printer to entrust, for he durst not make use of
the former Printer, lest he should acquaint his Dealer; but it was not long ere
he light upon one fit for his purpose, and to work he went, my Master sending
in Paper, and so they were Printed, delivered, and paid for, but when my Master
had them, he knew not how to dispose of them, lest he should be caught; but
that he might have the better pretense, he went and bought 300 of them of his
Dealer, and so laying them by, sold his own, and being acquainted with a
Primer-binder, he got him to exchange with him for Primers, and such like small
books, he was rid of most of them to his great profit, for he gained, as I have
heard him say, above five pounds by that job, which was a great deal of Money,
and by this means his Shop was better furnished with small books and paper, and
now he had good credit with the Paper-Merchant, which before he could not have.
Not long after, the Printer who Printed the A B C, came to him and acquainted
him, that if he would venture a matter of ten pounds, he might be concerned in
printing of a book that would turn to a very good account, and it may be get
twenty pound by the bargain: he having had such good suc^ess in the last,
ventures upon this: it was a Ser^on that then sold very well, and he had
another partner, and my Master having some money by him, and ^re^ty good credit
at the Paper-Merchants, he found paper, and the other paid for printing, and at
two places it was done in a week; my Master putting them ou^ in London to the
Mercuries and others at on^ ^enn^ a piece less than the ordinary rate, and his
par^^^^ dealing with Country-Chapmen, sent good store awa^ into the Country,
and thus, though this was another man's Copy, they sold all their books in a
sh^rt time, and gained 25 l. a pei^e. This was a goo^ ^eginn^ng, said I to the
Bookseller, and I did not thin^ (...) trade had been so profitable* but now I
belie^^ that these courses being prosecuted; a considera^^^ ^state may be
gained in a short time: that you shall soon hear, replied he: but the discourse
being som^^hat long, I shall for the present end, and prosecute the rest in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. XXIII.
He proceeds in the Discovery of his Masters ways in cheating, in preferring
some Copies, and other ways of getting Copies.

MY Master having now had some experience in this way of Printing, was resolved
to play above board, and get some Copy or Copies to Print, that he might own,
which in short time he did, and glad was he to see his name in Print, supposing
himself now to be somebody: but these things did him but little good, and sold
but easily, he not having the way of preferring books, and sending them to some
Country Chapmen, and the rest of the booksellers, who endeavor to crush any
beginner (and will not sell his books, unless they may have them at their own
rate) would not sell any of them for him; and besides, now he gave Money for
his Copies, the other costing him nothing: and though a book be never so good,
they will not sell with some men, for the others will undervalue and spoil it:
as for example, If my Master had Printed at that time the best book of
Surgery, Husbandry, Cookery, or the like in the World, and though the book
had been famous enough, so that every one desired it, and if asked at any
booksellers shop for it, they would have said to their customers, Truly Sir,
There is such a book, but in regard it is a foolli^h idle thing, and of no
weight, I have not any of them, I will not trouble my shop with them; but Sir,
here is another of the same Subject, that is much better, and in great esteem
with ingenious and knowing men: If the Customer replies be would have only that
book and no other for that it was recommended to him for an ingenious well-writ
piece, then will he reply, Truly Sir, I never heard any of your judgment
before, till now I was never asked for them; but sin^e you speak so well of it,
I will procure you one: and then it may be, for all this Discourse, he will
show you one, as if left by chance, or else send to his Neighbour-bookseller
for one. Thus will he disparage other men's books, and prize his own, and many
times put off some of his own, the buyer being so civil as to believe him: and
this is a general Maxim, That they will not offer, or prefer a book of any
man's printing except their own, unless they have it either in exchange, or at a
low rate; and this is the cause that their is some books considerable, and good
as any in England, that did not sell at first for little better than wast
Paper, till some of the Grand ones of the Company get them all into their
hands, and then they sell for three times the price they did. But to leave this
Discourse and proceed, my Master having now printed two or three things, did
look upon himself as some body; and though he had not such good success in his
last undertakings as before yet he made a shift to get what they cost him for
paper and print, and had many of them still by him to sell when he would, or
exchange; but he having but two or three sorts of books, could not do much good
upon that: he seeing this, and observing what books sold best, it being at the
beginning of these late Wars, found that factious Sermons, and such like things
would do the business; he thereupon bestirs himself, and gets acquainied with
most of the factious Priests about Town, by often hearing them and frequenting
their Companies, and having learned to write shorthand, took notes of their
Sermons, which he Collected together, and now and then he would get them to
revise one of them, and print it; by this means spending much time and money
amongst them, he grew very intimate, and was become the general publisher of
most of their Sermons and Controversies. This was that which brought him great
gain, in a short time he could vie with the best, what he sold not for money, he
exchanged for books: and now he could command any book in all the Company
without money, upon account, as is the Custom. His Shop being well furnished,
he gets a Ware House, where he bestowed his books in quires; and being thus
furnished, he was first spoken to by some Country booksellers, and then writ to
by them and others, for several books, so that any thing that he printed he
could sell off well enongh; for having good hap to print some very good selling
books, they helped away the other that were not so good, and still were thrust
into the parcel amongst the rest: and now having some good Authors, he would
not accept of every one; and as he formerly had fought for, and courted Authors
to write books for him, now they (knowing his way of preferring and selling of
books) followed, and courted him to print their books. If a stranger came with
a Copy to him, though never so good, he had books enough already; but however,
if they would give him so much money, he would do it, and they should have two
or three, or six books for themselves and friends: many a one did he thus
persuade out of their money, being desirous to be in Print. If he had a desire
to have any thing writ in History, Poetry, or any other Science or Faculty, he
had his several Authors, who for a glass of Wine, and now and then a meals Meat
and half a Crown, were his humble servants; having no other hire but that, and
six or twelve of their books, which they presented to friends or persons of
Quality; nay, and when they have had success, if they wanted any more books,
they must pay for them: further I have known some of our Trade, that when the
poor Author has written a book, and being acquainted with some Person or
Persons of Quality whereto he Dedicates and presents it, the Bookseller will
go snips and have half shares of what is so given him. M^ Master being now
gotten to the height of his Trade, was soon called to be one of the Livery of
his Company, which though it be somewhat chargeable at first, yet it soon
brings in profit, there being many conveniences therein: for they have Liberty
to put a sum of money into the public Stock, and so great is their profit,
that they have seldom less than twenty per cent, and then, when they come to be
Stock-keeper or Warden, they have the disposing of the Stock-books, such as are
Testaments, Psalters, etc. and putting them out to print, they often print so
many over numbers, that shall serve them as long as they live. In particular,
there is no Trade that I ever heard of, that gets so much by their Commodity;
for whatever we print, if it sells, we get eight pence in the shilling: and for
those that deal with Country Chapmen, they put off the bad well enough at one
time or at another; and if they are very bad, then a new Title is printed as if
it were a new book; and what with this and changing, they march off in time.

There was one Preacher in London that my Master was much respective to, for he
had gained much money by Printing several of his Books (and though my Master in
outward appearance seems a Saint, yet he has his freaks, and will be merry
with his friends, and be profane enough.) One Sunday my Master having been
rambling in the fields, entered the City in the Afternoon just as Sermon was
done, and seeing this Parson going before him, he stepped forwards, and
overtaking him, salutes him thus, Sir, I am glad to see you so well, indeed Sir
you have this day taken a great deal of pains, and we are all beholding to you
for your Soul-saving Sermon: how say you, said the Parson, what do you mean?
Why Sir, I thank you for your Sermon you Preached this Afternoon: Nay, now Sir,
said the Parson, I see you are mistaken, for I have not Preached this day, my
Master hearing this, was wonderfully surprised, not knowing what to say, but
left the Parson, and came home discontented at his Error. We have several
Country-Chapmen, some whereof owed my Master considerable sums of money, he took
occasion to go into the Country, and to be sure, he would make it worth his
Journey, for at every considerable Town he would buy some books, and sell them
at the next, or send them up to London, and sometimes whole Libraries; and he
did take order with all his Chapmen, to acquaint him with all Libraries or
parcels of books that were to be sold, which if worth the buying, he would
have. He would also frequent the Schools, and by drinking with the
Schoolmasters, and discoursing of books and learned men, he would get their
custom to serve them with School books. There was one famous Country-Parson,
whom he much desired to be acquainted with, and to him he came, telling him he
was troubled in mind, and desired him to satisfy him in a case of Conscience,
the which he did; and then for his satisfaction and to oblige him, he prayed
and courted him to see him when he came to London, the which he did, and all
this was to get the Printing of his books. If a Customer comes into our Shop to
buy a book, he has such ways of preferring and recommending of it, that they
seldom go and not buy, for he will open the book, and if it be Divinity, show
them one place or another, out of which he will preach to them, and tell them,
that very saying or discourse is worth all the money in the world, and if they
do not like it when they have read it over, he will take it again: and so many
of our Trade will promise, but you shall hardly ever get your money again; you
may by chance get them to exchange it for some other book, which they will the
more readily do, if there be money stirring in the case. My Master having had a
book written for him by a Poet, the Author (not having the wit to make his
bargain, and know what he should have before hand) when he had finished it,
desired payment for his pains: Nay, said my Master, you ought rather to pay me
for Printing of it, and making you famous in Print. Well then, said the Author,
if you will not give me money, I hope you will give me some books. How, said my
Master, give you books, what will you have me forswear my Trade, and be a
book-giver? I am a bookseller, and to you I will sell them as soon as to
another, if you will give me money, paper and Print costs money, and this was
all the Author could have for his pains. My Master is now one of the Grandees
of the Company, and that besides the ordinary way gets him something. Not long
since, he and others went a searching, and finding an Impression of unlicensed
books, seized them, but instead of suppressing and turning them to wast paper,
they divided the greatest part of them amongst themselves, and immediately my
Master sent some of them away to all his Chapmen, and the rest we sold in the
Shop. It so fell out lately, that a book being to be Printed, my Master
repaired to the Author to get the Copy, but another of the same Trade had been
there before, to whom it was in part promised; but however, (out of respect to
my Master) the other being sent for, it was agreed that they should have the
Printing of it between them, whereupon one Printer was employed by them both to
do the work. My Master soon after sent for the Printer, and tells him, You must
do me a kindness: Yes Sir, said the Printer. It is this, said my Master, I am
to give away to the Author some books, wherefore I would have you to Print 200
for me above the number, and do not tell my Partner, and I will pay you: Yes,
said the Printer, and so he did, and was paid for them accordingly. But the
Printer seeing the knavery of his Imployers, (for the other had been with him,
and engaged him to Print the same number of 200 over, pretending some private
use he had for them) he likewise Printed 400 over for his own use, and
publicly sold them; and neither of them could or would complain of him to the
other, because they knew themselves guilty of the same crime.

One of the greatest pieces of profit the whole Company has, is the Printing
of Almanacks, for by that, I believe they clear above 1000 l. per annum: but a
knavish Printer lately outwitted them, for he Printed a great number of
Almanacks, and though he Printed but two sorts, yet they served for all the
other sorts, only altering the Title page at the beginning, and the last sheet
which we call the Prog, or Prognostication; and these Almanacks he affording
cheaper than ordinary, as indeed well he might, he sold off a good number of
them, which was to his gain, and their great hindrance; but he is lately
discovered, and how they will deal with him I know not.

In the late times of Liberty, when every one Printed what they pleased, if one
Bookseller Printed a book that sold, another would get it Printed in a lesser
Character, and so the Book being less in bulk, though the same in matter, would
sell it for a great deal less price, and so undersel one another: and of late
there has been hardly a good book, but it is Epitomized, and for the most part
spoiled, only for a little gain: so that few books that are good, are now
printed, only Collections and patch^s out of several Books; and Booksellers
employing the meaner sort of Authors in spoiling another Copies by such
Epitomies.

A young man being lately to set up, was a suitor to my Master to speak to the
Company to lend him 5 l. for a certain time without interest, as is customary:
for there are several sums of money left the Company so to be disposed of, for
the benefit of young beginners. My Master knowing his power in general,
particularly promised to effect his disires, provided that the young man would
agree to lay out his money when received with him: telling him, he would use
him well therein: but whether he did or no, you may guess, for he kept not open
shop above six months before he broke, and is now gone ^or a Soldier, and the
Company in general likely to loose the Money. This replied, I, is one of the
worst acts I have heard of, if it were intentionally done, for it is an abuse
of the Donors will; but I see it not material with some men, if they get money,
how they come by it: but I pray, let me hear the rest of your Story. That you
shall, said the Bookseller, but first let us drink; which he having done, and I
pledged, he proceeded, as you may hear in this following Chapter.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Booksellers Prentice having discovered his Masters way of Cheating, now
discovers his own.

THus said the Bookseller, have I given you a summary account of the most part
of my Masters dealing, and the main way how he gained his Estate; for at this
time he has a Shop very well furnished with all sorts of bound Books, and two
or three Warehouses full of Books in Quires: he has above 1000 l. owing him
by Country-Chapmen; some Estate he has in Land and Houses, and a very good
Stock in the Hall, and all this is acquired in six years time out of nothing;
and in this account of my Masters dealing, I have acquainted you with the
greatest mysteries of our Trade: but, said I to him, I must confess you have
told me those things I was not only ignorant of, but what I could not have
believed could have been done, and so great an Estate could have been gained by
the Bookselling Trade, especially from so small a beginning as an A B C: but
all this while the mystery is not disclosed; for though you have told me how
your Master gets money, yet I hear nothing of your gains, neither indeed can I
as yet conjecture how you should be furnished with money; for I suppose you
keep an account of what you receive and pay, and that your Master takes care to
look into his accounts, that no great matter can be gained that way. It Is very
true, replied the Bookseller, he does so; and as he is of a false knavish
temper himself, so he is suspicious of me, and very vigilant and watchful over
me: but do you think, that I who have observed all his ways and crafty dealing,
cannot find a way to be even with him, and put money into my own pocket? and
indeed he does allow of my knavery and craftiness in overreaching of others;
for he in general is accounted the fittest servant of our Trade, that can
out-wit and overreach his brother bookseller; for it is not so much our keeping
Shop, and selling a few Books to Scholars, Parsons, Gentlemen, nor sending to
Country-Chapmen, for in that we use a constant price, and there is not much wit
or craft to be used therein; but the craftiest part of our pofession consistest
in making an Exchange note with other Booksellers to the best advantage; and
there is our greatest prize: for if any of our Chapmen send to us for Books,
such as we do not print, and such as we are not at present furnished withal,
then away we go to that Bookseller who is best furnished with them, and desire
him to make a Note with him, which he (being desirous to sort himself with some
of our Books) willingly consents to; then do we commonly pretend least use for
those Books we most want, otherwise we should be sure to go without them,
unless we took many of other sorts, that were little better then wast paper;
and so we, by telling our brother Bookseller that of such a Book they are
almost gone, and the like, we put off the greatest number of our worst Books,
and the fewest of our best; and being indifferent of taking any quantity of
those we most need, we commonly have most put upon us; and so are furnished
with what we desire: and in this way of exchanging Books for Books, we have the
most occasion of exercising our wits, and many times receive commendations from
our Masters for so doing; and when we meet with one another, the busine^s being
over, triumph over those we have thus outwitted.

This business of Exchanging brings us Prentices acquainted with each other
more then any thing else, for that this matter is commonly left to our
management; and on this acquaintance depends the greatest part of our profit:
for though we can sometimes when we take money in the Shop put up half a Crown
or a Crown for a Book that our Master knows not of, yet that is but seldom,
and little Money is given us, unless it be by the better sort of Customers,
whose books we carry home, and then perhaps we may have a shilling or two
bestowed on us; but this is nothing in respect of our other profit, which I
shall now tell you of.

We trading for a great deal to Chapmen into the Country, do Print much, and
sometimes one Book is printed very often, and a number of 25 or 50 cannot be so
discovered: sometimes we are in fee with the Printer, procure him to print such
a number over for us; which he consents to, that he may do as many for himself:
and then for the manner of our selling of them, it is by Combination,
Con^ederacy, and Correspondency, which some of us Apprentices have with each
other; ^or we have our Warehouse as well as our Master, and are furnished with
much variety; every one of the Combination bringing some quantity to this joint
Stock, of what his Master printeth; and then as occasion serves, we furnish
each other: but the chiefest way of making money of these, is by three or four
young Booksellers, who being newly set up, do buy them of us, it may be two
pence in the shilling cheaper then they can buy them of our Masters: we have
ready Money, or at furthest when they have sold them; and to this end we have
commonly one of these Booksellers in every considerable place of Trading about
Town, and sometimes we employ a rambling-Bookseller to go a Birding, and offer
them at places, and oftentimes our Masters buy some of their own Books of this
Ubiquitarian-Bookseller; and one or two being entrusted with management of the
Stock gives account to all the rest; and so we divide the profit: at other
times we being employed by our Masters to get in Books for our Country Chapmen,
we inform them that the Book being out of print, we cannot have it without
ready money, and then we being ordered to get them, (for our Customers must be
served) we have them out of our own Stock, and put the ready money into our
Pockets. Sometimes I have gotten forty or fifty shillings by being partners
with one of the young Booksellers in Printing a Pamphlet; and if it be an
unlicensed thing, we sell them privately to Customers in the Shop; if a
factious thing, we have our factious Customers; if obscene or wanton, we
accordingly are provided with those that buy them: and thus with these ways,
and some others, which are too long to relate at this time, I can make a shift
to spend forty or fifty pound a year, to keep my suit of private Clothes, and
to allow my Wench eight shillings a week, to whom I constantly pay that
Portion; and I think my share of the Stock at present may amount to forty
pound. And thus you see, that though so many thousands go through the
Scriveners hands, and so few through mine, yet I can make a shift to get some
Money out of our Paper, as well as he out of his Parchment; and I doubt not,
but when I come out of my time, to do as well as the best of our Trade; for
having learnt so much in this Art, I question not but I shall put it in
Practice to my advantage.

Thus did he put an end to his Discourse; and drinking a Pot or two more of
Beer, having had some other merry discourse about the Scriveners Wench, and
such like other matters, we parted; he, to go meet with some of his brother
Booksellers, to take account of their private Stock; and I, to my Masters about
my ordinary Employments, still ruminating in my mind of all the passages that
these two Blades the Scrivener and Bookseller had related to me; and from
thence did conclude, that I should find all the rest of our Clubbing-Brethren
stored with the same Discourses; and now I meditated on nothing more then how I
might get money enough, for that was the only thing that made crooked things
straight; and if a man have enough of that, he may defy all men. It can make
knees bow, and tongues speak against the native genius of the groaning heart;
it supples more then oil or fomentations, and can stiffen beyond the Summers
Sun, or the Winters white-bearded cold. In this we differ from the ancient
Heathen; they made Jupiter their chief God, and we have crowned Pluto. He is
Master of the Muses, and can buy their Voice; the Graces wait on him, Mercury
is his Messenger, Mars comes to him for pay, Venus is his prostitute; he can
make Vesta break her vow, he can have Bacchus be merry with him, and Ceres
feast him when he lists; he is the sick-mans Aesculapius, and the Pallas of an
empty brain; nor can Cupid cause Love, but by his Golden-headed Arrow. Money is
a general man, and without doubt excellently parted: Petronius describes his
Qualities.

Quisquis habet nummos, secura naviget aura:
Fortunamque suo temperet arbitrio.
Vxorem ducat Danaen, ipsumque licebit
Acrisium jubeat credere quod Danaen:
Carmina componat, declamat, concrepat, omnes
Et peragat Causas, fitque Catone prior.
Iurisconsultus, paret, non paret: habeto;
Atque esto, quicquid Servius aut Labeo
Multo loquar: quidvis nummis praesentibus opta,
Et veni^t: clausum possidet Arca Iovem.
The Mon^ed-man can safely sail all Seas,
And make his fortune as himself shall please:
He can wed Danae, and command that now
Acrisius self that fatal Match allow:
He can declame, chide, censure, Verses write,
And do all things better then Cato might.
He knows the Law, and rules it, has and is
Whole Servius, and what Labeo could possess.
In brief, let rich men wish whatsoere they Love,
'Twil come, they in a locked Chest keep a Jove.
And to conclude, as it commands Gods and Goddesses, so all sorts of men and
women are obedient to him that has the command of this God Money; and therefore
I was resolved to put in for a share of it.

CHAP. XXV.
The Relater with the Scrivener and Bookseller and their Wenches, being merry
in a Tavern, fall out with other Company, and are sent by an Alderman to the
Counter. The Relater in revenge, cheats the Alderman of his Scarlet Gown, which
is converted into Peticoats for the three Wenches.

I Having thus gained an intimate acquaintance with all these my
Brother-Clubbers, did set forth my own good parts; and they having been open
with me in the discovery of their manner of living, and how they furnished
themselves with money even to super^luity, I was as free to them in relating
many actions of my forepassed life; by which means they found me the more fit
for their Society: and I having passed through variety of conditions, as having
been of several Trades, and informing them of several mysterious Cheats which I
had performed in them, they all took a very great liking to me; but there was
none whom I so much affected as the Scrivener and Bookseller, because I ^ound
them the best stored with money; and I often accompanied them to their Wenches,
where we had extraordinary Treatments, and such Company as exceeded all the
rest; for I had my Lass as well as they; and though I paid nothing of the
reckoning, yet my Wench was often as well provided for as theirs; for I
furnished her with Clothes equal to any of them, and then the less money served
their turn. We three being one night at a Tavern with our Wenches, where we
passed a winters evening in their pleasing society, our spirits being raised
with wine, and the harmony of Music joined to our Ladies voices, in which they
all three were very excellent; It happened that their harmony begot a desire in
the people in the next Room to be attentive to our Music: the Scrivener
desiring his Lady to sing a particular new Song alone, she consented thereunto,
and performed it very well, with good applause: one person in the next room,
who had given attention thereto, and had lately been in company with the
Singer, knowing her Voice, was resolved by one means or other to see and drink
with her; and thereupon leaving his Company, he came into our Room, and civilly
asking leave, saluted the Ladies, and took acquaintance with the Scriveners
Mistress: she being somewhat displeased thereat, in short time took occasion to
tell her friend the Scrivener that she was much troubled at this accident, and
desired his favorable interpretation of this action, for she assured him, she
only knew this person as a retainer to the house where she lodged, he coming to
another Lady there, and not to her; and withal, she desired him, if he thought
fit, to affront and chastise him for this his unmannerly intrusion. Her friend
the Scrivener being thus informed by his Lady, called me and the Bookseller on
one side, and acquainted us with the matter; so that we suddenly resolved to
rid our selves of this bold intruder: when we returned to the fire where we
left our unwelcome guest and the women, we found him toying with them and a
little more bold then they or we were willing to permit and allow of; wherefore
we gave him some angry words, which he being a bluff fellow retorted, and we
striving to force him out of the Room, he singgle as he was set upon us all, to
the great affrighment of the Women, who now beginning to squeak out, our noise
occasioned the rest of our guests Companions who were in the next Room to come
into ours, and there seeing their Friend set on by us three, which indeed being
odds, they fell on us to his assistance: many blows were not enterchanged,
before the Master of the house and others (being called by the noise we made,
and the clamours of the women) entered the Room; but all they could do, could
not part us, so eager we were in defending, as we thought, the honor of our
Ladies; so that the Constable was sent for, and we all seized on; but refusing
to be obedient, he forthwith caused us to be conducted to the Justices, who was
an Alderman that lived not far off; we being brought before his Worship, being
as yet hot as well with Wine as anger, could not agree in our story, nor the
occasion of our quarrel; but glad we were when we saw that our Ladies had slipped
away, as indeed it was but time (for had they gone with us, I doubt Bridewel
would have been their Lodging, and they should have had rapping cheer.) They
having thus made their escapes who were the cause of our difference, and we
every one contradicting each other in our Discourses, the Alderman made no more
ado, but sent us all to the Counter, both Plaintiffs and Defendants: by such
time as we were well settled in our Quarters, and had paid our Garnishes, we all
considering the matter, and at length conversing with our Adversaries, put our
quarrelsome business in a fair way to be ended; for the occasion being a Whore,
we all agreed upon one tale to tell the Alderman next morning; when being
brought before him, and he finding then no difference between us, supposing
that it was only a drunken quarrel, was at length persuaded to release us; but
before we went, he forced us to pay our fees, and likewise some money to the
Poor for being drunk: all which we made a shift to do, by borrowing of one
another, and so we were discharged.

Thus was this business overpassed: but though we made a shift to hide it from
our Masters, pretending some of our wonted excu^es, yet the rest of the
Brethren of the Club were accquainted with it, and we were soundly laughed at,
and our wenches applauded for their wit in making their timely escape, or else
it would have fared worse with us as well as them, and our business must have
come to our Masters ears.

This disgrace did stick upon us a great while, for our Companions would often
ask us, when we would go to visit Master Alderman again: wherefore I bethought
my self of a trick how to be revenged of the Alderman, and thereby cause the
Discourse to cease: I often going by the Aldermans house saw him standing at
his door, and he had a common custom every afternoon to stand or sit there
three or four hours together. I waiting my opportunity, went to the Alderman,
and asked if his Maidservant was within: which of them, said he, Nan or Suzan?
Suzan, quoth I: yes, said the Alderman, What is your business with her? May it
please your Worship, said I, I was sent hither to take measure of her for some
new clothes What? then thou art a Tailor, said he; I replied, yes, and so he
sent me in. I being acquainted with the Maids name (and seeing the Alderman
engaged at the door still talking with another Person) asked for Suzan: when
she came to me, I told her, that her Master sent me in to her, and wished me to
ask for his Skarlet Gown, to mend it against a Feasting-day then approaching:
she knowing her Master was at the door and believing my story, went for it (I
in the mean time watching whether the Alderman still continued at the door (for
if I had seen him coming in, I would have my excuses and depart) but as good
luck would have it, the Maid came and gave me the Gown, and went about her
other business: I wrapping it up under my cloak, went again to the door where
Master Alderman was sitting, who asked me whether I had taken measure of his
Maid*; I told him, yes: What already? said he. Yes, and please your Wor^hip:
then thou have made haste, said he; make her Clothes handsome, she is a good
Wench, and make haste, with them too, and let me see that you work well, and
thou may do some work for me, and in time thou ma^st have go^d of the Wench.
I (being troubled with Master Aldermans large discourse) only replied* I shall,
if it please your Worship; and so left him, and so went my way to the next
Alehouse, where I applauded my self for my so happy contrivance, and safe
deliverance from Master Aldermans impertinencies.

After a little stay in this Alehouse, and night comi^g on, I being thus
fraughted with this Cargo, sailed to the Tavern where we used to meet, and the
Gown being wrapped up in a Cloth, I delivered to the Drawer to lay up, and went
up into a Room, where calling for a saggot and pint of Wine. I had not staid
long ere some of our Club came, and in short time all the rest; we fell to
merry-making, and in our jollity some of our Company nosed us with Master
Alderman: well, said I, I suppose that jobb might cost us twenty shillings
apiece, and though master Alderman might put the most part of it into his
pocket; yet how say you, if I can propound away how to be revenged on him? My
two Companions, the Scrivener and the Bookseller, told me, if I could do it,
they would give me twenty shillings apiece; a match, said I, I Will be judged by
the Company: and thereupon I tol^ them the story, and how I had cheated Master
Alderman of his Scarlet-Gown; and to make good my wo^d, caused it to be brought
up, and showed before them: very well pleased was the Scrivener and the
Books^ller, and all the rest amazed at the boldn^ss o^ my adventure, which was
by all ^pplauded for a great piece of wit, and my money was by them accordingly
paid me: then after a cup or two of Wine, consideration was had, what should be
done with the Gown, and how it should be disposed of, for we all knew it was
hazardous and dangerous to dispose of it as it was: so after many propositions
and consultations, it was at length generally agreed on, that I should cut it
in pieces, and out of Master Aldermans Gown I should make three Peticoats,
which should be bestowed upon our three Madona's; and this adjudged very fit
and equitable, that they have endured part of the brunt, should receive the
whole prize: this I assented to; and the Scrivener and Bookseller, in regard
the Gown was mine, gave me each of them twenty shilling apiece more for their
share of the cloth; and also they between them furnished me with a rich Gold and
Silver Lace, to be put upon my Ladies Peticoat, equal and alike to that which
was put on theirs: and this was an end o^ the adventure with Master Alderman,
of whom we never enquired how he and his maid Suzan agreed about the Gown.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Relater and several others of the Clubbing-Prentices assist the Drugster
in putting off of some of his Commodities; he gives them gratuities, and
relates a notable Cheat by his Master put upon an Iron-monger.

IN this manner did we spend our time; and though our Masters gained more
money, and daily increased their Estates, yet we enjoyed the greater pleasure
in each others society: and now we being all acquainted with one another ways,
assisted each other in all things, and there was no want for our selves or
Wenches, who were often at our meetings, and assisted in our mirth.

I remember one evening, a young man, a Drugster, who was one of our Club, told
us that we must all of us assist him in a matter he was about, and he should
not only gain a good opinion of his Master, but we should have a Piece or two
to spend; we hearing there was convenience and profit, agreed together, soon
consented to do our utmost, and therefore desired him to acquaint us with the
matter: he thereupon told us, that his Master had lately bought a parcel of
Drugs of two or three sorts, which did cost him about 1000 l. in hopes of great
gain, for they were at double the price that he would afford his at; but they
being too much for one man's sale, he offered to sell good part of them to some
of our Trade: but they refused to buy, unless they might have them cheaper then
he was willing to afford them, pretending that they had no need of that
Commodity, being sufficiently furnished with the same; although we were very
certain that they could have none of it, there being none to be had in all
London, till of late my Master bought this parcel that came from beyond Sea:
Now my Master being desirous to sell his Commodity, has considered of a way
how to make his Brother-Drugsters come to him, and pray him to sell it to them
at his price; that way is thus:

He has desired me to get some of my acquaintance to go to most of the
Drugsters in and about London, and pretending to be Apothecaries and others
that need those Commodities, to enquire for them, and bespeak quantities
thereof; and then he knows, that not being able of themselves to furnish them,
they will repair to him, and give him his price. Oh! said the Bookseller, have
you learned that trick? I am very well acquainted with this manner of trade,
for we commonly use this slight to sell our Books: for when we have printed a
Book that we doubt will not sell without preferring, and more ado than
ordinary, then we not only Title it upon Posts, put it into News-books, and use
several other ways to make it Famous; but we sometimes send several of our
acquaintance and friends to most Booksellers shops to inquire for this new
book; and they coming so one after another, at length Master Bookseller is
persuaded to buy some of them; nay sometimes, the more to encourage the
Booksellers to buy some quantities, we allow our friends to lay out some moneys
with them, and buy several of them; and so the Bookseller will commonly, if he
sell one or two, buy six or a dozen; and by this means our moneys comes in
again with very great profit. Well, replied the Drugster, this course must we
take with these Drugs, or else they may prove a very Drug to my Master; for he
has served some of our Trade so many tricks already, that they are very
cautious how they deal with him; but this trick of sending friends to ask for a
Commodity he has often used, neither did he learn it of the Bookseller: but
there happened an extraordinary chance sometime since, and from that experience
he has taken this course.

For there was a Person who used to make Syringes, which Chirurgions and others
use to squirt withal in several Distempers; and this man being out of
employment, made a great quantity of them, and laid them by him; but not
knowing how to dispose of them, he bethought him of this way of sending some
friends to inquire for them: and so well did he manage his business that by
employing persons to enquire of Drugsters and Apothecaries for them, he not
only sold all he had made by him, but in less than a quarter of a year, he took
above 200 l. for this Commodity: and this my Master took notice of, and I
suppose made a president of, and now resolves upon the same course to put off
his Drugs; wherefore I desire your utmost assistance herein, and I shall when
you please spend a Piece or two in a Collation. All our Club-fraternity agreed
on this* and promised to be active here: and thus resolving on our next time of
meeting, we parted.

I for my part, the next day accoutring my self in a Country Gentile-garb, went
to several Drugsters, and asked for several Drugs, whose names I had gotten;
but amongst all* I more earnestly desired a good quantity of those that were to
be thus put off, telling them I was a Country Apothecary, and should call three
or ^our days after again, and lay out a considerable sum of money with them. I
having done this for my part, and the rest of our associates having been as
diligent, we meeting three days after together, our Drugster told us that his
Master had sold all his Commodities to very great profit; and therefore, said
he, This collation, and each of you a Crown more to buy Gloves, is my Masters
charge, and he desires you to accept thereof; which we accordingly did, being
glad we had done so good service to him and his Master.

I understanding by this, that there were tricks and cheats in this Trade as
well as others, was desirous to be acquainted with the manner of their Trading;
and he being but a Novice, told me, he could not tell me much of it, but he was
very sensible that there was much knavery in that Mystery, in mixing and
sophisticating their Drugs, and getting the Spirits of some of them away, and
renewing it in others, as served to their profit: and pursued he, I have one
trick whereby my Master gets some Money in a year; ^or it being customary to
give a Pipe of Tobacco to any that comes into the Shop, and desires it, I give
them of that which is very good; and they liking thereof, and the price,
commonly buy of the same, and sometimes a quantity, desiring still it may be of
the same they have tasted; the which I promise to do, and before their Eyes
take it out of the same box: but the knack of it is this, it is for all that a
different and worser sort of Tobacco; for the Tobacco that I gave them as a
taste, is only placed in one corner of the box for that purpose, and so it goes
off, as if it were all the same; and sometimes we put off, a whole Roll of
Tobacco in the same manner: for the out side roll is of good Spanish right, but
all in the inner-part is Mundungoes, not worth a great a Cart-load.

But this is nothing to what way my Master has; and he lately exercised his
wits to a pretty profitable account, and thus it was: My Master among other
sort of Drugs, had bought a quantity of Dragons-bloud, being pieces of wood,
dipped, as is supposed, or rather pretended, in Dragons-bloud; and this is good
Physic, and for other uses: this Commodity not proving very good, my Master
had a great desire to put it off, but could not get any body to buy of it: he
had been not only with Drugsters, but also with some Iron mongers to sell it,
for they use it about their Locks, and other Iron work, to keep them from rust;
but no person was willing to deal with him about it. My Master had a Neigbour
that was an Iron monger, whom he had a great desire to deal withal; but he
being a wary young man, and hearing that my Master was a snap, refused all
dealing with him: and some words passed which displeased my Master, and
therefore he resolved to be avenged; and thereupon having designed his
business, with the help of two Confederates, he thus puts it in execution.

He gave a small quantity of this Dragons-blood to one of his Confederates, who
having full instructions, went to the Iron-Mongers house, and seeing him
standing at the door, asked him if he wanted not some of that commodity,
showing the same to him: No, said the Iron-monger. I was informed, said the
man, that you sometimes deal in it, and was recommended by a friend to come to
you; and if you please to deal with me, I shall use you very kindly. To this
the Iron-monger replied, that he needed not any of it. But, said the other, I
suppose you sell of it to others sometimes, and may therefore do me a courtesy,
and your self too, for I have not a shop to sell it in, and am a stranger;
wherefore, if you please, I shall leave this parcel with you, and you putting
it on your stall may happen on a Customer, which if you do, I can furnish you
with more; and thus you, without laying out any money, may get some profit. The
Iron-monger hearing of this, and conceiving the man to be honest and harmless,
consented to his desire, entertained the condition and the goods, and enquired
further of the price; the man telling him that he understood it was worth three
shillings per pound, but he would willingly take two shillings eight pence,
because he might have profit; and telling him that he would call on him in a
weeks time: and they at this time parted.

And thus the Iron-monger having received the Commodity, put some of it out
every day on his stall, till at length a man coming by, and seeing that to lie
there, and the Master of the Shop at the door, asked him the price thereof; the
Iron-monger told him three shillings per pound. The Customer desired to look
further into it, desiring to know how much he had of it: Truly said the
Iron-monger, I cannot tell, but I suppose, if we agree, I can furnish you with
a good quantity. Why, said the Customer, I will give you two shillings eight
pence per pound for it, if you have 500 lib. of it. Well, said the Iron-monger,
call here a day or two hence, and I will resolve you, and it is like we may
deal together: Thus at present they parted. But he came again the next day, and
the day following, pretending great earnestness to buy the Commodity: in the
mean time the Iron-monger waited and watched narrowly to see and speak with the
man that left it there, but could not meet with him, for he stayed away on
purpose; and this Customer that came to buy, was likewise the other of my
Masters Confederates, and sent by him for that purpose. At length, the
Iron-monger standing at his door, he saw the man that left the Dragons blood
passing by his door, and called to him, and then discoursed seriously with him
about the matter, as, what would be his lowest price, and what quantity he had?
To both these Questions he answered, He would take two ^hillings six pence; and
the quantity he had was ^^0 lib. The Iron-monger hearing this, and resolvi^g
^ow to deal, told him that he thought it was to dea^; but if he would take two
shillings four pence, he thought he might buy all his quantity. To this the
Seller replied, That it was too cheap; but taking all, and paying him ready
money, he would do it. The Iron-monger replied, That ready money was two
months: but, said he, If I deal, you shall have half down at the delivery, and
the other half at three months: to this they both agreed. But the Iron-monger
being cautious, would not at present fully conclude, referring the ending the
Bargain to two days, in the mean time resolving to see if his Customer came
that was to buy; and then enquiring the name and habitation of the Seller, they
parted.

Long had not the Iron-monger waited, but his buying Customer came, and as
earnestly as formerly desired to buy the Commodity; the which now the
Iron-monger agreed to sell at two shillings eight pence per pound, and to be
paid at weighing: and that he might be sure of his Customer, he takes ten
shillings in part of payment, and appoints two days thence to finish the
bargain Thus did the Iron-monger reckon to gain 500 Groats, which is 8 l. 3 s.
4 d. Bes^des, he was resolved to have all ready money, and to pay but half; but
he reckoned without his Host, as I shall presently tell you: the Seller of the
Dragons-blood coming the next day, finished his bargain, delivered his
Commodity, received his money, and took a bill from the Iron-monger for the
moiety of his money to be paid in three months. But now the Iron-monger had the
Commodity, he might go look for a Customer; for he that left the ten shillings
came no more, and the Commodity lay still on his hands; at which he was
fretted, but could not help himself.

My Master having thus managed this affair by these two Confederates, received
the money, and had the Bill assigned to him, giving both his Confederates
something for their pains.

He having thus done the Iron mongers business, was not contented with the
profit alone, but was resolved to vex him; and therefore when he passed by his
shop, he asked him if he would buy any Dragons-^^ood. No, said the other, I can
sell you some. I Will buy, said my Master, but when he saw it, and heard the
price, he told him, No, he could sell him as good as that for 12 d. per pound.
At this the Iron-monger was more vexed; but now not knowing how to help
himself, was forced to rest contented: at length the three months came, and
then my Master was resolved to show all his anger, and vex the Iron-monger
more, and therefore went himself to demand the money that was due: the
Iron-monger answered him, that he owed him none: Whereupon he produced his
bill, and a Letter of Attorney; and then he too late perceived how he had been
served. For my Master told him, that now he would be even with him, for
refusing to deal with h^^, and abusing him. The other said, it was a cheat, and
he would make him bring out the party that bought it, giving him ten shillings
in part of payment. That shall I do quickly, said my Master, but it will be but
small to your gain: and then told him the name of the man, and that he was not
worth a farthing, and a Prisoner in the King's Bench. At this the Iron-monger
being much more vexed then before, told my Master that he would not pay him,
and bid him take his course; the which he did the next morning, and arresting
him, soon brought the case to a trial, and having an absolute bill of payment
of the money, cast the Iron monger; who advising with his Lawyers, went to
Westminster for a Writ of Error, which he gained: but when he came back with
it, thinking to stop Execution, he found that he came too late; for my Master
doubting such business, never left till he served the Execution, so that when
the Poor Iron-monger came back with his Writ of Error, he found the Bailiffs
and my Master in the shop, in possession of his goods; and he being out of
Moneys (...) present was forced to let my Master have all his Dragons-blood
again at twelve pence per pound, and ^o in that and other Commodities paying
his Debt and Charges, and giving each other general Releases (which my Master
earnestly insisted on, and without which my Master would do nothing, the
Iron-monger being in a strait) they made an end of this bargain: and now the
Iron-monger, when he came to a second reckoning of his bargain, sound, that
instead of getting 8 l. 2 s. 4 d. h^ had lost 33 l. 3 s. 4 d. besid^s all his
Cost; and my Master thus having gained (...) commodity* ^old it since to
another for one (...) pence per pound. And this, said the Drug (...) one of my
Mast^^s (...) to g^t money*

This young fellow had taken a great deal of pains to discover every particular
of his Masters late bargain: from what he had related, I concluded the Master
to be a very cunning practitioner in the Mysterious Art of Knavery, and
therefore I was desirous to be acquainted with him; and knowing that he was but
a young man himself, and also desirous of acquaintance, I found no great
difficulty to attain to my desires, which I soon after accomplished, as I shall
relate to you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Relater and the Drugsters Master come acquainted, being concerned in
Trials at Law: their several Cases they relate to each other.

MY Master having much dealing, had many Debts owing him, and he was forced to
sue some persons to get in his moneys; and I having delivered a parcel of
Clothes, was sid p^^u^'d to attend to testify the same in Court, upon a Trial
which my Master was to have with his Debtor. I attended the Court when Trial of
the Cause should be called, several hours; and there did I meet with the young
Drugster, who was waiting upon some such like occasion: we both having leisure,
and his Servant having told him that I principally assisted in putting of his
Drugs, he to gratify me, offered me a Pint of Wine. I accepted his kindness,
and to the Tavern we went, where he again thanked me for the courtesy I had
done him; and then he enquired my business at the Court, I told him, it was
upon a Trial of my Masters, who sued one for money for a suit of Clothes. That
is strange, said he, that any should re^use to pay for work when done. True,
said I, but he pretends there is somewhat more then ordinary in the Case, as
indeed there is, if well understood; and knowing you to be ingenious, I shall
relate it to you. A person had occasion to have a suit of Clothes made, and
would not entrust my Master to buy the Cloth; but having enquired how much
would do the business, my Master told him five ^^rds and a half, to make a Suit
and large co^t The other supposing that five yards would do the business, and
the half yard be saved, bought but five; and bringing it home, desired my
Master to cut it out before him; and if there w^nted any more cloth, it should
be supplied. My Master seeing himself distrusted, was resolved to be even with
his Customer; and to cutting of it out he went: first, he cut out the Dou^let,
and then the Breeches; but instead of one pair of B^eeches, he cut out two
pair, persuading the Customer that it was but one; and when he came to cut out
the coat, there was a great deal of cloth wanting; so that the Gentleman was
forced to buy a yard more of cloth, the which he saw cut out likewise; and
though he was cheated before his face, could not discover it; my Master s^rving
him well enough: for whereas he int^^^^d but to get half a yard of cloth by
him, he now saved a whole one.

The suit was made up, and the Gentleman wore it: but as ^et not being fully
satisfied, coming into Company with another Tailor, he asked how much cloth
might be in that suit and coat. The Tailor replied, Five yards: the Gentleman
said he bought six, and saw it all cut out and put into the clothes. The Tailor
wondering hereat, told him, that he would make hi^ ^ ^uit and coat full as
large as that with five yards. The ^entleman agreed, and more cloth was bought,
^eliv^^ed to the Tailor, and the suit made accordingly (...) ^he Gentleman not
as yet having paid my Master h^^ ^ill, refused to do it, pretending he is
cheated, but n^^ ^nowing how; and this day we are to have a T^yal* and I
question not, but I who am my Masters chief w^^^ss, shall be able to outwit the
other Mast^r-Ta^^or* who is here in Court ready to testify against us How do
you mean to order the matters said the ^^ugster. Truly, said I, in one word I
will make (...) that the Gentleman's six yards of cloth was cut out and m^de up,
in Doublet, Breeches and Coat, as in^e^d it was: but I do not say how many pair
of Breeches; and I suppose, they not suspecting me, will not be curious in
asking the question.

The Drugster was so well pleased in my relation of the story, that he told his
case, which said he is this; I have had some little misfortunes in the world,
and people have lately called on me for money, more then I could well pay at
present; and one person particularly has been so outragiously foolish, as to
say that I was a Bankrupt, and that I would never pay him; now I have brought
my Action against him for slander and defamation, and hope to get so great
damages against him, as he shall be willing to forgive me my debt: and this
will be a good leading Card to muzzle the Mouths of the rest of my Creditors,
who indeed are so civil as to come into Court, and testify in my behalf.

This Case being well managed (said I) may be very considerable with you, and
turn to your profit and credit both. Our Wine and Discourse being ended, we
both went into the Court, where I heard his trial so well managed, as he
recovered 200 l. damage: and my Master, with my evidence, recovered his Debt;
and then threatened to sue the Gentleman for defamation: he hearing thereof, and
seeing how great damages were given to one there present, upon the same
account, presently made his Composition with my Master, and gave him ten pound
to put up the business. My Master gave me 20 s. to spend, which I did in Wine
and good Company; and the Drugster having had this success, was now more
contented then ever, and his credit grew high in the City, so that he was
entrusted with some thousands; but he and I being after that very intimate, I
persuaded him at a convenient time to give me an account of his life and
actions; I having formerly told him of many of mine. We being planted at a
Tavern, and no person to interrupt us, he began as follows.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Drugster in relating hi^ Life, discovers several Cheats which he performed
under the Cloak of religion; as also how he cheated his Masters Sister of her
Mai^^^^-hea^ and E^tate; and several Cheats in Sm^ckling.

THough the whole course of my Life, from my Infancy to this time, has been a
continued piece of Knavery, I having been of many Trades, and most Factious in
Religion, in which I have always been a very great stickler: yet I shall not
give you any account of my minority, omitting all my actions till I came to
about twenty years of age, when I gained some experien^e in the world, and had
learned how to play my Ca^is to the best advantage.

I served an Apprentiship with a Master whose whole Famil^, cons^sting of
himself, Wife, Sister, and four Servan^^, was an absolute Compendium of most
Religious (...) then practiced in England: He himself was a (...) rigid
Presbyterian; his Wife a Ranter; his Si^^^ (...) Anabaptist; three of the
Servants Independ^^^ (...) of several Churches and Persuasions; and I, ^^^ugh
an Independent, being of all Religions, yet (...) non^ at all, that gave them
all the hearing; and w^^h my Master was a Presbyterian, and would ordinarily
accompany him in his long-winded prayers, which being filled with tautologies
and nonsense, he esteemed and often used, believing himself to be assisted with
a Divine Spirit. Many absurdities he committed in his Devotion, as praying for
the Reformation of his Family, and pointing out a time when he should or would
have a return of his Prayers, at which time he would charge Providence with the
fault; he having strictly observed all the Commandments, in Fasting, Praying,
relieving the Brethren, and performing all other Duties which Sir John his
Ghostly father had imposed on him. He would often recount the particular
enormities of his Wife and Family, and how she lay out from him three nights
together in a week, and where she was; and would earnestly pray for, either her
conversion, or confusion. Many other impertinences would he commit, which would
be too tedious to me to recount: but in general, I found his zeal to be a
weakness in his brain, and he was continually led about as Sir John Presbyter
directed.

My Mistress was likewise led about by those of her Gang, which were absolute
Libertines, affording themselve all manner of pleasure, and denying themselves
enjoyment of nothing they could Purchase; and she would pretend Religion in all
her frollicks; for she would say, That no sin was imputed to the Saints; and
indeed it was no sin, unless she her self thought it so. That she, or any other
Sister, might lie with another Brother, was accounted a general maxim amongst
them, especially if they those their time when their Husbands are asleep, which
they termed to be dead, and therefore might then do it without breach of any
Commandment. She would be very costly both in her Apparel and die^s,
alleging, that it was not fit, that the Body which was a sacred Temple,
should be coursly either clothed or fed. I had a great mind to have been of
her Religion, because there was so much freedom and enjoyments therein; but my
Master kept me in a little too strictly; and my Mistress keeping company with
the High-boys, slighted the tender of my service. Thus having failed in this
attempt, I made my way to my Mistresses Sister, who was an Anabaptist; she I
often waited on by my Mistresses commands, and at length was admitted to be one
of the Brethren in the Conventicle, whereof she was a Sister; I professed a
great deal of zeal for that way, and my Master often instructed me in
Scripture, I soon from a proficient became a Preacher, and was of great
eminency amongst them.

Thus did I spend my time till my Apprenticeship was out, and was a freeman;
and then did I begin to look about me, to see what I might get for my self: for
I had not undertaken this course of Teaching, but in hopes to gain my
Mistresses Sister; and she still put me off till I was (...) of my time,
pleading tenderness of Conscienc^ w^^ld not permit her to give me any enjoyment
^f (...) before Marriage, and that could not law^ully (...), till my time was
out: which being come, (...) courted her, and she gave me the hearing, (...)
put me off desiring me first to settle my self i^ (...) World, I now believing
that she intended to (...), was resolved to play the same hand at Cards (...)
her; and persuading her that I still gained (...) of an Estate by my dealings
in the World, I sp^nt ^ome moneys on her, and taking my opportunity, g^in^d my
ends upon her; for pretending that I had la^ely made a bargain, whereby I
should get a 100 l. if I had fifty pound ready money more then my own, which
was likewise fifty pound; She having moneys by her, willingly consented to lend
me fifty pound, provided that she might see the disbursing thereof. I then
thinking to kill two Birds with one stone, readily consented; and heartily
thanking her, desired her to provide he self to go with me next Tide to
Gravesend, where I was to lay out the moneys: she did accordingly, and carrying
fifty pound with her, I having raised such another sum, we took boat and made
for Gravesend, where, when we arrived, I left her to rest her self at an Inn,
and went on board a Ship that was newly come from the Indies, and bought as
much Indigo as came to 150 l. I had it a very good pennyworth, but not so good
as to persuade her that I should gain 100 l. by it, which I had promised;
wherefore, that I might make out the matter to be plain to her, I engaged the
Seaman I had dealt withal to secrecy, and made this bargain, that I should pay
him 100 l. down, and pay the rest in two months, telling him that I was a
great dealer. He believing me without much difficulty, not only consented to
this, but also to say, that he had but 100 l. for all the Commodity: we having
thus agreed, went to my Sweet-hearts Chamber, and there concluded our bargain
before her; who having some skill in the price of that Commodity, did believe
the bargain to be as profitable as I alleged to her, and freely laid down her
money, which together with my fifty pound was paid to the Seaman, and the goods
delivered into a Lighter to be carried to London, and delivered according to
order.

This affair being dispat^'d, I was resolved to drive the nayl home a little
further, and as I had got the money, so to g^t the Maid; wherefore, I
preten^ing expedition, told her, it would be most convenient for us to ride
home: the wholly confiding in me, consented thereto, and a Horse was procured
to carry us double* mounted we were, and so advanced on our journey, but
pretending some business, I made an halt at the next Town homewards, where I
did my Horse the unkindness to prick him in the foot, that he might halt, and
not be able to carry us through that night: this being done, we again mounted,
and I fell to thanking my Mistress for this great favor, not only in assisting
me with her Purse, but accommodating me with her company; and now, said I, I
hope you will no longer delay me the enjoyment of your self, and the rest of
your Estate. Truly, said she, this days action has resolved me of all doubts,
and now I have so good opinion of you, that I shall no longer delay our
Marriage then shall stand with your convenience. To this I returned an answer
full of love and kindness. Our Horse by this time felt the effects of my work,
for he halted so much, that we could only go a foot pace, and with much
difficulty came to the next Town, where we were forced to alight, and it
growing late, and impossible to get to London that night, we resolved to take
up our quarters for the present.

I having placed my Mistress in a private Chamber, went into the Stable, and
soon removed the obstruction that hindered our horse from going, so that by the
next morning he was well enough able to Travel, I left him to the care of the
Hostler, and went up to my Mistress, who expected me to Supper, which I had
ordered to be provided for us, and that being ready, I invited our Landlady to
be a Guest, though our Commons were but short, being only one Chicken, yet I
made a long Grace, which according to our custom, might amount to a Prayer;
and I remember that among other matters, I prayed that our Horse might be so
well recovered, as that he might be so well able to carry us next day to
London: our Landlady soon understanding what kind of Guests she had, believing
that she should get little by our Company, was desirous of leaving it, which
she did, by pretending business, and so we had the whole Chicken left us for
our own eating, we hardly made or left any bones of it, so hungry we were.
Supper being ended, we went to the fire, and I designing my business, called
for a quart of Claret, which we burned, sweetened, and drank off; and by this
time my Mistress was so sweet upon me, that we talked very familiarly and
pleasantly, and oftentimes I interlaced our Discourses with Kisses and amorous
Sighs, to which I was welcomed, and many times invited: I then called ^^r
another Quart of Wine, which we likewise drank off, and then I found my
Mistress very full of the Creature, so that she drew ^ear to the Bed, and at
length cast her self thereon; I was not long after her, but lay down likewise,
and first beginning with embraces and kisses, in a little ^ime I gained
possession of all my endeavors, she lying as fast asleep all the while; but
when I had done, and was again laid by her, she started up, and seemed to be
very angry with me: but I supposing that it was because I had so soon done,
catched hold of he^, and attempted to be at her again, but in vain did I
endeavor it, for she then began to be angry, reproaching me with dishonesty,
and using many canting terms, which I omit: I told her, what was done could not
be undone, and therefore comforted her, and told her all should be well by our
sudden Marriage: thus did I appease her, and we soon agreed upon every thing*
so that though I was appointed another Chamber, which I pretended to lodge in,
yet I lay all night with her. The next morning we arose betime; and mounting
our horse, who was now well enough, we soon arrived at London, where for the
present we parted. I having thus gained my ends of this woman, having part of
her Estate in my possession, and by the enjoyment of her person having the
command of the rest, was resolved only to abuse her; stripped her of what she
had, and so leave her: for I found no such sweetness in my nights lodging with
her, but what I might expect from another; having before that tasted woman in
the enjoyment of two or three of our Sisters, which passages I omit, and tell
this to acquaint you how this woman undid her self by her Covetuousness, for
had she not distrusted me with her money, I should have married her, but now my
mind was otherwise bent.

I received my Goods, and now my stock being much increased by this fifty
pound, and the profit of my bargain, I paid the Seaman, and proceeded in
Trading: and though I had little skill in foreign Commodities, yet I ventured
at all, neither did I want Money, for instead of paying back the fifty pound to
my Mistress, I soon after had 100 l. more, and yet she could not persuade me to
marriage, I still pretending multiplicity of business: at length, all her
Portion, being 400 l. got into my hands, I only paid her with a nights lodging,
which now and then we had together; but as to marriage, I still pretended one
reason or other to defer it.

I not only proceeded in my Merchandising, but continued in my Preaching at our
usual Conventicles, where I was become very famous, and a great disputant; but
at length I finding there was but little to be gotten by them (and my principle
being always to gain what I could) I became now almost weary of them, and
willing to leave the Congregation for another that courted me, but I was
resolved e're I left them, to make some use of them, and get somewhat of them.
I thus laid my Plot: I gave a Bond to a Confederate for 100 l. pretending that
I owed so much to him; I gave out, that I would on such a day not only preach
to my Congregation, but also Dispute with any opposer on several Articles. The
time being come I had a full Auditory, and performed my Preachment and
Disputation to the general satisfaction of all, and then appointed that the
next day I would hold forth some other points, that had not as yet been
disputed of, inviting all the Congregation and all others that would come, to
meet me in a larger room then that was wherein we exercised at present. Thus
having finished my Discourse, I dismissed my Auditors; but I was no sooner out
of the House, but I was seized on by a bailiff, in Execution for 20^ l ^o^ my
Confederate who had the bond, had brought ^t to Judgment: I was then
accompanied by two or three of my Congregation, who much wondering at the
business, desired the Bailiff to have pat^ence, and to go into the next House,
which we did and ^he Case being opened, I confessed the Debt, with^l, alleading
that I was not at present able to pay it, having lately ventured most of my
Estate to Sea. Those of my Congregation hearing this (and being much grieved
that their Pastor should be thus snatched from them, especially when he had
deserved so well) sent for some more of their Brethren, who were monied men;
and so among them they paid the debt, and I was discharged: but soon after
this, I left them, and they were forced to make a Collection or gathering among
themselves to reinburse themselves their moneys; and my Mistress who had been
all this while delayed by me with fairwords, made her complaints to the
brethren, but to no purpose, for she received no redress or satisfaction, I
having now quite left them and their faction for another, where by reason of my
abillity in preaching, I was entertained, and an accord made between me and my
quondam Mistress, I only giving her back 50 l. of her 400 l. we being now
absolutely parted from one another, she receiving no other satisfaction of me,
either for her many nights lodging or money, then fifty pound, which she
willingly received, believing me to be a beggar; my new Congregation
voluntarily raising that money for that purpose.

Thus was I quit of her, and had gained five hundred pound in my pocket, only
under the cloak of Religion. and having such success, I in short time
discovered my self to be rich, by buying many bargains of good value, paying
ready money, and raised my self to so high a reputation, that I won a widow of
an indifferent fortune to be my wi^e, and so settled my self in the World.

As for my Preaching-trade, I finding that it had already done me as much
service as I expected from it, I left it, for I had now a wife and money, and
for that end, and to get them, I took it up, and being provided with both, I
left it, but especially finding that it grew every day into disesteem, it being
about the time of his Majesty's happy Return; when instead of a preaching
Fanatic, I quickly faced about, and leaving my congregational friends, I
enquired out, and procured Cavalier acquaintance, so that I who a little before
the Kings coming home, was used to wear short Hair, and was modest and precise
in my habit) had now a large Perewig, a great Plume of Feathers, and all other
accoutrements accordingly, being still diligent on all occasions to associate
my self with the Captain and chief Officers of the Trained-Bands of our
Company, into whose acquaintance and Society I soon insinuated my self, by my
Gallantry in my habit and expenses in Taverns being conformable.

Thus did I become a Gentleman, and from a Precisian a Prodigal, nay an Antic,
and every thing, what not? that I might please all: for instead of Prayer Book,
or some other Fanatical piece of divinity, I now carried in my pocket, either
Cards or Dice, and so great a love I had to Hocus Pocus, that all their Tools,
viz. Box of Counters, Balls, Cups, and other Trinkets which are made use of in
that mysterious function, were all my Companions: having learned confidence
when I was a Preacher, I was now the better emboldned to stare my Spectators in
the face, while I cunningly enough performed my feats of activity; and such a
readiness I had, that I was an able proficient, I spent so much time in these
fooleries, that I almost lost my self; and now having a wife and family to
maintain, I found my Estate so far to decrease, that I was forced to look after
my business, and fall to Merchandising: but having lost a considerable part of
my Estate which I had adventured at Sea, I was resolved, as I said, to trust no
more to that Element, and not to let my Estate go out of my sight; wherefore I,
still as shipping came in, went on board, either in the Downs, Portsmouth or
Plymouth, and there buying good bargains, which the Seamen, newly come home,
would afford for ready Money, I began to prick up again, and have Money at
command; I then bought me a small Pinnace or small Pleasure boat; and with that
went on board of Ships, bought Goods, and made a shift to stow as much on board
privately, that I saved much by the customs and other duties. This Trade I
drove a long time, gained much by stealing Duties; neither did I care what
goods I dealt in, having Customers of all sorts and Trades, who knowing that I
drove this Trade, employed me to buy for them, agreeing the prizes before hand:
but I was snap'd one time, and all my goods seized for not paying duties, and
an Information put into the Exchequer against me: I finding that it would be
but a folly to contend there, agreed with the Informer, and he suffered me to
cast him; so that I got off for a sum of money, but I gained much experience
thereby, so that I then began a new Trade, and would engage many of my Friends
to go and buy Goods on board of Ship, and if they got them clear from the Ships
side^; it was enough; for I would come immediately in another Boat, as if a
stranger, and seize the Goods as forfeited for want of the payment of duties,
and so secure them from any other seizure: and if any other person came to
seize on them, I then pretended it to be my business, having made the first
seizure, but if we were not met with by another, then we passed clear without
any more trouble: nay, so bold and confident was I grown in this kind of Trade,
called Smuckling; that I have had fifty and an hundred pound at a time given me
to go over into Holland or France in a Ship which has brought much prohibited
goods, which I have seized so soon as we came near any Port of England, to
prevent any other seizure; and then putting an information into the Exchequer,
have suffered costs against me, and all has been clear. I gained not only much
money by this means, but also the esteem of a cunning subtle fellow, and was
employed in many such affairs, and sometimes in Lawsuits.

I remember once I came into Company with a very f^ir Lady, who having an old
cross-grained fellow to her Husband, had not only lived from him some time, but
was so foolish as to be married to another person, who was a Gentleman of much
worth and merit, The Ladies old Husband (understanding it, and more out of
Covetousness of gaining money, which he believed the Gentleman would on this
occasion part from, then any love he bore his Wife) hunted them out from one
place to another, and the young Gentleman refusing to comply with the old
Knights desires, he was resolved now to prosecute her for Life.

This Story was told me by the Gentleman himself, and the Lady assured me of
the truth of the matter, imploring my assistance: Well, Madam, said I, come, be
ruled by me, and I will disapoint your old Husband, and you shall laugh at him:
Having considered the matter, I ordered her to go next day into the Country,
above 100 miles from London, and there to expect me, and obey my further
orders, this she did; and I soon following her, and the Assizes beginning the
next day, I got a Warrant to apprehend and bring her before the Bench, she
came, and I charged her with having two Husbands, she denying; and I alleging
the matter, she was committed, and an Indictment brought in, but when she was
to be tried, I was not to be found, nor any person else to prosecute her: so
that she was quit by proclamation. A Copy of this Process I took out of the
Court, and so she and I came to London to the Gentleman her friend, who gladly
welcomed us, and now they live together in spite of the old Knight, who
attempted to trouble them, found it in vain, for she could not be tried for one
fact twice.

This feat did I merely out of my own apprehension and fancy, and it succeeding
according to my wishes, I had a considerable reward for my pains.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Drugster sets two Persons, his wives Brothers-in-Law at variance, he gets
Money out of them both, proceeds in T^ading, but adventuring too much, cannot
pay his Debts, and is therefore clapped up in Prison.

I Drove this rambling Trade for a long time, and gained enough by it, but I
was so prodigal in my expenses (both at home and abroad, that I might be
counted some body) and sometimes loosing considerable sums at gaming, that I
began to go behind hand, and oftentimes when I pretended to go to Graves^nd,
the Downs, or other places to buy some Drugs, or other Merchandise aboard a
Ship, I went not far from London to a brave handsome Lass, that I kept for my
private recreation. For though I had a wife, and she indifferent handsome, yet
was she cold in her embraces, and still talking of the cares of the World, and
propounding ways to get Moneys. But my private Lady was quite different, being
wholly composed of Love and sweetness, professing nothing more dear to her,
then my Society: and we had no other discourse but pleasure and enjoyments, in
the greatest height we could imagine; This, though it were pleasant, was very
chargeable, to keep such a Commodity for my own private use, so that I gained
not much at the years end, and what I got over the Devils back, I spent under
his belly, as the Proverb goes: Wherefore my wife called on me to stay at home
and apply my self to some settled way, but that I could not do, for my Stock was
grown low, and my spending as high as ever.

My Wife had a Father-in-Law who was a Citizen, and a monyed man; him I got
into favor with, and by my free entertainment of him, won him to me; for he
having left off trading in London, lived some miles off, and coming to London
would often visit me, where I still welcomed him, and attended him abroad when
he went to receive Rents, or any Moneys, and assisted him in all such things
that I could with much diligence. My stock being very low, I borrowed Moneys of
him to trade with, and was very Punctual in my payment, so that he put so much
confidence in me, as to lend me 100 l. and more I might have had, had I
requested it: as he and his wife (who was my wives Mother) often visited me at
my house, so at convenient times I was a guest at theirs in the Country, where
I associated my self with the best Gentl^men of the place, wining upon the
affections of all, by my facetious and pleasant converse. I had hopes of
raising my fortunes by my wives Mother, who I hoped would outlive her husband,
and then at her death be able and willing to give me good part of her estate,
but it fell out otherwise, for she fell Sick and died before him, but it was
but good luck to be there, and my wife being still near her, she gave her some
Rings and other things that were considerable.

The old man my Father-in-Law being desirous to bury his wife at London,
according to her request, went up with us, and being somewat sick before, so
soon as his wife was buried, was so surprised with a distemper, that he took
his bed, and after ten weeks sickness dyed at my house, during his sickness, I
be thought my self of what advantage I might make it, and endeavored to please
him in all I might, but he having two Sons, I could not expect much of the
estate, but was resolved by hook or by crook to have a considerable share, and
to that end, I knew no better way then to divide the two Brothers, and put them
at difference. The eldest was a married man, and though of an easy temper, yet
I knew was too honest to be wrought on to do any unhansome action, the youngest
being a young bluff fellow, was apt to believe any thing I should persuade him
to, wherefore at first I possessed him with a jealousy against his brother, that
he would defraud him of his share of the estate, if he did not take heed and
follow my directions, which if he did, I would put him into a way to command
his elder brother in every thing.

The young man being of a suspicious nature, easily believed me; and then I
particularly advised him, that the first thing he ought to do, was to get the
Register of his age altered; for if his father should now dye, and he not truly
being twenty years of age, could not expect to have the possession of any part
of the Estate, unless he were one and twenty. Wherefore to the house of the
Parish Register we went, and for the spending of one shilling, and five
shillings in Money, we had the Register book delivered to us, where I being
well skilled in counterfeiting and imitating of hands; soon altered the
Register, putting his age out in one place, and writing it in another place two
years before, so that the young man was now made half a year above full age.
Then did we call the Register, who gave us a Certificate out of the book of the
young man's age, and this we carried with us as authentic, and to be produced
on all occasions. I having done thus much for the young Man, he could not deny
me any thing I desired or requested: so that the old sick Gentleman being still
weaker, and having his Money in a Trunk by his Beds-side, I persuaded the
younger Brother (who had the key) to take some out and lend to me; which he
did: and that the old Man might not see the action; I and my wife would stand
by the beds-side before him, so that by degrees I got 100 l. from thence: and
when the old man dyed, though he left a considerable Estate, yet was there not
a penny of ready Money. The elder brother knowing that he had foul-play showed
him, began to be angry, but to no purpose, for he was forced to comply, the
younger brother having possession of that Trunk, and the keys of all others
where all the Writings were. The old man being buried (and much excess and
prodigality showed in the expen^es and costs thereof, which was done
principally at my invitement, that I might gain repute by inviting as many
friends as I pleased, and also drain my two young men of their moneys) the two
brothers began to discourse the matter, the elder brother demanding possession
of the Estate, and a divident to be made according to the Will of their Father;
and, said he, Brother, your share must either be in my hands, or else in the
Chamber of London till you come of age: How, said I, till he come of age? Sure,
you mistake your self, he is of sufficient age already; and thereupon produced
the Certificate, which though it was very punctual, yet the elder brother (who
was near ten years older then his brother) and several others who were present,
knew to be false: and this was the first breach between them, which had like to
have grown to a high flame: for the elder Brother applying himself to the
Register, upon search of the Book, found the fallacy: and indeed the Register
acknowledged the fact; for which he, and the younger brother, and my self had
like to have kissed Newgate, by order of the Lord Mayor, who being acquainted
herewith, was highly incensed against us all, professing before the whole Court
of Aldermen, That this act was of high concernment, and might be prejudicial to
the whole City. The elder brother was very cautious in prosecuting this affair,
being tender of his brothers credit, and therefore endeavored by fair means to
bring h^s brother to a fair compliance; which he effected in my absence, and so
wrought upon his Brother, that the Trunk of Writings was sent for to a Tavern,
where they were then divided, and the Trunk with part of the Writings delivered
to him, with promise to put a fair end to the rest of the difference. When I
came home, and found the Trunk gone, I stormed exceedingly; and believing my
self disappointed of my purpose, found out the younger Brother, and schoold'd
him so foundly, that he by my directions went back to his brothers house, and
by a false token, regained the Trunk with the Writings, which he had new sent
home. Thus was their difference enlarged, and likely to be worse; but the Elder
Brother so moderately complied with all mine and his demands, though never so
unreasonable, that a division and partition was made, not only of the Estate,
but some part of the Goods, which being Plate, and Linen, and Pewter, were
delivered into my custody: and all the differences between the brothers being
ended, I demanded of the elder brother satisfaction for his fathers being at my
house during the time of his sickness: he little expected this; for his father
had given to me and mine an hundred pound, but that was nothing; I owed him so
much, and I must have more, and so I told him I would have, or mischief him:
not giving any other reason, but that he had enough, and I would have part.
Thus did I hope to huff him out of his money: but he, though he was easy and
good-natured (which I accounted next of kin to a fool) yet wholly refused me,
affirming that I had no reason for my demands, for I had an hundred pound given
me, and that I had not been at any charge, for his father had continually given
my wife money to provide all necessaries, and that some of that was still in my
wives hands.

Though I knew what he alleged was true, yet I still persisted in my demands,
and told him, that so much I would have for the trouble of my house: he offered
to refer it to two men; I long refused it, but at the length consented, and
tampered with his Arbitrator, promising him a reward, if he would answer my
exp^ctations; but he, contrary to my expectation proved very honest, and gave
me but half what I asked; neither would he have consented to that, but that the
elder brother himself advised him thereto, out of a desi^^ of Peace. This Award
I was much troubled at, and seeing I could get no more, was contented with what
I could get of him: but the youner brother I flee'd somewhat more considerably,
getting out of them both, in Legacy, Money and Goods, to the value of three or
four hundred pounds: with which stock of money, and a greater of credit,
re^orting of greater matters that were given me, I again fell to trafficking,
and now dealt more considerably then ever: for I went to public Sales, where
great quantities of goods were sold by inch of Candle, and bought thousand
pounds worth at a time; and so considerable was I looked on, that I was often
employed by others to buy for them. I bought several parcels and sorts of
Goods, which I fetched away as I paid for them: at last I bought several parcels
of Goods to a great value, and fetched away most of them, which I sold to
profit: but one parcel of 500 l. being a failing and decaying Commodity, I lest
in their hands so long, that it was much damaged; and unwilling and indeed
unable to pay for them, was Arested, and clapped up into a prison; where I was
forced to lie a great while, till I had spent and consumed most of what I had;
and at length they finding there was nothing to be got by me, released me, I
releasing my bargain: which I willingly did, but soon after repented it; for
the price of that Commodity rising, it soon amounted to great profit; and
whereas I should have lost, I now might have gained as they did by the sale of
it, near 200 l.

CHAP. XXX.
The Drugster having fail^d in London, goes to live in the Country; where by
counterfeiting a sickness, and making a Will, he gets into Credit, and
borrowing Money falls again to Trading.

THis Misfortune of my Imprisonment did sensibly afflict me; especially, when I
understood that instead of loss, I might have gained by holding to my bargain;
but it now being past, could not be helped. I was reduced to such necessity,
that not only all my Money, but my Plate and best Goods were sold; and not only
my Wife, but my Whore parted from their Rings and Jewels to redeem me: for when
I was in prison, every body that I owed money to, though never so little, came
upon me; and though I came off with my great Action easily enough, yet many
other little ones stuck close to me, which I was forced to discharge. I had now
time enough to consider my forepassed Actions, and to examine my self what I
had done to deserve this affliction; I bethought me of the trick I first served
my Mistresses Sister, in cheating her of her Money and Virginity; but that
stuck not much upon me, because I thought her to be justly enough fitted for
delaying me, distrusting me, and other bad practices I knew her guilty of: but
when I considered the wrong I had lately done the two brothers, in first rasing
a difference, and then continuing it between them, and not only prosecuting the
elder brother so highly my self, but putting another of my acquaintance (to
whom I knew he was indebted) upon him to sue and arrest him, with all the
disgrace I could, by causing it to be done on a Sunday as he went to Church, I
my self attending: This consideration possessed me with an opinion that this
Judgment was justly fallen upon me for this cause, I being rightly enough
fitted, being likewise arrested my self on a Sunday, as I was going to Church,
but now being discharged of my Imprisonment, I bethought me what course I was
to take, and resolved that since I had suffered disgrace in the City, it were
best for me to remove into the Country, where I was not known; therefore I soon
took a house of considerable value, and putting my self in a very good Habit,
and in equipage every ways suitable, I and my Wife, with most of my family
removed from my London to my Country House; I soon got my self acquainted with
the best and wealthiest people of the place, and gave them very handsome Treats
and Entertainments at my house, which they answered me with the like civility.

Though I had been a Prisoner, ^et I had played my Cards so well in paying my
small debts, and told my tale so advantagiously about my great Action, that I
had preserved a sufficient credit with some of my dealers; so that making up
about fifty pound out of my Wives and Wenches Rings, Jewels, and some Plate, I
was entrusted with a 100 l. worth of Commodities, with which I set up another
Trade in the Country; this turned to good account: for I seldom ventured on any
thing, but it was effectual and to purpose; and if I would wholly have bent my
mind to get Money, I might have had a good estate; but I effected pleasure
equal to, and above profit; and though I was thus low in the World, yet I still
kept my Wench, whom I had now quartered in the midway between my London and
Country House, and therefore could lie with her commodiously enough, and tell
my wife if at my Country, that I lay at the London house; and so on the
contrary.

As I thus enjoyed my pleasure, so I now began to be more wary, and look after
profit, which I did to good purpose; but I now wanted a Father-in-Law who was a
moneyed man, or some other friend who would furnish me with money* and if I
could have produced three or four hundred pounds in ready money, I questioned
not but to make extraordinary advantage: for this end I thought on several
ways, and at length did hit upon one that did my business. I traveling in the
Winter, took an extraordinary cold that forced me to keep my bed for some days,
and indeed I did so longer then I needed; for I counterfeiting an extraordinary
sickness, and that I was much troubled with the Stone and Colic; and so
desperate ill I pretended my self to be, that my Wife lamenting, and my
Children and Family being in much disorder, I was persuaded to make my Will: to
this I consented; and the Scrivener of the Town was sent for; I then told him,
that by reason of my Childrens childhood, and my Wives incapacity to manage
affairs, I was in a great strait how to dispose of my Estate, which though it
was considerable enough, yet if it were not well managed, would soon come to
nothing; I now being in a strange Town, distant from London, where my
acquaintance lived, I knew not well what person to entrust as Executor, unless,
said I, Mr. B. of this Town would do me the kindness to take that trouble on
him, which I would willingly requite by a sufficient Legacy, and my Wife and
Children would be bound to pray for him. Sir, said the Scrivener, I question
not but he will do it; and if you please, I will not only ask him, but persuade
him thereto. I thank you kindly, said I, and for this offer of your friendship,
I shall give you a Legacy as a Remembrance of me; and therefore, I pray, take
notice of the heads of my Will, and then go with it to Master B. and showing it
to him, make this request to him in my behalf: whereupon the Scrivener begun,
and I dictated to him, what and to whom I would give; which was 1000 l. to my
Wife, 300 l. apiece to my Children, and several other Legacies, amounting in
all to near 3000 l. and 100 l. I gave to my intended Executor, and 10 l. to the
Scrivener.

This affair being thus ordered, the Scrivener departed, and went to Master B.
my intended Executor who being a well monyed man, and withal very covetous, was
very glad of the matter, and willingly accepted of the offer, and within few
hours came to me, and told me he was very sorry for my sickness, and wished my
recovery; but if he could do me any service living, or to my Wife and Children,
if I should die, which he hoped would not happen, he should be ready and
willing both in purse and person to assist me. I then told him what I had done
as to my Will, and withal caused my Account-books to be produced, where I
showed and demonstrated how my Estate stood, and in whose hands it was (having
prepared false Accounts for that purpose:) he seeing the matter so plain, and
hoping to get a fleece out of my Estate, caused the Scrivener to proceed and
fini^h the Will, which I sealed; but during his stay with me at that time, and
some other times when he visited me, I so counterfeited faintings and pain,
that he and all others near me, did fully conclude, I was no man for this World.

After I had managed this affair to the height, I soon recovered, and had now
not only gained this old penny-father to be my friend, but by his and the
Scriveners reports of my Estate, had many others, who more then ordinarily
respected me, and made me tenders of their service; all which I thankfully
refused at pre^ent, as not having any need. Soon after this, I hearkened out a
place, for which I was to give 1000 l. and it being a good pennyworth, I
engaged in it: I made a shift to raise two hundred pound of my own moneys, and
that was all I was then able to do; but pretending I had of my own five hundred
pound in money, I soon persuaded my intended Executor to furnish me with five
hundred pound more; and so paying seven hundred pound to my Chapmen, he took my
word for three hundred pound more. This place put me in very great credit; and
now as well my London as my Country-acquaintance looked on me with respect,
supposing all to be true that had been discoursed of me. I did not long keep
this place, but sold it for an 100 l. profit, and so became Master of more
ready money, then ever, with which I again came to London, wholly leaving my
Country house, and paying my Country Penney-father part of his moneys; and with
that little of my own, and the rest that was left, and what I had gained, I
took a house and Shop in the place where I now live, and drive a Trade equal to
the best of my Neighbors; only I have had some dealings of late, which have a
little puzzled me, as I lately told you, when I had my trial; but he that
slandered me paying so dear as 200 l. dam^ges, will not only himself beware,
but always teach others to hold their peace.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Drugster now breaking in carr^st, endeavors to cheat his Creditors, and
(...) himself and Estate into Holland; but is discover^^, and his Estate
seized, and himself stopped; but b^ assistance of the Relator, he gets off, and
having a good sum of Money, and the Scrivener and his Wench, all get away, and
travel to the East Indies.

THus did the Drugster finish his story. I received satisfaction equal to
whatever I had, either in the Scrivener, Bookseller, or any other Relation; for
I found that his Actions had been different from theirs; for what they did
under the cloak of honesty, he did under that of Religion, which I found was
too often the covering of Knavery. This Discourse being ended, and our Wine
out, we parted; profferring to each other all kind of service: and indeed, it
was through his occasion, and to do him service, that I am come to this place,
so far from my Country; I shall therefore give you an account of his last
Actions in England, which are as remarkable as any I have hitherto related to
you; as also somewhat further of the Scrivener, who is our other Companion; and
so finish this large Narrative, which I doubt has almost wearied you.

I being unwilling to hinder the Traveller in prosecuting his story, had with
much pleasure attended and hearkened to what he had said; and though his
discourse was long, and had taken up much time, yet I found so much pleasing
variety, that made me ample satisfaction and amends; and being desirous to know
the rest of their Adventures, and what fortune or misfortune had brought them
hither, I desired him to proceed, which he did in this manner:

I was now acquainted with three persons, ( viz. the Scrivener, Bookseller, and
Drugster, an account of whose actions I have given you) that gave me full
satisfaction, and put me into an absolute opinion, that there was not only
Knavery used in all Trades and Professions, but that most Trades were composed
of, and most Estates gotten by overreaching and Knavery: I therefore resolved
to look about me, and see what I could do in the World; and having an intimate
and familiar a^quaintance with the Scrivener, I was by him supplied with what
money I desired, laying it out in Clothes, which I bought at the second hand,
and sold again to my profit, and so repaying the Scrivener, who took no other
interest then a Pint or a Quart of Wine. I did light upon so many good
Bargains, that I had gained a Stock of about fifty pound of my own, and my
Master did not contradict or deny me in my dealing, because I assisted him in
his profit, by bringing him Customers of our Club and acquaintance; I brought
the Scrivener and Drugster to be acquainted together, and they liked one
another so well, that they contracted a friendship, which had hitherto lasted;
and the Scrivener was likewise assistant to the Drugster in procuring him
moneys at a pinch, which he honestly repaid him; and the Captain (which I told
you the Scrivener first adventured to Sea withal, so much to their own profit,
and the loss of the Insurers) was now a Person admitted into our society, and
being now got up again in the world, b^came Master of a good Ship, and often
employed by the Drugster, and others of his acquaintance, on several short
Voyages to Holland, when at his return he was assisted in conveying and
securing much prohibited and uncustomed Goods by the Drugster, which was to the
very great gain of them both; and in general we all thrived very well, till
fortune, who is always changeable, in short time turned tail upon the Drugster,
and had like to have crushed him to nothing. He b^ing at the height of his
Trade, and studying now only how to be an Alderman, did drive a great Trade,
bu^ing and selling much Commodities, both Drugs and Grocery* Ware, and indeed,
any other Merchandise whatever nothing came amiss to him, till at length he not
only had a great loss at Sea, but buying a great quantity of Pot ashes,
intending to make a great profit by keeping them up, he lost a 1000 l. at a
clap; for much of that Commodity coming in unexpectedly, he was forced to sell
his at a great loss: these two unlucky hits, both falling on the neck of one
another, shrewdly squeezed him; but he being of a great courage, took little
notice of it to the World, but still run on all that he could, adventuring a
great part of the remainder of his Estate to Sea, which likewise failing, he
was quite undone, but remembering that he had been in as bad condition ^ormerly,
and still made a shift to come off clear, and creep up again, his credit being
still high, he bought great quantities of Goods upon credit, to pay at three
months; but not knowing how to bestir himself, being now got very highly in
Debt, and knowing very well that he could not make profit enough by those Goods
to set himself to rights, he thereupon bethought himself of con^eying away what
he had, and giving all his Creditors the slip: he had two other inducements
that moved him thereto, the one was his Wives death, which was lately happened,
and the other was his Wenches con^en^ and earnest desire for him to do so,
promising to a^ses^ him in all she could, and also to accompany him to hi^
Voyage.

This being agreed, the place intended for his Voyage being Holland, he sold as
much Goods in (...) at an under-rate for ready money, as he received (...) for;
and the rest of his Goods amounting to (...) worth, was put on board a Ship,
which was immediately to set sail for Amsterdam; his Lady being (...) board the
Ship, but in a Disguise, Virago-like, (...) in man's apparel: he carried not his
design so closely, but some of his Creditors got knowledge of it, and
understanding the business to be desperate, took out a Statute of Bankrupt, and
going on board the Ship seized on all; he being then at London, taking leave of
me, the Scrivener, and some other friends. This being done, the news came
quickly to his knowledge; for before we parted, two of his Creditors,
accompanied with Officers, not only acquainted him with what they had done,
but also secured his person. We were all surprised at this action, especially
the Drugster, who now appeared more dead then alive; and though he was asked
many Questions, yet he knew not readily how to answer one; and therefore they
soon left us, carrying them away to one of their own houses, where they
tyrannically kept him for some days, not permitting any person to come at him;
for though I attempted it, 'twas in vain. The Scrivener and I being together,
wondered at the action, and could not tell what should be the occasion of this
sudden business, for the Drugster had not acquainted us with the bottom of his
design, only telling us, that he was to go a two months Voyage to Holland,
and so return. I then parted from the Scrivener, and attempted to see and to
speak with my friend the Drugster, but it could not be at present; but by often
importuning, and pretending business of consequence, in ten days time I was
permitted to see and speak with him; when having secured and examined the
Chamber where he was, that none might overhear our Discourse, he soon
acquainted me with every particular of his business and design; nor did he
relate to me that his Wench was on board in man's apparel, and how he had given
a 100 l. in silver into her Custody. But, said I, where is the other 500 l. for
in all I heard you say, you had 600 l. in ready money? That said he, I hope is
safe, if my Clothes are so; and therefore, I pray, said he, assist me a little
in this affair, and enquire what is become of the Wench and my Clothes, and I
doubt not but in few days to put all things right enough again. I not only
promised him to do my utmost, but went about it very faithfully; and going on
board the Ship, found that all was gone; but upon enquiry, heard that the young
man that was to accompany the Drugster in the Voyage, was on shore at a house
not far off: thither I went, and upon enquiry found out the party: I desired
private speech with him, for she went for a man; this was granted, and I
discovering my self so plainly to her, in every particular, she made no great
difficulty to be as free with me, and told me all was gone, Clothes, and every
thing else, except her own Box, where she had secured the 100 l. that was given
to her; and, continued she, My friend could not have employed any person to me,
to whom I would have been so free as I shall to you: for though you do not know
me in this Habit, yet I suppose had I my woman's dress, you would soon remember
me: I then protested to her, that I could not call her Phisnomy to mind. Well,
said she, we have been more inward, and ere now lain together; and thereupon
told me, that she was one of those three that I lay with one night, and had
redeemed from pawn, as I have formerly told you, at my last coming to London.
Upon this, though she was in breeches; I made bold to kiss her and embrace her:
Well, said she, proceed no further, there may be time enough for the rest; let
us now consult what is necessary for our distressed friend: for, said she, if
you and he desire it, I shall be willing to part from all the hundred pound,
which I am yet Mistress of. Well, replied I, you are the most generous and
deserving Woman of all your Sex, especially of your Quality, not only for what
you now offer, but what I formerly by experience, and lately by his Relations
have understood by you. Truly, replied she, where I promise fidelity, I
perform it; and where I find worth, I will endeavor to deserve and requite it:
and though I have lived wantonly, yet since I was entertained by this Gentleman
as his friend, I have been wholly constant, and will persevere so long as he is
able or I can otherwise handsomely contrive a way to subsist. In this you are
very obliging, said I, but I hope you will not deny any old friend a courtesy.
Well, said she, more of that hereafter. From this discourse we fell to the
matter in hand, consulting and contriving what was necessary to be done for our
friends present accommodation: for the present, we agreed a^ ^^at money should
lie in her hands, only she should remove her quarters to the place appointed.

This being done, I again repaired to him, and acquainted him with my
proceedings; he was glad I had found her and the hundred pound: but when I told
him that the Chest with his Clothes were gone and secured from him, he was
almost out of his wits, c^yed out, that now he was miserable, and never till
now. Well, said I, come; be contented, there may be a way found to remedy this
evil. No, said he, never till I am again Master of that Chest with my Clothes.
Upon this he was silent, and soon after two of his ^heif Creditors entered the
Chamber, and told him that if he would be ingenious with them, that they wo^ld
not only release him, but put Money in his Pocket, that he might trade again:
For, said one of them, we have been at great cost already for the taking out
the Commission of Bankrupt, and the Commissioners Fees ^or sitting has already
cost two hundred pound, and it runs up every day to more and more; So that in
fine, it will consume the Estate, unless you will assist us in making up your
accounts; for there are several that we supposed had owed you money, do put in
for to have a share with us; and there^^on, they named two or three parties who
had de^^^ded moneys of them. To this the Drugster re^^^^ that he owed no such
sums as were pretended, (...) of them owed him two hundred pound; (...) this
and offering to prove it, they desired (...) against the next day to appear
before (...)ssioners; and if he did justify this, they (...) ^^mediately
discharge him. This being agreed (...) him, and he was now in somewhat better
taking then he had been, and I encouraged him to be^^ up, and hope ^or the
best. Well, said he, if I can but get my Chest of Clothes again I care not; and
I pray fail not to be with me to morrow, and get my Mistress to send me ten
pound, that I may have occasion to ^e. We discoursed not much further for the
present, but parted; and I returning home to my Masters, asked leave to be
absent for that night; to which he consented; and indeed, I had so much
liberty, that I might stay out so long as I pleased, my Master using me rather
like a Companion then a Servant.

I now went to the Drusters Lady, and my quondam-acquaintance, and informing
her of my business, she freely delivered me ten pound: But, said I, this is not
all, I must have somewhat else before I go; and thereupon called for Wine, and
we drank so briskly, that we were both pretty merry: And it being now late, she
asked me where I intended to lodge: I said, with her; That must not be, replied
she: and indeed I had somewhat to do to persuade her to it; but at length I
did, and we lay together without any suspicion, she going for a man. We often
interchanged many amorous embraces, and performed all those dalliances that two
longing Lovers could expect, and made many protestations of a farther
friendship: I telling her, that I believed her friend the Drugster would not be
offended, if he knew of our enjoyments, and would as well impart to me, as he
had done his chiefest secrets: Well, said she, if you gain his consent, you
command mine, and I therefore leave it to your management; and I suppose if you
tell him of our former acquaintance, the greatest difficulty will be overcome.
This I thought would be a ready way, as indeed it was: and since then we have
had an equal enjoyment of her; she having lain with one of us every night
since, and during our Voyage hither, and is one of those two are in men's
apparel, and is called George.

But, said I, to return to my matter in hand, I the next morning parted from
her, and with ten pound in my pocket, went to my friend, who was going before
the Commissioners, whither I attended him; and there he carried himself with so
much free^om and ingenuity, that he was set at liberty, and promised more
favors: he then made it his request, that he might have the Chest with his
Clothes: to this some consented, but others replied, all must be appraised, and
till then nothing could be disposed of, and therefore they demanded the key of
him: this he refused; but they told him, that then they would break it open: he
seeing there was no other remedy, promised to bring it the next morning, and
then desired they might be appraised, and delivered to him: and thus they
parted; and after he and I had drunk a Pint of Wine, we also parted.

As I was going home I met with the Scrivener, who being desirous to know how
matters went with the Drugster, would enforce a glass of wine on me; when I
told him all the matter, and omitting nothing, we judged that his five hundred
pound was in that Chest with his Clothes, and that now he would be stripped of
it. But, said the Scrivener, I wish he were Master of that Money, and then I
should propound a way to him to leave them, by making him partner in a design
which I have lately projected, and is now near execution.

I needed not use many words to persuade him to acquaint me with his design,
wherefore after few words, he opened to me the matter thus:

I have, said he, lived in so full an enjoyment of every thing here, that I am
weary of it, being tied to one place; and my spirit being of a soaring rambling
temper, am desirous of novelty and change; and to that end, I have some time
since purposed, and lately contrived a way to leave England for some other
place, and consulting with the Captain whom you know, have resolved for the
East Indies, whither he is now bound: and that I might not go away beggarly,
(for I never intend to return, unless very rich) I have contrived a way how to
carry good store of money with me, which I am now plentifully provided with.
Yes, said I, I know it is no difficulty for you to procure what money you will,
having the keeping of so much Cash. You are mistaken, said he, I intend not to
wrong my Master of a penny, but have done it otherwise, the manner thus:

My Master has lately taken a Journey into the Country, and left the sole
management of his affairs to me; and resolving now to make use of my time, I
have put my Project in Execution. I have been with one of our Money-Masters,
and told him, that such a man, whom he knew to be a good man, that is, a rich
man, wanted so much Money: this he readily consented, and I had the Money
delivered me, only giving him a Bond, whereto I have counterfeited the name of
him whom I told him was the Borrower, and my self, with one more was a witness:
this have I done with two or three, who was confident would trust me; and with
two I have pretended they would borrow of one another two hundred pound apiece,
and given each other a Counterfeit Bond; and I cannot choose but smile, to think
in what a case they will both be when the time of payment comes, and instead of
receiving, they will demand two hundred pounds of each other: it may be they
will be so frollick as to go to law; if they do, it will make good sport for
the Lawyers. By this means, as I tell you, I have raised fifteen hundred
pounds, which I have all ready by me in good Jocobusses, and am ready in ten
days to march off with my Captain for the East Indies, now if the Drugster had
his money in readiness, I should be glad of so good Company. I heard him with
much delight, and from that very minute resolved to make one of the Company,
and then offered him my service, which he kindly accepted of, and promised me
that I should share all fortunes with him.

I went back to my Mistress, and provided my self for my Voyage: and the next
day the Drugster bringing his Keys, the Chest where his Clothes were was
opened, and all in it were examined, but no Money found: I remember that every
parcel of Clothes they took, his eye was so fixed, that I thought would never
remove it; but at length all was passed over, and the Clothes prized at Twenty
pounds: he earnestly entreated that he might have them; but they replied, they
could not do it without the consent of all, unless they gave so much out of
their own pockets, and they had already lost too much by him. He finding that
there was no way but one, took me with him to a Tavern, and conjured me to do
him one kindness, which was, by all means to purchase these clothes at any
rate; and giving me the ten pound, I had brought him, and five pound more, he
knew not at present what to do for five or ten pound more, which he advised me
to give for the Clothes rather then fail. It was too far to go to his Ladies
Quarters, wherefore I out of my own stock supplied that want; and then going to
the Creditors, with much ado, persuaded one o^ them, who had the Keys, to sell
me the Clothes: he would not consent to this, unless I would give him thirty
pound, which was ten pound more then they were appraised at: though the demand
was unreasonable, yet I was forced to consent, and putting ten pound into his
own pockets, willingly delivered the Clothes to me, charging me not to discover
what I gave. I did not much heed what he said, but gladly received the Chest
and Key, and carried it to the Drugster, who with much impatience expected me,
it being carried up into a private Chamber; and the door fast locked, he
unlocked ^he Chest, and took out the Clothes, and drawing his Knife, unript the
Collar of a Doublet, where were several pieces of Gold: Nay then, said he, we
are still safe, and I defy Fortune and all her malice: in less then half an
hour, with my assistance, we found out 500 l. in Gold, which was sewed up in
several places about the Clothes. This being done, I soon acquainted him with
the Scriveners Project, and my resolution, to this he likewise consented, only,
said he, I must not leave my honest Girl behind me. For that, said I, I
question not but I shall have some influence to persuade her; and thereupon I
acquainted him with my former knowledge of her: Well, said he, since it is so,
we will continue her a friend to us both, and not entertain any jealousy. In
fine, we agreed not only in that particular, but in every thing else; and the
Scrivener being acquainted with all our designs, we so ordered the matter, that
I, the Drugster, and our Mistress, and the Scrivener, and a Wench of his, whom
he had likewise put into man's Apparel, did all come on board with all our
Treasure into our Captains Ship which was in the Downs, and bound for this
place; and so having good Winds, good Company, and every thing to our content,
are all safely arrived in this place.

CHAP. XXXII.
He being now by the Relator brought acquainted with the Scrivener, Drugster,
and the rest of his Companions; they enter into discourse about the s^veral
Factious Religions practiced in England.

THus did our Relator finish his long story, which was so filled with profit,
as well as pleasure, that I accounted the time I had spent in hearing him the
best bestowed of any: for I gathered so much variety of experien^es, that if I
had any mind to prosecute my former course of life in cheating and Roguing, I
might now soon profess my self to be my Arts Master, if I did but bravely
follow those Examples he had related to me: but if they were any wise improved,
as I had a Genius fit enough to be highly active, I might then out do all
Example.

These were my first thoughts, but I had not much time to spend in
contemplation: but he having put an end of his discourse, I kindly thanked him
for his great freedom used in his relation; and told him, that since he had
been so generous to me in unbosoming himself, I in requital did promise him a
lasting friendship, and at our first leisure recounted some of my life to him,
which I had hitherto concealed, that should give him satisfaction that I
intended to use an absolute freedom with him.

Thus did we contract a friendship, and it was now time to eat somewhat, the
best part of the day having been spent in his long narrative: such as the house
afforded we had, and after a repast, we concluded both to go on board of their
Ship to find out his Companions; he resolving to acquaint them with what had
passed between us, and to let them know my quality, believing they would be
well enough satisfied with what he had done, because they might have great
occasion to make use of me.

In this resolution we were preparing to go to the Ship, when the Scrivener and
Drugster entered the house, enquiring for their Companion, who presenting
himself to them, they desired him to walk out, that they might confer together:
No, said he, let us take a Room here and discourse, which we may do with as
much freedom as any where else: he urging it, they consented, and having a
private Room and necessaries, after a cup or too of Wine, I left their company,
on purpose to give my friend the Tailor (who was called Gregory) the
opportunity of acquainting them with what had passed between us, which I
suppose he did in very few words; for within half an hour I was called for, and
being kindly saluted by the two Gentlemen, was desired to sit down and make one
of their Company. After a Cup or two of Wine more had passed, my friend Gregory
Tailor thus spoke to me: Friend, I have acquainted these my two Friends and
Companions with our late discourse, and by that they know that all their
affairs are known to you also; I have told them what I know of you, and we are
all sen^ible that your acquaintance may be very useful and necessary in all
things, but much more your friendship; Wherefore, as you say, I by my freedom
with you have merited your acquaintance and friendship; so I desire the same
room in your b^^^ f^r my friends, who by me desire it, and in requit you shall
command ours; and whatever we have, you shall be equally Master of with our
se^ves.

I made no long pause in replying to them, that they might command my love and
friendship* and in that my all, to render them the utmost testimonies that I
could. And thus did we all agree to have a friendly correspondency, and to
conceal nothing of our affairs one from another. We then dran^ off some more
Wine, and though their two Ladies and the Captain were absent, yet we remembered
them in our Cups, and resolved the next day to dine all on board the ship: and
at my importunity I so far prevailed, as that the Women might appear there in
their own Female-Habits; for it had now been a long time since I saw any
European beauties.

We after this, discoursed of many affairs of general consequence, as the
manner of the Countries, and Governments both Eccle^ia^tical and Civil, in
which we spent some time: but in regard all that can be said of that matter, is
already related in the second Chapter of this second part, I shall therefore
here forbear it: but it wrought much upon the spirit of the Drugster; who
having formerly been a great stickler in Religion, was amazed that there was so
good a correspondence in Religion, which was as he imagined so barbarous: Well,
said he, I find that most places enjoy a greater happiness in their
conformities in Religion, then our Native Country of England; for there instead
of Unity and loving Conformity, they are rent and torn in pieces into many
Factions; and that has been the principal occasion of the effusion of so much
blood as has been spilt of late years. and when I left England, there was a
discontented party that was ready on all occasions to attempt a public
mischief for their private interest, and only to maintain a private self-willed
fancy, which they termed Religion.

I my self ^or a long time bewitched with a Fanatic Zeal; and my Master being a
man of the same Humor, had instilled such Principles into me, that I had much
ado to have any charity for any person that was in the right: but in time I
finding a great deal of strictness in the precise practice, and that under
pretense of much Zeal, there was more Covetousness then in any other
persuasion; I quitted that persuasion for another, and shifted so long, that I
found my life but one continued Comedy of errors. In the end I went over to the
Episcopal party; and one of the most powerful reasons that I had to follow the
Independent persuasion, was a Woman, my Mistresses Sister, as I suppose you
have already heard. Yes, said I, this our friend has given me satisfaction in
that particular, and I very well approve of the revenge you had upon her: and
as for my own part, I was once a very great Lover of the Ramble my self, but
left it, out of a more generous consideration: for being in company with an
Orthodox Parson, he told me that I was much mistaken in my opinions; he gave me
such a Character of a Libertine Zealot, as I knew to be true, and wholly put me
out of conceit with the Faction: they were now all desirous to hear what was
said to that particular; and therefore I told them I would recollect my self,
and give them the best account that I could, and such a one as I believed they
would conclude with me, was not only ingenious, but true: and thereupon I began
in this manner.

The Character of a Libertine Zealot.
TO describe him right, is a task like that of the Tailor who took measure of
the Devil; for there is nothing more like him upon Earth then he: He is lined
with Covetousness, and covered with Hypocrisy, the Root and Cloak of all evil.
Although at this time he carries a Bible, yet upon occasion he wears a Sword;
so that it is hard to say, whether he be of the Tribe of Simeon or Levi. He
swallows contrary Oaths faster then the Eagles in the Tower do gobbets of
flesh; for the way to Hell, and the Conscience of a Libertine, are two broad
things. He condemns the lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the Church; and is more
ravished with the squeaking of a Tythe-pig, then with the Music of Organs.

He appears at his Preachment (like Aesops Crow) in a dress of borrowed
feathers; for he preaches the works of other men, which are so much the worse
for the coming out of his mouth, as Wares for being of the second hand. But it
would grieve your heart to see how he racks the ancient Fathers, when he makes
his own confession, and mangles the Modern Divines more barbarously then the
Hangman did the body of Hugh Peter's: I am sure poor Priscian gets many a
broken head.

His Eloquence consists altogether in railing, as though he had got his
education at Billinsgate. In his discourse he runs on like a Mad-dog, foaming
and open mouthed, yelping at the Reverend Bishops; and even accounts many of
his own Brethren, the Sectaries, as mad as himself. Yet sometimes he perceives
that his stuff is too short for the Hourglass; and then the wheels of his
Rhetoric moove very heavily: he then spends much time in humming and spitting;
and with the wiping of his Nose, makes many a filty Parenthesis.

As for his Text, he handles that as Moses did his Rod, when it was turned into
a Serpent, he lays it down, and runs away from it: yet his Sermon lies all
written before him, for the poor Copy holder in Divinity can do nothing without
his Notes. Thi^ his weakness he would have you think is his worth, for he
charge men of abler parts with presumption: Yet when he prays, he shuts his
Eyes, pr^f^ring Nonsense and Tautologies before the Divine Lyturgy. Vain
Wretch, that dares not speak to men without Papers, and yet presumes to talk to
God extempo e^ As for his Cong^egation, he Saints or reprobate th^^, according
to what they give him; and like a Gypsy, tells good Fortune to none but those
that cr^ss his hand with a piece of silver; and by him, as well as by the Pope,
you may be Canonized for money: Thu^ he is a mere Balaam* that blesses and
cu^seth ^or rew^^d: he that opposes him, acts the part of an Angel; but he
that submits to him is worse then an Ass If you consider his constancy, he is a
kind of Religious Proteus, that is now ready to fawn upon that Power against
which he has so long barked. If therefore th^re be a Church in England which
consists of men, surely, The Orthodox, faithful, constant Ministers, are the
Doors, Windows, Pillars, Bells, and Candlesticks; and the rest serve only for
Weathercocks.

It is confessed, that at the beginning of the happy Reformation, he was a
little stubborn; perhaps, expecting a second War; but now (poor heart) he has
learned to pray for his Majesty: but (if you could hear the language of his
Soul) it is so, as impatient heirs pray for their rich fathers. There are two
sorts of men, who having escaped a deserved pair of Gallows, prey for the King
very strangly, that is, a Felon, whilst the Executioner burns his hand; and a
Traitor, whilst the Devil sears his Conscience.

If you would know his name, you may find it subscribed to an ugly Petition*
for where Bradshaw was a Pilate that condemned, he was one of those Jews that
cried Crucify. He professes sorrow for the Martrydom of our late Sovereign;
but believe him not, for his hand helped to hale him to the Block. In a word,
he is (at best) but a State Crocodile, and one that is Maudlin-drunk with the
Kings blood.

No more, but if you chance to meet with a Hue and Cry, you may tell them that
he was lately in a Sequestered Parsonage.

This Character was hugely pleasing to the Drugster, and indeed, he and his two
Companions, the Scrivener and Gregory the Tailor, did all conclude that it was
very ingeniously true, and gave much satisfaction to them in that particular;
and they all agreed, That the Dissenters from the Church, were the Murderers
of their Prince.

They all so well approving of what had been said of these Varlets, I told them
that I could likewise relate somewhat else of the same Gentleman's composure,
who writ the Character; and which I did conclude to be altogether as ingenious,
and that it was a great novelty, having never as yet been in Print: they being
earnest in their desires to hear me, I told them it was only the fifth Fable of
Aesop Moralized; and thereupon I began as follows: The Brutes would once go
hunt: a nimble Crew
Of those that dwell in Dens and Caves pursue
And take a goodly Stag, who in his fall
Proclaims sufficient booties unto all.
Each Beast being troubled with their hungry maws,
Were urging Clyents to their panting Iaws:
Divide, says one; another cries, cast lots;
With that, the Lion Roars, Away ye Sots;
Who Is that who says divide? pray be content,
The first part's mine, because most excellent;
And but one part! nay, then you do me wrong,
A second part is mine, because most strong;
And if you dare give credit to my word,
Our pain and sweat have meritted a third.
Now there remains a fourth, which is but small,
And scarce worth speaking of amongst you all;
Which you may give me willingly; and thus,
Renew the friendship betwixt you and us.
Be wise therefore; is it more safe to move
A Lions anger, or confirm his Love?
For if you show the least unwillingness,
I Will make you know the Senior of your Mess.
This said, the Hunters were amazed thereat;
They knew their distance, and they durst not prate,
But hung their tail betwixt their Legs for shame,
And went away more hungry then they came.


This, said I, was the Fable, which though it had already admitted of many
Paraphrases and Morals, yet was never yet in my opinion so fit and aptly
moralized, as in what I shall here recite, which I did thus: But take away the
brutes and clear the Stage;
Enter those mighty Nimrods of the Age:
That cursed Crew that hunted for a Throne,
And made a Babel in Religion.
Lo here they come, that England did express
To be more brutish than a Wilderness:
A wide-mouthed yelping-cur, with a long ear,
Of a Scotch brood, they called him --:
Cerberus was his Sire, and for his dam,
A Beast to whom Adam never gave Name.
The solemn Covenant which he did take,
Hun^ like a pair of Couples on his Neck,
The which he soon shook of; nay more, the Dog
Threw by his Conscience, 'twas a tedious Clog.
And then began the game: Actaeons hounds
Never gave their Master half so many wounds,
As these their King: it was a Hellish brood
That took the sent of none but Royal blood.
Loud was their cry, and nimble was their Race,
A sadder hunting far then Chevy Chase.
But at the length, the Royal Heart they take,
Nor would they spare his life for Caesar's sake;
But he must die, yet Noble -- scorns
His share, -- only got the Horns.
But like the Lion, Cromwell, that great man,
Made of Behemoth and Leviathan,
Thus speaks; And do you think, my friends, to share
That Prize in Peace, which I obtained in War?
Divide the spoil, and then as General, I
Claim the first part due for my Excellency.
A second part our able strength demands;
A third is mine, 'cause these victorious hands
In all those Fights wherein we had to do,
Were the most painful and most prosperous too.
Thus our activity, and strength, and worth,
Have wone three parts, there only rests a fourth;
Which we'll with Love accept, but if denied,
Our Sword shall teach you better to divide.
Thus, as our Saviors Vesture, which might not
Be cut in pieces, was obtained by lot:
So our great Charles his power, which could not be
Dissolved into an Aristocracie,
Was Tyrant Cromwels share; and now our whips
Were turned to Scorpions: Now the grand Eclipse
Began; we saw no Sun for twice seven years,
Only two fatal Stars by turns appears:
Protectorship, and Rumpish did prevail;
Nol was the Dragons-head, and they the Tail.
But welcome Charles the Second, happy are we,
That Britain's Monarchy's restored in thee;
If Cromwels life had put a period to it,
I Would both begun and ended in a Brute.


If they were pleased with the foregoing Characters, this Fable thus moralized,
gave them much more satisfaction, and highly contented them; for the truth
contained in it, was undeniable, and it was expressed with much ingenuity, and
they told m^, that certainly he that composed these two things, the Character
and Fable, was a person very ingenious* and able to convert any that were
seduced in that Faction, unless they were very obstinate, as most of that
Faction were: for having been Rebellious to their Prince, they made that saying
true, That Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, not to be repented of.

In this discourse of the several Factions in Religion we spent some time; and
the Drugster being best acquainted with all of them, made a discourse of every
one in particular from top to bottom: and when he came to speak of them, he
told us, that he supposed there would now in a short time be some end of these
growing Factions; because, said he, that Quakerism is the last that is risen
up, and it is now above twelve years since it began to be famous; and though
hitherto it increases, yet they have not found any other novelty from that, as
at first there was out of the first Religious faction: but there is not one
that is produced by the Quaker; so that it is hoped that will be the last of
the Factions. I have heard of one small Faction that contradicts the Quakers,
and that is one Muggletons Sect, who together with one Reeve, does pretend to
be the two last Witnesses that are to come upon earth. Reeve is some time since
dead, but Muggleton surviving him, is a great enemy to the Quakers, and their
chief Opponent: for they questioning his Call, he for that cause Damns them;
and so absolute he is, that he says, after he has Damned them, they cannot be
saved, not by Providence it self. He professes in one of his writings, being an
Interpretation of the 11 Chapter of the Revelations, That he, and he alone can
give a true Interpretation of the Scripture, and unfold the whole Counsel of
God, concerning himself, the Devil, and all Mankind from the foundation of the
world to all Eternity; and this was never revealed by any of the Sons of Men,
until now: Thus subscribing his Papers, By Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two
last Commissionated Witnesses and Prophets of the only High, Immortal, Glorious
God, Christ Jesus.

We told the Drugster that this Sect of Mugletons we had not heard of; and I
being very desirous to be further acquainted with this opinion, asked him if he
had read his Writings, Yes, said he, and there is as extraordinary matters and
opinions handled and treated of therein, as any Sect that this last age has
produced: nay, and more absolute he would make himself then all others; but he
more especially writes against the Quakers, in a manner condemning them all in
general. I desiring to be more particularly informed of his writings, he
granted my request, and proceeded as follows:

This Book of his writing, said he, falling into the hands of one Edward Bourn
a Quaker, is by him despised and cavilled at; for, he said that he had perused
it till he was weary with looking into it, for it was one of the dirtiest and
confusedest pieces of work that ever he saw: and many other particular cavils
had he against it; which Muggleton hearing of, is so much offended, that he
writes a Letter to him, dated in August 1662. and there he concludes:

I write these Lines unto you Edward Bourn, knowing you to be of the seed of
the Serpent, and appointed to eternal Damnation before you were born; though
you know it not, I do know it, by your speaking evil of that Doctrine which is
declared by us the Witnesses of the Spirit, by calling it deceit, confusion and
lies, with many more wicked speeches against the purest truth that ever was
declared by Prophet or Apostle, because this is the Commission of the Spirit,
and the last Witness of God on Earth.

Therefore for these your hard sayings against the Doctrine of this Commission
of the Spirit; In obedience unto my Commission, I pronounce you cursed and
damned, both Soul and Body, from the presence of God, elect men and Angels, to
Eternity: neither shall that light within you, nor any God deliver you from
this curse, but according to my word it shall be upon you, because you shall
know, that God has given power unto Man to curse you to eternity, and there is
a Prophet of the Lord now in England.

This Letter being thus subscribed, was Printed and sent to the said Edward
Bourn. Also another to one Samuel Hooker and W. S. both Quakers, wherein
amongst other things, he thus writes:

First I decla^e as I am a Prophet and Messenger of the true God, that the
people called Quakers, are not the ch^ldren of the most high God, but for the
g^nerality o^ them, they are children of the Devil, and are the very Seed of
the Devil, and were begotten by him; and I (as I am an Ambassador ordained o^
God by voi^e of Words) can as truly say, that they a^e the Seed of the Serpent,
and so the children of the Devil, as Christ did to the Jews, when he said, that
they were Serpents, yea Devils, and the Devil wa^ their Father. So can I say by
you Quakers, and ma^y thousands more as well as you, that you w^^e the children
of the D^vil, that were begotten by him, and not begotten by Adam, who never
came ^h^ou^h the loins of Adam, though they came through the Womb of Eve. For
this I know, Cain was the first born of the Devil, and Adam had no part in the
begetting of him. And from this Cain cam^ the Jews that Christ called Serpents
and Devils.

Much more he writ^s against the Quakers, and is as absol^te i^ his sentence of
Damnation against these t^o being almost in the same words as the former. H^s
w^itings in general are filled with many strange Op^ni^n^ and h^^i now the
greatest Enemy of the Q^a^^rs, t^ll^ng them that they are but some of the
m^l^ncho^ly o^t o^ Ra^t^rs, and by ^alling from Ranti^g t^ Quaking* ar^ ^ow
worse than before; for be^^re ^hey were in ^he Wild^^^es^* bu^ are now return^d
ba^k into Egypt, and so the ^u^ther off from entering into the Land of Canaan:
and in one place he is pretty pleasant with the Quakers, for says he, The
greatest things that ever I heard the Quakers do, is to find fault with a piece
of Ribbon, Gold-button, or a Bandstring, and such like, and to possess
themselves with a melancholy spirit of Witchcraft, and so ^all into
Witchcraft-fits, to lie humming and groaning, which does fright the beholders;
so instead of those merry Devils which they had upon the Ranting score, where
all was good, lying with their Neighbors wife, deflowring Virgins, coz^ning
and cheating, and destroying every one in their outward Estate which did
ente^tain them, and now that Devil is cast out, now they are grown in as much
extreme on the other side; for now they are grown so precise and exact for
Apparel and for words, no words must be placed out of joint, so that no man can
almost tell how to deal with them; and this melancholy Devil has cast out the
Ranting Devil, which makes them so proud and stiff necked, thinking themselves
that they are better than other people, when they are worse; for they are
possessed with the Spirit of Witchcraft, which makes them two-sold more the
children of the Devil then they were before; which none can discover but this
Commission of the Spirit; neither did I ever hear by any which heard the
Quakers speak, that they did ever Preach any sound Doctrine, but only exhort
people to hearken to the light within them* which is a very low and easy thing
for every ordinary understanding to comprehend; and this is the cause there is
such a multitude of men and women fall into it, etc. And thus did he proceed,
his whole writing being to pull them down, and set himself up.

Soon after the Printing of these Letters, I met with a Quaker, an acquaintance
of mine, and asked of him whether he had seen these Letters of Muggletons,
which went by the Name of The Neck of the Quakers broken, or cut in sunder by
the two-edged sword of the Spirit, which is put into my mouth. He replied, Yea,
he had. What thinke^t thou, said I, of those of your persuasion in general, and
more particularly of those persons whom he has damned? I think him to be a
deluded person, said he, for I have known him long, and also his fellow Prophet
Reeve, who is since dead: and I remember this one passage, that one of our
persuasion did calmly discourse with Reeve about many principal things of his
Judgment and Opinion: and though they did not agree to every thing, yet Reeve
said he, believed he would be converted, for that he was confident he was of
the seed of Faith, and not of that of the Devil; only that his eyes were not
yet opened, but in time they would. And thus they parted.

Soon after Muggleton (who was always more vigilant than Reeve) being affronted
by some Quakers, according to his custom, pronounced the sentance of damnation
against them; which the Quaker, who had discoursed with Reeve hearing, and
meeting with Muggleton, told him he had done very ill in being so rash as to
damn them: And further, charged him with wandering up and down to make Sects. To
this Muggleton replied, It is not I, it is those of the Quakers that wander up
and down; as those that went to New England, and John Perrot unto Rome, to get
the Pope and his Bishops to be Disciples of Christ; and there to be puni^hed in
his Body: and when he came home again, to be damned to Eternity by me for his
pains; because he went by the light within him, and was not sent by the voice
of God without him: Therefore eternal damnation will be his reward for going
without a Commission from God; and so will all the Ministers of the Quakers.
And whereas you say that my mouth is full of cursing, and that I shall reap of
the same: Likewise you say, that I am out of Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine,
that said, Bless, and Curse not; with many other sayings: As for my Mouth being
full of Cursing, that is my Commission; neither do I curse any but Devils,
which are appointed for it of God; and there is never a one that I have cursed,
that shall escape that Curse which I have denounced upon them; neither will any
God deliver them from it: for I do curse none but the Seed of the Serpent, who
had his Curse denounced upon him and his Seed, at the beginning by God himself.

To this discour^e of Muggletons, our Brother the Quaker making some angry
reply, in contradicting what he had said, Muggleton did for that cause
presently pronounce the sentence of Damnation, alleging that he was of the
Seed of the Devil. Thus, said the Quaker, though Reeve said he was not of the
Seed of the Devil; yet Muggleton his fellow Prophet said he was, and therefore
proceeded against him to damnation. Now, whether he be damned or saved, judge
you: And therefore, said he, I think it matters not much what he says, because
they thus contradict one another.

And thus we parted, and I concluded, that as it was no great matter what
Muggleton said or did; so there was no great heed to be taken with what was, or
should be said or done by the Quakers: I believing and knowing that what
Muggleton had said of them as to their humors, and falling from Ranting to
Quaking, and such like particulars, to be true; though I believed him, and all
other Factions to be alike deluded and mistaken in the general.

And, continued he, though this Muggletons opinions and Doctrine be thus
strange, and he a very inconsiderable unlearned fellow, being by Profession a
Tailor, yet he has gained many to his belief, who give him much respect; but
he takes no money of them, only he gets hi^ writings Printed, and distributing
them among his people, they pay him for them; but in the main, he works at his
Trade for a livelihood: and he has, as well as the Quakers, su^fered
Imprisonment, but has been released and savoured, as I have heard by some
persons of Honor, who are well willers to him.

Thus did the Drugster discourse of the Factions, and we with him did hope and
conclude, that since there was no greater a growth in Faction, there having
been no new ones for some years last past, that it was more than probable that
they would consume and moulder away of themselves.

The forenoon being spent wholly in the large Narrative of the Adventures of my
now fellow Companions and Guests, and the most of the Afternoon in this
Discourse, it was time now to think of parting; and they being mindful of the
Entertainment they were to give me the next day on board of their Ship, being
out of my house, furnished with some necessary provisions, all parted from me.

CHAP. XXXIII.
He is treated by the Travelers on board of their Ship, where he sees the two
women Travelers: he invites and entertains them at his house; where upon
enquiry and discourse, he discovers the two Women to be of his acquaintance
when in England.

MY Company being thus parted from me, I began to consider all the passages
that had been this day related to me; and after a serious contemplation of
them, I concluded, that I might place this day as the most remarkable in all my
life; for I was acquainted with so much variety of experiences, as I had in a
manner been hitherto wholly ignorant of* what had happened to me in the former
part of my life, having been trivial in comparison of what I had now lately
heard: and I concluded, that if I should have traveled to all parts of the
world to have found out Companions fit for me; I could not have been better
accommodated with those that should have been so agreeable to my natural
inclination, then those whom fortune had now brought to me. I had made it my
resolve, to make my li^e as comfortable as I could, according to the old saying
amongst those of my quality Though a short life, yet a merry: and I saw
Providence had put such an opportunity into my hands, that I had all things
provided for me, and nothing before their arrival was wanting but such a
Society. For I had a plentiful estate, but that gave me little content, being
without the usual Society of the Wits; and I now was likely not only to enjoy
that in a full measure, but also there was some female Company, the two Lasses
in men's apparel, who I understood were good Girl, and such I hoped as would not
prove hard-hearted, and deny one of their Countrymen the usual civility of
their enjoyments: I did not much question it, because indeed I was so much in
favor with Venus, that I was hardly ever refused that courtesy by any of her
Votaresses.

I told my wife, there was a great likelihood of much profit to be gained by
these Guests, who were resolved to take up my house wholly for their quarters,
and therefore I ordered all things to be provided in ample manner for their
constant entertainment: for though I was now rich enough, yet I knew not how
soon fortune might turn tail upon me, and therefore knowing that my Guests were
all well provided with Moneys, I was resolved to put in with them for a share
of it: But I had no thoughts of wronging them, or putting any trick upon them;
for it is accounted a very great crime in the greatest proficient of Roguery,
to cozen or cheat his fellow Thief, and a thing seldom done amongst them. I
had now some thoughts of leaveing my black wife and that Country; and when
these my new acquaintance should leave this place for another, as I suppose
they would, then to go with them, for there was nothing there that gave any
great invitation to stay in it, my inclination leading me rather to visit some
European Country.

These considerations took me up some time; and night coming on, I betook me to
my Cot, where I took my ordinary repose; and the next morning being come, I
apparelled my self the richest that I could* that I might add some grace to my
person, being to vi^it two of my Country-women, in whose favor I was desirous
to get some place. Being thus accoutred, I went to the Seaside, and with the
help of a Boat was soon aboard a Ship: where I was welcomed by the Captain and
the rest of the Company, and by them conducted into a great Cabin, where was no
other Company but the two Women; who now being apparelled in their Woman's habit
Ala mode d' Anglois, I was very well pleased, not having for a long time seen
any thing so acceptable and pleasant: I had not forgotten our English Fashion
of saluting them, neither were they backward in rising and meeting me in order
thereto: that done, I placed myself between them; I soon began a discourse to
them, which I knew would not at all be displeasing, and that was commending
their Beauties, telling them, that if the present Emperor of the Country, the
Great Mogul, did but understand what a treasure he had in his Country by their
arrival, that he would quickly secure it to himself, and hinder the prosecution
of their Voyage any further. To this they replied, that they did not believe he
would see any thing in them that should merit such an esteem: but, added one of
them, If he should do so, and be never so desirous of my Company, yet I am
better satisfied (in the Society that I am at present in possession of) then if
I were courted and served by the greatest Prince upon Earth.

To this so generous speech, I replied, that those persons who had the honor
to be her servants were in that very happy. These Complements being passed
drink was brought, and after that Victuals, which we had in great plenty, there
being no want of any thing that could he had at the best man's table in England;
and all the dishes of Meat were dressed in the English fashion, by a Cook of
that Country. After Dinner we fell again to discourse, the Women being very
desi^ous o^ Novelties, and to be acquainted with the customs of the Country,
especially of those used by Women; but when I told them of that Custom of the
better sort of Country-women, how they usually accompanied their Husbands in
death, by burning their living with their Husbands dead bodies, they were not
very well pleased therewith, accounting it great folly; for, said they, it
cannot possibly do their Husbands any good, and why they should so destroy
themselves out of a complement, was foolish. To pass through, and accompany a
Husband or friend whilst living in all dangers, is what is befitting; but there
being no remedy for death, nor no present enjoyment after death, thus to cast
away themselves, is ridiculous. We allowed of their Opinions, as grounded upon
reason: I asked them how they liked our Men, the Inhabitants; Not at all, said
one of them as a Husband or Bedfellow, but if there were no other men to be
had, we must be contented with them rather then none, as well as you are with
the Native-women. Various were our Discourses in which we entertained one
another with much pleasure, having a lusty bowl of Punch still standing by us,
which as we drank off, we renewed, and at some of our frolicks, one of the
great Guns were discharged. I had eyed both these women very curiously, and did
imagine, that I had formerly seen them, and had some acquaintance with them. I
knew one of them more particularly by the tone of her Voice, but it having been
so long a time since I had seen either, I could not call them to mind; I did
not at all think it covenient to ask them any particular questions, referring
that to a greater privacy. I being now acquainted with most of their
transactions, they asked my advice in disposing their moneys, and selling their
Commodities, and what to buy to turn to the bent advantage: To all these
Questions I gave them the best answers I could, to their satisfaction; and now
night coming on, I desired to leave them, and invited them all to my house the
next day, they not only concluded on that, but agreed that the Women should
constantly take my house for their quarters, it being more convenient then on
board of the Ship, they coming in their men's apparel, and I providing for them
with all privacy; to this I agreed, and after a fresh Cup of Wine, and my
ordinary salutes to the women, I left them and went home to my wife, who at my
desire provided all things necessary, not only for the next days entertainment,
but for the future convenience of my lodgers who were not to be known to her
for other then men.

The next day they came, and we were again all merry but some occasions calling
away the men, the women were left alone with me. I was now resolved to enquire
whether they had never known me: they both replied, Not that they at present
knew of; but they both said, that certainly they had seen me in England, but at
present they could not remember where, wherefore they prayed me to give them
some account of my condition and quality when I lived in England: To this I
replied, that I had indeed been of all conditions, and a very rambler, and it
was a great chance, but if they had been in any public house of
Entertainment, that I might have seen them there, to this they both answered,
that they had for some time been public enough in entertaining Gentlemen in
their Company with much freedom: But, said one of them, who was the Scriveners
Mistress, I have certainly seen and known you before I undertook any such
courses, for if I be not mistaken, you are the man did first deceive me, and
therefore, I pray, tell me, if in your travels in Englan^, you did not light
into a Farmers house, and d^d some kindnesses o^ discourtesies to his Daughter,
and then le^t her. I hearing her say this, after some small pause, recollected
my self, and seriously viewing her, concluded he^ to be the very Farmers
Daughter whose Maidenhead I bereaved her of, and in requital left her, and gave
her no other satisfaction then a paper o^ Verses. I being now resolved in my
opinion, ran to her and embracing her, begged pardon for that affront, telling
her, that it was only one of those ma^y youthful tricks whereof I had been
guilty. She at first out of sense of the affront I had done her, could not
forbear weeping; but I gave her so many good words, that in fine, she was well
enough satisfied, and lovingly permitted me to embrace and kiss her.

The other woman hearing that my acquaintance with her Companion began with the
loss of her Virginity, mus^d and blushed, and very strictly beholding me, said,
And truly, if I be not mistaken, I purchas^d my acquaintance with you with the
same loss: but I was deceived by you in a more subtle manner then this my
Companion; for she knowing you to be a man, permitted you to her bed (as she
has related to me.) But if you are the person that I mean (as I now think you
are) you became my bedfellow by a mistake; for not only I, but many others of
the Family believed you to be a Woman. I hearing her say this, fixed my eyes
upon her, but could not perfectly remember her: but to the discourse she made,
I gave this answer; Truly Madam, I have been often guilty of Female frauds; and
during the whole course of my life, I endeavored chiefly to have the Company
o^ F^males; and I hope if you were one of those with whom I ^ay at a
Boarding-School, where I went for a S^rvant-Maid, that you will forgive me that
fact; for i^ it were not there, I then cannot tell where I should have so much
happiness as to enjoy you. There it was, replied she, where I lost my Virginity
and honor, and which I have so often repented of; for I was then well beloved
of an indulgent Father, who for that fact cast me off; and ever since I was
forced to wander like a Vagabond, and by infamous courses to gain a livelihood,
and with this she wept.

I was much amazed at these two adventures, and indeed pitied them both; but
more especially the last, whom I had so long since deceaved; and seeing her
tears, I kneeled down to her, begg^ng her ^ardon, and telling her that what was
p^ss'd was not to be prevented or help^d; but if she plea^^d I would for the
future be he^ humble servant in ^ss^^ting her in what I might. To this she told
me, that she knew there was no remedy for what was passed, but that the
remembrance of that first misfortune could not but sensibly afflict her, but
she should throw off that sorrow, and make the best of a bad matter; and thank
providence, that since it was no better, that it was no worse: and as she had
hitherto been well contented with her condition, so she intended to frame her
spirit and mind to be so for the future; and that now she had the satisfaction
she had often desired, in seeing that person who first tasted and crop'd her
Virgin Flower. Her Companion did likewise say, that it was the greatest
satisfaction she had ever received since the loss of my company, that she had
again found me; for (notwithstanding my base and abrupt leaving her) she had
still preserved a more cordial love for me, then for any person she had ever
since then enjoyed. The other said the same, and though I was partly unknown to
her when I lay with her, as being disguised in woman's apparel, yet she still
had me in her memory, and often wished for the sight of me: And from this
discourse we all concluded, that though a Woman had many Husbands or Servants,
yet she seldom loved any man with so much affection as him with whom she first
tried and tasted the effects of love, and who had her Virginity.

Well Ladies, (said I) I am so much bound to you for preserving an affection
for me, who have so unworthily deserved it, That I shall dedicate the remaining
part of my life wholly to obey and serve you. As for that profession of your
love now, said the Drugsters Mistress, (who was the youngest, and her, who I
had enjoyed at the Boarding-school) it matters not much, for we have had
experience enough in the World to shift for our selves; and neither are we
unprovided of those who will take care for us, and save you that trouble. No
trouble at all, replied I, but an honor, which I pray you to bestow on me to
serve you in any degree.

They were very much surpised, and so was I at this adventure: And I thought
it was best to talk no more of it at present, wherefore I called for some Wine,
and such Banqueting cheer as I had, and desired them to participate of it,
which they did; and so I at present diverted them from that profound
melancholy wherein they were brought upon this occasion. At length they again
reassumed their jovial temper; and beginning to be a little frollick, I
assisted them in that humor: but I was very earnest to know their adventures,
being, as I supposed, concerned therein, they being both with Child by me when
I left them; I therefore begged the satisfaction to know what did become of the
Fruit of our enjoyments, those Children which I suppose they had by me; for I
told them I was not unsensible of the condition I left them in when I parted
from them. Truly replied the Drugsters Mistress, who was named Mary, I know not
at all what became of mine since it was born. And said the other, who was the
Scriveners Mistress, and was named Dorothy, and had been the Farmers Daughter,
I know but little of mine since it was a year old. I was desirous to hear of
both of them their several fortunes, or rather misfortunes since I first knew
them; and they agreeing to give me that satisfaction, it was concluded that
Mrs. Mary, with whom I had first to do, should first relate her story: and
therefore she began as follows.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Mrs. Mary relates how that she being got with Child at the Boarding-School, is
renounced by her Parents but provided for by her Aunt, where she lay in of a
Daughter, after which she is courted in way of marriage by a Gentleman, who
hearing of her mischance, instead of marriage abuses her; and being engaged in
a quarrel about her, leaves her to shift for her self, etc.

IN the discourse that I shall make to you concerning those accidents or
misfortunes that have befallen me, I shall neither be reserved nor tedious, but
plain and short; for I have no reason to disguise any of my actions to two such
persons, who are so generally welt acquainted with the general affairs of the
World, and who have a particular knowledge of me: Though, sa^d she to me, I
must needs confess I received very much pleasure in the first embraces I had
with you; when, though I supposed my self in bed with one of my own Sex, yet I
found to the contrary, and then tast^d the pleasures of a Male Bedfellow:
though, said I, the sweets of that converse were delightful at pre^ent: yet I
have through that only occasion suffere^ many cross^s, and been accompanied
with much affliction and trouble, which soon overtook me.

I was very young, not being above sixteen years of age when I first lay with
you; and so innocent I was a^ tha^ age, that I did not imagine that I should
h^ve ^ound so sudden an alteration in my body, as w^^ thereby occasioned;
neither did I conc^ive what would be the effects thereof, till some of my other
companions, who had lain with you before me, were di^cov^red to be sick, and
the occasion of their dist^mper being enquired into, it was ^ound they were
with Child, and th^n I did guess my self to be in the same condi^ion

^ suppose you are not ignorant of what you had done, and therefore took your
flight; but though you con^rived your e^cape cunningly enough by puttin^ on
^^ns apparel, yet it was observed, and you were ^ollow^d so narrowly, that we
supposed you had be^n ^a^^en, but it proved otherwise. Yes replied I, when I
made ^y escape, I made for London, and being ha^ited in a suit of Clothes of my
Mistress^s Sons, I wa^ ^^a^ful o^ being discovered and known by them, an^
therefore meeting with a young man of my a^quaintance: I remember, I persuaded
him to exchange Clothes with me, and so I escaped; but I would gladly know how
be came off. Truly, replied Mrs. Mary, that story was somewhat strange, for the
Constable who seized him, had order not to make much noise in the matter, but
only to secure him at present in his own house, which he having done, came to
our Boarding-School, and acquainted our Mistress that he had secured the party;
this being known, my Mistress sent her Son whose Clothes were stolen to the
place; where instead of finding our maid Jane (for by that name, I remember you
went, when you lived with us) he saw a strange young man in his Clothes, though
he was told before you had his clothes on, which he yet saw before him, yet he
knew you well enough, not to be so mistaken: for the party that was in that
habit was nothing like you; he therefore thoug^ that all that had been reported
to him was false, till he had made a further enquiry of the young man your
friend, who was first asked, where he had those Clothes: he not knowing any
reason he should deny any thing of the truth, freely and fully acknowledged
that he had them in exchange of his own, of a young man his friend; and being
asked many other questions, as whether he knew you, and knew you to be a man,
and where this Exchange was made? He fully resolved his Examiners of all
questions, and proved the Exchange of Clothes by the people of the house where
the exchange was made.

My Mistresses Son being returned with this answer to his Mother, it caused
great wonder in all who were not privy to your disguize, but there being about
seven or eight of us, who were knowing of that secret, and were known to lie
with you, we were all privately examined, and some of us having been sick for
some time before, and now strictly examined of the cause, and whether we knew
any thing of your disguise, and whether you were Man or Woman; we could not
hide or deny our knowledge thereof. Upon this discovery, our Mistress (though
she was termed a very discreet person) was so outrageous, that we thought she
would have lost the ordinary use of her Senses; and several revenges she
propounded to take of you, not thinking you were escaped her power: but when
she understood that you were gone, she caused all privy search and enquiry to
be made after you, but to no purpose. The young man, your friend, who had been
secured, was discharged, as being found wholly innocent of the crime; and
neither was he deprived of his clothes, but had them freely given to him, and a
good sum of money promised him if he could find and secure you: but th^^^h much
endeavor was used to find you, yet I could never hear any thing of you, till
this late encounter.

But to proceed in my story, our Mistress upon second thoughts resolved to keep
this business private for some longer time, to see how many of those seven or
eight with whom you had lain, would prove with Child; and it was not long
before she found that five of the number were pregnant, whereof I was one. How
she ordered the matter with the rest, I know not; but for my own part, my
father being made acquainted with my misfortune, wholly refused to take any
care or notice of me; neither have I ever since seen his face; for though I
supposed he loved me well enough, yet I had a Mother in Law, who might persuade
him to flight me, and made use of this occasion to throw me off: but though I
was thus cast off by my Father, yet I had an Aunt, who was Sister to my own
Mother, who came and visited me; and finding that what was past could not be
helped, took me home with her to her house; where after the usual time of Women's
breeding and bearing children, I was delivered of a Daughter, which was soon
after its birth sent further into the Country to be nursed: and I suppose it
was carried thus privately, in hopes to soulder up the crack that might be in
my reputation, which though it did for the present, yet it soon after brake out
again.

For a young Gentleman who lived in the next Town to that where my Aunt dwelt,
having seen me, fell in love with me, and often waited on me at my Aunts, and
took many opportunities of meeting me abroad. Though I liked and loved him well
enough, and could have been pleased to have entertained his love with liking at
the first offer of it, yet I was commanded by my Aunt to stand off, and be coy
in my entertaining of him, lest, as she said, he might by my freeness suspect
me of lightness; for the matter had been so privately carried in my lying in,
that it was not known to him nor any, but some few in the House; and to all
others I passed as a Virgin. I taking this advice of my Aunt, gave him but
indifferent entertainment; so that he who was passionately in love with me,
devised all ways he could to woe, please and win me; and to that end, he not
only presented me with many Gifts, as marks of his affection, but also
(according to custom) and that so largely, that she promised him all her
assistance, and gave him notice of all opportunities whereby he might wait on
me, and please me. All things were now brought to a very good pass, and my Aunt
had so prudently managed this affair, that my Father was content to part from
a considerable sum of money for my advancement which was ^o the full
satisfaction of the Gentleman who courted me.

There wanting nothing now to conclude this ^ffair but the accomplishment of a
few days, in which ^ll Writings were to be Sealed, and the Wedding to be
consummated; when all was done, and in that I undone, by the treachery and
pe^fidiousnes^ o^ thi^ ^y Servant maid. For she having received Gifts (...) the
young Gentleman, and I having angered her in a trivial matter, she to be
revenged on me, did a^qua^nt my Suitor with my condition, and that I should not
die with my first Child, for he should be a ^^ther ^he first day of Marriage.
Although at he^ first dec^aring this matter to him, he could not (...) re^^i^
thereto, yet she affirmed the same with s^ m^n^ and so earnest asseverations,
that he was confirm^ (...) that belief, and therefore enjoining her to ^e^^esie
(...) assistance, and to that end pres^nting her with som^what that was
considerable, he left her; and now (...) resolved to deceive me, as I intended
him, he ordered his affairs accordingly, and to that end he caused some delay
to be used in the Writings.

We being now, as I thought, as good as Man and Wife, I entertained him with
much f^eedom, and he courted me with less observance, coming now closer to me
in his salutes and embraces: I was so pleased with him in all his actions, that
I became wholly at his Devotion, and therefore without the consent and
knowledge of my Aunt, we went together out of the Town to a Merry making of
several of his Acquaintance, where we stayed somewhat late, and he having
caused me to drink to a good height, made a halt by the way, and we went into
an Inn of his acquaintance, he pretending somewhat was amiss in one of his
Horses shoes: here we having privacy, he attempted to be more free with me than
ever, and prevailed so far with me, that he had the examining of my Placket,
with more freedom then modesty would allow of; but though he would have
proceeded further, yet I refused it; he seeing this, desisted, and we again
remounte our Horses, and he conducted me safely to my Aunts: but although it
was very late, yet she sat up, and expected me; and expressed her self very
angry with him for keeping me out so unseasonably: he did not well relish her
words, but replied somewhat tartly to her again, which increased her anger, and
raised it to some passion, and so in anger they at that time parted, he riding
home to his own house. I was likewise suffi^iently schooled by my Aunt, but I
excused all with soft answers, and pleading obedience, which I thought I was
bound to pay him, being our Marriage was so soon to be celebrated.

My Lover was resolved to make use of that days experience of my easiness, and
my Aunts anger, which he was well enough pleased should continue, and therefore
forbore coming to visit me; but he sent a M^ssenger to my Maid (who had
betrayed me) to give him a meeting: she obeyed his summons, and there, and then
was my ruin contrived; for it was agreed between them two, that she should
persuade me to be ruled by him in every thing, without acquainting my Aunt any
more with my proceedings; and a Letter was written, wherein he express^d a
continuance of his love, and desires of mine, and for a proof thereof, he
desires me to provide my self to meet him at a place appointed, which I did,
and there we concluded to go for London together, where he promised to Marry me
without any more delays. I believing him in every thing, (being persuaded
thereto by my treacherous servant) took only some few necessaries with me, and
so went to him. And thus leaving all, went with him to London, where when we
were Arrived, he went to some Lodgings, where he had provided, as he said, for
himself and wife. I was at first contented with the discourse and name of Wife;
but when Bedtime came, I was not fully satisfied to go to Bed with him; which,
though I at first opposed, yet in the end, after many protestations of his next
days performance of Marriage, I consented to, and thereby agreed to my undoing;
for the next day, instead of Marriage, he went out in the Morning, leaving me
only with the Landlady of the house, and returned not in two days; and then he
pretended he had been in great vexation, for that very morning he left me, he
being going to speak with a Priest to Marry us, he was met with by a person, to
whom he was a little indebted, who basely trappan'd and Arrested him, and he
was forced to be in the custody of Bailiffs ever since, till he had persuaded a
Friend to lend him some moneys, which together with what he had of his own, he
said he had paid to his debtor, and so was discharged. And now, said he to me,
I have sent home for some more moneys, which I know will be brought me in two
days time, and then I shall put an end to this business of our Marriage

Although I seeemed discontented with what he told me, and did begin to believe
that he would abuse me; yet I knew it was to no purpose to be very angry, and
only caused him to give me fresh protestations of the honesty of his
intentions, and that as soon as ever his money was come, he would fulfill all my
desires.

Thus was I forced to be contented with what he said, and to comply with him in
all his desires: for we lay together; but I kept within doors very privately,
refusing to be seen by any body, till such time as our Wedding should be over.

But though two or three days, and a week was now past since he pretended he
had sent into the Country for money, yet there came no returns: at which I was
very much discontented, he also seeming dissatisfyed, I then told him, that I
had brought a small sum of money with me, which I supposed would be sufficient
to pay the charges of that occasion. He asked me how much I had, I told him
about 10 l. I remember he was somewhat blanck, and at a nonpluss at this
proposition: but he soon recovering himself, told me that he expected 100 l. to
be brought him, and that would be little enough to defray all the charges he
intended to be at; for he purposed to lay it all out in Clothes for me and
himself, that we might appear the more splendidly, not only to some friends in
London, whom he purposed to visit soon after marriage, but also in the Country
whither he intended in short time to return to demand my portion, and settle
all things according to the agreement of our friends and as for the small sum
of 10 l. he told me I would have occasion to lay it out in trivial things on
that occasion.

Thus was I put off at this time; and indeed so often afterward, that I in
plain terms told him, that I supposed he intended to abuse me, he being
resolved to stand the brunt of all my exclamations at this time, did not
endeavor, as formerly to pacify me, but rather provoked me to say more, and
be more angry with him, which I was, and reproached him with the abuse he had
done me. He having heard the utmost of what I could say, in short told me, that
he was the abused party; for should he marry me, as he intended, he should have
a greater charge to maintain then I told him of, for he had u^derstood that I
was Mother of a Child; and so the abuse that I would put on him was double: I
was so surprised with what he said, that I was more dead then alive, and could
not for a long time speak to him; and when I attempted it, I knew not what to
say for my self, for he ^i^^ctly told me, that he was acquainted with every
particular of that my misfortune: and thus having said, he left me.

Many and sad were the thoughts that I entertained in my mind, and I perceived
my self to be miserable: for to return to my Aunt, I knew it would be to no
purpose, I having thus abused her in my last leaving her. Therefore I concluded
it was my best course at present to comply with the desires of my first Lover,
not knowing whom to flee to for refuge; wherefore at his return home, I began
to him in tears to lament my sad condition, begging pardon for what was past,
clearly confessing the truth of all my former misfortune, and that I would for
the future be very obedient and constant to him in all things: he gave me the
hearing of what I said, and told me all should be well; but I could never find
him after that inclinable to marry me, only putting me off with one pretense or
other and having a full enjoyment of me already, cared for no more: and now to
content and please him, I must not only entertain several of his friends at
home at our lodging, but also wait on him abroad; and instead of a Wife, I
passed for his Cousen.

Amongst other persons that came to visit him, there was a Gentleman of good
quality, who being of his intimate Acquaintance, was frequent at our Lodgings:
he taking his opportunity to find me alone, made a tender of his Love and
Service to me, and offered me his assistance in every thing I should command
him. I finding that he understood somewhat of my condition already, and
believing it would be to no purpose to conceal any thing from him, did make him
an exact and true narrative of my misfortunes: he was much troubled at the
recital of things so strange, but did comfort me the best he could, promising
me his best assistance in putting his friend on to perform his promise of
Marriage: for, said he, I know little reason he has to deny or refuse it. For
your misfortune at the Boarding-School, was so subtle a business, that you
cannot w^ll be blamed for it.

This Gentleman accordingly did endeavor to possess my hoped for Husband with
that opinion, and to persuade him to marry me but all in vain; for he had now
all the sweets he could expect from me, having lain with me for above a month
together, and in that time I endeavored with all artifice I could, to give him
all possible content: but he was now cloyed; and therefore told his friend,
that for his Mistress he intended to keep me, but never to have me for a Wife.
I was near distracted when this answer was told me; but the Gentleman did again
comfort me, promising that he hoped in short time to put all things to rights
again. I seeing it was to no purpose to be angry, resolved to bear all things
with patience, and seem to be frollick, which was to a good height; and this
Gentleman seeing me in so merry a humor, was desirous to put in for a share in
the pleasure of my enjoyments, and to that end now courted me indeed: he had
been so civil to me in these late transactions, that I could not hansomely
refuse him any thing; but however, I for some time held out against all his
loving importunities; but he having an absolute freedom in our lodging, so
opportunity, that he won me to his embraces, and had a full possession of me.
Thus was I enjoyed by two men; but my last Lover was very cautious in keeping
this his enjoyment from the knowledge of his friend, and we took opportunities
in his absence to renew our pleasures. But at length we grew so bold in these
practices, that my first Lover discovered us, and waching his opportunity by
hiding himself in the Chamber, he took us in the manner. He discovering
himself, used many outrageous speeches to me and my Companion, as, that he
abused him, in persuading and urging him to marry with one who was his
prostitute: the other flew out in high expressions; and being valorous enough;
they drew their weapons, and before I could get any to interpose and hinder
their fight, my new Lover was wounded, and that so desperately, that he fell;
the other seeing that, and supposing him killed, fled, and so left me: and my
wouned friend being visited by Chirurgions, recovered a little, but desired to
be removed to his own Lodgings lest he might be prejudiced by the various
reports that would run upon this occasion; I was likewise willing to have it
so, as thinking it most covenient.

Thus was I left alone, and I, who lately had two Lovers and Servants, was now
left without any; for my old friend came no more after me, and my new Servant
who was wounded, was forced for his health-sake to be carried into the Country.

Now did I find my self truly distressed, for I wholly retired my self, not
seeing any man, and was only accompanied by my Landlady, and another ancient
woman who frequented her house. In vain did I expect the return of either of my
Lovers, and almo^t all my Moneys was gone, in Diet, and for payment of Lodging.
My Landlady proposed several ways and courses for me to take, as to send to my
first friend who brought me thither, which I did, but could not hear of him;
she would have had me send to my Aunt, but I wholly refused so to do, being
resolved to bear with any necessities, rather then again to apply my self to
her.

The other old woman, who, I told you, frequented our house, did then put in
some words to the Discourse, and my Landlady leaving us together, she told me,
that if I would be ruled by her, she would so order matters, that I should want
for nothing, and live the most pleasantest life in the world. I who was now
miserable enough, was well enough pleased to hear of pleasure, and bid her say
on: She thereupon told me, that it was great pity that so delicate a beauty as
mine should be closeted up, and that I should spend that time in tears and
lamentations, which might not only be a pleasure to my self, but many others
who would love me with a great deal of passion; and whereas hitherto I had only
been reserved to serve the pleasures of one man, or two at the most, and for
that I had only reaped sorrow and trouble; that I might command many, who
would, not only please and serve me, but I should command their purses, by
having money enough at my own dispose. Many words to this purpose she uttered,
and many arguments she used. Though at the first I did not understand what she
aimed at, yet by several Questions, which she answered me, I found she would
have me prostitute my Body for my pleasure, and to gain a livelihood; and in
fine, should get my living with the hands I sat on.

Though I had tasted man, as first with you, and afterward had two at a time,
my two late Lovers, and by that was induced to desire more of the same
pleasures, yet I was extremely unwilling to prostitute my body to every fellow
that should bring money in his hand; and this I suppose I must do, if once I
undertook that course. Thus I reasoned with this old woman, but she told me.
No, I should not do so, for I should only have my choice of what and whom I
liked, and few of such would be profitable enough to maintain me in a splendid
Garb; and to this she gave me so many reasons, that I consenting to leave my
Lodgings, went with her to the place where she conducted me.

CHAP. XXXV.
She gives an account of her being entered into a Bawdy house, where she
received great profit by the sale of her Maidenhead.

I Being now come to the place intended, was entertained by a Grave ancient
Matron, in whose face might be seen the ruins of no common beauty; and the
defects of that being occasioned by age, was sufficiently supplied in a
deportment and garb that was not common, though it were very pleasant. She gave
me many welcomes, and told me that she had a very great respect for me, having
heard of my misfortunes, and hoping that she might put an end to my sorrows,
and afford me fresh pleasure: she had to that end employed that ancient woman
as her Messenger, to persuade me to leave that house of Mourning wherein I was,
for hers, which was a Palace, nay, a Paradise of pleasure, wherein I should be
accompanied with all manner of contentment. I told her I should be willingly
obedient to her commands, in expectation of those pleasures she promised.
Several other Discourses we had, whereby she gave me instructions how to behave
my self; and, said she, since you intend to make one of my Family, I shall give
you an account of my manner and method in governing the same.

My house, continued she, being frequented by persons of all Qualities, it is
therefore necessary that I should be furnished with women, who should be proper
and fit for their respective accommodations, for the Servants and Pages must be
sometimes served as well as their Masters; I therefore distinguish those women
that belong unto me into three several sorts and distinctions; and because I
intend to make use of you only in the first and principal, I shall therefore be
more particular in my discourse to you of that.

You are therefore to know, that as my house is well enough furnished with
women to accommodate my ordinary Guests, so I have several who are kept abroad*
who serve for the extraordinary accommodation of my best sort of Guests, and
those are such as are so queamish stomached, that will not see one face above
two or three times; with these a Maidenhead is a very great dainty, for they
lay out with me for one, sometimes a quarter or half a year together. Now,
though I know you have parted from yours already, yet I question not but to
make a good Merchandise of yours, and get a good round sum of money for you and
my self; and if you will be ruled by me in everything, I shall so manage the
business, that you shall not have to do with above two or three in a twelve
months time, and they shall be such, as shall not only maintain you in a brave
Garb and equipage, but you shall gain many Jewels, and a good round sum of
money. To this Discourse I replied, that I hoped she would perform what she
said, and in expectation thereof, I should dispose my self to be wholly
directed by her.

This I remember was our first Discourse, or to this purpose, and she presently
orderd me a Lodging within a few doors of her house, where I had such another
as my self for my Companion, and we were very well accommodated with every
thing; my habit was somewhat altered, for I was now put into the most exact
mode that was then in best esteem. According to her Directions I carried my
self in every thing; and once a day I waited on her, or else she came to me. I
had not been there many days before she told me that there was an opportunity
to begin my business, and therefore she advised me to go the next day to a
Play; and set my self out in the best manner that I could; but she advised me
by all means to decline drinking, or entertaining any Discourse with any
person, though I should be importuned thereto, I promising obedience to her
commands; and my Companion, who was my Bedfellow, attended me to the
Playhouse, where by great attention to the Comedy that was acted, I did not
mind those who made it their chief business to gaze on me. The Play being done,
I went out, but was stayed by two Gentlemen (who by their Habits seemed of
quality) who offered me their Service to wait on me. I at first answered them
with silence; but they seeing I had no other Company but my Bed fellow, were
very importunate to have me accept of theirs. I told them that they were
strangers, and therefore durst not admit of their kind offer: Having said thus,
I called for a Coach, and though they still importuned me to accept of their
Company, yet I absolutely refused it, and so caused the Coachman to drive home.
That evening was I visited by our Matrona, who told me, I had done well, for
she had an account given her of my deportment: for, said she, it is not unknown
to me that you were offered the service of two Gentlemen, one of which is a
person who is a retainer to my house, an old beaten Soldier, and several such
we are forced to keep correspondency withal, that we may have new fresh Guests
brought to our house. The other Gentleman, said she, is one who has a long
time laid out for a fresh bit, and he was carried to the Playhouse on purpose
to see you; whom I gave my correspondent his companion so just an account of,
that he could not miss knowing of you: they both followed your Coach to your
Lodgings; and have since been at mine, and my young Coxcomb is very much
smitten with your beauty, and offers any thing that he may enjoy your Company.
I have promised him my assistance, but he must come off well first; and I
question not but to manage him so, as in few days you shall find the effects of
his love in some noble present, therefore said she, fail not to be directed by
me, and I doubt not but you will reap much pleasure and profit. I having
promised a just compliance to her desires, she departed leaving me in the
company of her Bedfellow, who that night entertained me with a large account
of her Adventures.

I remember she told me, that when she first came acquainted with our Matrona,
she was picked up almost in the same manner as I had been; and that in less
then two months, her Maidenhead was sold six times, for which she had gained
in Presents to the value of fifty pounds; and I suppose, said she, our Matrona
gained above as much more in money: since then, said she, my first Customers
have but rarely visited me; and she having no more Customers for my Maidenhead,
I now pass for a Merchants Wife, and am often sent for in that name; and I
seldom miss a day without one or two Customers, who entertain me as such a
person. She being thus free with me, I thought good to ask her some more
questions, as, how she paid for her Diet and Lodging? and from whence she had
Clothes? To this she answered, that for the first half year her Diet was paid
for by the Matrona, who indeed had all the Money that was gained by her; and as
for Clothes, she had them first of all lent, or given by her, and since given
her by those who had to deal with her: and now, said she, I pay for my own
Diet, and have all the Money that is given me; and all the profit she has, is
in selling her Wine, and other things she vendeth at our Collations; and now
and then I suppose she gets half a piece or a piece of a new Customer by
procuring me.

I was somewhat satisfied with this Discourse, and the next day I was visited
by the old Woman (who brought me first acquainted with our Matrona) who brought
me a Letter from my Amorous Gallant; I remember it was stuffed with
Complements, and all the happiness he desired, was to see me once more at the
Playhouse. In this affair, I taking advice with our Matrona, it was resolved I
should return no answer; but however, within two days, I again went to the
Playhouse, where I was no sooner seated, but I was attended by my Gallant, and
now I could not decline his Company: during the Play he treated me with all
manner of fruits, and such things as could be purchased there; and the Play
being done, he offered me a farther treat at some other place; but I refused
that, as also any further converse with him; and again (calling for a Coach) I
went home, refusing his company, and being very shie and coy to all his
Proposals, which though many, yet prevailed not at all upon me.

The next day I had another Letter sent me, as also a Diamond-Ring of Twenty
pound price as a present: I accepted of both, and then promised within two days
to meet him again at the Playhouse, where my Gallant came richly accoutred in
all his bravery, I then entertained discourse with him, and the Play being
ended, I at his earnest opportunity accepted of a Trea^ he quickly provided for
me at the next Tavern. I then told him, that I durst not stay, for I expected
my Uncle to come and visit me that Evening at my Lodging, who was to bring me
news out of the Country about my Father: he being desirous to please me,
consented to my departure, I promising to give him another meeting at a place
we appointed the next day, and thus we again parted. I was now so far engaged
with him, that I the next day again met him, and he then courted me for
enjoyment; but I seeming very angry, he to pacify me, gave me a Gold Watch,
and then I permitted him to embrace and kiss me; and though I contradicted his
proceeding further with me yet he found by me, that in time he might arrive to
it. In this apprehension he was very prodigal in his promises, and what great
things he would do, if I would permit him so great a happiness; he oftentimes
wishing himself a single-man (for he was Married) that he might make himself
happy in so brave a Wife, as he knew I would be. These Discourses, and others
which he used, and those many strict embraces which he gave me with the
tittilations of the flesh, and I had much ado to continue inexorable: but
remembering how I had been deceived formerly, and withal knowing that I had
not our Matrona's order as yet for fruition, I therefore contradicted my own
thoughts and wanton desires, and refused to let him proceed to any other
satisfaction than what he could get by kissing and embracing me, and handling
my Breasts and Neck, and so we again parted, I being still attended by my
Bedfellow.

We were no sooner come home, but she was sent for by our Matrona, to whom she
gave an account of our actions; but that was not all her business, for when she
returned home, and we were in Bed together, she told me she had been at the
Sport with a brave Gallant, with whom she had received great pleasure, for he
was newly come to Town, and willing enough to have continued the sport longer,
but that it was late, and therefore they had referred a continuance of the
pleasures to the next day; and that she had not only pleasure but profit, for
he had given her three Crowns, and promised to be more beneficial to her during
his stay in London.

This discourse of hers, the remembrance of what she had been at, and what I
might have received if I would, did very much fire me, and I then took up a
resolve not much longer to delay those pleasures I had now so long been
without; and thereupon being visited the next day by my Servant, (and having
the permission of my Matrona so to do) I entertained him with somewhat more
freedom than formerly, and went with him to the house of our Matrona, as if a
great stranger there; and now was I doubly courted, not only by him, but her;
so that I permitted him enjoyment, and he so well pleased me, that at his
further earnest opportunity, I consented to lie with him all Night, where I
satisfied him and my self in all those amorous sweets that two willing Lovers
could receive or give.

Whilst I was thus occupied at our Matrona's house, my Bedfellow was not idle;
for she understanding my place would be void, was resolved to have it supplied,
and therefore summoned her Country Gentleman, who very readily attended her,
and for that night was so pleased with her Company in the night, that he
desired it the next day at a frolic at a Tavern. She accordingly attended him,
where a plentiful dinner was provided, there being four or five Gentlemen, and
two Women besides her self. Dinner being ended, and some quantity of Wine drank
off, they all began to be merry, and therefore a noise of Fiddlers were called,
and they all fell to singing and dancing, in which they spent some time; and
the other two women being likewise Ladies of the right stamp, they did by turns
leave the rest of the Company, and retire by Couples into a private Room, where
they had the convenience of a Bed, and thus they spent most part of the Day.
Night drawing on, reckoning was called for; but it being a large one, all the
Gentlemen were dissatisfied, not being willing to pay so dear for their
pleasure, and to have such sour sauce to their sweet meat: the Fiddlers being
paid, they resolved to put a trick upon the Vintner for his reckoning. The
Fiddlers now playing their last Lesson, the Gentlemen one after another made
their several exits, leaving the three women to pay the Score; who for some
time waited the return of the Gentlemen with money, but in vain. The Master of
the house understanding how he was likely to be served, came up to the Women,
and gave them such a lesson as made them sing lachrimae: they made many
Apologies and excuses, but in vain, money or a sufficient pawn he would have
before they went. They considering the neceessity of the business, resolved to
leave some of their Rings and such like Movables for their enlargement.
Agreeing on the manner, they were now considering the matter, what, and how
much should be left, when two or three men entered the Room, and bluntly asked
for the Women, naming them by their several names. Not only they, but the
Master of the house was of opinion, that they were come with Money to redeem
them; but their Errand proved not so pleasant to the Vintner: for these men
declared themselves to be Bailiffs, and their business was to arrest the three
Women at several actions, and to that end produced their Warrant. The women
were much troubled, and began to exclaim that they owed no such sums; but the
officers who were not to be baffled, told them they were their Prisoners, and
must along with them. The Vintner now put in, and demanded satisfaction, and
would have the women leave some pawn for the Reckoning; but the Officers told
them, that they had best keep what they had for they might have occasion for it
upon the account of the Arrest; and for the Reckoning, the Vintner must take
his course at Law; the Vintner for some time opposed the Officers, and said he
would be paid first, and although a Constable was sent for, yet to no purpose,
for the Warrant being produced, they were permitted to march off with their
Prisoners; and a Coach being called for, they all crowded into it, ordering the
Coachman to drive toward the Goal.

The Women used many Arguments to the Bailiffs, who now having done their
business, seemed only at the request of the Women, to attend them to a Tavern,
whither the Coachman had orders to drive, and there they were conducted into a
Room, where instead of Bailiffs, and a Prison, they had the company of their
day Companions, who now kindly welcomed them, and acquainted them of their
frolic, and how all this was only designed to cheat the Vintner of his
Reckoning, who had formerly put tricks upon them. All parties being now well
pleased, they spent that night in the Tavern together, and my companion coming
home the next day, acquainted me with this Story.

CHAP. XXXVI.
In prosecution of her Extravagancies, she comes acquainted with a young
Gentleman, with whom she acts several frollicks, occasioned by seeing Plays
acted.

THis continued, Mrs. Mary was my beginning or entrance into my public
profession, and indeed, I cannot well call it public, for I was private and
reserved, not admitting any more servants but this one in one Month; and
indeed, in the first half year, I had but three, but they were so beautiful,
that I had wherewithal to satisfy my self in every thing: having in Jewels and
other presents, to the value of 100 l. Neither had I any thing to pay for diet
or lodging, the charge of that being always born by our Matrona who I found
had gained above 60 l. in money for procuration, and assistance in winning me;
besides, a great deal more money spent at her House in Collations and
Entertainments for me, which were very frequent and costly. The Trade for
Maiden-heads falling, the price being so great, I was forced to fight under
another Banner, and though I did not pass for a Maid, yet I was accounted in
the next degree, for I passed as the Mistress, or Lady of Pleasure of a Person
of Quality, who kept me as a great rarity for his own diet; and indeed I did
not deceive my first customers upon that account; for whereas I went under the
notion of belonging to one Person, I did belong to but three: and I was forced
to play my game pretty cunningly to please them, and not give them suspicion of
one another, for they being all introduced into my acquaintance by our Matrona,
or some of her Agents, she did help to manage my affairs; and when she knew I
was to accompany or lie with one of my sweet-hearts, she would tell the other,
(if he or they desired the same, that it could not be for the present, for
either I was waiting upon my Uncle, or some other Relation, or otherwise
employed, that I must be excused at the present: but against such a time she
would endeavor to procure me to accompany them; and this was her tale or mine,
when more than one importuned me with their visits, and by this means did we
both gain the money, and I, Rings, Neck-laces, Watches, and new Gowns, and
sometimes Gold to spend or Play away; but in time these three growing somewhat
weary, or tired both in their Bodies and Purses, but especially in the last,
they by degrees left me, seldom visiting me, and when they did, they would
desire their pleasure on free cost, although I could not be so ungrateful as to
deny them that which cost me nothing, and which I had equal pleasure in, yet I
saw it was time to look out for other better customers; and therefore as I told
you, I passed as the Mistress of a Person of Quality, and was sent for to our
Madonas house, whether I would pretend I had stolen out, but durst not stay,
least my amorous Master should return and want me: several persons I enjoyed at
this rate, and much ready money was coming to me; for they with whom I had to
do, understanding I was a professed Lady of Pleasure, knew well enough that I
would not be contented to pleasure them without a reward; and therefore they
gave me money. But now the case was somewhat altered, and I must now pay for my
Diet, for our Madona has, as I told you, a certain custom or rule which she
walked by, which was this, that at the first she paid for Diet and Lodging as
long as the Maidenhead customers lasted, for all that time she took the money,
and the Woman the Presents, very little money coming to their hands; and indeed
it was not by our rules thought honorable or convenient, that a price in money
should be given on that account to the party her self; but when they came under
the notion of a Lady of Pleasure, and Virginity was gone, then it was accounted
reasonable, and indeed necessary, that the Party her self should receive money
for her better support, and then she must be at the cost of her own diet; and
this was my cause: And my Companion and Bed^ellow, who had bin in this
condition for some time, and had passed, as I now did, for a private Lady, a
Merchants Wife, and several other Titles and qualities, was now grown so
common, and her face was so well known to all our Madona's own house, and there
serve in common for all Gentlemen customers that come. Thus as I was removed
one step lower then I was, so was she, and it was not long ere I had a pretty
young thing brought to be my companion: and though her Virginity had been
parted with above a twelve month before, (as she confessed to me) yet she was
to succeed me in my place, and act the part of a Virgin as I had done.

I now began to bethink my self of what I had bin, and what more I was to be,
and run through: I found that I was already at the second degree, and that in
short time, I must follow my late companion to the third, and be forced to go
home to our Madona's house, and there prostitute my self to every drunken
fellow that brought money in his hand; to be slabbered, tumbled and tossed as
he pleased: this I say went against my stomach, and I was much troubled at it;
nay, I saw that some who had bin in as high a place and degree as my self, were
in bad condition enough; for there was one who was my late companions Bedfellow
before I came, and was at that time called into the house to make room for me,
this Woman being very frollick, and withal negligent of our Madona's commands;
which were to Sweat, Bath, and Purge, and use other remedies to drive away all
distempers; she I say being negligent and wanton, and keeping an open Stable
for all Horses, gave entertainment to a running Nag, which so paid her, that
she was soundly peppered, not with a Horse-Pox, but as bad, or a worse disease,
which stuck to her so soundly, that notwithstanding our Madona's diligence, she
was fain to go under the Surgeons hands. Nay, and those that did Escape this,
were in time put to bad offices, as to attend the rest, and when their money
was gone, they served the Grooms and Skip-kennels that attended their Masters
to our house.

These considerations, I say, made me think of a remedy to take in time; and
therefore I was resolved to order my matters so, as never to come to our
Madona's house, but provide for my self before it should come to that point;
and therefore I purposed to accept of the offers of the next best customer that
came, that would take me from the condition I was in, and to provide for me;
for it was a usual thing, that we had many offers by several persons to take us
away; and keep and maintain us privately.

I had now every day more variety of servants then formerly; for now I had done
trafficking for my Maidenhead, I was more free and open, and to be courted and
treated at a cheaper rate; and now I was at my own dispose, whereas before I
was still watched by our Madona, or my Companion, who had it in charge from
her, to give an account of all my actions; and the same charge had I given me
over my new-come Bedfellow. All that was expected from me, was always to be
ready at my Lodging, to come when sent for; but I had this in general, and so
had all the rest of our Companions, not to permit any man to exceed kissing and
feeling, till 3 or 4 Bottles of Wine were first drank.

These, and many other Maxims we were instructed in, which I shall omit, and
only give you an account of two or three frollicks I was a party in whilst I
professed this quality, and so conclude.

Among other Servants or Sweet-hearts that I had, who were my constant
customers, I had one, a young Country Gentleman; who, being Heir of a good
Estate, was brought up to London, and placed in one of the Inns of Court; but
instead of studying Law, he applied himself to a more soft and effeminate
study: the Art of Love and Courtship; he had read Ovid's Art amandi, at home
in the Country, and could repeat many lines out of it; and he had read some
other pieces of Poetry; but his fancy was not drawn to the height, till he had
not only read some Comedies, but also seen them acted; and then he was so taken
with them, that he spent his time commonly every afternoon, in seeing one
acted: he being a guest at our house, (being introduced thither by one of our
Hectors) and his Pockets being very well lined with crown pieces, our Matrona
thought me a fit Mistress for him; and he being a handsome young fellow, I
willingly accepted him for my Servant: he being as I told you, well skilled in
Ovids Art of Love, would often make use of several of his expressions, to
persuade me to his embraces.

Though he needed not use these arguments to induce me to permit him to enjoy
me; yet I was well enough pleased to hear his Poetry; and I being no Novice in
the School of Love, did withstand him, knowing that the mind is most eagerly
bent on that which is forbidden; and therefore, like a torrent, it overflows,
and becomes more impetuous by opposition; and I had read so much Poetry as to
remember that, She that is willing to love me,
To her unwilling will I be
And, Proffered pleasures I defy,
Give me her that does deny.


He making use of his Poetry, made me think of mine; and therefore I was the
more coy to him; but still held him in hand, and gave him certain hopes of an
absolute enjoyment: This his vain of Poetry was not only pleasant to me, but
profitable; and he fell into one of the finest humors that I have heard of: for
I attending him to the Play Houses very frequently, we one day saw a Play
called Philaster, or, Love lies a bleeding: The Play being done, we went to a
Tavern, and there he highly commended the ^ction, but above all things, the
women's parts: he was very much pleased with Arethusa's constancy and love to
Philaster: but that which tickled him most was Megera's acceptance of
Pharamon's Court-ship; for though she were a great Court-Lady, yet she accepted
his gold which he presented her, and was so kind as to attend his pleasure in
his lodging. Now said he to me, though I have tendered you my service, and am
willing to make you a present of all I have, yet I cannot induce you to be so
kind to me.

I now hearing him at this point, was resolved to accept him and his present,
(for, though he had been some days in my company, yet he had bestowed nothing
considerable upon me) therefore I told him that it was true, the Lady Megera
did accommodate Prince Pharamond; but he did first present her with somewhat
that was considerable, to induce her to it; and though I had a very great
respect for his love, yet there was some what more then love to be tendered, as
he might now very well understand by this late passage.

My yonker (who I suppose, had never tasted woman, but with his Mothers Chamber
Maids, or some such Creatures, knew not what belonged to Women of my
profession) being now awakened, as it were, out of a dead sleep; quickly drew 5
pieces of Gold out of his Pocket, and made a present of them: You may be sure I
was not coy nor cautious in receiving them, but quickly put them up; and, for
the present, thanks was all I returned, delaying him in his desires, till we
came to our Madona's quarters; where we had a plentiful Supper: And I having
now acquainted her how I had dealt with my Young man; it was thought reasonable
that he should have a nights lodging for his Money; neither did I refuse it,
but agreed to all he asked me, and I so well pleased him, that I persuaded him
out of a Diamond Ring worth 5 l. more.

I am the more particular in my relation of my acquaintance with him: and the
means of our closing, by seeing a Play, because of the advantage I gained on
him afterward by the same occasion: for the next day we again going to see a
Play, it happened, that it was the Siege of Rhodes, and then he was as much
taken with Roxolana, as he had formerly been with Arethusa, and highly
commended that part: I perceiving his fancy, tol^ him, that I supposed he would
be very glad to embrace Roxolana in his Arms; Yes, said he, that I would,
though it were at the expense of 20 l. well said I, give me the money, and I
will so order the matter, that you shall receive that satisfaction; nay, said
he, but I doubt you will be offended thereat, no said I, it will be as much to
my content, as yours. He hearing this, without any difficulty, agreed to give
me 20 l. which was sent me that evening, I told him the next day, that in one
weeks time, he should receive the content he expected, and to heighten his
expectation: I refused to let him lie with me in the mean time.

In this weeks time I so ordered the matter, that I got a Tailor, and other
persons who were used to make the habits for the Players, to make me a habit in
all things like to that of Roxolona; this being done, I acquainted my young
Gentleman, and told him that for his better satisfaction, he should see the so
famed Princess at our quarters, where he might have more freedom then at any
other place; he was herewith very well contented; he habiting himself in the
richest garbs he had, and a Colation was provided to treat his expected
Mistress; all things being thus fitted on his part, I put on the provided habit;
and instead of his expected Roxolona, I entered the Room where he was, attended
by two or three, who bore up my train, and had set my self out with so many
Jewels, both good, and counterfeit: and was indeed in all things so like the
Roxolana he had seen, that he doubted not but I was the very same, and was much
surprised at the matter: and although my face was as lovely as hers, yet I had
added somewhat thereto to appear more beautiful.

Our Matrona seeing him somewhat amazed, went to him, and rouzing him up, asked
him, why he did not salute me; for said she, though her habit is not English,
yet you see she is of this Country, and will admit of the ordinary salutes. He
being now quickened u^, approached me, and gave me the ordinary salutation^,
which I accepted, and at his request I sat down by him. Well said our Matrona,
has not Mrs. Mary per^ormed her promise with you. Yes, said he, to admi^ation:
and if before I desired this Ladies Company at the first view, I am much more
pleased than I expected; and as I have a very great esteem for this Lady* and
intend to continue it, yet that shall be no prejudice to Mrs. Mary, whose great
love and kindness to me in this particular action, I shall always remember, and
largely requite; Well Sir, said I, what love you bestow on her, shall be very
acceptable to me, and I shall endeavor to retalliat the same.

My young man had not till now heard me speak, and though he did, he could not
distinguish me by my voice, so great a difference was there in my habit, from
my ordinary dress, that he did not so much as suspect it, but, hearing me speak
with so much affection for Mrs. Mary, ha! replied he, that since I was so much
a friend to her, he was the better satisfied in what he had desired; and he
wanted nothing to content him so much, as her presence. Well, said our Matrona,
if that be all, you may have that satisfaction quickly: nay, and you have it
already; for she is in this Room: he hearing her, looked earnestly about; and
though he gazed much in my face, yet he could not discover me; but my greatest
business being now done, our Matrona could no longer forbear, but fell into a
very great fit of laughter, and so did the rest of the company; neither did
this make him sensible of the matter, till our Madona, taking him by the hand,
caused him to take me by mine; and told him, that if he desired Mrs. Marys
company there, he had it; for she was the same party with that Lady, and had
only put on that habit, to give him the content and satisfaction he desired.

Although at first he could not credit what she said, yet looking again
earnestly upon me, he discovered the matter; and then he said, Ah Madam, I did
not imagine that you could be guilty of so pleasing a fallacy; but I am very
well satisfied therein, and am now more glad that you have found out this way
to please me, than if I enjoyed the very party her self.

To this I answered, That I hoped I should as well satisfy his ^^sire in
enjoying that Princess whom I represented, as if he had in his Company the same
person who acted that part at the Theater; for, said I, it is only her habit
that makes her appear so like a Princess; and I, being now in the same dress,
may as well pass as she; and as for face and other parts, I shall not give her
any pre-eminence, neither I hope will you, if you look on me with an impartial
eye.

My friend was very well satisfied in what I had done and said, and now coming
more near to me, we fell to our Collation with much freedom. I was attended by
^everal whom I had appointed to that purpose, and demeaned my self so
Majestically, that as they told me, I might very well pass for the very person
whom I did represent; and my Gentleman was so extremely well pleased, that I
thought he would have lost his Eyes in gazing at me. Our Collation being ended,
I and my attendants Danced, and spent much time in such kind of divertisements;
but I saw that my friend was impatient till Bedtime came, that he might have
me his beloved Princess in his Arms: we were waited on with all manner of
state, and had Music attending us, not only at the time we were up, but also
when we were in Bed: they being placed in the Chamber adjoining to our
Lodgings, where they played for two hours space after we were retired.

The Strength of imagination was much, for as my bedfellow imagined that he had
a Princess in his arms, so I conceited my self to be little less, great was the
pleasure I received from, and gave to my bedfellow, for we were both in the
flower of our age, he being about twenty, and I eighteen, we had both equal
desires, and thought of nothing but pleasure: we banished all other passions,
to make way for that of love, according to the Poet. Fair Venus never goes to
Bed,
To those that are with sorrows fed.


CHAP. XXXVII.
Her Friend being forced from her by his Friends, she meeting with one of her
old acquaintance, falls again to trading for her self, till in the end, she
meets with the Drugster, who kept her for his private use.

ALthough I was well enough pleased with my nights lodging, and so was my
Bedfellow: yet as the longest day, so will the longest night have an end; and
as no pleasure is lasting, neither would ours continue, for the morning being
come, we were again called up by Music, but being glutted with that, we
ordered them to retire, and I first arose out of our Bed, and going to dress me
in my ordinary habit, my Bedfellow did forbid it, and entreated me to give him
the satisfaction and delight to see me again in my Turkish dress. He having
pleased me so well, I was contented to pleasure him, in a request that was so
indifferent; and therefore dressed my self accordingly.

He was so well pleased with me in every thing, that taking me in his Arms, I
remember he sighed, and I demanding the reason of that passion, he told me, it
was out of the extremity of the love he bore me, and which he desired above all
things to continue; indeed I liked him so well, that I could have been well
enough contented to have been his Wife, and have left all the world for him,
for he was of so easy a pliant nature, that I could have wrought him to any
thing: and therefore being desirous to make use of that opportunity, I desired
him not to be melancholy, for all that I could serve him in, I should readily
do: he finding me so free with him, told me, if that I would wait the death of
his Mother, he would make me his wife, and in the mean time would entertain me,
and provide for me wholly as if I were so: but he durst not Marry me till his
Mother was dead, she having a great power over his Estate, his Father who was
lately dead, so ordered it; and beside, he was not as yet of Age to demand it.
I being desirous to close with him, (not only out of a desire. I had to leave
that course of life I then led, but also out of pure Love I bore him) soon
agreed to be wholly disposed by him, and desired him therefore to be constant
in his affection; and take some time to consider how to dispose of me, and I
should readily consent to it, for he knew as well as I, that it would not at
all be convenient for me to remain where I was. This was our discourse, and
then we went from our Chamber into another Room, where we were expected by our
Matrona, and some others of my companions, the next day also we spent in
^rolicking and mirth* but the whole charge of it, was not bo^n by my friend,
for several of our Matrona's Friends and Clients did participate in the cost,
as w^ll as the mirth, which was very high, and lasted all the day and night,
and then tired, though not satisfied with such delights as Bacchus and Venus
could afford: we (having imitated the Empress Messalina in our debauchery; of
whom the Poet says, The Impereal Stumpet, with one Maid, stole out
In her Night hoods, and having cast about
Her black hair, a red Perriwig she got,
Into the stews --
There many thirsted for encounters tried,
Departed tired with men, not satisfied.


This frolic being at an end, I and my friend began to be serious, and in
short time after, he provided me a private Lodging, and I making up my pack of
Clothes, Jewels, and Money which I had gained, and which was considerable; left
our Madona, and now retired my self, and resolved to be very honest, and
absolutely constant to my friend, who continued his love to me in a very great
measure.

But at length, all the Moneys that he brought to Town with him, and all else
that he could get or procure, was spent; (for he had not spared any thing I
desired to content me,) and which was worse, his Mother came to Town to visit
him, and upon examination, he could give little account how he had spent his
time and monyes; wherefore it being concluded, that ill company was the cause,
his Mother laid out very diligently to discover what company he kept: though he
abstained from coming ^o often to me, as formerly. Yet, he either sent, or came
to me every day, that he might not be absolutely out of favor with his Mother,
I furnished him with what ready money I had, and he in requital, promised me a
continuance of his love, and a retalliation of my kindness, and which was more
than all, he engaged to Marry me, (notwithstanding all the oppositions his
Mother or friends could make) if I would stay till he was of Age, and had his
Estate in his hands; I had this promise from him, not only by word of Mouth,
but also by Writing; but all these promises were quickly vacuated and void; for
his Mother by her extraordinary diligence, found out his haunts, and discovered
his coming to me: and followed the tract of my actions and life: that she found
from whence I came, and who I was; and then soon concluded, that I had been the
chief occasion of his mispending his time and Moneys; and now she mustred up
all her wits, to prevent his ruin, which she supposed would be inevitable, if
he continued any longer a correspondency with me.

To this end she called her Son before her, and examined him in the presence of
all those of his Relations and friends which were then in Town. She laid the
business so plain and home to him, that he could not deny the matter, but
somewhat of the manner he did; for whereas she reported me an absolute
Prostitute, he alleged me virtuous and modest, as indeed well he might, (for I
had ere since my first acquaintance with him, been constant to him) but it
being proved from whence I came, and how immodest I had lived, it was a
sufficient argument to make out what I was, and that I could not be a fit Wife
for him: She was a very discreet Woman, and one who had known the World, and I
suppose was well enough acquainted with that saying of the Poet. If Modesty and
Women once do sever,
Farewell their Name, farewell their Fame for ever.


And therefore it being evident enough what I had been, she from thence
concluded what I would be: In fine, she so scooled her Son, and ordered the
matter, that he was contented to relinquish my company; and because she would
be sure he should do so, she never left till she had got him in the mind to
Travel, and so putting him in an equipage befitting his quality, she sent him
for France.

Thus, when I thought my self near the greatest happiness I ever yet arrived
to, (which I earnestly hoped, and expected by being married to this young
Gentleman) was I stripped of all joy and comfort, in his sudden and absolute
departure from me; his Mother and Friends, were so strict with him, that they
would not permit him to take his farewell of me; I only received a short Letter
from him, wherein, he complained of his ill fortune, in being thus forced from
me: but more especially at the manner of it; for he had not the opportunity,
nor power to be civil to me, in reimbursing me with the moneys I had lately
furnished him with; for his Mother gave him more ready moneys, then he should
have present occasion for; promising him, to supply him with more by Bills of
Exchange, when he should arrive at the place he was designed for; and then he
promised that I should hear further from him.

This was the substance of his letter; and indeed I could not well complain of
him: for what moneys he had lately received of me, had formerly been his own;
but I was now reduced to a very low condition: having no ready money, so that I
was forced to sell some of my Jewels; and for a while supplied my occasions
with the moneys they yeil^ed me; I living a very solitary, and retired life,
and all my pleasure was in reading Plays, and Romance: in which I spent much
time, and took great delight; I wai^^d long in expectation of letters from my
friend, according to his promise; but whether he sent, and they were
intercepted, or how; or whether he ^orgot me, or (...), I know not; for I never
after that heard of him.

Being weary with this soli^ary life; and finding no effects of my friends
pro^i^^ to send to me; I began to consider what course I was to take; I was
very unwilling to visit my old Matrona again; but one day* I was met by one of
my old ^weet-hearts: one of those whom I had known in her h^use; but I saw by
his habit, and afterw^rd^ by the strength of his Pocket, that he was but in a
low condition, and was more ready to receive, than give, he ^astned on me for
old acquaintance sake, I was forced to drink with him; but he ingeniously told
me, that Hector was not in the Field, he had no money in his Pocket; wherefore
I (though money was not very flush with me, as having had a long time of
vacation:) not only paid our reckoning, but at his entreaty, double horsed him,
by lending him, (or I may rather say, giving him) two half crowns.

This put him in Stock and heart, and he gratefully acknowledged my civility,
telling me, he would requite it, and talking of thousands he was to receive. He
was very earnest to know my Lodging, but I concealed that place from him, and,
as I thought, parted from him warily enough, and went many ways about before I
went home, bu^ he dogged me, and seeing me housed, waited, lest that might not
be the place; but after a sufficient stay, he was better satisfied; for I came
no more out, and so he went to his quarters.

This my old acquaintance, as he had formerly been bit, and had others lived
upon him, so now he only lived upon others; and though it was not above a tw^
new month since he was a great gallant, and spent very highly with me, yet he
had made have and consumed above 3000 l. he was young enough, and as wanton and
desirous as ever of my Company; but he knew very well I would not consent,
unless there were money in the case; he being destitute of that necessary
commmodity, therefore sought out for one who was better suppl^ed with it; he
needed not to look long, neither did he, till he found one, who was now, as not
long since he had been, better stored with money than wit, and as desirous of
pleasure, being willing to have it at any rate; him he tells of a rare
purchase, a Lady whom he had the happiness to be acquainted with, that was
rarely handsome, of an excellent good nature, and he questioned not but she
might be flexible. The monyed Gallant did not ask many questions, but desired
by all means to see this celebrated beauty; for he doubted not but she must
needs be handsome, whom the other so cried up for beautiful. My old
acquaintance was as willing as he to attend him to this Lady, which was my
self; and therefore to me they came, and believing that confidence was the best
way of speaking with me; he boldly asked to see and speak with me; pretending
great business, not so much as questioning whither I lived there or no. The
people of the house believing him one of my intimate acquaintance, directly
brought him and his friend up into my Chamber.

I was somewhat surpised at the sight of him; but after the first salutes, he
took me to one side, and privately told me all his design; and that this party
whom he had brought, was a very well-monied man, and much might be squeezed out
of him. Altho^^^ (...) was not yet resolved to fall to my old trade, yet ^ow he
was come, I knew not how to put him off, wherefore I indifferently entertained
him, and I may very well say indifferently, because I was yet cold in my
desires, and had very little appetite, however some bottles of Wine being sent
for, we drank them off: and my young Gentleman being warm in his gears, began
to talk a little boldly, but it was to no purpose, for I forbid all actions,
and at that time he only purchased a kiss, but (that I may draw to a period to
my discourse) I did not long continue so cold to him, for he bringing meat in
his Mouth, good store of Gold in his Pocket, which he willingly and freely gave
me, I permitted him to take all the pleasure he could receive by me.

Thus did I renew my old trade, and my old friend, who had brought this new
acquaintance, finding some benefit and profit in the case; for he had money of
his acquaintance, whom he had brought, as also of me, neither could I at
convenient times deny him the pleasure he had formerly tasted with me; he, I
say, having both pleasure and profit, turned Broker for me, and brought me
several Merchants, who traffiqued with me for pleasure, which I commonly
afforded them a good pennyworth, though sometimes a dear one, for I would not
deal with every ordinary fellow, and therefore was paid the better, by those
who were my customers.

But let me do what I could, I saved little or nothing at the months end,
(years I will not say, because I was weary of this trade in six months time:)
for I now had not only my self, but this my old acquaintance, and new Broker to
provide for; for he finding that most of my profit came in by those he brought
me, would be very bold in demanding a share with me: and his expenses were so
high, which he pretended, was only to bring me of the better sort of customers,
that I was now poorer than ever, and he now became so impudent, that he would
not only command my money, but my Rings, and other Jewels, which he would sell
or pawn as he lifted; and indeed, it is the fortune or misfortune of all those
of our quality, to be troubled with some such fellows, hangers on as we call
them, or else we should or might in little time gain sufficient Estates; but as
I say, commonly what we get one way, these followers spend the other, so that
at length, all that we are likely to purchase, if we have not a great care, is
only a disease, which may stick long enough by us. I being fearful of this,
for my Friend or Hector, I may call him both, was now grown so intemperate,
that he kept all companies: and if I refused him money, or a nights Lodging, he
would go to any other common Woman, the first he met withal, and so afterward
coming to me, I might be spoiled; to prevent this, I privately left my
Lodging, and hearing of two of my own Sex and quality, that were going a
progress into the Country to take a frollick, I made the third, and had a man
as well as they to attend me; and as I expected, to bear my charges; but we all
reckoned without our Host, for we were basely trappand by those who went with
us, and left in pawn for a reckoning that was considerable; we were in a
strange place many Miles from London, and much distressed, but at length a
resolution was taken, that one of us should go to London, and fetch money to
redeem the rest, it fell to the lot of one of my companions, who being on her
journey, had the good luck to meet with honest Gregory, our now companion, and
he, very liberally relieved us, by sending money to us, whereby we had the
freedom to come to our companion, and him, who attended us. She being come to
this part of her Relation, I told her, that I heard it already by Gregory, who
among other passages of his life, acquainted me with that.

Well then, replied she, if you know that account, I have little more to
acquaint you with, for not long after my Arrival at London, I fortunately met
with my honest friend the Drugster, and he liking me for a Mistress, and I him
for a Servant or Master, which you please, agreed to obey his pleasures, he
providing for me, which he has hitherto done in a very plenti^ul manner: and I
on the other side have bin as constant and obedient to him.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Mistress Mary having finished, Mistress Dorothy begins her Story, wherein she
relates, that having left her Friends in the Country, she comes up to London,
and entering her self into Service, lies with three several men, by whom she was
got with Child, and so orders the matter, that all three pay well for it.

I Had given very great attention to Mrs. Mary's story, and Mrs. Dorothy, (who,
with me, had been the only Auditor) told her, that she had received a great
deal of satisfaction; for, said she, though I have formerly heard many of your
particular actions, yet I never received a perfect account till now. Nay, said
Mrs. Mary, this account is far from being perfect, and is only such passages as
I could at present call to mind; but indeed they are the most remarkable, and
by them you may guess at the rest.

I was very well pleased with what I had heard, and being likewise desirous to
be acquainted with the adventures of Mrs. Dorothy, requested her to relate them
to me, which she did as follows.

Old friend, said she to me, you have great occasion to love and respect me,
for the great love I have born to you and your memory; for after your departure
from my Fathers house, I was very much afflicted for your absence, and I did
believe that you intended Marriage to me, as you protested; and though my
Father and Mother had often doubted of the reality of your intentions,
especially, after you had so unworthily left me, yet I still persuaded them
that you would return. You know well enough, that my Father was not ignorant of
our privacy, he having surprised us in the manner, and you then promised to
make me amends by marriage; but all the satisfaction I received, was a Copy of
Verses, and 20 pieces of Gold: In the one you expressed your Wit, in the other
your Generosity, for I very well knew that you might have omitted both, and not
have sent either; but I suppose, you were more skillful than I, and knew that I
was with Child by you, and therefore sent that money to defray the charge I
should be at on that occasion. This piece of civility of yours did put me into
good hopes that you would return; and I accordingly persuaded my Father, and
Mother; but time convinced me of my error: and also made it more apparent that
I had been sporting with you; for my Belly swelled so, that my Mother soon
resolved me that I was with Child by you.

I was very melancholy upon this occasion, but my Mother endeavored to
comfort me (for I being her only Child) she had a great deal of love for me;
and knowing what was passed could not be helped, she took order to conceal and
keep the knowledge of my misfortune from being publicly known and discoursed
of; Wherefore I, at her desire and directions, kept within doors, pretending a
sickness, which indeed was not wholly counterfeit, in regard I much grieved for
your absence. In this condition I spent my time, till the time of my
deliverance from Childbearing came, and then I was brought to Bed of a Boy,
which was no soooner Born, but it was taken and carried from me, to a Town
three miles off, to be nursed by a Woman, whom my Mother had for that purpose
provided; and this was done to conceal the shame that I should or might
sustain, if it were known that I had a Child, without knowing who, or at least,
where was the Father.

So soon as a Month was expired, I went to see the Child, the sight of which
put me too much in mind of the Father; and I was then again sensibly afflicted
at his absence, methoughts in that infancy there was so much resemblance of my
beloved deceiver, that I kis'd the Infant not only for its own, but for the
Fathers sake. I then returned home again, and now after so long a time of
retirement, I began to recover, not only my strength, but some additions to my
beauty; so that I having had 2 or 3 Suitors, when a Maid, who had forborne
visiting me by occasion of my ilness, they now again renew their suits; but if I
had some dislike for them before; now I could not endure them in my company,
they were such absolute Hobbinolls. Though I was was not satisfied in their
frequent visits, yet my Father and Mother pressed me, not only to accept them,
but also their suit, and make choice of one of them for a Husband, alleging,
that you would never return; and it would be not only safe, but necessary in
time to bestow my self. This discourse did much disturb me, and I was so often
troubled with my suitors, and disturbed and vexed by my Father and Mothers
importunity, that I resolved to quit both, by leaving them, and therefore
purposed to go to London, that I might not be troubled with the importunity of
my Father and Mother; nor the troublesome visits of my sweet-hearts.

In persuance of this resolve, I fitted my self with all necessaries; and that
I might not wholly distract my Parents by my thus leaving them, I writ a Letter
of excuse, and left it for them; and so walking to the next great Town,
attended the coming by of the Passage Coach, and in that got me a place to ride
to London.

I continued for some time in the Inn where the Coachman set me down, and the
rest of his Passengers; but knowing it would be impossible for me to continue
long there, I gained acquaintance with the Maid of the house, and told my tale
to her as well as I thought convenient. She understanding that I was willing to
serve, and wanted a place; and I acquainting her with my abilities, as that I
could sew, wash, and starch, and do most necessary things required of a
Servant, she soon procured me a Place in a house that entertained many Lodgers.
I spent a quarter of a years time very privately and honestly in this service;
but then, our house being full of Lodgers, one of them cast a wanton eye on me,
and being well pleased with my face, began to court me very familiarly;
although at first I opposed him and gave him nothing but slights and denials,
yet he so managed his business by Presents which he gave me, and making use of
all other opportunities that he gained his will of me, and I again entered the
Lists of a Loving Combat. He took many opportunities for enjoyment, not only
in the day time, but sometimes we spent whole nights in our amorous sports; and
though my Mr. and Mrs. did not discover any thing of the matter, yet another
Gentleman, who was also a Lodger, and lay in the next Chamber to my friends,
watching me, found out my haunt; and therefore, he (being as amorous as the
other) was desirous of sport, became a Suitor to me upon the same account. I
absolutely denied him, for I thought it was enough to have to do with one man,
and was resolved to venture my self no further; but he taking the opportunity
of the others absence, first treated me with Wine, then presented me with a
Ring; but all this would not do, till he in plain terms told me, that he knew
very well I was not so hard hearted to every one; for were Mr. such a one,
nameing my friend, there, I would not deny him the courtesy: I at first made
strange of this story, and denied it, but he falling into plain terms with me,
and telling me that he had watched me such a night, when I lay with him, I
could not then deny it, neither did I long deny or refuse him what he desired;
so that he likewise took his pleasure with me; and having obtained his desire
at that time, he made bold with me so often as he lifted, when the other was
out of the way.

I had now two Bedfellows, so that I could seldom lie alone, one of them would
still bespeak me; but the first of them did not know of the second, though he
knew very well of the other: Though I had sport enough with these two, yet it
was not long ere a third man likewise put in for a share with them, and that
was my Masters Brother, he was a very pretty young man, and one whom I could
well enough love for a Husband; but he looked a little higher than to Marry a
Servant maid: but as a Mistress he courted me. Many attempts he made in vain,
but time that brings every thing to pass, made me flexible, and I likewise
gave him possession of the thing he desired; he took much pleasure in my
company, and very respectful he was to me, often presenting me with Linen and
Laces, and sometimes a Crown or an Angel came from his Pocket, as well a^ from
the other two, who well fed me with money, which I still pocketed up; but as I
got money, so again I got somewhat else, a great Belly, and which was the worst
of my three friends, I knew not which was the Father, but if I am not mistaken,
I believe it was my Masters Brother.

But I was resolved the other two should help to Father it, or else pay for it;
and therefore I soon told them all three, as they had occasion to deal with me,
in what condition I was. My first and oldest friend was most troubled at it,
being, as he thought, the most concerned, because he knew not of any else that
had to do with me; he was somewhat startled at it, lest, as he said, his Wife
should come to know it; for, he was a Married man: and although his Wife came
sometimes to Town, and would lie with him, yet he would sometimes before he
went to bed to her, take his opportunity to have his pleasure with me: He, I
say, was troubled at the News, but that did not hinder us in our purposed
Nights lodging, only in the Intervals we considered what course to take; at
length it was resolved, that he would provide for me, the time of my lying Inn,
and afterward for the Child; and in earnest of the charge, he soon gave me
Twenty pound to provide me necessaries. I having now done with my first
Customer, was resolved to get something of my second: but he still gave me the
hearing, presuming on his knowledge of my having to do with the first: so that
he would not on this occasion advance any thing, intending to shirk off,
because no body knew what trade we did drive together.

I perceiving his intention, was resolved to be even with him, and it may be
out-wit him; and that he might not distrust me, I seemed no ways dissatisfied,
but gave him as much freedom with me as ever; but to carry on my design, I
thought good to break the business to my Masters Brother, wherefore I likewise
acquainted him with my condition, and told him in plain terms, that I was with
Child by him: He could not deny the Fact, nor make any excuse; not knowing any
thing of my dealings with the other two: but he was likewise very much
surprised, but I doubting he might put me off, I took the opportunity of
telling him this news, when we were in bed together, knowing there I should
have time, and convenience to discourse it.

He knew not what to say, and indeed was very cold with me, and I was forced to
help him out, for he was then a Suitor to a young Gentlewoman, and was fearful
that this business would hinder his Fortunes: and though he loved me well
enough, yet he was unwilling to Marry me; for that would prove so
disadvantagious to him: he supposing that nothing but Marriage would content
me, was much troubled, and could not tell what answer to give: wherefore I was
forced to break silence, and told him, that as I loved him, so I would show him
sufficient proofs of it, for I would not that my love should ruin him, as I
knew it would, if the world should know what had passed between us; and though
nothing could satisfy me but Marriage, yet I could be content to wave that,
and propo^e somewhat else of satisfaction: nay then, said he, if you will be so
kind to me, propose your own terms, and take them: I hearing him thus generous,
it was not long before we concluded upon terms, which were these, that he would
give me Twenty pound down to bear my charges in the time of my Lying-Inn, and
if the Child lived, he would give Fifty pound more to any person whom I would
appoint to take the Child, and provide for it; these terms I was well enough
satisfied with, only I considering that he would hear of my lying with the
other, because I intended to discover that to him, and have his assistance
therein, and then I doubted he would suspect me, and it may be refuse to pay
the Fifty pound when due; therefore I was resolved to have him seal a Bond to
me, for payment of it: and I urged him to do it out of this consideration, that
he was to be Married: and though he now loved me well-enough, yet when he had a
Wife, he would happily slight and forget me, and so refuse or neglect to pay
it. He was content to hear my arguments: and though always protested a
continuance of his love to me, notwithstanding all the Wives in the World; yet
he consented to give me Bond according to my desire.

Thus every thing being agreed on, we again renewed our pleasures, and spent
that night, as we had done many before, But morning being come, I arose, and so
managed my affairs, that I that day had a Bond Sealed to me for payment of
Fifty pound to be paid in six month; I also within few days received of him
the 20 l. he had promised me.

Thus did I order my matters with my first and last Cu^tomers, and I gave them
their wonted satisfaction of Lying with me so often as they pleased* and so I
did to the other my middle Customer, but do what I could, I could not bring him
to any considerable Composition; and though he were the best able, yet he
offered me the least, and intended to come off with a trifle; however I gave
him his wonted freedom with me, but purposed ere long to be even with him, as I
was.

For one night being in Bed with my Masters Brother; I having very well pleased
him, he talked of his little Hains in Kelder, the Boy in my Belly, wishing very
well to it, not in the least doubting but it was of his own begetting, using
many words to that purpose: well Sir, said I, it is very true, it is yours, but
if I would have been as free with others as I have been with you, it might have
had more, if not another Father; and thereupon I proceeded, and told how that I
had been often importuned by Mr. such a one, his Brothers Lodger, and my Second
Bedfellow. Well replied ^e, I am the more beholding to you, that you have
accepted of me rather than him; but though I am not at all dissatisfied in what
I have done, I wish he had been the Father for your sake as well as mine, for
you may compel him to Marriage, or else get a considerable sum of money from
him. As for Marriage, said I, I doubt I should hardly draw him to it, but some
momes I might get of him, and would yet, if you will consent to it, and assist
me therein. To this he answered, that in any thing I should desire, he would
not be wanting, and therefore he bid me propound the way, and he would not fail
in his assistance: I then told him, that I knew but one way to do it, and in
that I must Play the disloyal wag with him, to do that which I had no mind: for
that matter, said he, you shall have my consent, and I think I guess at your
meaning, which is, that you must agree to let him lie with you; wherefore since
it will be so advantageous to you, let him do it; for I am sure he can do me no
great wrong, for notwithstanding what he can do, the Child will be all mine, of
my own getting.

He being so free to it, and agreeing to all things according to my desire, we
resolved that I should permit my second Sweetheart to lie with me; but I
should so order the matter, that he should take us in the manner, and then we
would agree to act the rest very well. I now having laid my plot very well, and
orderly, I appointed my time when I would lie with him, and agreed to leave the
Chamber door open, that he, rising early the next morning, might (pretending
some business) enter the Chamber, and find us in Bed together. Our Plot being
thus laid, and my Second Sweetheart desiring it, I promised to come to Bed to
him about midnight, which I did; but my Masters Brother knowing of my design,
was resolved to have the first carving of me, and that he should only have a
buttered Bun; and therefore caused me to lie with him all the former part of
the night; but midnight being past, he permitted me to proceed in my adventure.
I was expected by my Bedfellow, and accordingly entertained; but I minding the
design I was about, awaked early in the morning, and so ordered the matter,
that my Bedfellow likewise threw of his drowsiness to encounter with me in our
nocturnal pastime, which when he had done, I began to discourse him, reasoning
the cause with him, and desiring him to resove me what he would do for me in
that condition I was, and what provision he would make for me. He gave me
indifferent answers, and I grew passionate with him, and on a sudden the
Chamber door opened, and my Masters Brother entered the room. I seeing this,
left of speaking, and crowded my self close down into the Bed, as if pretending
to hide my self; but he coming boldly on, bid my Bedfellow Good morrow, and
asking him a que^tion, came nearer the Bedside, and drawing the Curtains,
said, what have you a Bedfellow? No said he, (...) I; surely said the other you
have, for I am mistaken if I did not hear some other tongue than yours, the
other deny^d it, but he knowing well enough what he had to do, soon found out
where my Petticoats lay: How, said he, surely you have a Bedfellow, and that a
Female one; the other being thus surprised, knew not what to say: Wherefore my
Mr. B^other proceeding, said, surely I should know these Coats, for if I am not
mistaken, they are our Mai^ Dorothys. I finding my self discovered, now
appeared, and in the first place begged his pa^rdon, and that he would not
acquaint my Master and Mistress with it. He seeming very angry, soundly ratled
me and my Bedfellow, and said he, This is not the first time that you two have
lain together, for I have long suspected you, and have watched you. Truly Sir,
said I, it is true, this Gentleman has long knew me, but I pray you make no
more words at present, and for modesty sake leave the Chamber, and I will anon
satisfy you further in every particular. My Bedfellow likewise requesting the
same, very civilly left us, shutting the door after him. My Bedfellow was much
surprised at this sudden accident, and I seemed to be so; and quickly getting
on my clothes, arose and left him, retiring into my own Chamber, leaving him to
consider of it.

I having now done my business, by having a witness of my lying with him, was
bold with him, to know what I should do in the case; For, (said I) my Masters
Brother will certainly acquaint my Master and Mistress with our actions, and
then I must leave the house, and whether to go, I know not, nor who will
entertain me. He argued that the other, my first Sweetheart, must provide for
me; to this I told him, that I believed he would do somewhat for me, but he had
a Wife, and could not do what he listed, whereas he on the contrary was a
single man, and rich enough; and he still endeavoring to put me off, and lay
all upon the first, I in plain terms told him, That if he continued to say so,
I would wholly deny my dealings with the other, and though he should avouch it*
yet he would not be believed, he being a party guilty, as could be proved by my
Masters Brother; and therefore it would be judged by all, that he, and he
alone, was the Father of the Child and would be forced to Marry me, or at least
provide for me and the Child. I having told him my resolution, left him to
consider of it, and then my M^sters Brother came to him, and he and I together,
so ordered the matter, that he gave me 20 l. down, and gave me Bond to pay 50
l. more at the Birth of the Child. This, said Mrs. Dorothy, was the first of my
Adventures.

And this shall be the last I shall relate to you in this part, referring the
prosecution of her^ and other adventures, to a Third Part.

FINIS.

